A RETURN TO THE Ministers OF LONDON; By way of Answer to their SEASONABLE
EXHORTATIONS, (so called) directed to their Congregations.

With sober reproof sent unto them, because of their secret Smitings against
the despised People called QUAKERS, whom they have secretly reproached in their
said EXHORTATION.

And this is written for the better information of them and their particular
Congregations, and that truth may be exalted, and deceit and iniquity may bow
and tremble.

By E. B.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-Spread-Eagle and Windmill in
Martins, near Aldersgate, 1660.

A Return to the Ministers of London, by way of Answer to their Seasonable
Exhortation, (so called) etc.
1 FOrasmuch as you the Ministers in and about London, have sent forth a
Seasonable Exhortation (as you call it) to the people of your Congregations,
which I have seen, read, and considered, and do find something therein worthy
of Answer; for the end that people may be satisfied concerning things doubtful,
which are in controversy this day among many; for it is well known the
controversy has been long, and is grown very high between us and you,
concerning Church, Ministry, and Religion: And diverse things in your
Exhortation are doubtful unto many, and that all doubts may be removed, if
possible, therefore I do return what follows as an answer unto you.

Whereas you say, you are not ignorant of the prejudices and prepositions,
wherewith the carnal world is leavened, concerning your Calling, Office, and
Doctrines, and what clamours, and fiery contentions, abound for them every
where, that pleads Christ's Cause in the gates, etc.

Answ. As for your Calling, Office, and Doctrine, there is much to be said
against them, in and by the Spirit of the Lord, for your Calling and Office, is
not according to the example of Scriptures, though the Calling and Office of
Ministers of the Gospel has example in the Scriptures, yet as you are called
into your Office, that is not according, but rather contrary to the Scriptures:
And as for your Doctrine, it is in some things unsound also. Now as for
Seasonable Exhortations of Ministers to people, I do acknowledge that is a duty
which ought to be done, but how seasonable and sound your Exhortations are,
that remains to betryed; and it is not only the carnal world, as you speak,
that are doubtful concerning your Calling and Office, but it is the best of the
people, whose eyes the Lord is opening, to see and behold the false imitations
of the Calling and Office of Ministers, as you have stood for many Generations.
And it is true, them that pleads Christ's Cause, they all cried out upon, and
contended with, but this fully belong not to you, though you apply it to your
selves, but it pertains more to others, for the World speaks well of you, as it
use to do of false Prophets.

And you say, We the Ministers of the Gospel in the City of London, do with
earnestness exhort the people of this City, to awaken, as out of sleep, and to
lay to heart, the great dangers that threatens you, which you represent under a
threefold consideration.

1 The fear of the return of Popery.

2 The distracted estate of Religion amongst us.

3 Other symptoms of Gods wrath hanging over your heads.

Answ. That you are Ministers of the Gospel, this is doubtful unto many, and
many more testimonies might be given to the contrary, than can be given for it.
But this is not the present debate, and therefore no more of it.

And what, is the people of your Congregations yet asleep? Have not you
awakened them in so many years time? Have you been preaching over them, and
taking their money so long, and are they yet to awaken, as out of sleep? Will
not the blame of this, and the condemnation of it fall upon you their Watchmen,
who has not yet awakened them? And may not they say that you have dealt
unjustly by them, who are left as asleep under all your preaching, and are yet
unsensible of the danger that threatens them? Oh friends! will you consider,
and your people with you, what you have been preaching, and what they have been
hearing for so long a time, seeing you now acknowledge they are yet asleep, and
unawakened.

Now as to the first of your considerations, The fear of the return of Popery,
for which you lay down diverse things to make the people believe it: First, The
union of foreign Popish Powers: Secondly, The vast numbers (say you) of Popish
Emissaries and Jesuits that swarms amongst you: Thirdly, The vending and
printing of so many Popish Books every year, etc.

Answ. As for Popery, I know it is idolatry, and their Church and Worship, and
every part thereof abomination to the Lord, and the spirit that leads them, is
not the spirit of Jesus; and as for Popery, it was never yet truly cleanse out
of the Nation, but there has been, and are great remainders yet standing,
which may indeed easily prove its former strength: For is not the most part of
the worship of the Church of England made up of such things, as was first
instituted and practiced amongst the Papists, witness, the making Ministers by
natural learning, at Schools and Colleges, and their maintenance by tithes,
and yearly stipends, and their way of Parochial settlements, are not all these
things Papistical? and witness sprinkling infants, calling it the Baptism into
the Visible Church, and witness the singing of David's Psalms, as now they are
sung among you, these things for the most part are of Popish institution, and
many other things also pertaining to your Church, Religion, and Ministry, so
that Popery was never clean cast out of the Nation, though the Lord has
wounded it, yet there is the remainder of it yet standing in great force, so
that while tithes are pleaded for by you, and those things practiced by you, it
may indeed be feared, the return of Popery, seeing you stick so fast in those
practices which were of Popish institution, and the cause of fear lies at your
door, and upon your selves principally, and if there be vast numbers of Popish
Priests and Jesuits swarming amongst you, if you be Ministers of Christ, why
do you not discover Wolves in Sheeps clothing, and fright then away? Why do
you not lift up your Spiritual Weapons, (if you have them) as the Apostles did?
whose weapons were powerful and mighty through God, and who shall bear the
blame but you, if Wolves in sheeps clothing tear your Flocks? that is a sign
you are lazy idle Shepherds, and that you want the Power and Authority of God,
and when the powers of the earth fails you, and your carnal weapons are all
broken, then you are like to be overcome with the swarming of Popish Priests
and Jesuits, if there be any such among you look you to it, for I know not
any, and if you know any by name, and where they are, you ought by your Law to
discover them.

Now (you say) they are acting under the disguise of Sectaries, and subtly
insinuating many of their Doctrines, as teaching Justification by Inherent
Righteousness; perfection, unlawfulness in joining in your Ordinances, and
nullity of your Ministry etc.

Answ. Now these that you call Sectaries, may truly plead against you, against
your Church, Worship, Ministry and practices, upon good grounds; and as for
Justification by Inherent Righteousness, it is a Doctrine of the Church of
Christ, that the Saints witnessed Christ, and his Righteousness within them,
and that none are justified by any righteousness without them, but who witness
Christ revealed in them, for all are reprobates that do not witness Christ in
them, 2 Cor. 13. 5. And as for perfection, that is the doctrine of the Gospel,
and of Christ, for the Apostles spoke wisdom to them that were perfect, 1 Cor.
2 6. and Christ commanded them to be perfect, Mat. 5. who never commanded
impossibilities. You might better have charged these doctrines upon the
Apostles, than upon the Papists; and as for joining to your Ordinances, there
is many that fears God, who are not Papists, that for good conscience sake
cannot join to your Ordinances, nor own your Ministry, neither in its Call,
Practice, nor Maintenance; and if these things were in dispute, I should show
you, according to Scripture, that it is not lawful for the Saints of God, to
join themselves to your Ordinances, nor own your Ministry; but it is lawful for
them both to deny your Ordinances and Ministry in their present standing; and
as for printing and vending so many Popish books as you say, oh it had been
your wisdom to have mentioned, the books by name, that all might have known
which were Popish books; but because your Charge is general, I cannot answer
particularly, either to clear or to condemn, except you had mentioned in
particular, which you ought to have done, rather then to have slandered in the
dark.

Your fourth reason, whereby you would make your people believe, that there is
fear of the return of Popery, is, That the whole body almost of Popery is
published by Sectaries, especially Quakers; and you say you cannot but observe
a ready co-incidency with Papists in their Opinions, etc.

Answ. As for the Quakers, which you have long opposed by Prisons, Goals, and
Persecutions, and your carnal weapons, and now also charge great things upon
them, to make them odious to the people. Alas, do you not know that they are
blessed of the Lord? Is there never a man among you sixty one Priests, so wise
as Balaam was, he saw there was no Enchantment against Israel, nor durst he
curse whom God had blessed; but however, they have borne with patience (and
they do therein continue) all that you have caused to be acted, and all that
you have spoken against them, and your words and works against them shall be
your own burden in the day of the Lord, and shall sink you into misery, who
has made the innocent people the people of your malice and fury, but God is
with them, I need say nothing: and why have you not particularly instanced what
particular part of Popery they do publish? Why will you charge in secret, and
prove nothing in particular? therefore I do charge you to mention, what
particular things they do publish which is Popery, and not the truths of the
Gospel, and then you shall have a further answer.

Your fifth reason is, Jesuitical designs, and you mention the Protestant
Universities, and the impoverishing; and disgracing, and overthrowing a godly
learned Ministry, etc.

Answ. As for the Universities, thousands are satisfied concerning them, that
they are of Popish institution, and are not the Fountains of Divinity, as they
have been falsely called, for its possible I could give large testimonies of the
wickedness of the educations which is these in those places, and how little
good they learn, and how much evil; But you have stated the cause wrong, for
the plucking down the Universities would rather seem to be the removing part of
Popery, than to be the way to let in Popery: and as for a godly Ministry, that
is truly godly; and truly learned, alas there is no fear of impoverishing,
disgracing, and overthrowing of that, for that is always poor and low, and
contemptible to the world, and so it must be; and it is Antichrists Ministers
that fears to be made poor, and that their tithes and stipends should be made
less, and it is they that fear to be overthrown, and not the Ministers of
Christ, for the Ministers of Christ are out of all such fears, because their
standing and falling depends not upon earthly powers, but are builded upon the
Rock of Ages, and cannot be overthrown.

Your sixth ground is, Toleration for Popery is publicly pleaded for in print,
etc.

Answ. That Popery is idolatry, and the Church of Rome 2 false Church, that I
have said, and I hope shall never renounce it, but shall always give
testimony, until death, against the Church of Rome; but I must tell you
plainly, it is not my judgment that the Papists ought to be burned for their
Religion, or if a Jesuit be taken in England, I would have him so tolerated,
that he should not have his life taken away by inhumano cruelty, not for
Religions sake, except something can be charged upon him, besides, matters of
his Religion, or Conscience: This is my judgment, that both the Papists and
you are Antichristian, (in this) in that you kill each other, when they take
one of your Ministers, and you theirs, to destroy each other: this is not of
God, but of the Dragons power in both, and there ought to be more toleration in
both, that lives may be spared; and you ought to conquer with Spiritual
Weapons, if that you have them, and not to kill and murder persons, but to
judge spirits; That is contrary to Scripture, and the Apostles example, to
destroy men's lives for Religion sake: And why may not the Papists have
toleration, in matters concerning God, as well as others: So those that plead
for their toleration upon this account, that they may be converted from sin,
and not destroyed in their sin; this is no error, that their lives may be
spared, but to plead for their toleration, as the right Religion, this is sin.
And thus your sixth ground, wherefore you fear the return of Popery, is
answered.

Now I come to the second consideration, which is, The present distracted
estate of Religion, which you say is evidenced in diverse particulars: First,
your division in civil and spiritual things, so that the wonted love and
communion in holy duties, is interrupted, strangeness and distances fomented,
censures and hard opinions of each others entertained, etc.

Answ. Here is your error, for true Religion is not distracted nor divided in
it self, but it is one in unity and peace, and so are all they that are in it,
their hearts being united by the Spirit of the Lord, in their Faith Practice,
and Worship, and in all things pertaining to their Religion: Its true, there is
distraction amongst all the false Sects and Churches upon the earth, and it
must be so, Babylon is divided, and confounded in its self, and one part of it
against another, so the distractions is among your selves, among Papists,
Prelates, Presbyters, and the rest, tearing and rending one another about
Church-worship, and Religion, all like Wolves in sheeps clothing, biting one
another, being divided in civil and spiritual things, one crying for this, and
another for the other way of Government in Church and State, and you are out of
the true love, and true communion in holy duties, and interrupts one another,
and what one says is right, another says is wrong; and all this is in
Babylon, among your selves, and none of it among them that are in the true
Religion, and in true Church-Vnion, who are gathered by the Spirit of the Lord.

Your second Evidence of the distracted estate of Religion (as you say) is the
many horrid and hideous errors, which for some years past have abounded amongst
us, against the Authority of Scriptures, the Diety of Christ, the Holy Ghost,
Trinity of Persons, Immortality of Souls, Doctrines of Repentance, Humiliation,
Sanctification, Resurrection from the Dead, the eternal recompense of Heaven
and Hell, yea, diverse Sects increasing every day in numbers, power, and malice,
and under the names of Quakers, Ranters, Seekers, etc. oppugning the received
Doctrine, and unquestionable interest of Christ Jesus amongst us.

Answ. That many horrid errors have abounded amongst you, that is very true, as
in many particulars might be instanced: But why do you maliciously charge the
Quakers with opposing the interest of Christ Jesus? The Lord shall judge you in
his day, when he makes it appear to all the world, that those whom you charge
with the contrary, are the very friends of Christ's interest, and have been
patient sufferers for his Name sake, under the wickedness of your Generation;
and as for the Ranters, Seekers, and others, whom you have reckoned up together
with the Quakers, it is well known that we are in opposition in spirit unto all
these, and have given large testimony in the fear of God against them, though
it is certain, that there is many as upright and sincere men toward God
amongst these Sects you have mentioned, as any of your Congregations; and
though in some things they are condemnable, yet in some things they are as
justifiable as you are, before the Lord: And what the Seekers, Ranters,
Familists, and the rest mentioned by you do hold, as in these things you have
charged them with, I Will leave that, for I am not now pleading their cause, but
the Cause of God and his People, whom you in scorn call Quakers; and though you
have joined them in accusation with others, yet I must separate them from
others in my Answer, and must tell you in the fear of the Lord, that you have
belied them, and falsely accused them out of your malicious hearts, for they do
not deny the Authority of the Scriptures, but gives that authority to them,
which the Spirit of God that gave them forth have formerly given, neither do
they deny the Deity of Christ, but do say, in him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead; neither do they deny the Holy Spirit, nor the Father, Son, and Spirit,
but say there are three, and these three are one; but as for your Trinity of
persons, that is language besides the Scriptures; and we do affirm the Soul is
immortal, and as for the Doctrines of Repentance, Humiliation, Sanctification,
Resurrection from the dead, the eternal recompense of Heaven and Hell, these
Doctrines are publicly held forth by them in words, and also in practice, more
than by your selves; therefore with what face you could charge them with the
denial of these things, it is almost wonderful; and there are thousands of your
Congregations that are and have been sometimes hearing in your City, that shall
bear witness against your accusations, and give evidence that they have heard
them, whom you call Quakers, give faithful witness of, and for all these things
which you charge them with denial of: Do you think that your Congregations are
all so blind as to receive for truth what you herein have spoken, nay, I must
tell you, some of them are offended with you because hereof.

First, in that you have reckoned the Quakers with Ranters, and others, between
whom there is absolute opposition, and not agreement, neither in doctrine nor
practice.

Secondly, That you should charge the Quak with such things as they are
altogether clear of, and known to be so by many; but this is, that your folly
and weakness might appear, and as you speak of increasing every day in number,
power, and malice, some part of this is true, for the Lord does increase his
people daily in number, and power, by his spirit, but not in malice, and that
is your torment, the increase of the Quakers, which as they have begun to
increase, so the Lord will continue them, and you nor mortal men shall not be
able to hinder, neither the Magistrates persecution, nor the Ministers
instigation thereunto, though you have joined hand in hand against them, for
the Lord is with his people, and his authority and power is their defense, and
they are not in empty forms (as you say) but in the power of Godliness; and as
for your Ordinances and Ministry, of which you speak, something I have said to
it already, and more I shall say hereafter.

Your third Evidence is, the odious scandalls of those that profess themselves
to be the people of God, as their self seeking, their unparaellel'd breach of
all civil and sacred oaths, whereby the mouth of iniquity is opened, and the
reverence of religion abated, so that to us (say you) there appears no visible
way of repairing the credit of strict profession, but by a severe punishment of
Professors, etc.

Answ. It is true, many that do profess themselves the people of God, but are
not, but by their lives and practices gives odious scandalls, and are
self-seeking, as you say; but upon whom the guilt of this may truly be charged,
that remains to be sought out, doubtless it lies as near your doors as any
others, for is not your pride and oppression by taking tithes, and suing people
at law for wages, and casting them in prison, because for good conscience sake
they cannot pay you, your seeking for your gain from your quarter, and your
taking great sums of money, and preaching for hire, taking so much yearly, are
not these odious scandalls, and very self-seeking practices which you are
guilty of, while you pretend public good? as for breaches of oaths and
covenants, I wish you to search your own hearts, for that iniquity does lie as
near your generation as any others, witness that you and your brethren have
from time to time engaged to such and such things: as first, did not you engage
for the government to be without King, and House of Lords? And did not you then
cry up the Protector, contrary to your engagements, and now cry up another: and
thus it is very evident, that the guilt of breach of Oaths and Covenants, lies
near unto your selves, which indeed opens the mouth of iniquity; for the very
Cavaliers and Prelates say, you were once strict in your way, but now you have
struck hands with them, and are now your selves doing that which you cried out
against in them* And thousands in this Nation is abated in their affections
from your Church and Ministry, as knowing them to be upon a false Foundation,
and to be of Babylon, and not of the Heavenly Jerusalem: And what do you mean
by severe punishment of professors? do you mean to set up Ecclesiastical laws
again, and that all must be forced to your Church way and Religion? is it in
your hearts to drive the Nation by force, and if they will not, to punish them
with fire, and faggot, and prisons? If this be your meaning, as may justly be
supposed it is, the Lord deliver the Nation from you, this is not the way to
gain the credit of Religion, but the further you go on in this way, as you have
formerly walked in, the more will your Profession and Religion stink in the
nostrils of all good men.

Your fourth Evidence is, Immensity, and boundless liberty permitted, assumed,
and freely practiced by many, to write, print and publish all manner of
blasphemies and opinions, etc. the sad and woeful effects thereof appears in
many, some being in Apostasy, others in luke-warmnesse, and much decay in the
power of godliness, etc.

Answ. As I have acknowledged there are without doubt many errors, blasphemies,
and false oppinions extant in this Nation, both written, published, and
maintained, but upon whom, and what sort of men this can truly be charged, this
is very doubtful to many; and your charge being only general, no particular
answer can well be given, only it appears, you would have none to write, print,
and publish, but your selves, or by your consent; and you would tie the Nation
up in the bondage of your own spirits; and you would be the only Judges of
blasphemies and errors; but that we allow not, for enemies must not be Judges,
and it is very possible that such is your darkness, that you may call truth
error, and error truth in some particulars, but if you shall instance any
particular Doctrines, Blasphemies, Errors, and Opinions, published and
maintained, in my next I shall freely give my witness against them, if they be
really so, and against the people that holds them, as well as your selves, and
more particularly I cannot now say; and there is indeed woeful and sad effects
of errors brought forth in this Nation, and many are in the Apostasy from the
truth, and in the luke-warmness also, and the power of Godliness is decayed,
and they have the Form, and holds that without the Power: your selves may do
well, and your Congregations also, to search your own hearts, by the spirit of
the Lord in this case, that the guilty may see, and turn unto the Lord, that
his wrath come not upon them.

Your fifth Evidence is, Sabbath Profanation, both in Opinion and Practice,
grown to a greater height than ever formerly; the Jews Sabbath cried up,
instead of the Christian: Shops opened upon the Lords day, yea, some working
the works of their ordinary callings, in knitting, and sowing of garments in
our Assemblies, even in the Pulpits, in the time of Gods public worship, etc.

Answ. This remains doutful to many, what the true Sabbath is, and whether the
Lord does require of this generation the observing one day above another, and
if so, what day it is that he requires the observing of; as for the 7th day of
the week, we know that the Lord commanded the Jews to keep as a Sabbath, and
to rest, But that was never commanded to the Gentiles; and as for the first day
of the week, which is called the Christians Sabbath, that is doubtful to many,
whether God commands and requires the observation of that day by the gentile
believers, yea, or nay; seeing that there is neither command nor binding
example for it, through out the Scriptures* if there be any I do desire that
you would show it in your next, and by what authority, whether from men, or
from Heaven, the first day of the week is now kept by you, as your Sabbath; for
really many are doubtful in this case, and you would do very well, if you have
a command from God, or example from his servants in former ages, to discover so
much unto the people; And as for your calling it the Lords day, it is certain
every day is his, and not one day more then another; and as for shops opening,
and such things as you mention, though every one that do such things, may not
be justified in the doing of it, yet such a thing in it self may be justified,
if the spirit of the Lord moves unto it, and who shall limit the Lord? And why
may not others labor in their ordinary callings that day, as well as you in
your ordinary callings? I mean, your ordinary calling of preaching; that it is
an ordinary calling, it is certain, because you deny any extrordinary calling
in these days, and so I only query this, why others may not follow their
ordinary callings as well as you? for it has been affirmed very lately by
some, that preaching was a trade, and a function for men to get a living by,
and we do not question but there are many now in this Nation, called Ministers,
that do preach for that end, and would cease to preach, if money and tithes
were ceased to be given them: I speak this of some, not of all, which does
demonstrate, that the way of your preaching, is an ordinary calling; which you
labor in, on your Sabbath day.

Your sixth Evidence, is the pouring out by many of all sects with a full
mouth, all manner of obloquy and contempt upon Ministry, and Ministers of the
Gospel, openly interrupting them in the exercise of their duty, whereby they
are discouraged in their work, while they are represented under the notion of
Baals Priests, Gehazaes, pulpited divines, distributers of Sundaies Doses,
Simonions, Decimating Clergy, common Incendiaries, etc.

Answ. It is certain, that the true Ministry, and Ministers of the Gospel were
in all ages and now are contemned and despised, and all manner of evil spoken
against them for the name of Christ: But whether you are those true Ministers
of the Gospel, and your Ministry the true Ministry sent of Christ, this is
doubtful to many; and by many particulars which might be instanced, the
contrary does appear: The Ministers of Christ in the days of the Apostles,
they never complained of being interrupted; for they were haled before Rulers,
and commanded to preach no more in that name, and yet they were not discouraged
thereby in their work, nor when they were called movers of sedition, and
deceivers, and such reproachful names, they regarded not these things, but as
for you, you seem to be troubled that any should speak to you, or ask you a
question, or exhort you to repent, if any out of good conscience query with
you, concerning your practice and Doctrine, and if any exhort to good, and cry
against evil amongst you, this you call interrupting of you, in your
Ministerial duty, and to prison, houses of Correction, and to Whips and Stocks,
must such go, which was never the Apostles practice, never was any sent to
prison for opposing of them; and what if the Ministers of England be called
Hirelings, and false Prophets, and greedy dumb dogs, the practice of some of
them does prove it that they are so; these things you must bear, as coming
deservedly, and not unjustly upon you, for the servants of the Lord in all Ages
ever cried against deceivers, and false Prophets, and called them deceivers,
and greedy dumb dogs, and Serpents, and vipers, and evil beasts, and slow
bellies; these names and terms did Christ, the Apostles, and Prophets, use unto
such as are some of the Ministry of this Nation, and not with revilings and
reproachings, but with the Spirit of Authority from God, that reproves the
wickedness of Prophets, Teachers, and people; and tell me, have not some of you
sued men at the Law, and cast them into prison in this City, because they would
not give you money, and tithes, and hire, though such as have not heard you,
nor received you as Ministers, not received any thing from you, and such as you
did never any work for, have you sought wages from, and caused them to be
imprisoned that would not give you? And tell me in good earnest, can any less
be said of such who thus walk, but that they are insatiable hirelings, and as
bad as Baals Priests, and even cheaters, and greedy dumb dogs, let the Witness
in your own consciences answer, and you shall have a reply.

Now I come to your third particular, which is other causes and symptoms of
Gods wrath hanging over your heads, the frequent disappointment from time to
time, of all hopes of coming to any settlement in Government in the Nation,
occasioned by strange confusions, which is a clear evidence that God has in
displeasure darkened our eyes, and bid counsel from us (say you.)

Answ. It is very true, that from time to time of late days the Lord has
disappointed the purposes of men, even concerning settling of Government, and
there has been almost strange confusions in changes, but to what can this be
attributed? Have not your fins been as great a cause of it as any others? And
have not you and your Generation been the Counselors in all these matters? Was
not some of you or your Brethren in Olivers days, and in Richards days, and
in the Armies days, and in the Parliaments days, and are not you and your
Brethren busy at this day in ordering a settlement of Government in this
Nation? But the Lord has hitherto disappointed you and them, that you have
counseled; and broken you into confusion and distraction, and turned backwards
even the proceedings of Rulers, and Teachers, and the spirit of deep sleep and
of slumber is powered upon you all, and the vision of these things is as a
sealed book unto you, even because of Gods displeasure against you; and in that
you say, your eyes are darkened, and counsel is hid from you, in that you say
true, though to your own shame: And what trust can be put in such Watchmen?
What confidence can be placed by your people in you? when as you acknowledge
that your eyes are darkened, and counsel is hid from you; the Scriptures
mentioned by you does prove there was darkness upon the Land, but Isaiah does
not say, nor David, that counsel was hid from them, or that their eyes were
darkened, neither did ever the Apostles say so, but witnessed that the Lord was
their light, and in him their eyes were opened, and counsel was revealed to
them.

Secondly, You say, This sadly presages of unchurching the Nation, or the
departing of the glory of God from you.

Answ. By unchurching the Nation, I suppose you mean making the Church no
Church, which if this can be done, then the Gates of hell may prevail against
the Church, contrary to the words of Christ, who said, the Gates of Hell should
not prevail; but I must tell you, the Nation of England, as to the general part
of it, has been long, and yet is unchurched, that is, ungathered by the
Eternal Spirit, into the true fellowship in the Body of Christ; for the night
of Apostasy and Darkness has been over the world, since the Apostles days,
and over this Nation in particular, and your Churches has been no true
Churches, nor the people under your Ministry truly joined and united in true
Church Order, and under true Church Government, though I do not say but that
there are thousands of sincere people that loves the Lord, yet remaining among
you, and the day of the Lord is appearing, which will confound the Whore, the
false Church, which has been set up in this Nation, and through the world, and
Assemblies which has had the name of the Churches of Christ, will be found to
be otherwise in the judgment of the Lord, and all the false Ordinances,
Practices, and Ministers, must be thrown down, that the glory of the Lord may
again appear.

Further you seem, to charge your selves with leaving your first love, and
former zeal, for the truth and worship of God, but the present coldness and
indifferency in the things of God, together with your barrenness and
unanswerable walking to the Gospel of Christ, etc. (say you.)

Answ. Though to your own shame, yet I do believe this is truly acknowledged,
that you have lost your first love and zeal, which once was in you, in the
days when you were persecuted under the Bishops, you were full of love and
zeal for the truth, and worship of God, according as it was made manifest, and
then you were sufferers your selves, but now you are causers of others to
suffer, and there is indeed much coldness, and dryness, and barrenness, amongst
you and your people; I do truly desire you may repent you thereof, that if so
be the Lord may heal you; and your walking indeed is unanswerable to the Gospel
of Christ, (to wit) your taking of tithes, and so much by the year for
preaching; and suing people at the Law that will not give you wages, though you
do no work for them; these, with many other things which you practice, is an
unanswerable walking to the Gospel of Christ, and seeing you have confessed
your sius in some measure, repent and sin no more, that your iniquities may be
blotted out.

Again, you complain of the prevalency of Atheism, and doting upon error,
endless separations, common ignorance, unbelief, profaneness, the prejudice
against wholesome doctrine, and all order of discipline in the Church, and many
other confusions are upon us, (say you.)

Answ. Alas! So it is, but where is the blame? Oh you Watchmen! Should not you
have better preserved your flocks? Should not you have fed them with living
food? Should not you have been examples of righteousness and truth unto them?
And should not you have nourished them with knowledge and understanding? But
because the Shepherds have been lazy and idle, and fed themselves, and not
their flocks; but the Shepherds have ruled over their flocks with force and
cruelty, and their Ministry and Preaching has been a very burden and
oppression upon the people, and therefore it is that their flocks are divided
into many Sects, and separations, and great confusions is in your Assemblies,
and among you, even the sin of the people in some measure, will be charged upon
you their Teachers, whole flocks are run into errors, and Atheism, and despise
wholesome doctrine, and are out of true order, and Church Discipline, even in
the traditions of men: Therefore oh that you Ministers would consider! and that
you would learn more wisdom, and that your people would come to receive the
Spirit of the Lord into their hearts, whereby they may be led into all truth,
and into the Covenant of God, where there is no unbelief, ignorance,
profaneness, no confusion; but peace, love, and unity altogether, and if you
and they did come into this, you might be happy, and the judgments of the Lord
would be removed.

Now I come to some particulars which you do promise for your selves: First,
That you will use all holy endeavors to keep God and his Truth among you.
Secondly, That you will be more diligent in watching over your flocks. Thirdly,
That you shall endeavor the establishment of your Congregations against Popish
delusions.

To all which I answer: You must first make clean your own hearts, and you must
first repent of your own iniquities, before you can heal others; and you must
first learn obedience to God in your own hearts, before you can truly instruct
others therein: And indeed there is need enough for you to mourn before the
Lord, and to fast, and to confess your sins, (as you say) for the Lord has been
long departed from you, and his presence from your Assemblies, and that is the
cause of deadness, and dryness, and barrenness among the people, because
Gods presence is wanting among you; and you had indeed need to be more diligent
in watching over your flocks, for you have been negligent therein, and have fed
your selves, and not them, and you have sought theirs, and not them, its partly
evident, and it is time for you now to amend, and to put away the evil of your
doings; but first, before you dispense the word to others, you must feel the
word in your own hearts, to be as a fire and as a hammer in you, and you must
know another Foundation for Ministers than you have long stood upon, even the
Lord Jesus Christ must be your Foundation, and you must cease to preach for
hire, and to divine for money, and then should it be better with you, and your
flocks would have comfort in you, if you had received freely from the Lord, and
ministered freely to them; but while you do it for ends to your selves, they can
have no good hopes nor confidence in you.

And whereas you exhort your Congregations in diverse particulars: First, to
take heed of false teachers, trying their spirits, and holding fast that which
is good, especially to beware of Popish insinuations, (say you, etc.)

Answ. Your Exhortation is good in it self, but you should have demonstrated
more plainly how false teachers should be known, conparing their fruits now,
with what they were in the days of old, when the Scriptures were written, and
that had been a good way to have discovered false teachers; that sixteenth of
Matthew, mentioned by you, bids them beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and
Christ said, they were such as was called of men Master, stood praying in the
Synagogues, loved uppermost rooms at feasts, went in long robes, and of such
Christ bids beware, and of such now the people in London are to beware, where
ever they are, for such as do these things, are in the steps of the Scribes and
Pharisees, which Christ cried Woe against, and the true Prophets cried against
such in their days as preached for hire, and that sought for their gain from
their quarter, and such you ought to cry against now, as seek for their gain
from their quarter, except the guilt of these things in your selves stops your
mouths from crying against them in others; and the Apostles cried against such
as went for gifts, and rewards, such as taught for filthy lucre, and such as
made merchandise of people for gain for themselves, such the Apostles and
Christ declared against, and such you ought to declare against; but the people
of your Congregations may say, who are such now? and where are they? that I
leave to their consciences to judge who it is, and where they are now, and
whether there be any of them in this City now, and in the Nation, that are
called of men Master, and love uppermost rooms at feasts, and that preaches
for hire, and money, for gifts, and rewards, seeks for their gain from their
quarter, teaches for filthy lucre, and gain; who are found in these things
now, such are false teachers, who ought to be taken heed of: I shall not now
say it is any of you, but I shall leave it to you, and to your peoples
consciences, to whom your Exhortation is; and as I have said before, let all
Popish inventions and Popery be first cast out of this Nation, and then if you
join with us against it, through the Spirit of the Lord we will endeavor the
keeping of it out, and that it shall no more enter in amongst us into this
Nation.

And you say, that your knowledge here, and all other graces here, are
imperfect; to which I say, then you are imperfect Saints, imperfect Ministers.
But what do you mean by here? I suppose that you mean upon earth, now there are
none of the Graces of God that are imperfect, but the Grace of God is perfect
in it self, and the Spirit of God is perfect, and every gift of God is perfect;
as says the Scriptures. Now that you should say the Graces of God are
imperfect, this is error, even abominable error, and you show unsoundnesse in
Judgment, even in the things of God, and has belied the Graces and Gifts of
God, which in their least measure are perfect. And thus I have looked over your
Exhortation, and thus I have returned to you again, not but that I know it is
the duty of Christ's Ministers to exhort their flocks, and that exhortation in
it self is good, but when I find where lies and false accusations are against
the Quakers, whom I dearly love and own, upon that account, and not otherwise
have I engaged with you, and what I have done, it is not rendering evil for
evil, but rather to reprove your evil, and to undeceive your Congregations, who
might otherwise take all for true that you have said, if it were not reproved.

Again, you exhort your Congregations, that they manifest sincerity, not only
by hatred of error, but by a love of the truth, etc.

Answ. Sincerity of heart is indeed precious, especially where the Spirit of
the Lord is the rule of Judgment, and does manage that sincerity; but where a
false spirit rules in the judgment, the sincerity is often betrayed into a
zeal against the truth, and against the ways of the Lord, rather than
otherwise; and thus it was with the Jews, whose sincerity (through their error
of judgment) was turned into zeal and bitterness against Christ: And thus it
is to be feared it is with many in your Congregations, who may have a zeal
without knowledge, and be short of true discerning between what is truth, and
what is error, I speak not this of all, but of some, for its no small thing to
discern between truth and error, especially in this day, wherein there are so
many ways and professions of Church-Ministry, and Worship, and yet all
professing the Scriptures are their Rule of Faith, worship, and practice; and
seeing that all Sects do profess proof from Scripture for what they hold
forth, what ground have the people to believe you more than others, or others
more than you? for where people receives Doctrine or Religion by report from
others, without the evidence of the Spirit of God in their own hearts, this is
not receiving of the truth unto eternal life; wherefore I exhort your
Congregations, that every one amongst them may wait upon the Lord, to have a
feeling and discerning in their own hearts, and that each one may be led and
taught of the Spirit of God which leads into all truth, that they may deny all
false Ministers, and false worships, and may worship God in Spirit and Truth,
through the ministration of his own Spirit in their hearts and consciences, and
thereby will they discern between truth and error, and will love the one, and
hate the other.

Thirdly, You exhort, That they keep themselves unspotted from the prevailing
corruptions of these backsliding times, etc.

Answ. Concerning the times, many are ignorant; but this is certain at the
present time wherein we are, is the Lord disquieting of men, and its the latter
days of Antichrists Reign and Government, that has been in full power and
authority for many generations, and Babylon that great City, her ruin is
threatened, because of her abominations, that have been many and great, for the
whole earth has been corrupted (as its written) and now the Call of the Lord
is, that every man come out of Babylon, and deliver himself, that he may not
partake of their plagues; and happy are they that are made clean and unspotted
from her sins, that they may not be found covered with her garments, for the
day of the Lord is come, and coming upon Babylon, and all back-sliders from God
and his ways. Now Babylon is that great City, which has ruled over the Kings
of the earth, and in her has the blood of Souls, and of all just men been
found.

Fourthly, You exhort to endeavor a healing of those sad breaches and
divisions which have been amongst you, etc.

Answ. Now the sad breaches and divisions which is indeed at present in this
Nation, cannot be healed, but as the cause and ground thereof be removed, which
is the sins of Rulers, Teachers, and People; and this is the cause wherefore
the Lord has brought distraction amongst them: Oh what ambition and
self-seeking has been among the Rulers! What judging for gifts and rewards?
what neglect of Mercy and Judgment amongst them? And oh how have they
oppressed the poor, and trodden down the needy! and because hereof is the
righteous God vexed? And oh what covetousness and greediness of gain are the
teachers guilty of! How do they preach for hire, and divine for money? How have
they unreasonably caused men to be imprisoned, and their goods to be spoiled
for wages, and tithes, and hire? Oh how has covetousness, and idolatry, and
superstition abounded amongst the Teachers in this Nation? Oh abominable has
been their sins, their oppressions, and self-seekings! and because of these
things has the Lord brought distractions amongst people, and the sins of
Rulers and People cries for vengeance from the Lord, and till these iniquities
be removed by repentance and forsaken the fruit and effect thereof shall never
cease, but breach upon breach will the Lord make, till the Rulers and Priests
repent them of their iniquities, Gods hand will be upon them both in Judgment;
and for their sakes that divine for money, and preach for hire, and judge for
rewards: Will the Lord make the Nation as heaps, and as a ploughed field?
Therefore let all people repent of their iniquities, and return to the light of
Christ in their own consciences, and become followers of the Lamb, and this is
the perfect way of healing of all breaches inwardly and outwardly.

Fifthly, You exhort to be diligent in the spiritual and conscientious
performances of family duties, etc.

Answ. Men must first be awakened and enlivened unto God, before they can act
for God in holy duties; and as for duties performed in pretense unto God
traditionally, and without the teachings of the the Spirit of God, is but
idolatry, and the Nation is weary of such a Religion which they have received,
and held traditionally, for thereby the Soul immortal cannot be nourished unto
eternal life, and while you teach duties toward God, by that rule, while you
teach praying, singing, repeating, catechizing, by tradition and imitation,
without the leadings of the Spirit of Christ in them, you do but teach
idolatry; as long has been taught in the Christian Nations, the doing and
performing such and such things, as Christian duties and practices, and the
forcing and compelling of doing such things upon people in the unregenerate
state, and unconverted nature, this Religion and such performances of duties,
have been of Babylon, and of Antichrist, and a cheat upon peoples Souls,
whereby many have been murdered and slain in that great City, and the form of
Godliness without the Power has been practiced, while duties have been
performed unto God, without the teachings of the Spirit of God, and such their
consciences are blinded, and the Lord abhors their Sacrifices; and people must
first come to feel the Word of God in their hearts to regenerate them, before
they can perform any acceptable thing to God; and therefore do not teach people
to be hypocrites, do not teach them such and such performances, in the corrupt
nature, without the teachings of the Spirit of God in their own particulars,
for if you do, you make them but two fold more the children of the devil, and
such duties performed in that nature, shall not cover nor hide from the Wrath
of the Lord which is coming upon all hypocrites.

Sixthly, You exhort that they would cause their children and servants to
submit to Catechisings, and train them up in there verence of godly Ministry,
etc.

Answ. It may be enquired into, what you mean by cause them to submit; how
cause them? by force and imposition upon their consciences, by outward external
personal punishment or threats? Is this your meaning? Will you set up Religion
by violence? And must children and servants be compelled by resraint and force?
This is not the right way to promote Religion and the Worship of God, nor to
make children and servants truly religious; it was the Beast that received
power from the Dragon, that caused all to worship, both small and great,
children and servants; and this causing to worship was in the time of the
Apostasy, when the true Church was fled into the Wilderness, and all the time
ever since, has Nations been caused and compelled to such and such
performances, and practices of Religion and Worship, and such causing, I am
jealous, your meaning is, whereby you would force and compel such manner of
worship and practices upon people: And what do you mean by godly Ministry? Will
you admit of just trial according to the Scriptures, whether yours be that
godly Ministry or no? for all sorts of Christians, Papists, and Protestants,
and all others, they will say that they are in the right way, and their
Ministry is the godly Ministry, but the fruits of many proves the contrary, and
we cannot believe that yours is the godly Ministry, except you will prove it to
us, by, and according to the Scriptures.

Now it is certain, that the Ministry of the Apostles was the true godly
Ministry, and if yours agree with theirs, then we will confess that yours is
the true godly Ministry. Therefore tell us plainly, Do you agree with them in
your Call, and in your Maintenance, and in your Practices, and in your Fruits
and Effects, in your Lives and Conversations, and in your Doctrines? Are you
justly according to? and do you agree with the Apostles in all these things?
Shall we lay you to the line, that you may be judged? This is but as a hint at
things whereby you might justly be tried, for if you agree not with the
Apostles in these case mentioned, then it is evident that your Ministry is not
the true godly Ministry; but hereafter we may have a better occasion to try
you: And thus the principal parts of your Exhortation is answered, and if you
can, receive it in love.

TO all you sixty one Teachers in London, under whose hands your Exhortation
passes: This I say to you, in the fear of the Lord God: Oh ye men consider!
and let it enter into your hearts, the day of the Lord is at hand upon you, and
account of your Stewardship must you give, and his reward must you have whom
you have served, and you must reap the fruit of what you have sown: Oh look
upon your flocks, and see what a condition they are in! Oh what pride and
vainglory is abounding amongst them! Oh how does wickedness spring forth from
them! Are they like unto sheep of Christ's Fold? Or are not they appearing
outwardly Christians, when as the evil nature is uncut down in them? Oh what
wickedness abounds in this City! What double-dealing and dissimulation? What
lying, and swearing, and drunkenness? Oh high are all the fruits of the flesh
grown amongst your Flocks! Your Vineyards are not dressed as they ought to be,
there is abundance of corrupt trees, and fruitless branches which cumbers the
ground: Oh it makes the heart of the righteous sad to walk in the streets, and
to view the abominations that are daily brought forth, by a people professing
Scriptures, Church, Ministry, and Christ: Oh! it burdens the just, and grieves
the righteous soul to consider how high iniquity is grown among the sheep of
your Pastures, whom ye should have fed with knowledge, and converted unto the
fear of the Lord, had you been messengers sent of God; the very Jews and
Heathens they blaspheme against Christ, through the abominations brought forth
among Christians, that have the name to live, but are dead: Oh let it enter
into your hearts, and smite you, that your many years Ministry should have so
little effect, for your vineyard is like untilled ground, unploughed, and
unbroken up: Oh there is much hard-heartednesse amongst your people, and their
hearts goes after covetousness, even while they profess God with their lips;
Oh the righteous mourns in secret to see the profaneness, the scornings, and
reproaches that are brought forth in your City: And oh the idolatry that
abounds! let it repent you, that you have been so slothful, and never more seek
the fleece, but seek the flock that's gone astray from the Lord, who is the true
Shepherd, whose voice has not been obeyed, and many Pastors have destroyed the
Vineyard, and many Shepherds have fed themselves, and not the Flock: Oh
consider the day of the Lord is at hand, and he will visit with his rod: You
and your Flocks prepare to meet the Lord, for his Kingdom is nigh to come,
which will be a terrible day to all workers of iniquity.

And as for this your Exhortation, I say, as for Exhortation in it self,
Ministers ought to exhort their Flocks; so such a thing in it self I do
commend, and not oppose; but when I had read and seriously considered the aim
and intent of your spirits in your Exhortation, I found it secretly, and in a
measure openly opposing, and striking at, and secretly smiting the people of
the Lord, whom you have reproached by the name of Quakers, who are dear to the
Lord, and he cares for them, though you see no beauty in them, but accounts
them altogether vile, and in as much as you lifted up your hands against them,
upon that account was it upon my spirit to return something in answer, for the
information of many, that they might be undeceived, and not in envy toward
any, but in love to all, to both you and your people, and you have occasioned
this upon your selves, though you are reproved; and not as a man of strife or
contention have I proceeded, but as one that desires the further manifestation
of truth, and that no false accusastion may rest upon it, which you have
secretly brought forth, with which the Lord is not well pleased, that you
should set your selves in opposition against his people; and if any of you
shall receive a just reproof and repent, it may prove to you an advantage of
much good, and be not so proud as to say in your hearts, What art thou, weak
man, that reproves us? or wherefore art thou so bold thus to deal with us? but
rather fall under just reproof, for in uprightness of heart have I proceeded
toward you, and not in mine own, but in the will of the Father: And oh that
your Flocks would also consider, among whom there are many that are zealous in
their way! Oh that their Zeal and Judgments were guided by the Spirit of the
Lord, then should it be well with them! Oh that they would be meek and humble,
and learn the fear of the Lord! Oh that every one of them would consider, and
turn from their iniquities, and become followers of Jesus Christ, then should
the glory of the Lord be revealed unto them, and peace, and truth, and
righteousness should be unto them, and their Families, and their City, if they
would come into Covenant with God, and he taught of him, and be exercised by
his Law in their hearts, then should the countenance of the Lord be upon them,
and then should they discern between truth and error, between the Ministers of
Christ, and Deceivers. Oh! there is a pity for many poor people, which are
zealous in their way of Religion, without knowledge, and they think they do God
good service, while yet their consciences are not exercised by the Spirit of
the Lord, but a false spirit that rules and leads, and many holds the truth in
unrighteousness, and they know not but they do well: Oh that such would
consider, and not be hasty in any thing to perform or profess Religion in
their degenerate estate, but that they would come to know the Regeneration, and
the renewing of their minds by the Holy Spirit, and that the Immortal Birth
might be born in them, even the Birth of the Spirit which is Heir of God: Oh
that that might live and rule in them, then should they be Heirs of God; and
Citizens of the New Jerusalem! And oh ye people of London! lay it to heart, you
must be born again, or else you can never enter into Gods Kingdom, you must be
changed in nature, and must be crucified to this world, that you may live unto
God; this must you come unto, or else you have no part nor portion in eternal
life; all your duties and performances in your forms of Religion they cannot
save you, nor justify you, all your preaching, praying, singing, and all your
duties whatsoever, they are all nothing, till you come to know changing and
renewing inwardly, and do witness the Seed of God raised up in you, and the
head of the Serpent bruised in you by the Seed of the Woman, this must you come
to witness, that your souls may live: Oh that you would consider! be not so
zealous against that which you may call Heresy and Schism, for while you err
in judgment, you may soon speak evil of truth, and persecute it under the name
of error; many have woefully fallen into that snare, and brought sorrow upon
themselves thereby: The wise Jews, even the chief Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees, they were confident in their way, as you can be, and yet they erred
in judgment, and would not receive Christ, but persecuted him, under the very
name of a Deceiver; and thus it is possible for many to do in this age: What
though you have Christ's words, and the Apostles words; yet if you have not the
Spirit of Christ, that was in the Apostles, you know nothing rightly of the
Scriptures, neither can you understand them, nor have Salvation by them, for
you must know Christ in you, your hope of glory, else you are reprobates, and
shut out of the Kingdom of God: And search the Scriptures, and see, if they do
not witness this: Do not they say, Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates?
and do not they say, The Law of God is written in the heart, and the Spirit of
God is put in the inward part? And do not they say, That Christ has lightened
every man that comes into the world with the true light? And do not they say
that the Apostle exhorts people to hearken to the Word of God in their hearts,
and to be followers of the Spirit of God that was in their hearts? And do not
the Scriptures say, That it was the light that shined in the heart, that gave
the knowledge of God unto the Saints? Search the Scriptures, and see whether
these things be so; and must not men be born again of the immortal seed? Oh
consider and let not these doctrines seem new unto you, neither reject them,
though they come unto you in weak appearance, not with words of men's wisdom,
but in simplicity, and in sincerity, and in the Power of God: And search the
Scriptures whether these things be so; were not they false Prophets that
preached for hire, and divined for money, and sought for their gain from their
quarter? Were not such deceivers in the true Prophets time, and them that
preached for filthy lucre, and for money, and for gifts and rewards? were not
such false Brethren, and false Apostles? Search the Scriptures, whether these
things be so, for the day of trial is now come, wherein all must be searched,
and that Religion, and Worship, and Ministry, which is not according to the
Scriptures, which was given forth by the Spirit of God, let that Religion,
Worship, Church, and Ministry be utterly condemned of the Lord, and all his
people; and let such Ministers as cannot prove their call, their maintenance,
and practices, to be according to the Scriptures, let such Ministers be
confounded, and silenced for ever, and come to try this matter when you will.
For whereas you cry out against us, as if we were deniers of Scriptures, as if
we were enemies to Church, and godly Ministry, and Religion, and as if we were
Deceivers, Heretics, Papists, etc.

But I say unto you, these things have you never yet justly proved against us,
but rather accused us behind our backs, to make us odious among people; and
though for diverse years together we have been public, yet when did ever any of
you Ministers seek by lawful means to convert us, or show us our errors, if we
were as you say of us, oh it had been your time to have sought our conversion!
and not to have persecuted, to have sent to prisons, houses of correction, and
by such weapons of an outward force and cruelty have you dealt with us, and not
in meekness, and by the Spirit of the Lord, as Ministers of Christ ought to
do; but has cried to the Magistrates to defend you and your Church, and
worship, being unable, as it were, by the Authority of Gods Spirit to defend
your selves: Therefore I say unto you now, lay down your carnal weapons, and
come out in in the spirit of meekness, and come out in the Authority of Gods
Spirit, if you have it, convince us thereby, if we be in an evil way, as you
say, let us hear your soundest arguments by the Spirit of God, and according to
the Scriptures, to prove those things which you say of us; prove it by evident
arguments, that we deny Scriptures, and that we are Heretics, and that we are
Papists. I challenge you all in the Name of the Lord, even all your Ministers
of London, let us hear your sound reasons openly in the spirit of meekness,
and do not back-bite nor slander in the dark, neither let us be bawled against
by your rude members, as often we have been, even in the spirit of wickedness;
but come out you Ministers, we are willing to be tried according to the
Scriptures, and by the Spirit of God in our Religion, and in every part of it;
and if you be the same, then come forth in the spirit of meekness, like
Ministers of Christ, and lay down your carnal weapons, and let us have fair
dealing openly, that truth may be manifested publicly, and error may be
discovered; and let us not envy one another persons, and seek to destroy one
another lives, but let us seek to destroy the evil in one another, that men
might be saved, and this would be a Christian-like way, we would hear what you
have to charge against our Religion, by sound arguments in meekness, that we
may answer, it, and then we will charge something upon your Ministry, Church,
Religion, and Worship, and we will prove what we say against you, according to
the Scriptures; and we will not impose our Religion upon you, by the force of
outward Powers, and outward Laws; neither would we have you force your
Religion, Ministry, and Church upon us, by such means, but we will leave the
effect of all things to the Spirit of God; and come out when you will in such a
way as this, and this would satisfy thousands, and let meekness and the fear
of God be amongst you, and this is the way to exalt Religion; and we would
think it a happiness, more then otherwise, to be joined in sober debate and
dispute against you, that you and we, in your Religion, Church, and Ministry,
and in ours also, might be tried according to the Scriptures, that all may be
satisfied who are doubtful, and may hear your principles, and our principles
discussed, in the presence of the people, who may judge by the light and
witness in their own consciences, for to that in all we do appeal; and in such
a proceeding, come forth when you will; lay down your carnal weapons, and take
the weapons of the Spirit, and come to the trial, for the day of the Lord is
approaching upon all the world.

THE END.

