TO THE RULERS And to such as are in AUTHORITY A True and faithful testimony
concerning Religion, and the establishment thereof, and how it may be
established in persons and in Nations.

By EDWARD BVRROVGH.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

THere has been a great cry of late years among the Priests and many others,
for the settlement of Religion, and this they have sought after from the powers
of the Earth, and the cry has been to Parliaments and Rulers by the priests
and professors for many years, settle us Religion, settle us Religion.

Now to this I answer, all this cry and this desire has been by these Priests
and professors to have Parliaments to make Laws, to establish one sect, and
throw down and limit all others, that is the chief thing that has been eyed in
the request, and not simply to have true Religion established; if we come to
show what true Religion is in it self. But people of diverse sects have been
requiring and desireing every one to have their own sect established and set
up, and all others thrown down, and not to have a place nor to be tolerated, so
that their cry has not risen from the ground of true love to true religion,
but their desire has chiefly risen and sprung from self love to their own
sect, and from malice and envy against others that were not of their way, and
this has been the end of their craving the settlement of Religion, and not
simply for true religions sake. Now religion in it self is this, the
fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets, loving God with all their hearts and
the neighbor as self, and doing to all men as they would have men to do to
them, and not otherwise doing or speaking toward any, then they would that
others should speak of or do to them, and a walking toward God in all things,
as they have received of his Grace, answering to the Lord in all things, as his
spirit leads them and moves them, this is true religion toward God and toward
man, and to have the conscience always kept void of offense, and that no
offense lie upon it in the sight of God, nor in the sight of man, and this is
true religion in it self, in short declared, to wit, the leading of the spirit
of God into all truth, to do the truth, and speak the truth in all things, and
this Religion is accepted in the sight of God, and to be kept unspotted in the
world, from all its pollutions. But now tell me, can this religion be settled,
or any Nation or people or any person in it, by any external power or outward
authority of men? or can the Laws of Kings or Parliaments settle such Religion,
or make people truly religious, or establish a Nation or people, in this
Religion? I say no, nor any thing, save only the teaching and leading of the
holy spirit of God being received from the Father, its that only that makes
men religious, and settles a people and Nation therein. Oh ye fools and blind
Priests and professors, that are doting on settling religion among unconverted
people by out ward Laws and earthly powers of men; I say no, this must not be,
for the Laws of men can but settle a sect, or some sects, and limit other
sects; but true Religion can never be settled by that means; for before any be
settled in Religion they must first be changed and created a new in Christ
Jesus, and borne again of the seed incorruptable, and they must first be
changed from death to life, and from Statans power to God; this must first be
witnessed before a man or a nation can be religious, and settled in true
Religion, he must put off the body of sin, and be circumcised in heart; and he
must have a new Nature planted in him, and he planted into Christ a new and
living vine, before he can love God with all his heart and his neighbor as
himself, and before he can have his conscience kept void of offense, and be
without stain toward God and toward man, and it is only the word of God and
his power in the heart that works this, it is only the operation of Gods spirit
in and upon a creature that works him unto this, it is not the Laws made by
man that does it, nor external powers of the Earth that can work it, and
therefore true Religion cannot be settled thereby, nor a nation or a people in
it; but only that which changes him, and makes him religious, that is it only
that must settle religion and Nations, and peoples therein; and as every one is
turned to that of God in him, and thereby to feel the power and word and spirit
that does change him, and renew him as I have said, by this means comes a man
and Nations to be religious, and to be settled therein, and by no other ways
nor means, and this is done through the preaching of the everlasting Gospel,
and through the Ministry of Christ, which turns the minds of people from
darkness to light, and from Satan's power to God, whereby they are changed and
made religious, and also settled therein, and established thereby, and it is not
by outward Laws, and powers as I have said. But what are peoples, and the
Nations yet to settle in religion? and is religion unsettled yet, that you are
craving Laws made by men to settle religion? what have you preached for this
many years? what, have your preaching been all in vain? and have you done no
good this many years by your preaching, that Religion is yet to settle? Oh
blind and ignorant men! this is a shame unto you, how many thousands of
thousand pounds have the Priests had out of this Nation for teaching religion,
and preaching to people, and yet the nation remains unsettled in religion and
they are beging to the powers of the Earth, to constrain and compel a
settlement of Religion, and this shames them, and shows that they are they that
Paul speaks of, and that the people of this nation are them that are ever
learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, though you have
been long learning, you are unsettled, and are not come to the knowledge of the
truth: but had these Priests been such that were sent of the Lord, through
their ministry would the nations long since have been settled in Religion, for
they have been teachers long enough, and put the Nation to charge great enough,
that people might have known ere this day the holy anointing to dwell in them,
and to teach them, and to settle them in Religion, but it is manifest that they
have ran and not been sent, but left peoples and nations unsettled as the
waters, notwithstanding, all their preaching, and ministry for so many years,
yet it seems there wants still a settlement in Religion, and seeing their
preaching has had no effect to do it, but their Ministry has been all in
vain, and people are not learned in Religion, nor yet established therein,
whereby their Ministry is proved not to be Christ's Ministry (for the Apostles
did setle people, and the Churches in Religion, which theirs has done no such
thing) and therefore it is that the powers of the Earth are called to, that
they may force by violence and by violent Laws, that by that means a worship
and Religion may be settled as they say; and their Ministry has not drawn
people by love, and therefore would they have people forced and compelled to be
of such or such Religion but this is not Christ's way, nor the way that his
Apostles and true Churches were in; for the spirit of the Father led each one
of them, to be Religious, and that same spirit settled and established them in
it, and not external Laws nor powers of the Earth, but that was Antichrists
way, and the beasts and the false Prophets way, for when they had killed the
Saints, and slain true Religion, then the beast and false prophets they
established a Religion or worship by outward Laws; and its written, that he
caused and compelled all, both small and great, bond and free, to worship the
beast and his image; and here was a settled people in a Religion and worship by
an outward compelling power. And thus it was then and is now the same, false
Churches and false Religions are settled by an outward Authority; and it was
Nebuchadnezzar and his wicked Princes that settled a Religion or worship by an
outward power and by an earthly authority, but that was not the worship of true
Religion, but was the worship of Antichrist, and so it has been for ages; that
worship that is settled, and that Religion which is established by an outward
external power and the Laws of men, is but the worship of Antichrist, and not
the true Religion, nor the worship of the living God, which is in spirit and in
truth, but it must all be overthrown and brought to naught, both that Religion
and worship that is out of the spirit, and that power that upholds it, and now
the Lord God is risen to confound the thoughts of men's hearts, and he alone
will setle and establish Religion by his own power and by his own Law, and
through his own Ministry, and as people comes to that of God in them, to feel
the Spirit and power of the Lord God to change them; hereby will every one
particularly be settled in Religion, and by no other way nor means; and this I
know from the Lord. But how should people be settled in Religion? for peoples
and Nations have been and are as waters, which has been driven with the winds,
this way or the other way, and the great Whore sits upon the waters, and the
beast has carried her and born her up, (false worships and Churches and an
outward power) and she has ruled and made all Nations drunk with her cup of
fornication, and the true Religion has been lost for many ages, and the Sects
and false Churches has been set up and established upon the waters; and as for
true Religion, it cannot be established while Nations are waters under the
Whores Dominion, and so the many Sects which has been the many horns upon the
beast, and one has risen after another, and one diverse from another, and they
have been striving one with another, and persecuting one another, and one
subduing one another, and each one of them has cried for help from the beast,
and from the powers of the Earth, to be defended from the power and malice one
of another, least one should prevail against another, and get the better one of
another; and so that Sect that could get authority from the powers of the
earth, and have them of its side, that Sect has thriven, and has been settled
more then another which has not gotten the powers of the earth to defend it;
and so as the powers of the Earth has been changeable, so has Religion been
changeable; and what Sect the Rulers has been on, that have they highest
tolerated, and most defended against all other; but all this has not been the
true establishment of true Religon.

But now some may suppose and query, whither I speak this as if I would have
Religion not at all settled, and as if I were against the establishing of
Religion, and so thereby may be accused, as if I were an enemy to all Religion,
and would not have Religion established, etc.

To all this I answer, I am a friend to true Religion, and seeks the
establishing of it in the right way, and by the Ministry of righteousness, by
turning peoples minds to the spirit, and to receive the anointing that they may
be all taught of God, and true worshippers of him in spirit and truth, and may
be settled in the true Religion; and this true Religion would I have established
in the world, and in the Nations and would have all people therein established
by the Ministry of righteousness thereunto ordained. But I am against the
establishing of Sects, and the settling of one Sect above another, by the powers
of the earth, and I would not have one set up and another thrown down by the
Laws of men, for that brings forth nothing but tyranny, and oppression, and
strife, and wickedness in a Nation, and among people; though thus it has been
for many ages, false Sects and false Churches has been established by the
powers of the Earth and external Laws, and that Sect which the King or Queen,
or Ruler has been of, that has been set up and tolerated above the rest, and
the rest despised, and persecuted and set at naught; for when and where a
Prince or a Ruler is of the Papists Religion, then that Religion is the most
established and settled in that government; and if at any time a Ruler change to
be of the Protestant Sect, or one come to govern that is of that Religion, then
that Sect was the most established and upheld, thus it is through Nations, and
in England particularly within these late years, when King Henry the eighth
turned from the Papists to be a Protestant, then that Sect was established, and
all other thrown down and persecuted; and when Queen Mary rose to govern, which
was a Papist, then she established that Sect and false Church, by Laws, and the
rest were limited and thrown down; then when the next Queen arose being a
Protestant, she established that Sect again by outward Laws, and cast all
others down, and thus it has been for many ages throughout all Nations, of
what Sect and Religion the Governor and Ruler has been, that Sect was only
established and all the rest persecuted as I have said, and so the saying is
fulfilled, Nations has been waters, and peoples and multitudes waters; and as
a King and governor has changed his Religion and of what Sect as he has
been, so has the Religion of the whole Nation or country changed, and such a
Sect only established against all others; but this I cannot call the setlement
of true Religion, nor are the Nations and peoples hereby established in true
Religion, but only false Sects and false religions has risen and been
established by the beasts power, who has carried the whore, yea and though
many other Sects, has risen, and many other horns appeared diverse one from
another, out of the many heads of the beast; for his heads has been many, and
his horns divided, and diverse one from another, and each head exalting his self
above another, and each horn pushing one at another, and each Sect and horn
crying to the beast for power to be established, and to have others thrown down
and limited, through the powers of the earth, and thus has it been for
generations, and in this Nation in particular, and many Sects has risen
besides the Papists and the Protestants and all these Sects has risen one out
of another, and appeared diverse one from another, and each one of them has
sought to the powers of the earth for setlement and defense, and that the other
that were contrary to them and of another appearance might be stopped and
limited, and this has been done by these teachers and Professors under the
account of the establishment of Religion, and they have begged to Parliaments
and to Rulers for the establishment of Religion, and for the stopping of
heresy, that is to say, for tollerating and defending of their own Sect which
they call Religion, and for the stopping and subduing of all others which they
call heresy, but confusion has come upon all this, and will upon the like for
ever, and true Religion never gets established by it, but as every new Sect
has appeared, that only has sought establishment against all the rest.

But yet I say, I am not against establishing of true Religion, though thus I
speak, but would have true religion settled and established, but does not seek
to the powers of the earth, to have true Religion established by earthly Laws;
for that cannot establish true religion, neither is it at all committed of the
Lord to the powers of the Earth, or to outward authorities to establish
religion, or to make men religious; for that belongs to the Lord to rule over,
and in men's consciences, and to exercise them in the true Religion: no Ruler by
any Law whatsoever ought to to exercise Lordship over the consciences of any
people, either to exalt or throw down any sect, or worship of religion; for
they are with their Laws but to rule the outward man, to settle their persons
and estates in security, from the wrong and unrighteous dealing of wicked men,
and to limit all evil men and evil doers from wronging and doing violence to
men's persons and estates; this is the work, and the place of Kings and Rulers
of the earth, their power is only committed to them of the Lord to extend over
the outward man, to defend and preserve that, and be a praise to all that do
well and lives righteously, and to be a terror, and limit, and punishers of the
unrighteous evil and violent doers, this is the Magistrates place, and the
length and breadth and height of his authority, whether it reside in King,
Queen or any other person or persons. But for the exercise of conscience, that
is out of their power, and over and beyond it, it is not committed of the Lord
to them to compel and cause people from, or to such a worship and religion, it
is not the magistrates work, but the ministers work, that are sent of Christ
to teach religion; but let all sects have their course, and every religion its
liberty in a nation or country (so that they do no violence to one another
persons and estates) and if they do, then they fall under the Magistrates
power, and then let them be punished, and let every sect strive to exalt it
self, and to overthrow others, by what authority it has in doctrine and
forceable arguments, and let them use what spiritual weapons they have, and
defend themselves thereby, and let them that have the spirit of God overcome,
and let them alone to be established, and let all the rest be subdued before
that, and let that alone be settled only by the power and authority of the
spirit of God, which overcomes all the contrary; and let all men, and all of
man's power and authority be silent and quiet, and have no hand in this matter,
and this is the way to establish religion in a nation; and a kingdom, let the
spirit of the Lord have its liberty, and let no man whatsoever limit it in them
in whom it dwells, but let it have its course and its operation, and its full
authority by them in whom it dwells, in whomsoever it be; and let all sects
whatsoever have their liberty -- in their arguments, and their practices, and
their worship, and then let it be manifest, who it is that overcomes, and who
it is that is overcome; and such as overcomes by the same spirit and power
that gives them victory, by that alone let true religion be established, and
the rest of all sects bow under that true Religion that overcomes all others
by the power and authority of the spirit of God, and is established thereby;
all other under that shall bow, and whilst this is in trial and debate, let the
powers of the earth, and the Rulers of the world be all quiet, and look on in
patience, and let their authority herein be exercised, not to limit one, or
tolerate one more then an other, only let them keep men's persons and estates
in peace and defense from the injury and malice and wrong dealing one of
another, as I have said, and here is the way, the true and perfect way, for the
establishing of religion in a Nation among people, and if this were brought to
pass, and had been in generations past, then would not the Papists have been
prevailed against by the Protestants, they being at the first discenting from
the Church and sect of the Papist, more sincere toward God, and more upright
to him, and in some things more true in doctrine and worship, then the other
which they discented from, though still in the main but a false sect, and of a
false religion, though they hated the whore in some things, and they would have
prevailed against her through that sincericy toward God, that was in them, but
they gave their power to the beast; and would not many other sects have
prevailed against them, which has risen out of this, and discented from her,
who was more in the sincerity and uprightness toward God, than she? for God
blessed that and loved that, in what measure so ever and wheresoever it be; I
say, would not many sects ere this day have prevailed one against another, had
not the powers of the earth stopped, and limited whom they would, and given
liberty to set up whom they would? but now the light of the day is arisen, and
has appeared, and the Lord is making a way to establish his own Religion by
his own Power, and he is gathering his seed, who shall wax stronger and
stronger, and shall prevail through all opposition, through all false sects and
false worships of the earth, and they shall wax weaker and weaker, and shall
never be established in righteousness, but they and the power that upholds
them shall be broken together, and this will the Lord bring to pass in his
day; And thus I have showed you what true Religion is, and how it cann^^ be
established, and how it may be, and what the authority of earthly Rulers is,
and how far it extends, and does show that true Religion cannot be settled
thereby, but by the Lord alone it must, and that it is the work of Christ's
ministry, and not of earthly power by violent laws to establish Religion.

And this is a testimony from the Lord God of heaven and Earth to ye Rulers,
and Parliaments that makes Laws and ministers Laws; meddle not with Religion,
to establish one sect or sects, and to limit and throw down others; But fear
the Lord God, and wait for his wisdom, and remember that that has been a
rock, whereupon many before you have been split, and brought into confusion;
even when they have gone about to limit or stop or establish Religion, how have
they been confounded, and never had success from the Lord to such endeavors,
for the Lord has never showed countenance for many generations to such as have
attempted to make men religious by outward Laws, and to settle Nations therein
by outward Laws.

Wherefore now be wise ye Rulers and kiss the Son, for the wrath of the Lord
is already kindled, and he will break in pieces and dash Babylons children
against the stones, and confound the great Whore, (the false Church) and all
false sects, her daughters who has been brought forth, and set up in Nations
ever since the woman, (the true Church) has been fled into the wilderness,
and the beast has carried the whore, born her, and upheld her, and she has
journeyed through Nations upon the beast, and the Beast has defended her; if
any man has an ear let him hear; and this is a visitation to ye Rulers, and
to all that make Laws, and ministers Laws,

By a friend to righteous men, Edward Borough.

The End.

