SOMETHING OF TRUTH MADE MANIFEST (In Relation to a Dispute at Draton in the
County of Middlesex in the first Month last) in opposition to the false
account given of it by one Philip Taverner, in his BOOK styled the
QVAKERS-ROVNDS; OR A Faithful Account, etc.

And this is written for the Truths sake by E. B.



LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1658.

FOrasmuch as one (who has (I suppose) ambitiously styled himself Mr. Philip
Taverner) has taken in hand to set forth to the view of the world, an account
and relation of a dispute happening in the 11. month last, at Draton near
Colebrook, to which relation I am a little engaged to write something by way of
answer thereunto, that all people may know the truth; and being the truth is
somewhat concerned herein, that is the reason wherefore I have taken in hand to
write a little by way of answer to his relation, being without any prejudice
toward the man, as concerning any wrong he has done to me, though me as well
as the truth he has wronged, as may appear to such who desire to know the
truth.

It Is true, a public dispute I had, the time and place mentioned, with a
company of Priests, and this same Philip * Taverner was one of them; and the
occasion of the Dispute was thus; I being a few weeks before at a meeting with
some friends in the said Town, one Richard Goodgroom in his relation mentioned
was present at the hearing of what was spoken, but at that time did not object
any thing, though afterward in London and other places he went up and down in
a backbiting manner, and gave forth that I had held forth blasphemous Doctrine,
or the like; whereupon I much desired a dispute for the trial of those things,
and it was accomplished, and that day the truth was much made manifest, and
deceit consounded; and as to all the things objected agauist me by R. G. which
he would have seemed to have taken great occasion thereby, as if some great
matter of heresy and error had been uttered by me. I say, the very truth of
all these things was demonstrated according as I had laid them down, and his
arguments against them made of none effect; and though such as hardened their
hearts might go unfatisfied, and in greater unbelief then they came, yet I am
sure the upright-hearted, and such as desired the knowledge of the truth, were
wholly satisfied, and this many can give testimony of with me: And though by
his relation it may appear otherwise to some, yet wherein he has related
falsely, it shall fall upon his own head; and his folly shall truly more appear
in the end then he would have, or seem to cause any in me to appear at this
present, and so he might with more credit to himself been silent, then to have
meddled in that wherein he has showed himself so imperfect. For I believe that
this same Philip Taverner has given a relation of four times as much as he did
speak at that meeting; and have related, as though he spoke that which he never
uttered, by so miny times so much as I have said, and have not related so much
by many times, as was spoken by me, and by them of my part, as many may
witness; which work of his seems not to be perfect, neither yet altogether
honest, as sober men may judge; but such a thing must redownd more to his own
dishonor, then to the truths disadvantage. And first, as to the Title of his
false relation, which is styled, The Quakers Rounds, or a faithful Account,
etc.

To this I answer, that the very Frontispiece and Title of his Book savours of
a vain light scornful spirit; and so every spiritual man may judge of it to be
so; but why do thou P. T. say a faithful account, but that to confirm
falsehood with audacious words, having a show of confidence upon it, thereby the
more easily to enter into the hearts of the people, as if it were
irreproveable, coming also from the hand, and under the hand of a Mr. Philip,
etc. having so styled thy self, to make thy fame great, and to publish thy work
under a seeming authority; but had thou had more humility, less pride would
have appeared: and had thou had a better heart, less of unfaithful dealing
would have proceeded from thee; but as I have said, evil shall fall upon
himself that hatcheth it for another; but why do thou say Faithful Account
in the Title page? signifying to the world, that all in it is true, and nothing
of truth wanting in relation to that Dispute; and yet in thy Epistle says,
thou do not undertake to set down the multitude of words that that day was
filled withal, and page 29. says, that a third man of the company made a large
discourse concerning the person justified, but relates not one word what was
said by him; and here thou have not dealt faithfully, nor given a faithful
account: And page 31. thou says, E. B. at such a time did multiply many words,
but does not relate his particular words, and so has not in this dealt
faithfully, nor given a faithful account; and also in many other things thou
have not related what was spoken at all; and thus thou have contradicted thy
self, in saying a faithful account, and yet consessing in effect
unfaithfulness: And thy own words being compared together, proves a
contradiction in thy own mind and pen; for to give a faithful account, as
thou say thou have, is to relate the whole truth, and not to keep any back,
neither to speak more then the truth, by adding thereto any thing. But again
thou say, thou undertak'st not to relate the multitude, or every particular
of words, neither does relate what particular words such a one and such a one
spoke, but says he said so, and multiplied many words, not saying what his
words were; and therefore thou have heaped a contradiction upon thy own head,
and it shall remain till it have made thee ashamed.

And now as to the particulars, upon which the Dispute depended, so far as they
are truly laid down in my words; and in my intent and meaning I am ready to
justify them at any place or time convenient, or before any Auditory
whatsoever upon lawful occasion, but as thou have laid them down, or some of
them, thou have wronged me and the truth, and either not understood my meaning,
or subverted and perverted my words to thy own advantage.

And whereas in the Epistle thou say, I would not own them, viz* the
particulars laid down to be mine at first, and yet owned every one of them in
the discourse, etc.

Answ. I did not own them; but how? and how did I own them but thus? the
Objector had laid down some of the particulars, not in my words, which made
them vary from the intent of my meaning; and others of the particulars he had
laid down utterly false, and so I did deny them as coming from him; but as to
the substance of some of the particulars, I did own, having laid them down
according to my own honest meaning, in my own found expression of words; and
thereupon I engaged a dispute upon the particulars, having first denied them as
laid down by him, and in his corrupt expressions, and then owned them in the
simplicity in the words as by me uttered; I mean some of them, but some I
altogether denied. And as to speak of that Text, Ioh. 5. 39. by which say
thou, I endeavored to skin over what I spoke, but to no punpose. I do deny thy
words; for that same verse shall stand a witness for me, and against thee in all
the world; and that verse shall prove that some of the Scriptures were spoken
to the world, and not to the Saints, and the truth it self is my covering, and
I need no other thing to skin over, as thou scornfully spakest.

And whereas thou say, There was just matter of reproof in the dispute, in
both parties, etc.

Answ. While thou have condemned others, thou have judged thy self, who was of
the one party, a strong contender for the Priests party; and having now accused
both parties, would clear thy self to be of neither, but cannot; for it is
known that thou did take their part, and in the title thou say, the
discourse was betwixt a party of them called Quakers, with Mr. Philip T. etc.
where thou do own thy self to be one, (and reckons thy self the foremost
Master) of the Disputants; and now upon better consideration I think, when thou
have searched into their solly with whom thou wast joined, thou would absent
thy self to be none of them, but a third party; but let me tell thee, what
disorder, prejudice and passion as thou speaks of, as was amongst the Priests,
thou have a part in, and must own their sin and their condemnation, for thou
art also guilty; and that there was any passion (except pure zeal for God and
his truth, which thou might falsely so call) or prejudice, or such like
amongst us, I db deny it, and knows thee to have born a false testimony; and
all thy covers, as if thou were a moderator or the like, in thy speaking, will
not hide thee, nor cover thee from what I have said of thee.

But as to the things in particular I now come, and may show what my words are,
and the ground of them, and how I laid them down, and upon what occasion in the
first meeting whereupon the Dispute did arise; and I do not here go about to
give a perfect relation of that Dispute, for my memory has not contained what
passed; but as to the intent and meaning of my words, I would give all the true
knowledge thereof, and how far I do own the particulars charged against me.

First, as to that, The Scriptures are not the word of God, because the Devil
spoke something, and Pharaoh something, which is there written.

Answ. There is some truth in this; but my words were drawn up by him at the
shortest, and the most for his own advantage laid down by him; for I do
remember, that in the first meeting I was a speaking concerning the Word of
God, and concerning the Scriptures, which are a declaration thereof, and
showing the difference betwixt the Word and the Letter, and Scriptures; for the
Word of God was in the beginning, and the world was made by it, and it endures
for ever; but the Scriptures were not in the beginning, for Moses was the first
that wrote any thing of the Scripture, who was long after the beginning;
neither was the world made by them, neither can they endure for ever; and
therefore the letter, the Scriptures are not the Word of God which the
Scriptures call* the Word; for also in the Scriptures are written what the
Devil spoke, and what Pharaoh and other wicked men spoke, and therefore they
are not the Word of God, but as I have said, a declaration of the Word, and
what is written of, is the Word; but the Scriptures, (the writings) are not,
but a testimony and declaration of the Word: much more as to this might be
said, and was spoken by me at the meeting, which is not particularly related;
and this is sufficient to any honest man that is spiritual, who has an
understanding to judge hereof.

Now I suppose themselves, none of them are so ignorant, as they will say the
Scriptures are that Word which was in the beginning, and which shall endure for
ever; but say they, the Scriptures are another Word, a declarative Word, or
such like terms; now when we dispute or contend with any about the Word of God,
we dispute what that Word is which the Scripture says is the Word, and does
deny that Word to be the Scriptures (writings) though still we do own the
Scriptures a declaration of that very Word of God, and that the Scriptures in
any place does call themselves the Word, or signify so much, I do deny it, and
it is left for any of our opposers to prove it that can; if they do, I will
confess it to be the Word, and revoke all that I have spoken to the contrary.

And as for thy deductions and consequences drawn from my words, I do deny
them, for they are not to me, but will turn upon thy self; for thou say, A
strange kind of assertion, as if nothing of the mind, will, and council of God
were declared in Scripture, and whitherto can be the tendency of such giddy
doctrines, then to a weakening the authority of the Scriptures, and begetting
slightings and undervaluing thoughts and that the effects may be lightly
esteeming the Scriptures: These and such deductions have thou drawn through thy
ignorance, from my words, from all which I am clear, as having no intent to any
such things, nor any intent but to testify the pure innocent truth; and thy
deductions are far more ignorant and impudent then my assertion is strange; and
let thy consequences be what they will from my words, the truth of my words
will justify me, in the sight of God and his Saints; for I do honor the
Scriptures above other writings, and gives them the authority, and esteem, and
respect due unto them, and more I dare not.

And some of thy pages I pass over, as not worth taking notice of, only does
say, thou have wronged me, in not relating so much as was spoken by us, by far;
and in relating more then was spoken by thee, or thy party. And the next thing
I note is this, where R G. said he would, and went about to prove, that the
Letter is the Word of God, but was not, nor is never able to prove; and thou
have changed the words of his argument in thy relation, from what they were as
he laid them down in the dispute, from called, to owned; For thus his words
were laid down at that time; said he, That which Christ and the Apostles called
the Word of God, is indeed the Word of God, but Christ and the Apostles called
the Scriptures the Word of God, Ergo. Now I denied, and do yet, that it can be
proved, that ever Christ and the Apostles called the Scriptures the Word of
God, and neither does thy proofs now, nor his then, of the minor Proposition,
prove that the Scriptures, viz. the writings were ever called the Word;
although it be true the Pharisees made the Word of God of no authority by their
traditions* but that Scripture does not say that the Letter is the Word, which
thing he was to prove, or else he said nothing to the purpose, and as to the
other Scripture, 1 These. 1. 13. that will not prove that the Apostle called the
Letter the Word, for it was the Gospel which they received as the Word of God,
and not the Letter; the Gospel is the Word of God, not denied by me but sealed
unto: but the Gospel is not the Letter, and writings, but the Gospel is the
thing written of; and that is it which the Apostle means to be the Word of God,
for that is the Word which he preached to the Thessalonians, and which they
received, and so thy arguments and proof of thy minor Position is denied, and
so the major Position falls to the ground; and by this nor any other argument
can all you Priests of England prove the Letter of the Scriptures to be the
Word of God, which thing R. G. took in hand to prove, but could not, and would
have cried against it in me, as a great deal of heresy for denying it; but
error is fallen upon his own head. The next thing I note, is in page 13. where
thou would seem to cover over R. G. thou say his words were not, That I had
the thing signified in my hand, when I had the Bible; but that I had that which
declares of it. Now to justify him in evil, thou have wronged me and the
truth; for he did say when I held up my Bible, I had in my hand the thing
therein signified upon this very occasion; I holding up my Bible in my hand,
and saying to this very effect, that that in my hand, I had the thing which did
signify in words of such and such things; but I had not the thing signified;
and R. G. made answer and said, but I had the thing signified, and this some
can witness, whereupon I made answer and said, if it be so that I have the
thing signified in my hand, then I have God, and Christ, and the Saints, and
Heaven, and Hell, men and beasts, and all things that here in is written of,
and then he saw the folly of his own argument, I perceive.

And much more as upon this subject was said on both parties, which I desire
not much to recollect, only what I have said I can certainly remember, and can
justify it; and I must confess, that P. T. in some things has done pretty
fairly, though in other things he has not done so.

And now as to the next thing charged against me in the relation, being placed
the second, though it is the third.

That evil motions not consented to were not sin* in the first private meeting
I remember my words was laid down thus* and so I owned them in the Dispute,
that temptations or motions unto evil are not sin to any man who does not
consent and obey to serve temptations or evil motions, and they are not sin to
the man, except they be consented to by the man, and this was proved in the
example of Christ, who was tempted of the devil, and had motions to do evil,
yet did not consent nor commit sin, for he resisted and overcome the Tempter,
and so the devils motions and temptations which were sin in themselves, yet
they were not sin to him; and this proof then they could not deny, neither can
any sober or upright man, and so in the dispute the thing was put to a farther
question; Thus, but are not those motions which arise out of a man's own heart
sin, except they be consented to? To which I was willing to speak something,
and to own the very truth, and to justify that there is a state wherein evil
motions may arise out of a man's own heart, which are sin in themselves, and sin
in the man, yet not sin to the man, if he does not consent to them, obey them,
and fulfill them, and the Scripture does prove it, Romans 7. where he says it is
no more I that (...) but sin that dwells in me, for in his mind he served the
Da^ of God, and with his mind did not consent to the motions of evil and sin,
and the sin was not his, nor reckoned against him by the Lord, because with his
mind he consented not and this no upright man can deny; and also I applied my
self at that time for witness to the experience of sober people and Christians,
whether many times there had not been evil motions in their hearts presenting
themselves, to which they had not consented; but the Lord had given them power
over them, to resist them, and deny them, and they were not overcome of them;
and whether ever they were accused and condemned for such motions, which the
Lord gave them power against? or whether the rather they had not peace and joy
in the Lord, who had discovered to them, and given them power over the evil
which had presented it self? And I also gave them that which I had witnessed
concerning the thing, as a testimony agreeing with the Scriptures to that
particular; and though the relation says, as if I spoke of my present state to
be so; but here in the hearers were mistaken, if so they understood me; for my
present state is another then what it once was; I bless the Lord I speak
without boasting, and my present state I did not then, nor now shall declare;
for I am not known to the world, nor desires to be, as what my state is; but
this was my intent, and is in these things; my state was say I, yea I believe
from ten years old, till many years after, that many times I had evil motions
arising in my own heart, which sometime overcame me, and sometime the Lord gave
me to overcome them; so that I consented not to them, nor obeyed, nor followed
them; and when they did overcome me and lead me aside, then was I troubled and
condemned of the Lord, for they were reckoned to be my sins when I consented,
and many times the Lord gave me power over them, and I consented not, but
resisted them and denied them, and then had I great peace and joy in the Lord,
and no condemnation; and this was my experience for some years together, though
my present state be mother condition, of which I shall not speak, as not being
needful at this time; and this is the truth which no sober Christian can deny.

It Is true, we spent a little time in disputing upon those things, but to
little purpose as on their part; for what I then said, many of the people saw
to be the very truth, and all was well satisfied, except such as might harden
their hearts; and much more passed betwixt us.

As to this thing which I cannot relate, only P. T. as he began so he goes on,
giving a report in his Relation of much more then himself spoke, and a great
deal less then we spoke* which thing in him is not very fair nor honest; For I
then proved by many Scriptures, that some were perfect in this life, 1 Cor. 2.
5. even perfect without sin, John 1. 47. 1 John 3. 7. and yet I did declare at
that time that many of the Saints and Children of God were not come to the
state of perfection, which admits of no addition, for many of the Saints daily
receives more and more of Gods wisdom, and of his power and life revealed in
them, wherein they grow up to God from strength to strength: And though they
did so much contend against it, yet in the end was forced to confess to the
substance of what we speak, as to the particular of perfection.

The next thing is concerning perfection, and I am charged with holding that
perfection is attainable in this life, which thing I did hold forth and contend
for it, and am not now ashamed of it, and my very proofs, which then I used,
some of which are related by P. T. is sufficient enough to prove the
particular, if I should say nothing more; and even as the thing is related,
though what I spoke, the whole is not related by much as about this particular
of perfection; but what is related shall stand as a witness for me, and
against them that does so much plead against perfection, even of such
perfection to be without sin in this life: And to this I shall say little more,
but leave his own relation unto the consideration of sober people, only must
say that P. T. has belyed his own memory, in saying his relation is A
Faithful Account, and yet has related much more then he spoke also about this
particular.

As to the next thing which is objected against me, That the Scriptures were
given to the world, and not to the Saints, this is utterly false, and was
neither thus spoken by me, nor yet my meaning. And at the Dispute I did deny
that I spoke the words, neither had I any such intent as they have deducted,
though still I do confidently affirm, that that Scripture, John 5. 39* was
spoken to the unbelieving Jews that went about to kill Christ, who had never
heard Gods voice, nor seen his shape, nor had not Christ's words abiding in
them, and to them* he spoke that Scripture mentioned; neither had I any such
meaning, but that the Saints and all sober people, and all people might search
the Scriptures, though such a bad consequence they have drawn upon my words,
and says, it is a giddy assertion that has dropped from me, and yet himself
is forced to confess what I spoke is true, to wit, that that Scripture in the
fifth of John was spoken to the unbelieving Jews, and not to the Saints, and
yet P. T. to confound himself, confesses that I said the Epistles were given to
the Saints, and this is a contradiction from his own pen: First, to say, that I
asserted, the Scriptures were given to the world, and not to the Saints, and
yet says, I confess the Epistles were given to the Saints, which are some
part of the Scriptures.

And whereas P. T. farther speaks, questioning in himself, how far I own the
authority of the Scripuures, and such like, which shows his ignorance or his
unbelief; for I have, and do here again speak plainly that we do own the
authority of the Scriptures, and we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures have had hope: And they are able to make the man of God perfect
through Faith, and what Christ and the Apostles owned the Scriptures to be, the
same we do, and neither more nor less: And in this we are approved of God, and
let men judge what they will.

And whereas P. T. speaks something of Jesuits, and says he does not
apprehend me to be of that measure of subtilty, which is found among men of
that brotherhood, unless says he, I have more then an ordinary art of hiding
my self* etc.

To which I answer, Jesuits I deny, and all of that Fraternity, and whatsoever
savours of Popery, yet am I hidden from people; and what I am he knows not,
neither the world* for from that wisdom am I hid, neither can I manifest my
self to that wisdom which is devilish, and knows not God* nor the least of his
sons and servants; for in all those things of which we then discoursed, the
depth thereof could hardly be spoken of, because of the darkness of peoples
understandings. And especially concerning justification I was very sparing, and
could hardly freely declare my self; yet what I spoke was a great satisfaction
to many then present, though the one half that I spoke is not truly related,
though so much as is related shall stand a sufficient witness for me, and
against them that oppose me, and that my words and meaning w^^ honest.

This was the thing charged upon me, That no man was further justified then he
was sanctified. Now my intent and meaning in this was honest; and as about this
particular much was spoken, which now I do not recollect to repeat; only P. T.
has hinted in short at things how they passed, and my words shall be for ever
witnessed, That sanctification is a witness of justification, and no man can
further know himself to be justified then he is sanctified, nor justified then
he is restored. And had P. T. but laid down my full answers as I spoke them at
that dispute, there would have been no need to have written any thing in
answer; only I do remember I did stand to manifest, that the new Birth,
Sanctification, and Justification was all agreeing in one, and not one without
another, and that Christ wrought righteousness perfectly without us, and also
fulfilled rightenesse in all that believe, and no man is justified by the one
of these without the other, and that has not the other; and they held the
contrary, and R. G. did publicly affirm that a man was justified by Christ,
excluding the new birth, and the work of sanctification which I denied, and
must always deny, that any man who is not born again, but is in the old
nature, and not sanctified, but is in the pollutions of the world, is justified
by Christ's righteousness; neither can he in that state till he be born again
and sanctified, have any benefit or manifestation of justification by Christ;
and this all men shall witness, though because of this I now may be fasly
judged: And though R. G. did openly testify that Christ justified sinners as
sinners; yet say I, all that are justified, are justified through faith, and
faith does purify the heart, as was largely spoken by diverse of us at that
meeting, which is not particularly related; which definition of our
justification, they could not except against; for we never were, nor are
ashamed to declare what we hold concerning justification, which is through
faith in the blood of Christ the seed of the Covenant, and though at that time
they made much jangling, yet to no purpose as to convince us of any error, or
any sober men there present of any error in us as concerning that thing.

And whereas it is related, as if I should say, We are men brought up at
plow-tayle, and understand not Scholar like terms* my words were not thus
spoken; but upon the occasion of their speaking words which is not in
Scripture Language as inherent righteousness, for such like. Whereupon I
desired them to keep to the form of sound words, and of Scripture Language,
that people might understand what they spoke; For said I, ye are Scholars as ye
profess, and some of us were brought up at Plow or Cart, and may be does not
understand Scholar-like terms, though I did not mean all of us* and what some
of us do understand* as to that, I shall not now speak; yet this I say, the
least of us does understand betwixt truth and error, and between that which is
righteous, and that which is unrighteous, and in that is more peace then in the
knowledge of Arts or Tongues; and our knowledge in that is dung and loss in
comparison of the other.

And as to Justification, upon which subject we contended a long time, though
they foolishly charged us with it, we do deny utterly the works of man, and the
works of man's righteousness, as in relation to our justification, and that it
is only and wholly by grace and gift of God, and the righteousness of Christ
who is revealed in all that believe in him* by which justification comes; yet
say we, that faith without works is dead, and will not justify a man; but by
that faith which brings forth works, even the works of God in us and through
us, by that faith are we justified* and according to the Apostles words so we
believe; not by works of righteousness which we have done, nor by a dead faith
without works, but by a living faith which works in us, are we justified; Let
vain men deduct what they may, this is truth in the sight of the Lord, and all
men.

These indeed are the particulars upon which the Controversy depended; and
having been some hours together, they were willing to depart, and R. G. would
give little hearing to me when I charged him with something uttered by him at
diverse times in my hearing, which I should have proved to be unsound doctrine
and error had he had that patience to have stayed; and whereas P. T. does speak
of having a Pope in our bellies, with such like scornful words, which a
discreet man would not have defiled his mouth withal, but that he must show
himself to be of the generation of Priests, who persecuted the innocent in
every age, and for his telling of our error, and recovering of our feet out of
the snare, and delivering us from the delusion; its true, his words stands but
upon a supposition, and that supposition stands upon the report of others, as
he seems to intimate, which is but a thing far off true credit; for what error,
and snares, and delusion, did P. T. convince us of in five hours discourse? not
any at all, but the rather was forced to confess, to the most part of what we
delivered; then what need was there to utter these his words in writing, as if
he had heard some great matter of delusion or error; but all these his words I
do bear, and if he has harbored such thoughts of us, as it appears too much
by his words, let him cleanse his heart by repentance, lest his intended evil
bruise his own head.

And whereas he has commented upon a book, called a Standerd lifted up, which
book I own, and that which is therein written, and himself is forced to own
what himself objects against, and comments upon: if* says he, E. B. mean so
and so, then his words are truth, but if so and so, then it is Pope* like, or
such like.

Alas poor man! must I be judged upon thy own meaning* nay, or must thy
interpretation be the judge upon my words? We have no such law, my words stands
true, as I have laid them down, to be received by such as are spiritual; and
such as loves to raise constructions falsely, where there is no just ground,
their judgment I do deny; and charity will teach P. T. to judge upon the best
sense, and so let him own my words as truth, and judge himself for his false
construction of true and upright words; only this I take notice of, says P.
T. A perfect conformity to the Law of God in our own persons, though not
wrought in our own strength, but in the strength and power of grace* the spirit
working all in us, and for us, is no other then the righteousness of the Law.

I need not much strive to confound this black doctrine by many arguments or
multitude of words, for the thing as laid down in his own words, is vile and
abominable to the understanding of any spiritual man; for say I, if it be the
spirit working in us, and for us, not in our own strength, then is it God that
works in us, both to will and to do, and the fulfilling of the righteousness
of the Law in us, and not the righteousness of the Law wrought by us; and if it
be in the strength and power of grace, and not in our own strength, then it is
the work of Christ in us, and the work of Gods own righteousness in us; and any
man that knows the least of God in truth, will witness to this, and against his
imagined doctrine held forth by P. T. I might demand a proof of him from
Scripture, where it is said or signified, that the working of the spirit, all
in us, and for us, and the working of the power of grace in the creature, is
reckoned to be our own righteousness, the righteousness of the Law; and my
words stands true from which he draws his false consequences, and lays down
his dark assertions, and my own words I do own, which are, such as are taught
by Christ, and guided by him in all the ways of righteousness, are justified
by him, and none else, not in any word or work whatsoever, but in what they are
led to fulfill by him; and in these words there is neither contradiction nor
unsoundnesse, though he has ignorantly charged them with both; but the words
shall stand for a testimony against him, and all his false deductions, and he
and all shall know, that God justifies the righteous, and condemns the wicked,
and that it is the new man that is justified, and not the old, and let
righteous men judge what can be in such a man's heart, who can draw so bad
consequences from such upright words.

But farther, he goes on, and has transcribed more of my words, as Christ
Jesus the Son of God is the light and life of the world, and has enlightened
all mankind that comes into the world, with the true light, etc. Now says he,
how does these agree with man's state in the first Adam, in transgression is a
state of perfect enmity, and death raigns in every man, and he is possessed
with blindness and unbelief, etc. I say these do very well agree, and they are
both true, for death raigns in every man, and he is in unbelief and ignorance,
and in a state of perfect enmity against God; as he is in the first Adam, yet
Christ has lightened him, and the light of Christ shines in darkness in him,
and the darkness comprehends it not, and he is enlightened, that he may be
changed from death to life, and from ignorance to knowledge* and though he walk
in darkness, and be in blindness, and in a state of enmity, it is because he
does not walk and believe in the light which Christ has lightened him withal,
and in my words there is no disagreement nor contradiction, the darkness is in
his own mind, who cannot comprehend the light, nor the words that proceed from
it.

Further, he questions upon my words, of having the witness in themselves of
being restored again. First, whether none are restored again, but such as have
the witness in themselves? I answer, all that are restored again, and does
believe, has the witness in themselves; and none does believe, nor are
restored, but they have the witness of it. Secondly, he queries, whether all
are restored, but some want the witness in themselves? I answer, All are not
restored, nor does believe, and such wants the witness in themselves, that are
not restored to God, but them that are restored wants it not. And again* he
queries, whether the light which is in all, is sufficient, without any thing
further of grace super-added, to bring up every man to believe in Christ, etc?
I answer, The light which every man is lightened withal by Christ, is sufficient
to bring up every man to believe in Christ, that loves the light and walks in
it, and unto such is grace added and increased daily; for as every man improves
the measure of the gift of God, so it is increased, the light is increased,
grace is increased, faith is increased, but still the light of Christ in it
self is sufficient.

Again, from my words, to wit, the spirit is given to be the guide and rule of
life to the children of God; from whence he queries, whether the spirit is so
given to be the guide and rule of life to the Saints, that they have no more
need to attend upon the Scriptures? I answer, It is promised, that the spirit
shall lead into all truth; and such does own the Scriptures, but not as their
teacher; for the anointing dwells in them, and they need no man to teach them,
but as that anointing teaches all things, and they have no need of the
Scripture to teach them, for all the children of God are taught of God, and
needs not any other teacher, nor needs not to say one to another, know the
Lord; and yet all such does own the Scriptures to be the testimony of that
which they believe, and have received. Again, from my words, to wit, the light
of Christ in every one shall give testimony to the truth of what I spoke, unto
which I do commend my self; from this he queries, can these be witnesses to me,
and of the truth in me, who are ignorant of the life and power of the Creator,
etc. who are following the counsel of their own hearts which are evil, etc? I
answer, Yes, the light of Christ in such shall judge* one day, and to it I
commend my self, and by it one day shall be approved, though now the wicked
hate the light, yet does it witness against them, and for us, that we are of
God, though its true they cannot judge between light and darkness, between
truth and error, yet the light in them which shines in their darkness, does
judge and put a difference; and when the book of conscience is opened, it shall
justify us, and condemn our enemies.

Again, he queries, whether I make the Holy Ghost and the eternal Spirit two? I
answer no, they are one, neither do I seem to make them two, it is want of
knowledge in him, who cannot understand, but raises objections where there is
no cause.

Again, from my words, this is acceptable and well-pleasing to God, above all
words and outward conformity, etc. from this he questions, whether the doing
the greater things of the Law is acceptable, where the less are neglected? I
answer, No; for every tittle of the Law, less and greater, must be fulfilled by
Christ in us, in whom we are accepted; and thus I have returned a few words to
the consideration of people, and particularly the people of Draton, and the
Country thereabouts, to whom I direct my speech, thus,

All ye people who are scattered, as sheep without a Shepherd, and knows not
Christ the everlasting shepherd, to lead you and to rule you; cease, oh cease
from all your teachers without you, who are dumb shepherds, which does not
gather you to God; such are they that preach for hire, and devine for money,
and that takes gifts and rewards for preaching, who through covetousness, by
feigned words does make merchandise of souls; such do keep you always learning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth under their teachings;
your souls are starved under them, and you perish for want of true knowledge,
and death raigns amongst you, and many are in the broad way that leads to
destruction, but few in the strait way that leads to life; and iniquity, and
wickedness abounds amongst you, and like teachers, like people; for from the
least of them, even unto the greatest of them, every one is given to
covetousness, Jer. 6. 13. great ignorance has blinded your minds, and great
darkness is over your hearts, and your teachers does deceive you, and they
cause you to err, and you give your money for that which is not bread, and
your labor for that which does not profit, even as the people of Israel did,
so do you, and in their transgressions do you walk, and your teachers are in
the steps of the Pharisees, they are called of men Master, as the Pharisees
were; they stand praying in the Synagogues and Temples, as the Pharisees did;
and they have the chief seats in the Assemblies, as the Pharisees had, and they
even shut the kingdom of heaven against men as the Pharisees did, and will not
enter in themselves, nor suffer them that would; cease from all your outward
Priests, and hearken to the voice of the Lord, which breaks down that nature
which is contrary to God, and raises up the seed which is heir of Gods
kingdom, and turns your minds to the light in you which Christ has lightened
you withal, which light shines in your consciences, and convinces you of your
evil deeds, it reproves you for vain words and ungodly speeches, it will let
you see what your hearts goes after, and what your love goes out unto, and if
you love that, it will lead you to Christ, and he will be revealed in you to
teach you, and to give you the witness of peace and reconciliation with God,
the light is your eye by which you may see God, it will lead you out of all
idolatrous worships and works, and from your false worships, which is
abomination to the Lord; and you must be converted and changed into a new
nature, and you must put off the old man and his works, before you can worship
God aright, for he is worshipped in spirit and in truth only; and such the
Lord is now seeking to worship him; therefore cease from your
Steeple-house-worship, which is in the traditions of men, and not in the spirit
of the Lord; and that worship must be confounded, for its root is corrupted,
and its branches will wither, and the breath of the Lord is kindled against it;
if you love the light of Christ and walk in it, there is your teacher; and if
you hate it, there is your condemnation.

The next day after the Dispute, this was written, and sent in a little time
after to Draton, and up and down that ways.
Richard Goodgrom,
FRiend, has not thy ignorance, folly, and wickedness toward me now appeared,
and is it not made manifest in the sight of many people? And now thou may
cease to boast, and also to back-bite for the time to come, and no more
secretly to surmise behind my back, to the raising of unruly spirits against
me, so much as in thee was possible: and had thou been more crafty, and more
subtle, more mischief thou might have done; but the innocent is delivered,
and thou art taken in the snare which thou laidst for another, and false
doctrine is proved to proceed forth of thy mouth; and thou and thy company may
be ashamed, when you consider the managing of your work against me, who many
times appeared immoderate, in speaking many at once consusedly, and also were
unreasonable in not being satisfied with just answers; but it shows your
blindness and unbelief, who cannot understand the truths of the Gospel of
Christ* but comends against them, though in the end you are forced to confess
to them as was sufficiently witnessed that day of the Dispute; and thou in
particular who reproachedst me behind my back in diverse places where I have
heard of it by my friends, whom thou judgedst had not been so, jet they have
discovered the naughtiness of thy heart both in the Country and in the City:
Thou have given forth that I had preached false Doctrine, and such like wicked
reproachful backbiting language behind my back, not like a man faithful to
God and thy neighbor, but one that has surmised evil against the harmless:
and thou may remember, all these things which thou objectest against, who
would have made a great matter of them against me, yet are they sufficiently
proved to the understanding of many honest people. And if thou and thy company
will be blind, it is because you harden your hearts against the truth, and I
am clear in the sight of the Lord; and all shall know that have an ear to
hear that what I profess, preach, and practice, is the saving truths of Jesus
Christ; though they may be branded to be heresy by such as thee, who may call
light darkness, and darkness light, and put good for evil, and evil or
good; and at a convenient opportunity I may take in hand to prove that thou thy
self have held forth that which cannot be justified by the Scriptures, but are
condemned thereby. Many things fell from thee in my hearing, which I may object
against, and prove the contrary, and I shall not go behind thy back, as thou
have done, to slander thee; but I shall rest contented, and wait the
opportunity to lay open thy nakedness and weakness in the sight of all
people: And whatsoever thou judge, The Scriptures, (the writings) and the
things written of, is two things. The one is the word of God, but the other is
not, and this all sober men confesses too. Though thou jangle, and twist about
it with thy lame arguments, to no purpose at all, except to show thy weakness
and folly: And also no man is justified by Christ's righteousness, until he
receive it, and as he receives it, and this thou shall one day witness; for
though righteousness be in him, sufficient to justify, yet by it art thou nor
any man justified, but in the receiving of it, and dwelling in it, and this
shall thou confess to be truth in the day of the Lord: And in the mean time let
me bear thy false censure in calling this heresy. And also a man may be
tempted to sin, and there may be evil motions to him; yet he not being
overcome of the temptation, not consenting to the motion of sin, it is no sin
unto him, neither shall sin be imputed to him, if he commit it not; but he that
commits sin, though he profess never so much of justification, yet for his sin
shall he be condemned, and this shall thou witness in the day of Judgment.
Also that there is a perfection attainable in this life, even to be perfect and
without sin in Christ Jesus: and this I affirm to be the truth of the Gospel,
and that wherein the faith of Gods people stands* and though thou made a
twisting and a wrangling against it, yet it is too strong for thee, and in thy
wisdom and thy arguments, is thy folly and thy weakness seen, and truth stands
over thee, and thou can not it nor me reprehend; and also that some of the
Scriptures was spoken to the world, and not to the Saints, this I also have
sufficiently proved, and thou art not able to detect it, and all thy snarling
in opposition to these things is confounded, and thy arguments made without
effect; and all whose eyes are opened, sees thee to be of too short a measure,
and of too weak a capacity to understand the deep things of God which is
hidden from thine eye, and them thou savourest not in that wisdom; though thou
have the words* yet thou art ignorant of the life, and the life is in dominion
over thee* and to it must thou submit, and lay down thy Crown; and from thee am
I hidden in that life and truth which I do possess: And though I be as a
deceiver, yet am I true: And though I be slandered and reproached, and
back-bited by thee, yet it is for Christ Jesus sake, and for his truths sake,
and not as an evil doer. But friend, learn more wisdom then to judge a man
before thou hear him, or to condemn the matter before thou hear the proof of
it; for by these things thou have not gained a good report, but God condemns
thee for it, and men sees thy shame in it, and the burden of it one day shall
thou bear, even then and all that own thee in these things.

And now thy spirit is tried, and it is found too light, and cannot stand in
judgment, for it is unfavoury: And though separate from the world in
appearance, yet is thy spirit of the world, and reaches not the knowledge of
the things that are eternal; but art imagining in thy mind, not being guided
by that Spirit which gave forth the Scriptures, and so thy konwledge is
natural, and cannot contain spiritual things: Therefore friend, come down to
Gods witness in thee, the light which shows thee sin, and convinces thee of
evil, that light is thy teacher if thou love it, and thy condemnation if thou
hate it. I have diverse particulars against thee at a convenient season, to
manifest thy folly and weakness by them; and what ever thou judge me, I am a
friend to thy soul.

E: Borough.


Richard Goodgroom held forth at the Dispute at Draton the 18. day of the 11.
month, 1657.
HE said the Letter was the word; and by Letter he said he meant the thing
contained in the Scriptures: And when I said I had the Letter in my hand,
meaning my Bible, but not the thing signified; he said, but I had the thing
signified: and he said, people were justified by Christ, excluding the new
birth and the work of sanctification; and Christ justified sinners as sinners
(that is) while sinners remaining in sin.

At Justice Fortescues house, in the year 1656. he did deny that any was
converted to God by a light within* and then asked if it was not that same
light which converted, which gave the knowledge of God, and they confessed yea:
and yet did deny that the light within converted to God, though I showed them
that Scripture, 2 Cor. 4. 6. which did confound the deceit.

At Uxbridge one time he said, Christ needed not to have come to have judged
the world, for there was sin enough in the world to judge it before he came.
Then I asked if sin judged the world, and he answered yea; and he said they
were in the Covenant of God, spoken of Nehem. 9. which turned the law of God
behind their backs.



THE END.

