A General Epistle TO ALL THE SAINTS; BEING A VISITATION OF THE Fathers Love,
Unto the whole Flock of God; who are called and gathered into the Spiritual
Kingdom of Righteousness and Peace; To be Read in all the Assemblies, of them,
that meet together to Worship the Father in the Spirit and Truth, in the
silence of all flesh.

E. B.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Blackspread-Eagle and
Windmill in Martins l'Grand, 1660.

(...) live unto God, in all that which is answerable unto him; and your words
and works will be accepted of him, and well-pleasing to him, even because it is
him that works in you to will and to do all good things, and he alone exalted
in you, and you subjected, and the Maker is become the Husband, and you married
unto him; and he lives in Power, and Rule, and Command, and you live in
subjection unto him, and in fulfilling his Will in what he guides in by his
Holy Spirit; And this life is very precious.

Oh Friends! live in it, and dwell in it always, and then your Joy and Peace
will be with you over all this world, and you will be Comforted, when Fear and
Terror comes upon all men; for the Lord God whom we serve and worspip in the
Spirit, will cause his Enemies to know his Power, and that he does and can do
whatsoever he Will, and will smite his Enemies, and wound them in their
Consciences; for all Power, Dominion, and Authority is with him, he is mighty
to save, and mighty to destroy, and his Reward is to every one according to
their deeds; and this is the God whom we fear and worship, and all flesh must
bow before him, when he shows his presence; though men be high and lifted up,
and go on in Rebellion against him without fear, yet the hand of the Lord will
be upon them, and he shall smite them with the Rod of his mouth: Wherefore all
Friends, have respect unto the Lord in your hearts in all things that you do,
and in all things that comes to pass, for that is blessed in a people; and
they shall prosper, their Souls shall be nourished, and their lives refreshed
with the mercies of the Lord, even all they that do wait upon the Lord, and
have respect unto him and his Eternal Power, which does and suffers all
things that be; In which Power you must dwell and walk, and feel it in your
hearts, and it will be your Armor and Defense in all things, and it will carry
you through all that which works contrary. And it is very precious to be
Armed with the Armor of God, in the Day of Temptations and Trials, that you
may not be overcome of the wicked, nor spoiled of the heavenly Inheritance. Oh
Friends! put on strength, that you may stand, and never be moved from the hope
of Eternal Life, and feel the renewing of your inward man, even the increase
and growth of the immortal Life in you, that you may live in that unto the Lord
God, and Covenant with him may be preserved, whereby, you may be a praise and a
glory to him in your Generation in the sight of the whole world, even all you
who have tasted of the Presence and Power of the Lord, and who have known his
Mercies and Judgments, and been acquainted with him, that you may be kept
faithful unto the end, and not be subverted by the wicked one, nor drawn from
the Obedience to the Truth, nor loose your Crown of Immortality, neither by the
flattery nor terror of the ungodly, but that you live in the Dominion of
Immortal Life, which keeps above all Mortal Temptations and Mortal Terror, and
gives Authority over all: And this Life is blessed, where the Glory and Peace
of this world, and the Troubles and Sorrows of it also, are seen over, and felt
beyond, and nothing of it can move the Heart, nor disquiet the Spirit, nor work
any Separation from the Fathers Love; and in the Seed of God, where it lives
above mortal, is this enjoyed by us and all the faithful: But if the man's part
live above the Seed of God, that, will be drawn aside by the love or by the
terror of this world, for that is changable, and the evil one has a part in
it; so that part is to be kept in subjection in you, under the Seed of God, and
it must bear the Cross of Christ always, else you will be overcome of the
wicked, for in that part (the man's part) which is of this world, the Devil has
something, a place to receive him, and a part to obey him; but in the Seed of
God he has nothing, neither place nor part: And so Friends, live in the Seed
of God, for in that is your Victory and heavenly Dominion; and also your
Election and your Assurance for ever, even in the second birth, begotten of the
Father, for that is the Heir of God, and therein does man inherit Eternal Life,
and Rest, and Peace, to his Soul, and therein is Blessings and Peace, and life
inwardly and outwardly, and all fullness is enjoyed, where the Lord is the
Teacher, the Father, the Shepherd, the Master, the King and Judge; and he is
become to us the all in all, and the Kingdom delivered to him, and all
subjected under him, even God with us, the substance of all, the end of all,
and all the contrary put under, even the Lion and the Lamb laid down together,
and man lives in Peace according to the Promise; and the Mountain of the Lords
House is established on the top of all, in which nothing can destroy or hurt
the pure Life; but life is in Dominion over all, and Death is swallowed up of
it.

Oh Friends! this is the mark that is before you, press on toward it, that you
may obtain the final end of all your travel and waiting, of your obedience and
suffering, and the end of your hope and patience, and the very end of the
message sent of God, and delivered to you by us; The end of all, is this, That
you may dwell in God, and he in you, and be gathered up to him, to be ever with
him, and that he may be your all in all, and you may be to him an honor and
praise throughout the world in your Generation, even he your only God, and you
his only people.

And Friends, certain it is, that the way of life, and peace, and of Salvation,
is made manifest unto you, and you know wherein Everlasting peace and
reconciliation with God stands; and you also know, what the cause is of all
trouble and sorrow and condemnation, the Lord has opened many hearts, and
given unto many a good understanding: And seeing you know this, live in the way
of peace, and escape the other, that you may not come into condemnation; for it
is a fearful thing to fall into the condemnation and wrath of the Almighty. And
for this cause, that men should be saved from wrath, and have peace with God,
the message of Life and Salvation, has the Lord sent abroad plentifully in
this Nation, and you have received it and believed the report, though many have
rejected it unto their destruction, whose Judgment will be upon them; but you
have tasted, handled, and felt of the Word of Eternal Life, by which the Lord
has wounded you, and healed you again; and many has he slain and made them
alive, even through his Word and Power, which has entered into many hearts,
which kills the enmity, and quickneth the Seed, and which breaks off from
all the worlds fellowship, both in Transgressions and Righteousness, and makes
all void, all Covenants with Death and Hell, and marryeth unto the Lamb, and
the marriage of the Lamb is come unto many, even unto all in whom his innocent
and heavenly nature is begotten and brought forth; for this is of his flesh and
of his bone; and here is his wife that has made her self ready, and is
prepared for the Bridegroom; and blessed are ye, if ye know these things and be
witnesses of them, even the marriage of the Lamb, and the making ready of his
Elected in you, even the reviving and quickening of his flesh, and of his bone;
for this is the Virgin unto whom he is joined, that has put away all other
lovers, and loves the Lord with all the heart, and with all the Soul, who is
clothed with perfect beauty and innocence, and covered with Divine
Righteousness, in which there is no spot, being delivered out of the
wilderness, and freed from her mourning state, and is no more separated from
her husband, but she again quickened into Life, and adorned with beauty, and
married to the Lamb, to live with him for evermore.

Oh Friends! wait upon the Lord, that ye may possess these things; for to know
them, and be in them, is Everlasting Treasure and Riches; the possession of
them are Riches to the Poor, Bread to the Hungry, and Clothing to the Naked,
and Life to the Dead: And if ye know these things, lay them up in your hearts,
as your most precious Treasure, and let none spoil you of it; And if ye are
married unto the Lamb, then are you the True and only Church, even his Body
and living Members of it; for such only are the True Church, that are married
to Christ, and United to him in his own nature; and all such are false
Churches, and are even of the great Whore, that has taken upon them the name
of Churches of Christ, but were never lawfully married unto him, and such are
deceived, and Deceivers of others with the very Name of Christ, calling
themselves by the Name of his Church, while they are in the nature contrary to
him, nor they ever lawfully married unto him; and this is the great Whore who
commits lewdness through Nations, in all false worships and Idolatrous
practices and Ordinances, and in her false Ministry and false Doctrines; and
she was set up in Nations, by the force of cruel and violent Laws and men, and
is upheld by Oppression and Injustice at this day; and yet all this she does
under the Name of Holy Church, and uses the Name of Christ, as if she were his
Wife, and yet has other Lovers; and by such means has this great Whore
deceived the world: But now the Day of the Lord is come upon her, and the hour
of her Judgments is at hand, and all that have taken pleasure with her, shall
mourn and bitterly lament, because of her Judgments which comes in a day; but
we are delivered from her Judgments, because the Lord has called us from her
abominations; and we can no more drink her Cup of false doctrines and
Practices, all which are Idolatry, and to be Judged of the Lord, though she
should drink our blood, as she has done the Saints before us; But I say, the
Lord has led us out of this Babylon, He has delivered us from this great
City, and made us Spiritually free from its abominations and Idolatries, though
not outwardly free from her oppressions and cruelties: And though this great
City has Ruled over the Kings and great men of the earth, and subjected many
Nations through its wickedness and violence; yet certainly its ruin is near to
come, Else my Hope is lost, my Life is smitten, and the Lord has not spoken by
me: And the Lord will Reward this false woman, this false Church, that has
deceived the Nations, even according to her deeds, as she has done to others,
so shall other's do to her, measure for measure; and much more might we say
concerning her, but the Lord has opened our eyes and we see her abominations,
and she cannot deceive us: And this is the loving kindness of the Lord unto us,
for which he is worthy to be praised by us, for evermore. And in that ye have
received the Truth, and do know the Truth, live in it, and walk in it in all
faithfulness; and be not fearful and unbelieving, as though the Lord were not
with you, though ye suffer much for his Names sake; for he is not wanting unto
that man that does fear his Name, and that walks in his Way; but for the
deliverance of all such will he appear, he will free the oppressed, and the
afflicted people he will save, even by his outstretched Arm: Wherefore let our
eye be unto the Lord in all estates and conditions, whether of sufferings or
otherwise, for from him Salvation comes, and not from the Mountains of the
earth; and keep your Meetings in your several places, and be faithful in all
things, that your Consciences may be kept void of offenses, both toward God
and men, that no disobedience nor load of iniquity may be upon you, but that in
the sight of God, you may feel clearness and freedom of Soul and Spirit, from
the burden of all transgression, that you may know the Remission of all sin,
and all iniquity may be blotted out, and no guilt of transgression may lie upon
you, but you may enjoy Peace in your Consciences, in the Sanctification and
Justification of the new man; and this is the heavenly Life, even upon earth:
And when you are met together in the Name and Power of the Lord, mind his
presence amongst you, for that is life, and will make your Meetings profitable
and full of Virtue to your Souls, and the Lord will instruct you in all that
which is good, and Christ will be your Minister of Peace and Comfort, and his
Spirit will lead you into all Truth, and by his Word, even the speech of God in
your hearts, you will be quickened in Spirit, and your strength and Peace in God
will be renewed day by day; and walk in all Wisdom, and in the fear of the Lord
one toward another, and toward all people, that your Righteous and innocent
life, and your Holy Ways and Works of Truth, may have Evidence in the hearts
of your Enemies, that you are of God, by the shining forth of your light before
them; and that the Devil, nor all your Enemies may have ought against you,
saving concerning your God, and the Worship of him, and the matters pertaining
to good Conscience; and then if any suffer affliction and tribulation by wicked
men, if it be for Righteousness sake, and concerning the Law of your God, and
the matters of his Kingdom, in such suffering the Lord will be with you, and
not forsake you, but he will give you Dominion, and carry you through it all,
in Patience and Faith which gives you Victory over all Enemies; And nothing
shall happen to you, nor come upon you in the anger of God, but all afflictions
shall be turned to your Comfort, and by Persecutions and Tribulations the Lord
will but try you, and not destroy you, you being delivered from his wrath, and
from that which is the Cause of it: And therefore Friends, it being much upon
my Spirit, I do lay it upon you, to be mindful in this very thing, that you
walk in all Wisdom, so that your Enemies have nothing against you, to cause you
to suffer for, but only for Truth, and Righteousness sake, and concerning the
Law and Worship of your God; and then if the wicked one take occasion against
you, to inflict his wrath upon you by wicked men, because of the exercises of
your Consciences toward God, thereby shall the Lord take occasion against your
Enemies, to destroy them in his season, and he will deliver you; and for this
Cause does the Lord plead with the wicked in his wrath, even because of the
unjust sufferings of his People, for that always drew down the wrath of the
Lord upon Nations, and Rulers; and for this Cause has many been destroyed; and
in our sufferings must be filled up the measure of the iniquities, both of
Rulers and People in this Nation, that the Lord may over-turn them with his
hand, when their measure of oppression is finished, and the burden of its guilt
falls upon them.

Therefore let us have Patience toward all men in all Conditions, and Faith
toward God at all times, for therein is our Armor of Defense, and our Weapons
to resist all our Enemies, and giving up into the Eternal Will of the Father,
whether in Life or Death, in Tribulations or in Rejoicing, and giving our Power
wholly to the Lord, and not unto any other, knowing, That not one Hair of our
Head can fall without him, whose Power is over all, and through all: So that if
we Live, it may be unto him alone; and if we suffer, and dye, it may be for
him, and herein Peace shall be with us, in whatsoever comes to pass upon us,
if we can receive all things as from the hand of the Lord; and Live in the
feeling of that Power, which does all things, or suffers all things to be
done.

And blessed is he that is not offended in Christ, who cannot be offended in
him, nor separated from him by Principalities, nor Powers of Darkness, nor
Death, nor Life of any thing: And in this growth was the Apostle, which the
same is to be waited for, blessed is he that obtaines it; for that which takes
offense against Christ, is of the same with that which gives it; for all
offenses against him, arises from the Corrupted nature which knows him not,
and that which receives any offense against him, is the same which knows him
not; Yea, though an offense may be justly given, yet that in which the offense
takes place, knows not the Father nor the Son: And Christ said offenses should
come, but woe unto him by whom they come, and woe unto that which stumbles and
falls through offenses. Therefore every one is to mind, the certain evidence
of the Spirit of God, and of the Truth and Way of Salvation in his own heart,
and being persuaded concerning the Way of Salvation, by the Spirit of God, that
Spirit will judge every offense that is given, and not embrace it; and that
Spirit which judges and casts out, that which gave offense against God, in that
Spirit may a man be preserved above all offenses, so as nothing can separate
him from the love of God; but though this offense, or the other, whatsoever may
arise, yet such a one feels and possesses the Mercy, Love and Peace from God in
his own spirit, and such a one lives in the heavenly Life, and cannot make the
evil example of another an occasion of iniquity to himself, but he rather
hears and fears, and keeps in more diligence and respect to the fear and
presence of God in his own heart, yet he covers not the offense that is given
in it self, but with a Spirit of Judgment treads it down and walks over it; and
this is the Right Way for a man of God to walk in; and that Spirit is not right
before the Lord, nor that heart which takes unto it self an occasion to stumble
at, or deny the Power and Mercy of the Lord, because another may abuse them:
But if one be from the Spirit of God in their own hearts, their mind unsettled
upon that, and unseasoned with that, then the offenses enter, and works
darkness and prejudice in the mind, and the wrong part being up, it receives
all things to a wrong end, and it abuses Gods Mercyes, and also wants the
Authority to pass Judgment upon offenses, and because hereof is a man undone,
for prejudice will eat out the good, and destroy Simplicity, and wound the
Soul, and bring men into Death and bitterness of spirit: Therefore this is to
all Friends, that you may be kept in the Spirit of Judgment, which will not
receive an offense into the wrong part, but will Judge all offenses in
themselves, and hereby all will be preserved, and Truth must travel through all
his enemies, and blessed is he that is kept faithful to the end, in the Power
of the Lord God, that Reigns over, and Judges the Power of Darkness in every
appearance of it, Inwardly and Outwardly.

And as concerning the times and seasons, and the present Confusions and
Distractions that is amongst men, much might be spoken; but certainly the end
of all these things, shall be turned for good unto us, and unto all that do
abide in Faith and Patience unto the end; and though the present times be of an
heavy countenance toward us, like as if we should be swallowed up through the
roaring of the Sea, and because wickedness does abound by the Spirit that now
is exalted; yet in this let us respect the Lord, for certain it is, that Times
and Seasons are in his Hand, to change them at his pleasure, and to take them
from one, and give them to another when he will, the day is his, and the
Victory is in his Hand: Oh! let not mortal men glory against him, man's time is
but for a moment, and it is our Blessedness and Peace to be still, to be still;
And to have a Respect to the Lord through all these overturnings; And though
the spirit that now is, be wicked and abounding in iniquity, yet the Lord will
limit its way: And as for the men that now are in Power, it is very Just with
the Lord, to let them have their Day, even to try them what they will do, many
others before those have had also their Day, that have promised great things,
as to Liberty and Freedom of the Nation, even much more than these; but they
abused times and seasons, and opportunites, and were deceitful toward God and
Man, and sought themselves more than the good of others, and therefore are they
justly under Reproach and sufferings, even for their disobedience sake, who
would not give ear to the Cry of our oppressions, though they were called
unto, but made our Yoaks more heavy, and, our Tasks more great, though the Lord
looked for better things from them, yet they were rebellious till they were
sunk into Confusion; and we yet stand, and they are fallen, that thought to
destroy us. And this spirit, and these men who now are, which once the other
had power over, is now Justly set in Power over them: And all this is
accomplished, in the Justice of the Lords hand, and therefore, Why should we
murmr against God? or say, Why have thou done it? But let us travel in
Patience through all the Oppressions, and in the Power of the Lord, we shall
work through them, as through others heretofore, even till the Lord deliver us:
For this Spirit that now is, must Rule, until the pleasure of the Lord be
fulfilled concerning it; May not the Lord do something through it, unworthy of
a better spirit to be employed in? God has vessels of dishonor; And the King
of Assyria and Nebuchadnezzar, must serve his pleasure, when he will use them:
And therefore no man at present is found able to divert the Authority of it;
for it seems right unto the Lord, that it have its season, if not in love to
it, yet in his wrath, that its measure of wickedness may be filled up in this
occasion given unto it, that the Lord may destroy it; for though it have all
Power to Rule, and to subdue that which rises against it; yet this is not,
because the Lord is on it side; but thus he suffers it, for a Rod to correct
others, that have been unfaithful, even till the Lord correct it also with his
Judgments. And the purpose of the Lord is to prove the men, if so be some of
them may learn Righteousness and be saved, though some of them want the show of
Religion, which others have had; yet God has not left himself without witness
in them: And the Lord may be nigh to some of them, if he smite, they must be
wounded; let us walk in Wisdom and Innocence toward them, and be faithful
toward the Lord concerning them, and leave them to him.

And as for all the confusions, and di^^ructions, and rumors of Wars, what are
they to us? What have we to do with them? and wherein are we concerned in these
things? is not our Kingdom of another World, Even that of peace and
righteousness? and has not the Lord called us, and chosen us into the
possession of that Inheritance, wherein strife, and enmity dwells not? Yea,
he has broken down that part in us that is related thereunto, and being dead
in that Nature of Strife, Bloodshed, and Wars, how can we live in strif and
contention in the world, or have fellowship with any therein? And can we have
pleasure in the confusion and distraction amongst men, or join in any thing
with them, if so be we are quickened in the new life to God, which is a life of
love and peace, and free from such things? and if we are crucified in the life
to this world, out of which all these confusions and strife does arise, how can
we live therein? and therefore these thing are nothing to us, neither are we of
one party, or against another, to oppose any, by rebellion, or plottings
against them, in enmity, and striving with them by Carnal Weapons; nor to
destroy any men's lives, though our Enemies: so we War not for any, nor against
any, for the matters of this worlds Kingdom.

But our Kingdom is inward, and our weapons are spiritual, and our victory an
peace, is not of this world: And our War is against souls enemies, and against
the powers of darkness, even by the sword of the Spirit, which God has given
us, and called us to war therewith, to convert people from sin and death, and
from the very occasion of wars and contentions about the things that are
earthly; and this is our calling and work at this day; and these things all the
Children of the Lord are to mind, and to keep over the spirit of this world in
all people, which all this enmity, strife, and confusion that is up amongst
men, lodges in, and out of it arises; for these things are the fruits of the
spirit of this evil and sinful world, and the fruits of the spirit of God are
of another nature, even Peace and meekness toward all, and not enmity toward
any, in which Spirit let us live and walk, admonishing all hereunto, and
Praying for our enemies, and not hating them, but doing good for evil, and not
rendering evil for evil; but being meek and humble, merciful and patient
toward all: and this is the true Christian life learned of Christ, and this
life is blessed in this World, and in the World to come; and them that live
here are redeemed out of the world, wherein is Troubles and Confusion, Wars and
Strifes: But let us not heed any of these things, for they Rise and Fall in
their season, and are brought forth and effected in the changeable and erring
spirit, which works not the honor of God, but is in the dishonor to him;
And Friends, let us be a people separate from all that live therein, waiting
for the deliverance of the holy seed, in all; and believing, that through all
these things the Lord will set up his Kingdom, and thus it must come to pass,
BABYLON, MVST FALL WITH A GREAT NOISE; for in strife and confusion was She
builded, and therein has She long stood, and thereby must She fall; and
Tribulations must come upon the earth, that People may learn to fear the Lord
through his Judgments: And he will speedily do great things in the world,
which cannot be believed by many, if it were told them; for Hell and Death must
be destroyed, and both the Beast, and the Whore, must be taken alive, and cast
into the Lake of the anger of God: But blessed are they that do wait upon the
Lord, and rest under his shadow, and waits in his Counsel, and receive his
Instructions; they shall see the marvelous works of his hand; but the wicked,
and unbelieving shall be turned into darkness, and shall not see the
countenance of the Lord to refresh them, but their sorrow shall be Increased.

And as for me, if I were no more, this is the Testimony of my Love unto the
Seed of God, through these Nations, who am a Companion to all that travel
after truth and righteousness, and that seeks the Lord in their hearts that
he may Rule; and these things were upon me, to send amongst the flock of God,
to be read in all your meetings.

Oxfordshire, the first day of the third Month, 1660. EDW. BOROUGH.

THE END

