The Crying Sins REPROVED.

WHEREOF The Rulers and People of England, are highly guilty; With additions to
their own Confessions held forth by them in a Declaration of their own, bearing
date Septem. 23. wherein these three Nations are called to a day of solemn
Fasting, etc.

WITH MEEK EXHORTATIONS To this present PARLIAMENT, That they take heed to
themselves lest they make the guiltless to suffer upon the account of Blasphemy
or Error, etc. while the evil doers go free, and the false Prophets defended.

And this in love to all their souls is a warning to them By one that loves
Equity and true Judgment, and hates every false way, and is a friend unto the
Commonwealth, waiting till true justice be exalted in this Land, who for want
thereof is a sufferer with the Saints; who bears the reproaches for Jesus
Christ.

E. B.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1656.

A sober REPROOF Of many particular SINS: WHEREOF The Rulers and Teachers of
England are guilty.
HOW long? How long shall Gods righteous soul be grieved, and his pure Spirit
vexed with the vain oblations and offerings of them whose heart is far from
him, even after their Idols, and in their covetousness, and earthly honors of
this vain world, while they honor with their lips and profess love with their
mouths in outward observances? How long Lord shall thy enemies lean upon thee,
and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? while they oppress the innocent, and make
a prey upon the upright, and tread thy glory underfoot, and despise thy Law and
Ordinances, and set at naught thy children, and causes them to suffer grievous
burdens under heavy hands of cruelty, every one smiting with the fist of
wickedness? Will thou be pleased Lord with a sacrifice of the unclean hands,
given unto thee from polluted hearts, offered upon the (...) own precepts in
set times? VVilt thou be worshipped in (...) and traditions, in a set day, of
hanging down the head li^^ (...) for a moment? Can thou accept a Fast
appointed by the will of (...) while the bands of wickedness are not loosed,
nor the oppressed set (...) And will thou be found in a way decreed by the
children of men, (...) way is corrupt before thee? Yea Lord God men seeks, but
not (...) o^n way; and they call upon thee, but not in thy Spirit; and they
(...) toward thee, but not at thy door; they ask of thee the Ordinance (...)
Justice, and they delight in approaching to thee, and they are as a Nation that
works righteousness, yet does their sins cry aloud in thy (...) and their
oppression and backsliding calls for vengeance upon their o^^ heads; When will
you be wise ye Rulers, and learned you Judges of (...) earth; for now the
jealousy of the Lord burns like fire, and his wrath is kindled more then a
little; and yet you do not trust in him, but in the day of (...) Fast you find
your own pleasures, and in the day of your humiliation your hearts are lifted
up in vain glory, and you presume in his presence, and call him Lord, but does
not that which he commands; for the oppressed is not eased, (...) the captive
is not freed, nor the hungry fed, nor the naked clothed; the Lords soul is
wearied with you, and your offerings unto him is as if you cut off a ^^gs neck,
and your incense is unto him as if you blessed an Idol; you neglect the Fast
which God has chosen, and makes unto your selves a Precept and a day in which
your work is not accepted; while your fear toward God is taught by your own
Precepts, and they that fear the Lord mourns for you, and they that know his
way wishes good toward you, that your eye might see, and your hearts
understand that which belongs to your peace; but you despise the repr^^f of
instruction, and chooses your own ways, and does that which is right is the
sight of your own eyes, and you weary the Lord from day to day, and ^e is
pressed under iniquities, as a cart is pressed with sheaves; and shall not his
soul be avenged upon you, and upon such a Nation as this, whose fear toward
him is taught by the Precepts of men, and whose worship of him is exercised is
the vain Trad^tions of their own inventions; hear ye deaf, and look ye blind,
behold the Lords hand is upon you, and you know it not; his judgments (...)
nigh you, and you are not aware, but exalts your own horn, and some of (...)
seeks unto your selves a Kingdom to rule in oppression over the poor and
needy, who cries to the Lord day and night under the heavy hand of cruel
burdens which lies upon the innocent, but you will not touch them with one of
your little fingers, woe is me for you, for your destruction comes upon you as
an armed m^^, and your desolation as an unresistable flood; for you regard not
the oppressi^^ of the poor, but makes it a thing of naught you that pass by:
Hear and consider ye Parliament of England, ye are something concerned herein,
if you m^^^ to be established, loose the oppression of the innocent, and let
the oppressed go free, for this the Lord requires of you more then your
oblations and set days of humiliation, wherein you make a show of repentance to
the Lord, and hangs down (...) for a day like a Bulrush, when your hearts are
not truly upright (...) L^^d.

^^claration I have viewed, proceeding from you, as the first work (...) h^nds,
and therein you declare your selves to these three Nati^^ seeming relentings
before the Lord, [I wish your hearts were as (...) ^^fess] and first you say,
Such has been the out-going of God for his (...) this our generation, that
none as men but must say, It is mavelous in (...); and none as Christians,
but must cry out, It is the Lords doings.

^^to which I ansner: Indeed true it is, that the outgoings and dea^^^ of the
Lord have been and are mighty and wonderful in this Na^^^, (...) cr^^^ for his
people, which now are trodden upon, and oppressed, (...) the shame of some of
you; and indeed some of you were partakers (...) a good degree of his power,
and outgoings with you, while you stood in his counsel, and then it was
mavelous in your eye, and you could cry o^t, It is the Lords doings; but
Friends, will you consider how you (...) stand, and into what ye are fallen, so
as that instead of being the Lords people, you are turned enemies to the Lords
people, and he is departed from you, and hardly goes out with you any more:
while you ^ere little in your own eyes ye loved justice and judgment; but now
you are exalted and lifted up, and has forgotten the mavelous doing of our
God, and Judgment is turned backward, and Equity is fallen, and the hand of
oppression is laid heavy upon the Lords servants; Oh that you would lay it to
heart before the decree be sealed against you, when no time of repentance can
be found by you. And further you say, [He] the Lord has always been a ready
help in time of need, and never did his poor servants seek his face in vain,
neither did he ever lend a deaf ear to the voice of their weeping. To which I
answer, Verily it is true, he is always a ready help for us his servants in time
of need, neither did we ever seek his face in vain even when we lay under the
grievous oppressions of the enemy; nor you your selves (some of you) sought not
in vain while your hearts were upright with him, but had the deliverance
desired by you out of the hands of all your enemies, and their necks to tread
upon, but it is not so now, inasmuch as you are become vain, formal seekers,
and hypocritical fasters, and a deaf ear will the Lord lend to you, and to the
voice of your weeping, til you remove the oppression from off the neck of the
distressed, and you shall seek his face and find no answer from him; for the
vision shall fail unto you, and though you houl unto him, and call upon him, yet
will he hide his face more and more, and leave you to your selves, and will not
regard the voice of your crying and though you have found him a present help in
time of trouble and of your need in the day of your integrity, yet trouble and
destruction shall come upon you, and no help from him shall you find, till you
return to him with all your hearts and spirits, and lay down your own crowns,
and exalt him the Lord of glory, who is now appearing in power. And further you
say, in the midst of such unequalled and signal mercies, how great has been
and is your ingratitude and unfruitfulness.

To this I answer: Truly have you spoken to your own sha^^, (...) ingratitude
and unfruitfulness exceeds many that went before you, (...) justly were cut off
for the very sins of which you are highly guilty; and more may I add unto your
confession, how great has been and is your oppressions, and pride, and
vainglory, and self-exaltings, and hypocritical fastings, and confessions with
your mouths, when your hea^^^ are far from the Lord; yea, as your mercies has
been unequalled, so your sins cannot be numbered, as though you sinned that
Grace might abound; or did evil that good may come; or took liberty to your own
hearts lusts, from your former mercies and deliverances received. Then further
you say, Should the Lord say unto you as once he did unto Ephraim, Ephraim is
joined to Idols, let him alone; that same Sentence would be your desert; as
insensibility is your crime, so it might be too justly made your punishment.

Answer; Yea verily the Lord may say so unto you; many of ye Rulers of England
is joined to Idols, let them alone; and that same sentence is your desert; but
Insensibility is not wholly your crime; for you have had a day of visitation
from the Lord, in warning of you by the mouth of his Servants; and you are not
altogether unsensible of your crime of great oppressions, and false worships,
and Idol Shepherds Oblations, which you are joined unto, and your punishment
will justly be the same; for the time comes that it shall be darkness and night
upon you, and you shall seek the Word of the Lord but shall not find it; for
God will smite your Idol Shepherds, and break down your Idol Altars of vain
Tradition, and the Lord will leave you to your selves to wallow in darkness and
in the way of death; and the Servants of the Lord shall let you alone, and
shall no more weary themselves with seeking to reclame you. And further you
say, Who has been melted with mercy? who has been broken by Judgments? a
sinful Nation; a people laden with iniquity; a seed of evil doers; children
that are corrupters; they have forsaken the Lord; they have provoked the Holy
One of Israel to anger; they are gone away backward; why should ye be stricken
any more? ye will revolt more and more. And further you say, As those sad words
do Characterise us as fitly as these of Judah; so if that sad destruction should
also be our doom, we could not but acknowledge the Lord is righteous in all his
ways.

Answ. Verily few of you have been melted by mercies, or broken by Judgments,
but are a sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers,
and ye have read your own character fully, for you have forsaken the Lord, and
are children that are corrupters, and are gone away backward, and provokes the
holy One of Israel to anger; and true is it, why should you be stricken any
more, or warned, for you will revolt, and turn aside more and more; how truly
have you numbered up the sum of your own Estate, even to your shame and
confusion of face, and to the justifying of the Lord when he in vengeance
appears to judge (...) even assuredly that sad denounciation will be your doom,
(...) Judgments shall overtake you when the Seed is gathered (...) among you,
even desolation of Cities, and madness of Prophets, (...) will smite you
together with confusion, and you shall not bring (...) deliverance in the Land,
neither shall the Nations have peace in (...) ^^yes, while you revolt when you
are stricken, and persecute the (...) when they warn you.

And in the day of your recompense, you shall indeed confess to your
^^^^^mnation, that the Lord is righteous in all his ways; and fur^^^r you say,
How deeply have you grieved your God, in not mourning as you ^^ght for that
profaneness and barrenness that is so ripe amongst you, even (...) such
means of knowledge and grace, and in not being sensible under, (...) making a
sanctified use of those rebukes you have of late received.

Answer. Yea, you have, and do daily even in your set days and ^^nes of
Fasting deeply grieve the Lord God, in not mourning and fasting, with a heart
prepared to the Lord, but in hypocrisy and even for strife and debate: indeed
ignorance, and prohanenesse, and barrenness abounds among you, and you are
ripe therein to be cut down for the fire, even the more ye are inexcusable,
because you have neglected the messages of the grace of God, and means of
knowledge from the mouth of the Lords despised servants, whom you have
persecuted even in cruelty, some of them unto death, and have imprisoned others
unjustly, while your false Prophets and Diviners have been set up by you, who
have dawbed you with untempered mortar; and you have made your hearts
unsensible, by hardening your hearts against reproof and rebukes, which some of
you of late have received; the messengers of which rebukes have been evil and
shamefully entreated in your Towns, Steeple Houses, and Highwaies, and
elsewhere in your Dominions; and how should you but be ignorant, and profane,
and barren, while you cannot receive the message of Light, but stumbles at
Christ Jesus the Light of the world, and cannot believe in the light wherewith
Christ Jesus has enlightened every one of you which is the way to knowledge,
and to receive righteousness into your souls, and therein to be fruitful to
the Lord.

And you say, Every individual man has helped to fill up the measure of their
sins; First, in not improving mercies so fully as might have been to his
glory from whence they were received.

I Answer. Indeed I believe not one of you may be excused in the sight of God,
but are all guilty in filling up the measure of transgression, and even in not
improving mercies to the glory of God; for had you improved the great mercies
of your Deliverance and Conquest over your En^mies, the Nations had been in
peace and rest before this day; but you strove to glorify your selves, and
sought a Kingdom of riches and honor to your selves, and who might be the
greatest and highest, to the pleasure of some, and to the grief of others; and
(...) mercies to your selves, and not to him that gave them; and (...) your
Dominions filled with distractions, and fears, and (...) every side, and your
Dominions are as broken vessels th^^ (...) joined together, but is full of
wickedness, and false Sects, (...) worships, and in your own Counsels are you
filled with (...) And thus it is justly come to pass upon you, because of your
tr^^^^^^sions.

Again you say, In the sad neglect and want of Activity, Resoluti^^ (...)
Integrity in Magistrates and others empowered therein for the punis^^^^ (...)
suppression of vice and crying enormities.

I answer. True, it is a sad neglect, and want of Activity and lo^^^^ in the
Magistrates has been, and is, to punish and suppress vice; (...) therefore it
abounds in all fullness in the very streets, and it has (...) wholly contrary;
for vice has gone at liberty, while the Magistr^^, and such who have been
empowered, have been active, and full of ^^gour, and no neglect found in them to
punish (or rather to opp^^^^ and suppress) the innocent and meek of the earth,
and even they h^^^ done violence to the harmless, witness most parts of
prisons this d^^ in England, how many have been beat and abused, and haled, and
knocked down with staves, in the sight of some of the Magistrates, and how many
have been imprisoned for passing on the highwayes, and through their Towns, and
some for declaring against Vice and crying Enormities, which one day must be
laid to yours and their charge; f^^ a sad neglect has been for want of justice
and true judgment, and they that have been empowered, have turned their power
against (...) Lord, and have been active to lay their sword upon the
guiltless, while the guilty have gone free; witness many who have been bea^
i^ your Steeple Houses by violent men, and afterward committed to prison,
while the peace breakers and violent have gone free: And indeed it is time to
lay these things to heart; for till you purge your selves from these
iniquities, you shall never be established, nor your Dominions in peace; for,
for these things, and such like abominations are yo^ filled with distractions,
and fears compass you about, and that justly from the hand of the Lord, as
the light in your consciences shall answer in the dreadful day of account,
which comes suddenly upon you.

Again you say, In the abominable blasphemies vented and spread of late through
the apostacy of, and the abuse of liberty, by many professing Religion.

Answer. No doubt but blasphemy is a crying sin, whereof the Lord is guilty, if
you were able to judge thereof, but rather indeed this cause is not rightly
stated; for you call that blasphemy, which is truth, such is the grievous
ignorance of some of you: And this, I am sure, is your greater (...) ^^demning
the guiltless, rather then suffering the guilty (...) ^^^^lar. Friends,
beware, lest your judgment be so corrup^ (...) evil good, and good evil, and
thereupon approve the (...) the good, being given up to hardness of heart, and
(...) ^^i^de; and such were the sins of the Rulers in Israel, who (...) the
true Prophets under the account of Blasphemy, and (...) and approved of the
Prophets that Prophesied falsely, and of (...) that bore Rule by their means;
for the people loved to have (...) 5. My soul wishes that you Rulers may be
wise, and ye Judges (...) in this particular, lest you go in the way of your
Fore^^^ to destruction, persecuting the innocent without cause, through (...)
^^^gement of the way of truth, which may be called by you He^^^ (...)
Blasphemy, who in the blindness of your minds cannot dis^^ of the things of
God; for in that way which the wisdom of the (...) calls Heresy, do we
worship the true God of our Fathers; and (...) so much the more I may warn you
herein, to take heed for the (...) come, because you have some of you been
highly guilty of this ^^^gression of late, even in condemning the guiltless
concerning this (...); so that thus for you I may more truly state the
particular. In (...) ^bominable violence and oppressions acted of late upon the
inno^^, ^^d them who have worshipped God in the Spirit, through the wick^^^^ of
some Rulers, and the abuse of liberty, by them which have ^^^ssed love to God
and his way, through the false judgments, and ^^^^^ry opinions of many, who
have called truth error, and the (...) of God blasphemy: And this is your
sin, of which if you that (...) guilty repent not, and turn from it, and beware
of it for time to come, your honor shall fall into the dust, and your fall
shall be more deeper into confusion and destruction then any that have yet gone
before you; for of late the Lord powerfully has begun to work, and to vent his
truths through the mouths of his servants, and to bring out of the Apostacy
and Blasphemies (which has reigned since the days of the Apostles) the true
and pure Religion, which stands in the exercise of a pure Conscience.

Again you say, In the little love and tenderness which is even amongst
Professors themselves toward one another, who whilst they contend for things
disputable, lose that which is certain, even charity; without which they become
as sounding brass, or tinkling cymbals.

Answ. This is also your sin, and the sin of the Nation, want of love and
tenderness in Professors toward God, and one toward another; and that love
which appears, is but in the show, and in the form and likeness of things,
and not from the true ground of love and peace; and these are they that hate
the Light, and walk not in the Light wherewith Christ Jesus has lighted every
man that comes into the world, in which the unity of Saints do stand, and in
which their love is one to another; and they that are out of the Light, are
(...) ^^ritie, which is the bond of perfection; and these that know (...) of
Christ, to guide them in the ways of God, are in all (...) and words, and
actions, as sounding brass, and as a (...) and these are they that are in the
Disputes, and Co^^^ti^^s, (...) about the Leteer, drawing their own
consequences and deduct^^^ (...) it, in their own wisdom, and knowledge, and
sensual under^^^^^^ and those lose the substance, and know not that which is
certain, (...) Jesus in them, to be Ruler over them, but are as dry trees, to
be p^^^^ up; and all their Profession will wither, and all their pretended
(...) will perish, and their show of things in the outward appearance (...) be
confounded, who know not the Light of Christ to guide them; (...) Light is the
ground of true love and tenderness, and brings to the k^^^ledge of things
certain out of the contention of things disputable.

But further you say, In allowing difference in Forms, more power (...) divide
Christians then agreements in Fundamentals has to unite the^, (...) of the
dangerousest and fruitfullest seed that has been sown by the E^^^ous One.

Answ. Christians are they that follow Christ Jesus, who are not so only in
name, but in practice; and they are one, and cannot be divi^^^ as they walk in
the Light which comes from Christ, who is the f^^^^tion, or fundamental
Principle of the Religion, which is not in for^^, but in power, ^greeing in the
foundation, and in the whole building: But Friends, you seem to charge the late
Powers of the Nation, if (...) your selves, yet some part of your Body which
now is in power, (...) great things, with no less then to be Satan's Seedsmen;
for if allo^^^ difference in Forms be the dangerousest and fruitfullest seed
that ever was sown by the Envious one, as you say it is; then who do you blame,
either the foregoing Parliaments, of which some of you have been, and so cannot
be clear from that evil, or the Protector himself? and this seems to be a very
great charge upon him (whose judgment is appearingly to give allowance unto
difference in Forms) to be the Seed^man of Satan, or to allow the Envious One
to sow the seed which you call dangerous; it is not Christians that ere divided
it, but the Sects and false Opinions, men of corrupt minds,

Thus much in Answer to the words as they are laid down: But I rather choose to
speak to the mind or intent of the Penmans Spirit of your Declaration, which
implies an inclining to be against many Forms, and to bind up all into one
Form of Worship; and so thereby, though some which is evil would be shut out,
yet would the true spiritual worship of the Saints above all assuredly thereby
be excluded, and the tender spirits of people who truly seek God, would be
oppressed: But keep your selves from that evil I warn you, lest you be broken,
and never bound up; and lay no law, nor make no law upon Religion, but let
Religion defea^ ^^lf, only lay your Law upon Peace-breakers and violent (...)
not men's consciences to a Worship by your Precepts ei^^ (...) already, or by
such as may be made, if you ease the oppressed, (...) ^ill establish you in
peace if you fulfill his Will herein.

(...) you say, In not being fully sensible, though the Lord in the depth of
(...) and righteous Judgments has for some years last past been over^^^
several Authorities in these Nations, and has as it were been pouring (...)
fr^^ Vessel to Vessel, he has been pleased ever since his people publicly
(...) for his Truths, still to set up Rulers who have allowed them the free
^^^^ise and profession of them.

Answ. Indeed you are not sensible of the righteous Judgments of (...) in
overturning several Authorities in the Nation, and therefore you (...) the same
abominations as they did who were overturned, till you ^^so be overturned as
they were; but takeheed to your selves lest you be ^^re then poured from Vessel
to Vessel, even spilt in the dust of misery, and never more gathered again:
Your last part of this particular is false, (...) that are in the pure
Religion, and in the exercise of our pure con^^^^^, have not from some of you
our Liberty, but are cast into Goals ^^d Dungeons, and banished out of your
Towns and Cities, some of us by f^^e that have been Rulers set up; if this be
doubted by you, exa^^^^ through your Nation, true testimony may be given; so
that here you have spoken better of the Rulers then indeed it is, and would
make the Nation believe untruths to establish you; though I condemn not all,
but my words is toward the guilty, that they may repent, lest they perish in
their iniquities, and be cut off in their transgressions, and the Curse be upon
you all for somes sake.

Again you say, In that Athiestical and lukewarm spirit, too commonly amongst
you, whereby not only the form, but the power of Godliness is reproach^^, and
accounted as a vain thing, but also too many have fallen from their first Love,
and others esteem themselves rich while they are miserable poor, and blind and
naked; sins which are the highest aggravated by being committed in Countries
where the glorious Light of the Gospel shines clearest.

Answ. This you have confessed truly to your own shame, in the sight of other
Nations, your spirit is not only lukewarm unto righteousness, but it is too
common among some of you to be zealous and hot in persecuting the way of
righteousness; and indeed many of you are grossly fallen from your first Love
and Integrity, and thereby the power of godliness is not only reproached by
you, but persecuted and counted vile, and they that live in it oppressed; such
is your zeal in your dead form, some of you, that even you count the true way
and worship of God mad^ess, (...) you are the men that esteems your selves rich
while you are (...) and blind and naked, and your sins are aggravated the more
and hig^^^^ because God gives you warning daily by the mouth of his Servants,
(...) holds forth the Light of the glorious Gospel, and bears witness unto your
face against your abominations and Idolatries committed by you (...) all this
you continue in your Iniquities, and evil entreats the Mess^^^^^^ of Peace unto
your souls, and are the men indeed which is Athi^ even many by their works,
saying in their hearts there is no God; and (...) truly as you have confessed
your sins, so must you confess the justness of the Judgments of God upon your
own heads if you return not unto the living God, and own the day of your
visitation.

Again you say, In being more dissatisfied, that you have not abtained all
(...) aimed at, then thankful that you have obtained so much as you n^w ^^joy.

Answ. Verily this is not the least of your sins, but exceeds so^^ others; for
you aim at that which you shall never obtain til you be thankful, and walk
worthy of what you enjoy; and this is the way, ease the oppressed, and take off
the yoke of the poor and needy, and of the Lo^d you may be heard; and seek not
your own honor, for that is the ground of dissatisfaction and unthankfulness
among you, and the cause why you abuse the mercies which you do enjoy, having
lost the sense of the former dealings of the Lord with you.

Further you say, all which, with other the grievous sins of these three
Nations, call aloud upon all the good people in them, to lay low in the sight
of our offended God, and by Prayer and Humiliation (a way which in our deepest
distresses we have found both our duty and comfort to tread in) to seek to
appease his wrath, and that he will be pleased for his own Names sake to remove
whatsoever accursed thing there is amongst us, and that as he is our God, so we
may be his people.

Answ. Indeed, many more grievous sins is highly abounding in these three
Nations, your own oppressions and self-seeking honors, and vain glories in your
self-performed righteousness, which your persecution of the Innocent by
grievous and unjust Fines and Imprisonments, not regarding the cry of the poor,
which lies under the heavy hand of oppression of you subordinate Rulers; these
abundantly adds to the measure of the iniquity of these three Nations, all
which abominations cries aloud for vengeance upon the heads of some of you
rather then for humiliation, for sin cries not for humility, this is your
ignorance; but the good people of G^^ does lay low in his sight, who ye highly
offend every day; and (...) you, and suffers under your iniquities, though you
reward (...) them with persecution and hard censures of cruel dealing till
(...) your wickedness you repent, and turn from it, all your Prayers (...)
H^miliations, and set days of seeking God in your rebellious Hy^^^t^cal
hearts, shall never appease Gods wrath, but the rather shall (...) ^^ereunto,
and kindle it more abundantly against you: away with (...) oblations, and false
divining Prophets, they are a weariness to ^^^^d, and his hand is against them,
while your hearts are upright (...) him; and though sometimes some of you have
found God near (...) distress when you called upon him, even when your hearts
were (...) a measure upright with him; yet in vain you now set your selves to
(...) him, and your cry he will not hear, nor his wrath shall not be appea^
(...) for you have truly confessed the cursed thing is amongst you, even (...)
Idolatry of the deepest nature, both in Teachers and people, and ^ll you repent
and remove every burden from off the innocent, the ac^^sed thing cannot be
taken away; but for his Names sake which is E^^ty and Justice, Judgment must
he bring upon your heads, and unto you ^e will be a God of vengeance, and unto
him shall you be a people of his Curse, except you break of your sins by
righteousness, and your ^^^^ities by showing mercy to the poor.

Further you say, and this you desire, That he will infatuate the Counsels, and
defeat the designs of all those that labor to exalt themselves against the
^^terest of his Son and his people.

Ans. Friends, you or some of you are the men which seeks to exalt your selves,
(and not with) and therefore against the interest of the Son of God and his
people; instance the unjust suffering of many of Gods people, who know the Son
in them, to rule them under your Laws upheld by you, and acted in by some of
your selves; and you say in your hearts you will not have this man to reign
over you, for you own not the bringers of that Message, but uphold your false
Prophets which speaks smooth things to you, and cries Peace while you follow
your own ways; and verily herein you go to seek God against your selves to
your own destruction, as being some of you the very men guilty of the
Abominations which you set and propound to your selves in your humiliation to
pray against; your eye is blind, and your hearts unbelieving, and ye know not
what you do; and your own counsels and designs, or so much of them at least,
as is against the Innocent, is sure to be infatuated, and defeated, and you
shall receive from the Lord the answer of your requests upon your own heads;
for you labor against the Interest of the Son, while you seek to bind any
man's conscience to this or that Worship.

Again you say, That he will be pleased in a most special manner to (...) his
presence to those who are entrusted with the management of the A^^^ these
Nations.

Answ. If you do his will, and fulfill his Ordinance of Justice and ^quity
toward all men, not seeking your selves in any thing, (...) Lord in all
things, and wait on him in his Light, by which Christ ^^^neth every one of you,
to be guided thereby in all your ways, (...) presence you may enjoy in a
special manner, in the managing of all ^^fairs to his glory; but if you keep
not the conditions of the Lord in f^^^ing his honor only, and in denying your
selves, his presence you (...) not find with you, but shall be filled with
desolations and content^^^ and the Nations over whom you are entrusted shall
not have peace (...) deliverance in your days, but they under you shall have
confusion (...) oppressions, and the special presence of the Lord shall not be
sho^^ (...) you or to them; and remember this is a warning to you.

Again you say, That he will appear the mighty Counselor experimentally (...)
them.

Answ. If you stand in his counsel, and walk in uprightness of he^^^ before him
in the Light of Christ Jesus, then will he appear to be mighty in his counsel
with you and for you, otherwise shall you be given up to follow the counsels of
your own hearts, which shall never bring forth good, but evil to your selves,
to your whole Nations, and this shall you know experimentally by the Light in
your own consciences.

Again you say, That he would in all things spirit you unto the work (...)
which you are called, and give you unity among your selves, even the best
^^^ty, that of the Spirit, in the best Bond, that of Peace, that as you are a
people ab^^^ding in mercies, so you may abound in returns.

Answ. The work is great unto which you are called, and shall hardly be
accomplished by you, except you receive the Spirit of the Lord to be ruled
therewith in your own hearts; for if you rule for him, you (...) first be ruled
by him, [mark] and ordered with his light, which will condemn every evil
affection in you, and this is the Spirit of unity in the best bond of peace
which is most precious, which brings forth a humble walking with the Lord in
all righteousness before him, and being led every one in particular with this
spirit, and united to God, and one to another, in not seeking your selves, but
the Lord: This is the way where Gods blessing is received, and a returning unto
him of praise for his mercies; but I wish you are not rather adding sin unto
sin, and fulfilling the measure more and more of your transgressions, till the
wrath of the Lord break forth against you to confound you for ever.

Again you say, And that at last through the unwearied goodness of our God
(...) after such memorable revolutions may be settled upon the sure (...) truth,
mercy and peace, and his people henceforth being deliver^^^^ ^^^^ies, may
serve him without fear in holiness and righteous^^^^ all the days of their life.

(...) Ver^ly the goodness of God ha^h been unwearied to these three (...) in
many respects it appears, and many memorable revoluti^^ (...) to pass in this
last age, even in cutting down one power (...) of oppressions after another,
till many great mountains ^^^red, and the Nations levelled; and the Lord is now
bringing his (...) ^^rk to pass in overturning once and again, till his Reign
and his (...) be exalted over all in truth and righteousness; and if you
shor^^^ your hand in your oppositions and persecutions, your selves shall (...)
overturned, that God may in righteousness settle these Nations (...) remains as
a wavering leaf, and as an ungirded vessel, full of (...) ^^d distraction,
fears and jealousies) even among your own selves, (...) in your ways and
thoughts in Truth, Mercy and Peace; but in (...) sayings, and Oppositions, and
Confusions, stand tottering like a (...) ^^edge; and the proud is exalted, and
the poor is despised, and (...) that love Sion are set at naught; and verily
you go not the way to (...) the Nations upon the true foundation, but
backsliders from the (...) truth: what is the foundation? upholding iniquity,
and establish^^^ false Prophets and Diviners by a Law; and such who the Lords
(...) is against, who upholds the horrible filthy thing, and abominati^^ of the
earth; and confusion is upon them till they be overthrown, ^^^er to deceive the
Nations more? therefore hear ye deaf, and look ye ^^in^e, and understand ye
hard-hearted, love Truth, and Mercy, and ^^ce in your own hearts, and depart
from Iniquity; and cast away y^^r Idols, and cease from evil, and learn to do
well; and put away the evil of your own doings, and turn to the Lord in this
the day of your consolation, and to the light of Christ Jesus, wherewith he
has ^^^ned you; take heed, thereby to be guided every one in particular, (...)
fear and tenderness, toward God and toward man; not ruling in Tyranny and
Oppression, nor making Laws in your own wills, according t^ your own thoughts,
as some that went before you have done, till they were cut off, as you are
witnesses, who were made in the hand of the Lord their executioners; and if you
follow in any measure their example of wickedness, take them for an example in
a cursed end; in love ^o all your souls this I write, and not to shame you in
your wickedness, but rather that you may repent, and that you may know how to
exercise your selves in the Law of God toward the Nations, and that every
burden may be removed, and the oppressed may go free, and the hands of iniquity
may be broken; and this is the Fast accepted of the Lord, required of him from
you, which if you observe wi^^ (...) hearts, a Blessing will the Lord make you
unto the Nations (...) sent age, and unto your selves for evermore; but if you
(...) hearts against the Lord, and tread in the steps of your fore (...) seek
to limit the Holy one, or to bind the tender cons^^^^ (...) Lords People, then
shall you fall into their perdition, and (...) up in everlasting confusion, and
your memorial shall stin^ i^ ge^^^^^^ons to come, and shall be a hissing among
the Heathen Kingd^^^^ (...) deliverance will God bring another way unto his
people, (...) throw, if you walk not in the council of the Lord.

And whereas upon the consideration and purpos^^ (...) said, you have ordered
that a day be observed and kept (...) solemn humiliation and seeking the face
of God through the ^^diation of Christ, in England, Scotland and Ireland. (...)
which in much tendrrnesse of spirit I desire to say, that (...) you seek his
face in the hardness of your hearts, and in (...) way of your own peecepts,
while the yoke of the great ^^pressions in these Nations are not broken from
off the (...) of the poor, his fece shall you not behold though you s^^^ it,
but in vain shall you weary your selves, and shall tra^^^ without issue as to
that which you desire, and his counte^^^^ shall be hid from you till he show
his face for evil against you and not for good; and to you it shall be said, To
what p^^dose is your Oblations and Solemn Meetings? Who has required it at
your hand? even your own doings and appointed Altars of Inventions which the
Lord cannot accept from you; therefore give ear ye Mountains, and listen ye^
tall Cedars, if you establish the false Prophets, which makes a prey upon the
people through covetousness, and which acts the abominations of Israel in
preaching for hire, and in divining for money, and in crying peace to the
wicked, by a Law, and maintain them through the oppression of the poor, in the
crying oppression of Tithes, or otherwise imposing such things upon the tender
consciences by any Act or Statute made or allowed by you, God shall not hear
your cry, nor answer your requests, nor ever establish you in peace, nor the
Nations over which you are set likewise, if you make a Law, or allow such a one
to be acted ^^ich any way may tie or limit the spirit of (...) any of his
servants from reproving the a^^^^o^s of the times in Rulers, Teachers or
Peo^^^^ (...) streets, or Temples, or places otherwise, (...) time whatsoever,
the Lord will not hold you (...) ^ay assuredly, if you do but hide your face
(...) suffering of such, who through the wicked^^^^ some under you, may be
afflicted upon such ^^^^^nt, you shall not be altogether innocent, but (...)
shall be upon you likewise, if any for con^^^^ sake deny to answer upon any
account, accor^^^^ to the former vain customs of the Nations, ^^^d up thereto
in ignorance and blindness, in hu^^^^ traditions, and thereupon suffer
imprisonment, ^^^ing, or otherwise whatsoever, by any order from (...) or from
any of your subordinate powers, you (...) be guilty in the sight of God, of
that suffering (...) ^^e innocent in such a cause, much more shall you ^^ilty
if by any means, in any cause, upon any ^^^^ition men be compelled by any
authority of this ^^^^ion to swear; likewise if any suffer for not bow^^ the
hat or knee to any of you, or of your Judges, (...) Underofficers, and
thereupon be accounted transgressors, the Lord shall account such things
oppression from your hands, and tyranny and cruelty, and you shall not escape
unpunished as the Lord lives; these and many more abominations which of late
have abounded in these nations, cries for vengeance against some of you who
have had your hand deeply dipped in such oppressions, and therefore to you this
is a warning to break off these sins by righteousness, and these evils by true
repentance, l^^^ (...) Fasts prove only for strife, and to smite wi^^ (...)
fists of wickedness: Clear your selves, and (...) your hands from these
abominations, lest the frui^^^^ them be given you to eat for food; and let this
O ye Rulers be acceptable counsel unto you, that the days of happiness may
appear, and the long expected and wailed for day of liberty may yet dawn,
through this dark night of bondage which overshadows your heads, that you
cannot behold the glory of the son, and herein shall you be established, and
we shall have cause to bless the Lord for you and with you; otherwise you shall
never be renouned, but all your counsels and purposes shall fail and be cursed
of the Lord, and evil shall be upon you, and upon the Nations for your sakes.

ANd all you that fear God, listen and give audience, and let the fear of the
Lord be before your eyes, and keep your selves pure from the iniquities which
the rest loves to drink in; and though your power be shorter, and your vote
lower, then the uprightness of your hearts desires, yet unto God be faithful in
bearing your testimony for him, and against all that which with the light of
Jesus, you see to be contrary to him, and be awakened unto righteousness,
judgment and mercy; the light is springing over your heads, and the day of the
Lord is dawning out of darkness, and a seed is sown in your dominions which
cannot be rooted out til (...) overspread the Earth with the precious ^^^of,
and though it be striven against to be (...) up, yet shall the branch and root
thereof be ^^^^gly renouned, for it is of the true Jew, and he ^^^lls before
it shall never more rise up again.

And this is by a true Lover of your Souls, in faithfulness unto God: Given
forth for your sakes who fear the Lord, E. B.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 34. for ere read are, and add is after it in the same line: p.
10. l. 33. read with for which; p. 11. l. 9. add not before upright; p. 12. l.
22. add and after selves, p. 13. l. 18. r. stands for stand, and in line 21.
read backslides for backsliders; and in l. 21. r. which for what; and in l. 22.
r. whom for who; p. 14. l. 17. r. great for grean; and l. 19. for fece r. sace:
p. 15. l. 11. for answer r. swear; page 16. l. 8. for wdiled r. waited.


