A VINDICATION OF THE People of GOD, CALLED QUAKERS;

DIRECTED Unto Roger Boil, Called Earl of Orrery. Charles Coote, Called Earl
of Mountrath. Theophilus Jones Called Sir Theophilus Jones.


BEING AN ANSWER To a BOOK, dedicated to Them, by one George Pressick of
Dublin. In which Book many Lies and Calumnies are presented against the
Innocent People of God. And this is for the clearing of the TRUTH, that no Lie
may rest upon it; And for the Satisfaction of all Sober People in Ireland, and
elsewhere. With a Word of Good ADVICE to the Chief Governors there.

By E. B.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, in Martins Le Grand.

A VINDICATION Of the People of God, called QUAKERS.
THere is Irreconcilable Enmity between the two Seeds, (to wit) the Seed of
God and the Seed of the Serpent; and these two are always opposite and
contrary one to the other, in Nature, Fruits and Effects; and the Seed of the
Serpent is always persecuting the Seed of God, in every Age and Generation;
and they in whom the Seed of the Serpent is living and ruling, are always
projecting and contriving mischief and hatred against the People and Servants
of the Lord, in whom the Seed of God lives and reigns; as it is written, He
that is born of the flesh persecutes him that is born after the Spirit: Thus it
has been in all generations, and thus it is at this day: Great is the
opposition that is made by many in Lies and Slanders, in Reviling and
Reproaching, in Imprisoning and Persecuting, and in all manner of evil works
and words against the innocent People of God, called Quakers: How have the
hands of ungodly men been lifted up to smite that People by many kinds of
abuses? and how have their tongues been set on fire, to reproach, and revile,
and slander in all kind of evil-speaking? and all this for Righteousness-sake,
and not for any evil-doing: For who is the man, and where is he, that can
justly charge Evil upon that People, either in Doctrine, Faith, or Practice? or
in any thing relating to their Religion to God-wards, or in relation to their
Conversations and Walking toward men? It is true, we have not wanted Accusers
to every Authority, but such and such things have been falsely charged against
us, and that to every Power that has been since we were a People, under whom
we have been a Suffering People, even from all that ever have sitten in the
Throne, since the Lord raised us up to bear witness of his glorious Name and
Truth in the world.

Now the present occasion of this my present work, is, Forasmuch as we now
stand accused of great and heinous Crimes in the view of this whole Kingdom of
Ireland; and more particularly before you Three, in a Book, called A brief
Relation of some Remarkable Passages of the Anabaptists in Germany, etc.
published by one Geo. Pressick of Dublin, and dedicated in a special manner to
you; that his Work may pass with the greater Credit, and his Slanders and
Calumnies, be received for Undoubted Truths: Now that the Innocence of the
Upright may be cleared, and that no lie may rest upon the Truth, nor that you,
neither any others, may receive Falsehoods for Verities, because of our silence;
therefore it is that the Lord has* put it into my heart, to defend the Cause
of God and his People, by returning plain and sober Answer to the principal
parts of his Book, wherein we are concerned and falsely charged; and for the end
that the false Accuser may be reproved, and his Calumnies returned into his own
evil and malicious heart, from whence they came; and that You, and all men, may
be truly informed, and prevented (if possible) of being seduced into the belief
of falsehoods, lest that your hearts and hands should be stirred up to Act or Do
in your Authority against the People whom God has blessed; and from the ground
and cause of Mis-informations and false Accusations, without better testimony,
which would be a way to destroy your selves, and to bring the guilt of the
unjust Sufferings of the Lords People upon your own heads, which would draw
down the heavy Wrath of God upon you.

I cannot flatter you by feigned words of Guile, nor give you flattering
Titles, but I judge you are Reasonable men, in that degree as to hear and
consider our Defense, as well as our Enemies Charge; and I hope you are wise in
that degree, as to judge between Truth and a Lie, and to distinguish one from
the other; and I suppose you are just in that measure, as to receive what ye
know to be Truth, and to reject what ye know to be False, being convinced in
your own Consciences; and, as such, I must place my Plea before you
particularly, and make my Defense to your Judgment Seat, [even to the Witness
of God in your Consciences, I intend and mean] And I shall omit to say much to
the Accuser himself, as supposing him, a man more full of envious raging
humor, than of solid and wise judgment, to receive either reproof or
conviction; for many such as he I have dealt withal in this case, whom I have
found men so filled with prejudice, that neither the Authority of sound Reason,
nor of the Word of God, could convince them of their evil proceedings;
Therefore, before you, I shall state the particular Accusations, and the
Defense against them.

The way in which our Adversary has proceeded in his Accusations is obscure,
and yet malicious enough, and also in great ignorance: for he tells you in his
Epistle, he has gathered up out of several Authors, the most remarkable
passages both of the Doctrine and Practice of the Anabaptists (so called) in
Germany, 139 years ago; and then he charges the same things upon the
Anabaptists and Quakers (as he scornfully calls them) in these days; and then
he applauds you three in words of high style, for being instrumental to
suppress their insolent tyrannical usurped Authority, which they exercise over
Gods People in this Nation, to enslave us (says he) to their insatiable lusts.
There are his own words in his Epistle.

Answ. In answer to all this, diverse things are very considerable, which I
desire to lay before you.

1. Concerning the Anabaptists (so called) in Germany, and their Doctrines and
Practices, with the several Transactions falling out in that time: It is not my
work now to plead their Cause, nor yet can I justify them in their
proceedings, if the relations given of them be true, which are many, and to me
seems not in every thing credible; because I find, it were their Enemies, who
are our Authors; who seldom give true relations of such whom they hate: But be
the Relations true or false, it is not material in this case in hand, for my
occasion is not concerning a People so far off, as in Germany, and of so long
time, as above a hundred of years; but I am to clear the Innocent who are now
living, from the present Accusations of an envious man; though, if it were
necessary, or would edify, or were a matter of pertinency, I could say
somewhat more concerning that Peoples appearing in Germany, but being a matter
not suiting my occasion, I do forbear it.

2. As for them, called Anabaptists of this our Age and Country, I shall not
plead their cause at this time, though I cannot believe that they are of that
spirit of Murder and Tyranny, etc. as is reputed by your Informer; though their
Judgment in every Case, neither about Civil or Spiritual things, I dare not
justify; nor may I lawfully clear all of them from a large measure of the
spirit of Ambition and Covetousness, Vainglory and Self-seeking; for which the
Lord has justly brought them under a just reproof, and by this time I believe
some of them may see some error in their own way, andmore I may not say of
them, but that I believe the present Accusation against them, by your present
Informer, is more out of bitter and perverse enmity and devouring malice that
he bears toward them, than out of any other end; and I doubt not but they are
sufficient to answer for themselves, and to clear their Innocence in things
wherein they are not guilty; and if they are guilty, let them fall in their
trial: I leave them to speak for themselves, thus omitting any further Answer
on their behalf.

3. As for us, whom in scorn the Accuser calls Quakers, and whom he has
accused as guilty in all things, with the Anabaptists (so called) in Germany,
and in this Nation; I say, there is great difference both in Judgment and
Practice, in things Civil (so accounted) and things Spiritual between us and
them, as is well known; and were they fully guilty of all what is said of them
(which I dare not believe) yet how can we be charged guilty of their Crimes,
being they and we are different in Judgment and Practice, as I have said:
Surely your Informer has neither showed good Conscience, nor yet pure Reason
in his proceeding, who has laid things to our charge which we never knew, and
has accused us guilty of that which never entered into our hearts to practice,
and has (as it were) charged other men's crimes upon us, being wholly innocent,
as will appear in the prosecution of this matter; and I hope to make it plain,
that he has wronged us, and abused you, by dedicating Falsehoods for your
approof, and sent Slanders abroad, as it were, under your Name or Patronage.

4. As concerning the Charge it self, included in these words, says your
Informer; And considering how instrumental your Honors have been to suppress
their Insolent, Tyrannical, Usurped Authority, which they exercised over Gods
People in this Nation, to enslave us, etc. In these words there are very deep
Accusations, Slanders, and unjust Reproaches vented against us; and with what
face (except Impudent) we can be thus charged; is almost wonderful; especially
considering that we have been our selves a suffering people by every Authority,
since the time the Lord raised us up, and never had any outward* Authority in
this Nation, but all were cast out of all place and power, both Civil and
Military, when as they have become one with us in our way, and this has been
the manner of dealing with us by all that ever have ruled; and yet we are
charged most unjustly with exercising insolent, tyrannical, usurped Authority
in this Nation, etc. for it is said, Their insolent, and They exercised, to wit,
the Quakers; when as it is manifest, as I have showed, that we never exercised
any outward Authority at all, but have been a suffering People by all
Authorities unto this day: therefore I do appeal to the Witness of God in your
own Consciences, how great is this Slander, and how false this Accusation, and
how wicked is our Adversary in thus accusing us before you, in the things which
you so well know are utterly and detestably false; and the Accuser and his
Accusations are to be condemned together.

5. But and if it had been so, or should be so in time to come, that we had
any, or all outward Authority in our hands, (I may suppose impossible things,
to manifest the truth of our Principle) our Principle is not to be in insolent,
tyrannical, nor to be Usurpers over Gods People, to enslave them; but far the
contrary, even that Justice, Mercy and Truth may sit in the Throne, and that
Peace and Freedom may be held forth unto all; that no Usurpers nor Tyrants, but
Just men, and men that fear God, and hate Covetousness and every evil way, that
such alone may sit in Judgment whom God calls to that place; who will rule in
Righteousness and Justice, and regard the Cause of the Poor and Needy; we would
that such only ruled, who were ruled by the Lord; who would be a blessing in
the world, and to all people; not desiring more liberty to our selves, than
what we would give unto all others in all just ways. This is our Principle, as
to matters of outward Authority among men, and not as this false Accuser has
suggested out of his evil heart.

6. As to the matter of your suppressing us, which your Applauder says, you
have been instrumental to do: This is as false as the rest; for we are no more
suppressed; than before you exercised your present Authority, but are every way
in as much liberty of persons, and otherwise, as in their days before yours;
and are no way suppressed, nor fearful of it: So the Author of such Lies, has
but flattered you, and fawned upon you, in telling you, ye have suppressed us,
when as it is nothing so: but and if it had been in your hearts, or be at this
day, to suppress us, and to hinder us of our liberties, and to persecute us,
the Lord shall plead our Cause against you, and give no success unto your work;
but it shall be turned to our Renown, and to your Overthrow, and the secret
hand of God shall confound you, and break your purposes, and deliver his People
out of your mouths; Thus it shall come to pass, if that your hands should be
stretched forth to hurt us, who are Gods Heritage, and the Sheep of his Fold.
And thus much in answer to his Epistle.

Now I come to a second Accusation of his, stated in his first Page, in these
words. We may see from whence Anabaptists, Quakers, Ranters, and Levellers all
had their Original, namely, from the Papists, etc.

Answ. 1. As for the Anabaptists, Ranters and Levellers, I leave them to plead
their own Cause; and though we are accused with such, yet there is much
difference in Judgment and Practice between us and them; though I believe, they
are all further from Popery both in judgment and practice, than is this Accuser
of them; but yet they shall answer for themselves; and I shall only mind the
matter I have in hand, which is, to clear the People of God, called Quakers,
from the Accusations charged falsely against them, whom I know to be innocent,
from these false Accusations.

2. That we did arise from the Papists, or, that they are our Original, in
Doctrine, Faith, or Practice, this is utterly false; for between us and them is
perfect separation, and we are of another Spirit, and divided from them; as
appears every way, even by their persecuting of us for our Testimony bearing
against them and their Religion; and they have written against us, and we
against them, diverse Controversies; and they have imprisoned diverse of our
Friends in their Dominions, for giving Testimony against their ways: By all
which it does appear, that we are not of the Papists line, nor arisen from
them; for if we were of them, they would love us, and not persecute us; and
that herein we are falsely accused, as in other things: And this is an old
out-dated Accusation, and is of no account; for now we are otherwise known
through these Kingdoms, and we are manifest to the Consciences of men in the
sight of God, to be such as fear the Lord, and walk in his ways.

3. And as for our Original, It is the Lord God alone that has raised us up,
and planted us a People, that were not a People in times past; And not from the
Apostate Christians, neither of Papists nor Protestants (so called) are we
sprung; but are of the Apostles line, and of the stock and race of the true
Christians, that believed in Christ, and followed him; and in every part of our
Religion, both in Faith and Practice, and in Conversation, we are agreeing with
the holy Apostles, being witnessed unto by the Scriptures in all that we
profess and practice; and the Lord has raised us up out of the Apostasy, into
which all Christendom has been fallen since the Apostles days, whilst
Antichrist has reigned over the World; and we are as the first fruits unto God
and to the Lamb, since the falling away from the true Faith; and Truth and
Righteousness is our Original, and Christ Jesus is our Foundation, on whom we
are builded, and the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against us: and this
Testimony the Spirit of God gives for us, and in us, in Contradiction of the
false Accusations of all our enemies.

4. And if it be an offense to be risen from the Papists, and if all that be
evil which they are the Original of; then the Protestants (so called) are in
the offense, and their Ministry, and the chief part of their Church Government,
Worship and Ordinances are evil; for did not the Protestants spring from the
Papists? and did not the Papists institute the Way by which the Protestants
make Ministers at Schools and Colleges? And was it not they that first
instituted Sprinkling of Infants, and calling it Baptism into the Faith, and
into the Church? And was it not the Papists that first taught the Protestants
to keep holy days, as Christmasse and Candlemasse, so called? And many other
particular things relating to the Protestants Church, Ministry and Worship,
were originally ordained and first practiced by the Church of Rome and Papists:
And so while this false Accuser is charging others, himself and the men of his
way, are found guilty of the same things; and the Papists may justly say to the
Protestants, that they are false-hearted to them, in denying of them and their
Church, when as their fathers were the Instituters of the principal parts of
the Protestants Worship and Ordinances; and so they, like unnatural Children,
have denied their Mother that bred them up, and ordained them a way of making
Ministers, and maintaining them, and many other parts of their Religion: But
because she has not been the National Interest for these many years, therefore
the Church of the Protestants have denied the Church of Rome, though originally
they rose out from her.

The next thing in his Book I take notice of, is, where he seems to charge
us, with boasting that we talk with God, and God with us, and have Revelations,
and as if God commanded them to kill all the Wicked, and to make a new World: A
Sect in Saxony (says the Accuser) arose that held this; and the Quakers now
are like them: which is as much as charging all this upon us.

Answ. 1. That we do boast of talking with God, or of Revelation. This is
another of his false Accusations: for we boast not, nor do we glory in any
thing, saving in the Lord, and this is no Error, but that which we must
acknowledge unto, or else deny the Truth, to talk with God, and God with us, in
and by his own Spirit: for all the Saints have converse with God, and union and
fellowship with him in his own Spirit, as the Scriptures do declare: And as for
Revelations, we do acknowledge according to Christ's words, that we had never
known the Father, not the Son, but by Revelation; For none know the Father but
the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him, as it is written; and all such as
have not converse with God, and that have not Revelation, are not in the way of
Eternal life, but are ignorant and without God in the world, and neither know
him, nor have fellowship with him.

2. As for killing all the Wicked, this is another false Charge; for it is not
our principle to war against the persons of any men, and kill them with carnal
weapons, about Church, and Ministry, and Religion, as the Papists and
Protestants do one with another; but it is our Principle to war against the
evil spirit in men, and to smite that with the Spiritual Sword of Gods Word;
and we would have men's Wickedness killed, and their Persons saved, and their
Souls delivered; and this is the War we make, even till men be changed by the
Power of God, and all things made new; even a new World, and a new Earth we do
expect, according to the Lords promise, so that it is no error to expect a New
Earth, and a New World; for there is a New Creation which the Saints do
witness, created a new in Christ Iefus, to bring forth good fruits unto the
living God: and all that do not witness this, are in the transgression of the
old Creation, which brings the Wrath of God.

Again, The Accuser tells a story of one, that prosessed the gift of discerning
Spirits, and to know the Elect from Reprobates, and that made Holiness to
consist in speaking little, and living homely and sordidly, as our Quakers do,
says he.

Answ. 1. As for discerning of spirits, that is gift which the Saints of God do
receive in all Ages: for the Apostle said, to some was given the discerning of
spirits, by the manifestation of the Spirit of God; So to profess discerning of
spirits, is no error in us, though it be stated as a great error before you,
by an ignorant man, who knows not what he says, nor whereof he affirms: And
it is possible to know the Elect from Reprobates by their fruits and works; for
the Children of God (who are the Elect) are known by their holy and righteous
works and fruits; and the children of the Devil (who are the Reprobate) are
known also by their works and fruits of unrighteousness which they bring forth;
and this the Scriptures bear witness of.

2. As for speaking little, and living homely and sordidly: If he means, by
homely and sordidly, plainly and without superfluity; this is also works and
fruits of Holiness; and it is better to speak little, than to utter multitude of
vain words; and it is more justifiable to God and just men, to be plain and
homely (as he says) in Apparel, than superfluity of naughtiness in vain
attire, and more holy; for true holiness consists in the Power of God, which
crucifies all idle words, and all superfluity in Apparel, and whatsoever is
not like God: And was this Accuser but as wise as he is envious, he would never
be seen to scorn the Quakers (scornfully so called) with speaking little, and
wearing plain and sober Apparel; but fools love to be meddling to manifest
their own folly, as it is written.

Again, The Accuser tells another story of Muntzer, how he did exhort some
that were on his part, (viz. Anabaptists) to kill every mothers son, for a
sacrifice to the Lord; and, says he* by this we may guess, if Anabaptists and
Quakers should get the upper hand, what they would do, etc.

Answ. 1. As for the Quakers getting the upper hand, we strive not for it by
carnal weapons, to have victory over men's persons, though we know the Lord will
give us victory and dominion over the Beast, and over the false Prophet; for
the Lamb shall get the victory, and they that are with him, who are called, and
faithful, and chosen; but this victory is spiritual, and obtained spiritually;
and thus we believe the Lord will give us the upper hand, even Victory over all
our Enemies.

2. But what a wicked envious surmise and suggestion is here couched under, as
if the Quakers, if they had victory, would kill every mothers son for a
sacrifice, and that they would make War, etc. The Lord rebuke his slanderous
tongue, who has hatched mischief in his mind against the Innocent, and
presented you with forged lies and surmises, and imagined and guessed cruel and
evil things against us, who are far otherwise principled than as he guesseth:
but all this his own doings, does but manifest the folly of his own heart, and
his own wickedness; for we are of the Spirit of Mercy and Peace, and not of
Murder and War; not to kill men's Persons, but to war with the Spirit of God
against spiritual enemies; that men's Iniquities may be slain, and their Persons
and Souls saved.

Again, The Accuser, page 4. tells a long story of Micher Hopman, and others
with him, what things they held, As they condemned the Baptism of Children:
they would not take an Oath: they pulled down Magistrates: they undertook to
kill all Princes: they taught, that in their Churches all were holy; and that
it was lawful to have many Wives: that all Learning is profane, and that mean
men are fittest to expound Scriptures; and there must be no ordinary calling in
the Church, but every man must speak as he is inspired: And thus it is (says
the Accuser) with the Quakers and Popish Agents, who are their Ringleaders,
have been endeavoring in these three Nations these eight or nine years
bypast, etc.

Answ. 1. It is to be considered, that all these things are fully charged upon
us, as bei^^ ^ilty thereof, and so to every particular I shall answer. As to
that of the Baptism of Children, we do say, there is neither Command nor
Example for it in all the Scripture, God never commanded it, nor did the
Apostles ever practice it in their days, but it is a Tradition of the Church
of Rome, introduced into the world long since the Apostles days; and except
better ground can be showed for the practice of it, than bare Tradition, it is
lawful to deny it, as being no Ordinance of God in his true Church; except (I
say) that it can be proved that God ever commanded it, or the Apostles and
Saints practiced it; till which be done, it is no error to deny the sprinkling
of Infants, and to deny it to be the true Baptism into the true Church.

2. Concerning taking an Oath, we say, Christ Jesus commanded, Mat. 5. Not to
swear at all; and the Apostle James said, Above all things, my Brethren, swear
not: so that to deny to swear and take Oaths, is according to the Command of
Christ and his Apostles, and is no error, though the Accuser has here charged
it on us as a heinous crime; but we do deny All Swearing, in obedience to the
Commands of Christ, and our Yea is Yea, and our Nay is Nay, as Christ has
taught us, without an Oath; who has commanded us not to take Oaths, nor swear
at all.

3. As for pulling down Magistrates, and killing all Princes, and that it is
lawful to have many Wives: These are lies and slanders charged upon us by a
false Accuser; for our Principle is, to obey all Magistrates, and all Princes,
in every thing, either by doing or suffering, and we would have Princes and
Magistrates to rule and reign in the Power of God, justly, righteously, and
according to the Law of God; and would not have them killed and pulled down:
And we say, it is better to keep in the single chaste life, than to have many
Wives: but any Accusation to make us appear vile, this your Informer spares
not; but according to his Work will be his Reward in the Day of the Lord.

4. Concerning all being holy in the Church: we say, That every Member in the
true Church of Christ, is holy: for the Church of Christ is his Body, and every
Member of his Body, which are flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bone, are
holy, as he is holy, in kind and quality; and it is his Exhortation to his
Saints, Be ye holy, for I am holy, faith Christ: So that to hold that every
Member of the Body of Christ is holy, is no error, though it be so reputed by
an ignorant man.

5. Concerning all Learning being profane, and that mean men are fittest to
expound Scriptures: I do say, that Learning in it self is a gift of God, and is
not profane; though as to the knowledge of God, and the things of his Kingdom,
learning in Tongues and Languages, is little available; for it is the Spirit of
God that teaches the things of God, and reveals all the things of his Kingdom;
and none can know God, but as the Spirit of God discovers him: for the
Disciples, who were some of them unlearned men in books and letters, had the
knowledge of the matters of Gods Kingdom taught them by the holy Spirit: and
such as have the gift of the Spirit of God, be they Poor or Rich, are fittest
to expound and understand Scriptures; for none can understand the Scriptures,
nor the things therein declared, but by the Spirit of God that gave forth the
Scriptures; and it is not Latin, Greek or Hebrew, that teaches to understand
the Scriptures, but it is the Spirit of God, and to whomsoever that Spirit is
given (and God gives it to whom he pleases) they only are fit to declare the
things of God unto others, and to expound Scriptures, and none else but them
who have experience of the operation of the Spirit in their own hearts: and
this we hold and believe.

6. Concerning ordinary Calling, and speaking as he is inspired: I say the
Scriptures no where speak of ordinary calling: and if by ordinary Calling it be
meant, calling to any Office in the Church, without the Spirit of God; I say,
there was no such Calling: for the Ministry of Christ in the Apostles days,
was called by the holy Spirit, and the Ministry of the true Church, is made,
ordained and called according to the gift of Gods holy Spirit, which he gives;
And as every one (says Peter) has received the gift of the Spirit, so let him
administer the same one to another. So that it is manifest by the Scriptures,
that the Call to the Ministry in the Apostles days, was not of man, nor by
man, says Paul, but according to the gift of the holy Anoiming, the Spirit of
God: And also every one in the true Church might speak, as it was revealed to
them, for, says Paul, If any thing be revealed to another that stands by, let
the first hold his peace: for ye may all speak one by one, that all may be
edified: So that it is no error to hold, that every one in the true Church may
speak as the Spirit of God gives them utterance, and to whom the things of God
are revealed by the Spirit.

7. That there are Popish Agents among us, and that such are our Ringleaders;
this is a false slander, and you ought to put the Accuser to prove it, it is
your duty so to do; and that such Popish Agents be named, and where they are:
And I challenge the Accuser to name One among us, or else let him stop his
mouth for a Liar; who has abused your Names, with dedicating Untruths to you
for your approof.

Again, He accuses us for saying, The Spirit blows where it lists, and, he
says, we judge none have the Spirit but our selves.

Answ. 1. Christ himself said, The wind blows where it lists, and so is
every one that is born of the Spirit: And we do judge God has given of his
Spirit to many that are yet ungodly, and many are convinced of sin by the
Spirit of God in their Consciences, that are wicked and ungodly, who are not of
us: but yet we say, as the Saints in Ages past said, We know that we are of
God, and that the whole world lies in wickedness; and they that are of God,
hear us, and are one with us; and we do inform all People to the measure of the
Spirit of God in their Consciences, that they may come to the knowledge of God,
and to be one with us.

Again, He accuses us to be acted by the same deluding spirit as John of
Leyden was acted by.

Answ. 1. What spirit John of Leyden was acted by we now dispute not, neither
does this Accuser well know, but what he has from the Reports of others, which
may be false as like as true in some particulars; but the Spirit that we follow
is the Spirit of God, by which we are acted in the ways of Truth and
Righteousness; and are not deluded, nor followers of a deluding spirit; for we
are willing to be ^ied in our Doctrines and Practices according to the
Scriptures: and though we stand accused of these and the like things, yet we
challenge him to prove it before you, and that we may be admitted to make our
defeace; and we shall the rather easily prove that our Accuser is acted by the
spirit of the Devil, who is an Accuser of the Brethren like the Devil; and that
is a deluding spirit that teaches men to backbite, lie and slander, as this
man has done; so he is proved fully guilty of that whereof he has accused
others, and must own the shame and condemnation to himself which he would bring
upon others.

Again, The Accuser charge us, that we would neither have King, Magistrates,
nor Ministers, but of our selves, etc.

Answ. 1. I have before mentioned what kind of Rulers and Governors we would
have, even such as are just men, and men of Truch and Righteousness, and that
hate Covetousness and every evil way; and such are of us, even such we would
have to reign as are approved of God, who would be a praise to them that do
well, and a terror to evildoers; and that would only rule and reign for the
Lord, exercising and executing his Righteous Laws by the Spirit of God; and
such will be blessed in their Authority.

2. And till such only rule and bear the Sword of Justice in the Earth, we do
know peace and happiness can never be in the Kingdoms of the World, but
divisions and confusions will arise and be brought forth; for it is the only
Blessedness of a Government in any Nation, when the Authority it self is just
and according to God, and when such as bear the execution thereof are Just
Kings, Righteous Magistrates, and Ministers of Justice, that will judge for God
and not for man, and we seek not the place of Government in this World, nor do
we intrude our selves into such places; though this we say, while that spirit
reigns and rules in the Nations of the Earth, which is not of God, but contrary
to us, Peace and Happiness in good Government amongst men through the World,
can never be; though we are truly subject to whatsoever Authority is set over
us, by doing or suffering.

Then the Accuser speaks of teaching the ways of Righteousness, and says,
according to this, the Quakers have gone through Ireland, and he speaks of Gods
wrath following for hardness of heart, and this (says he) is just like the
Quakers Doctrines now.

Answ. That the Quakers (scornfully so called) have gone through Ireland, and
through many other Nations of the world, to teach and preach Truth and
Righteousness, this is true, and without occasion of an evil Charge against
them for so doing; and the Lord has prospered us, and been with us, to the
turning of many from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God;
and we have testimony in the Consciences of many for the truth of our Doctrines
and Practices; and this is not Error nor Heresy, to proclaim the Wrath of
God, because of the hardness of Peoples hearts; for that is the portion of all
hard-hearted men: and we are not ashamed of this Doctrine, for it is according
to the Scriptures of Truth; and but that this Accuser is given up to blindness
of mind, he would never have mentioned these things as against us, nor used our
names in reproach in this matter.

And lastly, Whereas he says, some of the Quakers say, they are Jews, and are
not, but are of the Synagogue of Satan: and thou chargest James Naylor with
saying, that he was Christ: and that one should say, George Fox was John
Baptist, and such false Prophets and Prophesies we have heard too much of, etc.

Answ. 1. That they say, they are Jews, and are not, are such as have a name to
live, but are dead, who say and do not; but we are not such; so this his Charge
is false and wicked, and of the Synagogue of Satan he does manifest himself to
be, by his accusing of the Brethren: And as for James Naylor he never said he
was Christ, though this has been cast, as a foul reproach, upon him by others,
yet it never was proved against him lawfully, nor any thing tending thereunto,
saving that he said Christ was in him, as he is in every Member of his Body,
according to measure. And as for the story of George Fox, there are many such
lying stories that have gone abroad in these Nations, in opposition to the
Truth of God made manifest; but over all these things Truth has gotten the
victory, and the Lords Work must prosper in the Earth; and all Liars must be
confounded, and have their portion in the Lake: And this is our portion from
the World, as Christ said, They shall speak all manner of evil against you
falsely for my Name sake; but great shall be your reward in Heaven: And this is
for a testimony against them, that our Enemies are of the Devil, and for a
testimony to us that we are of God.

And thus I have returned Our Defense before you, against his several Lies and
Slanders, and it is left to the Witness of God in your Consciences to be Judge
in this Case, between us and him; and if you be clothed with the Spirit of
Moderation and Meekness, and will judge according to Equity, I doubt not but
the Case is clear against our Adversary, who wrongfully, and to a wicked and
evil intent, has hatched mischief against us, and brought it forth before you;
and we desire nothing of Revenge toward him for his evil work, but do leave
him to be rewarded of the Lord, who will justly give him, and all men,
according to their deeds.

And now I have a few Considerations, to present unto you Three in particular,
as such in that capacity who bear Rule in this Land.

1. Consider how that you are set in Place and Authority, and ought to judge
and govern for God alone, and to be a Terror to all evildoers, and a Praise to
all that do well; and the living God requires of you to do Justice, Truth and
Righteousness in the Land, to hear the Cry of the Widow and Fatherless, and
to judge uprightly the cause of the Poor, without respect to your own
self ends; and ye ought to be meek and humble men in your Places of Care and
Trust, which is committed unto you; and take heed that your hearts be not
lifted up in the honor of high places, and so Judgment, Mercy and Truth be
neglected, and Oppressions and Cruelties be brought forth.

Consider, that if ye do Justice and Righteousness, and walk humbly with the
Lord, and exercise Mercy and Truth in the Land, and hear the Cry of the Poor,
and deliver the Afflicted; then the Lord can make you a Blessing to your selves
and to the People: But if you be proud and exalted, and ambitious and
vainglorious, and exercise Cruelty and Oppression, and tread down the Poor,
and vex the Needy, and grieve the Lord God by your Iniquities; then God will
cast you down, and lay your honoue in the dust, and make you a Curse and a
Reproach, and your Names and Memorial shall be a stink; and the justice of the
Lords hand shall effect it.

3. Consider that year men, and not God, and your strength flesh, and not
Spirit, and there is a God greater than all, who is above all; who can suddenly
in a moment save his People, and destroy his Enemies; and he can break you down
and never raise you up; he can turn his hand upon you and all mankind, as the
Potter does with his clay, even tread it and mould it for honor or dishonor;
and if his Spirit blow upon you, and if he smite you, you perish, and none can
restore you: Take heed to this God and have respect unto him, and remember you
are but as dust before him; and you now have a time for a moment, which the
Lord has given you to try you what you will do, and how you will walk toward
him; an Account unto him must you give of all your ways: Remember this now in
your lifetime, while you have time, and the day of your visitation is not
quite extinguished.

4. Be tender and compassionate toward all men; not perverse, hasty and
froward, thinking to bow men to your wills by rigor, but rather win them by
love; and this is of good report to you, to be humble, meek and tender toward
all, even toward your enemies; and insult not over the Afflicted, neither add
to their sufferings; for the Lord can raise up, and bring down whomsoever he
will, according to his pleasure; and remember that Law to walk by it, Do to
others, but as ye would have others do unto you in the same case; and be not
too cruel to such, who cannot conform to times, and things, and men, for what
know you, but some men's Consciences may be tender in things which you yet make
no conscience of; Meddle not to persecute any for their Conscience Sake in
Religious matters, but rule and govern well in outward affairs, according to
the Law of God, but afflict not, nor persecute any for their Conscience Sake
toward God, while they walk justly, as men, in things between man and man;
take this Counsel, lest ye vex the Lord against you to destroy you.

5. Be moderate and compassionate toward this same People, that are accused
before you; though they are at this day a People under great afflictions and
sufferings every way, yet show not the height of Rigor and Oppression against
them; though you have power to imprison them, and to deal hardly with them, yet
be tender and meek, and show bowels of mercy and forbearance; and use not the
extent of your Power, to seek their destruction, lest ye provoke the Lord
against your selves: for the God of Heaven remembers their Cause, and does
give ear to the cry of their Innocent groanings under their heavy burdens, and
Deliverance may he work for them, whether you will or no: Though it be an hour
of Affliction, and a day of great Trial upon them, yet Woe unto them that shall
be found adding to their Afflictions, by increasing their burdens through
Injustice and Persecution: Therefore, as ye hope to receive mercy from the Lord,
and as ye would have his compassion showed to you, do the same to his People,
for power is in your hands, to be merciful or cruel, to relieve them, or
persecute them; and it is your day of trial what you will do; ye have your hour
to do good or evil, and according to your works will the God of Heaven reward
you.

6. Consider the Innocence of this People; they are Clear before the Lord and
you of plotting, or contriving, or designing evil against You, or this
Government, they seek not the hurt of any man's person, nor do they intend evil
toward the Government or Governors; Who have found them agitating any such
things? Of all such things they are innocent, and are peaceable Subjects under
the Government, and are persuaded in Conscience so to continue: And as for
their deportment in their Callings and Occasions, and Tradings amongst men, ask
their Neighbors; Do not they deal justly, truly, and equally in all their
dealing and occasions? Do not they speak the Truth to their Neighbors in all
matters? and are they not persons of upright and inoffensive lives and
conversations? Do they defraud their Neighbors? or, are they Drunkards or vain
persons? Let the very Witness of God in their Neighbors answer. And if you
should fall a persecuting this People, and seek to destroy them, concerning
whom the Witness of God in men's Consciences gives such an Evidence, Woe, woe
will be unto you; for you cannot hurt them, but you act contrary to the Witness
of God in your own hearts, which will condemn you in the Day of Judgment. So
let this dwell upon your spirits, and be aware what you do; take good
consideration, lest you act out of Gods Counsel to your own overthrow.

7. Consider what became of all the Persecutors of old, Were not they Eminently
destroyed by the hand of God who persecuted the Lords People? What became of
Pharaoh? and what became of Hammon, and what became of Herod, who persecuted
the Lords Heritage? Let this enter into your hearts, to be Examples to you that
you persecute not the Innocent, lest God overturn you by the roots; for, as I
have said, the Cause of this People God regards, and he will avenge himself
in his season of all their Persecutors; Have not your hands dipped in their
unjust Afflictions that God may bless you, and spare them that you may be
spared in the Day of Vengeance; if you have no matter of evil against them, in
things between man and man, nor in the affairs of your Government, as
contriving against it; nor nothing but concerning the Worship of their God, and
the matters of their Conscience in Spiritual things; Touch them not, Persecute
them not, Afflict them not; but be tender toward them, as you will answer the
same before the God of Heaven. These are only Considerations of Warning to you:
and I commit the matter to the Lord; and ye have time to do Good or Evil, and
accordingly will God reward you.

A Testimony concerning Government and Authority.
WE are a People whom God has raised up out of the Apostasy, Darkness and
Ignorance which all Christendom has long been fallen into; for since the days
of the Apostles many have professed the Words of Christ, and had a name of
Churches, and the show of Religion, and have professed the Scriptures, but have
wanted the same Spirit and Power of Godliness which the Apostles lived in; the
Life and Spirit of God has been wanting amongst the false Christians, and they
have been persecuting one another about Religion and the Worship of God, and
imposing upon one another Consciences, in Spiritual matters; and Kings and
Rulers have been setting up what kind of Worship, and Religion and
Church-Goverment as they pleased; and they have imposed upon Kingdoms, and made
People subject to them, to profess and conform to such a way of Worship and
Religion, some in the ignorance of their Consciences, and some conttary to
their Consciences; and all this has been in the Apostasy, since the Apostles
days, while men have been fallen from the true Faith, and many have been
subject to their Rulers and Governors by force, and for fear, and not for
Conscience Sake; for Love, Peace and Unity has been wanting among Christians,
and Bitterness, Frowardness and False-heartedness, has been amongst them: but
out of all this the Lord has redeemed us into Peace and Comfort with God, and
one with another.

And as concerning our Principle about Magistracy and Government, and obedience
thereunto, this I do declare.

1. We do own and acknowledge Magistracy to be an Ordinance of God, instituted
of him, for the punishing of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do
well; and we acknowledge all just subjection to Authority, Magistracy, and
Government: This is our Principle, and has ever been our Practice, known
through these Kingdoms, that we are subject by doing or suffering, to
whatsoever Authority the Lord is pleased to set over us, without Rebellion,
Sedition, Plotting or making War against any Government or Governors.

2. That Government and Authority which is justly according unto God in all its
Statutes and Ordinances, We are, and do engage to be subject thereunto, by full
Obedience unto all the Commands and Injunctions of such Authority and
Government, whose Laws, Ordinances, and Commandments are grounded upon right
Reason and Equity, which leads to do to all men as we would be done unto, and
punishes the contrary; to such Government and Authority we are readily subject
in all things and cases; and we are for the Order and Assistance of such
Government in all Righteousness.

3. That Government which is contrary unto this, which is in Injustice,
commanding and requiring things contrary to the Law of God, and imposing upon
People in Matters and Cases, contrary to right Reason and Equity, whose
Commands are different to the Will of God; yet to such Government we
acknowledge subjection, by patient Suffering under all Penalties inflicted for
disobedience to the Commands which we cannot perform by Obedience for
Conscience sake; And this is our Principle, Though an Authority and Government
were never so Unjust in it self, and in its Exercise, yet we may not Plot or
Contrive, or make turbulent Insurrections to redeem our selves from such
Government and Authority, but we must commit our Cause to the Lord in such
case, of suffering under any unjust Commands of men.

4. As concerning Church and Ministry, and the Exercise of Religion, We believe
and acknowledge that Christ has a Church upon Earth, and a lawful Ministry;
and we are not Enemies to Church, and Ministry, and Gospel Ordinances, as we
are falsely reputed by men, ignorant and slanderous; but we only bear witness
against the corruption and degeneration of the Church of Papists and
Protestants (so called) wherein they are different and contrary to what the
Churches of Christ were in the Apostles days; they are different and contrary
I Assert, to what the Churches of Christ once were in Ministry, (in its call
and maintenance) in Ordinances and Worship, in Discipline and Government; in
all these things there is difference to what these things were in the true
Churches in the Apostles days; And our Principle is, for the Reforming of
Ministry, Church Government, Discipline and Worship, and not to destroy them.

5. As concerning Imposing of Faith, and Doctrine, Practices, and Worship in
Religion by the force of Laws and Penalties, in the ignorance of men's
Consciences, or contrary to their Consciences: We do say, This Practice never
was in the Apostles days, but is an Intrusion of Antichrist, and we bear
Testimony against it, not to be of God, but contrary to him; And that outward
Government and Authority in Kingdoms and Nations, is to be exercised over the
outward man in things between man and man, and not over the inward man, in
things between God and Man's Conscience in Spiritual Matters, and Worship, and
Duty to God-wards: No King, nor Ruler upon Earth, has Power given him of God
to exercise such Authority over the Consciences of Men in the matters of Gods
Kingdom; And further, Religion and Church Government so set up and Established
by force, upon Pains and Penalties, can but Reform a People into Hypocrisy and
false Conformity, and not into any real Performance of Religion or Duty to God;
And such Performance of Religion, Church Fellowship and Ordinances is not unto
Eternal Life, but to the making of men twofold more the Children of the Devil.

6. We do believe, That it is the Conviction and the Teaching of the Spirit of
God that does make men and People only truly Religious: I^ is that only that
persuades the Conscience from all Evil un^o that which is Good; and true
Religion, and the Worship of God, and Duty toward him, is not truly learned by
Traditions of Time, Commandments of Men, or Custom of Countries, or the like;
but it is the Spirit of God, and its Teachings in ^he Consciences of People,
that leads into all Truth, according as Christ has said; So that the Way of
forcing Religion and Duty to God upon People by force and outward Penalties,
this was never known among the Saints and Apostles of Christ.

These things are Presented to your Considerations; The Lord give you a right
Understanding of them, and that you may walk in the Way of your own Peace with
God and man.

Written in the 10th Month in IRELAND.
THE END.

