To Charles Fleetvvood, STEWARD, Robert Hatton, Recorder:

Bailiffs.
Sackford Gunstone, Henry VVilcock,
Being Judges in the Court of Kingstone upon Thames.

The State of the old Controversy once more laid before you, depending in your
Court, Between Richard Mayo, Plaintiff, and Edward Borough, Defendant.

By Edward Borough.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

FRIENDS,
THE Innocence and truth of my Cause, does lift up its head unto all people,
and stands Justified in the sight of God and all Just men, and in Justice and
Righteousness it cannot be condemned, or judged guilty by any man; And it is
upon me yet once more to state it before you, that you and all men may see the
countenance and favor thereof, (for it dare show its face unto you, and all
people) though much already has been written and spoken about it, which you
have not taken notice of (as you ought to have done) but yet many are informed
in the truth of the matter, and what has been spoken is not in vain, though my
just cause lies always at the stake, and is hardly thought upon by you, and
vilified and evil spoken of before you by my adversary, who always seeks false
judgment against me, to justify himself in his iniquity, and to condemn the
guiltless; For the Lord knows, and just men knows, and the witness of God in
your consciences may show you that I have not wronged Richard Mayo, nor spoken
of him any thing saving the truth, and because thereof, and without any other
cause, am I thus prosecuted by him in his pleading before you, and begging of
you for false Judgment, which if he should obtain it, and you should give it,
yet should I be clean in the sight of the Lord, though by you I may deeply
suffer; And your own unrighteous judgment if it proceed from you) will return
one day upon your own heads, and the weight of your own iniquity shall the Lord
lay upon your own consciences, in the day when he judges the secrets of all
hearts; and to God I have appealed in this thing, who Justifies me because of
truth, and then who shall justly condemn me, while Truth is on my side, and I
not convinced to the contrary.

Therefore in the fear of the Lord God, I say unto you, take heed what you do
in this matter; but deal impartially in the sight of the Lord, in the
examination thereof, and try, whether I have spoken the truth, or whether I
have spoken falsely; and hearken to my plea, which I have often asserted before
you, and do yet once more lay before your view, and I do appeal to the light of
your consciences, and let that justify me, or condemn me; and this I testify
as my sufficient Plea: unto you, (which no man has truly answered before you,)
that I have spoke nothing but the truth of Richard Mayo my adversary; to this I
stand to be justified, and if I be condemned, it is for this, this rests with
me for ever, and if I fall, I fall for it, (viz) for speaking the truth, and if
I stand, I stand by it, and no man whatsoever can convince me to the contrary;
and hereof am I invincible, and if you condemn me for this (to wit) for
speaking the truth, it will be upon you, and I am clear, and this is my only
plea, which I have often, and may by the spirit of the Lord always clearly
demonstrate, and I do indeed wave all the multitude of arguments that has
been, or can be made, by the lawyers in this business, and not by words of
man's wisdom, but by truth must I be justified; and I do here again return to my
first manner of proceeding, and stand to the naked simplicity of truth, and I
have no other defense to shelter under, neither do I choose any, nor no other
weapon to resist my enemy with, but the word of the Lord which is truth; and if
truth will not justify me, I will not be justified, and if it will condemn me,
my mouth shall be stopped; for by the truth I stand, and if I fall, I fall for
it, in this matter; and therefore you my Judges patiently hear a few words
again, as to the beginning of the matter betwixt Richard Mayo, and me, which is
thus, He sent for me by a messenger to come to him, and being come to him, he
challenged me to speak what I had against him, and again under his own hand he
challenged me to dispute, either in public or private with him; and he again
bad me call him deceiver if I durst, and upon all these four particular
invitations and challenges, and also knowing him to be guilty, as I am still
able to prove; I did say to him that he held forth damnable doctrine, and
error, and that he was a deceiver, and this was the beginning of the
controversy; whereby I would have you to take notice, how unrighteously he has
dealt with me, first to invite me, and challenge me several times; and then for
speaking the truth of him (which I am able prove) to arrest me, imprison me,
and thus to prosecute me, is not this unchristian like, and not like a Minister
of Christ? and this I proved in your court, his challenging of me, and also I
have manifested diverse particular sayings of his, which does appear to all
sober men to be damnable Doctrine, and error; and for the manifesting of my
innocent cause further, and that you may know, that you ought not to condemn
me, (neither can you with a safe and good conscience in the sight of God) and
to lay the truth as plainly as I can before you; therefore I do here insert the
particulars to you again, which I proved in the open Court against Richard
Mayo, which I do say is damnable doctrine, and error, all, or some of them at
least.

1. That Paul, as a Minister of Christ exhorted Saints (the Corinthians) to
follow and obey a light which was not Christ, nor the light of the Gospel. 2.
He did exhort the people of Kingstone, as a Minister of Christ in his preaching
to them, to follow and obey a light, which (said he) is not Christ, nor the
light of the Gospel. 3. He said that a man may be a righteous man, and not a
godly man without distinction. 4. Also at another time before that, Rich. Mayo
affirmed that the light of Christ which every man is lightened withal, John 1
9. is carnal, and darkness. 5. He did affirm under his own hand, that Christ
was not the word that David walked by. 6. He affirmed that the Devil is the
power of God. 7. He affirmed that the Gospel is not the power of God, no more
then a rose cake is, which he laid his hand on in the window, at the present of
his so saying. 8. He affirmed, if one man murder another, he did it by the
power of God.
Now hereby it may appear to you, (if you do not wilfully harden your selves
against the truth, and the righteousness of my cause) that I have done Richard
Mayo no wrong, only I have spoken the truth of him; I said he held forth
damnable doctrine, and error which saying, is truth, and I had a good cause to
speak it, for he invited, and challenged me diverse times to speak it, and then
when this is considered by you, let your consciences judge what wrong I have
done him; seeing it does appear I have spoken the truth of him, and had good
reason so to do; ye my Judges, at whose door my cause (which is innocent) lies
despised, and ready to be condemned, come but to plainness and honesty in your
own hearts, and be not passionate toward me, but use meekness, and let the
sincerity of your hearts tell me, whether I have lied or spoken truth; but if
you do the worst that can be done against me, I must, and have already
committed my cause to God, and I doubt not but he will avenge my cause, and
recompense my adversaries in his season. Now again consider, if Richard Mayo
did make his invitations to me, on purpose to ensnare me, (as it may be justly
supposed that he did) that he might have occasion to execute his malice upon
me, then you ought not to give judgment against me, and to be his executiners;
for if he has laid his plot to ensnare me, how can you justly give him power
over me? and he has no power over me except you give it him by unjust
judgment; and you can but give him power over my body, for my spirit is at
liberty, and in dominion over you and him, because I have the truth on my side,
and it is hard for you to strive against that, for it cannot be buried, but the
truth of my cause will always live to vex its opposers; but and if his
challenges to me was not to ensnare me, but for information (supposing himself
to have been clear from all damnable doctrine and error) then he had done well
to have owned my words as a reproof, and to have repented, and not, to have
held forth any more such doctrine; and you ought not for reproving him, to
condemn me, for reproving any man for evil ought not to be condemned; good men
will not do it, neither would he (were he) not an ungodly man prosecute me thus
violently, and thus continually beg your Judgment of 100 l. against me, for
reproving of him, and declaring against his false doctrine, which he delivers to
the people, when as himself first invited me to speak to him; and the Lord
knows the souls of people are so dear to me, that where I hear false doctrine
held forth, which would destroy the innocent souls, I cannot but reprove it,
least people receive false doctrine for true, to the destruction of their own
Souls, and upon that account I spoke in this Cause; Wherefore take you into
consideration what Richard Mayo's end was in inviting me, and do not you fulfill
his evil purpose, which I believe, if he had power over me, would execute his
farthest cruelty upon me; I have good reason to believe it, for many cruel
threatuing words have proceeded from him already agianst me, but the Lord can
deliver me from them all, but if he will not, he will give me patience to bear
it, whatsoever is suffered to come to me; But, and if any shall doubt, and
cannot receive these things, and believe that these particulars are damnable
doctrine and error, as they are laid down in themselves, and if what is spoken
already be not sufficient, I may upon any just opportunity prove unto you, and
all men, in the sight of my enemies that these particulars held forth by
Richard Mayo, and alleged by me before you, are damnable doctrine and error,
and if I could be convinced to the contrary by him, or any man, in sober
Arguments, according to the Scriptures; and if he shall be able to prove that
these things are true, and sound, and saving doctrines, then may I confess that
I have wronged him, which never can be done; Therefore can I never confess
(without lying against my Conscience,) that I have wronged him; but God
justifies me, and just men, and my own Conscience excuses me from all wrong in
this matter; and here, or hereafter shall you and he know it also, that I am
without offense to him in this cause; And if I suffer, I suffer, be it upon you
that are my Judges, and the guilt of my sufferings will be upon you one day;
For, for the truths sake am I not afraid nor ashamed to suffer whatsoever you
lay upon me. And whereas it is chiefly pleaded by my adversary and his Council,
that he is damnified, and much dangered by the speaking of my words, and
because I said he held forth damnable doctrine, therefore say they, he is in
danger to loose his place, and so he and his wife, and family cannot tell how
to live etc. These things they plead, and upon this account begs judgment
against me, because he is, or may be in danger to be damnified. To this I
reply, and Friends I would have you to consider, he has not yet proved to you
the damage of the value of two pence, nor is he in any outward estate worse,
by loss of any thing outwardly, by any thing that I have spoken; and it is
unjust to condemn me in an 100 l. upon supposed danger, and damage, which may
come, while as he has sustained none at present; and further I say unto you, I
have had no intentions of evil against him, nor purpose in my heart to endanger
or damnifie him in any outward thing, God is my witness; But that nakedly, and
simply I spoke the truth of him. And if speaking the truth to him does endanger
him, and damnifie him, according as they plead, then is he a bad man, and an
evil person, and not well worthy of you taking part with him, if you be just
men, (as yet I know nothing to the contrary) nor worthy of giving your
judgment against me for him; if the speaking truth to him can so endanger him,
then consider you what a man he is; for speaking of the truth can never hurt an
honest man, nor damnifie a good man, for honest men rejoiceth in the truth, and
the speaking of it is an honor to them; but speaking the truth may indeed
endanger and damnifie a bad person, as to discover his wickedness, and to
prevent him of more wickedness, which he may intend, but speaking the truth
cannot damnifie a a good man; And if it be so that Richard Mayo (because of his
badness) be damnified by my speaking the truth to him; Must I therefore be
condemned for speaking truth, or ought you to do it? Let that of God in you
answer; will you justify his false doctrines, and condemn me for reproving
him? Did ever any good men, or just Judges of old condemn any man for speaking
the truth? or will you shame your selves, in the sight of wise men, by acting
contrary to a good Conscience? which if ye do condemn me for speaking the
truth, I do, and must tell you (while I live) that your judgment is unjust,
and you act contrary to a good Conscience, and are unrighteous judges, and that
you commit the great abomination, in justifying the wicked and condemning the
Righteous; And is it not a shame to him that professes to be a Minister of
Christ, to plead the loss of his livelihood and of his calling, and the poverty
of his wife and family, etc. because of my speaking the truth to him? Never any
of Christ's Ministers pleaded any such thing; Were not they reproached and much
spoken against? And they were called Deceivers, and seditious men, and such
like; and did they proceed on this manner, as he has done against me? Nay,
they forgave their enemies. And if I had spoken falsely of him: (as I have not)
he ought not to have done thus, if he had been a Minister of Christ, as he
professes; and does his livelihood, and his place, and his maintenance of
himself and his family depend upon my forbearing to speak the truth? For he
pleads that he is damnified, and endangered in all these, by what I have
spoken; And I still testify and all good men, knows, that I have given no
offense, saving then speaking the truth; and rather then he shall be damnified
by my speaking the truth of him, Will you unjustly damnifie me for speaking the
truth? Is this the way of justice to condemn the truth that I have spoken, to
save the guilty from supposed danger? Consider of this, and save your selves
from unjust judgment, least the Lord justly Judge you, and condemn you; This I
show in short, and much more I might, as to the unjustness of the action
prosecuted against me; and now I come to show something of the unjust
proceedings in this matter against me in the time of my trial, and other times,
and some part thereof I here lay before you, that you, and all may see I have
had as unjust proceedings against me in the matter, as an unjust action at
first brought upon me.

At my first appearance in my first answer, I demurred to the jurisdiction of
your Court, and shows that your Court and Judicatory being temporal, you could
not (in that Courtt)ache cognizance of this cause, being of a spiritual
Dependancy, and ought only to be tried in spiritual Jurisdiction by spiritual
Judges (if there were any such) and showed out of the Laws of England
reasonably that your Court had no power to try this matter; But one of the
Bailiffs, John Forth said (which should have been my equal Judge) they would
overrule that, and they would try the matter, without showing any just reason
out of the Laws, against my Argument grounded upon the Laws, and they did
overruled me in that; and the Court-day before the Trial, when the Jurymen was
to be chosen and nominated, I told them that the Jurymen should be such as had
the gif of the holy Spirit, and the holy Ghost in them, or else they could not
try the matter, because it was Doctrine that was to be Tried* which none could
try, but by the Spirit of God; Neither could I cast my self into the
Determination of any in this cause but such; And the Bailiffs Obadia Wicks, and
John Forth answered, if they were men that could take the evidence that I spoke
my words against Richard Mayo, they were sufficient to try the matter; whereby
it does appear that they had unjustly determined in themselves, not to try the
Doctrines, but to have a verdict against me howsoever; again some that were
called to be of the Jury were heard to say, before they saw me, or ever heard
the matter; if I came into their hands they knew well enough what to do with
me; hereby it does appear they were not equal men, but malicious and prejudiced
against me; and moreover in the very time of the trial, some of the Jury, at
the Bar, said, they would not believe any thing, or take any witness for
testimony, which any of those on my part, that were called Quakers, spoke; and
this was also the witness of their malicious, and envious spirits against me,
who were rather as a party against me, then my equals; And were not these
unjust men for the trial of such a matter? and moreover when all his witnesses
could not say enough to give color for a verdict against me, one of the
Bailiffs, John Forth by name, who was one of the Judges upon the Bench,
proffered to come down off the Bench, and swear as a witness against me; and
when some spoke against that, he sent for a man into the Court out of the Town,
James Levite by name, and whispered with him upon the Bench, and told him what
he should swear, and he went to the Bar and took his oath against me, that I
followed Richard Mayo with reviling Language, in three several rooms, in
Bailiff Gunstones house, which I do testify, was a false oath, before the
Lord, and all men; and many knows that I speak the truth, and that that man
took a false oath, who was sent for into the Court, and told by one of the
Judges what he should swear; I suppose Bailiff Gunston himself knows that this
was a false witness, and are not these unjust proceedings? I appeal to your
consciences, and upon such proceedings as these, was a verdict gained against
me, by much a do, in above three hours time; and the Foreman of the Jury
himself said, he would not have brought a verdict against me, but only for the
man's oath, James Levite, which as I have said, swore falsely, being sent for,
and told by another man what he should say; Again, when the foreman of the Jury
said, they could not try the cause, and desired it might be referred, the said
Bailiff Forth on the Bench cried no, and told Richard Mayo he should not referr
it, he should have a verdict first, and ought my Judge thus to have spoken? no,
he appeared to be rather a party against me, then my equal Judge; and to all
sober men, these proceedings may appear to be unjust; And I hope some of you
will make more conscience of your doings, then to pass judgment upon such an
unrighteous verdict And moreover, the Jury did not try the cause, which only
ought to have been tried, which was, whether I had spoken truly, or falsely of
Richard Mayo, that is to say, they ought to have tried, (and that was the thing
in controversy between us) whether these particulars alleged by me against
Richard Mayo were true, and sound doctrine or damnable doctrine and errors, for
if the particulars mentioned be true, and sound doctrine, which were affirmed by
Richard Mayo, then I have wronged him, and I must confess it, and assent to
your Judgment; but if the particulars be false doctrine, and error, then I
have done him no wrong, for I have spoken nothing but the truth; and for that,
how can you condemn me? And this was the cause to be tried, which the Jury
themselves confessed they did not try, and therefore the matter is not yet
tried in truth, neither have I had a legal trial Before you, and then how can
you give judgment against me, being the action it self, is so unequal, and the
procedings so unjust also, and the matter yet not fully tried? do but consider
of these things in the coolness of your Spirits, and let not me receive worse
dealing from you, because I am a stranger, neither because I am a Quaker so
called; but deal justly, and truly, for I desire nothing else of you, but true
judgment, for that will justify me, and clear me, and respect not persons,
but have respect to the Law of God, which commands you to hear, and Judge the
cause of the poor, and of the stranger, without respect of persons, and if you
give regard to the Law of God in this matter, you cannot give Judgment upon
this verdict, which is thus unjustly brought in, by unrighteous and partial
men, as is manifest, and you must either wholly arrest Judgment, or at least
you must bring it to a new trial, else you do me much wrong and injustice, and
all good men will so Judge of it; And further, diverse sufficient reasons has
been showed by men of knowledge in the Law, first against this action, and also
against the proceedings herein, which might be reasons to you not to go on in
Judgment against me, but to clear me; and even in your own way, (as I may say)
you have been dealt with, and you have been showed my innocence; so that if
your hearts be not hardened, you cannot go any further against me, but go
contrary to the truth of my cause, and contrary to your own Law also; and
though it was the dear love, and respect of friends to the truth, in freeness
of their love to me, more then any desire of mine, or my knowledge; I do own
their love, and justify it, yet much that has been spoken in forms and tricks
of law, and punctillio's of Law I do wave, and lets it pass, and keeps always
to the naked truth of the matter, as before laid down; And therefore if any
Jury shall upon their oaths Justify, Richard Mayo his doctrines to be true and
sound doctrine; and if you your selves, upon your oaths dare give Judgment,
that Richard Mayo his doctrine, is not damnable doctrine, and errors; Then I
must lie patiently under your Judgment, and under the breach of such Jury-mens
oaths, and of your own oaths also; and therefore I demand of you according to
right and Justice let me be cleared, otherwise let me first have a fair trial
before I be condemned, which yet I have not had, because the matter was
perverted from that, whether I had spoken the truth, upon which the true issue
depends, and upon no other thing. Whether I spoke maliciously, was a
straining of the cause to a wrong head, and perverting it from its proper
issue, and hereby was the Just cause of the innocent clouded over, and
rejected, and vilified, and even betrayed into another meaning, more then it
ought to have been; but it can show its face above all this, and truth cannot
be daunted though it may be veiled and lie hid for a season, and though I be
condemned by the Prejudice and unsaithful Jury speaking maliciously, yet the
Lord bears me witness to the contrary, and that I have no malice in me against
any man, and I love your souls better, then that you should endanger them to
destruction, and to everlasting burning, by giving Judgment upon your oaths
against me upon this verdict, in this cause which is thus unjust and unequal in
it self, and in its proceedings also; for if the Jury had tried, whether I had
spoke the truth, or whether I belyed Richard Mayo then it would easily have
been known whether I spoke malioiously; for if I belyed him, and if his
doctrine be true, and sound, and not error, then may it be easily Judged that I
spoke maliciously, because I spoke not the truth, but if his doctrines
alleged by me, be not true, and sound doctrine, but damnable doctrine and
error, then I have not belyed him but spoken the truth in love, and not
maliciously, for truth and malice goes not together; and till this be tried, to
wit, whether I have spoken truly or falsely, who shall be able upon their oaths
(without forswearing themseves) to give it upon their oaths that I spoke
maliciously? nay, how shall any men lawfully swear, that one speaks
maliciously? it is a hard cause to swear that any man speaks in malice, for who
enters into the heart of another man, to know the thoughts, save God, and his
Spirit.

And this I may say at least, and safely too, that, that Jury, which gave into
the Court upon their oaths, that I spoke my words maliciously against Richard
Mayo, have greatly endangered the forswearing themselves, and the breach of
their own oaths, and some of them knows before this day that they did
transgress therein against God, whom God suddenly after cut off with Judgment,
and took off the earth by death; and though they, that are yet living may be
insensible of their own wickedness, yet let all good men fear to dye out of
this body with that burden upon their Consciences, as some have, and others of
them may have, in this particular, for breach of oaths; and though they have
given it to you upon their oaths, that I spoke maliciously, yet woe will be unto
you, if you shall upon your oaths justify, they have done well, and condemn me
falsely upon their false verdict, and if you do condemn me, it is upon their
false verdict, because I spoke maliciously against Richard Mayo: and you cannot
do that, but you forswear your selves, and acts contrary to your trust, who are
set in place to Judge justly by what does appear to your view; And cannot nor
dare not, I know, upon your oaths, say, that I have spoken falsely and
maliciously against Richard Mayo; But and if you do, one day you will feel that
you have spoken against your own oaths, and Consciences, and against God, and
against your own Souls. And this is all that I can lay before you, as to this
particular, to warn you, that you do Judge justly, and that you condemn not the
innocent and just cause of the upright, but that you may save your selves from
the anger of the Lord, who will be avenged upon all false swearers and
unrighteous Judges, that Judges not in righteousness the cause of the Poor, and
of the Stranger; and the Cause yet remains before you, to show your selves Just
or unjust, righteous or unrighteous Judges in this matter. And whereas Richard
Mayo, and some of your selves spoke to me, to confess I have wronged him, and
would have me to acknowledge that I am in a fault, and that I have spoken wrong
of him; yea, it was said to me, if I had not wronged him, could I not confess
that I had, to preserve my self? etc.

To this I must answer; Nay, I cannot confess contrary to a good Conscience,
and contrary to Truth, that I have wronged him; if my life stood upon it, as it
is but my liberty at most, for God has given me to make Conscience of my
words, and to keep it void of offense toward him and all men, and to confess
that which is false, to be true, would stain a good Conscience, in the sight of
God and his people, and that I may not do, no not for my own preservation, and
the Lord deliver me from the Judgment of such who would have me confess that
which I am not guilty of, for that is all one to say I am clear, when I am
guilty, as to say I am guilty, when I am clear; and I rather choose to suffer
what can be imposed upon me, then to transgress the truth, in my own heart, and
if I should say, his doctrine were sound and true doctrine, and not damnable
and error, I do believe the witness in your own Consciences would rise against
me, and many more would say, I then spoke falsely, then does now; for I hardly
ever heard any, no not your own selves say, that his doctrines alleged by me
against him, are sound and true doctrine, neither can you in good Conscience
say it; So I say, I cannot lie against my Conscience, what ever comes of it,
for to walk with the Lord, and to have his Peace, and not to loose his
presence, is of more worth to my Soul that is immortal, then all the sufferings
that you can lay upon me, can be damage to my mortal body; for my life and
Soul you cannot touch, but therein am I free, though outwardly entangled
amongst briars and thorns, which would pierce me and seek to catch me, and if
there be no other way for me to be preserved, but by confessing contrary to my
Conscience, that I have wronged Richard Mayo, I freely give up my self to
suffering, rather then to be preserved by such means, and you do evil in
putting such a thing upon me, and expecting it from me, which I cannot give,
but transgress the Law of God, and offend him, and my own Conscience, and if
you defer the determination of the matter, upon such hopes, that I may confess
that I have wronged Richard Mayo, I desire, you would not defer it one moment
longer, but let me be quitted of your temptation, for it is your temptation and
not true love; for I cannot confess any such thing, though thus I do
acknowledge, it has now depended in your Court, and at your door, near two
years, and I should be glad that it were ended justly, because I am not a man
given to suits in Law, neither do I love it (though it be so that I am fallen
into it) to offend any man, or be offended in that way by any, yet may I not
use any unlawful means, or indirect way to obtain an end of this business, but
the rather I am content with what the Lord suffers to come to pass, though it
be the very greatest malice of my very devouring enemies, and because I would
have peace with all men, and have all men reconciled to God, and one to another
to live in love and unity one with another, upon that account I would this
business were ended, and though I do not doubt my cause, nor am faint of it,
but can freely receive the determination thereof in the Court, be it for me or
against me, yet I would have it ended, and have sought it in Justice, and once
did to my adversary say, I could refer it to any sober men; and another friend
being with me, Oliver then Protector, or Charles Fleetwood or Col. Pride, all
these was mentioned, and to any of these, I could freely have referred my
Cause, and though before he seemed willing, and said that if any sober man in
the Nation, that was no Quaker, would say that his doctrine was not sound, and
that he had not wrong, etc. But when these men were mentioned, he was
unfaithful to his word, and would not refer it.

And also not long ago, a day and time was appointed by his own advice and
consent, by a friend of his own, to bring the Cause before Alderman Tichburn,
to which I was willing, and that he with some other man might here and
determine the matter, and at the time appointed we met at the Aldermans house,
and the Alderman with some more of us waited for Mayos coming, till near the
9th hour in the evening, and he never came, so ungrateful and unjust was he to
his own friend, to Alderman Tichburn, and to me, that we waited all for him
some hours, and he came not at all, though his own friend, by his own consent
and desire did bring that appointment about; And thus I would have you to know,
that I seek peace with all men, and with him, upon just and equal means, and
can refer it to honest men to hear and determine; for who are truly just
toward God, cannot condemn me nor my cause; And likewise ye may see how
unwilling my Adversary is to bring his business to hearing and determining by
wise and descreet men, and how unfaithful he is to his own words and desires,
only he thinks he has gotten a verdict that will do something for him, and
upon that he depends, waiting also for your unjust Judgment, and because he
hopes always for your Judgment, which I say is unjust, if you condemn me in
this matter; Therefore he will not bring his cause to be heard and determined
by any other, because he supposes you will proceed according to that unjust
verdict, which if you do not, you offend him, and loses his unjust cause; and
if you do, you offend God, and condemns the guiltless cause of the just, and
whatever ye do, this follows upon ye, and if you offend God and despises the
cause of the Inocent, and the truth, ye must bear your own burden, in the
sight of God and Just men; And if his cause were good, he need not thus shrink
and faulter, to let any man hear the matter, but his hope of your unjust
Judgment nourishes his heart in his unrighteous cause.

And these things were in me to lay before you, that it may not be said by you,
we know not these things, for I would have you to know them and take notice of
them, and to compare all things in equality, and to Judge according to the Law
of God, and the good Law of this Land; I am not careful at present to answer or
say more to you about this matter, only this remains with me; the Lord God can
deliver me from the teeth of the wicked if he will, but if he will not, I
cannot bow to the Devil, but has given up my life, to live to him, or to
suffer for him; and this Testimony remains for ever; not as I will, but as He
will, who brings all things to pass, according to his pleasure;

I am a Lover of your Souls, and a Sufferer for the Elect seeds sake, and a
witness against the malice and injustice of evil men, EDWARD BOROUGH.

THE END.
THE Cause why this is first Printed, before it come to your hands, is, because
I would not give cause of Suspi^^^^ that I seek any thing in secret or
underhand of you. But would have all things come to Light and public view,
for I love the Light, and the Truth; to be justified thereby, or to suffer for
the Testimony thereof.


