THE EXCELLENCY OF HOLY COURAGE IN EVIL TIMES.

In which (besides many other seasonable truths) there is showed.

1. That wicked Men in power are very fierce in their wrath. 2. That Faith will
keep a gracious heart from immoderate fear of Men of Authority and Power. 3.
Directions in our fear of Authority. 4. Directions how to order our selves. If
Authority enjoin unlawful things. 5. How Faith helps against the fear of Man
opened in fifteen Particulars. 6. Arguments against the fear of Men; And wicked
men are less to be feared than others. 7. Differences between natural boldness,
and Holy Courage from Faith. 8. How far we may lawfully avoid danger by flying.
Several Cases of conscience concerning flying. 9. Objections Answered
concerning flying. 10. How the heart may be taken off from the fear of Man. 11.
The Power of Faith to carry Gods people through the most difficult works and
services. 12. How to know whether Faith will carry us through difficult works.
13. Helps to put on Faith in our undertakings. 14. How Faith carries the Soul
through the difficult work of forsaking Egypt. 15. The wickedness of Sodom and
Egypt compared with the wickedness of Antichrist.
By Jeremiah Buroughs, Preacher of the Gospel at Stepney and Criple-Gate,
London.

Published by Thomas Goodwin, William Greenhil, Sydrach Simpson, Philip Nigh,
William Bridge, John Yates, William Adderly.


London: Printed by Peter Cole, and Edward Cole Printers and Booksellers, at
the Printing-press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1661.

A Testimony to the Reader.
WHAT we have by way of Preface set before the several Books already Published
of this Reverend Author, Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, may sufficiently serve for all
that are come forth: So that we only need now give Letters Testimonial to the
World, that these ( viz. The Sermons on Hebrews, the 11. Chapter, 27. verse) We
avouch likewise to be the painful and profitable Labors of the same Author, and
Published by the best and most Authentic Copies.

Thomas Goodwin, William Greenhil, William Bridge Sydrach Sympson, Philip Nigh,
John Yates, William Adderley.


Books Printed by Peter Cole, and Edward Cole, Printers and Booksellers of
London, at the Exchange.
Mr. Buroughs WORKS viz. on Matthew. 11.
1 Christ's call to all those that are Weary and Heavy Laden to come to him for
Rest. 2 Christ the Great Teacher of Souls that come to him. 3 Christ the Humble
Teacher of those that come to him. 4 The only Basic way to Heaven. 5 The
Excellency of holy Courage. 6 Gospel Reconciliation. 7 The Rare Jewel of
Christian Contentment. 8 Gospel Worship. 9 Gospel-Conversation. 10 A Treatise
of Earthly Mindedness. 11 Exposition of the Prophecy of Hosea. 12 The Evil of
Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of Sin. 13 Precious Faith. 14 Of Hope. 15 Of
Walking by Faith.
Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumes.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light. 2 Christ in Travel. 3 A Lifting up for
the cast down. 4 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false
Apostle tried and discovered. 7 The good and means of Establishment. 8 The
great things Faith can do. 9 The great things Faith can suffer. 10 The Great
Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from
Christ's Priestly Office. 11 Satan's power to Tempt and Christ's Love to, and Care
of his People under Temptation. 12 Thankfulness required in every Condition. 13
Grace for Grace. 14 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural
Impossibilities. 15 Evangelical Repentance. 16 The Spiritual Life, and in being
of Christ in all Believers. 17 The Woman of Canaan. 18 The Saints Hiding place,
etc. 19 Christ Coming etc. 20 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances. 21 Grace and
Love beyond Gifts.
New Books of Mr. Sydrach Simpson. VIZ.
1 Of Unbelief, or the want of readiness to lay hold on the comfort given by
Christ. 2 Not goeing to Christ for Life and Salvation is an exceeding great
Sin, yet Pardonable. 3 Of Faith, Or, That believing is receiving Christ; And
receiving Christ is believing. 4 Of Coveteousness.
Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volumes: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto.
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hoooker made in New Edgland. Are arrested
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, To be written with the
Authors own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volum being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer on the seventeenth of John. Wherein is showed.
1 That the end why the Saints receive all glorious Grace, is, That they may be
one, as the Father and Christ are one. 2 That God the Father loves the
Faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ. 3 That our Savior desires to have the
Faithful in Heaven with himself. 4 That the happiness of our being in Heaven,
is to see Christ's Glory. 5 That there is much wanting in the knowledge of Gods
Love, in the most able Saints. 6 That the Lord Christ lends daily direction,
according to the daily need of his Servants. 7 That it is the desire and
endeavor of our Savior, that the dearest of Gods Love, which was bestowed on
himself, should be given to his faithful servants, 8 That our Union and
Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our happiness in Heaven.
Ten Books of the Application of Redemption by the Effectual. Work of the Word,
and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners to God. By Thomas
Hooker.
Dr. Hills WORKS.
The Kings Trial at the High Court of Justice. Wise Virgin. Published by Mr.
Thomas Weld, of New England. Mr. Rogers on Naaman the Syrian, his Disease and
Cure: Discovering the Leprosy of Sin and Self-love; with the Cure, viz.
Self-denial and Faith. A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of
Peter. By Mr. John Rogers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex. Mr.
Rogers his Treatise of Marriage. The Wonders of the loadstone. By Samuel Ward
of Ipswitch. An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr.
Ward. The Discipline of the Church in New England By the Churches and Synod
there. Mr. Brightmen on the Revelation. Christians Engagement for the Gospel,
by John Goodwin. Great Church Ordinance of Baptism. Mr. Loves Case, containing
his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech. A Congregational church is a Catholic
Visible Church. By Samuel Stone in New England. A Treatise of Politic Powers.
Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians. Vox PacifiCa, or a Persuasive to Peace. Dr.
Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's Overthrow. Pious Man's Practice in
Parliament time. Barriffs Military Discipline. The Immortality of man's Soul.
The Anatomist Anatomized. The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech. Woodwards Sacred
Balance. Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter. Abraham's Offer, Gods Offerings: Being a
Sernion by Mr. Herle, before the Lord Major of London. Mr. Spurstows Sermon,
being a Pattern of Repentance. Englands Deliverance. By Peter Sterry. The Way
of God with his People in these Nations By Peter Sterry. Mr. Sympson's sermon
at Westminster. Mr. Feaks sermon before the Lord Major. The best and Worst
Magistrate. By Obediah Sedgwick. A sermon. A Sacred Panegyric. By Stephen
Marshal. A sermon. The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries. By
Matthew Newcomen of Dedham. A sermon. Clows Chyrurgery. Marks of Salvation.
Mr. Stephen Marshals New WORKS. VIZ.
1 Of Christ's Intercession, or of sins of Infirmity. 2 The high Privilege of
believers, They are the Sons of God 3 Faith the Means to feed on Christ. 4
Self-denial. 5 The Saints Duty to keep their Hearts, etc. 6 The Mystery of
spiritual Life.
Several Physic Books of Nich. Culpeper Physician and Astrologer; and A. Cole,
etc.
1 Idea of Practical Physic in twelve Books. 2 Sennertus thirteen Books of
Natural Philosophy. 3 Sennertus two Treatises. 1. Of the Pox. 2 Of the Gout.

Sennertus Art of Chyrurgery in six Parts. 1. Of Tumors. 2. Of Ulcers. 3. Of
the Skin Hair and Nails. 4. Of Wounds. 5. Of Fractures. 6. Of Luxations.

4 Twenty four Books of the Practice of Physic, being the Works of that
Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riuerius. Physician and Councellor to the
late King, etc, 5 Riolanus Anatomy. 6 Veslingus Anatomy of the Body of Man. 7 A
Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. Wherein is added, The Key to Galens Method of Physic. 8 The English
Physician Enlarged. 9 A Directory for Midwives, or a Guide for Women. 10 Galens
Art of Physic. 11 New Method both of studying and practicing Physic. 12 A
Treatise of the Rickets. 13 Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physic for the Common
People. 14 Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic. The London
Dispensatory in Follo, of a large Character in Latin. The London Dispensatory
in twelves, a small Pocket Book in Latin.
To the Physical Reader.
THe greatest Reason that I could ever observe why the Medicines prescribed in
these Books above mentioned, and in many other Physic Books, do not perform
the Cures promised, is, the unskilfulness of those that make up the Medicines.
I therefore advise all those that have occasion to use any Medicines to go or
send to Mr. Ralph Clarke Apothecary at the sign of the three Crowns on
Ludgate Hill, in London; where they shall be sure to have such as are skilfully
and honestly made.

THE CONTENTS OF The Treatise on Hebr. 11.27.
CHAP. 1. The words Opened; Six Doctrines raised. Page 1 Chap. 2. Handling the
first Doctrine. Page 5 Chap. 3. Handling the second Doctrine; which is. Page 16
Chap. 4. Directions for the ordering our selves in our fear of Authority. Page
19 Chap. 5. Some further Directions, how we should order our selves, if we
should be enjoined unlawful things. Page 24 Chap. 6. The Point prosecuted more
strictly. Page 26 Chap. 7. How Faith helps against the fear of man; Opened in
fifteen particulars. Page 30 Chap. 8. Arguments against the fear of man, taken
from the Consideration of Man, First, as Man in six particulars very
observable, 1. What he is, 2. The vanity of Man. 3. The dwelling of man. 4. The
pomp of man. 5. The foundation of man. 6. The life of man. Secondly, As a
wicked man. 1. His baseness. 2. What he is in the greatness of his power
opposing the Godly. 3. How near the enemies of Gods people are to ruin and
destruction. Page. 44 Chap. 9. How Audaciousness and boldness of spirit differ
from Faith. 1. Audaciousness makes us bold to sin. 2. It appears in causes that
concern our selves, more then in those which concern God. 3. Boldness the
curing of one passion with another, Faith the curing of passion by Grace. 4.
Natural boldness makes men rash, and hinders consultation. 5. The cause of
immodesty. 6. It is sudden and violent. 7. It proceeds and lives upon outward
encouragements. 8. The issue of ignorance. 9. Or despair. 10. More outward then
inward. Page. 49 Chap. 10. Shows, How far we may lawfully avoid danger
without fear of men. 1. Religion does not teach men to be foolish or desperate.
2. The care of a Christian ought to be to do his duty, rather than to avoid
danger, which may fall out in his duty. 3. When God brings his people into
danger, he intends more to exercise their graces, then to try their discretion.
4. Though danger may be avoided, yet it is more honorable for a Christian to be
called to exercise Faith Courage, Patience, and in away of suffering, then his
prudence in avoiding it. 5. Take care of mistaking discretion, which is not
wont to abate the vigor of Gods Graces, but to improve and increase them. 6. A
Christians greatest endeavor should be to get his will to submit to God. Page.
53 Chap. 11. Contains a further Resolution of the former Case in nine
particulars. 1. God does, give leave to his people to fly, and avoid Danger! 2.
Such avoiding of Danger (if rightly qualified) argues neither distrust of God,
nor defect of Courage. 3. In some cases, Christians not only permitted, but
commanded to flee, as 1. When no extraordinary thing depends upon him in that
station in which God has set him. 2. When the hand of God loses those
relations, which would otherwise be obligations to him. 3. When God gives him
an opportunity else where, to bring greater revenues of glory to him. 4. When a
Christian is doubtful about his call to suffer at the present. 4. There are
some cases wherein it is utterly unlawful to flee, viz. The contrary to those
above named. 5. Mistakes in flying. 1. To flee upon every slight and trival
thing. 2. When it tends to their spiritual disadvantage. 3. When having
secretly denied the Faith, Men flee to prevent the shame of Apostacy. 4. When
they look at their own safety alone, without care to fit themselves for further
service of God. 6. How to know when avoiding dangers proceeds from Faith, or
Cowardice. 1. That which is by Faith is not in a Violent, Rash, Heady manner.
2. When it proceeds from Faith, it is joined with a resolution to return and
bear wittness to the truth, when God calls. 3. When we use the liberty we have
to get hearts to return. 7 The case of public Officers, Magistrates,
Ministers, especially the latter. Page. 58 Chap. 12. Containing the eighth
particular, to wit. Answering some objections made against flying. ob. 1. Men
may not leave their country. Answ. In two particulars. Ob. 2. Should none stay
to suffer. Ans. ob. 3, God Alsufficient to help in greatest dangers. Ans. ob.
4. Fleeing a ceasing to give testimony to the truth of God. Answ. ob. 5. Many
of Gods servants had power to fly, and did not. Answ. ob. 6. What shall become
of those left behind, if they are forsaken by men of ability. Answ. ob. 7. If
men would master their fears, and stay a while, the cloud would blow over.
Answ. Ninth particular, Direrections for ordering our selves when we do fly. 1.
Leave as little guilt behind in the place as you can. 2. Carry your selves so
that the name of God may not suffer in the place to which you flee. 3. Behave
your selves as exiled people, as men mortified to the things of the world. 4.
Get a contented frame of heart. 5. When you are delivered keep your selves in
the fervency of your spirits. 6, Let those from whom you flee have your
prayers. Page 70 Chap. 13. How the Heart may be taken off from the fear of man.
First, it is against the solemn charge of God. Secondly, It is an Idolizing of
the Creature. Thirdly, It becomes not the State and Spirit and profession of a
Christian. Fourthly, It dishonors God, and the Cause of God. Fifthly, It
mightily heartens the enemies of Gods people. Sixthly, It is threatened as a
great judgment of God upon a people. Seventhly, The evil effects of the sinful
fear of man 1. It distracts our thoughts. 2. Weakens the heart. 3. Eats out the
true fear of God. 4. It indisposeth us to any service. 5. Insnares a Christian.
6. It. causes other desperate fears. 7. Procures the judgment of God in our
destruction. Page 78 Chap. 14. Another Doctrine. Much difference between Gods
peoples spirits at several times, Illustrated by examples. Reasons, 1. From the
different dispositions their hearts are in to receive truths. Which proceeds
from Three Causes, First, the abatement of the strength that is opposite to
that truth. Secondly. The stirrings or activity of those habits which are
suitable to truth. Thirdly, The prevalences of self interest. Reas. 2. From the
different representations of Truth. Reas. 3. Because the Graces of men do not
burn so clearly and purely at al times Reas. 4. From the weakness of Grace the
parts and members of it are not consolidated. Reas. 5. Because our hearts are
sometimes filled with more heavenly consolations then at other times. Reas. 6.
From the different breathings of the spirit of God. Reas. 7. Because men have
sometimes a more clear and distinct sight of their call to suffer then at other
times. 3. Particular directions in this Case. Reas. 8. The different tempers of
man's Body. Reas. 9. From the difference in the encouraging occurrency of Gods
providence. Page 97 Chap. 15. Containing the First Use, Which teacheh us to
entreat God not to take the advantage of us when our hearts are low. Page 110.
Chap. 16. Another Use, to teach us not to be discouraged at this different
temper of our Spirits, but to be humbled for it. Five Helps against
discouraging thoughts. Two objections. Page 113 Chap. 17. Containing the Third
Use of Direction: branched into four particulars. 1. If courageous, and fit for
service, give God the praise. Four reasons for it. 2. Learn to rebuke unbelief.
3. Labor to keep your hearts up. The manner how that may be done, in eight
particulars. 4. Improve this gracious working of God. Page 119 Chap. 18. A
fourth Use. To be restless till we get our selves into a good frame. Page 128
Chap. 19. A Fifth Use: To see the misery of being always unfit for service. A
Sixth Use: To teach us to long for Heaven. Page 130 Chap. 20. Showing the power
of Faith to carry through the most difficult work. Question, What is there in
Faith which helps the Soul? Answered, in four Particulars. 1. It settles the
Heart on the surest ground, which is Gods call, and Promises. 2. It fetches in
the greatest strength. 3. It assists with the highest encouragements. 5. Faith
of its own Nature is a mighty strong principle. The most illustrious work of
Faith. Thirteen remarkable things concerning Faith, and the difficulties which
it breaks through. Page 133. Chap. 21. Uses of the Doctrine, Use, First, Let
none think God an hard Master, when he puts them upon service, because he
affords them a principle to carry them through. Use. Secondly, To Believers
that they should expect to be put upon difficult things. 1. Four considerations
against discouragements. It is not to be accounted an affliction to be put upon
difficult things for 4. Reasons. Use, Thirdly, Showing it can be no concluding
argument against a work because there are hindrances. Use, Fourthly, When you
have been carried through difficult services consider, what it was which
supported you. Page 145 Chap. 22. Quest. How to know whether Faith will carry us
through difficult works, Answered in several particulars, 1. Faith Goes upon
spiritual grounds motives, and ends. 2. Makes men sollicitous and careful for
the enjoyment of Gods presence with them 3. Causes men to carry themselves in a
Gracious manner. 4. To have an high esteem of the name of God. 5 Makes them
careful, that they may not be frustrated of their end. 6. It makes men
satisfied with God Alone. 7. Faith is a continued work. That Faith, which
brought you out, will carry you through. Page 156 Chap. 23. Containing other
uses of the point. Use, 5. Shows the reason why we fail in any thing we do; it
is for want of Faith. Use, 6. Labor to rise in indignation against your
unbelief. Use, 7. Consider what it is to fail in that work which concerns thy
eternal estate. Page 162 Chap. 24. Helps to put on Faith in any undertaking. 1.
Set before you the example of our great Captain Jesus Christ. 2. Make
preparation for the work of Faith by Humiliation. 3. Renew your Faith in the
Covenant of Grace. 4. In difficult times, set Faith on work to purify the
heart. 5. Take heed of shifting ways and dependances. 6. Set loose from your
own ends. 7. Cast your selves upon the word of God. 8. Plead the word with God
in Prayer. 9. Refuse no means that God puts into your hands. 10. Do nothing
with a slavish spirit. 11. Be not discouraged by miscarriages that are past.
12. Take heed of the disturbance of passion in your work. 13. Observe the
dependances one work has upon another. 14. Lisson not to Temptations. 15. Take
heed of perverse reasonings. 16. Take heed of disorderly working, in four
cases. 17. Use resolution and courage. 18. Look on your selves as Gods
Instruments. 19. Be constant though you find nothing come of it. 20. Increase
not the difficulty by your carriage. 21. Look most at your Encouragements. 22.
Use not the difficulty in the way to reason against the work. 23. Labor to
harden your selves by Faith against al difficulties. Page 165 Chap. 25.
Containing a second consideration of the Text, to wit, and Allegorical
interpretation of Moses forsaking Egypt by Faith. Warrant for Allegorical
interpretations. Forsaking this world, renouncing our natural estate, a
difficult work* Fourteen reasons of it. Page 184 Chap. 26. How Faith carries
the Soul through the Difficult work of forsaking Egypt. Their Works of Faith.
1. The discovering work, in two particulars. 2. The relying Work. 3. The
Surrendering work. Question Resolved concerning the force of Natural Conscience,
in three Particulars, showing the great difference between the actings of Faith
and Natural Conscience. Application, 1. Hence see the Ground of Miscarriages.
2. A Rule of Direction; Encouragements to Faith and Believing. 3. Let delivered
Persons see what delivered them. Faith which acts by a power without us. Twelve
Considerable and useful Directions in this matter. Page 187 Chap. 26.
Containing the second Allegorical sense of the words, viz. Concerning
Antichrist. The wickedness of Sodom and Egypt, compared with the wickedness of
Antichrist. 1. Idolatry. 2. Cruelty. The bondage of Christians under
Antichrist. 1. Outward, in Estates, and lives. 2. Inward, a Soul bondage. The
baseness of this showed in several particulars, concerning Ceremonies worse
then Egyptian bondage. Faith must deliver us, Deliverance difficult in several
particulars. The work of Faith in delivering people from this bondage, in 6. or
7. Considerations Quest. Whether men may not reject the yoke of Antichrist upon
other grounds besides Faith? Ans. In 10. Particulars. Page 199
THE EXCELLENCY OF HOLY COURAGE IN EVIL TIMES.
Hebrews, 11.27. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King,
for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible.


CHAP. I.
The words Opened; Six Doctrines raised.

HAVING finished Moses his Choice, namely what he did choose, the excellency of
his spirit in making such a choice, and the principle of faith that enabled him
thereunto, from this Chapter verse. 25.26. I now proceed to speak of another
excellent fruit of the faith of this Worthy of the Lord, as it is set forth in
verse. 27. and here we are to observe two things.

1. The act of his Faith. 2. The Argument by which it was strengthened to act.
First, In the act we are to observe, two things.

1. That notable work of his going from Egypt notwithstanding the wrath of the
King. 2. His constancy, he endured in all that he did.
Secondly, The argument by which his faith was strengthened, was that sight he
had of the Invisible God.

The opening of the words with the several Doctrines in the Text.

By faith he forsook Egypt] By this forsaking of Egypt the faith of Moses was
much set out: for him to undertake such a work as that was, to carry so many
thousands out of Egypt into a wilderness, not knowing what might become of
them, they being unable to resist their enemies, and not knowing what provision
they should have, this was very much.

Not fearing the wrath of the King] He could not but think he was in danger of
Pharaoh, and his company to be pursued by them: for howsoever Pharaoh seemed
willing at last to give them leave to be gone* yet such was the disposition of
Pharaoh (which Moses was not ignorant of) that he might quickly change his
mind, and follow them with all his power to cut them off, as it appears he
did. Yet Moses feared no such matter, but he went on his way for he endured, as
seeing him who is invisible.

Object. But it seems Moses did forsake Egypt for fear of the wrath of the King.

Answ. It is true, Time was that in forsaking Egypt he did fear the wrath of
the King. in Exodus 2.14. it is said, Moses seeing two Hebrews smiting one
another, he said to him that did the wrong, Why smitest thou thy fellow? And he
said, Who made thee a Prince and a Judge over us, Intendest thou to kill me as
thou did the Egyptian? And then Moses feared, and upon that he fled.

And if we understand the Text of this his first forsaking Egypt, we may thus
reconcile the Apostle with that place. First he fled not fearing so much the
King as that he should offend God; if he offered himself to the danger, and did
not make an escape, he should have tempted God by presuming: Thus Osiander.

Or thus, He fled not for fear in respect of himself, but least his calling
should be hindered if he stayed: So Simler.

But these words are rather to be understood of his second forsaking of Egypt.
The first time he forsook Egypt out of fear; but the second time he forsook
Egypt out of Faith, and he did not fear: after he had slain the Egyptian he was
afaid, but when he came to take all the People of Israel with him, then he
forsook Egypt and did not fear the wrath of the King.

From whence we have these Observations.

Doct. 1. First, That wicked men (especially when they have power) are very
fierce and outrageous in their wrath when any thing crosses them.

Certainly, Moses apprehended this wrath of Pharaoh great, in that the Holy
Ghost makes it a notable fruit of his Faith not to fear the wrath of the King.
It appeared his wrath was great, in regard of the power he raised against them,
had it not been for Moses. Faith he would have feared.

Doct. 2. Secondly, Faith will keep a gracious heart from immoderate fear of all
the men in the world, let them be never so great, and have never so much power.

Doct. 3. Thirdly, There is a great deal of difference between the spirits of
Gods People at sometimes and other times.

There was a time when Moses was afraid, now he goes on and is not afraid

Doct. 4. Fourthly, Faith will carry a man through very hard services, and
difficult works that God calls him unto.

Doct 5. Fifthly, That it is the honor of the People of God to endure in the
ways of God, notwithstanding all the hardships they meet withal.

Doct. 6. Sixthly, The sight of an invisible God is a strong means to carry one
on in the ways of God, notwithstanding al oppositions and difficulties they
meet withal.

These are the Doctrinal Conclusions we have in verse 27.

CHAP. II.
Handling the first Doctrine.

Doct. 1. That the wrath of wicked men, especially when they have power,
usually is very fierce and outrageous.

FOr the proof of this Point. It must be acknowledged that sometimes God indeed
restrains it, but usually it is so. There is in every one a great deal of
distempered wrath that does break forth and vent it self when occasion serves
and when temptation comes, in most vile and fearful effects and fruits. A
furious man (says the Holy Ghost in Prove. 29.22) abounds in transgression:
Those that have hearts distempered with Passion, Anger, and Wrath: they are
such as abound in transgressithere breaks most horrible things from them, when
they are in the heat of their passion and anger, not caring almost what they
say or do, all the Commands of God are broken then.

We read of Moses, when he came down from the Mount, Exodus 32.19. and saw the
people in their sin, his anger was stirred, and he broke both the Tables: but
there his anger was good, for though both the Tables were broke, yet not one
Commandment was broke: But usually our wrath and anger is not good, and in our
passion all the Commandments in both Tables are broke.

The Hebrew word that signifies to transgress, does signify Anger, because it
is seldom that any in their passion do not transgress. It is the speech of one,
that if there were two principles of things (as the Heathens are conceited
there is, one principle from whence comes all good, and another principle from
whence comes all evil) then Anger should be the principle of all Evil, and God
the principle of all Good: much evil and very fearful things come from wrath
when it is distempered and let out.

First: Because it does wonderfully blind the Judgment of men. Anger hinders
the mind that it cannot see that which is true. And therefore in Job. 5.13. it
is said, The counsel of the froward is carried headlong.

It is a notable passage that I read of a poor Woman, that had her Cause
pleaded before Phillip King of Macedon, who passed sentence in his passion, and
she apprehending her self wronged, says she I appeal, he smiled at that,
being Sovereign, and said, To whom will thou appeal? says she, I appeal from
thee when thou art angry, to thee when thou art not angry: noting that Anger
blinds the judgment.

Secondly: Passion and Wrath is compared to Fire, and fire is active, and
quickly goes beyond its bounds, and then there is no hold of it, but much evil
may come of it, and so it is with Wrath.

Thirdly: Much evil comes of Passion being inordinate, because, being as
distempered Fire that comes from a Disease, it eats out the natural heat: as in
the Body, the heat of the Fever that is distempered, it consumes the true
natural heat. And so, though there be some natural heat, or some kind of
goodness, and kindness naturally in a man, that heat and goodness is taken away
if he be in any passion; And therefore one brings in this comparison. Kindness
is as one that is very hot naturally, when passion comes, it does consume and
take away the good natural heat, and he is altogether carried on in a
distempered heat.

Fourthly: Wrathful passion does warm all the Lusts that lodge in the heart, and
put an activeness into them, whereas before they were cold, and like Snakes,
being cold do not stir, but if they come to be warm, then they craule about and
sting: And so many corruptions lie in the hearts of Men and Women, that are
congealed with cold, and like Snakes lie and do not stir; but when the heat of
passion comes, it puts a heat into all those corruptions, and then they craul
forth and make woeful work.

Now in all men there is a distempered Wrath, and fearful fruits come from it,
if it be not mortified: but when there is power joined with passion then it is
outrageous indeed. As we see here, How violent in wrath was Pharaoh against
Moses, and therefore the Holy Ghost commends Moses that he was not afraid of
the passion that was joined with power. So Saul. How violent was his passion
when once he had power? He seemed to be a man of a very quiet spirit* whilst
he was in a private condition, and withal at his first coming to the Kingdom
(as you may read in 1 Samuel Chap. 10.) but when he was warm in the Throne, and
had power more settled in his hand, then you may read how outrageous his
passion was, as in 1 Samuel 22 18.19. he caused Doeg to slay at one time
fourscore and five Priests of the Lord, and Nob to be smitten with the edge of
the sword and all this because David his supposed enemy had been there, and as
Doeg informed him, Abimelech the Priest had enquired of the Lord for him.

You may observe here how outrageous men will be in their wrath, when it is for
themselves, when in the mean time in the cause of God they can be quiet enough.

As when God commanded Saul to slay Agag and the Amalekites, and all their
Cattle, then he was loath to be so outrageous, but out of compassion he spared
some for Sacrifice, but then the Cause was Gods: now when it was his own Cause,
then slay all, Priests and Men, and Women, and Sucklings, and Oxen, and Sheep,
and all: Thus many in the Cause of God are content to forbear and pass by many
things.

Many that have but power in Families, Parents or Masters: if their Children,
or Servants sin against God, they can put up that, but let their Children or
Servants offend them, and then they are outrageous in a fearful manner. Thus
violent and fierce is wrath where it has power.

And so Rehoboam, when he had power he answered the People rigidly, in 1 Kings
12.14. My little Finger shall be thicker than my Fathers Loins, my Father has
chastized you with Whips, but I will chastize you with Scorpions.

And you know likewise the example of Jeroboam, having power in his hand, when
the Prophet came from God, and prophesied against the Altar. Lay hold of him
says he, as it is in 1 Kings 13.4. And so Jehojakim, when the Will was read,
he bad them cut it with a Penknife and throw it into the Fire. As you may read
in Jer. 36.23. Even gracious men having power in their hands in their passion
will do many evil things. As Asa the King a gracious man, when the Preacher
angered him he struck him, See it in 2 Chronicles. 16.10. But where there is no
grace, there it is outrageous beyond measure. As Zerxes a great Captain being
angry, he showed it aginst the water, for he cut a great River, and made it run
another way.

The Reasons why wrath and anger are so outrageous where there is power withal,
are these.

First, Because power does puff up the heart with pride and pride is the ground
of passion: So much as men are passionate so much pride is not mortified in
them. But as one man through the disposition of his body, may be more subject
to passion than another, So some by the disposition of the body may be more
subject to pride also: Power and strength do much puff up the hearts of men and
therefore in Psalm. 90.10. It is said, Their strength is Labor and Sorrow.
Eorum certitudo, A. Mont. Interli^.
The word translated strength signifies pride, for they are ready to think the
strength and power they have, is given them for some excellency and worth that
is in them above others, whereas it may be far otherwise. It may be God
raises them above others, not out of esteem to them but out of indignation to
others, that he means to scourge by them.

Anastatius Arenus, tells us of a Monk who was raised to be a Bishop over a
place, which was a very ill place, and he began to be puffed up in pride that
he was raised to honor above others: there was a voice heard, Not because you
are worthy, but because they have deserved such an ill man. So God raises some
to honor, not for any excellency in them, but out of indignation unto others.

Secondly, Men that have power are mighty fierce in their wrath, because when
any thing cross them it comes mighty unexpectedly, they cannot think any dare
cross them. And therefore when the three Children would not submit to that
which Nebuchadnezzar commanded, he was full of fury, and his countenance was
Changed: what dare you resist me? do you know who I am?

It is reported of one Canutus that was a King, being puffed up with
flatterers, thought that all creatures must submit to him, and therefore he
caused his Chair to be set by the Sea, and gave his command that they should
not presume to come near his Seat, because (says he) you and the earth I sit
upon is mine. So men that are in power think all is theirs, and therefore if
any thing come cross unto them it is unexpected, and that causes them to be so
outrageous.

Thirdly, There is naturally a revengful Spirit in men, and where there is
power men do run upon it, and think it their only glory to revenge: it is the
glory of God to be merciful, and yet men think it a glory to revenge,

Fourthly, Where men have power they look upon every offense through their own
greatness. God may justly look at every sin against him as very great, because
he looks through his own greatness; and men that have power will be like God.
Men that have any greatness and above others, they are ready to look at all
offenses committed against them as through their own greatness, and therefore
think it unsufferable.

Fifthly, Besides, Men that are above others look upon all under them as mean
and contemptible, as if it were better for them to perish as filth and dross
then for them to be crossed, and prize the content of their humors more then
the life and welfare of al under them.

Sixthly, Further, Those that are above others have nothing to keep in their
wrath, as meaner men, though their anger be up yet it is kept in by higher
power: but where there is nothing to keep it in, it will break over bounds.

Seventhly, Again they have many flatterers that stir up their wrath, and put
oil into the fire, as the young men did Rehoboam.

Eighthly, They think there is no way to maintain their authority but their
wrath, when as nothing does more hinder the authority of a Governor then
distempered passion, nothing does more hinder the reverence that Governors
should have then passion.

Ninthly, Again, They think it beseemes their greatness for them to have more
wrath, and more displeasure then others. It is a notable expression that Seneca
has It is not the greatness of the mind that causes wrathful anger, but the
swelling of the mind. A leg that has the gout, is bigger than the other, but
it is not the commendation of the Leg, but the swelling of the Leg. So
Antiochus Epiphanes was called by so me Deifical Epiphanes, yet the Holy Ghost
calls him a vile person. And so Rehoboams counselors might tell him, this
becomes thy great spirit, but the Scripture calls him a child.

Tenthly, Again, They have nothing else to satisfy them, nothing to make up
any thing that crosses them, therefore when they are crossed they are
outrageous in their wrath.

USE. 1.
Hence we Learn, that it is a great judgment for any people to be under the
power of those that are evil, and passionate, because their passion will be
outrageous, and then fearful, lamentable and grievous fruits are like to follow
upon it.

USE 2.
Hence see, that those who are under others which are passionate, have cause to
seek God much for them, and to entreat God to moderate their passion and to
quiet it. In Psalm. 76.10. It is said, God restraines the remainder of wrath:
and therefore upon that word seek God for those that are in place, and above
others, that God would be pleased to moderate their passion.

USE. 3.
Hence see what cause we have to admire Gods goodness to his Church in
preserving his Church, notwithstanding there are so many that have power over
it, and are crossed mightily by the ways of Gods people, that it is not
swallowed up by them It is the Lord that says to the proud waves, hither you
shall go and no further, Job 30.11. And that place in Psalm. 76.10. Is further
notable for this purpose, Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee. It is God
that turns the wrath of man to his praise: and he does not only preserve his
Church notwithstanding it, but makes it work for the good of his Church.

USE. 4.
Here we have a good use of direction to those that have power over others, as
Parents and Governors, to take heed this power be not abused; and therefore
consider with your selves:

1. Who is it has given me this power, Is it not the Lord?

2. Again, Consider how have I provoked the wrath of God against my self, and
yet God does not use his power against me? those that are over others and are
given to anger should think, How is God provoked and crossed? and if I do think
because I am crossed to put forth all my power against them that cross me, how
is it that God is so patient, and that he does not put forth his power against
me? Though I am over them, I am under God, and God might justly put forth all
his power in the execution of his wrath against me, because I that have but
little power when I am crossed, I put forth all my power against them.

3. And then in the third place: Consider the power that you have over others,
when it is the power of authority, it is a very glorious thing, it is that
which has a part of the Image of God in it: Will you now then take your
Authority, and Power to subject it to your lusts and make that an Instrument of
the Devil which is a part of the Image of God? it must needs be a great evil,
and the more authority and power any have, to use it in the Devils service, the
more evil it is. Joseph's speech to his Brethren is very observable in Genesis
50.19. when they were afraid least he should at last revenge himself upon them,
he answers them, Fear not, for am I in the place of God? There are many
interpretations given of this, but it may well carry this sense with it. That
power I have is from God and under God, yea it puts me into the place of God,
therefore I dare not abuse it to make it serviceable to revenge. The Lord is to
have the Glory, is to have the Glory of our strength, the Psalmist has such an
expression. Has God given you strength and power over others? let God have the
glory of your strength and do not abuse it.

Many think it is a disparagement to yield to others when they cross them, but
they do not think it much to yield to the Devil. Says the Scripture Ephesians.
4.26.27. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the
Devil: Rather give way to any Creature than to the Devil: if any cross you, and
you let your wrath go on against them, you give way to the Devil, but rather
give way to any Creature.

4. Again, It is a most pestiferous force not to be resisted: the greater a man
is above others, the less passion he should have.

5. Again, Consider God may give you power rather in wrath than in mercy. A
learned Man said. You must distinguish between that which God gives in good
pleasure, and that which he gives when he is angry: Whatsoever we have from God
in a way of favor, or in a way of anger: whatsoever God gives me in love, I
must use it in fear, least God should not have honor from it: and if God give
it me in his anger, I must take heed I do not abuse it to my perdition.

Many times God permits some to be above others nor only in his wrath to them
that are under them, but in wrath to themselves, that they being above others
might fall and break their necks: and therefore they that have place above
others had need take heed they do not abuse it: Consider, have you used it for
God? When you had power for God you were content then to forbear, and shall you
now use your power for the maintenance of your Lusts?

USE 5
Hence we learn, seeing those that are in power have such wrathful and
distempered passions, It should teach us to take heed of crossing any in power
above us. Many are under others, and yet have higher Spirits than those above
them. It is not good to stir up a Lion; and if we have not a good call to it,
we shall have little comfort in any thing we suffer. Let us go on in the way of
God, and we shall have false accusations enough against us, that will provoke
those that are in authority, though we do nothing to provoke them justly.

USE 6
The last Use that I will name from hence is this: The more ordinary and usual
it is for any that have power in their hands to be thus wrathful, the more
honorable it is, they should be able to cross their anger and their passion. It
is a blessed thing for a Man or Woman in power, to think it is more Glory to
use their power to cross their passion, than to use their power to revenge them
that cross them. You think if you can make others to yield to you, that is a
brave thing: but you that have power over others be convinced of this, that it
is a greater honor to use your power to command your own passion by, than to
use it to make others to yield to it.

Phillip the second King of Spain, being intent about some great business in
writing a Letter to the Pope, and requiring some have, he sat up al night, and
being done, his Secretary standing by, and being half asleep, he bade him throw
some sand upon i^, and he took the Standish, and powered Ink upon it: now though
the King was crossed, yet he went away and put it up and made nothing of it.
What a shame is it then for Christians to be so revengeful? And that Phillip
being spoken ill of by one Cradon, some put him in mind to revenge himself on
him, but he sent him many Gifts, and spoke well of him, then he asked what
Cradon spoke of him, say they, no man better: then says he, I am a better
Physician than you. This is an honorable thing in whomsoever it is.

And thus much for this first point. That the wrath of wicked men when they
have power, is very fierce and outrageous.

CHAP. III.
Handling the second Doctrine; which is,

Doct. 2. That Faith helps against the immoderate fear of men of Authority, of
any Creature.

FIrst: Those that are Godly ought to have, and have due and reverend respect
unto all those that are in Authority: though they be not afraid of the
displeasure of the King, or of any in Authority, in the Cause of God, yet those
that are truly gracious and Godly, do give due reverence to them, in their
persons and in their Authority and power. Though they are not so basely afraid
as others are, to yield to any thing against God, or Conscience, yet so far as
they may, no people in the world give that reverent respect unto Authority, as
Gods people do.

Secondly: None do it up on such good grounds: because they do it for
Conscience sake, and submit to authority, further than others do: they dare not
in their secret thoughts have any ill mind against authority: and they do it,
because they see the image of God upon them, not to save themselves.

3. And Thirdly. None do fear authority in so good a manner; they do it
willingly and cheerfully, not by force, but as being the will of God they
should do it; it is agreeable to the disposition of their souls for to do it.
Naturally, no man would be under another, but it is agreeable to grace to be
so, and therefore no such subjects, as those that are Godly, if it be rightly
considered.

It has been a scandal cast upon Religion in all ages that they did contemn
authority, and did not give that fear that was due to authority. As Pharaoh
said, they would rebel against him; and so they said in Nehemiahs time Just in
Martyr and Tertullian, were fain to make apologies for the Christians in this
particular, to convince them, that none were more obedient to authority then
they.

Tertullian has a notable expression in his apology. What is the reason you do
not count us obedient to authority? because we will not worship Idols, and
pray to the Idols for your Governors? yet we pray to the True God for your
Governors. Like men in these days, because they will not yield their Consciences
prostrate to authority, and seek the honor of it in an unlawful way, therefore
they are not subject to them, when as, none are so truly subject unto men, as
those that are obedient unto God.

And therefore we read of Constantius he took this course to know his true
subjects: he proclaimed, that whosoever would not worship Idols must be
banished the Court, and those that would, should stay: now some rather than
they would leave the Court, and be banished, they would sacrifice to Idols:
others left the Court: upon this he chose those that left the Court, and
banished the others: says he If you be not faithful to God, you will not be
faithful to me.

Can any man submit truly upon right grounds to a Justice of Peace, that will
not yield to the King? if he submit to the inferior, he will submit to the
superior. And so those that upon right grounds will submit to authority, it is
upon this ground, because they are subject to the authority of God: and indeed
there can be no trust to any to be faithful to authority, but those that are
Godly. As that notable example of Homizda, that was a great man in the King of
Persi's court, and the King would fain have persuaded him from Christian
Religion, by all the flattering arguments he could, and to get him to sacrifice
to Idols: says he O King be not so eloquent to thy destruction: who shall think
him to be faithful to man, that is not faithufl unto God? if so be we do not
obey the authority of God, how can we be obedient unto you. And therefore those
that are Godly do give a due, and reverent respect unto authority though they
do not fear any authority in the cause of God, yet so far as God requires,
their hearts do fear, and they do reverence them.

Before I come to the point, to show how faith does help against the fear of
men, I will give some helps for the ordering your selves in the right fear of
the authority of men; though we must not fear it in any way against God, yet
we must fear it: Faith will teach us not to fear it one way, and yet it will
teach us to fear it another way. As the Apostle says in Romans 13.7. Give fear
to whom fear belongs. It is a Christians duty to give fear to whom fear is
due. Luther speaking of obedience to authority. Says he; I had rather obey
than work miracles. And that is a very observable place we have in the Epistle
of Peter; where the Apostle speaking of those that God will come in judgment
against, amongst the rest he reckons those that despise government: so that we
see God would not have us to despise and contemn Government.

CHAP. 4.
Directions for the ordering our selves in our fear of Authority.

WHerefore for the ordering our selves in our fear of authority, and those that
are above us these things must be laid down as a Ground.

1. First. That we must fear no authority but as under a higher.

2. Secondly, We must distinguish between authority and men in authority.

3. Thirdly, It is necessary for us to know the several callings that men have
to their places of authority.

4. Fourthly, It is necessary to know the limits of authority.

5. Fifthly, It is neccessary to know what we should do in case authority is
abated.

6. Lastly, We shall give some rules of direction to order our selves in our
passive obedience to authority when it is abused.

These six things contain this part of handling the point, and I will be breife
in them.

First, This must be laid as a Ground. No authority is to be feared and obeyed
but in order to a higher. I remember their usual expression that was wont to be
in England in their way of Jubilies and commissions was this. In all things be
sure there be no prejudice to the right of the King. And so among the Turks
when any were in the place of Judgment or authority, one goes and proclaims
before him; Let nothing be done against the truth. It is reported of Frederick
the Third being asked who were those that were most dear to him he gave them
this answer. Those that fear God more than me. And likewise it is an
expression of Augustine He does not contemn power That does choose to serve a
higher power. O Emperor, (says he) give us leave not to serve thee in such and
such things, for you threaten prison, and God he threatens judgment and hell.

It is true, Man in Authority is Gods vicegerent, but not only God is to be
feared above his Vicegerent but in every man there is a vicegerent that is to
be obeyed rather than any other vicegerent, as the Conscience of man; so that
man comes to be obeyed in the third rank First, God is the highest. Then there
is a Second, that is Gods immediate Vicegerent, that is Conscience. And then
there is a third, that is, the authority of man: He is a Vicegerent that is
under these two. Nothing therefore is to be done against the highest authority,
no nor against the authority of conscience.

Secondly. For our direction in our subjection unto those that are above us,
and our right fear of them: we must distinguish between authority and men in
authority. That is authority that is enjoined by virtue of a law-ful power that
is given to any man in authority: but if so be any man in authority shall
enjoine any thing that is not by virtue of that authority that is given him,
though it be good, then it is not authority, but his own mind, and his own
will. As Sampson said, If I do thus and thus I am as another man. So a man in
authority may be as another, because he does only enjoine his own will and
therefore to disobey the mind and will of men in authority, is not always to
disobey authority, if the thing be not enjoined by virtue of authority.

In the Third place. It is needful for us in ordering our selves in our fear,
to know the several calls that men have to the place of authority. This must be
taken for granted. All lawful authority is from God yea the power of Heathens
is from God.

But there is a two fold call to the place of Government and authority.

First, An immediate call; as God called Saul and David to the place of
Government.

Secondly. A mediate call: and that is when God by men does put, either a
particular person, or such a family into a place of government or authority.

Now when any shall be brought into government by those that have lawful power,
though it be of man, yet they are in their place as by God, and are to be
obeyed not only for fear, but for Conscience sake.

It is very needful for to know what it is that first ties a man's conscience to
be in subjection unto an other man: there was a time when such men or such
families had not the power of authority; now there must be something that must
give them power, it is not his strength that can do it, nor conquest, because
my conscience is not tied to submit to one that has more strength than I, as
my governor, but only to regard my own safety; and then if another come and get
the victory, am I to leave my former Sovereign and submit to him? That will not
be granted, that we may upon any terms relinquish our Sovereign to go to
another, because he has more strength; but what then must tie my conscience?
it must be some signification of Gods mind that this is my Governor, and this
must be either immediately from Heaven, by the Prophets, or it must be by
inclining the hearts of those that have power to put one in authority, to put
this man, or this family into authority, and so far as Gods mind is declared to
me, so far I am bound in conscience to submit.

4. And from hence follows a fourth thing, and therein you must consider, how
far this authority is limited. If no particular man has no authority, any
further than God reveals his mind; and God now reveals his mind, either
immediately from Heaven, or by inclining the hearts of those that have power to
give authority, to give it to such an one; then the limitations must be
according to that power that conferts authority. If God does immediately confer
authority, then it is to be limited by that, but if God does confer power by
man, then it is to be limited by that.

In several Kingdoms and Countries there are several Governments: one Country
is governed by States: another Country a government of Monarchy; and other
Countries other kinds of Governments: what is it that makes this difference of
governments? of necessity the difference must be made by that power that does
first confer this authority, and so it is to be limited by that authority.

5. But suppose Those that are limited: shall abuse their authority and go
beyond it?

To that I answer. The persons that are in authority are to be reverenced, but
their abuse may be two fold. When they command a thing that is unlawful: or
when they do command a thing that is beyond their authority. As suppose a Lord
should command a thing that is beyond his Lordly power and belongs to a Prince;
if he does command any thing that is beyond those limits where with he has
been limited from God by man, then it is not disobedience to authority to
disobey, because authority does not enjoine it: If it be believed, there must
be power to confer authority, and this power must be from God, or man, and if
God or man do not confer it, then they have no authority.

But suppose. That any that are in authority do command a thing that is
unlawful to be done and yet they do not go beyond the limits of authority?

How can that be? It is true, God gives commission only to command things
lawful, yet man may confer so much power upon others, as they shall by virtue of
that power is given to them by man, command that which is unlawful: I do not
say rightly, but their power will work to it: Now if any by the power which is
given to them by man, shall command that which is unlawful, though we should not
actively obey, yet we must obey passively, or sly: we must not right our
selves by way of mutiny, or rebellion. And my ground is this, because it is
between governor and Subject, as it is between man and man.

Suppose, another man has in his possession that which is my right, yet I
cannot violently go and take my right from him; I may justly be dealt withal as
one that does wrong, and be proceeded against as a malefactor; I must be
content to suffer til such time as I can legally recover my right out of his
hands: And so if one in authority has that in possession given him which he
should not have, as to command things that are unlawful, by our forefathers or
our own subjecting our selves to him, I must suffer til I can recover my right
out of his hand in a legal way by the power that first gave it him.

And this will answer a great objection.

The Christians in the Primitive times, that lived under persecuting Emperors,
they commanded them to worship Idols, that was a thing that was unlawful, yet
they would not rise against them, though they had strength enough, but rather
suffered. And upon this some think, whatsoever men in authority do command,
there is no way to right it but by passive obedience. It is true the Christians
did not rise, but did suffer passively, because the Emperors had power given
into their hands, and they could not recover their right out of their hands, in
a legal way, by the same power that gave them power.

So that all will arise to these three conclusions.

The Firsts is this That al true authority is from God.

Secondly, So far as authority is administered lawfully. We are to submit, not
only for fear but for Conscience sake.

Thirdly, If authority be administered unlawfully, yet so long as it is
authority, there must be passive obedience or flying.

This shall suffice to give some light unto the bond of obedience to those that
are obvoe us.

CHAP. 5.
Some further Directions, how we should order our selves, if we should be
injoined unlawful things.

BUt to give some further rules of Direction; if we should be enjoined things
unlawful, and we could not in a legal way recover the power out of the hands of
those that do injoine such things, how we should order our selves.

1. First, Do not do any thing otherwise than authority enjoines rashly:
forbear as long as you can, and consult, and consider further about it,
because we should loath to do any thing than that which is enjoined by tho
sthat are above us. If there be any arguments to show that they may be done, we
should listen to them. Some as soon as they see a thing Commanded that is
forbidden. they fly upon it, before they try it, and therefore when they come
to suffer they have little comfort in it: we are to try all our actions,
especially when they shall seem to have any opposition against authority.

Secondly. If we be put upon it, that we must of necessity do those things that
authority forbids, do them privately, that it may appear we are loath to disobey
those that are in authority: because if we should do it openly, others that
know not our grounds, may be brought into contempt of authority.

Thirdly, We are to do it as silently as we can, not to make a brag and boast
of it: as many will take a delight and pride in it: if they have warrant enough
to go against the command, they brag and boast of it wheresoever they come: it
is enough for us to go on silently; if we may do our duty to God, make little
noise of it.

Fourthly, Observe all circumstances of time and place, and so all other
circumstances, so as to do it in a way that may as little exasperate them that
are in authority as possible we can. Many when their Conscienc will not suffer
them to do those things, which those that are above them do enjoin, they will go
against it with such bitterness of spirit, as if they did take delight to
exasperate them, this does not become a Christian.

Fifthly. Howsoever we do those things that authority forbids, let us take heed
we give as reverent respect unto authority as we can: not to be violent in our
words, nor to give revileing, provokeing speeches; that shows our own pride of
heart rather than any thing else.

Sixthly. Be sure you keep to your Principles; that they may be convinced that
what you do is out of conscience, and not out of any refractory humor: if so be
you should plead you cannot do such and such things because of your Conscience,
and they shall observe that you will do other things that are as apparent against
conscience, they may see, it was not out of your conscience but out of your
stoutness: but if they shall observe that there is nothing in which you dare go
against the rule of your conscience, they shall see that it is not out of
disobedience unto them, but in obedience to conscience: And therefore by how
much the more you are forced to disobey in some things, by so much the more be
careful, to obey in what you may.

And this is usual, that those that are truly gracious and are in place of
office, they will labor to see those laws that may make for Gods glory shall be
executed, and so they are accounted rather two busy, Because they will do so
much for authority: but howsoever, it ought to be the care of all Gods people
to be obedient to authority in what they can.

And in the last place. If authority should deal never so hardly with you, take
heed you have no thoughts of revenge, but commit your cause to God, and requite
good for evil, and pray for those that persecute you.

And these directions being premised, you see how far you are to fear the wrath
of the King, and the displeasure of all that are in place above you.

CHAP. 6.
The Point prosecuted more strictly.

BUt now we come to the point more strictly: After you have observed these
rules, and made use of these directions, you are to go on in your way
resolutely and comfortably, and cheerfully, whatsoever falls out, not to baulk
your way at all in the least degree that God requires at your hands, but to go
on without fear.

The Scripture says concerning a righteous man, In Prove. 28.1. He is as bold
as a Lion: if a man know he is in the way of God, he is to go on boldly like a
Lion; and in Prove. 30.30. not to turn out of his way for fear of any
creature. We find in scripture how the Godly are commended for their
resoluteness and courage of spirit, that they would not fear man and the
creature.

As those three Prophets. in 1 Kings. 18.17.18. Elijah, Elisha, and Micaiah.
When Elijah met Ahab, Says he Art thou he that troublest Israel? No says he,
it is thou and thy fathers house. And so Elisha, when those three Kings came
down to him, the King of Israel, and Jehosophat, and the King of Edom: says
he; 2 Kings, 3.14. Were it not that I regard the presence of of Jehoshaphat
King of Judah, I would not look toward thee nor see thee.

And so Micaiah, when they would have had him prophecy good things, says he,
1 Kings. 22.14. What the Lord says unto me, that will I speak. I might give you
many instances in Job and David of their courage, not fearing the wrath of man.
Job has a notable expression. Job. 31.34. Did I fear a multitude, or did the
contempt of families terrify me? that I kept silence, and went not out of the
door? he was not afraid though he lived amongst those that were vile and
wicked.

And great courage you have in David in Psalm. 23. and others, Though he walked
in the shadow of death, and whatsoever befell him he would not be afraid. And
so the Church of God says in Psalm. 46.2.3.4. verses, Therefore we will not fear
though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the
midst of the Sea. Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though
the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof, There is a river the Streams
whereof shall make glad the City of our God. We enjoy the ordinances of God, and
we will not fear though there are such tumults abroad in the world.

And so that which is said concerning Jeremiah in Chap. 15.12. Shall iron
break the Northern Iron and the steel? though they were as Iron that reasoned
aagainst Jeremiah, yet Jeremiah was to be as steel when Iron Strikes against
Steel. It does not break it, but brighten it; and so all the opposition that
Jeremiah had from all the great ones was but as the striking of Iron against
Steel, it did not break his spirit but brighten it. And that of the three
Children in Dan. 3.16. Shows the magnanimous spirit that they had. We are not
careful to answer thee in this matter. And so that speech of Saint Paul. Acts,
21.13. What mean you to weep and break my heart? for I am ready not to be
bound only, but to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

And so many expressions we have of the Martyrs in the Primitive times. Justin
Martyr making his apology for the Christians to Antonius Pius, says he; we do
not speak to dissemble to you, but for our own right, we can be hurt by no man,
you can kill us, but not hurt us, if you like mad men will observe the customs
of men before the truths of God, do then, we will not.

I do not name every speech of those servants of God as imitable, because we do
not know what spirits they were carried on with, but to show the strength of
their spirits.

And so that of Ambrose, speaking to the Emperor do not lift up thy self O
Emperor, if so be you would rule, be subject to God. And so Odosius, that was a
good man, when he had been crossed with the people of Thessalonica, he caused
many of them to be murdered; upon that Ambrose refused to give him the
Sacrament, though he came to the Temple door, and desired it of him, and fell
down upon the ground, yet Ambrose stood and resisted him till there was through
repentance manifested to the Church.

And so Chrysostom. The Emperess Eudoxia had taken by wrong the vineyard of
another; Chrysostom forbad her the Communion.

And likewise Basil, he writ to Julian the Apostate: Cr^tainly if you
understood what we writ, you would not oppose that we writ. But (says he) when
I consider the dignity and crown you have, and the use you make of them, I
tremble, for they are for your honor but they make you more dishonorable.

And Julian meeting Pagmelius, says he I thank God I see you, and when he
replied you cannot see, says he, I thank God I can not see, you are an
Apostate.

And that is a notable speech of Luther, when he was to go to Worms to answer
for his faith, says he, though all the tiles of the houses of worms were
Devils yet I would go. And so diverse women that were weak in regard of their
sex, yet when faith came what abundance of courage had they.

And thus you see by many examples both out of scripture and likewise out of
Ecclesiastical histories the magnanimous spirits of Believers.

That we are to do now, is to open the point in these three particulars.

First to show, Wherein lies the power of faith to help against the sinful
fear of authority, and of man or any other creature.

Secondly, to show, The difference between audaciousness of spirit, and that
courage which proceeds from faith.

Thirdly, Though we are not sinfully to fear man, yet to show how far we may
lawfully fear him.

CHAP. 7.
How Faith helps against the fear of man; Opened in fifteen particulars.

First, wherein lies the power of faith to help aaginst the fear of man.

Much has been said concerning the power of faith to help against sufferings,
but now we have diverse things to say concerning the power of faith in helping
against the fear of man.

First. Wheresoever faith is, it putts the Believer into a very secure and safe
condition, making sure of the safety of the Soul, and that the terms between
God and it are good, and by that means it delivers the soul from being
transported by fear. There is nothing can secure the soul that the terms
between God and it are good, but faith: and that it does by putting the Soul
into the Covenant of Grace, and conveys the good of that everlasting Covenant
that can never be broken, unto the soul, and transferreth upon the soul the
sure mercies of David: and that must needs make the soul in a secure condition.
A man is not troubled with fears, when he knows he is provided for his life:
So a believing Soul is provided for Eternity, what now can trouble such a soul?

The Apostle in 1 Pet. 4.19. Would have us in the time of danger commit your
soul to God in well doing: when the soul is committed unto God in well doing,
there is no further fear. As if so be a man were traveling, and he had some
precious Jewel were worth abundance, and he apprehends himself in some danger
if he can commit his Jewel to some safe hand he is without fear. And therefore
in some countries you have your Banks: men that are afraid of their money,
commit it to the Bank, and there it is sure. So a soul that can commit it self
to God in weldoing, and be sure of that, it is not troubled with much fear.

Qust. But should we not take care for our estates, and lives, and liberties?

Answ. Says the Apostle, be at a point for them, but be sure you commit your
souls to God, and you are well enough.

As in a time of common fire and burning, If a man have some lumber in the
fire, he does not care for them, but if he has Jewels and treasury, he commits
them to some safe custody: and so a believer having committed his soul to God
by faith, and so being sure of the terms between God and it, his soul will not
admit of fear.

We read of Noah. Genesis 6.14. When he had made an Ark, he pitched it about the;
word that is translated pitched, is the same word that is used for propitiation
or atonement: noting, that pitch was to Noah's Ark, that the atonement of
Christ apprehended by faith is to the soul: whn a soul by faith can apprehend
the sure meercies of David in the propitiation of Christ, this is to the soul
in the midst of dangers, to keep it from fears, as the pitch was to Noah's Ark
in the midst of the waves, that kept it from the waters. And that is the first
thing.

Secondly, Faith keeps from fear, because it has a speiciall eye to the
highest first being of all things, now that is a rule, No inferior cause can
work, but by an influence from the Superior; and therefore when by faith the
eye can behold the highest supreme cause, so as to see.

First, There is no Power in any creature but from that.

Secondly, The Acting of that Power is from that.

Thirdly. The Force of that Power, is from that.

Fourthly, The Success of that Power is from that cause; and when the soul
looks up to this highest cause and sees all clear there, it needs not much to
look how it is with the inferior causes. As if a man had an instrument, that
hung upon many wheels, though the inferior moves, and it seems as if it would
break and fall upon him, yet if he has an eye upon the highest wheel that
moves all, upon which all depend, and be sure that holds, he does not much
regard the other. And so it is with a spiritual eye. A carnal eye looks only at
things that are objects of sense, he looks at the creatures, but a believer
looks at the highest supreme cause, and if that be right, he does not look at
the lowest causes.

We have a notable speech in Isay. 54.16. Behold I have created the smith that
blows the coals in the fire, and that brings forth an instrument for his
work, and I have created the waster to destroy. Are you afraid of the sword
and the wasters? I have created the smith that blows the Coals, and I have
created the waster to destroy; If they have any power to do hurt, it is from
me; why do you look upon the instrument and not upon the hand? If there be any
power in any instrument of war, they depend upon God, and he makes them to
destroy: and therefore faith looks to the highest cause, and is conversant with
that, and carries the affections to that; it is not much affected with under
causes; it does not fear the wrath of men, nor the power of any creature,
because it looks so much at the highest cause that is above al.

The confidence that carnal hearts have in outward helps, keeps them from
fearing God, should not the confidence of the Saints in God, keep them from
fearing man?

Thirdly. Faith helps against the fear of man, because it helps the soul to
overcome greater fear than any fear the creature can cause.

A believing soul has been conversant with other manner of fears than the
wrath of a King, namely, the wrath of an infinite God, a believer knows what
the wrath of a Deity means, what the terror of conscience, and the curse of
the Law, and the flashes of Hell mean, and he has had some experience
concerning the fear of these, and he has received some thing of the spirit of
bondage, that has caused him to fear other manner of things than the fear of
man, and when faith comes, that has delivered the soul from these fears,
others must needs vanish; the power of faith soon extinguisheth them 1 Samuel
17.37. As David when he was delivered from the Mouth of the Lion, and the paw
of the Bear, he was not afraid of Goliath: so a believing soul is not afraid
of the wrath of man, because it has been delivered by faith, from the wrath of
an infinite Deity, and the terrors of the Law and of Conscience.

In the 51. of Isa. 22. Mark how God brings the deliverance of his people from
the fear of his wrath, as an argument to strengthen them against all other
fears. Behold I have taken out of thy hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs
of the Cup of my fury. To what end is this spoken? In the beginning of the next
chapter (for Chapters were not divided by the Prophets, but afterward, and
therefore they have an immediate connection to one another) Awake, awake, put on
thy strength O Zion, put on thy beautiful garments. So says faith to a
believing soul, why art thou afraid of the wrath and displeasure of men, be
not fearful, for I have taken out of thy hand the cup of trembling: there was
a time wherein there was a cup of trembling in thy hand, and thou were afraid
thou should drink of that, I have taken that out of thy hand, and therefore
awake, put on strength, be not afraid of man, being thou art delivered from
such fear.

It is a passage in the book of Job. Job, 38.17. when God would bring Job to
fear, says God, you seem to have some boldness: but have you seen the gates
of death? and has the shadow of death been made known to you? that were
another matter if you had gone through those fears, and yet were bold; but a
believing soul may say, yea Lord the gates of death, and the shadow of death
has been in some measure made known to me, and yet I am bold.

The Prophet says in Jer. 17.17. Be not thou a terror to me, for thou art my
hope in the day of evil. Lord let me be delivered from thy terror and all the
world shall not terrify me. Those that have been brought up delicately, and
know not what any danger means, if they hear of any commotion and danger, they
tremble, but those that are used to wars, that continually heat the noise of
Cannons, and see the affrighting objects, and desperate things that are there,
they are not so soon made afraid, because they have been where terrors have
been, and have been delivered from them and so a believing soul has been
acquainted with other manner of terrors than the terrors of men, and faith
delivering from them, will deliver from these.

Fourthly, Faith helps against the fear of men, and all dangers and evils, by
implanting the true fear of God in the soul. Where faith comes, as it brings
all grace with it, so it brings the grace of the fear of God and the reason of
al disorderly fear in the world, is for want of the true fear of God: I do not
mean the fear of his wrath, but that reverence that we owe to God as creatures
to the Creator, that fear of God wherein a great part of Gods worship
consists: if the soul were possessed with that, other fears would vanish.

As in other afflictions. True spiritual joy will overcome carnal joy, and the
best way to cure carnal joy, is to have the heart possessed with spiritual joy:
many take content in the flesh, but they never come to have their carnal joy
mortified, till their souls be filled with spiritual joy. And therefore though
in the time of sickness. They cry out against their carnal joy, it is not
mortified, but they return to it again, because they had only the conviction
of conscience that their carnal joy was naught, but had not a contrary stream
to fill their hearts.

And so for sorrow, There is no way to mortify carnal sorrow, as to sorrow for
sin; and so for desires: no way to mortify sinful, creature desires, as to
have desires Sanctified for God. As in other afflictions, so in that of fear:
no such way to mortify carnal, sinful fear, as to have the true fear of God
planted in the heart.

As Moses, when the rod was turned into a Serpent, the Magicians turned their
rods into serpents, but the text says, in Exodus 7.12. that Moses Serpent did
devour the Magicians Serpents. So there is enough in the true fear of God to
take up all the soul, that it has no space for the fear of Man; As when God is
truly worshipped, there he is only worshipped: so when God is truly feared
there he is only feared, and all other fears are in subordination to that.
Where God is truly feared nothing else is feared, and indeed nothing else need
be feared: As where God is not feared, no creature can help us: so where God is
feared no creature can hurt us, in Hosea. 10.3. Because we feared not the Lord,
What then should a King do to us? so on the contrary, because we fear the
Lord, what then can a King, what can all the power in the world do against us?

Fifthly, Faith does discover unto the soul, that it has more with it than
against it. You know the Prophets man was afraid, when he saw their enemies
about them ready to apprehend them: the Prophet prayed to the Lord to open his
eyes, and to let him see in 2. Kings, 6.16.17. There were more with him than
against him.

So till a man's eyes are opened by faith, he may see many enemies against him
to cause fear; but when God does open the eyes of his Soul to see more with him
than against him all fears are gone. It sees all the Attributes of God, all the
ways of Gods Providence, all Angels, all creatures working for the good of it;
and so it sees more with it then against it.

If a child or man, be alone in danger he is afraid, but when he comes into
the company of his friends, that has more with him than against him, he is not
afraid. So by the eye of faith we see more with us than against us, and that
frees from fear.

Sixthly, Faith keeps from fear by bringing in the spirit of Jesus Christ into
the Soul, and makes the Soul partaker of the spirit of Christ: Now Christ is
called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Revel. 5.5. He was full of courage, and
did not fear any thing which opposed him in his way: now every Christian does
partake of the Lion-like spirit of Christ, and has something of it in him, and
that puts strength and courage into him.

In Isa. 11.2. We read of the spirit of Christ that he was anointed withal, the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, spirit of counsel, and might, the spirit of
knowledge, and the fear of the Lord. Wheresoever the spirit of Christ is, there
is a spirit of might and strength, that will not easily yield to fear It is a
sign of a poor low spirit, to ly down and fear every thing that is never so
little fearful: but a spirit that is magnanimous, and a raised spirit will not
easily fear. The spirit of Christ is a magnanimous glorious spirit, he has
the same spirit with his Father, and so those that are Christ's come to have the
same spirit of the Son and of the Father with them. And therefore says Saint
Paul in 2 Timothy 1.7. We have not received the Spirit of fear, but of power. The
Spirit of Christ has a great deal of power and strength in it, and when faith
brings in the spirit of Christ it must needs help against fear.

Seventhly. Faith helps against fear, by taking off the heart from the
creature, and from all the comforts that are in it. Why does a man fear? but
because he thinks the creature will take away some comfort from him: now if the
heart be taken off from the creature, and the comforts of it, and so from
creature evils, neither esteeming the one, nor accounting much of the other,
there is not much cause why he should fear, now faith takes off the heart from
the creature. In Revel. 12.11. It is spoken of those that overcome Antichrist,
that they loved not their lives: and if they were taken off from the love of
life, then by consequence they were taken of from the love of any creature.

It is a notable speech that Chrysostom has concerning a worldly man. None
more miserable, and more fearful than a man that is fastened to earthly things,
for says he, he does continually live the life of care, and of trembling: but
when faith comes, it takes off the heart from being fastened to the creature,
and so such a one comes no longer to live the life of care, he does not tremble
any more. And suitable to his expression so was his life; speaking of Eudoxia
the Empres: says he, what will she do? will she bannish me? the earth is the
Lords and the fullness thereof. Will she cut me asunder? so was Isaiah. Will she
drown me? John was cast into the Sea. Will she stone me? So was Steven. Will
she behead me? so was Paul; Will she take away my substance? my heart is taken
a way from that already.

It is reported of Illaria meeting with thieves, say they are you not afraid?
no says he I have nothing to loose: but We will Kill thee; says he, I am
prepared to die And to a Heart seeing it has nothing to loose, and it is
prepared to die, it does not fear; it values no evil in the creature, nor any
good in it, and therefore it is not afraid: Now it is faith that glorious and
mighty grace, takes the heart off from all creature Evil, and creature good:
and by this you may know the work of Faith in your Souls; When you feel a
principle within you taking you from the creature, and lifting you above
creature comforts, and creature evils, that is the glorious work of Faith. And
that is the Seventh thing.

Eighthly, Faith does interest God in the cause of a Believer. Whatsoever cause
a believer does undertake, wherein he does exercise faith, his Faith does
interest God in it, so that it has not only the countenance, command, and
faithfulness of God to help it, but the Name of God, and God himself. As in
England if a man has a debt, and knows not how to get it, he will turn it
over to the King, and if he can interest the King in the debt, He thinks that
will be a way to help himself. So here when a believer is in a straight, and he
knows not what to do, he looks this way and that way, and sees nothing but
fears and Terrors and knows not how to help himself, yet if he can but turn
over the cause to God, and interest him in the cause, he is quiet.

Ninthly, Faith has a notable work to help against fear, in that it fills the
heart with spiritual good: and the true boldness that is in any heart comes
from the fullness of spiritual good that is in their Souls. As the Naturalists
observe the reason why the Lion has that courage and boldness, Is, because he
has a heart compacted and filled with strong spirits. Many things when they
are empty are weak, but when they are filled full of that which is suitable to
them, it makes them strong: So when a Soul has a fullness of spiritual good in
it, it is very strong,

Look what is the reason of the boldness and courage and impudence of wicked
men in their sin, the contrary is the reason of the boldness and courage of
Gods people in the way of God.

The special reason of the courage and boldness of the wicked in a way of
evil, is the fullness of wickedness that is in their souls; And therefore in
that fact of Ananias and Saphira Acts. 5.3. says the Apostle; Why has Satan
filled thy heart to lie unto the holy Ghost: If Satan had not filled your
hearts, you could not have been thus bold to have lied to the holy Ghost. And
so it is a notable passage we have in Esther. 7.5. speaking concerning Haman,
says the King, Who is he? and where is he that durst presume in his heart to
do so? In the Hebrew it is who has filled his heart to do this? who has a
heart so full as to venture upon such an evil as this;

As the filling of the heart with evil makes it bold and courageous in that
which is evil, so the filling of the heart with spiritual good makes it
forward in that which is good. As it is observed concerning Steven; after
Steven was filled with the Holy Ghost how bold was he? he could look upon the
face of his persecuters with boldness: in Acts 6.15. and the Council looked
upon him, and saw his face, as it had been the face of an Angel, because his
heart was filled with the Holy Ghost. And so the Apostles were very fearful
before the Holy Ghost came down upon them, but when they were filled with the
Holy Ghost they had no more fear.

And so Elisha, how full of courage was he when the three Kings came to him,
says he, Had it not been for Jehosaphat I had not seen thy face: What was the
reason? he had the Spirit of Elijah double upon him, and therefore he was bold.
As there is a Plerophorie of evil that causes boldness, so there is a
Plerophorie of good that fills the heart with boldness, and nothing does so
fill the heart as faith: that fetches of the fullness of Christ, and of his
fullness we are full.

In the Tenth place; Faith has a great deal of power to cause boldness and
take off the heart from the fear of Man; because Faith does acquaint a
believer with the ways of God toward his people, and therefore he does not
fear: A believer comes to have skill in the passages of Gods Providence, and
his dealings toward his people, and thereby he comes to know that it is Gods
ordinary way to suffer the enemies of his people to rage against them and
prevail against them, and to have much power over them, and yet they are his
people. And it is no argument that God has forsaken them because of their
affliction: And therefore you know, the Scripture speaks oftentimes of Gods
leading his people through the Fire and the Water, and that God will be with
them there, Isa. 43.2. It is the way of God to choose his people, and set his
heart upon them in the Fiery Furnace; when he intends the greatest good to his
people, He brings them through Fire and Water, and sets them in wealthy
places: Psalm. 66.12. And if one be acquainted with Gods way he does not fear.

If a soldier be not acquainted with the way of his General, when he sees him
undertake great things, and brings them into danger he is afraid: but one that
is acquainted with the way of his General, how he will lay his stratagems, and
knows that it is his way to go through such dangers, he is not afraid: And so
it is true; carnal Hearts as soon as they see any danger, they are afraid,
because they have not the skill to understand the mind and will of God in his
way toward his people, when as the people of God know, that it is the ordinary
way of God to work good out of Evil.

As Luther says, He does kill that he may quicken, and cast down, that he may
raise up, And the like; and so he goes on in three or four lines together: but
says he, For to know this, this is the art of arts, and the Knowledge of
Knowledges, very few do know and understand this way of God. It is a secret
that God does discover only to those that fear him; Faith does not make one
like a Child to know nothing, but does Doctrinate the Soul in the ways of God,
and so does enable it to overcome fears.

In the Eleventh place. Faith helps against fear: because it does put the soul
into a high and glorious condition, as into safety, so into a wonderful high
condition. A man that is great in the world is not afraid as others are: Now
faith makes the place of Gods people to be very high and glorious In the 43
Isa. 4.5. Since thou wast precious in my sight thou have been honorable and I
have loved thee Therefore will I give men for thee and people for thy life fear
not for I am with thee.

If a King should come to a poor subject and say fear not, you are honorable
in mine eyes, I prize your life more than the lives of thousands, would not
this keep him from being afraid; God says so to every gracious soul, and
faith closes with it, and this keeps the soul from fear. Mat. 10.31. Fear
not says Christ, you are more worth than many sparrowes: Gods providence is
over sparrowes but you are more worth than they. So precious are Gods people to
him, that he numbers every hair Mat. 10.30. and tells all their steps, and
bottles up all their tears. Psalm. 56.8. Surely he values every drop of blood,
and much more their lives, Ps. 116.15. and their spiritual privileges. They
are in a high and excellent condition above others.

It is a notable expression that Chrysostom has of the Priest Azariah,
because he resisted King Vzziah when he would have offered sacrifice; says he,
Every one that commits sin, is a servant to sin, and therefore base though he
has a thousand of crowns upon his head: but he that keeps righteousness is
more a King than any King, he is in a higher condition than any in the world,
But a most excellent expression is that of Tertullian concerning this Why
should I fear when the Saints shall be raised to judge the world? why should
that man fear, that ought to be feared by Angels, for he shall judge them, and
ought to be feared by Devils, he shall have power over them, and ought to be
feared by all the world, he shall judge all the world. Does a judge fear the
prisoner that is before him. This is the condition of a Saint of God, and faith
makes use of this, and knows what it is that God has revealed of the high
condition of his people, and therefore they do not fear.

Twelfthly. Faith helps against fear, because faith does much strengthen a good
conscience; wheresoever faith is, and according to the degree of it so a good
conscience is strengthened; they go together faith and a good conscience.
Therefore the Scripture speaking of some, In 1 Timothy 1.19. That they had made
Shipwreck of faith, they had put away a good conscience too. The one cannot
stand without the other Now we know what a great power there is in a good
conscience to make one without fear: to know nothing ill concerning our
selves, is a wall of brass; the the breastplate of righteousness helps against
any dart that comes; and a good conscience holds forth the breastplate of
righteousness: and says a good conscience, they accuse, but I will excuse,
they condemn, but I will justify: I will be with thee in death, and before the
Lord, and plead for thee.

If a man come to be made a terror to himself, then no marvail if he be afraid
of every thing else; but if a man be not a terror to himself, if he be able to
behold God in righteousness, and his conscience be right and good, he may look
with boldness upon any thing. Job. 11.14.15. If iniquity be in thy hand, put it
far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacles: For then shall thou
lift up thy face without spot, yea thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear
before men, no nor before the Lord himself.

Again, Faith helps mightily against fear, by bringing in, and making use of
all the gracious promises to help against fear. I will name but two promises,
and you shall see what a great deal of power is in those to help the soul
against fear. Deuteronomy. 31.8. He it is that goes before thee, he will be with thee,
he will not fail thee nor forsake thee, fear not, neither be dismayed. Mark how
God heapeth up expressions. Before he bids Moses bid Joshua be strong in the 7
verse, First he goes before thee, Secondly, He will be with thee. Thirdly, He
will not fail thee. See Isa. 41.10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not
dismayed, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee yea I
will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness, Thus God heaps up
expressions to help against fear. Faith makes the encouragements of the word
real to the soul, faith brings the divine power and efficacy of them to the
soul.

Again, Faith helps against fear by making use of al experiences of Gods
dealing with his people in former times, In Habb. 3. throughout he makes use of
the ways of God, and shows what God had done for his heretofore. Psalm. 87.4. I
will make mention of Rahab and Babylon, I will make mention of What God has
done in Rahab and in Babylon.

Lastly. Faith helps against the fear of man, because it causes a Christian to
judge of men as God himself judges of them, and look at men as God looks at
them, and to have the same thoughts of men, as God has and this is a mighty
help against fear.

Now we must see how God has revealed himself concerning man, and what little
cause there is to fear men especially wicked men, and the enemies of Gods
people. I will no fear says the Psalmist, in Psalm. 56.11. what can man do unto
me? And I will not fear what flesh can do unto me. In this same Psalm. 56.4.

CHAP 8.
Arguments against the fear of man, taken from the Consideration of Man,
First, as Man in six particulars very observable, 1. What he is, 2. The vanity
of Man. 3. The Dwelling of man. 4. The pomp of man. 5. The foundation of man.
6. The life of man. Secondly, As a wicked man. 1. His baseness, 2. What he is
in the greatness of his power opposing the Godly. 3. How near the enemies of
Gods people are to ruin and destruction.

FIrst, We are to consider what the scripture says of man as man.

Secondly, What it says of man as a wicked man.

There are these six things that we are to consider about man.

First, What he is. Secondly, The Vanity of Man. Thirdly, The dwelling of Man.
Fourthly, The Pomp of Man. Fifthly, The foundation of Man. Sixthly, The life of
Man.
In all these we have notable expressions to show what a poor creature any man
is, that we should be afraid of him.

First, What he is,

1. He is Earth, Where the Psalmist says, what is a man that I should be
afraid of him, the word signifies Earth.

Secondly, It signifies poor sickly sorry men, will any be afraid of earth or
a sick man.

Thirdly, The Scripture calls him a Worm, Job, 25.6. Will any be afraid of a
Worm.

Fourthly, Man is called Clay. Job, 10.9.

Fifthly, Man in scripture is called grass and the flower of the field. Isa.
40.6.

Secondly, Consider what the Scripture says concerning the vanity of man.

1. A man is like to vanity, Psalm. 44.4, 2. He walks in a vain shadow, Psalm.
39, 6. 3. Man is vain himself. Job, 11.11.12. 4. Man is vanity it self. 5.
Altogether vanity. 6. Every man is vanity. 7. In his best estate vanity, And all that you have in Psalm. 39. 8. He is lighter than vanity. Psalm. 62.9,
And if we could look at man as God looks at him we should not be afraid.

Thirdly, For the dwelling of man.

In all his bravery and strong rich palaces it is but as the dwelling of a
moth, and as a booth in Job, 27.18, and as a house of Clay. Job. 4.19.

Fourthly, The pomp of a man.

Put man into the greatest gallantness that can be, that causes some fear in
the hearts of men that are carnal: Now in Acts* 25.23. when Bernice and Agrippa
came to sit in judgment they came with great pomp as Judges use to do to
strike fear into their prisoners: now the word signifies, they come with much
phansy. Faith makes men to judge of things as the Holy Ghost does, and so keeps
them from fearing of them.

Fifthly, The foundation of Man.

It is in the dust, Job. 4.19. and that which has no foundation but the dust,
it has no great strength.

Sixthly, The life of man.

Some times compared to a buble and a vapor; a weavers shuttle, and the wind in
Job, 7.6, 7, he is compared to the Eagle flying in the air, and to the Ship in
the midst of the Sea, and as the days of an Hireling, Job. 7.1. And as a
shadow. Job, 8.9. He is such a poor creature, that the moth crusheth him. Job.
4, 19. Now that which can crush a man must have a great deal of power over him:
And his days are but as a hand breadth. Psalm. 39.5. And his breath is in his
Nostrils. Isa. 2.22. This is to show what little cause there is to fear man.
Now put all these together surely he is not a creature much to be feared: and
here we see what wonderful dishonor God has, when man is feared above God*

But now let us consider him as a wicked man, and then he is less to be feared,
and there we will consider of him in three respects.

Consider, 1. His baseness. 2. What he is in the greatness of his power
opposing the Godly. 3. How near those that are wicked and enemies of Gods
people are unto destruction.


First Consider the baseness of wicked men, we do not fear things that are
base.

1. Wicked men let them be never so glorious in regard of outward things, they
are but as dross and dust. Psalm. 119.118.119.

2. And then their Root (that which should uphold them, and be their power) is
rotten. Isa. 5, 24.

3. They are as Straw trodden down for the dunghill. Isa. 25.10.

4. They are compared to the Froth and Foam of the Sea. Hos. 10.7,

5. His baseness is expressed by being compared to Briars and Thorns. Ezekiel.
2.6.

Why should wicked men be feared that are compared to such base things? Thus
God judges of them, and those that have Faith should judge so of them. But
they have a great deal of power and much strength.

Secondly, Let us therefore consider what God speaks concerning the power of
wicked men.

1. It is all but a Noise Jer. 46.17. Egypt was a great Kingdom, and the King
of Egypt with all his power is but a noise.

2. All their power is but a little small dust Isa. 29.5.

3. In all their power, they are but as a company of beasts, or little children
that have reeds in their hands. Psalm. 68.30. Rebuke the company of Spearmen,
the multitude of the beasts. The word translated Spearmen is rather to be
translated Children that carry Reeds instead of Spears.

4. Their power is Cursed. Psalm. 119.21. Thou have rebuked the proud that are
cursed. When they are in the top of their pride and rage, and they look upon
the Servants of God with scorn and contempt, then they are cursed in their
pride, and strength; and that which has the curse of God upon it, must needs
come to nothing.

5. All their power is as nothing. Isa. 41.11 And if their power be as nothing,
there is no cause to fear their power.

6. They are Less than nothing. Isa. 40.17. Now what can be said more, for the
power of all Nations to be less than nothing. If we have the same Judgment that
the Holy Ghost has cocerning Man, there is no cause of fear of man.

Thirdly, and lastly: Consider what the Scripture says of wicked men, in
regard of their nearness to destruction. They are ready to perish.

1. They are compared to Tow. Isa 1.31. A little spark of fire does presently
blaze up tow.

2. They are like the Crackling of thorns under the Pott. Eccles. 7.6.

3. They are like to Smoke. as Psalm. 68.2. Smoke the sooner it ascends the
sooner it vanishes: so the greater men are in their power, the sooner they
perish.

4. They are compared To wax that melts before the fire, and as the chafe
before the wind, and as stubble. as Job. 21.18.

5. And al Their light is but as a Candle; Solomon says, The candle of the
wicked shall be put out. Prove. 24.20.

6. And they are likewise compared to The tops of the ears of Corn, that one
can nip off with his finger. Job. 24.24.

7. The Psalmist says, God cutteth off the spirit of Princes. Psalm. 76.12. The
word signifies such a cutting off as one with a knife would cut off a bunch of
Grapes.

8. Again they are like The blasted Corn: and not only as grass, but As
Grass on the House top. Isa. 37.27. Wicked men are going to destruction as a
thing rouling before the wind. It is said they are set in Slippery places, and
the Angel of the Lord persecutes them. Psalm. 35.6. If one be set upon the Ice,
and another come to persecute him, he cannot stand long.

9. And they are as a Garment that the moth has eaten. Job. 13.28.

10. And they are compared To the fat of Lambs before the fire. Psalm. 37.20.
And as Snow melting before the Sun.

First consider what man is in himself; and wicked man in his baseness and
power, and how near they are to destruction, and this is a mighty means to
help against fear. Oh! Let us be ashamed, that profess our selves to have
Faith, and yet when we see how the Scripture does judge of men, that we should
be so conscious to our selves of so much fear of wicked men, how they will
Crush us, and we shall never go on in quiet before them, and they are ready to
put us out of our way.

And thus we see wherein the power of Faith lies to help against fear.

There are two things yet behind for the explication of the point.

To show the difference between that boldness of spirit, and audaciousness that
men have that have no Faith, and that Fearelesness that comes by Faith.

As also to show how far we may lawfully avoid danger, without fear of men.

CHAP. 9.
How Audatiousness and boldness of spirit differ from Faith. 1. Audatiousness
make us bold to sin. 2 It appears in Causes that concerns our selves, then
those which concern God. 3. Boldness the curing of one pasion with another,
Faith the curing of passion by Grace. 4. Natural boldness makes men rash, and
henders consultation. 5. The cause of immodisty 6. It is suden and violent. 7.
It proseeds and lives upon outward encouragements. 8. The ishew of ignorance.
9. Or despair. 10. More Outward then Inward.

FAITH helps against fear, but it must be granted that men may be much helped
against fear by a mere audaciousness of spirit.

Quest. But how shall we know the difference.

Answ. Audaciousness of Spirit, though when it proves to be in Gods cause, it
seems to be faith, yet there are many differences.

First, Where it is Audaciousness of spirit, when occasion serves, they will be
bold in Sin against God, as well as bold in that which is good for God: but now
where faith is, though it does make the soul to be bold and fearless for God in
the way of God, yet there are none so afraid of sin: they tremble at the
appearance, or occasion of sin: many that are mightily bold in sin are mightily
afraid when they are in danger, others that are fearless in the way of God,
they have no boldness in the way of sin. Wicked men that have had the basest
spirits of all, have been bold in sin; As Manasseh, how audacious was he in
sin? and when he came into danger how feared he? It is said he was found among
the thorns, 2 Cor. 33.11.

And so Ahaz, what a bold spirit had he in sin? when he came into danger what a
base spirit had he? he was afraid and shook like an aspine leaf. And so it is
reported of Caligula, in Isa. 7.2. That was a bold wretch in sin, yet when he
heard it thunder, he would run into a bench hole.

And some may go so far, as not only to be bold in sin but to be bold in some
danger too, and it may fall out to be in the cause of God, but know, if there be
any boldness in sin, and if you do not fear every sin, al your boldness and
fearlesness in any thing else never comes from faith.

Secondly, Where there is natural audaciousness, then men are especially bold
in causes that concern themselves more than in causes that concern God. When
any business concerns themselves in which they are opposed, they care not for
any one that have more power then them selves, but they are not so in the cause
of God: but others that are truly gracious, that are feareless from their
faith, they are very yeildable and shamefaced in their own cause, in things
that concern themselves, but in things that concern God, there does appear
another spirit, they have a new spirit.

Thirdly, Where the boldness is merely natural, there is a curing of one
passion with another; but the boldness that comes from faith is the curing of
passion with the contrary grace. As thus, where the boldness comes from natural
audaciousness, there is the curing of the passion of fear with the passion of
wrath and anger, they are never fearless and bold, but when their passion of
anger is stirred up: where faith cures the passion of fear, it cures it not by
stirring up another passion, but by Sanctifying of this, and bringing in the
true fear of God into the soul, it does not put out one evil with another, but
puts out an evil with a stream of the contrary good.

Fourthly, Where men are naturally audacious, and bold, usually their boldness
hinders their consultation, they have not command over their spirits, they are
carried on rashly and headily in their boldness: therefore in Isa. 35.4. The
word that is translated fearful, it signifies a rash heart, it is the same
word you have in Isa. 32.4. The heart of the rash shall understand knowledge: to
show that fearfulness does cause rashness where it is immoderate; but where
fear is moderate, and guided right, it makes men to have power to consult of
things and advise of things, and examine of things: but your bold, impudent
people care not, nor consider not what they say, but where fear is rightly
ordered by says, the heart is able to consider and advise best.

Fifthly, Again, Audaciousness when it is natural makes men to forget the
distance that is between one man and another, makes them immodest, care not
what they say to superiors that are above them: but when men are feareless by
faith though they will not be hindered in their way by fear of them, yet they
know how to give due respect to them that are in Superior place, which a
natural Audacious spirit does not.

Sixthly, Again, Natural Audaciousness is sudden, and violent, but a man that
is feareless by faith, does not presently, get up to this boldness of spirit;
but it comes by degrees and several steps, first, more fearful, and then less,
and so by degrees he gets power over that spirit of his which before he found
fearful, but the other is violently up, and does not come by degrees.

Seaventhly, Natural Boldness it is according to outward encouragements, but
the fearlesness that is from faith is by the breathings of Gods spirit upon his
heart; and according to the several breathings of Gods spirit upon their
hearts, so they are more or less fearful: the other boldness being natural it
works always alike, if they have but the same outward encouragements: but Gods
people though they have the same outward encouragements yet they are more
fearless at some times then at other times because they have not the Spirit of
God breathing upon them always alike.

Eighthly, Natural boldness comes from ignorance, and insensibleness, because
people do not know or are not sensible of the danger they are in: but faith
discovers the danger, and makes men sensible of the danger, and then it helps;
it is nothing to be bold when one is not sensible, and does not understand the
danger; but a gracious heart conceives aright of the danger, and is sensible of
it and then faith lifts above sense, and above reason.

Ninthly, Men that are naturally bold, it is through desperateness, because
they have nothing to loose, and care not what become of themselves: but by
faith men are not fearless because they are desperate, but they see help in
God, and in Christ and his mercy, the more they hope, the less they fear, but
the other are desperate and therefore they do not fear.

Tenthly, Where audaciousness is but natural, it appears more outward then it
is inward, but by faith men are less fearful inwardly then it appears
outwardly: faith does more cure fear within, then it is able to express
courage, and boldness without: but your natural audacious people know, though
they speak great words and make proud braggs, yet within their hearts do
tremble; but it is not so where there is true faith: There is an aspersion cast
upon Gods people, because they are forward in Gods cause. They are bold
impudent fellows: and those that are bold and impudent they go away as the men
that have the only courage: now the scope of that I say is to show that Gods
people are not impudently bold, but hold by the grace of God that comes from
his spirit, and is maintained by faith, and others though they be bold in many
things, yet they are far from this excellent spirit that Gods people have.

CHAP. 10.
Shows, How far we may lawfully avoid danger without fear of men. 1. Religion
does not teach men to be foolish or desperate. 2, The care of a Christian ought
to be to do his duty, rather then to avoid danger, which may fall out in his
duty. 3, When God brings his people into danger, he intends more to exercise
their graces, then to try their discretion. 4, Though danger may be avoided,
yet it is more honorable for a Christian to be called to exercise Faith,
Courage, Patience and in a way of suffering, then his prudence in avoiding it
5. Take Care of mistaking discretion, which is not wont to abate the vigor of
Gods Graces, but to improve and increase them. 6. A Christians greatest
endeavor should be to get his will to submit to God.

THe last thing that is to be opened in the explication of the point is this.
Faith helps against the fear of danger and the fear of man.

Object, But some may say that which you have said hitherto may seem to
embolden men to rush into dangers, this is the plea of many that bring
themselves into dangers, and rush upon their ruin, we must not be afraid of
men.

Answer. To that I answer, Religion does not teach men to be foolish or to be
desperate; it is too much boldness for any man to think God should give him
assistance in foolish, desperate, rash ways. It is a speech of Cyprian, God
would rather have us stay to manifest our faith, til we are called by him, and
see him go before us, then that we should go upon our own heads. Faith as it
has the word evermore for its ground and bottom, in that great act of it,
interesting the soul in the Covevenant of Grace; so it has the word for the
ground of it in every action it puts the soul upon. We have a notable text for
this in Prove. 10.8. The wise in heart will receive Commandments: but a prating
fool shall. fall. the wise in heart, those that are truly gracious receive
commandments: before they rush into danger, they will stay for the
commandment, for the word: but a prating fool shall fall, one that will boldly
venture himself in danger, in speaking before he is called unto it, he shall fall
in it, he must not expect the assistance of God in it.

Quest. But if we must not fear man, may we not flee from danger? may we not
labor to deliver our selves from it when it comes? we must not rush into danger
but suppose we see danger before us, may we not flee from it, and avoid it
before it comes? if we must not fear the creature, must we deliver our selves
from it?

Answ. First I shall give some general answers unto it, and then I will come
more closely to answer to that case of conscience concerning fleeing from
danger.

For a general answer unto this, consider these five things.

Your question is, whether a Christian may not flee danger?

I answer, First, That the greatest care of a Christian ought to be to do his
duty, rather then to avoid danger that may fall out in his duty: we should be
more afraid of our own base, earthly, cowardly, unbeleeving hearts then we
should be afraid of any evil that the malice and power of all the men in the
world, and Devils in hell can being upon us: No Christian is in so much danger
of evil from the malice and power of all the men in the world and Devils in
hell, as he is in danger of mischief from his own heart, and that man that does
not fear himself and his own vile heart, more then he does all the power and
malice of the men of the world and the Devils in Hell, he does not yet know his
heart: It is a greater judgment to be delivered up to a man's own heart: then to
be delivered up to the malice of all the enemies we have in the world; yea, it
is a greater judgment to be delivered up to ones own heart, then to be
delivered up to the Devil himself.

Those that are so sollicitous to deliver themselves from the danger and evil
of the power of men, let them first labor that the strength of their
Sollicitousness be to deliver themselves from the danger and evil of their own
hearts.

Secondly, You ask this question whether you may not flee danger? I answer,
when God does so dispose of things, as to bring his people into danger, usually
God intends more to exercise faith and courage, and patience, then to exercise
discretion, though it call for both? and that which is Gods usual chief intent,
should be our chief care; when as the care of most Christians in the time of
Danger, is more to exercise their discretion for their safety. Then to exercise
faith, courage, and patience that God calls most for.

Thirdly, Grant that the danger may be avoided, yet a Christian should count it
a more honorable thing to be called to exercise faith, courage, and patience in
a way of suffering, then to be called forth to exercise his discretion in
avoiding of suffering. Indeed God does not call at all times to that which is
the most honorable service, yet a Christian should account that more honorable,
and not bless himself that his condition is better then others, because God
calls others to suffer, and there gives them an opportunity to exercise faith,
and courage and patience, and that he gives him liberty to avoid suffering,
wherein he gives me an opportunity to exercise my discretion, and wisdom; I am
to count them the most honorable Christians that do suffer.

Fourthly, When God does call for the exercise of discretion in avoiding
suffering, there must be a great care in Christians, not to mistake their
discretion, to think that the work of Christian wisdom, and discretion, is to
abate the vigor, and activity and strength of any grace of Gods spirit: But the
work of it does consist in the managing, improving, and increasing of all the
graces of Gods spirit. There is a great mistake in the world about this, many
think they must be zealous. But there must be discretion exercised: what do
they count discretion? that which does something take off the activity, and
vigor of grace; but there is not one grace is so an enemy to another, as to
abate in any degree the vigor and activity of any grace whatsoever, but the
work of discretion is to manage and improve our faith, and courage, and
patience, and all other graces well for the glory of God, and the good of his
people, this is discretion; but if you account that discretion which abates the
vigor and activity of grace, though you put that glorious name of discretion
upon it, God calls it by other names, by cowardliness, self-seeking, and
temporizing, and what will become of those?

Fifthly, You ask whether you may avoid danger, and suffering? The chief way
that a Christian should use in avoiding of danger should be in this; namely, in
Laboring to get his heart to be willing to submit to God in a way of suffering
to be willing to endure suffering when he calls to it. As it is the best way to
obtain a mercy from God, to get our hearts to be willing to be without it, if
God shall see it sit, so it is the best way to avoid danger and evil, to get our
hearts willing to suffer that evil if God shall call to it. These things being
premised, there may be liberty to avoid danger.

CHAP II.
Contains a further Resolution of the former Case in nine particulars. 1. God
does give leave to his people to fly, and avoid Danger. 2. Such avoiding of
Danger (if rightly qualified) argues neither distrust of God, nor defect of
Courage. 3. In some cases, Christians not only permitted, but commanded to
flee. as, 1. When no extraordinary thing depends upon him in that station in
which God has set him. 2. When the hand of God loses those relations, which
would otherwise be obligations to him. 3. When God gives him an opportunity
else where, to bring greater revenues of glory to him. 4. When a Christian is
doubtful about his call to suffer at the present. 4. There are some cases
wherein it is utterly unlawful to flee, viz. The contrary to those above named
5. Mistakes in flying* as, 1. To flee upon every slight and trivial thing. 2.
When it tends to their spiritual disadvantage. 3. When having secretly denied
the Faith, Men flee to prevent the shame of Apostacy. 4. When they look at
their own safety alone, without care to fit themselves for further service of
God. 5. How to know when avoiding dangers proceeds from Faith, or Cowardice, 1.
That which is by Faith is not in a Violent, Rash, Heady manner. 2* When it
proceeds from Faith, it is joined with a resolution to return and bear witness
to the truth, when God calls. 3. When we use the liberty we have to get hearts
to return. 7. The case of public Officers, Magistrates, Ministers, especially
the latter.

BUT yet for the more close and full answer to this case of Conscience, whether
a man may flee from danger yea or no, I shall express my self in these eight or
nine several particulars.

1. We shall lay this for a conclusion that God does give his people leave to
avoid danger.

2. That if it be done as it ought, it is no argument of distrusting of God, or
want of courage, and magnanimity.

3. In some cases, some not only may, but are bound and ought to flee.

4. Some in some cases, must not avoid danger, and must not flee from it.

5. I will show you some mistakes that may be in the fleeing of danger.

6. I will show you whether that avoiding of danger comes from faith or base
fear.

7. I will show how far public officers may avoid danger, especially the case
of a minister.

8. I will answer to some objections that may be made against the avoiding of
danger.

9. I will give you some directions for the behaving and carrying of our selves
in fleeing and avoiding of danger.

For the first, God does give leave to his people to flee and to avoid danger
(that in the general must be laid as a certain conclusion) you know that of
Christ in Math. 10.23. When they persecute you in this City, flee into another.
There is leave given and injunction too. It is that which is according to the
light of nature, and religion does not extinguish the light of nature though it
shows somewhat above it, and except there come in some other command above
nature, we may follow the light of nature, if we do not mistake a false light
for a true.

And further we find it by plentiful example of Gods people, yea Christ himself
avoided danger, and fled from it, and therefore he gives leave to it. As Elijas
was a man of spirit enough, and yet in 1 Kings, 19.3. He fled for his life. and
those Prophets that Obadiah hid were willing to avoid danger, as in 1 Kings,
18.4. And the example of Christ himself presently after he was born, when Herod
slew all the children of two years old and under, then there came a commission
from God unto Joseph to flee with Christ into Egypt. Afterward when Christ
came to years, when he saw himself to be in danger, he avoided it. Diverse texts
we have for that in Math. 12.14.15. John, 10.39. And so Saint Paul. in Acts.
9.25. Presently after God had miraculously and wonderfully appeared unto Paul
yet notwithstanding when he knew the Jews laid wait for him to kill him, the
disciples let him out by the wall in a basket in 2 Cor. 11.33. it was a
contemptible way of fleeing of danger, and yet notwithstanding that glorious
word of God, that he was a chosen vessel to bear his name before the Gentiles,
in Acts, 9.15. he was content to avoid danger in that contemptible way. The
case is clear, that it may be done.

Secondly, But you will say, though it may be done, it seems to be some
abatement to faith, and courage. No, the avoiding of danger when it is in the
way of God must not be counted the least abating of faith and courage; and for
that I will give you two texts of scripture that are very remarkable for that
purpose, In Math. 10.23. Where Christ says, when they persecute you in one city
flee into another: The next thing that he says is fear not them. verse. 26. and
again, fear not them that kill the body, verse 28. Here seems to be a cross
thing: they might say blessed Savior, do not thou bid us flee? How can we
flee and not fear? this shows there may be fleeing from danger, that may not
come from the least degree of cowardlyness and fear of man and there may be
fleeing from danger, and yet no abatement of faith and confidence. As in Psalm.
3. The title of the Psalm you have thus. A Psalm of David, when he fled from
Absalom his Son, When David saw himself in danger of Absalom, he does not
venture boldly upon it, and say God has established me in my kingdom, and made
me many promises to uphold me why should I flee? he did flee, but was it not an
abatement of his faith and confidence in God? no, at verse. 3 But thou O Lord
art a shield for me, my glory and the lifter up of my head: To show there may
be fleeing and yet confidence in God as our shield, and glory, and lifter up of
our head and at verse 5. I laid me down and slept, I awaked for the Lord
sustained me, he Fled, but he was quiet for all that in verse. 6. I will not be
afraid of ten thousand of people that have set themselves against me round
about. He Fled from his Son and yet said he would not be afraid of ten
thousands of people. in verse, 7. Arise O Lord, save me O God for thou have
smitten all my enemies upon the cheek bone, thou have broken the teeth of the
ungodly. His faith was so confident as it made him to think that which was to
be done as done already and yet he penned this psalm in a Fleeing condition. So
that the second thing is appearent,

Thirdly, In some cases a man not only may but must Flee, he has not only a
permission but a command. when they persecute you in this city flee into
another.

Quest. What cases are those?

Answ. First If the case be such as no extraordinary thing depends upon me in
that station that God has set me: There is no station but has something
depends upon it, therefore if we should say they may not Flee, but when the
case is that nothing depends upon it, then none should Flee: but where there is
nothing extraordinary depends upon it.

Secondly, When I feel the hand of God loose my relations which are otherwise
ties to me.

Thirdly, when God in the way of his providence does open a door to me else
where, where I may honor him (may be) honor him more.

Fourthly, When I find my heart doubtful about my call to suffer for the
present: after much seeking of God and much examination of things, yet with a
heart desirous to submit to God when the case is such no question there is a
bond to Fleeing, and it will be a sin against God, and tempting of God not to do
it.

Fourthly, There are some cases we must not Flee in If you ask what they are?
It is breifely answered, the contrary to the other; when as God has set me in
such a place as some special thing depends upon me; or if I be convinced in my
conscience (being willing to be convinced) that the cause of God, and people of
God shall have more prejudice and hurt by my fleeing then by my staying.

It is an expression of Augustine in his Epistle to Honoratus about this
argument: When any by fleeing shall do more hurt then he is able to requite by
any work in all his life (as the case is so sometimes) then he is bound to
venture himself and not to flee. And it does depend much upon a man's own
conscience, and the judgment of others to know this: a man would be willing to
favor himself in such a case, but let him be sure he deal uprightly with God
and his own soul, and not go only upon his own judgment, but take the judgment
of others, and then if conscience shall give him this dictate, his life cannot
recompense that hurt he shall do by Fleeing, he is to stay, when he shall see the
cause of God shall suffer much in it, and God comes in by some especial
assistance helping of him, in a more then ordinary way; he may take it as an
item from God, that God has a special work for him to do. And this was the
case of Daniel. He saw the cause of God lay upon that work, and it would suffer
if he should baulk his way, and God did come in with especial assistance, and
strength to him, and rather then the cause of God should suffer, he would put
himself upon that danger: men according to natural discretion would think he
might have spared the opening of his window, but his conscience was convinced
that his life was not of so much use as his witnessing to the cause of God at
that time: and especially if we be in such a way, as we find God hemming of us
in, and knocking off those things that may further our fleeing, that we cannot
flee but we must do something against conscience and do something that is evil;
you are to know that God does call you rather to suffer, and to venture upon him
in such a case.

Fifthly, Those that flee to avoid danger if they take not heed, there may be
many miscarriages in their fleeing, whereby they may much sin against God, and
dishonor their cause. As

1. To flee upon every slight thing, that does not beseem a Christian, it
should be something of weight that should cause him to leave his station: for
there is no man or woman in any Station, but God set them in that station, and
therefore without the command of God we may not stir: We are all as Soldiers,
and God has put us into our ranks, as a Captain sets his Soldiers in their
ranks, now a Soldier dare not presume to Go out of his rank without a
commission: whatsoever pretense he has, though it be to do much good for his
country: so we must have a Commission from God, and not flee upon every slight
thing.

2. Many in their fleeing flee much to their spiritual disadvantage: as they
will flee for fear of suffering loss in their estates, and outward liberties,
and care not whither they flee to further themselves in their spiritual course:
though (may be) they might with some loss of their estates have more spiritual
advantage then in the place whither they flee, yet they will rather flee then
loose some of their estates, this is a miscarriage. Indeed if this be the care
of a man when he flees, to flee where he may have most spiritual advantage, not
outward trading, but God in his ordinances, he may have comfort in it* but if
men flee into places where they have no spiritual advantage, but only for
trading this is a miscarriage.

3. When secretly they have denied the truth beforehand not only fear what they
may do but their hearts tells them if they be called to suffer they cannot
stand out, and they flee only to prevent the shame of their apostasy; they
cannot tell how to look upon the faces of their acquaintance that shall know
they are Apostates, this is a miscarriage.

Tertullian has a whole treatise upon this concerning fleeing in persecution,
and I know no man that ever denied it might not be, but only he; he would not
have any flee in any danger for the case of religion; and he brings in many
arguments, but they are not such, but an ordinary understanding Christian may
answer, but this is one thing amongst the rest, says he, When you flee either
you find in your hearts you shall deny the truth of God, or you have done it,
or you know not whether you shall or no if you find in your hearts you shall deny
the truth you have done it already: but if you know not whether you shall or no
says he, it is in your own power or in Gods power to uphold you; if it be in
your own power, why should you not rather think you should stand for the truth
of God; if it be in Gods power, why do you not depend upon God: But I bring
this to show, that if you already think you cannot stand for the truth you have
declined already.

4. A fourth miscarriage is this, when people in their fleeing look at their
own safety, but do not take care to fit themselves for further future service
for God, or for suffering afterward, if God shall at any other time call them to
it, never minding to make their chamber of hiding to be a place of provision
for suffering afterward when God shall call to it.

5. Know a man may flee out of cowardlyness, and a man may flee out of faith.
Moses by faith forsook Egypt.

Quest. But how shall a man know when he flees, that it is of faith and not of
cowardliness.

Answ. First, That which is by faith it is not in a violent, rash, and heady
way, in the hurrying and confusion of a man's spirit; in his Flight he does not
run as one scared by common fire, or by the enemies coming upon them; no, but
his Fleeing to avoid danger being from faith, it is in a quiet setledness of
spirit, and for that take these two scriptures. The first, is that which before
was named in Psalm. 3.5. I laid me down and slept. He did not Flee as a man
agasted, but he was in the way that God opened to him, and his spirit was very
quiet, he laid him down and slept. And again that which is observed by one in 1
Kings, 19.8. Concerning Elijah, Fleeing, he arose and went, he did not run
eagerly, but he went on in the strength of that meat in the way that God would
have him: the phrase denotes a quietness and sedateness of spirit: so those
that Flee by faith do it with much quietness of spirit, being contented with
the hand of God, and not with bitterness and vexation of spirit, as many will
do, because conscience will urge them they must Flee or suffer, and they dare
not go against the dictate of Conscience, but will Flee, but they will do it
with abundance of bitterness of spirit: A man thinks with himself There was a
time I lived, and had al outward accommodations, a house and estate, and
trading, and means coming in, and all my friends about me, what a comfortable
condition is this, and now I must break off all, and go into a strange land,
among strange people, and I know not what shall become of me: this is far from
that contentedness of spirit, that should be in leaving al for the cause of
God: whereas Christians should not only go on in a way of contentedness, but
with joyfulness, because Fleeing is suffering.

2. Again where Fleeing is a work of faith, such a man or woman that Flees from
danger, will Flee with such a disposition of spirit, as he is willing to return
again to witness for Gods truth, if God calls him; though now he does not see
his call clear: Chrysostom speaking upon this text of Moses Fleeing: seems to
take it for his first Fleeing when he had slain the Egyptian, and when it came
to be known, he Fled from Egypt: but (says he) the scripture says Moses was
afraid, and here it says, he was not afraid, to that he answers thus. The
Scripture says he was afraid, but now it is not attributed to fear, because
though when he was afraid, yet he had a heart willing to return when God
should call him, he did fear because he did not see his call clear; yet he
went away with such a disposition of heart, willing to witness in Gods cause,
when he called him to it, therefore the Scripture says, he was not afraid.

3. It is an argument I Flee out of Faith, when I do but make that receptacle a
chamber to fit me for suffering, and make use of all the liberty I have, to get
such a heart to return when God shall call; this is a Fleeing that is rather to
be attributed to faith then to fear.

Seventhly, For the case of those that are in public office in Magistracy and
Ministry, great care is to be had in their Fleeing; they above al men should
most venture themselves; yet in some cases, Magistrates and Ministers may Flee
and avoid danger. As the people would not suffer in 2 Samuel 21.17. David to go
out to war Least the light of Israel should be put out.

It is a notable expression Augustine has upon that in his epistle to Honorius
says he, he would have gone, he would not of himself have abstained from the
danger least others should have been imitators of his sluggishness, but it was
their work to keep him from it. But now to speak especially of the case of a
Minister, whose tie is most to stand out against danger in dangerous times he
is not very readily to Flee, especially when the persecution is general, and
Saint Augustine has notable expressions about this in his epistle that he writ
to Honorius in answer to this question, being against it. He that is weak shall
perish by that knowledge, says the Apostle in Cor. 1. S. 11. no, he that is
weak, shall perish by thy ignorance rather. Again says he, There is more cause
to fear that the living Stones of Christ's building should be demolished, we
fleeing, then that the stones of the buildings of our earthly houses should be
set on fire, we being present.

Again says he, Let us rather fear that the members of the body of Christ
being destitute of their spiritual food should be hurt, then that the members
of our bodies by the violence of our enemies should be tormented, and never so
afflicted.

But if it be so, then consider this.

First, You that are the people, you must not lightly forsake a Minister
neither; if Ministers are so tied to you in time of danger, as they must
venture themselves for your good, surely people are not at liberty to depart
from their Ministers, for the tie is a mutual tie. You will say, there is a
difference between the Minister and another member: it is true, in regard of
use, but if you come to the tie, the tie of another member is as real and
strong, as the tie of a minister: As in the body the eye is of more use then
the hand, yet sometimes the hand may preserve life more then the eye, and though
it be of more use, the hand is as strongly and as truly tied to the body as the
eye; yea take all the members conjunctive, and there is a greater tie upon them
to their Minister, then upon their Minister to them: the Minister is tied to
the whole directly, and they are tied to him by being tied to one another: and
if there be liberty for one member of a Church to depart when he will, then
there is liberty for another, and so for all, and if liberty for them to
depart, then there is liberty for the Minister too: many cry out of the
Minister if he leave his people when he list, there is as much cause for a
Minister to cry out of his people if they leave him when they list.

Secondly, If there be such a tie upon a Minister to venture thus for his
people, he had need look to his call: and the especial cause why in other
places, and we our selves when we were elsewhere, were so ready to fear, and
Flee upon every occasion, was because there did remain some kind of fear and
suspicion of our call.

Thirdly, If there be such a tie upon a Minister to his people, his people had
need labor what possibly they can to encourage their Minister, there need be
strong union in their spirits, and they should take heed of catching of this
body, and that body, or that melancholy suspicions be cast to hinder the least
union, that if time of danger come, they may freely and cheerfully venture
themselves amongst them: we know not what things God may call us to, the way
that we walk in, and desire to walk in, is that which the world and the Devil
hate, and though through Gods providence we have a breathing time, yet if we
resolve to walk in this way whatsoever befall, we may meet with much before we
die; and as we are bound to venture all that we are or have for you; so all that
you are or have should be bound to us.

But in some cases a Minister may be so afraid as to Flee, and yet not to sin;
as the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles did Flee in the time of danger. A
minister may Flee, if the persecution be personal, and not general, and so as
his people be provided for otherwise by others, and so as he may be more useful
to his people being absent, then he could have done being present, and if he
Flee being willing to return again, when God shall show him his way, and if
people break their relations; when things fall thus, then certainly he may Flee.
In that Epistle of Augustine to Honorius, he instanced in Athanasius, and
justifies his Fleeing; because the Emperor was incensed, and enraged against
his person and he was willing to return when God should give occasion. I might
instance in all these, but I will only instance in that if they Flee being
willing to return as God gives occasion.

As Saint Paul and Barnabas in Acts, 14. if you compare it with that in Chap.
13. They Fled two or three times from several places, and yet when there was
respite they returned again to the very same places from whence they Fled, In
Chap. 13.14. They came to Antioch, there the Jews stirred up the devout and
honorable Women, and the chief men of the City, and raised persecution against
them, and expelled them out of their coasts: being persecuted, from thence they
came to Iconium, where they sped as before in Chap. 14.5. From thence they went
to Lystria at the beginning of the verse where at first they thought them as
Gods, but afterward so malicious were those of Antioch, and Iconium that when
they heard they were at Lystria, they came to persecute them there: so in all
these three places they were persecuted even to death. Yet at verse 21. they
returned again to those three places: thus you see the practice of the
Apostles, But if the relation be broke between minister and people, then they
may depart.

In the time of persecution the case is more difficult, it is not so difficult
for a Minister to leave his people in regard of sickness and weakness of body,
as in the time of persecution: and he is more bound to stay with them in the
time of persecution; then in the time of sickness. Christ says the hireling
when the Wolf comes he Flies from the Sheep: A true Shepherd undertakes to
venture his life against the Wolf; and for him to avoid that danger he
undertakes, that must needs be unfaithfulness, Jacob was content to watch his
Sheep in the night, in the frost and cold, as well as in the day, and in summer
time The scripture does not say if a Lion come he is a hireling that shall Fly
away; if the danger be such, as nothing but a miracle can preserve him, and his
life may be more useful to the Church in another place, then to lay it down
there, then he is not as an hireling, but as a wise Shepherd may avoid danger.

CHAP. 12.
Containing the eighth particular, to wit, Answering some objections made
against flying. ob. 1. Men may not leave their country. Answ. in two
particulars. ob. 2. Should none stay to suffer. Ans. ob. 3. God Alsufficient to
help in greatest dangers. Ans. ob 4. Fleeing a ceasing to give testimony to the
truth of God. Ans. ob. 5. Many of Gods servants had power to fly, and did not.
Ans. ob. 6. What shall become of those left behind, if they are forsaken by men
of ability. Ans. ob. 7. If men would master their fears, and stay a while, the
cloud would blow over. Ans. Ninth parcular. Directions for ordering our selves
when we do fly. 1. Leave as little guilt behind in the place as you can. 2.
Carry your selves so that the name of God may not suffer in the place to which
you flee. 3. Behave your selves as exiled people, as men mortified to the
things of the world. 4. Get a contented frame of heart. 5. When you are
delivered keep your selves in the fervency of your spirits. 6. Let those from
whom you flee have your prayers.

AND now I come to the Eighth particular to answer some objections that may be
made against this

Object, 1. It may be said men may not leave their country.

Answer, We know a man's country may be left on many occasions as for
merchandising, to get estates to maintain their families, so Ruth and Abraham
and his Sonns did: For learning as the Queen of Sheba did; surely then for
Religion: It is true if we see any opportunity of setting up Relgion in our own
Country, we are bound to set it up there rather then any where else, but if
not we may leave our country, as the Eunuch traveled and left his country to
come to Jerusalem for Religions sake. Besides;

God has a great work of providence in scattering his people, and had it not
been for persecution it is not like, the word of God should have been spread
abroad in diverse countries.

Objection, 2, But should none stay to suffer.

Answer, For this we are to know that fleeing is a suffering; and if it be
examined to the bottom, many plead with others to stay to suffer, and the
bottom is because they are loath to suffer so much presently, as the departing
from their country, and shops, and estates is. Peter Martyr in a treatise of
his about fleeing from persecution, gives a notable answer to those people, and
has a pretty expression to set out the temper and humor of those people. It
is like to many that are diseased, and the disease is such, as there must be
the cutting off of a Limb, or the enduring some great extremity to cure it,
one that is delicate and loath to endure hardship; if he can but get any one to
plead his cause that this is not the way to cure this disease to put the
patient to such pain, it may be cured by more gentle means, and it were better
for to venture with more gentle means then to cut off a Limb, now some through
their loathness to endure some present certain pain will venture to have it
cured with more gentle means, though at length it cost them their lives. So
some because they are loath to endure so much certain present trouble as to
part from their Countries and Estates, they rather venture with more gentle
means, when as many times they grow to deny the truth, and to defile their
consciences with superstitious things, and shamefully to subject them unto
others.

But why do not they stay to suffer; may be their time is not come (as Christ
says in another case) if they had seen their time come they should have been
as willing to stay as others,

Again, if they should stay they should show themselves unthankful for the
providence of God in opening to them a door, to enjoy the ordinances
otherwhere.

Again they dare not stay because they should tempt God, and trust in their
own strength: if they should stay and have not Gods call, they could not expect
Gods strength, and they know their own weakness.

Objection, 3. But is not God Alsufficient and able to help in the greatest
dangers.

Answ. 1. Certainly if it were compared who trusts in Gods power most, I
believe it may be found that those that do fly to avoid danger have more
exercise of their faith in trusting in Gods power then many that stay and plead
in that manner, as if so be we had not much need of the power of God for to
support us and releeve us, and the trusting in Gods power for that, is as much
as an ordinary, Yea, a strong faith is able to do.

2. Again we must take heed of stretching Gods power to work according to our
minds, God has power enough for the releife of his people, and he will put it
forth for the defense of his people, but if we will think to bring Gods power,
to work for our wills, it is not believing but presumption: if God will put
forth his power in the upholding that way that he is in: Who art thou man or
Woman, to think God should put forth his power in the upholding thy way?

Besides God will put forth his power in the use of means.

Object. 4. But then we leave to give Testimony to the truth, and is not the
giving Testimony to the truth of God more worth than our estates?

Answ. 1. Fleeing is giving witness, and those that plead against it are loath
to give so much witness, for a man to leave his estate and Country for a truth
is not that witness?

2. Besides being absent they may by their writing, or by their practice give
witness, and they may be reserved to give witness further.

Object. 5. But many of Gods dear servants (as the Martyrs) had power to fly,
and they would not.

Answ. 1. To that I answer first, may be there were many engagements upon them,
God did not loose all the ties they had.

2. Besides, secondly, much does depend on circumstances which a Christian that
is faithful by compareing one thing with another may see in which most of Gods
glory is.

3. It may be they felt some extraordinary work of Gods spirit in them, in away
of assistance, and comfort, and emboldning of them, so as their example cannot
be drawn into a general rule.

Object, 6. But what shall become of those that are left behind, if others that
have abilities forsake them?

Answ. 1. To that I answer first by the example of those that fly, what to do
if God open a door, But if it be said they cannot Flee, To those I answer.

2. Secondly, though they cannot Fly they may be confirmed in a truth by
others, that do depart and are willing to suffer so much for the truth in their
departures, and that more perhaps than they would have been by many
exhortations.

3. And Lastly, I answer, if God shut the door against them that they cannot
fly, and open the doors to others though their parts and graces be weak; if
they be faithful they may comfortably expect, that God will provide for them and
come in with more blessings and more assistance, than those that have strong
parts and strong graces could have expected, if they had not taken the way that
God opened for them.

Object. 7. But if men would stay a while the clouds may blow over, but they
are fearful and cannot stay.

Answ. To that I answer, we should be glad of that, that those that abide may
enjoy so much as we do, and bless God for it, and shall not enjoy them at all,
but though this should be, yet it is not enjoyed for the present. And if it be
the enjoyment of the ordinances one year we should account it more than should
countervail the loss of our estates all our lives. And thus we have finished
the eight particular in answering this case of conscience, but that we may
further direct christians in this, there are diverse notes for the ordering of
our selves when we do Fly. When we are put into fear by man, and caused to
Fly, we must show it as a work of faith; and therefore let us learn so to
order our selves in our Fleeing, and when we are Fled from danger as it may
appear it was a work of Faith: as,

2. When any are put to Flee danger, let them be careful they leave as little
guilt behind them in that place they Flee from as possibly they can, let them
labor to purge out the guilt they brought on that place as much as they can,
for there are none, that have not only brought guilt upon their own
consciences, but upon the place where they lived, and consider whether that
were your care to remove the guilt from the place, and if it were not our care,
now we are gone, let us mourn for our sins, so as they may not bring judgment
upon the place.

Again, in the place into which we are Fled let us labor so to carry our selves
as the name of God may not suffer among us, that they should have occasion to
say, these are the men that Flee for religion, do they live as such? but let us
labor so to walk as they may say, these people that make conscience of their
ways, surely they did come for conscience sake; Their ways are according to
that they profess. We have a notable expression of some that came from another
country for religion, and yet walked so offensively, as the name of God
suffered much by them that the heathen said, These are the people of the Lord
and are gone forth out of his land, Ezekiel. 36.20. we dare not say we are
among heathens, but when they were among heathens they profaned my holy name
says God: and so many Fleeing from their own Country, profane the name of God
in another Country, that give occasion to the people among whom they are Fled
to say, look here are some that are gone from their own Land, that profess
themselves to be the people of the Lord, and to Flee for religion, look what
kind of people they are; thus Gods name is profaned, let us take heed that we
give no such occasion to the people with whom we live to say, these are the
people of the Lord that are Fled for religion.

3. We should be careful to behave our selves, as those that are Fled for
religion, as exiled people, to be mortified to the things of the world, and to
be content with any condition that God shall call us unto, shall we repine when we
meet with any trouble? that were an argument we had too too delicate spirits
when we Flee from great danger and yet think we should meet with no trouble at
all.

4. When we are Fled, we should labor to get our spirits into a contented
frame, and walk in subjection unto God, and give God praise, as if we were in
the greatest prosperity that we could have been in, in our own Country; we
should not have our hearts dulled with any inconveniency but keep up our
spirits free in the service of God; It is a notable expression we have of David
if you compare two Psalms together, Psalm. 57. with the 108. and the 57. Psalm.
was when he Fled from Saul, and was in the care, but mark how David's spirit was
kept up, he was not dulled and stupefied as many are, that come from delicate
houses and are feign to live in Sellars and blind holes, their hearts begin to
rise, Oh! the fresh air, and brave living that once they had: David was so,
and yet his heart was kept up; In the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge,
a poor dark hole he was in, and he counted that dark hole the shadow of Gods
wings, again I will cry to God most high, though I be brought low and mean I
have an interest in this high God, and will cry to that high God, unto God that
performs al things. Had God performed al things for David? God promised David
the kingdom, and David is brought into a poor hole to shift for his life, and
yet David says he will cry unto God that performs all things for him: He shall
send from Heaven, and save me, though I be in this blind place, the God of
heaven regards me, and shall send from heaven to save me, verse, 5. Be thou
exalted above the heavens, let thy glory be above all the earths, verse. 7. My
heart is fixed O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise: all this
was when he was in the Cave, if you compare this with Psalm. 108. which was a
Psalm of thanksgiving, and rejoicing that he made upon his deliverance, and the
same expression that David had within the cave, the same expressions he had
when God had fulfilled his promises, and he was Blessing his name for his great
deliverance: noting thus much, look what temper of heart we should have in the
enjoyment of the greatest mercies, we should labor to have that temper of heart
in our submissions unto God when we are Fled from danger.

5. Again, let it be our care when we are delivered from the danger that we
apprehended our selves to be in, to keep our selves in the fervency of our
hearts, and spirits for God, and in the fervency of our love unto God and his
truth as we had in danger. Many when they are in danger of their enemies and
afraid of them, their hearts are in a great deal of fervency, and zeal for God,
and his truth; and if they can get a few together to fast and pray or hear a
Sermon repeated, how do they rejoice; but when they are in safety their hearts
are dead and Flat, and if they meet together to pray or to commune about the
word, their spirits are not so fervent as before, the Lord keep this from us.

6. Again, let us labor to do all the good we can to the place which we are Fled
from, by our prayers, or any other way we can; as the people of God, when they
were from their own country; yet they would remember Jerusalem: so ought we to
do, for we are much bound to God for it, in regard of the good we have received
in it.

7. Lastly, let us labor to make that hiding place that God provides for us to
deliver us from danger, to be but a preparing place for greater danger: let us
not think because we have avoided some danger and are in some safety, that al
is well, but this should be our care that those places that are our hiding
places to hide us from some danger, should be our preparing places for greater
dangers afterward, and thus using these directions we shall honor God in our
Fleeing, and shall not have cause to repent us. And thus we have done with that
argument, the answering the case of conscience about Fleeing.

CHAP. 13.
How the Heart may be taken off from the fear of man. First, it is against the
solemn charge of God. Secondly, It is an Idolizing of the Creature. Thirdly, It
becomes not the State and Spirit and profession of a Christian. Fourthly, It
dishonors God, and the Cause of God. Fifthly, It mightily heartens the enemies
of Gods people. Sixthly, It is threatened as a great judgment of God upon a
people, Seventhly, The evil effects of the sinful fear of man. 1. It distracts
our thoughts. 2. Weakens the heart. 3. Eats out the true fear of God. 4. It
indisposeth us to any service. 5. Insnares a Christian. 6. It causes other
desperate fears. 7. Procures the judgment of God in our destruction.

A Word of Exhortation, How the heart may be taken off from the fear of man.

There are two things that yet remain in this point, namely, to labor to take
off the heart from the fear of man, or any danger, by showing the evil that
there is in the sinful fearing of man, or of any danger that may befall us:
Secondly, by laying down some means to bring off the heart from creature fear.

First, A Christian must take heed of sinful fear of man, and not to fear any
creature in an inordinate sinful way, for there is much evil in it, more than
we are aware of.

1. In the First place, It is that which is against so many solemn charges of
God, whereby he charges his people against this to take heed of it as a thing
that would be exceeding displeasing in his eyes, I scarce know any thing in
scripture that God does in a more solemn way charge his people to take heed of,
then this; as that place In Deuteronomy. 20.3. Mark what several words God has, let
not your hearts faint, fear not; do not tremble, neither be terrified, and so
in Isa. 41.13.14. Fear not, I will help thee, fear not thou worm Jacob: though
thou think thy self a worm fear not, and so he goes on in that chapter
useing many arguments, and giving many cavaets against fear. So in Matthew. 10.
in a few verses you have two or three several expressions against fear, verse.
26. Fear them not therefore, in verse. 28. Fear not them that kill the body: and
in verse. 31. Fear ye not therefore: this shows our natures are subject to
sinful fear, we are dull enough to the true fear of God, but to the fear of man
our natures are exceeding prone: now that which is against so many solemn
charges of God, that must needs be a very great evil.

Secondly, The fear of man, and of the creature, is an Idolizing the creature,
giving that to the creature which is due to God; and as we set up the creature
in the place of God, by loving it, desiring it, trusting in it, and rejoicing
in it, in an inordinate way; so by fearing it, yea fearing of it in a sinful
way inordinately, not in subordination to God, is an Idolizing the creature in
a special manner, because the affection of fear is a mighty powerful affection,
and darws the Heart mightily after it; and therefore God gives great charge
that he himself should only be feared in Isaiah, 8.13. Sanctify the Lord of
Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. So that to
fear the creature sinfully, is contrary to the sanctifying of Gods name, and
against the special worship that God challenges to himself, and therefore in
verse. 12. He would take off their hearts from the fear of man, and the fear of
the creature. Say ye not a confederacy, to al them to whom this people shall say
a confederacy, neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. The fear of God is
put for the whole worship of God, for one to say I fear the Lord, and worship
the Lord, is all one: They are taught my fear by the precepts of men, they are
taught my worship: Isaac was said to fear the name of God because the special
worship that Isaac tendered to God was the fear of his name, and if the fear of
Gods name be such a special part of Gods worship, for this to be Given to the
creature not in a way of subordination to God, that is a great evil.

Thirdly, In the third place it is that which is exceeding unbeseeming the
estate, and spirit, and profession of a Christian.

1. It is unbeseeming the Estate of a Christian. What is the estate of a
Christian? It is a raised estate, higher than the estate of the world, but this
makes their estates low, for it subjects them to the Iusts and humors of men,
we need not fear what man can do when he walks not by the rule, and when he
abuses his power, it is his lust, and when we fear sinfully we subject our
selves to the lusts of men, and it is against the raised estate of a Christian
to subject himself to the lust of any man in the world, we must be subject unto
the power of man according to Gods rule, but be subject unto the lusts of no
man though it were the greatest Monarch in the world. The estate of a Christian
is a rich and established estate, but this fear makes it uncertain, as if he
had nothing to rest upon; The estate of a Christian has many priveledges; but
this makes it seem as if there were no good to make up the least evil. The
estate of a Christian is such as all the attributes of God work for it, the
power, and wisdom, and mercy, and truth of God: But this sinful fear shows as
if we had nothing to help us in our straights and distresses. The estate of a
Christian is such as must make account of a great deal of trouble in his way,
but this sinful fear shows as if we promised to our selves nothing but ease and
contentment to the flesh. The estate of a Christian is such as has gone
through a great many fears before, other manner of fears than the Creature can
cause; the fear of the wrath of God, and the stroke of Justice, and the Curse
of the Law, but this sinful fear makes it seem as if we had never been
acquainted with such fear.

It is unbeseeming the spirit of a Christian 2 Timothy 1.7. We have not received
the spirit of fear, that is unbeseeming a Christian. The spirit of a Christian
is a raised spirit, this is a low spirit, The spirit of a Christian is strong,
this is a weak effeminate spirit; The spirit of a Christian is raised upon high
principles; this is from base principles; The spirit of a Christian is an
ingenious spirit, this is a mean spirit discouraged upon every little danger;
The spirit of a Christian is full of love, this is full of Jealousy. The spirit
of a Christian is a Clean spirit, this is a polluted spirit conscious to it
self of abundance of evil.

Thirdly, It is unbeseeming the profession of a Christian; a Christian does
make profession of special interest that he has in God, and in the Covenant of
Grace and the promises of the Gospel and to be daunted with every little fear
is quite cross to this. And therefore that's observable of Ezra, Ezra, 8.22.
When he had made profession of Gods being with them, he was ashamed to ask of
the King a band of Soldiers: he was ashamed to do any thing to show that they
feared the enemy; and so when a Christian shall profess interest in God, yet
have such base sinful fear, this is mightily against the profession of a true
Christian.

Fourthly, A sinful fear is that which much dishonors God, and his Cause, a
great dishonor it is to God to have his people so afraid of every danger, it
is a dishonor to his power, his truth, his faithfulness, and his care over his
people, It is a dishonor to God, and so in that respect it is contrary to the
sanctifying of Gods name, and therefore you shall observe, where the Lord
charge his people with sinful fear, he charges them also that they did not
remember him. Isa. 57.11. Of whom have thou been afraid, or feared t,hat thou
have lied and have not remembered me, where there is sinful fear it takes off
the heart from God, as if there were no God in heaven to help a Christian.
Therefore it was Nehemiah in Nehemiah, 6.8. Would not be afraid when he saw
others sought to make him afraid, because it would have been a dishonor to
God, and his cause.

Fifthly, Besides sinful fear is that which does mightily hearten the enemies
of Gods people and dishear tens Gods people, it makes the enemies of Gods
people so much the more bold; the fear of anenemy heartens an Enemy, as Gideon
when he came to the Host of his enemies, and heard their communication that
they were afraid of Gideon, then he was so much the more heartned; and so the
spies that went to the land of Canaan, when they heard that the fear of them
was amongst the people this heartened them, and so when one knows his adversary
is afraid of him, he will be heartned; a dog will follow another, that runs
from him. And this discourages the people of God when they see others afraid in
the cause of God.

Sixthly, It is a great evil, because it is that which is threatened as a great
judgment of God upon a people, it is not only a sin but a punishment for some
former sin, in Deuteronomy. 28.65.66. This is Gods judgment against wickedness, and
therefore a sore, and great evil that Christians should count to be upon them,
if the spirit of fear be upon them.

Seventhly, The evil of it appears in the evil effects that proceed of it upon
ourselves: as.

1. The distraction of our thoughts and therefore the word that is translated
Rash, in Isa. 32.4. It signifies Fear, because it does distract the thoughts of
people, and makes them do they know not what, It is reported as an excellency
that was in Alexander and Caesar, and other valorous spirits, that they were in
the time of danger able to command their thoughts, and to consult and manage
any business, for usually fear distracts ones thoughts.

2. Again it weakens the heart exceedingly, though a sudden fear may cause some
strength, and the putting forth of the spirit, yet usually it does weaken the
spirit; In 1 Cor. 2.3. Weakness and Fear go together, and in Deuteronomy. 20.3.
Fainting of spirit and Fear go together.

3. Fear of man is that which does exceedingly eat out the true fear of God,
as love of the creature eats out the love of God, and joy in sinful things
eats out the true joy in God, So fear of the creature eats out the fear of
God. In Isa. 57.11. Of whom have thou been afraid, or feared that thou have
lied, and have not remembered me, as if God should say my fear and the fear of
the creature cannot stand together.

4. Sinful fear makes one altogether unfit for any service, to be used in any
employment for God* in Judge, 7.3. God gives a command to the people by whom he
would do great things, that all that were of a fearful heart should return back
again, as If God should say they are not fit for me.

5. The fear of man is a great snare, 29. Prove. 25. It brings a man to many
sinful courses, and shifting ways and to commit sin against God in Isa. 57.11.
Of whom have thou been afraid, or feared, that thou have lied: many servants
when they have done any thing that they are afraid of the displeasure of their
Masters or Mistresses, they are afraid and lie: and so in other cases, when as
people are possessed with the fear of man, they will take any sinful courses,
and lie to avoid danger you know what the Psalmist says in Psalm, 19. The fear
of the Lord is clean, but the fear of man is very impure, the fear of God
purges the heart; but the fear of man defiles the heart and exceedingly
polluteth it I was afraid says Saul of the people and I obeyed their voice: In
1. Sam. 15.24. And so many in Scripture were convinced that it was Christ, but
they were afraid and did not confess him* in John, 12.42.

6. The fear of the creature has abundance of evil in it, in that it brings
most desperate fears; if you give way to the fear of any creature, to fear any
danger and so to avoid it in a sinful way, you bring your selves by this means
to most desperate fears: As it was the desperate condition of Francis Spira
when he was afraid of those that had power over him and so denied Christ
against his conscience, Oh the dreadful horrors of conscience that he was sunk
into; and so it is usual, for men that will balke the ways of God against
conscience, when their consciences are enlightened, their hearts are Burdened
with such fears, as they cannot stand under them, other manner of fears then
the fear of man, in Jer, 1.17. God says unto Jeremiah be not dismayed at their
faces least I confound thee before them: it is the same word that is translated
before, dismayed; do not fear least I fear thee; be not dismayed least I dismay
thee, and to reconcile both translations the meaning may be, do not fear least
I so fear thee as to confound thee with fear so that you see this note is
clear. By fearing the creature, fearing danger, we come to plunge our selves
into the most desperate fears of al: And let this be a warning from God to us
all, be not dismayed and afraid in any way of God, least God fear you in
another manner, take heed you be not terrifyed least God terrify you, many
dreadful examples we have how many upon their sick beds, and death beds, have
had dreadful fears, that they have done things against conscience out of fear.

7. And the last evil that will come upon us in sinful fear, is the judgment of
God in our destruction in Revela, 21.8. Amongst those that shall be cast out
into the lake of fire and brimstone are the fearful, and therefore we had need
take heed of sinful fear and make God to be our only fear.

But now that we may conclude this argument in a word of Exhortation, as sinful
fear is a most dreadful evil, so the trrue fear of God is a most precious Jewel
in Isa. 33.6. The fear of the Lord is called the treasure of Gods people,
sinful fear has a treasure of evil, and therefore to be avoided; Oh then let
us take heed of sinful fear of the creature, as the Lord by the prophet Isa.
55.4. Say to them that are of a fearful heart be not afraid, do not plead and
say I am of a fearful nature says God, say to them that are of a fearful heart
be not afraid: so say I to you that are the people of God, in the way of God
though you be by nature fearful, you that are of a fearful nature be not
afraid whatsoever your natures have been, yet if your hearts have been brought
under the power of the Gospel, now there is a spirit of magnanimity put into
you; Give me says Lactantius, (speaking of the power of Christian religion upon
the hearts of men) a man fearful of pain of death and if once Christian
Religion prevails in his heart, he shall presently contemn crucifying fire, yea
that cruel torture of Phalaris his Bull in which that cruel tyrant delighted to
hear men roar being put into it when it was made burning hot. In the Epistle
of Saint Peter. you have the the holy Ghost directing his exhortation to women
who are naturally fearful 1 Peter, 3.6. Whose daughters you are as long as ye
do well and are not afraid with any amazement: it seems very strange at first
view, how the Apostle brings in this to women. It is brought in thus: First if
you consider Sarah and as the wife of Abraham; Abraham was to go out of his own
country and was like to meet with many dangers and difficulties and to suffer
hard things; and this is the Commendation of Sarah and she is set before al
Christian women as an example, that though she was a woman, and so by nature
Fearful, yet she was not an hinderance to him, she was not afraid with
amazement, she overcome the natural Fear of her sex by her Faith and it is a
notable note For Women, when God calls their husbands to go out of their
country, may be they would go but their wives are afraid of the Sea and of
difficulties and they are hindrances to them: but if you would be daughters of
Sarah, you must be daughters in this, not to be afraid with amazement, you
should be true yoke-fellows to help them in that work, and not to hinder them
with passionate fear. Further whose daughters you are this is spoken to
Christian women, now then many had Infidels to their husbands, now the Apostle
would have them imitate this example of Sarah and by faith to go beyond their
sex, may be their husbands would threaten them; if you do thus and thus, you
shall live such and such an uncomfortable life with me, this might discourage
many, and hinder them in their way, how shall I be able to live with such a one
that shall always be crossing and vexing of me because of such and such ways
that I take; therefore the Apostles instance in this particular, if God have
revealed his way and truth to you, whatsoever difficulties you are like to meet
withal be not afraid with amazement. Again they living in those times, whether
they had good Husbands or bad, they were like to suffer persecution: and now
might they say how shall such poor women as we; that are weaker usually then
men, be able to lie in prison or Burn in the fire? this would bring down the
spirit of the strongest man. The Apostle therefore directs this to women, be
not afraid with amazement, you have a strong God to be with you in whatsoever
you are called to suffer. There are many Gracious promises that we find in
Scripture that there is a time Coming when God will deliver his people from the
fear of man that will be a blessed time, for much evil does come to the people
of God by the sinful fear of man, and we should labor to fulfill Gods promises
what we can. In Isa. 54.11. God promises. O thou afflicted, tossed with
tempests and not comforted, behold I will lay thy stones with fair colors and
lay thy foundations with Saphires; where was this promise ever fulfilled? the
condition of the Church shall be very Glorious, that God will lay the foundations
with Saphirs, and the stones with fair colors; we use to lay the foundation
with rubish, and ordinary stone, but God will lay it with Saphirs, verse. 14. In
righteousness shall thou be established, thou shall be far from oppression, for
thou shall not fear; and from terror, for it shall not come near thee: So in
Jeremiah 23.4. I will set up Shepherds over them which shall feed them, and
they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed: many people have Shepherds over them
but they are afraid they should be taken away, but then they shall have
Shepherds and shall not fear, in Jer. 30.10.11. and verse. 46, Chap, 27. There
is a blessed condition of Gods people, and the more it is fulfilled to us, the
more Glorious shall our condition be. And this is an observable note, that I
have met withal that some have concerning that place in Cant. 8.4. I charge you
O Daughters of Jerusalem that ye stir not up nor awake my Love till He please:
In the former part of the Book in Cant. 2.7. And in Cant. 3.5. The Church
charges after another manner, I charge you O ye daughters of Jerusalem by the
Roes and Hindes of the field, that you stir not up nor awake my Love until he
please: But in Cant. 8.4. The Roes and Hindes of the Field, are left out, only
she charges them, Not to stir up her Love til he please; What is meant by
stirring up her beloved? And what is meant by the Roes and the Hindes? Stir not
up my beloved till he please, that is when the Church is brought into any
comfortable condition, there is a charge that they do nothing to alter that
condition, to make it more uncomfortable, not, to stir up Christ so stir up
Christ so as to displease him. But she charges by the Roes and the Hindes. The
Roes and Hindes are fearful shy creatures, that will run away from every little
motion, so some estates of the Church are such, that many would come to join,
but if they saw the least danger, or commotion they would presently run a way,
and then the charge runs thus, you that are the Church of God, when God has
granted any prosperity and peace, take heed you do not take such a course as to
loose your prosperity, because many are looking at you and would join to you
that are of fearful hearts and are not so established as to venture upon
dangers, and troubles and therefore if you cause disturbances, and Christ be
stirred up before he please, those that stand by that are of fearful natures,
will be afraid, and they will Reason, we thought to have joined with them, but
we see what troubles are like to be among them, and these are the Roes, and
Hindes that retreat: but now afterward the Church came to be in a more
established condition, and those that God intends to bring into his people
should not be of such fearful natures, and therefore in Cant. 8, he leaves out
the Roes, and the Hinds and says take heed what you do: indeed now there is no
such danger of fearful natures, those that God will bring in they shall come
through danger, and through trouble, they will reason there has been troubles
amongst Gods people ever since the beginning of the world, and they will not go
back because of them, yet take heed of troubles and disturbances:

Now there are many especial means to help against these fears, as

1. Labor to take off your love from the creature and you will not have much
fear, Says an ancient he that has nothing in the world that he loves, he has
nothing in the world that he fears, for the foundation of all fear is love:
According to the degree we love any thing so we fear the contrary, let us but
mortify our love to the creature and we shall mortify the fear of the creature,

2. Let us get and keep our interest in God, and that will keep us from the fear
of the creature.

3. Let us labor to see clearly that the cause we are in is Gods Cause.

4. Look to the call of that cause, though the cause be good if we have not as
all to that cause, we cannot be helped against Fear.

5. Labor to bring your Hearts to count it Honor, and Riches, and pleasure
enough to be employed in Gods service any way, whatsoever comes of it, if I
should endure such and such troubles in it, yet the will of God be done, God
calls for my estate, and liberty, and comfort to be employed this way, and that
is enough that any thing I have may be employed in Gods way, and if it be lost
in Gods service, it is well lost, if the Heart be brought to this disposition,
it will not fear the loss of any thing.

6. Keep the conscience upright in Gods way, Job, 11.14.15, If iniquity be in
thy hand put it far from thee and let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacle,
for then shall thou lift up thy face without spot; yea thou shall be steadfast
and not fear: When the Heart begins to decline in the least degree, then it is
filled with Fear.

7. Keep a close and full and comfortable communion one with another, let there
be no fear with one another, as that is a notable place 1 Cor. 16.10.
Concerning the care of Saint Paul over Timothy, because he was young, and so
weak, That he might be with the Church without fears. As a means to help
Timothy in his way against whatsoever troubles he met abroad, so whatsoever
dangers there be abroad in the world you will find this a notable means to
strengthen your hearts to be without fear of all the world, to keep close one
with another.

8. If you will needs fear, fear prosperity rather then trouble: and indeed
there is more cause to fear our ease and our prosperity, then to fear any
trouble in the world, there is more cause to fear the favors of men, then their
threatenings, there is more cause to fear the world when it comes like a Fox,
then when it comes like a Lion, the joys of this present world are to be feared
by a Christian: now Christians fear altogether present adversity, but you
should labor to fear prosperity.

9. Lastly, consider how little good, fear of any creature will do, it will
never a whit free you from the evil you fear. But rather bring it sooner, as
when Peter was afraid of the waves, and afraid of sinking, did it help him?
No, it rather brought the waves upon him, and so in trouble your fear cannot
help you, and deliver you but bring trouble sooner upon you. And therefore that
is an observable note, the difference between John and the other disciples,
when Christ was apprehended all the disciples fled, except John, and John stood
when he was in the Priests Hall, and when he was upon the Cross, he said to him
behold thy Mother, so that he was not afraid of his life, now their was not
one of all the Disciples that fled for there lives, but dyed violent Deaths,
and their lives were taken away, and John that did not flee, lived fourscore
years after Christ, and continued in his ministry. So that you see God many
times will preserve such as are least afraid, and let such as are afraid, fall
into the trouble that they are afraid of, at that time they are afraid or
afterward; And thus we have finished the second Doctrinal conclusion from
these words, that faith cures sinful Fear.

CHAP. 14
Another Doctrine. Much difference between Gods peoples spirits at several
times, Illustrated by examples. Reasons, 1. From the different dispositions
their hearts are in to receive truths. Which proceeds from Three Causes, First,
the abatement of the strength that is opposite to that truth. Secondly, The
stirrings or activity of those habits which are suitable to truth. Thirdly, The
prevalences of self-Interest. Reas. 2. From the different representations of
Truth. Reas. 3. Because the Graces of men do not burn so clearly and purely at
al times. Reas. 4. From the weakness of Grace, the parts and members of it are
not consolidated. Reas. 5. Because our hearts are sometimes filled with more
heavenly consolations then at other times. Reas. 6. From the different
breathings of the spirit of God, Reas. 7. Because men have sometimes a more
clear and distinct sight of their call to suffer then at other times. 3.
Particular directions in this Case. Reas. 8. The different tempers of man's
Body. Reas. 9. From the difference in the encouraging occurrency of Gods
providence.

WE come now to the next Doctrinal conclusion which was raised from hence,
there was a time when Moses was afraid, he did forsake Egypt out of fear; now
Moses by faith did forsake Egypt and was not afraid; The Point is.

Doct. There is a great deal of difference between the Spirits of Gods people
at some time, from that they are at other times.

Now Moses seems to have further courage and strength then formerly; we have
many examples in scripture, and daily experience of this that there is a
wonderful difference between the spirits of Gods people at sometimes and at
other times, As Elijah was a man of mighty courage that could look Ahab on the
face, and when Ahab said, art thou he that troublest Israel, nay (says he) it
is thou and thy Fathers house, at another time he fled from Jezebel, and God
said to him, what do thou here Elijah, art thou fleeing from a woman that but
the other day had such a courage: And so David, there was a time when David
was afraid; and behaved himself with much folly in his fear, as in the change
of his behavior before the King of Gath, at another time as in Psalm. 23. He
would not fear what man could do unto him, though he walked in the valley of the
shadow of Death. And so in many Psalms you have his heart mightily dejected in
the beginning of the Psalm and before he had done mightily raised: And so
Abraham sometime he had mighty strength and confidence of his Faith, at other
times his faith failed him, and he was fain to equivocate, and shift for
himself, And so Jeremiah God said he would make him as a Brazen wall, and he
would give him a spirit of courage, at another time Jeremiah was mightily
dejected because of the reproach he met withal, and he would speak no more in
the name of God unto the people. And so Peter there was a time when he was
afraid of a poor damsel, at other times who so bold as Peter, as in Acts 2.14.
And so Joseph of Arimathea* he was a disciple of Christ but secretly for fear
of the Jews, but afterward he came boldly and begged the body of Christ at
Pilates hand; And so Nicodemus he was convinced that Christ was a great prophet
of God, and much Good might be got by him, but he was afraid of the Jews, and
came to Christ by night, afterward he went with Joseph to beg the body of
Christ, and appeared publicly for Christ, and so Paul* there was a time, when
he was let down in a basket for fear, and he shifted for his life that way, but
afterward what abundance of courage had he. And so in after times many of the
martyrs, sometime what mighty fear was upon them, and afterward what strength
and courage had they. As Bilney, thar blessed Martyr; (as Latimer speaks of
him) he was in grievous perplexity, that those that came to apply any promises
to him, did as it were strick daggers to his heart, afterward he suffered a
glorious martyrdom, and had abundance of Courage, as may be read in his story.
And so Saunders when Doctor Pendleton came to him to strengthen him, says he,
will you that have put your hand to the plow now give in, and you that have
left Antichrist will you now follow him? Saunders, could not but have much fear
that he should forsake Christ, but so it fell out that Pendleton fell off
shamefully, and Mr. Saunders suffered and had abundance of Comfort, and
Courage. And so Mr. Glover when he was in prison after he was condemned he had
much fear, and a spirit of heaviness, yea the morning that he was called out to
the stake he was troubled with doubtings, till he came to the sight of the
stake, and then he had abundance of courage and Joy: These are the examples;
but now the reasons.

Reason, 1.
The first, Reason of the Differences of the spirits of Gods Servants is from
the different disposition that their hearts are in for their receiving of the
truths of God at some time, from that they are at othertimes; that it is even
to admiration sometimes to consider, that such a truth that there is but a hint
of it Given at one time, shall have such power upon their hearts as shall
mightily prevail with them, they shall easily entertain it, and easily be
convinced by it, and overpowred with it; at another time when there are strong
arguments, to bring the truth a great deal more powerfully, and fully to the
heart, it vanisheh and comes to little: we use to say; Whatsoever we receive is
received according to the disposition of the receiver: what is the reason why
people in the time of sickness are ready to hear of any truth, and ready to be
convinced of it, and no wranglings and objections against it. If God come in
their prosperity, and health with the same truths, they are nothing to them,
but wrangle, and object against them and will not yield and be convinced? The
truth is the same but the difference is in the disposition of the receiver. And
so in regard of the temptation to sin, sometime when a temptation to sin is
presented, the heart presently closes with it, without examining; at other
times through Gods mercy when temptation comes, it does not so easily take, but
a man's heart will stand out against it, sometimes a man's heart is to the
temptation, as tinder to the fire, every spark will take hold, at other times
the heart is as the three children, though they walk in fiery temptations,
their hearts have not so much as the favor of them: There are three things
that do cause the difference in the disposition of heart for receiving a truth
of God or receiving a temptation to sin.

First, The abating of the strength of that which is opposite unto any truth,
or unto any temptation, when as a truth comes to a man, there is in every man's
heart something opposite to that truth, now if the strength of that which is
opposite be abated that it do not stir, the truth prevails whith a great
deal of strength; but if that which is opposite to a truth be working and
stirring at such a time when they truth comes, then though it comes a great
deal more strongly, it cannot prevail: And so if temptation comes, and the
principle that is opposite to that temptation be stirring at that time, a man
can prevail against it, but if a man have some principle of grace, and that ly
dead when the temptation comes, then a great deal less temptation prevails.

Secondly, That which makes a difference in the dispositions of the spirits of
men for receiving a truth, or receiving a temptation, is the stirring or
activeness of those habits that are suitable to a truth or unto a temptation:
when there comes a truth presented to a man that calls for duties, service or
suffering, if a man have principles suitable to the duty, and these principles
be now stirring, then he can close with that truth and it prevails powerfully.
And so for sin if a man have seeds and habits of sin, and temptation come when
these seeds and habits are stirring, then he closes with it presently.

Thirdly, But the especial thing that makes the disposition of a man to receive
a truth or a temptation different at one time from that it is at another, is
when self is engaged in a business: As now take it in person or opinion;
Suppose there is such a man or woman that I am any way engaged to and serve my
turn in; in any thing that is spoken for them or their commendation, I am ready
to embrace it; but suppose this man or woman do not serve my turn, but the
engagement is broke, then I believe the least evil that is spoken against them,
when as I would not have believed ten times as much before, not that there is
more in them then before, but only the frame and disposition of my heart
toward them is otherwise then before: And so in opinion: If a man hold an
opinion upon which there follows some consequents that he did not see before,
after he has held this opinon upon which such consequents will follow, he
seeks with all his might to maintain it, not because the consequents are
true, but because it is his opinion that he holds. Come to a man that is
ignorant which holds an opinion, and tell him nakedly the consequents that will
follow upon that opinion he holds, without any reference to that opinion, and
he is mightily against them, but come another time and seek to draw those
consequents from that opinion which he holds, and he seek to maintain them,
which he would not do but for that engagement he has unto that opinion; but
when a gracious heart finds this that al engagements to men, and the world, and
self are broken, and he gives himself to be engaged wholly in God, all that was
self before in his credit, and liberty, and estate, and ease, and comfort, is
put upon the name of God, the praise of God, the furthering the truth of God
and his Gospel, then any truth of God that comes to the soul at this time, it
prevails mightily, because the heart is engaged in God and his truth: and
indeed if so be we did understand aright, we should see more of our own good to
consist in God, then in our selves; and this is the ground and principle of
self denial, when as the soul shall come to see my good is more in God, then
in my self, and therefore I will deny my good and comfort so far as it is in
my self and I will seek my good and comfort in God: and indeed no men in the
world seek themselves more then the Godly, only the one seeks himself in
himself, and the other seeks himself in God, the one is engaged to his
self ends and self-praise, and the other makes himself only engaged in God, and
when a man comes to be thus engaged in God, then any truth prevails with a
mighty strength more then before. And this is the first reason (which is a
principal one) that causes the heart, to be at a different condition at one
time, from that it is at another.

Reason. 2.
The second Reason is in regard of the differences of their presentations of a
truth, though when we are indisposed let the truths come never so powerfully it
is all one, but if the heart be fit in any reasonable manner to receive a
truth, there may be a great deal of difference in the manner of the
representation of a truth, sometimes the truth comes more clearly, and with more
evidences, more particularly, more powerfully: Sometimes it comes with greater
evidence of the spirit of God then at other times, there is not only a little
gloss of a truth of God, but the shine of it, that a man cannot shut his eyes
against it: sometime the truth comes more particularly to the heart, God does
not only present a truth in the general to him that this is a duty Christians
must do: but it shall come to the particular frame of the heart, and shall meet
with every objection, and he shall find the secrets of his thoughts to be
discovered and answered, so that the truth shall come like a key that is fitted
to a lock; if you bring a key to the lock though it may be like the right key
and as strong a key as the right is, yet if it be not indeed the right, if it
miss but in one ward of the lock, never so little, you may spoil both the lock
and the key, but you cannot open the lock though you have never so much
strength, but come with a key suited to that lock and do but turn it, and it
opens presently: So when it pleases God to come with his truth to our souls,
we were backward and we heard many truths, but they did not meet with all our
objections, and therefore it was stopped with some one or other, but afterward
it pleased God so to dispose of things, and to bring the truth so fully to the
heart, as it meets with every objection, and then the heart quietly yields, and
therefore it is said God opened Lydias heart, Paul preached to others and had
much wringing with them and could not prevail, but Saint Paul came to Lydia,
and he prevailed presently, because God did so dispose of Lydias heart as it
was fitted to the truth Saint Paul spoke of: as many when they come to hear the
word, cannot but say the truth of God has met with me in every particular, and
I have no secret object on in my heart, but it is answered, sometimes the truth
comes more powerfully then at other times: as in Isaiah, 8.11. For the Lord
spoke thus to me with a Strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk
in the way of this people, God did not only tell the prophet his duty, but he
spoke with a strong hand, so when God comes sometimes he tells you what you
ought to do, but he does not always come with a strong hand as sometimes he
does: Job, 36.10 He opens also their Ears to discipline and commands that
they return from iniquity: does not God command men at al times to return
from their iniquities does not god command men in prosperity to return from
their Iniquities, yes, but in the time of affliction ordinarily the truth comes
with more commanding power, then he seals instruction as in Job. 33.16. when
people came to hear the word they heard instructions to do such and such
duties, but those instructions did not come with command, they were not sealed,
but in affliction God seals them, if a man see a writing and see the hands of
others to it, it is something to persuade him to see others are of that opinion,
but when he sees the broad Seal to it then it comes with authority, and so when
men come and hear the word of God, they think it is but our opinion, and cast
it off, but in affliction those truths come with authority, and have the seal
of Heaven upon them, and then they prevail, you have other manner of thoughts
of them then before; that which Saint Paul spoke it was in power to the hearts
of the people; and they could not resist the spirit wherewith Stephen spoke
because he was full of faith and power. So sometimes God speaks with so much
power as they cannot stand out: we may see the different spirits of men by the
different representation of a truth in our selves or in others, sometime when
God pleases to convince us, and work upon us, we admire it our selves, did we
not hear these things before, what was it that kept me from being convinced, I
never was stirred before, and now methinks there is such mighty power in them
as I cannot stand against them, what was the matter? and so in others: let
there be two men, that shall go upon the same principles, and their ends shall be
the same, and both their hearts shall be upright, and yet they cannot yield to
the same thing, because the same thing is presented to the one, one way, and he
sees it clearly, and the same thing is presented to another, another way, and
he cannot see it; And therefore it should teach us to have patience when we
have to deal with such as do not see a thing clear. As when we come to a lock
that we have not the right key, and we try, and it will not open, we do not
presently throw it away, but we think, it may be there is some dust in it, we
pick that out, and try again if it do not open, then we think may be we did not
put in the key right, too far, or not far enough, and if it do not open then we
think may be we did not turn the right way, we try again if it do not open then
we think we did not turn strong enough: we try again, if it do not open then;
we think may be we have not the right key, if I choose another key that would
open it: Then we try again, if it do not open it, we are loath to loose the
lock, we think may be there is some ward in the lock that is a little bent, if
that were mended it would do, or the key is bent, and rather then we will throw
it away we will mend that, may be I have bent some ward, and a man will reason al
he can before he will throw away the lock: So when you have to deal with others
that are of another opinion, do not throw them away; reason this way, and that
way, because there is much in ordering men's spirits, in the communication of a
truth unto them, it is not always the evidence of a truth that is sufficient
to convince, but the manner of presenting of the truth, and that is the second
reason of the difference of men's spirits.

Reason, 3.
The third reason is because that sometime the graces of men do not burn out so
clearly and purely as they do at other times, As in fire when you kindle a
fire, first there is a great deal of smoke and we see little brightness in the
fire, stay but a while, and the smoke will be consumed, and the fire burn
bright: So in the graces of men and women, sometime there is a great deal of
corruption when grace is kindled at first, a great deal of smother but grace
continues and works out that corruption, and it burns more clearly: So in the
sun when it rises in the morning it may be a great mist, but when the sun is
up a little while it consumes the mist, and shines clearly; So Children when
they are young may be they have many il humors; afterward their natural
strength consumes their humors, and so they are more active and stirring; so
though the Godly have not that disposition of heart to do that for God they
should, yet when grace comes to burn more clearly they can do it.

Reason, 4.
Fourthly, As grace is mixed at first, so sometimes it is weak, the parts and
members not being consolidated, and strengthened: when an infant comes first
into the world if you expose it to the cold it is not able to endure it, which
afterward it will do, when the Joints are set, and so young plants cannot endure
that frost, which they will do afterward: And so Christians at first are as
children, carried away with every wind of doctrine, til afterward they come to
be more strong, and then they are fit for service. As Christ would not have his
disciples called to fasting and praying, they were hard duties while they were
weak, he has this expression; no man puts new wine into old bottles, nor sow a
new piece of cloth into an old Garment, for the bottles will break and the
garment will rend, in Math, 9.16.17. The meaning is do not bring unsureable
duties to men's spirits; fasting and prayer is a duty but they are not strong
enough for it yet, noting when people grow strong they shall be fitter for duty,
service, or suffering.

Reason. 5.
The fifth Reason is because sometimes our hearts are filled with more heavenly
consolation then at other times that does refresh the souls of Gods people as
with new wine, that they can go forth as a Giant, call them to any duty, and
they can go through fire and water. As for sin when a man's heart is warmed with
sin and they have had delight and satisfaction in their sin, come and speak
what you will against it and they can easily cast it off, and so for duty when
Gods people have been warmed by duty, and their spirits are refreshed in Gods
way, with what resolution do they go: and as that martyr Mr. Saunders said,
that which made the difference in him was because God was pleased to come in
with such refreshments to his spirit that he felt the consolation of God, not
only upon his soul, but flow into his body; and that put a great deal of
courage in him: And in the stories that I have read of Scotland Mr. Knox
reports of a young man, of eighteen years of age, that suffered martyrdom
under the Bishop of Glasgow: and when he came to suffer he was mightily
afraid, and thought to have recanted, and it pleased God that his spirit came
in mightily to him at that time, and he fell down on his knees and blessed God.
Blessed Lord (said he) great is thy mercy to man kind, and to me poor wretch,
that was like to forsake Christ my savior, and put my self into eternal
damnation, and now thou have come with the consolation of Heaven, and have
filled my heart and now I am freed from those fears that suppressed my soul,
let men do what they can I am ready. And to God sometimes comes to fill the
hearts of his people with mighty consolations and that makes a mighty
difference.

Reason, 6.
The Sixth Reason is because sometimes the breathings of Gods spirit, not only
in consolation but in assistance comes more fully then at other times: The
spirit of God blows where it lists, and when it lists, John, 3.8.
Sometimes more fully, sometimes more scantly. Says Christ in Math. 10.19. In
that hour shall it be given you, as Mr. Glover. When he was in his dumps
before, yet when he was at the stake he cried to his friend Austin, he is come,
he is come. And so it was with Sampson, sometimes the miraculous work of Gods
spirit came upon him, and then he was strong: and so in a spiritual way, the
spirit of God comes upon his people and then they are strong, though they were
weak before, Isa. 59.19. When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the spirit
of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him. So when there comes a strong
temptation like a flood that would bear him down, then the spirit of the Lord
shall lift up a standard and come in with abundance of assistance.

Reason, 7.
The seventh Reason is because sometimes a man sees his call to duty to
suffering, a great deal more clear then at other times and that puts a great
deal more strength As Moses now saw a further call to stand out against Pharaoh
and all his enemies, and here is a great deal of deceit in the hearts of men,
when a man is loath to put himself to trouble, he cannot be convinced of his
call, let us take heed of the deceit in this.

Question. What shall we do to take heed of the deceit in this?

Answer. 1. When there is any work to do either in doing or suffering hard
things: If you say; I do not see the Lord call me: Put it to your hearts
again, and say deal truly and really with me, do you not see the Lords call.

Secondly observe this rule if so be you have put off service or suffering upon
this ground, do but examine whether you find upon this that your hearts be as
stiring and lively in all other services as before. Usually if men from
sluggishness, because they are loath to endure hardships shall put off the call
of God their hearts will fall more dead and sluggish in other things, and if you
keep your life in all other things, then though you do not that thing which some
require of you it is a comfortable argument that you put it off because your
call was not clear and not out of sluggishness.

Thirdly, You may take such a course as your sluggishness may get nothing by
it, as thus, take the advantage of your hearts; I cannot see that I am called
to such a duty in which I must endure hardships, and so I have spared my self
in that, yet the sluggishness, and deadness of my heart shall get nothing by it,
for I will put forth my self so much the more in those duties, that I am sure I
am called to: if our hearts be thus we may have comfort, it is not from our
sluggishness.

Reason, 8.
The eighth reason is because there may be agreat difference by this in regard
of the temper of a man's body especially in those that are sickly and weakly,
they may find themselves in a mighty indisposition to that which is good at one
time and a greater disposition at another time, and yet there may be no decay
of Grace but only the temper and ordering of a natural spirit.

Reason, 9.
The Ninth Reason is because there may be a great difference in the spirits of
men, in regard of the difference of the encouraging occurrences of Gods
providence sometime God guids them by his eye, Psalm. 32.8. there is a
difference between Gods guiding by his word and by his eye, by his word that is
by some direction, but his eye, that is some providence to encourage them and
according to the different occurrences of the encouraging providence of God,
so there may be much difference in their spirits; As in sin sometimes men shall
find things so fit and pat for sin, as they would have it, and so sometimes Gods
people find the providence of God fall pat for them to encourage them, and that
makes a difference.

CHAP 15. Containing the First Use, Which teaches us to entreat God not to
take the advantage of us when our hearts are low.
USE, 1.
THis should teach us all to entreat God, not to take the advantage of us when
our hearts are low, when we are in a disposition to that which is naught, or an
indisposition to that which good, but that God would pity us, and favor us,
and that God would never call us to do any great service, or suffer for him, but
when he sees we are in a disposition for it: it is a wonderful mercy of God,
not to call out his people, but at such a time when they are fit. And so for
temptation to sin: God sees what dispositions there are in the best of us all,
he knows how corruption is working many times, and if a temptation to sin
should come at that time, what should become of us, we could not but forsake
God, and his cause, and wound our consciences, acknowledge the mercy of God
toward you, in keeping the temptation from you at such a time, sometime we are
wandering from God, if the roaring Lion should meet us then how like were it
that we should be devoured; sometimes we are ready to stumble upon every straw,
and if God should lay stumbling blocks before us then, what should become of
us, this is a mercy that God does not grant unto others, for thus God very
frequently deals with wicked men, when there is an opportunity for them to
enjoy the greatest good, at that very time there shall be something fall out that
shall put them in an opposition to that Good: as perhaps sometimes God in his
providence orders it; that a minister should be partly upon such a subject as
should be marveilous useful, and God is more then ordinary assisting of him,
then something shall fall out to keep them from the exercise, or the corruption
shall be up to harden their hearts, or there shall be some occasion to take up
their minds, more than at another time, that they shall not get that good they
might: but this is the mercy of God, to those he intends good to, that he will
give them an opportunity to receive Good, when they are fit for it: there was
such a time if such a point had been handled, their hearts would have been
unfit, but at such a time such a point shall be handled and pressed on, and says
God I will order it so, they shall break through difficulties to come to the
exercise; and though corruption will be stirring, I will order it so that
corruption shall not be stirring at that time: And so sometimes for temptation
to sin, God sees many times how a corruption is up, and he is fitted for a
temptation, and if temptation should come at that time, he would be drawn, and
would revive himself; now those that God will curse, he lets Satan eat upon
them, and lets them go on at that time when their corruption is most up: As now
in the cause of Ahab, when Ahab, would go to Ramouth Gilead, (says God) in 1
Kings, 22.21.22.23. Who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go, there came forth a
spirit, and said I will persuade him, how I will go, and I will be a lying
spirit in the mouth of all his prophets, go says God and thou shall do it. Now
had Ahab been a Godly man, God would have stopped him in his way, as many Godly
sometimes are in such a disposition to sin, as if they had any encouragement,
they would do it, but says God to Satan do not go. It is very observable how
God takes advantages upon wicked men; as in Genesis 34.25. Simeon and Levi, ^ame
upon the Sichemites when they were sore; So when many men are in such a
disposition, as they have no ability to resist a temptation, then the Devil
comes upon him, as that is observable we have in those Psalms, Psalm. 35.6.
Psalm. 73.18. In the 35, Psalm. 6. It is, let their way be slippery and dark,
and let the Angel of the Lord persecute them: see how God takes the advantage
of wicked men, they are in a Dark way, and upon slippery ground, then the Angel
of God persecuted them, when a man is upon a slippery ground, he had need to
have something to lean upon, but when he is in a slippery place to have his
enemy persecute him, that is dangerous, so God deals with the wicked; it is
otherwise with the Godly, when the Godly are weak, and their way is slippery,
God pities them, and the good Angel preserves them: so when men are in a
slippery way, and ready to fall into a sin, says God to the evil Angel, now
follow them in that sin, So in Psalm, 37.18. Surely thou did set them in
slippery places, thou castest them down into destruction. Learn for ever from
this point, to entreat God that he would consider of your frame, and say, Lord
thou know I am in a slippery place, and not in the good temper I am in at
other times, Lord keep me from temptation now; do not cast me down now: God
has promised: In 1 Cor. 10.13. He will not suffer his people to be tempted
above their strength. Sometime the Godly can say my heart is fixed, speak Lord
here I am to do thy will, some times Gods people are able to endure any danger,
and then God brings his people to the trial; As the disciples after the holy
ghost came upon them then they were called to suffer, they never were put to
such trials before; and when God grants mercy to his people this way, it is a
mercy indeed.

CHAP. 16. Another Use, to teach us not to be discouraged at this different
temper of our Spirits, but to be humbled for it. Five Helps against
discouraging thoughts. Two objections.
USE, 2.
THe second use of this point is this: If there be such a difference between
the hearts of Gods people at some time, from that they are at others, hence is
an encouragement to the servants of God, to teach them, though they do not feel
their hearts always in the same temper, and to have the same spirit to do good,
not to be discouraged: it is true we should be humbled for want of having our
hearts up at any time, but be not discouraged, because it is no other but what
befalls the most dear servants of God, and though you do not find your hearts up
always as at some time, do not therefore conclude there is now no good at al in
me, for Gods people are ready and prepared for every good work, and my heart is
thus dull, and heavy and dead, and it will never be otherwise with me, I am
afraid whenever I shall be called to the service of God, my heart will be thus,
and I shall forsake God, and betray the cause of God; Do not reason thus to
discourage your selves: take heed of those determining thoughts: to determine
that your hearts will be always so because they are so for the present, there is
a great deal of difference between the spirits of Gods people at some times,
and at other times, and therefore there may be so in you. For your help against
these discouraging thoughts.

First, Consider that you have union with a principle that is full of al Grace,
though you do not feel the influence of it, at all times alike, you have union
with a principle so full that you have no cause to determine against your selves.

Secondly, Know you have promises that are full of Grace, for the encouraging of
Gods servants: Promises that there may be drawn abundance of good from; and
therefore you cannot determine that it shall not be otherwise with you.

Thirdly, know the glory of God is as dear and precious to him as your own
souls are to you; and therefore if so be the cause, the honor of God depend
upon it; know God will take care for his own honor, you are afraid you should
betray the cause of God because you find your hearts so down now, and perhaps
if they were so down then when God calls you to stand for his cause it might be
so: but what is it that troubles you? you are afraid to bring guilt and misery
upon your selves and dishonor God; but know the glory of God is precious to
him, and being it is engaged in you that you should dishonor him; being one of
his, he will take care of you.

Fourthly, Consider how God has come in graciously to supply his people in the
time of need, he has filled their spirits in the time of straights when he
has called them to any hard work, and they have done that which they thought
they should never have done, as it is with wicked men: you see some so vile and
wicked, as you could never have thought they should have been, so the Godly
though som^imes their hearts are down, yet at other times they have such
assistance, and enlargement and fullness of the spirit, as one would never have
thought they should have had.

Fifthly, God has made a mighty difference in your estates from that they were
before, and therefore why should you not hope that God will make a difference
between that we are now, and that we may be hereafter, If God have wrought the
least degree of saving grace in you, he has made more difference between you,
and one that is in his natural condition, than there is between you and the
gloryfied Saints: (as I have noted before) and if God have made such a great
difference, why should you disturb your selves to think it will never be other
then it is now?

Sixthly, nay I appeal to you, have you never found your hearts up for God? was
there never a time that there was quickening and enlarging of your hearts for
God, that you have felt some comfortable fitness for service, or suffering?

Object. I cannot but say it has been so with me, but it is gone, and down
again; there are none but have some flashings, and stirrings, and some good
moods, and mine may be no more for all I know; grace is a constant thing, and
the heart is established with it, and therefore though I feel my heart a little
up sometimes, yet they are but such flashings as any may have, that have no
grace.

Answ. To that I answer, There are some works of Grace that are steady, and
constant, that do more immediately flow from the principles, and being of
Grace: and there are other works of Grace that are more remote, that are not so
steady and constant.

1. There are some that are steady and constant; as these two things: take Gods
people, and consider of them in any condition, if they know but their own
hearts, they will find these two things: First, An approving of the life and
power, and the strictness of the ways of Godliness. Secondly, they will find a
savor of that which is spiritual, either in Ordinances, or in Gods People,
their hearts will savor them, though their hearts be very much down, yet these
two things they find constant.

2. But for the abilities to perform duties, for abilities in service or
suffering; they do not lie so next the root of Grace; they are but as the
Leaves, or the blossoms, or the fruit: now though the sap be constant at the
root, yet the blossoms, leaves, and fruit are not.

Object. But you will say, Being there may be good moods in men, take the worst
of all, though their hearts be naught sometime, yet their hearts are up at
other times, and may not you instead of encouraging Gods Servants, encourage
the wicked? they may think, we hear there is a difference between Gods People,
they are not always alike: so it is with me, sometimes I am distempered, but at
other times (thanks be to God) it is better with me, and so instead of taking
away discouragements from those that are weak, there may be encouragement to
the wicked, and therefore where lies the difference between the good moods that
some have, that have no true Grace, and the difference of spirit in those that
have true Grace?

To that I Answer.

First, There may be a difference discerned by that which has been said; there
is something is constant: Whether is that which lay at the root of grace in you
still there? If you do not find those two things constant (viz. An approving of
the life and power and strictness of godliness; and a savor of that which is
spiritual, either in Ordinances, or in Gods People) all your good moods in the
world, though your hearts be never so up, will not discover the truth of grace.

Secondly, Those that have only some good moods at some time, and no bottom of
any true grace, they in their good moods are not humbled for that which was
failing in them before; their hearts indeed are sometimes up, and they bless
themselves in that; but now this does not make them look back how it was
heretofore with them, and to be ashamed and humbled for the wretchedness, and
distempers of their hearts formerly: but where the heart is up for God in those
that have truth of grace, when their hearts are most up, then they make use of
this to be abased, and humbled in their own thoughts for the deadness and
distemper that was in their hearts before; the good moods of others rather puff
them up, than further any work of humiliation for any evil that was in them
before, they think these good moods now, and being in a good temper, shall
satisfy God for their evil distempers that were in them before: But it is not
so with a gracious heart, a gracious heart when it does get up, it makes use of
this work of God upon it, to be ashamed and confounded in its self for those
evil distempers that were in it before. The more the heart is up, the more
discovery it has of its own baseness, and vileness, and wretchedness, which
others when their hearts are up, have not.

Thirdly, Gods People when their hearts are up, that does bring gracious
discoveries of God unto them, and of those things that do wonderfully
spirituallize their hearts: others though they have their hearts up, they only
have some affections, but in those good moods of theirs, they have not those
Heavenly discoveries of God, so as to purge their hearts, and spirituallize
their hearts, and make their hearts to be more heavenly as it does the godly.

Fourthly, Those that have only good moods, and no truth of grace, when they
have their good moods, they are not by them carried out of themselves to a
principle beyond themselves, but they rest in the workings that they feel in
their hearts: whereas a gracious heart when God raises his heart, and puts it
into a better frame, this carries it out of it self, to a principle beyond it
self, and it dare not rest in those stirrings and workings it finds for the
present, to think, now I am safe and well, because of them, but by these it is
carried beyond it self.

Fifthly, Where there are only good moods, and not the truth of the work of
grace, they do not work so seasonably, and orderly, as the breathings of Gods
spirit in his servants do: but the breathings of a gracious heart coming from
the spirit of God, it works seasonably, and orderly in their hearts, when there
is a spiritual use of them, in that hour shall it be given to you, says
Christ, the spirit shall come upon you when you have most use; whereas in
others, their good moods work only according to outward occasions, and as means
come in; but now at those times when they have most use of them, they are
furthest from them.

Sixthly, Where the heart is right, and truly godly, and God comes and breaths
in it more than formerly, such a one will watch over it self, and will not be
secure after this; but the other grow less watchful, and more secure upon such
moods.

Seventhly, Those that are truly gracious, though they do not find their hearts
up always alike, yet when they find their hearts down, they count it their
sickness, and their disease, and it is the disquiet and trouble of their
spirits; whereas others that have only some moods, they are not sensible of
their hearts being down as their sickness and disease, and the burden and
trouble of their souls.

Lastly, In those that have grace when their hearts are up at any time, it is
but a preparation for some further service; others having but moods, their
hearts being up, this is the period of all their godliness, in which they rest;
but the godly, when their hearts are up, at some time more than at others, it
is but a preparation for further Service, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. The hearts of the
people were up, and David blessed God for it, and says he, prepare their hearts
unto thee: unsound hearts would say, now our hearts are up, and we have offered
thus freely; are we but in a preparation? Yet David prays to God to prepare
their hearts, as if all their heart and affection at that time was but a
preparation to further duty: and this is the difference between the good moods
of the greatest Hypocrite, that come to the highest pitch, and the difference
between the breathings of Gods Spirit; and by these means only presented to you
it may be some help to discern the difference between good moods at some time,
and the different breathing of Gods Spirit in his people.

CHAP. 17. Containing the Third Use of Direction: branched into four
particulars. 1 If courageous, and fit for service, give God the praise. Four
Reasons for it. 2. Learn to rebuke unbelief. 3. Labor to keep your hearts up.
The manner how that may be done, in eight particulars. 4. Improve this gracious
working of God.
USE 3.
THirdly, If there be such difference between the hearts of Gods People at some
times, and at other times; This is an Use of Direction to all the people of God
that are acquainted with this difference of Gods breathing upon their hearts,
in these Four Particulars: First, When you find your hearts up more at some
times, than at other times, give God the glory. Secondly, Learn to rebuke your
Unbelief. Thirdly, Labor to keep your hearts up. Fourthly, Improve this great
working of God.


First, If so be you find your hearts more up at one time than at another (as
Gods People do find much difference, and can say sometime, let my Beloved come
into his Garden) give God the glory and praise of it, for it is a great mercy.
For,

1. It does prevent, and deliver you from abundance of danger you were in: when
your hearts were down, if a temptation had come, what abundance of danger had
you been in? now God has prevented that danger.

2. If your hearts were right when they were down, then you powered out your
complaints to God of the deadness of your hearts; now if God be come in, it is
a fruit of your seeking God, and of your humiliation before the Lord: now that
which comes in as a fruit of humiliation, and much seeking of God, surely that
should be the matter of our praises.

3. This is a gracious visitation of God, God comes in with this, and here is
the presence of God, and therefore there is much cause of praise.

4. It is an argument that God has some especial service for you to do: now
those that are godly, count this a great mercy, for God to have any employment
for them: now that they have received an evidence to their souls that God
intend to employ them, this is a great mercy.

Secondly, Learn to check your Unbelief; when your hearts were down, you were
ready to say, it would never be otherwise: now check your hearts, and bring
your hearts to this conclusion; I will never think it in vain to seek God,
though I do not find him come in presently; and I will learn, though I may judge
my self worthy that God should leave me, yet I will never determine that God
will not come in, because I see Gods ways are not as my ways, and Gods
thoughts are not as my thoughts. Oh take heed of judging the ways and thoughts
of God, according to your ways and thoughts.

Thirdly, Is God come in? and do you find that you have a spirit of courage and
boldness more than before, now you find God sweetly breathing upon you to put
life into that dead, and to raise that heavy heart of yours? do you find God
sweetly and comfortably enlivening your souls, and putting the spirit of
confidence in that unbeleeving heart of yours? Labor to keep your hearts thus.
There is a great deal of difficulty when a thing is fallen down to get it up;
but when a thing is up, if one be careful, it is not difficult to keep it up.
It is a notable expression that David had, when he found the hearts of the
people got up in their willing Offering, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. O Lord God of Abraham,
Isaac, and of Israel, our Fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the
thoughts of the hearts of thy people, and prepare their hearts unto thee. So
let it be thy prayer, and it is my prayer for thee: Is thy heart up more than
before? Pray, O God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, keep this in the thoughts of
the heart of this man or woman for ever: be careful now to keep your hearts up:
so when you are well, or otherwise if you should lose this through this
negligence.

1 It will make you call into question the truth of these gracious breathings,
yea, you will think it was but a mere flash, such as Hypocrites may have, yea,
not call this into question only; but to call the truth of al into question: this
is that which makes men take the foundation of al, because their hearts
sometimes are raised, and they through their negligence let them fall, and lose
that spiritual life and courage once they had, and so bring abundance of
sadness upon their hearts: now as you would have an evidence of the truth of
Gods work upon you, and the truth of grace, labor to keep up your hearts.

2 Labor to keep up your hearts otherwise if they fall off again, the ways of
God will come to be very tedious to you: As a man that walks unevenly in regard
of the unevenness of his legs, or the unevenness of the way, he is quickly
tired: and so if a Christians way be up and down, and there be not an evenness
in his way, he is quickly discouraged; and a main means to help one to go on
with freedom and courage in Gods ways, is to go on in an even course.

3 If so be you lose this, you lose the beauty of your profession; the beauty
of the ways of Godliness, consists much in the constancy, and if your way be
up and down, there is no beauty in your conversation, it takes away the
convincing power of your way and conversation; if others saw your hearts up,
and saw a constant evenness in your way, this would mightily convince them,
that it is a work of Gods Spirit upon your hearts; but sometimes your hearts are
up, and down again, sometime you are patient and meek, at other times you are
passionate and fretting; this does not convince them that it is the work of
Gods Spirit, but only the stirring of a natural spirit.

4 By this means you will cause God to walk differently with you; if you keep
not up your hearts when God has raised them, though God be in a way of mercy,
you will cause him to walk in a way of displeasure against you.

5 Again, When your hearts are up, that is the thing that the Devil does most
watch to give you a trip in. As when Daniel walked so strictly in all the
matters of the Kingdom, as they could find no fault in him, they accused him in
the matter of his God, of his Religion: so says the Devil, if I should tempt
him to such and such sins, I cannot prevail, but there is such a way I may
prevail; and the Devil does labor there most to trip you. As he did with Christ
in another case; when you are on the top of the pinnacle, then he labors to
throw you down: It is true, it is the work of God that has brought you up to
the pinnacle, but there the Devil does labor to throw you down.

Quest. You will say, How shall we come to keep up our hearts, whenas our hearts
are in a better frame, than at some other times?

Answ. First, When your hearts are up, labor to make use of that grace that
raised your hearts; improve it so as to make your hearts more holy, and more
upright. A Tree if it sprout upward only, and do not run down in the root
proportionably, it will wither, and die: and so if grace do work only upward in
abilities, and performances of duties, and joy, and such things, and do not
proportionably work downward in the root, it is like it will come to little,
and you will soon lose all.

Secondly, Work that grace you find in your inward, as well as outward man: Do
not think it enough that you have stirrings of Grace to enable you to do
duties, but improve this grace for the working out of corruption: consider the
corruptions of your heart, and now take the advantage to work them out.

Thirdly, be sure you take nothing that is Gods due at this time; that is, if
God have raised your hearts, though the peace and joy of it be yours, the Glory
of it is Gods, do not be fingering of that, take heed of lifting up of your
hearts in a way of pride, it is enough your heart is lifted up in a way of
grace, and you must be content with that, but many when God gives them a lift
in a way of Grace, they cannot be content with their part, the peace, and the
joy, but they lift up themselves in a way of pride, and would have some of Gods
part of the Glory, and that spoils all.

Fourthly, When you are in the best condition, prepare for the greatest
suffering, to lie down at Gods feet, and this will keep the heart in a sweet
frame, many when they have got their hearts up for service, they never think of
suffering, now they are in a safe condition, and free from trouble, and they
bless themselves, and when trouble falls upon them unexpectedly their hearts
sink, and they think God is come against them in displeasure, and if that
raising of spirit had been true, God would have kept me from suffering such and
such hard things: thou art deceived in that, a gracious heart that is wise,
when he is most enabled to do service, he will prepare for suffering.

Fifthly, Take heed of depending upon the old stock, do not rest on grace
received, but keep thy heart sensible of a need of a supply of grace, many when
they have been seeking of God, and have in some measure got that they prayed
for, they think they have stock enough, and they can trade pretty well in the
world, but though we had a hundred times as much grace as we have, and had not
supply from Christ, we should fail.

Sixthly, Watch against the least declineing, and account it a very great evil
to decline, and therefore be often calling of your selves to an account, at
such and such a time it was so with me, how is it now? is it now as it was
then? when people decline, it is hard, it is tedious to them to think of
returning, and therefore they decline, and decline, and loose all; wherefore
observe the beginning of your declinings and call your selves to an account
daily, that when you abate in the least degree, you may reform it.

Seventhly, Do not content your selves with what you have, but yet get higher
and higher, the heart must be in motion upward, or downward, therefore the way
to get establishment is to be in a continual motion upwards as in 2 Pet.
3.17.18. Says the Apostle, beware least you also being led away by the eror of
the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness: God has brought you into a good
temper, take heed you do not fall from your steadfastness, how shall we do? grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, Labor to get
higher.

Eighthly, Improve that you have well, and that will be the way to contrive that
you have, God justly takes it from you if you do not improve it. It were a
blessed thing if our hearts might be kept up constantly, our lives would be
comfortable to our selves, and wonderfully comfortable to others: we should
cause the people of God to rejoice in us, otherwise it takes away the comfort
that Gods people might have in us, though we be up at sometimes there is a
great deal of crosness at other times. There is a notable expression for this
of Saint Paul to the Philippians, 1 Phil. 3.4. I thank my God upon every
remembrance of you. Sometime a Minister of God may thank God upon the
remembrance of such and such workings upon the hearts of his people, but never
to think of them but to thank God, this is a great matter. Always in every
prayer of mine for you all, making request with joy: Sometime a Minister can
make his request with joy for his people, but at other times it is with sorrow;
but people should labor so to walk, as that a Minister may make request with
joy for them. And so we pass to the last thing.

Fourthly, If God have raised your hearts, improve it, we have but a little
time, and we have not many opportunities, and therefore we had not need lose
any time then, it is not often we have abilities to do for God, and therefore
when we have them we should improve them. As a Scholar that has a weak Body,
and is not always fitted for study, if he find himself fitted at any time, he
is loath to lose one hour of his study then: So with a Merchant or Mariner that
lay long for a wind, when it does come, he is greedy of that opportunity: so we
are fain to lie long for a wind, we see our duty, and are convinced of it, but
we want the breathings, and assistance of Gods Spirit, and wait for a wind, if
God do come in seasonably, we had need improve it; if we had improved al those
times that were sit, what abundance might we have got by this time? When we are
fit for outward employment, we may do more in one hour, than we could have done
in ten hours before; at other times they do but bungle, and trouble themselves,
and little good comes of it; but when they are fit for work, and the work goes
off well, what encouragement is it? And so if we had taken all advantages that
we found in our hearts, since we came to the knowledge of Gods ways, what
abundance might we have done? Indeed in comparison of that which God is worthy
of, though we had spent al our lives in his service, it would have been but
little; but in comparison of that we have done, it might have been abundance.

Quest. But you will say, How shall we improve this time?

Answ. First, When God is come into you, look back to former neglects in your
running with God in the time of unfitness: Many times you have said, I am unfit
for duty, and therefore you have left it undone, which you ought not to have
done. Now if God have put your hearts into a fitness, labor to make up your
former neglects in your running with God: If a man decay in his Estate, and
break through negligence, and he be set up again, it is expected he should make
up former neglects: and so does God expect of us.

Secondly, Set upon those duties that you never could do before.

Thirdly, Gather up all the experiences of God toward you at this time; if you
have had more manifestations of Gods presence with you than before, treasure
them up.

Fourthly, When God does grant unto you peace, and joy, make use of all the
peace and comfort you have for the furtherance of the work of your grace, and
that is a mighty improvement of that which God does give you: do not only
improve your grace, but that which comes in. Many that have comfort and peace,
rest in that as the fruit of all the good they do as their reward, but they do
not look at that as a means of further service.

Fifthly, Improve this work of God upon your hearts, by watching al
opportunities; let time now be precious unto you, let there none be lost.

Sixthly, Labor for that Christian skill to make up the graces of God every way,
according as God calls for the use of them. There are diverse uses of Gods
graces; sometime for life and comfort, at other times for defense; sometimes to
draw in, at other times to let out, as Isa. 2.4. They shall beat their swords
into plow-shares, and their spears into pruning books: they should have peace
and their instruments should be of another fashion. But in Joel 3.10. it is
otherwise, They shall beat their plowshares into swords, and their pruning hooks
into spears: So apply it to grace; sometime grace is to bring life, and
nourishment to the soul; at other times it is to bring in grace. As Faith,
sometime it is to close with Christ, and bring nourishment from him; at other
times Faith is to be a Shield: Many Christians look upon the work of grace to
bring life and strength to themselves, but have not skill to make use of grace
as a shield. So Hope, sometimes it is to prop the soul, at other times it is to
be a Helmet. So we should labor to understand the use of graces, according to
the several employments that God calls for; sometime one way, sometime another.
And this is the Third Use.

CHAP. 18. A fourth Use. To be restless till we get our selves into a good
frame.
USE, 4.
A Fourth Use is this: If it be so that Gods people are in such a different
frame of spirit; sometime they are afraid, and their hearts are down; at other
times they have a spirit of courage, and fitness for any service that God will
have them to do: This should teach us when our hearts are down, and not in that
fitness we desire, to be restless till we get our selves in a good frame:
Sometime the Godly have their hearts in a good frame, and therefore it is
possible to be had, and we should never be in rest til we had got it.

Quest. But how shall we get up our hearts when they are not in a frame fit for
service?

Answ. First, Be sensible of the evil of an unserviceable heart, so as to be
humbled before God for the want of it, and be more sensible of the evil of
that, than sensible of the evil of want of peace and comfort: Many when they
find their hearts down, and not in that degree fit for service that they
desire, they are troubled for it, but the reason is because their hearts being
down, there arise doubts of their condition, and their peace is hindered, and
they cannot have comfort in it, but they are not so much troubled because they
are unserviceable, and want hearts fitted for duty, and that is the reason why
their hearts are kept down: Now this should be our care, to be more sensible of
the unserviceableness of our hearts, than of the unpeaceableness of our hearts.

Secondly, Observe which way the strength of your spirit is let out, and labor
to recall your hearts from that; as thus: If the strength of a man's spirit be
not for God, it is let out to somewhat else, it is always working some way or
other; if it be not let out to some one particular object, it is scattered and
divided into diverse objects. Now if your strength be not let out for God, call
your hearts to an account, where is the strength of my heart? which way runs
it? If it can be discerned which way the strength of your heart is let out,
whether to any creature, or any lust, that should be your care to get it off.

Thirdly, When you come to present your selves before God in his Ordinances,
come with hearts panting after strength: as when you come to the Word, Prayer,
or Sacraments, bethink your selves beforehand, I come before the Lord that I
may get this dull heart of mine quickened in such and such a particular, I find
my heart unserviceable in such a particular. Now my heart presents it self
before God, and pants after God to be fitted for service in such a particular;
it is much may be done when we come to the presence of God panting for help
from God in such particulars.

Fourthly, Observe the beginnings of Gods coming into your hearts, and
acknowledge them, and improve them, and follow them, many times God is coming
into the heart, and because God comes not in fully as much as they would at
first, they take no notice of the beginnings of the work of God to embrace
them, and improve them: There are a great many sparks have fallen upon your
hearts, if they had been gathered together, they might have been a flame by
this time, but because God did not come in with a flame all together, they did
not regard that; you said, what can a spark do upon my heart? if you had
improved that little you might have had more by this time.

Fifthly, Labor to recall all those soul quickening Truths that ever you have
felt working upon your hearts: there was a time my heart was more lively, I can
remember since God did come in with his truth, and work mightily upon my heart,
labor to recall those truths, and set them fresh before your hearts, with as
much power as possibly you can, and keep your hearts in view of them
continually, and by meditation chafe them into your hearts; though the flesh be
benumbed, yet if it be rubbed, and exercised, there will come strength, and so
those soul quickening Truths that you have found before have quickened your
hearts, if you present them afresh before the heart, and chafe them by
meditation, they will get some strength and life into the heart.

Lastly, Look into the present condition you are in, and exercise the duties
suitable to your present condition.

CHAP. 19 A Fifth Use: To see the misery of being always unfit for service. A
Sixth Use: To teach us to long for Heaven.
USE 5.
BUt now in the next place: If Gods people find such a difference between
themselves, that at sometimes it is far otherwise with them than at other times:
Hence then, what a miserable thing is it to be always down, and always unfit
for service? This is a thing that does not usually befall the people of God;
though sometimes their hearts are down in comparison of other times; yet to be
always down, and unserviceable, this do not use to be the condition of the
Servants of God: this is a sad miserable condition to be so, as if you never
felt the power of God upon your hearts, never felt the Spirit of God breathing
upon you, never felt the grace of God stirring upon you; you come and hear the
Word, and those Truths that are soul-quickning warming Truths, that stir
others, and their hearts lie lumpish as a Log that lies in a flash of water
seven years together, and is never stirred by them. Like unto a vessel in a
House, that is cast aside, and lies moulding and rotting, that is never
employed, nor fitted for any service, are these Vessels of Honor? In 2 Timothy
2.21. the Scripture speaks of Vessels that are in a great house, that are
Vessels of honor; and he describes them that they are purged and fitted for the
masters use, and prepared for every good work: Now if a vessel lie always
moulding, and rotting, and never used, this is for the fire, and not for use:
So those hearts that are always moulding, and rotting, and never fit for
service, they may fear they are vessels of dishonor, and for the fire.

Object. But may some say, I am afraid I am a vessel for the fire, for I cannot
tell that ever I found my heart sit for any service that God called me to.

Answ. First, That heart that is sensible of unfitness, and is humbled before
God for it; it has not such an unfitness as to prepare it for the fire.

Secondly, It may be it is thy unthankfulness that makes thee say thou art
never fit for service, because you are not fit for that degree you desire, you
do not take notice of the work of Gods grace for the present.

Thirdly, May be now you are framing and fitting for service, if you be but
making fit it is a sign you are not for the fire, if there be a vessel for the
fire, there is no mending of it, but if the master of the house shall call for
a vessel and require it to be cleansed, and washed, and there is some work
about it, it is a sign it is not for the fire, so may be God is fitting and
prepareing you for service.

Fourthly, May be it is that you mistake your work, you do not know what the
work is that God calls you to, you are always unfit for such, and such
service, but that is not the work that God calls you to for the present, God
calls you to a work of humiliation, and dependence upon himself, and seeking of
his face, and a work of patience, do not say you are unfit for the Masters use,
because you are unfit for such and such a work; may be the time is not yet, for
the espicial work that God intend to use you in.

USE, 6.
In the Last place: if there be such a difference between the hearts of Gods
people, this may teach us to long for heaven, when our hearts shall be always
up there shall be such a difference from that estate we are now in, as it is
more then we are able to imagine; and there shall be no fear of the loss of it,
It is an observation of Mr. Brightman, upon the 19. Revel. 11. Comparing it
with Reve. 4. and in Reve. 4.1. It is said, there was a door opened in Heaven,
In Reve. 19.11. It is said, Heaven was opened, not only a little door was
opened, but the gates and walls of Heaven were opened. There is a great deal
of difference in the estate of Gods people here, sometimes they have a little
door opened to them in Heaven, sometimes the Heavens themselves are opened to
them, but a time will come, when the Heavens shall not only be opened for them,
but it shall be replenished with them, the chief Glory of Heaven shall be the
Saints there, and we shall take no pains to keep our hearts up; it were well if
our hearts were up always, though with never so much pains, they shall as
naturally work after God, as the Sun does naturally shine, and therefore let
us comfort our selves in that time, let us strive and strugle a while, there is
a time when our hearts shall be up, and we shall never take any pains.

CHAP. 20.
Showing the power of Faith to carry through the most difficult work. Question,
What is there in Faith which helps the Soul? Answered, in four Particulars. 1.
It setles the Heart on the surest ground, which is Gods call, and Promises. 2.
It fetches in the greatest strength. 3. It assists with the highest
encouragements. 5. Faith of its own Nature is a mighty strong principle. The
most illustrious work of Faith. Thirteen remarkable things concerning Faith,
and the difficulties which it breaks through.

NOw there is one point more out of these words, we have seen the Faith of
Moses in taking away of the impediment of Moses in his work, the great
impediment was the fear of the wrath of the King, but by Faith that was taken a
way.

Now he goes upon the work: and went out of Egypt, with a high hand; from
whence the Point is this,

Doct. That Faith will carry the Hearts of Gods People through difficult works
and Services.

Though the work be difficult, and they have many hindrances to let them,
Faith will carry them through it.

I remember in the beginning of this argument, I handled that Point of Faith in
carrying through sufferings, now the argument is, that faith will carry through
difficult service, as this work of forsaking Egyyt was a difficult work for
Moses to undertake difficult; in many regards.

First, In forsaking his own country. Egypt was Moses own country, and he
himself might have shifted well enough, and have enjoyed abundance of
prosperity, the Egyptians would have made enough of him; for him to forsake
Egypt his own country was something.

Secondly, For him to carry so many thousand poor people with him, unarmed into
a Wilderness without provision, and knew not what should become of them, Flesh
and Blood would reason, what shall I carry this people into the Wilderness; what
provision shall they have? they have but a little dough at their backs, and if
that be spent what shall become of them?

Thirdly, Then Moses might think, Pharaoh is such a man that there is no hold
of him, how if he follow us with his army and cut us off? again, if we go to
the Wilderness all the Nations round about us may come and cut us off. Not
withstanding al these difficulties Moses went on.

Faith will carry a Christian through works that have much difficulty in them,
faith has done mighty things in the world, and still it mightily prevails where
it comes, no difficulty is able to stand before it, faith breaks through all,
it casts down all opposition, it overcomes all resistances, whatsoever it does
undertake, it does conquer, and al strength is but as weakness before it, we
need no further testimony of the great things that faith has done in carrying
through difficult services then this 11. Chapter of the Hebrews, and therefore
we will look no further to other scriptures.

Qustion, But you will say, what is there in faith that helps the soul, and
carries a Christian through the most difficult works and services?

Answ. There are many things.

First, Faith does it by settling the heart upon the surest ground; if a man be
set fast upon a ground that is sure, and unmovable, it may do great things: as
one thought, if he could but have a sure ground, he might make such an Engine
as to shake the Earth. Now faith sets the heart upon a sure ground, Gods Call;
Faith does not only show a Christian his duty, and tell him what God does call
him to (that may be done by bare knowledge) but Faith settles the heart upon
Gods Promises, it does bring unto the heart the Authority, Majesty, and
Sovereignty of God in this his Call, and that has a great deal of strength
upon the heart to make it go through difficulty.

Secondly, Faith does fetch in the greatest strength, and does bring it into
the soul, it does not only make the strength of God to be his, but the glorious
strength of God, the chief of Gods strength (to speak after the manner of men)
if there be any thing more glorious in the strength of God than other, Faith
does fetch in that for the strengthening of the soul in the service of God. For
that we have two or three notable Scriptures, Ephesians. 1.19. which does not only
speak of the power of God in working of Faith, but of the power of God in the
sold after Faith is wrought.

First, It is the Power of God. Secondly, It is the mighty Power of God.
Thirdly, The working of his mighty Power. Fourthly, The greatness of the
working of his mighty Power. Fifthly, The exceeding greatness of the working of
his mighty Power. Sixthly, The same Power that raised Christ from the dead.
This is in be getting Faith in the soul.

Now it is that Power which a Believer being once a Believer, has the use of
afterward.

Another Text which is remarkable for this purpose, is Ephesians. 3.16. That he would
grant unto you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with
might by his Spirit, in the inner man: that which the Apostle prays for, is
that which a Believer by Faith may fetch in, and make his own.

First, There is strength in the inner man, and that is more than in the
outward.

Secondly, It is strength by the Spirit (now Spirit is a word that is used to
express strength) and that by Gods Spirit.

Thirdly, It is strength by the Spirit with might; one would think it were
enough if he had said, Strengthened by the Spirit of God, that does bring in
might; but it is, with might by the Spirit in the inner man.

Fourthly, This is according to his Glory; it is such a strength, such a might
of Gods Spirit as God is glorious in it; it is the glory of the might of the
Spirit of God in the inner man. And yet there is one higher expression.

Fifthly, It is according to the Riches of his Glory; Whose Glory? The Riches
of the Glory, of the Might, of the Spirit of God: Of what God? That God that is
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family of Heaven and
Earth is named.

Surely this strength must enable to do mighty things, and this strength is a
Believers own, to work for him, and assist him in any service. What a shameful
thing is it for any Christian to complain of the want of strength in the
performance of Duty, when such a strength as this is made over to him, and he
by Faith may fetch it in, employ it, and make use of it as his own?

Another place to show what strength it is that Faith does bring in, it is that
in Col. 1.11. Strengthened with all might according to his glorious Power, unto
all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness. Now if in your lives you would
show that which is proper to a Christian, you must do that which must manifest
a glorious power of God. Now what is it that you do, or have done in all your
lives, that does manifest a glorious power of God? This shows the glory of a
Christian, that all that see him may say, the power of Nature could not do this,
the power of Grace could not do this, and the power of all Creatures in Heaven
and Earth could not do this, yea, it is more than an ordinary power of God, it
is a glorious power of God that must enable him to do this. But though the
power of God be glorious, it is not always put forth in enabling men to do
duties; but it is sometimes put forth in enabling of them with patience to
undergo that which is laid upon them as well as to do great things: may be you
do not find the glorious power of God for to enable you to do great works; God
would sometimes have his glorious power work to make you patient; therefore you
must not only be patient, as an ordinary man or woman, but be so patient as to
show you have a glorious power of God to make you patient. Sometimes you have
been crossed, and have had afflictions upon you, that have been sore afflictions,
and have been long upon you, and may be you have been patient, but you must be
so patient as to manifest the glorious power of God in your patience; and
therefore though I have been somewhat patient, yet, have I been so patient as to
manifest the glorious power of God in it? and have I been so long suffering
toward those that have crossed me, as to manifest the glorious power of God in
it? Faith does fetch in strength to enable to do that. And that is the second
thing that Faith does to carry through difficult services, it does fetch in the
greatest strength.

Thirdly, That which Faith does in enabling the soul to any difficult work, is
the assisting of the soul with the highest encouragements that possibly can be;
the encouraging Promises of God, and the encouraging Expressions that are in
the Word, that might put life into the deadest spirit in the world: the
encouragements that are in the Scripture, lay as it were dead to the heart, no
but that there is life in them, but because of the deadness of the heart; now
Faith comes and puts life into them. In this 11. chapter of the Hebrews, Faith
i^ commended by raising dead to life; here is as great a commendation of Faith,
when Faith shall raise a dead Promise, and dead encouragement, and put life into
it. We read a Promise or an encouragement may be twenty times before, but it
was as dead; but now Faith does come and put life into it, and the soul can
come and lay face upon its face, and mouth upon its mouth, and eyes upon its
eyes, and it comes to be a mighty quickening thing to enable it to any service.

Fourthly, Faith carries the soul through works that God calls to, because faith
in it self (besides that it brings in) is a mighty strong principle: it is the
most glorious work that ever creature was enabled to do in this world; the
Angels in Heaven were never able to put forth a more glorious work for the kind
of it, than a believing soul does put forth in the proper essential work of
Faith; and if Faith in the proper essential act of it be the most glorious
difficult work that ever creature in Heaven or Earth did; then surely it must
have a mighty deal of power to enable the soul to do the most difficult, and
glorious Services.

Quest. You will say, What is that proper essential work of faith, that is the
most glorious difficult work that ever was performed?

Answ. For a Creature that does apprehend it self by Nature an enemy to God, a
poor wretched defiled creature by sin, standing guilty in the presence of God,
having the wrath of God incensed against it, the Justice of God crying for
satisfaction, and the Law of God pronouncing an eternal Curse upon it, for a
soul to see this, and be sensible of it, and yet in this condition to raise up
its self, to lay hold upon the perfect righteousness of a Mediator, God and
Man, and to venture its eternal estate upon that righteousness, and to tender
up to God by Faith that righteousness as a full satisfaction to his Justice, and
as sufficient to bear off the the wrath of God from it; and notwithstanding all the pollution of its nature, yet to unite it self to the Deity, in the nearest
union that ever creature was united to the Deity, except the personal Union of
Christ to the Divine Nature: this is a glorious work; and no marvel though such
glorious power of God be in Faith; and a Faith that can do this, may do any
thing, as Christ said, If you can believe, all things are possible: so say I to
every one that has low thoughts of Faith, and think it a mean work, If you can
believe, al things are possible; it is a greater thing to believe truly, than
for to work miracles; a man may work miracles, and yet be damned; but
justifying Faith does so unite the soul to God that it is impossible the soul
should be damned, and therefore it is a greater miracle than ever any was
enabled to do; though God enables Angels to do great things, yet he never
enables them to do such a glorious work as this. Besides, though people think
Faith is an easy matter, yet it is the most difficult work in the world.

First, Difficult in regard of the impediments, no work has such great
impediments as this. The soul seeing an enmity between God and it, and seeing
it self a polluted Creature, and seeing the Law of God in its strictness, and
the Justice of God must be satisfied, and sees the wrath of God burning against
it, and having nothing in its self to satisfy God, yet Faith does break
through al these, and if it can break through these, then certainly it will
break through any thing; for there can be no greater impediment to any service
that God calls to, than there was to this one work of believing: Let us not
therefore be feared by any difficulty and mountain that lies in our way to any
work, because there can never be any mountain laid in our way to hinder us in
any work, as did lie in our way to hinder us from believing, and if Faith did
burst through those impediments, it shall be able to break through al other
impediments.

Secondly, It is difficult, not only because of the impediments, but because it
is the highest duty of all; to reach high is painful to the Body; so the high
actions of the soul are difficult to the soul: now Faith is high; the object is
high, the act is high, and the end is high: the object is the highest object,
it is the perfect righteousness of a Mediator, God-man; and the act is of the
highest nature, it is an act of uniting the soul with the Deity: as by sin the
soul departed from God, so by faith the soul comes to be made one, and for the
end that is high, it is for the satisfaction of infinite Justice, and for
appeasing of infinite wrath, and for acceptance from infinite holiness: let
God be never so holy, infinitely more than we can conceive of him, yet faith
does procure acceptance; for such a polluted filthy creature as man is, from
the infinite holiness of God.

Thirdly, It is difficult, because it has the least furtherance from any
principle of Nature: some other Graces, as Patience, and Justice, and Sobriety,
they have some help from the principles in Reason and Nature; but Faith has no
help from any principles in Reason or Nature; and therefore surely it is
difficult, and if it be the most glorious, and difficult thing, surely it will
enable the soul to do most glorious and difficult works.

Fifthly, Faith appears to be a most strong thing to carry the Soul through any
service, because it enables a soul to go on in any way of service that God
calls to in a gracious manner, and this does facillitate a work, a main thing
that makes our services difficult is our blundering about them, and going about
them in a confused untoward manner, we do not carry things graciously, and
sweetly, In an outward work, to carry it on in a right manner does mightily
further the work; so in any work that Godsets us about if we went on in the
right way that God set us about, it would help us against difficulty, we may
thank our selves, because we go about our work unto wardly: As an apprentice
that handles his tool untowardly, he works with as much strength as another,
but not going in the right manner to work, he does but hack and spoil his work,
whereas a Mason, or Carpenter that works, by rule and goes to it in the right
manner he goes through his work with ease, and if there be a knotty piece in
the timber he knows how to order it, because he has skill: when as others would
throw away the work, and could not tell what to do. So many not having the
grace of faith to guide them by the right rule, when they set upon any work in
religion, they cry out of the difficultness, and how it tires them no marvel if
you be tired when you do not know the right rule: but the principle of Faith
being begotten by the word, and being fed and nourished by the word, it will
keep the heart close to the word, and give skill to the soul to apply it self
to the rule, and therefore though the work be hard, yet to such a one in
comparison it is Easy, and so carries through abundance of difficulties which
otherwise would hinder him.

Sixthly, Faith carries through difficult works, things that are hard to be
done, because by faith it is that the soul of a believer has much to do with
God, with the supreme Cause, with the highest cause of all, and by reason of
Faith the great things that he undertakes are transacted between God and him;
the chief difficulty of business lies most in second causes, in under causes,
now if so be the thing be clear between the supreme cause, and the agent that
undertakes the work, it may go on and that with ease. As many times in the
business and affairs of a country, if a man have to do with many under
Officers he may have a great deal of difficulty in his work, in passing through
them, but if the business be transacted between him and the King and all be
clear there, he may carry his business with ease; so all the business of a
believer is transacted between God and him, and faith keeps the soul to the
supreme cause and works it that way, and this must needs procure much ease to
a service, because the supreme cause depends on no inferior, but all inferior
depends upon it and the supreme cause is enough to work without any inferior
causes, and no inferior can any way resist the working of the supreme; yea it
is a great particular of the glory of the supreme cause, to work above and
beyond all inferior causes, and faith having to deal with that, it is not so
much scared with difficulties as others are

Seventhly, Yet further Faith helps through great difficulties, because it does
remove and cure the difficulties that are within the spirits of men and women,
and if these be taken away, external difficulties have little in them, we
complain of many difficulties in a work without, whenas indeed the greatest
difficulties are within in our hearts, and faith has a special efficacy for
removing and curing of them; As now unruly passions are great hindrances to
any work that we undertake, faith has a mighty power in curing of them. And
likewise distracting fears, (but of that before) And the reasoning of flesh and
blood have a mighty deal of power to make a work difficult, and great care is
to be had in curing of them: And the lumpish deadness of our spirits, And the
base sluggishness of our hearts, And the base ends that a man has: faith cures
them, and cleanses the heart of them, And so foolish presumptions that people
have and their false confidences, and resting upon rotten props, these and
diverse others may be named which are inward difficulties that faith helps
against, and by removing of them does easily overcome any difficulty that is
without, therefore when you have any work which is hard, look not so much for
the removing the difficulties that are without as the difficulties that are
within.

Eighthly, The Eighth particular wherein the power of Faith is, That Faith
makes the work that God sets a Christian about, to be suitable to his spirit;
let the work be what it will be, if it be a work of God, any way of Godliness,
Faith has a power to work the heart to be suitable to that work, that there
shall be an agreement between the frame and temper of heart, and the work that
God sets it to, and then a work will go on. If you set one to a work that does
but bungle, the work does not go off hand, because it is a work that is not
suitable to his principles: but if a man has a work that is suitable to him,
he can go to it with singing, and it goes off readily: as in Nehem. 4.6. The
work went on, because the people had a mind to work; though indeed it was a
hard work.

Ninthly, Again, Another power of Faith is this: Faith has power to make use
of difficulties for the furtherance of the work, and therefore much more power
for to carry through difficulties: Faith can bring water out of the Rock, it
can make the mountains that lie in the way to be advantages to raise the heart
upon: We have a notable place for this in Hebr. 11.3, 4. where it is said, Out
of weakness they were made strong: not that they were made strong being weak,
that they were brought out of their weakness, and had strength conveyed to them
(that is not al) but it is made a fruit of their Faith, that they were made
strong out of weakness: Faith did make use of their very weakness to strengthen
them by; so that Faith is not only able to strengthen those that are weak, but
to take advantage by weakness for to strengthen, to turn al hindrances into
furtherances: for so God having promised all shall turn to good, Faith can take
hold of that Promise, and so turn all hindrances that can be into furtherances:
Faith has a Chemical Art; those that have that Art will get Gold cut of Stones
or Iron: So Faith will draw Gold out of Iron and stones, out of things that seem
to be never so cross and contrary, it will draw help.

Tenthly, Faith helps against difficulty, because it works by love, and that
has a great deal of power to carry through difficulties; Much water cannot
quench Love: it is a speech of Bernard. Cant. 8.7. The force of Love is
violent. Says the Apostle in 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Remembering without ceasing your
work of Faith, and labor of Love: Love is very laborious, it will force through
difficulty; therefore that which makes so much use of Love, and inflames that,
that has much power against difficulty.

11 ly, Another thing wherein the power of Faith consists, is, Before we enter
on the work it assures of a certain good success: Now when we know the success
shall be good and certain before we begin, this will help against any difficulty
though the work be never so hard; it is want of the hope of the success that
deadens the heart: But this must not be mistaken; Faith does not always assure
of a particular success, if we will assure our selves of a particular success,
which is more than the Promise will bear, this will hinder Faith: but faith will
assure of success in the general.

12 ly, Again, Faith assures of the reward, 2 Chronicles. 75.7. Be ye strong
therefore, and let not your hands be weak, for your work shall be rewarded:
Faith assuring of this will make one strong, though God call to never such hard
things. Mariners in hope of a good reward they will venture themselves in
storms and tempests, and in dangers on the Sea. And so a Soldier, if his
Captain will give him a months, or two months pay, over and above, he will
venture his life.

13 ly, Lastly, Faith quickens and stirs up al Graces, calls in the help of
every Grace. Now many hands will do great works: and so, where al Graces do
work together, much will be done. And thus much for the explication of the work
of faith in carrying through services that have so much difficulty: For Use,

CHAP. 21.
Uses of the Doctrine, Use, First, Let none think God an hard Master, when he
puts them upon service, because he affords them a principle to carry them
through. Use, Secondly, To Believers that they should expect to be put upon
difficult things. 1. Four considerations against discouragements. It is not to
be accounted an affliction to be put upon difficult things for 4. Reasons. Use,
Thirdly, Showing it can be no concluding argument against a work, because there
are hindrances. Use, Fourthly, When you have been carried through difficult
services consider, what it was which supported you.

USE, 1.
First, Now then let none think God to be an hard Master, in putting his
servants upon such difficulties as are hard to do; though he do put them upon
difficulties, yet he gives them a principle to carry them through, and then it
is al one as if it were easyer: Carnal hearts are ready to complain of the
tediousness and hardness of Gods ways, and they are ready to complain of God
as an hard Master, how are they hard and tedious? They are hard and tedious to
you, because you want a principle to do them by, but they are not hard to the
Christian: indeed it was cruelty, and hardness to to Pharaoh to put the
Israelites upon work, and take away their straw, but God though he puts his
servants upon hard works, he gives them a principle whereby to do them: If a
man should put another upon an hard work, and give him an engine to carry him
through, then it is not hard; so though God puts them on hard works, he gives
them an engine to carry them through; says Daniel 10.19. speak Lord thou have
strengthened thy servant. So a Godly man may say, true Lord I have no strength
in my self, to do this difficult work, but being thou have strengthened thy
servant, and given him this strong principle in some measure, now Lord speak,
Command what thou will.

USE, 2.
A second Use is this. Hence let all believers that have evidence to themselves
that they are believers, or any hope that God has wrought faith in them, let
them expect to be put upon difficult things: because God has put in them a
principle to carry them through difficult things, and God delights to improve
al his creatures according to the powers they have; there is no power of
nature, but God will call it forth, and improve it at some time or other, and if
God delights to improve the power of nature, much more the power of Grace,
which is the special, and choice power that he does communicate to any
creature in the world; and for the kind the choicest thing that he will
communicate to any creature to al eternity, and therefore if you have not found
hard things, expect them and make account that your faith should be called out,
Faith is the most glorious Grace, able to do the most Glorious things that ever
creature is able to do, and have you it for nothing? have you faith only to
keep you in that ordinary way that the principles of nature are able to keep
you in? if God have given you faith, he has given you it for to do great
things, and therefore expect difficult things.

And yet so expect them, as First, not to be discouraged, Secondly, Not to
count it an affliction.


First, Be not discouraged: some think I can hardly do ordinary things, and
therefore how shall I do such hard things.

1. If you have faith though you be called to difficult things, you cannot be
called to a more difficult work than you have done already, and this is a great
encouragement to faith: the weakest believer in the world has done as
difficult a work as ever any shall be called to besides that, viz. the work of
believing at first, when we look upon our selves as enemies to God, for God to
justify the ungodly, this is a more difficult work then ever God will call you
to; and therefore if God has carried you through the difficulties in the point
of justification, never fear any difficulties that may follow hereafter: If a
man be called to any hard thing he comforts himself in this, I am not called to
a harder then I have done already, suppose God has called you to an hard duty
this not an harder duty then that you have done already, that is the work of
faith in closing with Christ in the point of justification.

2. Though you know God will call you to hard things, God has engaged himself
that you shall never have any temptation befall you, but you shall have
strength accordingly.

3. If you be called to any thing, God does not call you to any hard work, nor
never will, in expectation that you should do it in your own strength, but in
that strength which he will give you, and yet count it upon your own score, as
if you did it in your own strength to reward you for it, indeed when we
consider what little strength we have, we may be discouraged, but when God does
call us to any work he does not expect we should do it in our strength, and yet
he will reward it as our own, as in that 60. Psalm. 12. Through God we shall do
valiantly, for he it is that shall tread down our enemies: is it God that
treads down our enemies how do we do valiantly? it is God that does valiantly,
we do nothing, yet says the text through God we shall do valiantly, for he it is
that shall tre^d down our enemies; so that though the strength whereby God
expects us to do any work by, be not our own, yet God accounts it as our own,
and Christians may reckon it their own to give God the glory of it.

4. Further be not discouraged for fear of any difficult work you shall be
called to, because there is no work of a Christian, that he is called to, but
as it spends strength it gives strength, it gives more then it spends, in the
way of spending it gives: A man will never be afraid of cold in work that
brings more heat then cold, the sluggard would not plow because it was cold, in
Prove. 20 4. But if he had plowed his labor would have brought in heat; and so
it is a sluggish reason to think, shall I do such an hard work and I have such
little strength? the work will bring in strength; as if a man should say I am
cold in the house, how cold should I be in the field, and how cold when I take
hold on the plow which is cold, and the earth which is cold? indeed if there
were nothing in the work to bring in heat we might say so; but the work brings
in more heat, then there is coldness in the air: And so people think I have
scarce strength for that work which I have now, but if it be more difficult
what then? If it be more difficult, and it bring in more strength, then it
would be better then it is now.

Secondly, Count it no affliction; do not complain as if your case were worse
then the case of any, that God put you upon such hard taskes and works that he
does not others, thou know not what thou do in complaining of the
hardness of thy work.

1. Know a difficult work is a most honorable thing. As if a Captain have some
great difficult work to do, that is of great consequence for the good of his
country, he will not call out every base fellow, but his prime ones, and they
count it an honor to be called out. And so if a master of Defense have some
difficult work to be done, he does not call out the lowest in the School, but
the chiefest, and it is an honor to him: and if he were called to do only
ordinary things, and another were called to do great things, it would be a
dishonor to him, and so it might rather be an affliction, for God to call you
to do only ordinary things.

2. It is a mighty opportunity for the exercise of Grace: now as the scripture
says, 1. Pet. 1.7. The trial of Grace is more precious than Gold. For the
exercise of Grace, Grace it self is for exercise, and so the exercise is better
than the grace, and if grace be precious in the habit, it is more precious in
the exercise, you should prize one exercise of Grace more excellent then the
whole world: People prize grace in the habits; Oh that God would bestow Grace
upon them, but they do not set a price upon every gracious act, but come to
this, to set a high price upon every act of Grace as well as the habit, and you
will not complain of difficult works.

3. The more difficult services you are called to, the more opportunity you
have to honor God, you have don but a little all this while and the most part of
your time has been to little purpose, if God will give you an opportunity to
do a great deal in a little time, will you murmr at it and count it your
affliction.

4. Difficult works are for the improvement of your graces: If a man have a
stock, and he have had some improvement for it, but not full, he has some money
ly dead by him or is not improved for that advantage it might, if he shall find
a way to improve every penny of his stock, to the utmost advantage, will he
count this an affliction? he counts it an advantage; who grow rich but those
that have the full improvement of their stock: Men count it a misery to have
their stockly by them and not improved; why do not you count it a misery to
have gracely by you, and not exercised: Would you count it a happiness that God
should show you a way to improve your outward stock to the full, and would you
not count it a happiness that God should show you a way to improve your grace
to the full.

USE, 3.
The third use is this: If Faith enables to carry through difficult works, then
it can be no concluding argument against a work, because there fall out many
hindrances in the work, for faith carries through nothing but that which is
the work of God, and if it be to carry through hindrances, then hindrances
and blocks in the way can be no concluding argument that this is not the work
of God; this is our weakness, we set upon many works and before we begin we
consider whether it be the work of God, and we have considered and consulted
with God, and his people, and we find it is Gods work, and we begin to set upon
it, and we would go on, and always think it Gods work if things went on well,
but as soon as we find any let that stops us, we begin to call in question
whether it were Gods work or no. It is true when we find any hindrances in our
work, it should make us reflect our thoughts upon our call to it and see that be
right; and further, it should make us humble our selves before God to take away
whatsoever hinderance God should lay in our way out of any displeasure; for
though God sometimes do lay hindrances as an honor to improve our graces, yet
sometimes hindrances may be as chastizements to us; and therefore it is useful
for to humble our souls before God, that we may have more assurance nothing is
between God and us, and that our hindrances do not come as a fruit of his
displeasure, and the hindrances we meet withal should make us keep more close
to the rule, because Faith will bear us out in nothing, but according as we
go to the rule, and so we should improve hindrances to stir up our Faith: But
to make hindrances, and hard things that fall out to be an argument to think
it is not the work of God, that is a great evil: And for that I only speak this
one thing, and that is the way of God toward Jacob in that work of his when
God called him to go from Laban into his own country, You may read the story
at your leisure, God from Heaven calls Jacob to go to that Journey: It was the
work of God; Jacob might think it being Gods work I shall meet with no
hardship: but if you read the story, you shall find it was one of the most hard
Journeys that ever he undertook in his life as it appears by these six things.

First, After he went Laban followed him with an intent to mischeife him, but
that God stopped him, and there was some danger that Jacob was in; God freed him
from that.

Secondly, His wise's nurse dyed, that was a great help to his wife, God took
away even a right hand to his wife.

Thirdly, His wife dyed in that Journey, this was a mighty cross, he might
think God comes mightily to cross me.

Fourthly, After this His Daughter Dinah goes out, and she is defloured,

Fifthly, After this His two Sons Symeon and Levi go and commit that woeful
outrage, and murdered so many innocent people.

Sixthly, His Brother Esaw came with rage and fury against him, intending to
destroy him, and he was mightily afraid of his Brother Esaw: Now this may
quiet many that are to go any Journey; first, let them see the call of God, and
then go on in it whatsoever falls out, take it rather as a trial of your Faith,
then any stop of God in your way. And so you that are weak, that have friends
that undertake hard works, and hard voyages, you think they may do it before
danger come, but if danger come you are ready to think that it is not the right
way; if you have no other argument but that, know it comes from weakness, and
you are to lay down that weakness, and not to disturb your selves, and your
friends by your weakness, to think it is not the way of God, because of those
hindrances: and that is the third use.

USE, 4.
Fourthly, if Faith be the principle that carries through such difficult works:
Hence who ever have been carried through difficult works, look back to what God
has carried you through, reflect upon it and see what it was that did it; such
and such works God called you to, may be, as he did Moses to forsake your own
country, which you have done, not out of any outward necessity, but in bare
obedience to God, now may be you may meet with many hindrances, and
inconveniences, you might have stayed and lived comfortable and full handed
enough, if you could have dispensed with those things that others did, some
hardship you had in leaving of those things; and then the example of others
might come and make the work difficult: But through Gods mercy the work was
undertaken, and gone through, now what is it that carried you through? was it
your own natural resolutions? the strength of your own purposes? was it any
assistance you hade from any friends? or any help that we can imagine from any
creature? upon the reviewing of it cannot you say as in the presence of God, I
know not what in the world carried me through, but Gods giving me an heart to
depend upon him in it.

After what manner did God work upon thy heart? did he first prepare thy heart,
by a work of humiliation to seek him, and make up thy peace with him? when he
had done that: did God secondly take off thy heart from all creature props,
creature confidences, and dependances? After that did God cast in a word, and
promise into thee, and by his spirit mightily draw thy heart to close with it,
and fasten upon it? did God draw out a work of Faith to close with this wisdom
Faithfulness and power for the carrying of thee through when thou saw no
strength in thy self, nor did not know what should become of thee? were
willing wholly to venture upon God, to give up thy self unto him, to be at his
dispose? were thy ends good and right in this work? did not thou find that
there was a principle in thee carrying thee beyond thine own thoughts, and
beyond any strength that thou could possibly conceive to be in thy self, and
that has brought the work to an issue beyond they expectation? surely there
was faith in this, and if there were faith in this, consider what I have to say
to thee.

First, Know that this work is wonderfully acceptable to God, God looks upon
such works of nature as lovely, as the young man that came to Christ, Christ
loved him, in Mark, 10.21. But if it be a work of faith God looks upon it and
accepts it indeed, says the scripture, These obtained a good report by faith;
Heb. 11.39. They obtained a good report indeed, not only before men, but before
God.

Secondly being a work of Faith, thou may have abundance of peace, and joy
in it, we never have gone through difficulty but it is pleasant to us, if we
have gone some voyage, and have passed through difficulties, through many
storms, and tempests, we prize it, the water that David longed for, when it was
got with so much difficulty, he thought it too good to drink, but powered it
before the Lord. In 2 Samuel 23.16.17. As Jacob says of the portion he gave to
Joseph, Genesis 48.22. This I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword
and my bow. So any thing that we get hardly it is the more prized: so that when
we get through difficulties by our faith: that we should prize much, and
rejoice in.

Thirdly, If so be that Faith has carried thee through difficulty, Let this
encourage thee for ever for time to come; certainly there is no difficulty will
stand before thee: if difficulties have begun to fall, they will fall, and will not
be able to stand before thee. You may reason as Hamans friends, If thou
beginnest to fall before Mordecai, thou will fall, Est. 6.13. and therefore
thou may call this work by the name that David called that place where his
enemies began to fall before him; Baal-perizem, because God had made a breach
upon his enemies, 2 Samuel 5.20. he took that but as a pledge that God would make
al his enemies fall before him. And so, has God made some difficulties fall
before thee; then al difficulties will fall.

Fourthly, Let God have all the glory, neither thy self, nor the means; those
things that we do by Faith, God is in them, little of our selves, or nothing at
al; Boasting is excluded, says the Apostle, Romans 3.27. By the Law of Faith, or
by the Law of Works? By the Law of Faith, and therefore that which is done by
faith, excludes al boasting from our selves, and gives God the glory.

1. Because Faith of al Graces has least rooting in our selves: as for
Justice, and Temperance, and Patience, and Love, they have some assistance in
Nature; but faith has nothing at al, and therefore God must have the glory of
that chiefly.

2. Faith of al Graces has the least influence into that which it does, though
it be under the rank of efficient causes; it is but an instrumental cause, and
though an instrument be an efficient, it is the least efficiency of al, and
therefore the glory belongs to God.

3. Of al Graces Faith is the most emptying Grace, it carries a Creature out of
it self unto another; and therefore whatsoever we do by Faith we must give God
the glory.

4. Attribute nothing to means; for though thou usest means, ye whatsoever was
done by Faith, was done above means, beyond means, and might have been done
without means.

5. Has God carried you through any difficult work? and was this a principle:
Labor to prize the word of God upon which thy faith was built to nourish and
increase this Joy.

6. If you have found your faith has carried you through great things, take
heed thy Faith do not fayl thee in less things, that will be a shame; As a
mariner that has been in great storms, and tempests, and has wrought
through them, if afterward he should come, and perish in the haven, or in some
ordinary tempest, for want of Skill that would grieve him more; and so for a
Soldier that has been in desperate battles afterward to be overcome with a
little strength, he loses his honor, this is possible that a Christian by his
faith may be carried through wonderful great things, and yet his faith may fail
him afterward in lesser things, as many a man may escape great dangers, and
recover great success, and yet afterward die of a cold, and those that God
has carried through great things, may fail in lesser, but it is an infinite
shame, take heed to your selves in that: As David speaks concerning Saul, 2.
Sam. 1.21. The shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, as though he had not
been anointed with Oil. God has given thee faith as a shield, and it was the
shield of the mighty, and now it is vilely cast away, an ordinary temptation
comes and thou failest, as if thou had not been anointed with oil, when God
carried thee through difficult works, thou were anointed with oil, and now you
fall as if you had not been anointed with oil, you have been carried through
many difficulties in that work of leaving of your country, now when you come
here your faith will not serve you to order your ordinary business, and
affairs, but it fails fowly in every ordinary dealing with man, and in your
private dealings in your family what a shameful thing is it, that such a one as
has had such power, as to look upon the face of his enemies, and to testify
for the truth before them, when he has to deal with a servant, or child or
Wife he fails shamefully, and when he comes to deal with brethren, he knows not
how to behave himself, as if he were not anointed with oil, as if he never had
faith, nothing but nature, as full of frowardness, and pettishness of spirit,
and all outward distempers, as those that never were acquainted with Faith? And
so faith has carried you through great difficulties, enabled you to deny your
self to get to the ordinances, and when you are under them it fails you in
assistance to make use of them, and to give God the Glory of them, but you
rather defile them, and spoil them, what a shameful thing is this? Be ashamed
and confounded in your own thoughts, and stir up your Faith.

CHAP. 22.
Quest, How to know whether Faith will carry us through difficult works,
Answered in several particulars, 1. Faith Goes upon spiritual grounds, motives,
and ends. 2. Makes men sollicitous and careful for the enjoyment of Gods
presence with them. 3. Causes men to carry themselves in a Gracious manner. 4.
To have an high esteem of the name of God. 5. Makes them careful, that they may
not be frustrated of their end. 6. It makes men satisfied with God Alone. 7.
Faith is a continued work. That Faith, Which brought you out, will carry you
through.

QVEST. It is true faith does carry through difficult works, and amongst other
difficult works the forsaking of ones own country: it is much that we forsake
in forsaking our country, and we had need of Faith to carry one through this,
indeed a Christian should look upon all the world as his country, he treads
upon no ground but that which is his Fathers ground. Socrates used to call
himself a Citizen of the world when he was banished he counted it no banishment
for the world was his country, and he being a man was a Citizen of it,
certainly God has given the Saints the World: The promise was to Abraham and
to his seed that he should be heir of the World, Romans 4.13. And as it was said
of the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 11.24. So it may be said of the Saints,
Whatever ground you tread upon, it is your own for use: And further though the
world be theirs yet they live above the world and therefore they care not in
what part of the world they are: Thus Tertullian writing to Martyrs to
encourage them being driven from their own country it is no matter says he in
what part of the world you are who are separated from the world: Yet there is
much difficulty in le^^ing of a man's country, and he had need of faith to carry
him through who does leave it, But how shall we know that faith carries us
through, there may be many other principles.

Answ. First, Faith goes upon spiritual grounds, motives and ends, Faith is a
spiritual grace and it works exceeding spiritually, and the reasonings of Faith
are above the reasonings of Flesh and Blood, what were your motives and grounds
and ends by that you might know whether out of faith you forsook your country,
it may be it was from vexation or discontent that you left your country; or
from the example of others, or from engagement unto others, or out of novelty
or out of carnal fears or out of vain hopes, or for further providing for your
selves, a great many things there may be that may put people on such a way,
especially those three, novelty, example, and discontent: but if it be by faith
the ground and the end will be spiritual, for God and out of obedience unto God.
It is observable of Moses (for I will go no further for notes of trial then
from the work of Moses) Moses when he pleads with Pharaoh to go out of his
country, he did not plead the peoples bondage, you do so abuse the people here,
and we are in such grievous bondage, that we cannot bear it, but says he In
Exodus 4.23. The Lord has commanded, we must go into the wilderness to worship
him, that was his plea and ground and end rather then the bondage that the
people did suffer: so when men forsake their country, outward things may come
in, in subordination to higher things: and there may be faith in ordering the
heart about them, but faith must go above them: now can your consciences
witness, as in the presence of God, it was your longing desire, for to enjoy
God in his ordinances and to keep your souls from defilement, this was the
argument of Moses, they could not set up the worship of God there, but they
must go where God called them.

2. If Faith be the thing that brings any from their country, above all things
they will be very sollicitous, and careful, for the enjoyment of Gods presence
with them; though they are in a subordinate way to provide for their families
and to look how to live yet the great care of their souls is that they may
enjoy the presence of God: this was Moses argument: Exodus 33.15. Except thy
presence go with us Lord carry us not hence: now if so be it was thy care in
departing to carry God, and his gracious presence with thee, let me stay here
and suffer any thing, lie in prison and rot, rather then go without the
presence of God, this is an argument it was of Faith.

3. Moses in forsaking his own country and going from Egypt he carries it in a
very gracious manner, when he came to Pharaoh though the people were vexed and
troubled, because their bondage did increase, he did not fall exclaiming
against him, but rather yiedling to him in a way of submission as far as he
could: he did not go on rashly, headily, foolishly, and self-confidently, as
many do, which manifest a great deal of pride, and stoutness of spirit rather
then any thing else, but he carries on the business with a great deal of
sobriety and gravity, with much humility, and meekness of spirit, in a way of
wisdom; and so it is in every action of faith so far as faith is in it, now
what was the manner of your forsaking your country, was it in a way of seeking
of God, knowing the mind of God, with quietness of spirit, and humility, and
wisdom that you were brought away, that is another note that it is of faith.

4. Moses when he came from his country, above al things the name of God was
dear to him after he was come away and especially upon this because their very
departing from Egypt held out the name of God much, and therefore he was very
careful that that name of God, that was held out in their departing from Egypt
might not be polluted, when he was in any danger, presently he flees to this,
Lord what will become of thy great name: he does not so much plead in the
behalf of the people, as in the name of God, so if faith has brought you from
your country, the name of God is much in it: you take a profession that you
come from your country for the ordinances of God, and the further purity of his
worship, now for one to leave friends, and estate, and country, and all upon
this ground, if it were out of faith, how dear would the name of God be to such
a one, least the name of God that is held out in his profession should be
polluted; when you come here and there should be divisions, and nothing but
tearing, and rending of one another; consider what shall become of the great
name of God, thus Moses reasoned what will the heathen say, that thou have
brought the people hither to destroy them? so will others say, they are come
out of their own country to tear and rend, and fight with one another. Let that
name that is held out ^n your profession be dear to you, and make that an
argument to curb passion, and to order you in your dealings one with another.

5. Moses was mightily careful that he might not be frustrat of his end: he
went out of Egypt that he might come to Canaan: and when there was any danger
that he was like to be frustrated in this, how it troubled him it went to his
heart; and he cried to God that God would let him see that good land: so if it
be out of faith that you come from your country, great care will be had that
you be not frustrate of your end, wherefore came you? came you not to enjoy
God? to have further communion with God? to walk with God in a more close way
then you could do before? are you careful to attain your end? does it trouble
your souls when at any time you see any danger to be frustrate of your end?
does it come near to you that you find for the present you have attained so
little of your end? those that come out of other ends, let this go: but if you
come out of Faith, you will be mightily careful to attain the end for which
you came, that work that is done out of faith will work mightily to the end,
and never leave working till it come at its end.

6. If so be you came out of your country by Faith your souls will be satisfied
with God alone and the call and promise of God is that which your souls will
have recourse unto continually for the satisfaction of your souls, so Moses
when he was in straight he presently had recourse to the call and promise of
God, to bring his people out of Egypt, and that satisfied him.

7. As it will quiet, and satisfy the soul, so that Faith that brought you out
will carry you through all difficulties, now you meet with many difficulties,
and some you thought not of, if it were out of faith that you came, and that
faith were a continued work it will carry you through the difficulties you meet
withal, do you find that upon the difficulties you meet withal your hearts
sink? you may fear it was not Faith that first brought you out. I would not
have any gather any sinister conclusion from this which has been said, to
think that we make comparisons between our country and Egypt: no but we bless
God for the good we received in our own country, and do desire the good of it
as far as we can, but only to show the work of Moses in forsaking Egypt. But in
those that came from Egypt there was a mixed company; and those mixed company
were a continual trouble and disturbance to those that were the Israel of God.
Numb. 11.4. And the mixed multitude that was among them fell a lusting, and the
children of Israel also wept again and said who shall give us flesh to eat? the
mixed multitude they began the sin, and the children of Israel fell with them:
And so into these countries there are come many of the people of God that were
gracious out of faith; but there are a great many that are the mixed multitude,
that were of broken estates, they knew not how to live, and coming upon those
ends, the people of God are troubled with such, and they are the gratest
contemners of the ways of Godliness, they have kindness from the people of the
country, but they meet with trouble from this mixed company, especially when any
of those do creep into the Church, and come to be members of it, but for those
that come from their country by faith, we hope we shall enjoy comfortable
communion with all such, and thus much for this fourth use.

CHAP 23.
Containing other uses of the point. Use, 5. Shows the reason why we fail in
any thing we do; it is for want of Faith. Use, 6. Labor to rise in indignation
against your unbelief. Use, 7. Consider what it is to fail in that work which
concerns thy eternal estate.

USE, 5.
Fifthly, If so be that it be Faith that carries through difficulties, hence we
see the reason why we fail in any thing that we do, it is want of Faith: It
is not such a let, nor such a hinderance; no, know it is the unbeleiving heart,
it may be thou wentest in the resolution of thy own heart, and thought to carry
it through in the strength of thy own spirit, and that would not do: As the
Apostle says. Heb. 11.29. By Faith they passed through the red sea as by dry
land, which the Egyptians assaying to do were drowned: So by Faith such and
such passed through such and such works to the glory of God: But others at
other times, would assay to do them by their own resolutions, and they failed
and were drowned; it is true resolution may do great matters, but to carry a
soul in a gracious manner through any difficulty it will fail: Know therefore
where lay the cause of thy failing, and lay thy hand on the right place, and
accuse thy self of an unbeleiving heart,

USE, 6.
And upon that labor to rise in indignation against thy unbeleiving heart; as
suppose a man has been in some great work, and some have let him, and so
let him, as to spoil his work; his heart rises against him: I was in a good
forwardness and such a one came and spoiled my work; and so look upon thy
unbelieving heart: I was in such a work that God set me about, but my
unbelieving heart came and hindered me, and Gods name lost the glory, and my
own soul was wounded.

USE, 7.
Again does thy heart fail thee? if my unbelieving heart make me fail in
this work, what if I should fail through unbelief in that great work that
concerns my eternal estate? what should become of me then? I seldom undertake
a work but my unbelieving heart makes me fail in it; now there is a work of
infinite consequence, and nothing can carry me through that but Faith, and if
my unbelieving heart come and spoil me in that, it were better I had never been
borne, it has done me hurt enough in such and such things, I had need have a
care it do not spoil me in that: As if a man should say, there are such and
such businesses I have miscarried in, and I have lost much by them, but there
are such and such works if I miscarrie in I am undon, it is as much as my life
is worth, and therefore I had need take heed of those things that have been
hindrances to me in my other works: So if unbelief have done you hurt in these
works, take heed it do not hinder you in the maine work. And for a word to
those that are weak, who are ready to be discouraged, and think they shall
miscarry: Know God has a special care of all his people though never so weak
to keep off hindrances in that maine work, though God do suffer them to fail
in other works, and his name suffer some dishonor by it, yet he will have a
care they shall not fail in the maine work: and were we not sure of this that
God will have a care that our unbeleeving hearts shall not spoil us in that
maine work we have to do about our Eternal estate, we could never have comfort
know the covenant will not bear this, the covenant will bear that God should
let our faith fail in some works, but it will not bear this that God should
suffer the least degree of faith to fail in that work which concerns the
eternal good of the soul; Christ is called the mighty counselor, and the maine
work of Christ is to counsel the soul in those things that concern its eternal
estate, and notwithstanding all its unworthiness, he will counsel it so far as
it shall not miscarry in that great business, yet Christ does not always
afford his counsel in every particular action. As God deals in the way of his
counsel, so of his power, though he may withdraw his strength so, as not to
assist our faith in some particular actions, yet in the maine and great
business that concerns our eternal estate, we shall not want necessary
strength. As a Father that is going along with his child, may be he goes in
such ways as the child is in danger of many a fall, to get many a knock, and
sore bruise, the father will say to him have a care, take heed: but if he come
to a way, that if the child fall he lose his life the father will not content
himself with saying take heed, but he takes hold on him till he be past that
place: so God in all our ordinary business says look to your Faith, exercise
your faith, but for all that we get many a fall, and many a knock, but then may
be there comes another work, that concerns our eternal estate, which if we
fail in we are undone for ever, god takes hold of the soul there, and will not
let them miscarry in that, which is the infinite mercy of God to us; and were
we not sure of Gods mercy in that respect, being conscious to our selves of our
unbeleeving hearts, we might fear, yea conclude we should fail.

CHAP. 24.
Helps to put on Faith in any undertaking. 1. Set before you the example of
your great Captain Jesus Christ. 2. Make preparation for the work of Faith by
Humiliation. 3. Renew your Faith in the Covenant of Grace. 4. In difficult
times, set Faith on work to purify the heart. 5. Take heed of shifting ways
and dependances. 6. Set loose from your own ends. 7. Cast your selves upon the
word of God. 8. Plead the word with God in prayer. 9. Refuse no means that God
puts into your hands. 10. Do nothing with a slavish spirit 11. Be not
discouraged by miscarriages that are past 12. Take heed of the disturbance of
passion in your work. 13. Observe the dependances one work has upon another.
14. Lisson not to Temptations. 15. Take heed of perverse reasonings. 16. Take
heed of disorderly working, in four cases. 17. Use resolution and Courage. 18.
Look on your selves as Gods Instruments. 19. Be constant though you find
nothing come of it. 20. Increase not the difficulty by your Carriage. 21. Look
most at your Encouragements. 22. Use not the difficulty in the way to reason
against the work. 23. Labor to harden your selves by faith against all
difficulties

NOw does God call you to any service or work that has any difficulty in it?
you see what it is that will help. David by Faith in Psalm. 18.29. Says, he
could break through a troop and leap over a wall, and break a bow of Steel, and
Paul could do all things through Christ that strengthened him; As Christ said
of Miraculous faith, so it may be said of Justifying Faith. If you had faith
but as a grain of mustard seed, you should say unto this mountain be removed
hence to yonder place, and unto this Sycamine tree, be thou plucked up by the
roots, and be thou planted in the Sea and they shall obey you, in Math. 17.20.
And in Luke, 17.6. And so Faith if it come to a sin that is rooted, it will be
able to pluck it up by the roots, and to remove mountains. There is nothing
more weak, and unuseful then on ordinary conceited faith, that is but a bare
opinion, and groundless hope, but nothing more strong and useful then true
Faith, it has the quintessence of all graces, as the root of the herb has the
virtue, and quintessence of all the fruit, and branches in it, so faith has
the quintessence of all grace, and therefore it will do great things. As it was
said of Luther that had much faith, he could do whatsoever he would: So it may
be said of Faith and the Scripture says so of it; Faith can do what it will,
it was the speech of Christ to the woman: O Woman great is thy Faith be it unto
thee as thou will: In Math. 15.28. Those whose faith is great it shall be to
them as they will, but know it must be exercised, it is not enough to have it
in the habit, but the activity, and exercise of it: wherefore for the putting
on of your Faith.

1. Let us set before us the example of our great Captain the Lord Jesus
Christ you know what difficult works Christ undertook for the salvation of
man, such difficult works as all the Angels in heaven and creatures in the
world would have sunk under: But Christ went through them; and there was a
work of Faith in Christ that carried him through, though it was not such a work
of faith as ours, Justifying Faith, yet he had a Faith, his trust in his father
that did help to carry him through great and difficult works. In 2 Heb. 12.13.
Christ is propounded as an example unto us, Saying I will declare thy name unto
my brethren, in the midst of the Church will I sing praise unto thee: Christ in
his own person did praise God, and he sung praises in the hearts of his people,
so that by the way, take this as a comfortable note, to encourage us to
public duties, while we are praising of God, Christ is praising of God while
we are singing of psalms to God in a gracious manner, Christ is praising of God
the father. And again I will put my trust in him, it is a speech of Christ unto
the Father, Christ put his trust in the Father, and the example of the work of
Faith in Christ to carry him through all the works he had to do, is brought as
an encouragement unto Christians, to cast their relyance on God the Father, to
carry them through all the hard works they have to do. And as Christ did not
only praise God in his own person, but in the Church, so Christ did not only in
his own person trust in the Father and so was carried through the difficult
works he had to do, but he trusted in his Father, in the hearts of his people,
that they might be carried through the difficult works they have to do.

2. When any difficult work is to be done, labor to make preparation for the
work of Faith by humiliation, before you undertake the work and according to
the nature of any difficult services there must be a proportionable measure of
humiliation before you undertake that work: therefore when God has called to
extraordinary works, usually Gods people have made preparation for their faith
by extraordinary humiliation, as Nehemiah, Ezra and Esther, that were to
undertake great works, which they were to be carried through by faith, they
made preparation by extraordinary humiliation before hand. It is in the putting
forth of a new act of faith, as it was in the first act of Faith, as especially
humiliation was a preparation for faith at first, so especially humiliation is
a preparation for the putting forth of a new act of Faith, after we have it.

3. When any difficult service comes to be performed let there be often renewing
of Faith in the great covenant of Grace: and do not only think to exercise
faith in this particular work, but let your care be about renewing Faith in the
great covenant, let the great Charter be renewed, and inferior grants will come
in. Thus God dealt with Abraham, when any thing befell Abraham that he was in a
great straight, then God renewed his Covenant with him, I am God Alsufficient;
God thought this a special means to carry him through; If you have renewed the
covenant (in which all the promises are included) this is a great help to
Faith, Shall not God who has given us his Son with him also give us al things
else; the soul may reason strongly thus.

4. Faith must be set on work when any difficult service is to be done, for the
purifying of the heart, though you believe God will be with you, and strengthen
you in the work, yet unless you make use of Faith to purify the heart, as well
as believe, you may miscarry in the work, if there be any lust that lies next
the heart, you will never be able for to do great things; for sin as it is of a
defiling nature, so it is of a weakening nature. If you would have a spirit of
power, you must have a sound mind. In Nehemiah, 13.3. When they were about a
great work they separated the mixed company, and when you are about any great
work, Exercise Faith to purge your hearts from corruption, Says David, Psalm.
18.32. It is God that girdeth me with strength, and makes my way perfect. The
girding of him with strength and making his way perfect went together:
therefore: labor that the way with God in your own hearts may be perfect, and
clean, and then God will gird you with strength.

5. In difficulties labor to exercise faith to get you off from all shifting
ways, and creature dependances: It is observable of those that have to deal
with metals, when they are working of Gold, that they might have it work the
easier, they will mix other metals with it, and upon the mixing of Lead and
tin with Gold, it works the easier, but it is a great deal worse, it were
better they would take more pains in the working of it, it would be purer. Just
so do many Christians, that are ill workmen in the ways of God, when they are
working of good actions and they find them difficult, and go somewhat hard off,
they will be mixing their own carnal policy, and shifting courses, and to
that end the work may go off easier, but though it be easier to be done yet it
is a worse piece of work after it be done, then it would have been if it had
been done with more pains. Labor to exercise Faith to get you off from al
creature dependances, if the heart by Faith be given up to God alone, it will
do mighty things: but if so be we would have two strings to our bow, that if
such a means do fail we may have some other to rest upon, we shall never do
any great thing: And therefore when God would use any of his people to do great
things, he first took them off from al creature helps they had before, as I
have met with an observation that one has from Moses about this. In Acts, 17,
22. It is said Moses was an Eloquent man, a man of mighty words. Yet if you
read the Story in Exodus 4.10. you shall hear Moses complain that he was slow
of speech, and not eloquent. This is answered, Moses was a man of mighty words,
but when God was about this work, and a little before God took away his
excellency in words, that he might have further dependence upon God, then
before he had: whether there be any reality in this or no I know not, yet
certainly it is the way of God, when men have any creature helps, God does take
them off from them that they might have a sheere work of Faith, for when the
creature is used, it does usually rob God of a great part of his honor:
Therefore when Gideon had so many thousand, God said it was too great a
multitude for him to deliver his people by.

6. Faith must take us off from our own ends too, and engage God in the
business as much as we can, let God be seen in the work though we be not seen,
let God have the glory, though it be not known who did that difficult work,
great things will be done when God is engaged in the business. And it is a
special work of Faith to take us off our own ends; when you come to a great
work, you think to exercise faith and not being taken off from your own ends;
Faith loses its virtue and power.

7. When we come to any work that is difficult, let us labor to exercise Faith,
to cast our selves upon the word, to find out some promise, and to roll upon
it to venture our selves and the might of our work upon that word, as namely
thus: Suppose it be a work for the subduing of any sin; that word in Romans 6.14.
Sin shall not have dominion over you, look at the word, and make more account of
it, then of all your endeavors against sin whatsoever, if it be laboring to get
from under that difficulty, the guilt of Conscience, and delivering your selves
from the terror of it. That word in Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to those
that are in Christ Jesus. If it be for the doing of any work that we are called
to, that word that has vertually a promise in it: he works all our works in
us, and for us; Isa. 26.12. If it be to stand against any opposition, that word
which God gave to Joshua, Joshua. 1.5. I will be with thee and will not leave
thee: Exercise Faith to get a word and to rest your souls upon it.

8. Take this word and plead it with God in prayer when you enter on any
difficulty, do as it were show unto God his bond: though God binds him self;
yet he will not come in and help till the creature come and show his bond: and
upon the sight and pleading of the bond with God, God is pleased to come in
with help, God is much taken, and delighted with this, when any of his servants
in difficulty shall come, and plead his promises. The turning of promises into
prayer, and as it were the distilling of faith into prayer is a thing mighty
prevailing with God: As there are some Physical things that have great
operations, but unless they be distilled, or taken in such and such things they
will not work; but then they will work: So Faith when it is distilled and
turned in prayer, and mingled with prayer, and taken down in that, then it
works: If a Physician should come and say, how did you take such a thing? and
you say I swallowed it down, he will say you should have taken it in such and
such a thing, and then it would have wrought; so you believe God will help you,
but have you distilled your Faith into prayer? and taken it therein pleading
with God to fulfill his word: that is a great means to do great things.

9. Faith must refuse no means, if there be any means that God does lay in your
way, take them thankefully, use them faithfully, diligently, carefully as if
there were nothing but means: and when you have used them depend upon God above
means, as if there were no other means: Idleness and presumption are quite
contrary to faith: and therefore be faithful in the use of means. As it is
observed, God says he brought the people into Canaan, by his mighty power and
outstretched Arm: yet there was a great many valiant Soldiers and a mighty
power of the people; so that notwithstanding all means, Faith knows how to give
God the glory of his outstretched arm, knowing that all second causes work by
the power of the First.

10. Let us take heed that what we undertake to do, we do it not with a slavish
spirit, merely haled unto it but look upon every duty as a work of the Gospel;
that that people do merely in a compulsive way, out of a slavish spirit, they
will never go through it, but by Faith we are to look upon all duties as works
of the Gospel, not as works of the Covenant of works, but as works of the
Covenant of grace, therefore that is observable concerning Zerubbabel In Zach,
4. Where God says mountains shall be made plain before Zerubbabel,
difficulties shall be taken away, how? at verse. 7. At the laying of the corner
stones they shall cry Grace, Grace, magnifying the Grace of God, looking
higher at the Garace of God, then at all the strength that Zerubbabel had, and
so being carried on in a spiritual way, crying Grace, Grace, that was a means
to carry them through difficulties, and to make them as plains, for when you go
about any great work, when you lay the first stone in that work cry Grace,
Grace, this is a work that I must expect the free Grace of God in for
assistance, for acceptance, and for blessing and for the carrying me through
all: the more you magnify the grace of God in any work, the more you will be
enabled to go through that work.

Eleventhly, You must not be discouraged by miscarriages that have been before.
You have set upon a work, and you have carried your self so in it as you have
miscarried, and you think I have so miscarried, and sinned against God, as I
must never expect Gods help, If I had never miscarried in that work, I might
have had hope, but now having so miscarried in that work, there is little hope:
do not reason by former miscarriages: If we now set our hearts right to the
work, and come and ask wisdom to be carried through it, though we have
miscarried twenty times before, God will not upbraid us; nor say, what do you
come to ask wisdom to do that work, when as you have set upon that work before,
and have spoiled it, through the pride and sluggishness of your hearts?
therefore now away; be humbled for miscarriages before, but be not discouraged
by any miscarriages in that work or in any other; yea though we have begun the
work and miscarried at first, yet be not discouraged, many works have
miscarried at first, and yet have come to a glorious issue at last, especially
if miscarriages be through weakness: as Jacob though he was struck lame, and
the sinew of his thigh shrunk in wrestling with the Angel, yet he prevailed; so
though there may be failings, that our sinews may be shrunk up, and we be lame
in our work, yet there may be a prevailing at last, and therefore do not hinder
your Faith by being discouraged with former miscarriages.

12. Again take heed of the disturbance of passion in the performance of your
work, that which is done in a way of passion, and frowardness and anger is
seldom well done, if you have a servant, that will allwaies be busy, and doing
of somewhat, but do it in an anger, you had better he should do nothing, they
are the quiet and meek spirits that can carry a work sweetly and prosperously
on: So in any work that God sets us about, let us go about it with quiet
spirits, your strength shall be to sit still, Isa. 50.7. Says the Lord; so the
great strength of our hearts in the performance of any work, is to stand still,
and be quiet. Stand still and see the salvation of the Lord, Exodus 14.13. Not
the stillness that is opposed to endeavor, but that stilness that is opposed to
disquietness, and tumultuousness of our unruly affections: you would feign have
the salvation of the Lord, and help in such and such a work, why did you not
stand still, you are not in case to have the salvation of the Lord, so long as
you are in such a disturbance: many miscarry in a work this way, as many
foolishly ignorant people that are in a boat, when the boat tosses they run up
and down in the boat and will not be quiet, and so are drowned; whereas if
there be any skilful in the boat, they say, do but sit still and you are safe
enough, but they think they cannot be too hasty to help themselves, and so run
up and down and turn the boat over them; so are unruly passions of men in
their hearts, when they are in any work and apprehend any danger, their
passions are up, and they think there is a necessity for them to be stirring,
and it is in an unruly way, and so they overturne themselves, I beseech you
observe it in Moses. Moses he was to do the great work in carrying the people
from Egypt, and he was of a very quiet spirit a great way; but he was to go on
in the work, and though he was the weakest man upon the earth, yet the very
thing that did over throw Moses in the work at last, that made him to miscarry
for his own part, was the disturbance of his passion, when he came to strike
the rock, to get water for the people, for not sanctifying the name of God, but
did it in a passion, that was the thing that made him miscarry, as in Psalm.
106.32.33. They angered him also at the waters of strife, so that it went ill
with Moses for their sakes. So you (may be) have done some works, so as you
have found God strengthening of you, at length you come to a work where (may be)
there is more difficulty then before, and there being more difficulty your
hearts are disquieted; take heed you miscarry not now, it is a special thing to
carry on a hard work well; to go on with quietness: disquiet and passion do
much hinder; as it was the case of the people of Israel in the beginning of
Exodus; When Moses came they could not harken to him, because of the anguish of
heart; and the greatness of their bondage: So to apply it spiritually, you are
sensible of some gri^vous bondage under some corruptions, and you have much
anguish of spirit that you cannot overcome such and such corruptions, but take
heed you be not so disturbed in your hearts, as your being in anguish under
that bondage hinder you from harkening to the Lord in his word, and conceiving
the mind and will of God a right and knowing how to order your selves in a
right way: it was so with them, and truly this is just the case of many people,
because they are sensible of the bondage they are in under their corruptions,
they are so troubled, and their hearts are in such a toil, and tumult, that
they cannot hearken to any thing that should guide themselves in this work.

13. Another rule for the ordering of your Faith to help you through difficult
works, is to observe the dependances that one work has upon another; many see
a work God would have them to do, and they presently set upon that, and do not
observe what dependence, this has upon somewhat else and so miscarry. Suppose a
Mariner or some other should have a work to go and pull such a cable, such a
rope, he goes to the place that is in view to pull that rope, but may be there
is some other line; that holds it in some other place, and they may pull their
hearts out, and never pull the thing they would. So many are striving and
laboring, and tugging in many duties, but there is some secret holdfast that
they observe not that those duties have dependence upon, and they can never
bring their work to pass. As one complains of the difficulty of getting a
heart to go to God in prayer, God knows I have been in prayer and have striven
with my soul with all my might, as in the presence of God for to get up my
heart; you strive and tug at this and may be you think of some promise, and
exercise faith too, but there is some corruption that seems to be a great way
off from this, that this has dependence upon, which makes this difficult, and
you should set your faith on work to deliver your selves from that, and then it
will come off better, as now (may be) you have been striving to get your hearts
up to God in prayer, and if you look well to it, it may be the frowardness and
petrishness, and passion of your hearts in your families, with servants, or
wife, or husband is that which keeps down your heart, when you come into Gods
presence, you should first have set your faith on work, to have cured that, and
if you had cured that, you might have got up your hearts: many slip over many
corruptions, and look at duties a great way off and they strive, and take
pains, but if they had true Christian wisdom, they should look what difficulty
and hinderance lay between them and that duty, and they should labor to take
away that And so for faith, we cannot believe in God and in the promises, may
be there lay a sluggish heart in your particular calling, it may be so far off,
though you think there be but little dependence of Faith in that And so in
affliction you would feign have your hearts be patient, may be there lay a
dead lumpishness of heart and drowsiness of spirit: and therefore look narrowly
to corruption though never so far off, and set thy heart in general against
all, one as well as another.

14 Again take need of listening to temptation: when as you are about any hard
work there will come abundance of temptation, what you go through this work?
those that have been stronger then you have miscarried, it is a mighty hard
work, and you are a poor creature: If it be the work of the Lord, go to it with
a naked upright heart, If I miscarry so it is and do not mind temptations: A
very observable place it is of Nehemiah, in Nehemi. 6.3. When he was about the
great work of God, the adversaries sent as if they would parley with them, and
it was for nothing but to hinder his work, but mark what he says. I am doing a
great work, so that I cannot come, why should the work cease, whilst I leave it
and come down to you? so do you say to temptation, temptation would feign have
you come, reason the case, but say I am about the work of the Lord, why should
the work cease, and I spend my time and strength about reasoning with you?

15. Another rule for the putting on of your faith may be this: when you are
doing any great work God calls you to do. Take heed of perverse reasonings, as
thus. When God calls me to do any service, I should reason; if I were able to
do thus and thus I could believe but who can believe when they have such a
heart, so unable to do any thing, and so unable to overcome any corruption?
What a perverse reasoning is this? If I could do this I could believe, you
should reason I must believe, that I may do this: as If one should say, if I
could do any work I hope I should have strength, you must have strength to do
your work; or if I were at my journies end I could go; you must go to be at
your journies end, If I were over Sea I could venture into a Ship, you must
venture into a Ship that you may come over Sea: And so if I could do such a
thing I could believe how should strength come in but by believing? Wilt stay
believing till thou can get strength? it is as much as if one should say I
will stay going into a Ship til I get over Sea, his going into the Ship is a
means to get over Sea, and so believing is the way to get strength: and
therefore do not reason from thy want of strength to hinder faith but rather
reason from thy want of strength to further faith.

16. Again when you go about any work that is difficult, take heed of any
disorderly working of your heart about that work. The disorderly work of the
heart may be discovered in two or three part^culars.

First, To look at the success, it looks at the duty principally, for one to
look at the success more then at duty, this is a miscarriage and a hinderance
to the work of faith.

Secondly, If you do look at the success, yet do not look at the particular
success, though Faith do assure of the general success, it does not always
assure of the particular success.

Thirdly, take heed you do not judge of the final success, by some hindrances
in the work at first, as many because they have not success at the beginning,
they judge of the final issue by that.

Fourthly, Above all take heed of determining before hand that you shall have
no success, I may go about the work but it will never go on, it will never
thrive: As a servant that is froward will say, well I may go about the work,
but there will never come no good of it, so many will go about the work God
sets them to do, but they determine before hand nothing will come of it This is
a sinful boldness, who art thou man or woman, shall you be so bold with God, may
you determine, what Gods way shall be? you may say, I deserve that nothing
should come of that I do, but when it comes to determination, it is boldness
and sinfulness against God what should not I determine I that am thus and thus
vild, will God succeed any work in my hand? you may say I that am thus and thus
vild deserve that God should blast all that I do, but do not determine that I
shall never overcome this hard heart of mine, and I shall never get a patient
spirit. This is that which the prophet speaks against. Hosea, 7.13. Though I
have redeemed them yet they speak lies against me, So though God have redeemed
men, and has given them mercy, yet they speak lies against God, that they
shall never have such and such a mercy, that they labor for, or when God is in
a way of redeeming of you, and stirring your hearts for you to say there shall
never be no success, nor help, this is to speak lies against God; be humbled
for that you have been guilty of before, and take heed of determining of the
success for time to come: for assuredly, whatsoever unworthinss you see in your
selves, yet know it is a temptation of the Devil and a provoking sin.

17. Again it must be our care, together with our faith to put on that we do
with resolution and courage; As the Psalmist says in Psalm. 310.24. Be of good
courage, and he shall strengthen your heart. So when you go to any difficult
work, put on your faith with all the resolution you can, natural resolution
helps much against difficulty: It is a notable speech of Seneca, the mind of
man, gets whatsoever it commands it self, if it will lay a command and charge
upon it self it may obtain it. That he says concerning naural resolution,
natural resolution is a mighty help to overcome difficulty, a man shall be able
to do more then he thought he could have done, but if this be added with faith,
that we can make use of our Faith and then lay a necessity on the work; it must
be done whatsoever I hear, it is the command of God, this is a mighty thing to
help forward the work.

18. Another rule is in all services that God calls you to, look upon your
selves as Gods instruments in Gods hand, and look upon the work as Gods work
enjoined by him and done for him, and not your own. I am nothing what is an
instrument, an axe to the building of an house? the work is hard and difficult,
it is not mine, but Gods, I am not the principal efficient, but the instrument
and not in mine own hand, but in Gods and such a weak instrument in the hand of
a skillful workman, in his own work may do great things.

19. Again whatsoever work God calls you to do go a^out i^, continuing in it,
though you find nothing come of it, expect God to come in while you are
working, and do not say, if God did come in I could have incouragment to work,
work, expecting God to come in while you are working: and though you have been
working these many years and found nothing, yet if God do come in it will be
while you are working. As David said to Solomon his Son, up and be doing and
the Lord be with you. 1. Chron. 22.16. So say I to you do not say what shall I
be doing without the Lord, be doing and the Lord will come in: But I have been
doing and the Lord has not come in. Yet whenever the time comes that God will
come in comfortably, it will be while you are working, therefore be doing and
the Lord will be with you.

20. Again let us take heed we do not increase the difficulty by our disorderly
carriage, this we are many times guilty of, that when God sets us about any
work and there be some hardness in it, we make it abundantly more hard by our
untoward carriages: As a man that is fettered, by pulling and haling he pulls
the skin off his legs, and by that means makes it harder to bear his fetters
then before, the people of Israel that went out of Egypt, and went to Canaan
through the wilderness, it was a hard journey, but they made it abundantly
harder, by their carriage. From Egypt unto the borders of Palestine was but
seventy miles, and to Jerusalem but a hundred miles, and yet by their ill
carriage they made it a businese of forty years: so though indeed we are to
go through a wilderness, and a difficult work, yet through our ill carriage we
make it more difficult. Let us take heed we do not make it more difficult
really, by our complaints of it; we complain things are difficult when indeed
they are not so in themselves, but because of the sluggishness of men's spirits
in making complaints of the difficulty of the work.

21. Again be not all poring upon the difficulty, and looking at those things
that are hard and may discourage you in the work that God set you about, but
look at those things that may encourage you also, if there be any hardness in a
work, men are always looking upon that and they never look upon any sweet that
may encourage them, it is never like that they shall go on; Children if they
have a sore upon the body the finger usually will be touching of that though it
makes the sore to be worse, and causes it to be more and more angry, and keeps
it from healing: So many if they have any thing that is hard in their work,
their thoughts will be upon that. Difficulties in any work are like to bitter
pills, that God gives us to take down: But what a childish thing were it for
any that have pills to take down that are bitter, for them to chew them; no
marvel then though they spit them out and do not swallow them, they should
swallow them down and not chew them: And so when God gives us any bitter pills,
we must not always be chewing of them in our thoughts but free the command of
God, and so go on in our work. and labor to swallow difficulties as much as we
can, we have a notable place for this purpose in Psalm 86.4, 5. Rejoice the soul
of thy servant, for unto thee O Lord do I lift up my soul, for thou Lord art
good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy unto al them that call upon
thee. Thus we apply it; the cause why many go so drooping in their way, and
have no joy and comfort in any of their ways, is because they look downward in
the dark, if a man were in the bottom of a deep pit, and always looks downward
he could never see light; if he would see light, he must look upward to the
Sun: so mark the way of David. Rejoice the soul of thy servant, for unto thee O
Lord do I lift up my soul. If David had let his heart always fall downward he
would never had joy in his way, but when he would have joy he lift up his
heart, so if there be any work that is difficult and your hearts are troubled,
would you have that which should rejoice you? lift up your souls to God in
those encouraging ways that he presents to you. For thou Lord art good and
ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy. Here is a way to get mercy, he lifts
up his soul and looked upon God as good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in
mercy. I appeal to you when did you lift up your souls, and look up to God as
plenteous in mercy, you always looked downward in the bottom of the pit and
see the blackness of Gods justice ready to seize upon you, but you should lift
up your soul to God, and look to the sun, we should not always be poring, upon
those things that are difficult, but see those things that are encouraging.

22. Do not make use of difficulties in your way to reason against your work,
or to make you out of love with your work, but to reason against your hearts:
indeed it is an hard work, but it is through my wretched sluggish heart, and
because I do not make use of the means, and abilities that God affords me, many
that have less means and helps then I, can go through harder works then I, and
so labor to reason against your own hearts, and not the work, many when they
feel the work, hard reason against the work: the Lord knows I strive and do
what I can, but I have so many letts and hindrances, God does not come in with
his Grace, to help me, and I can do nothing without God, How comes it to pass
nothing is done? because the work is hard, or because you do not use what power
God gives to do it withal: now the safest way is rather to reason against your
selves, that you have not done what you can, but you rather put off all the
guilt from your selves and justify your selves, and that is all the reason why
nothing is done, it is because the work is hard, and you have so many
hindrances, and that God has not given you his power: but if you look into
your own hearts, you will find another reason, it is not so much the hardness
of the work as the ill disposition of your hearts: and that should be your care
not to reason against the work because it is difficult, but against your hearts.

And to conclude all, this is all I say: we should labor to harden our selves
by our Faith against all difficulties: As unbeleefe is a hardening sin one way,
So faith is a hardening grace another way, unbelief hardens in that which is
evil, and faith hardens in that which is good: Acts, 19.9. But when diverse were
hardened and believed not. They were hardened because they did not believe, and
faith has the contrary effect, and will do as much in that which is good, as
unbelief can do in that which is evil: As unbelief will make a man or woman so
hard, as to be as Iron to that which is good, so Faith will make a man as Iron
to that which is evil, and therefore the Prophet Jeremiah is compared to Iron
and Steel, Jer. 15.12. Shall Iron break the northern Iron and the Steel? God
has revealed himself to him graciously, and he was hardened by it, now of all
graces especially Faith does make the heart as Iron, for God, as unbelief does
make the heart as Iron to stand out against God: And therefore is the
exhortation of the Apostle, 2 Peter. 1.5. Ad to your Faith virtue: the word (
Virtus) comes from strength because every virtue puts forth strength, so it is
as much as if he should say, ad to your faith strength, put it forth strongly,
that it may help you against strong difficulties, with a warlike power, virtue
has a power to oppose enemies: and so ad to your faith virtue. And if we do
so, know it will be a very honorable thing, it is an honor to God, and honor to
us, for us to go through difficult things, it is honor to God: as David's men
that endured so much that broke through an host for to get him water, it was an
honor to him, and so for us to do difficult things for God, it is an honor to
God, and it is honorable to us, non so honorable as those that have gone
through difficult works, it will make them honorable to others, as some observe
from that place, in 8. Cant. 3. If she be a wall we will build upon her, a
palace of Silver. If she be a wall to stand out against opposition, and
temptation, we will build upon her a palace of Silver, she shall be made
honorable and glorious: and so every Christian if your heart be as a wall, to
stand out against opposition and difficulty, and hindrances in the way of God,
you shall have a palace of Silver built upon you, you shall be honorable in the
eyes of God, and all his Saints. And going through difficulty is a mighty
strengthening to grace, and the more difficulty any go through, the more Grace
is strengthened. As it is a rule of any thing that opposes another, if it do
not overcome it, it strengthens it, as fire and water, if you cast so much
water into fire as the fire can overcome it the fire gathernig strength to
overcome the water that opposes it, burns the better: So in all oppositions: So
in sin: If that a man comes to be opposed in his sinful way by the word, if the
word do not overcome his lust, his lust grows stronger: And so in grace, if any
lust or sin, or temptation, or any thing do come and oppose grace or any
gracious act, and if they do not overcome grace, but grace overcome them, it is
the stronger, and therefore let us go on in the way of God whatsoever
difficulties come of it.

CHAP. 25.
Containing a Second consideration of the Text, to wit, an Allegorical
interpretation of Moses forsaking Egypt by Faith. Warrant for Allegorical
interpretations. Forsaking this world, renouncing our natural estate, a
difficult work. Fourteen reasons of it.

NOw having finished the point in the Literal sense, the going through that
hard work which Moses was set upon by God, Let us speak a little concerning the
Allegorical Sense: Though that be not the thing which is especially intended,
yet we know many times the Holy Ghost makes use of Scripture in an Allegorical
way: And before I enter upon it, I will name two or three scriptures to show a
warrant for what I do in handling this scripture in a way of Allegory.

The Holy Ghost does make use of Scripture not only according to the primary
sense, but according to the Metaphorical and Allegorical sense, as in Psalm.
19.34. There is no Speech nor Language where their voice is not heard, their
line is gone through all the Earth, and their word is to the end of the world.
This is apparently spoken of the Sun and the going forth of the Sun in the
Heavens: The Heavens, and the motions in the Heavens, and the great
testification of Gods power therein, are compared to a Language and a voice:
And the instruments that are to be drawn from them, are gone through the whole
Earth. But mark how the Apostle makes use of this in a far different sense,
Romans 10.18. But I say, have they not heard? yes verily their sound went into
all the Earth, and their words into the end of the world. Having reference to
this place he does not go according to the direct primary sense, but he applies
it to the preaching of the Gospel, And the going forth of the Apostles.

And again in Math. 2.15. When Christ was carried into Egypt that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called
my Son. It has reference to that Prophecy in Hos. 11.1. Which is meant of the
calling his people out of Egypt And there it is applied to Christ, and in that
the Holy Ghost does not only apply Scripture according to the primary sense,
but Allegorically, and Tipically we have liberty also to do so.

And now we shall speak of this Text in an Allegorical sense two ways: And that.

1. In regard of the bondage we are in by nature under sin, and Satan as the
Israelites were in Egypt under Pharaoh, And as Moses by faith forsook Egypt, so
we must be delivered out of this spiritual Egypt, from this spiritual bondage,
that we are in by nature, under sin, and Satan, by Faith.

2. The Scripture compares the power of Antichrist, and the bondage that men
are in under Antichrist to Egypt Romans 11.8. There it is called spiritual Sodom:
and spiritual Egypt: And as the Israelites by Faith, were delivered from the
Bondage they were in, in Egypt: So faith does deliver people from the bondage
of Antichrist.

I. Then for the forsaking of Egypt, we are al by nature bondslaves to Sin and
Satan as the Israelites were to the Egyptians. And Canaan was a Tipe of Heaven,
and the promise of God unto them to bring them unto Canaan, was to set out the
condition of Gods people how they should be brought to heaven: All Gods ways
toward the Israelites in this work, were Tipical to set out further things
that were to be afterward. Therefore by faith this Egypt is forsaken, and the
souls of Gods people are carried on to Canaan, through the Wilderness of this
world to heaven by faith, as they were through that Wilderness to Canaan: It
must be Faith that must carry through this difficult work.

This is the difficult work of all works; the Bondage is the greatest bondage,
And therefore the work is the most difficult work that may be. If we consider,

1. The carnal reasonings that are in men's hearts against the work of God in
bringing them out of their natural estate.

2. If we consider the self confidences that are in men being confident of
their estate, and no way sensible of their Bondage.

3. If we consider the vain hopes that are in the hearts of people concerning
Gods mercy.

4. If we consider the dangerous mistakes that are in people, mistaking the way
of God, and the way of life, thinking they are in the way of life, when they
are in the way of Death.

5. If we consider the cursed prejudice that men have against the way of God
naturally.

6. If we consider the strong engagements that men have to keep them from
returning.

7. If we consider the many lusts that are in the heart, that can never be
overpowered, but by an Almighty power.

8. If we consider the strong accusations and Terrors that are in the
consciences of men and Women, when they come to be awakned.

9. If we consider the woeful Temptations of Satan following and daunting the
Soul, when it would go from this Egypt, as Pharaoh followed the Israelites.

10. If we consider the wonderful discouragements that people have in their own
thoughts, when they look into themselves, and see their Disability to do any
thing that is good, any Unability to resist any thing that is Evil.

11. If we consider, the persuasions of the world from without, when they begin
to forsake this spiritual Egypt.

12. If we consider, how often times God himself seems to walk contrary to
them, when they are forsaking Egypt.

13. If we consider the difficulty of the ways of Religion, at this first
entrance, and the long time that the Soul must have to go in through this
wilderness before they come to Canaan.

14. If we consider the great venture that the Soul must make to venture its
eternal estate and all its good upon the way of God that is revealed to it.

These things and Many others might be named, and enlarged, that make this a
difficult Work.

CHAP. 26.
How Faith carries the Soul through the difficult Work of forsaking Egypt.
Their Works of Faith. 1. The discovering work, in two Particulars. 2. The
relying Work. 3. The Surrendering Work. Question Resolved concerning the force
of Natural Conscience, in three Particulars, showing the great difference
between the actings of Faith and Natural Conscience. Application, 1. Hence see
the ground of Miscarriages. 2. A Rule of Direction; Encouragements to Faith and
Believing. 3. Let delivered Persons see what delivered them. Faith which acts
by a power without us. Twelve Considerable and useful Directions in this matter.

BUt though it be a difficult work, yet Faith carries the Soul through: and
brings it from this spiritual Egypt: and it is only Faith that does this: the
Law may do somewhat to show men their bondages; and the spirit of bondage may
make them sensible of their bondage, but this does not deliver them; as the
Children of Israel when they were in bondage, they Cried out, but that did not
deliver them, it was Faith by which they were to go from Egypt: So whatsoever
there may be in a way of preparation: Its Faith only that delivers from it.

Quest. How does Faith do this?

Answ. First, I will show how Faith does it.

Secondly, I will show whether a man may not be delivered in show by some other
things.

There are three works of Faith whereby we come to forsake this spiritual Egypt.

1. The discovering Work. 2. The relying Work. 3. The surrendering Work.
First, The discovering work, Its Faith that discovers clearly and with power
the great Mysteries of the Gospel, the great Work of God, wherein the Glory of
the great God appears in providing such a way, for the Reconciliation of lost
man unto himself, such a glorious means of Mediation for the satisfying of his
Justice, and for the making up of the breach that is between man and him. Its
Faith and only Faith, that can hold out the excellency and Beauty of God
appearing in the Gospel; And to show fully all that good that God intends to
communicate to the Children of men in this way of Mediation.

Secondly, The discovering work of Faith is, in setting before the Soul not
only the Glory and excellency and certainty of the work of Mediation in Christ:
but it discovers unto the Soul the Riches of the freeness of the grace of God
in Christ: it is Faith that must persuade the Soul that the way of deliverance
comes only from free grace, that God does Justify the ungodly, that it is
nothing in the creature for which God comes to justify.

Secondly: There is a relying Work of Faith: the Soul having these things
discovered in the Glory and power and reality of them: Faith comes to close
with these things, and to cast it self upon this Glorious Rich free Grace of
God, and venture its self and all its good upon it.

Thirdly, The Soul having thus ventured upon the free Grace of God, it makes a
surrender of its self up unto Christ. To unite it self to him: I do not only
desire to draw Christ to me; to be made mine. But I give up my self to Jesus
Christ to be his. In uniting of two things I do not only lay one thing upon
another, but join the other to that; and so in uniting the Soul to Christ,
there is not only a bringing of Christ to the Soul, but a surrendering of the
Soul to Christ: to him in him, to him, and for him, and to be satisfied with
him; And when Faith comes to discover with power, the Glory and reality of the
great Mysteries of the Gospel, enabling it to cast and roll it self, for all
its good upon this way and surrender its self up to Christ to be wholly his,
here is the work of Faith that delivers from this spiritual Egypt.

Quest. But may not natural Conscience help men through much difficulty in the
way of deliverance from this spiritual Egypt? Many come to see their bondage by
sin, and seem to be delivered, and may be it is only the strength of Natural
Conscience, and not Faith.

Answ. It is acknowledged that natural Conscience may in a great degree deliver
men from some hind of bondage under sin, and may deliver from a great deal of
the power of their sin, but you shall observe the difference to be thus.

First, Natural conscience may help men to abstain from sin, and set upon many
duties, that it may seem they are delivered from this bondage, but whatsoever
they abstain from, and whatsoever duties they do, It is rather because
conscience urges the necessity of it upon them, then any inward principle to
approve, and like of the duties they perform, or to dislike and disapprove of
the sin they abstain from, they are forced out of Egypt: But Faith it does not
make men only abstain from sin, but is gives them a principle to make against
sin; and it does not only perform duty, but the heartt is for that duty, and
there is an agreeableness, and sutableness in the heart unto that duty.

Secondly, Where it is only natural conscience, that carries through many
streights, it does enable to do outward things, and abstain from outward
things, but there is but little inward change of the heart, it may keep them
from some actions, they dare not commit such and such sins, no not in secret,
though none in the world know it, but there is not an inward change in the
heart.

Thirdly: Where it is a natural conscience Grace is desired for peace sake,
where it is of grace the soul desires peace for the furtherance of Grace.

USE 1.
To apply this a little.

Is it Faith that delivers from this spiritual Egypt: Hence let us see the
ground of the Miscarriages of most people in their deliverances from spiritual
Egypt: Many people by the word, by the Ministry of the Law, they come to see
their bondage, and woeful wretched estate, and their consciences are much
troubled, but they miscarry and it appears in the end that they were never
delivered from the bondage of Egypt, but they lived, and died, in Egypt, and
perished Eternally. They were come near to Canaan, and yet they perished, and
never come to Canaan, because it is not Faith that delivered them, they were
not acquainted with the mystery of the Gospel, and the covenant of Grace: they
must abstain from Sin, be no more drunkards, and Swearers, and Adulterers, and
Sabbath breakers: They abstain from them, and their Religion is a mere natural
work, and there they quiet themselves, and think they are delivered: But the
glorious work of God in Faith, is not mighty and powerful upon their hearts
carrying their hearts to God in Christ in the way of the Gospel, and
discovering the mysteries of the Gospel: and therefore they are not delivered.

2. Hence is a rule of direction to such as are about being delivered from this
spiritual Egypt. Are there any such, that God has made sensible of their woeful
bondage and would thou deliver thy soul from that spiritual bondage? is it
thy work that thou art now about? If any thing do it, it must be the work of
Faith. Thou may get some quiet and ease by some other means, but for
deliverance you can never get it but by Faith: Therefore do not content thy
self with any reformation, that its better with thee then it has been; never
rest till thou have got the work of Faith: and for the encouragement of such a
soul to believe that it may be delivered by Faith from that bondage, it is
sensible of, and which it is now about. Know,

First, If thou be sensible of thy spiritual bondage, know it is the great
work that God has set his heart upon above all the works of the world, to
deliver souls from this spiritual bondage: Many that are sensible of their
spiritual bondage say, I am in such a condition, and will God ever regard me in
this estate? will he regard thee? yes, know that the greatest thing that Gods
heart is upon, as the highest thing that he will do, is upon those that are
sensible of their spiritual bondage of this spiritual Egypt to deliver them?
And though thou art not sure he will do it for thee, yet this is a great
encouragement.

Object, But though he may do it for others yet I am so vile, that though I
have seen my sin, I have still gone on, therefore he will not do it for me.

Answ. 2. Wherefore know in the second place that the great design that God
has in this work, is not only to manifest his power, but to set out before
men, and Angels, to all eternity, the Riches and Glory of his free Grace. And
therefore those objections of thy unworthinss may be taken away: for thou
may see God does not intend to go on with thee in a way of retribution or
distributive Justice, if thou do so, and so and so, he will do so, and so for
thee, but he goes this way to work: that his great design is to magnify his
free Grace, And whosoever he does deliver, it is for this end, to show to men
and Angels, what the power of his infinite free Grace is able to do; and this
is a great Encouragement.

3. Further Jesus Christ has already removed all differences that are between
God the Father, and thy soul: the difficulties which make such a mighty vast
dismal distance between God and thy soul, is the wrath of God, and the justice
of God and the curse of the Law: Now it has been the work of Christ to take
away all these difficulties: So that when thou look up and see thy sin
against an infinite God, that is, infinitely holy, and infinitely just, and
see the curse of the Law against thee; thou think these are great
difficulties, how is it possible for me to get over these: know it is the work
of Christ that great Savior of the world, to remove those difficulties, and if
he had not undertook it, it had been impossible for any soul to come to God,
But he has done it and therefore thou have liberty to come to God; if thou
have but an heart to venture upon his free Grace, if thou say, how can I
know, that Christ has removed these difficulties for me? Its the work of Faith
that gives thee an interest. And therefore do not stay for any thing else: If
thou do but venture upon Faith, thou need not take care as those Women
did, who shall roll away the stone. Who shall remove the difficulties of the
curse of the Law? who shall pacify the wrath of God that is burning against me
for my sin? If thou do believe Christ has done it.

Fourthly, Christ has not only removed the difficulties between God the
Father, and thy soul; but there are many gracious promises in the Gospel (for
the removing of all difficulties in thy soul) that thou have as much right to
lay claim to, as any one in the world that ever was delivered by Christ:
Whatsoever ground any had to claim these promises, before the applying of
them, thou have the same ground; the great hinderance that is in thee is an
hard heart, a stout stubborn spirit: mark what is said; that there shall be a
way prepared for the Lord: Make his way strait, every high Mountain shall be
brought low, every valley shall be filled up, every crooked way shall be made
strait, every rough way shall be made plain. Luke, 3.4.5.6. Now who has right
to lay hold on these promises, this applying of them does give interest: do
thou find thy heart proud and can not pull it down? says the Lord every high
mountain shall be cast down do thou say I have an unbeleeving heart, I know
not how to believe Gods word, but my heart sinks down in unbelief, that is as
a valley dejected? Every valley shall be filled up. I have a perverse crooked
heart? every crooked way shall be made strait. I have a rough knotty heart?
every rough heart, Every rough way shall be made plain: So that Christ has
not only made things clear between God and thee but in thy own Soul.

Object. But he does not make it clear for all.

Answ. Thou have as much ground to believe as any had before they did believe,
I will take away thy strong Heart says God; This is revealed to all, and
therefore thou art to make use of them; And whosoever did get good by them,
they could not see any interest they had to them, more then thou can see.

USE. 3.
A Third use is this, If Faith be that which does deliver from this spiritual
Egypt: Then those that are delivered, let them see what has brought them out;
and magnify the work of God; let them stand and admire the Grace of God in
delivering them from al difficulties, and in carrying them through, that were
so poor and weak as they were: know it was not thy endeavor but the work of
Faith, and the work of God in thee. Faith works by a power out of us, and not
by our own power; And God delivers the Soul from this spiritual Egypt by Faith,
Because he would have the Glory of it. Therefore now if it have been a work of
Faith, let this Exhortation prevail with you: Labor to exercise your Faith in
going through the Wilderness to Canaan. There was a time you were in bondage
under sin and Satan and the Law; And now thou art delivered from the Law, and
brought to Grace: Is it Faith has done it? Let this Faith be employed to carry
thee on through the wilderness unto Canaan: And all the Rules that I will give
unto you, shall be from the People of Isreal's going through the wilderness unto
Canaan, when they were delivered from Egypt.

Direction. 1.
First, They were not to stir, but upon Gods Direction, when the cloud and the
pillar of fire went before them. So in thy way, keep close to the Direction of
God. Let thy Faith stick close to the word, and not to the Direction of thine
own Heart.

Direction, 2.
Secondly, When they were delivered, this was a great Evil, their Murmuring
because of the hardships they met withal: take heed thou be not guilty of
this: Let not thy heart run out too far, to murmur against the ways of God,
when you meet with any hardships: being God with his outstretched Arm, and his
mighty hand has delivered thee, God forbid thou should be murmuring upon
every difficulty.

Direction, 3.
Thirdly, Take heed you do not limit the Holy One of Israel, God was Angry with
them because they limited the Holy One of Israel, Psalm. 78.19. Can God prepare
a table in the Wilderness (say they) So many when they are in the way to
Heaven, and they find any difficulty, can God help such a one as I (say they)
Take heed of limiting God; do not propound Limits to to what God can do: No nor
to what God will do.

Direction, 4.
Fourthly, Take heed of slighting any thing that God gives you, as they did,
when they were delivered, and had Manna, say they, What is this Manna? Exodus
16.15. Numh. 11.6. They slight it, take heed you be not guilty of this
spirituality: when God feeds you with Manna, you say they are but husks. And
when God gives you his Grace, you say they are but such things as Hypocrites
may have, and slight all.

Direction, 5.
Fifthly, Take heed of having hard thoughts of God: as when they came into the
wilderness the Scripture says Deuteronomy. 1.27. They said God brought them thither
because he hated them, and meant to destroy them: So many out of the
frowardness of their hearts, (and that I tremble to speak of) When God is in a
gracious way, in doing good to them, and in bringing them to himself upon every
difficulty they find, they are ready to say God does all this but to aggravate
my sin, and because he hates me, and that my condemnation might be the more
grievous, if I had never known so much, and never had such convincings of
conscience, and had never prayed so much, my condemnation had not been so
great? this is an horrible abusing of the Grace of God, Just like those that
were delivered out of Egypt, this is because God hates us (say they) and means
to destroy us it is true God has wrought upon me more then others but it is
to aggravate my condemnation: let not us have such hard thoughts of God.

Direction, 6.
Sixthly, Observe their way in the wilderness: and take heed of being
discouraged by any hardship thou meerest withal in thy way; they said. Numb.
13.27.28. The Land was a good Land, but there were the Anakins, and Giants, and
they should never overcome them. So many reason, Heaven is a blessed place, But
there are such oppositions, the children of Anak, such strong lusts, and
corruptions, they shall never overcome such Giant like, Anakish corruptions:
But as David said, Psalm. 1.27.1. One day I shall perish by the hand of Saul.
So one day I shall perish by the hand of my lusts.

Direction, 7.
In the seventh place, Take heed of a passionate throwing off all, as they did
when they heard of the Anaks, and of opposition. Numb. 14, 4. Let us make a
Captain to return again into Egypt: So when men are in their way from Egypt
going to Canaan, they meet with strong oppositions within and without, and they
say we had as good cast off all, and go back again; take heed of flinging off
all.

Direction, 8.
Eighthly, Take heed of giving the least way to any lusting of thy heart after
former corruptions, Exodus 16.3.4. They would be lusting after their Onions and
Flesh pots in Egypt, and so were ready to commit sin. So many, when God is in
the way of working his grace, they are ready to think what they had formerly,
and they were not so strictly bound before, and they have some hankerings of
heart after former lusts: And though thou dare not conclude I will go and
commit such and such sins, I say though thou do not conclude, yet thy heart
and thoughts have some hankerings after them; take heed of that.

Direction, 9.
Ninthly, Take head of forgetting Gods dealings with thee, as they did when
they were going to Canaan notwithstanding God did such great things for them:
Psalm. 106.13. They presently forget them. So God did much for thee and thou
forgeitest the gracious dealings of God; God takes that very ill.

Direction, 10.
Tenthly, Take heed of resting in means as they did When Moses was absent:
Exodus 32.1. We wot not what is become of this Moses: And they knew not what to
do, they made them other Gods. So many depend on means, and if such and such
means fail us we shall never be able to go on.

Direction, 11.
Eleventhly, Be not too hasty in applying any comfort any further then God
gives leave, but be waiting upon God in his way and labor to cast thy self upon
the promises; you cannot be too hasty to believe, and rest your selves upon the
promises, but to have eager desire of comfort, there may be too much have. Number.
14.40. to the end. When God had them not go into Canaan they would, and they
fell by their enemies. So wait upon God, and see what he would have thee to
do, stay for to have comfort handed in by God and wait for his time.

Direction, 12.
And lastly, Take heed thou be not discouraged, beause the means is but weak
thou have to help thee. When they came to Canaan the great City Jericho, what
have they to overcom it? Jos. 6.4.5. The Priests must go with Rams-hornes and
blow seven times about the City and the walls should fall down. A poor weak
means, they might say; have we been forty years in the wilderness, and come
to the strong City, and have no other means to help us but Rams-hornes? yet
this is Gods way: If we reason with flesh and blood, when we meet with
difficulties, and look upon means, We shall turn back again, look not at means,
but rest on Faith and that Faith which has brought thee out of Egypt, will
carry thee on: and thus we have finished the First Allegory.

CHAP 26.
Containing the second Allegorical sense of the words, viz. concerning
Antichrist. The wickedness of Sodom and Egypt, compared with the wickedness of
Antichrist. 1. Idolatry. 2. Cruelty. The bondage of Christians under
Antichrist. 1. Outward, in Estates, and Lives, 2. Inward, a soul bondage. The
baseness of this showed in several particulars, concerning Ceremonies worse
then Egyptian bondage. Faith must deliver us, Deliverance difficult in several
particulars. The work of Faith in delivering people from this bondage, in 6. or
7. Considerations. Quest, Whether men may not reject the yoke of Antichrist
upon other grounds besides Faith? Answ. In 10. Particulars.

THe second Allegory, is the bondage under Antichrist, and Faith does carry
also from that bondage, from that Egypt: The seat of Antichrist, and the
bondage that we are in under Antichrist is called in Scripture, Egypt. 11. Rev.
8. and their dead bodies shall lie in the Streets of the great City, which
spiritually is caled Sodom, and Egypt: But because it is said, where also our
Lord was crucified: Therefore some of the Papists would have it meant of
Jerusalem: but he does neither speak of the thing, nor the place literally,
but it is spiritually Sodom, and spiritually Egypt: And so, where Christ is
spiritually crucified, so that in a Metaphorical sense, the chief seat of
Antichrist is Sodom, and Egypt and spiritually Christ is crucified there, There
is no place in which Christ is more crucified then in Rome, in regard of his
members. Besides if you will speak of Christ's being crucified literally, it may
be said likewise of Rmoe, because he was crucified by the Roman power, and
Roman Authority: But by comparing this place with other places in Revelation,
it must be meant, that in that place Rome is Sodom and Egypt: I might spend
much time in making Comparisons between the most abominable wickednesses that
were in Sodom and Egypt, and that are in that place.

First, Antichrist is like Egypt, in regard of the most gross Idolatries, Of
all places Egypt was counted the most gross Idolatrous place. They did not only
worship the Sun, Moon, and Stars, as other nations did, but Cats and Onions,
and any base creatures: So the Papists worship stocks, and stones, and all kind
of holy Relics, even the hair that came from the tail of that beast that
Christ rode on; and most base, vile things, that are too base to abuse an
Auditory to rehearse.

Secondly, It is compared to Egypt in respect of the cruelty of the Church of
Rome, None were so cruel and vild as Egypt: And so of all men those that are
under Antichrist are more cruel, as if they were Messengers came from hell to
show the power of Malignant spirits: and therefore they are said, to be drunken
with blood, and so have their clothes died in scarlet with the blood of the
Saints. Rev. 17.4.5.6. But the chief thing I aim at is to show the bondage
Christians are in under antichrist, and the work of faith in delivering from it.

The bondage under Antichrist is, 1. Outward, in Estates and Lives. 2. Inward,
a soul bondage.


1. An outward bondage, does not he challenge power over Kings and Princes, and
to free people from Loyalty to their Princes, that except there were a delusion
upon the hearts of the great ones upon Earth, It were unpossible for them to
submit unto that base bondage. Many cry out of the Godly that they are no good
subjects, they do not love to be under government, but what do you think of
Papists, that do teach for to free subjects from their loyalty: A Papist has
this expression concerning Antichrist, The Pope their head, He is the Sheppard,
and the Kings and Princes are Dogs, and if Dogs will do their duty, they must
be at their Masters command, but if they will be lazey, and bite and not do as
they ought, the sheppard must remove them. And for their Estates: Its a woeful
estate that Countries are in, in regard of their estates. I read a speech of
Bonner, in a preface to the Treatise of Gardener; that the Pope had near as
much out of England yearly, as the Revenues of the Crown came to. And it was
the speech of Innocent the fourth Pope of that name England was his pleasant
Garden and a well that never was drawn dry and in England many things grew, and
abounded and many things were to be had from it: So that the estates of men are
in great bondage where Antichrist prevails: as also, the lives, and liberties
of men.

2. But especially, the thing which I will a little stick in, is the soul
bondage, thus we have it in Rve. 18.13. The Merchandise was slaves, and souls
of men. So that men that are under Antichrist are slaves, and if there were but
a true Heroical spirit in men, they would not suffer themselves to be under
that slavery: though they seem to be the bravest spirits, yet being under
Antichrist they are slaves: And the souls of men are his Merchandise: the souls
of men are under bondage.

First, This is a base subjection and slavery of the souls of men under
Antichrist, in that he takes upon him to make Articles of Faith: that they are
bound in conscience, upon pain of Damnation to believe, whatsoever he shall say
in his Chair is infallible: what a base bondage is this? When as we know what
most Abominable, Sodomitical, Horrible Monsters have been in that Chair, and
yet they shall be bound upon pain of damnation, to believe, whatsoever they
say is infallible.

Secondly, Whatsoever his decrees are (though having no footing in the word)
they are bound in conscience to obey upon pain of damnation: So that if it
were possible to obey all Gods Commandments, they may be damned for want of
obedience, to some one of Antichrists comands, which must needs be a miserable
bondage for any man to make a new command, that is not under the command of
God, and to make damnation to be the punishment of disobedience to it, then men
are in danger of Damnation a hundred of ways more then for sinning against
Gods Law.

Thirdly, Those that are under Antichrist are under great bondage in being kept
from the rule of life, from the Scriptures, Wherein the counsels of Gods will,
concerning their Eternal Estate are revealed: Those that are slaves are kept in
dangers, and cannot have the privileges of subjects, or of Children: So
Antichrist keeps all under him in the most base slavery, in depriving of them
from this privilege of Children, that they cannot know the mind of their
Fathers, and the great things of God, that concerns their Eternal Estate; what
man that knows any thing of those great things concerning his Eternal Estate,
would be under that slavery? And yet if so be we had continued under the
bondage of Antichrist, we must have been deprived of this.

Fourthly, If they hear any thing of the word, they are bound to take no other
interpretation, but the Churches, the Priests give them, though it be never so
gross, now to bind men's Consciencs to this, is a most abinable Bondage, And yet
what vile Interpretations? If it is Blasphemy for the Devil to say, he will
ascend and be like the highest, no less to make God descend to be like the
Prince of darkness, to set the Kings stamp upon false coin, Now to bind men's
consciences to their wicked interpretations of Scripture, this is a most
abominable bondage.

5. This is a great bondage that no Ordinance can be administered but by the
power of Antichrist, and those he shall give power unto; and this is a great
bondage to the Church to be stinted in Gods Ordinances: They are the Churches
privileges, especially that of Prayer the spirit of Prayer and Supplication,
is one of the especial Privileges of the Church. Gal. 4.6. Because you are
sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts crying Abba
Father. There he speaks of the liberty of Gods people as they are sons, and
they have the fruit of their sonship: Now when as God does give his spirit to
his Church as part of their liberty; for them to be restrained in their liberty
to pray just no more then the Pope shall appoint, and so to have no Ordinances
but according to his power; what abominable bondage is this, and what heart
that knows any true Christian liberty, would be in such a bondage.

6. He takes upon him power of absolving and binding, keeping men under the
guilt of sin, and loosing of them from it when he pleases. from this power over
men's consciences, is committed all manner of villainy

7. Another Bondage which is greater then all, is that he keeps men under the
rigor and curse of the Law by keeping men off from Christ, and teaching the
doctrine of justification to be by the works of the Law, he keeps them under the
bondage of the law, and under the rigor and curse of the Law, and so keeps all that are under him from that precious liberty that Christ has purchased by his
blood to deliver us from the Law: And this is a greater burden then the other,
this is a damnable bondage that does endanger eternal destruction; the other is
not so dangerous.

8. He takes away al Christian liberty in regard of the use of the Creature,
restraining the use of the Creature, and Time, and Place.

9. The ninth is the bondage of human Ceremonies; we know that is a heavy
bondage: The bondage of the Ceremonies of the Law was great. And the Apostle
said Acts, 15.10. It was a Yoke, that neither they nor their Fathers could
bear. But the yoke of the Papists is a great deal heavier. If we were to
choose to to be under all the Ceremonies of the Law, which the Jews were under,
which the Apostle said was a yoke that we nor our Fathers were able to bear,
or to be under the Ceremonies of the Papists, if we did choose according to
wisdom, we should rather choose to be under all the Ceremonies of the Jews: Yet
if we read the 4. of Gal. we shall see it was a great privilege to be delivered
from them. And if we were under the power of any to appoint religious
Ceremonies in the Church. We have no benefit by the purchase of Christ to
deliver us from the Ceremonial Law, for it is a great deal better and easier
to be under the Ceremonies of the Law then to have any man appoint Ceremonies;
in several respects.

1. Because the Ceremony of the Law was by divine institution: but when man
appoints Ceremonies they are but human, and any man had rather yield and be
under the power of Gods appointing Ceremonies, then be under the power of men:
You had rather be under Princes then under mean Officers; so you had better be
under the power of God, then under the power of man; yet in the 2. Col. they
are called Beggarly rudiments.

2. There is a great deal of doubt and scruple about the Ceremonies of men:
Suppose that upon some distinctions we may yield to human Ceremonies, yet it is
not without doubt and scruple, but under the Law there was no doubt nor
scruple, and we had better be under a hundred where there is no scruple, then
under one where there is doubts and scruples.

3. Again, Those Ceremonies were typical, and the presence of God might be
with them, and a spiritual efficacy might be expected; but as for the
Ceremonies of men, there can be no such thing expected with them, and therefore
it is apparent that the Jews under the Ceremonies of the Law were in a better
condition, then the Christians should be in now, if they were under the power
of any to appoint Ceremonies, and therefore to be under the power of those that
do appoint Ceremonies, that is a miserable bondage.

10. Again another bondage that they are in is, that they are urged to the
ways of Idolatry, and sin by violence, without regarding the weakness of any,
or seeking to inform any, not regarding that place, Ezekiel. 34.4. When God
complains, they did Rule his people with Cruelty: And if any be weak and
desire to be informed they jeer at them, and say a prison, or a fire, or a
faggot, shall inform them. These and many other things might be named, to show
the most abominable and vilde bondage that those are in that are under
Antichrist; but put both together the outward and the inward bondage, to be
under those that are of such base and vile spirits this is mightily against the
spirit of an ingenious man: And for a Church of God, a thousand Congregations,
to be under the power of a base, filthy abominable, Whoremaster, that is known
to be so, to be troubled by him when he please, what a most horrible bondage is
this? And so for any Congregation to be, in which there may be thousands of
Souls, to be under the power of a Tapster, or Hostler, or any base fellow, this
is a mighty bondage: As now suppose a rich man die, and he has a Kinsman,
though never so vile and base, then his land coming to him he has the Advowzen
of the place, then may be he sends two or three hundred miles for a Priest, may
be one like himself, and though he be never such a blasphe men, and base fellow
and swearer, then they not knowing of him, and so having nothing to say against
him, They cannot keep him from the place; Now that one though never so wild,
should have such power, to appoint whom he will, any drunkard, Where master
Priest over such a Congregation, and they must depend upon him, to have the
Ordinances of God administered by him this is a sore bondage. Bondslaves are fed
merely with Chafe and brunn, so with what chafe and husks are those fed
withal that are under Antichrist: Many people are loath to submit to the true
government of Christ, to the true Ministers of the Gospel; if they tell them of
any sin they are guilty of, their hearts belk and swel, and they will not
yield, yet they will submit to the officers of Antichrst, and they will rule
over them and do with them what they will. As Saint Paul says in 2 Cor. 11.20.
For ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man
take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face. Other
false teachers you can suffer, But the true Apostles you cannot suffer them, if
one come in his own name, you receive them, I come in my Fathers name, and you
reject me says Christ. John, 5.43. And so many complain of the Ministers of
God, they take so much upon them, and they will not yield to that they say, but
if you live under Popery you must live under every base priest, and what he
says you must believe as your Faith, and venture your souls upon it, without
examining of it, and you must not manifest any rejection: So that is apparent
men will yield to any things rather then to God, rather count the subjection to
God bondage, then count the subjection to Antichrist bondage, rather be
servants to Antichrst, then servants to God. I speak this the rather, to see
what cause we have to bless God for our deliverance from this: And that we may
learn to know how to use our liberties.

This Bondage is worse then the bondage of Egypt.

1. Because it is soul bondage, and that was but upon the body, we do not read
that Pharaoh or the Egyptians did force them to Idolatry.

2. It was not so great bodily bondage, they did not destroy them, they laid
heavy burdens upon them, but did not put them to death, as Antichrist does, if
they will not submit unto them.

3. It was their misery to be under that bondage but not their sin: but it is a
sin to be under the bondage of Antichrist, look how much difference there is
between misery and sin, so much difference there is betwixt their bondage, and
the bondage of Antichrist.

4. They were Liable to the bondage of Egypt, but they were not liable to the
plagues of Egypt: They were free from them, but those that are under the
bondage of Antichrist are liable to the plagues that shall come upon Antichrist.

But it must be faith that must deliver from this bondage, It is a difficult
work, as it was a difficult thing to be delivered from Egypt, so it is a
difficult thing (that cannot be done without faith) to be delivered from this.

1. We know most part of the Christian world is educated, and the principles
that are dropped into them from them are Antichristian principles.

2. Though it be a bondage, there is a great deal of outward pomp and Glory in
their Idolatrous worship, that does much take sensual people, that do live by
sense; they will not worship God in such a mean way as others do, but there is
a great deal of pomp and outward show.

3. Though it be a bondage to the soul yet they give abundance of liberty to
the flesh, and though sometimes they suffer penance, and put the flesh to some
hardship sometimes, yet those that are rich may give way to their lusts, and
live as they list, for they may quickly be freed with a little money.

4. Besides there are so many examples of great men, and learned men, and some
that are Godly, that do yield to a great part of the yoaks, and their examples
are mighty engagements.

5. Besides, If so be they begin to flinch, presently there are such violent
afflictions and persecutions; thundering out of excomunications, and loss of
estates, and so many dangers that men are in.

6. Besides, It is hard, Because in the other of Christ's government there are
but a few mean men, and to come and yield to them this is hard to flesh and
blood, and there must be a great deal of self denial to yield to the
government of Christ, they count that the greatest bondage, especially
considering there may be miscarriages, and many Scandals amongst those that are
Godly, and do profess the ways, and ordinances, and liberties of Christ, that
except the heart be gracious there is a great deal of difficulty in submitting
to it, and people know not what to do but rather buckle under their bondage.

7. Besides: It is a fruit of the curse: not that all that are under that
bondage are under the Eternal Curse; But as all outward judgments are part of
the curse, so it is a part of the curse to be under the bondage of Antichrist,
and not to labor to get from it. I do not say that all that are sick and weak
are cursed, but it is a part of the curse; So men that are under that bondage,
are under part of the curse, that God will give them over to believe Lies: and
though a man has never so much Learning and understanding, yet if there be a
curse of God upon it, never talk of his learning and understanding, if his
parts were a hundred times more, they could not help him: It is the work of
Faith to deliver from it.

Quest. What is the work of Faith in delivering people from this bondage.

Answer. There are these six or seven things, that delivers from this bondage
under Antichrist.

1. Faith discovers unto the soul the spiritualness of the government of
Christ, and without that there cannot be a true deliverance from the bondage of
Egypt.

2. Faith shows unto the Soul the fullness of the Administration of all Christ's
offices, of his Preistly, Prophetical call, and Kingly offices: Now until the
soul understands this, it is never brought off from the government of
Antichrist to the government of Christ.

3. Faith shows the fullness and Glory that is in the world, which is the rule
for ordering and guiding of us in all our ways.

4. Faith shows the necessity of a divine rule, for a spiritual efficacy, and
that no humane invention can cause a spiritual efficacy: now the settling of
this principle is never done but by Faith.

5. Another work of faith is to discover the beauty and glory that is in the
Ordinances of Christ barely administered: no man but by the eye of Faith can see
the true luster, and beauty, and glory, of a divine Ordinance, except there be
some outward earthly excellency mingled with it: As I told you in the
exposition of that place in Hosea, They made them Altars, God would have an
Altar of Earth, and if they would have it of Stone, they must not lift up an
instrument to hew it, and grave it, but it must be plain. Now a carnal eye
cannot see the beauty of Gods Ordinances, unless it have some outward
excellency. It must be the eye of Faith, to discover the beauty of Christ's
Ordinances, in the naked beauty of them: And till that they are not willing to
come from under the power of Antichrist.

6. Faith discovers to the Soul the reality, and certainty of all the admirable
and glorious promises that are in the Gospel, made unto the true Church of God:
Promises of the glorious presence of God with his people; and promises of
abundance of spiritual good, as it might ask half an hour to show some
excellent promises that are made to the Church, which a carnal Eye does not
see: But Faith discovers there is abundance of certainty and reality in them,
and when by Faith they see them, this takes off, and enables them to go through
any difficulties to be partakers of them.

7. Again, Faith does discover the fearful threats against those that follow
Antichrist, and those (Revel. 14.9, 10.) that do receive the mark of the Beast
but in their hand secretly: they shall have their portion in the Lake that
burns for ever, and shall be cast out from the presence of the Lord. They that
read these threats make nothing of them; but when they read them by Faith then
the soul trembles, and fears, till it comes from under that bondage, it hears
a voice continually crying to it: Revel. 18.4. Come out from among them Oh my
people, come out, least being partaker of their sin, you also be partakers of
their Plagues: Now Faith by discovering these things brings the heart from
under that Antichristian bondage.

Quest. But may not men reject the yoke of Antichrist upon other Grounds
besides Faith?

Answ. Many times a spirit of contradiction may bring them from under the yoke
of Antichrist, though one good cannot be opposite to another good, yet one evil
may be opposite to another evil, and many men may oppose the government of
Antichrist by that which is evil in them, but if it be not by the principle of
Faith it is not right, and it may be upon other principles.

Quest. But how shall we know that we do forsake this bondage from Antichrist
by Faith.

Answ. I will give you some notes to show you who those are that are delivered
from this Egypt by Faith. And who those are that seem to be delivered upon
other grounds.

1. Those that are delivered by Faith are those that are well grounded in the
Doctrinal and maine points of Religion: Faith can never work off the soul from
the Government and Ceremonies of Antichrist, unless it be well grounded in the
doctrine and principles of Religion if I see men cry out of Antichrist, and of
the Government of Antichrist, and it appears that they have not a competent
measure of knowledge in the grounds of Religion and Principles of Faith, they
are to be suspected: As many: come and examine them about Church Government,
and they will tell you a great deal (not but that Christians should labor to
have knowledge in that) but come to examine them the Principles of Religion, and
there they are silly and ignorant: if they be not grounded in them it appears
it is not a work of Faith.

2. If it be a work of Faith, it is a work of much Humiliation, and Prayer; was
there a time you were under the power and bondage of Antichrist? how came you
from under it? did God show you the evil of it? and you sought God in much
Humiliation and prayer, for the taking off your hearts from it, and showing you
his good way and did you find your hearts coming off, was by that means, that
is a good argument it was of Faith; but many their Consciences tell them, it
was not a work of Humiliation and Prayer that brought off their hearts, they
are to be feared.

3. If it be a work of Faith it always lets in light: as in the point of the
government of Christ; many cry out against Antichristian government: and come
and examine them about it, and they have no more light, no other arguments, nor
further understanding then before but only a bitterness of spirit against it:
If a man grow bitter against those things which before he yielded too, he had
need have more light, but if they grow exceeding bitter against them and have
no further light and understanding then before, it is an argument it is a
distemper of heart, rather then any thing else. And therefore casting off all
at once is very suspicious; where it is of Faith God lets in light by degrees.
Its said of Luther in his reformation, First he saw the evil of one thing, and
then the evil of another, and so by degrees saw the evil of all: And so those
that forsake the bondage of Antichrist. By Faith, first God makes them suspect
their way, surely this is not the right way, there is some better way, and then
they fall a praying and humbling of themselves, and they fall examining, and so
they come to see the evil of one thing, and then they examine another, and so
light comes in by degrees, and then their hearts rise against them, and if
according to the measure of Light that you have, your hearts do come off, that
is a good sign.

4. If you break from Antichrist by Faith, it will make you a Separate from the
world as well as Separate from them: Many are Separates from any thing that has
but the least dependancy upon Antichristian government but they conform
themselves to the world, that there appears no difference between them and the
world, in their loose courses: that man that is a conformist to the world, is
not a Nonconformist to Antichrist by Faith.

5. If Faith take you off from the bondage under Antichrist it will take you off
from the bondage under any lust. That man that has not the power of Faith, to
take him off from any Lust, That man is not by Faith taken off from the bondage
of Antichrist. If Faith delivere from the bondage under Antichrist, it will
deliver from the bondage under Sin, and Satan, and therefore though men do
cry out of the bondage of Antichrist never so much, and yet they go on under
the bondage of any Lust, it is not of Faith.

6. That Soul that is taken from under the power of Antichrist by Faith, is
subject to the power and government of Christ and the Word: If Faith takes from
the one, it puts under the other: nothing but the Word can be the ground of
Faith, and if Faith takes a Soul from under the bondage of Antichrist, Such a
Soul finds the Word comes with divine power, and majesty upon the heart; and it
lays a trembling heart under the power and majesty of the Word, and it dares
not go from it, no not in no other thing. You plead for the Word in such and
such things, but there are other things you do not yield to the power of the
Word in, this is very suspicious: Those that by Faith are brought from the
power of Antichrist, their hearts are put mightily under the power of the Word,
and they ly with trembling spirits before the majesty and Authority of the word.

7. If it be Faith that takes off the Heart, such a one is not content that he
is taken from under the Antichristian government, unless he meets with Christ
in the Ordinances: he does not content it self with the bare husks, and to
make all his Religion to consist merely in Church discipline, and Church
constitution, and to think therefore, he has Religion enough, because he has
the Ordinances, and yet never finds any panting of Heart, after union and
communion with Christ Jesus in this way of Church Government, but goes on from
year to year, mearly in the outward performances of Religion. I do not speak
against the thing it self but to show it is not of Faith, if men do not pant
after union with Christ, if they be not sensible of the want of it, and do not
labor for the enjoyment of it.

8. If it be Faith that brings thee from this way, certainly thou will grow
more Spiritual: As thy heart will pant after Christ; so there will be a
Spiritualness of thy Soul in the ways of Christ, because thou come nearer to
the rule: And this is the difference between Actions of Religion, and civil
Actions; civil Actions that are done by civil rule have not always success,
but a Spiritual Action that is done by the rule, that has a Spiritual
success, though not an outward success, it does make the heart ever more
Spiritual: But for people though they be come from the yoke of Antichrist,
yet to be as dead as ever no more Spiritualness in their way then before, no
more savor of Godliness in their society and company then before: those that
knew them before can say; I knew them a great deal more spiritual and savoury
in that which is good then they are now, This is a dangerous thing.

9. Again, If it be out of Faith, such a one will give all the glory unto God
for his deliverance, and he will walk humbly in his own eyes, and think, I was
disobedient, and wretched and should have gone on in that way, but God by his
grace and power has come, and has taken off my heart, and it does magnify
the grace of God; It does not perke up it self, and contemn others, to think I
have got more wisdom, and understanding then others, and so attribute it to his
wit, and understanding; but it gives the glory to God, and instead of censuring
others, he prays for them, and says it is not all the arguments under Heaven
can convince them, for I had arguments enough, but they were all as nothing,
til it pleased God by his Grace to set them upon my heart, and so though they
may see arguments as well as I, they will not do: Therefore he pitties others
and prays for them; and he has a reverent respect to the Grace of others,
though they be not in the same way that he is in, and he does not presently
cast them off saying, surely there is no Grace, and Godliness in them, this is
a sign of a proud spirit; there are none that are gracious but know there was
a time when they went on in that way, and yet they did not go against their
light, but were willing to understand Gods mind, and yet til God came in, their
hearts were not taken off: and therefore they learn to have good thoughts of
those that are godly, though in other ways.

But especially, if it were out of Faith that you were brought from this
Antichristian Bondage, it will not leave in thee the Spirit of Antichrist: many
are far from being under Antichristian bondage, and yet have an Antichristian
Spirit, a Spirit of pride, a domineering Spirit, a Crooked, Perverse Spirit:
and this is a great evil, that in the way of Christ, there should be manifested
an Antichristian Spirit: this should be lamented with tears of blood. Now so
much as an Antichristian spirit does rule in any, though they be from under his
Government, so much it is to be suspected, it was not the work of Faith, but
somewhat else that took them off. We should have the spirit of Christ, the
spirit of Love, and Humillity, and gentleness, and peace, and as we would make
it appear, we are taken off from the yoke of Antichrist by Faith let us show
the Spirit of Christ, as Faith has taken us off from Antichristian power, so
we should exercise Faith to go on in the ways of Christ, as beseems those that
are delivered from Antichristian power.

FINIS.

