MANY Strong Reasons CONFOUNDED, Which would hinder any reasonable Man from
being A QUAKER; And Offenses taken out of the Way. But particularly, Four and
twenty Arguments Over turned and Confuted; Put forth and sent into the World by
Richard Baxter, a professed Minister; but a frequent Contender against the
ways of God: And this is an Answer to a sheet of his cried up and down the
streets in London as some excellent piece: But is proved to be full of Lies,
Slanders and false Reproaches against an innocent People; and this is sent
forth in the pursuit thereof, that people may not be deceived with every lying
Monster which is brought forth to public view; but first let all things be
tried, and only that which is good held fast.

And this is for the satisfaction of honest people by a friend, E. B.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1657.

MANY STRONG REASONS CONFOUNDED, Which would hinder any reasonable man from
being a QUAKER, AND Offenses taken out of the way, etc.
HOW long shall it be ere the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, and the
measure of this generations iniquity be fulfilled, who rush into iniquity as a
Horse into the battle, and who hastens to fill up the largest measure of
iniquity of any generation that ever went before? Is it not plain and manifest
to all people that have but an eye to see? How does the wicked run on greedily,
drinking up iniquity as an Ox drinks water? How does the Archers of Babylon
shoot at the innocent, and makes the harmless their prey? But this is but fot a
moment, the end thereof is nigh, and because the Devils time is but short,
therefore he is come down in rage, and has filled the hearts of many people
with raving envy and despite against the Lord and his people, whom the Lord is
a gathering out of the mouths of all their enemies; and the Serpents seed it
bruiseth the heel, but its head is deadly wounded by the seed of God.

And whereas many has set themselves in opposition against the Lord, and their
work is become a stinck and a proverb to be laughed at in generations to come,
yet must not the wicked cease their wickedness til their measure be perfectly
accomplished. And whereas Richard Baxter, a professed Minister in
Worcestershire, known to many by his fruits to be a corrupt Tree which brings
not forth good fruit, who sends out of his study lies and false reports, and
vain arguments to blind the eyes of people that they may not see the truth, and
has written once and again against the people of God, which he in scorn calls
Quakers, some of which writings has been sufficiently answered, and his shame
and folly seen openly by all people; yet he (as a man not weary of wickedness)
has sent forth a Paper, which he calls, A Sheet against the Quakers; wherein
what was wanting of wickedness in his former, is now fully brought forth out
of his vessel, (a malicious heart) which cannot contain within it self its
rage, and fury, and madness against the innocent: but needs must his folly
break forth openly, that all men may see it: And in this his foolish paper he
has twenty four reasons, which he says, Moves him to conceive that no
Christian or reasonable man should be a Quaker, or approve of, or excuse their
way; now his Reasons we shall try. But first of all I say, It had been more
honest for him to have made a sufficient Reply to have defended his former
works, and cleared himself of his former lies and slanders truly charged
against him, then to have past that slightly, and begin anew to revile; for
that Book which he often mentions and boasts of, callled, The Quakers
Catechism, was sufficiently answered, and his folly laid open, by a friend to
the truth, in a Book called, An Answer to the Quakers Catechism, to which Book
he never equally replied to this day, which had been more honest to have
cleared himself from what is truly charged against him in that answer, then to
have begun afresh to reproach and speak wickedness; and this all people may
consider of.

1. His first Reason which he brings forth against the Quakers, is, That they
deny and revile the Churches and Ministers of Christ; and yet says he cannot
tell indeed of any Church or Ministry which is to be preferred before those that
they do despise.

Answ. To this I answer, That is utterly false; for we do not deny the Church
and Ministers of Christ, nor do revile them, or any others whatsoever, but
speaks the truth in nakedness to all people: The Church of Christ we own, and
are of it, which are gathered out of the world through the preaching of the
Gospel, and separated from the world and all its works and ways, which are
evil, and are joined to Christ the Head, in the Spirit, and one to another as
members of Christ; and these are born again, and are redeemed out of the world,
and are of the kingdom of Christ, and of his Church, and members of his body,
and this we own to be a Church, and are of it, who has no fellowship with
darkness, nor no part with the practice of the works of darkness. And the
Ministers of Christ we own, who have received the gift of the Ministry by the
Holy Ghost, and exercises that gift by the Holy Ghost, whose call is from God,
and their work of God, and their end alone his glory, such we own to be
Ministers of Christ, and does not revile or deny (as he falsely says) such a
Church, and such Ministers of Christ; but this we do, and without offense to
God too, we do deny and bear our witness against such a people who professes
themselves to be a Church, and yet are in the pride, in the wickedness, and in
the evil of this world, and not redeemed, cleansed, and separated from the works
and iniquities thereof, such we do reprove for their hypocrisy, even all them
that owns a title to a Church because they were sprinkled when they were
Infants, and has not another ground; and such who professes themselves
Ministers of Christ, who has not received their Ministry by the gift of the
Holy Ghost, neither are lead by the Spirit of Christ, but are such as Christ
and the Apostles declared against, such we cannot own to be Ministers of Jesus
Christ, but does reprove them, and deny them, even such who preaches for hire,
and has gifts and rewardt for preaching, and set-places for so much a year,
these we disown, and yet does not offend God herein: And this in honesty I do
show to all people what that professed Church and professed Ministry is which
we do deny, and what that Church and Ministry is which we do set up to be
preferred, which is a right Ministry, and a right Church: And thus his
reasonless reason is overturned and confounded, and is found to be no
sufficient reason wherefore a man should not be a Quaker.

2. His second reason is, No wise man can be a Quaker (says he) because their
Religion is an uncertain thing, and so is not the Religion that must save us,
etc.

I answer, This again is utterly false, and no man that has Gods wisdom would
speak it; for our Religion which we profess is a certain thing, and we have
openly declared it once and again, and this is it, To believe in Christ, and to
receive Christ, and to be lead by the spirit of Christ, and caught in all
things to love God with all the heart, and a man's neighbor as himself, and
through the power of Christ dwelling in man, to do all good, and to be kept
from all evil: This in very short is our Religion, and it is a very certain and
established Religion, and this Religion we all agree in: And this in short is
the substance of our faith, Even Christ in us, believed on, and received by us:
This is the truth, and his lies is judged; and if he say this is an uncertain
Religion, let him give it under his hand, and subscribe to it, and he shall
have a further Reply.

3. His third Reason is, No man of reason should be a Quaker, considering that
amongst those scraps of their Religion which is made known, there is so much
notorious falsehood and ungodliness, says he.

Ans. Let all Christian people mark this his Reason, they are even lies heaped
one upon another: What secret slanders are these behind our backs, who never
would clear himself of what is truly charged against him in answer to his
Catechism? his words are turned by as utter lies: for that which we profess and
practice for Religion, which we have made known by word and writing, is,
uprightness, godliness, sincerity and truth, and neither notorious falsehood,
nor ungodliness, as he wickedly says: And why did not he make it appear what
this notorious falsehood and ungodliness had been? that had been more honest
then to cast his charges and prove nothing. And whereas he says, The very
person of Christ Jesus many of them does blaspheme, etc. this is utterly false,
for Jesus Christ have we owned and believed in only, and for his sake we do,
and suffer hard things.

4. His fourth Reason is, says he, Because their false pernicious Doctrines,
their practical Religion does much consist in most notorious wicked injujustice
and uncharitableness, etc.

Ans. Here is lie upon lie uttered, and wickedness joined to wickedness, and
drunk up as an Ox drinks up water, and no conscience made thereof by Richard
Baxter; it had been just to have mentioned these pernicious Doctrines, their
practical Religion, injustice, and uncharitableness, and not to have slandered
in the dark: but we are delivered by the Lord from all pernicious Doctrines and
notorious wickedness whatsoever, and we find this false Reproacher guilty
himself and his people, of what he accuses the innocent: And so his words are
(...) unto himself, and upon his own head I turn them.

^* His fifth Reason is, The worst of all, says he, is, That they behave
themselves like malignant enemies to the very Church, and Gospel, and Servants
of Jesus Christ, etc.

Ans. This man speaks as if he had sold himself wholly to lie: but my answer to
his first Reason is sufficient to answer this also, and does say, That the
Cause, and the Church, and the Gospel and Servants of Jesus Christ we do fully
and freely own, and are daily exercised therein as the very Servants of Jesus,
and are friends thereof in our hearts, and does not behave our selves in any
way as enemies thereunto: God will judge every lying tongue, and shall condemn
our false Accusers guilty of that which they charge the guiltless, to reprove
and bear witness against the wild, wicked, and rude conversations, and against
such as have gotten the Saints words, and by art frame an hours discourse
thereupon for so much a Sermon, or so much a year, to deny such to be a Church
of Christ, and Ministers of Christ, this we do, and does not behave our selves
like enemies to the Church, or Gospel, or Ministers and servants of Christ, as
our Adversary wickedly says.

6. His sixth Reason, says he, That part of the Quakers peculiar Religion
which consists not in error and malignant impudency, is made up very much of it
of childish and unreasonable foppery, etc.

Ans. As I have said, No part of our Religion consists in error and malignant
impudency, and as for that which he calls childish and unreasonable foppery, we
stand not to man's judgment, for it is a small thing with us for to be judged
of any man; for we do acknowledge that we are become fools for Christ's sake,
and herein we have cause to glory, though he upbraid us with it; and it was
such as he who called Paul a Babbler, and that his Doctrine was madness, as he
says ours in foppery; and let him know, that which is foolishness with man,
is wisdom with God; and we know God will confound the wisest of men by that
which they may judge to be foolish, and unreasonable, and foppery; for to such
who are lost our Gospel is hid, where the god of this world has blinded their
eye, as it is plain he has done this our Adversaries, and that is the reason
wherefore he has sent forth such lying Scribbles from his study of wicked
inventions; and let him make the best use of his wisdom he can, he can but
serve the Devil with it, while his wisdom is sensual and divillish: And let him
leave us to our childishness and folly, and let the issue prove whether is the
safer guide.

7. His seventh Reason is, says he, Their malignancy does blind them to make
that the principal cause of their rage and reviling the Ministry which is
plainly agreeable to the will of God, and necessary to the Churches good.

Ans. This is false also; we are not blinded, but does see Richard Baxter, and
all such, to be out of the way of truth and peace: And as for rage, and
reviling against the Ministers, that is false also, though indeed we do openly
reprove deceivers; and we know it is not agreeable to the will of God, and
necessary to the Churches good, though he says it is, for Ministers of Christ
to take tithes, or to have a (...) ^^intenance; for never none of the Ministers
of Christ that we read of in Scripture, either took tithes to maintain them, or
had a set-maintenance; but all that Christ allows to his Ministers, is to eat
such things as were set before them. And in that he says, We liken them to
covetous Priests among the Jews, that is true; to whom should we liken them but
to them that practiced the same things as they do? And I am sure there never
was priests in any generation that were more covetous then these of England
are, as in many particulars might be showed* for as the false prophets in
Israel did, so do these in many things; and what the Ministers of Christ did,
these do not: And whereas he pleads for tithes, never Minister of Christ did in
the Gospel-administration claim the tenth of peoples labors, nor none of the
Ministers of Christ were maintained by tithes, but lived of the Gospel which
they preached, which livelihood was not great sums of money, and compelling
some of it too from the people by a Law; but the Churches ministered to the
Apostles necessities, whom the Apostles had begotten to the faith, and planted
them as a Vinyard, and kept them as a Flock: But the maintenance of the Priests
of England is another case, they must have so much a year, and people is bound
to pay them, and sometimes so much a Sermon; and they maintain themselves in
idleness, and fullness, and pride, and spend the Creation more then upon their
necessities: But he says concerning tithes, That tithes are the Churches, and
not the peoples, and by the Law of the Land too. What the Law of the Land
requires, which is just, we do own, and do not resist it, but obey it; but what
the Law of the Land commands, which is contrary to the Law of God, as the Law
is which commands to pay tithes; we cannot be obedient to it; for we read in
the Hebrews, that Law which commanded to pay tithes, and take tithes in the old
Covenant, is put to an end, and Christ the second Priesthood established, and
the priesthood being changed, there was a necessity of change of the Law also
which upheld the priesthood: Then whence is that Law of the Land which commands
tithes of God, or ootherwise? judge ye, seeing the Scripture says, The
Commandment going before (viz. that gave tithes) is disannulled.

8. His eighth Reason, The Quakers way is too cruel and uncharitable to be the
way of God, they damn (says he) the most humble, holy, faithful servants of
God, to whom God has promised life, etc.

Answ. This is not the least of his lies, our way is Christ, and is neither
cruel nor uncharitable, but pure, and holy, and zealous against all sin, and
cannot bear and suffer iniquity, but reproves it; neither do we damn any, but
warns all to repent, to be humble and lowly, that they may have the promise of
life; and we sharply reprove sin, and deceivers, and deceit, and this makes the
men of this generation mad, and calls it cruel and uncharitable, whenas we do
but warn them of their sins* showing them if they live in sin they perish, and
if they repent and turn to God, they shall be saved; and God has given us the
spirit of discerning, and by their fruits we do know a child of God from a
child of the devil, and herein do establish the Gospel, and not repeal it,
though he falsely says so; neither do we condem any who fear the Lord, in any
thing they do, or speak in his fear, but with such we have unity, who walks in
uprightness in the midst of a malicious world, and perverse generation, as this
is.

9. His nineth Reason, says he, After all their sins they most impudently
(...) a sinlesse perfection, etc.

Ans. What such as are in darkness does conceive of us, and so utters, it
matters not; but many of us do witness that Christ has done away our sins,
and in him we are complete through faith, in which we are perfect without sin,
and it is not of our selves; and that perfection we exhort all to press after,
that they may be perfect in Christ Jesus without sin* And he says, They
themselves desire a sinlesse perfection, and (...) it is their command and
duty, and yet says it is an impudent (...) in us to profess that which
himself confesses they desire, and is their command and duty; and this is
great confusion, and comes out of Babylons store: And though he would falsely
suppose that the Quakers suppose to have no need of Christ, and says he, They
dare (it seems) say they will not be beholding to God, or to the blood of
Christ for the pardon of sin; but these are his foolish imaginations, for we
are beholding to Christ, and to his blood only, which has cleansed us from all
sin, and by it our sins and trespasses are blotted out, and forgiven: And we do
not think highly of our selves, though he impudently charge it upon us, and
has bent his tongue for lies, and made them his refuge and strong Reasons.

10. His tenth Reason, That we do in many Doctrines so openly comply with the
Papist, that people may see plainly that the Jesuits and Friars are our
Leaders; and he says, this has been proved by many Confessions, etc.

Answ. The Papist we utterly deny, their Doctrines, their ways, and whatsoever
savours of popery, and are not lead by any other but by Jesus Christ, as our
lives and Doctrines does make appear to all that have an eye to see; it is true
we may be falsely slandered and accused by Richard Baxter, and by the Priests
and the wicked people of the world, for it is enough for us to be as our Master
Christ, who was called a Devil; and as was he, so are we slandered and accused
in this and many other things: But that ever it was proved that we are led by
Jesuits and Friars, this is one of our Adversaries slanders he has once and
again accused us, but he never proved it, though now he says, The Papists make
the Scriptures a dead Letter, and no Rule of faith, and so do we: The Papist
cries down our Church and Ministers, (says he) The Jesuits cries up free will
and sufficient grace to all, and a common sufficient light to all, and so do we
(says he:) The Papist extenuate imputed righteousness in setting up inherent
righteousness: and the Papist place most in external abstenances and
observances, and so do we, says he, etc. To all this I answer, What is truth
we hold and maintain in the power of God, and may not deny it, though the
Papists may hold the same in words, which seldom they do; for we hold the truth
for the truths sake, and dare not deny the truth, though the devil confess it
in words; but he has falsely compared us with the Papists and Jesuits, for we
do not hold free will in the creature, neither do we extenuate imputed
righteousness, neither do we place most in external abstenances and
observances, herein Richard Baxter has belyed us: But what if I should measure
him by his own rule, and should say that the Jesuits and Friars are his
Leaders? Why, because the papists say Christ was born of Mary, and did many
miracles, and dyed, being crucified of the Jews, and was buried, and rose
again, and so does Richard Baxter say, and all the Presbyterians in England,
and therefore may we conjecture, they do but prepare people to be papists, or
open Infidels, as he says concerning us. But further, the papists say that
sprinkling Infants is baptizing into the faith of Christ, and they say none
must be free from sin while they are upon earth, and they cry against heresy
and error, and thus does Richard Baxter and his company, and therefore by his
own Arguments he may be judged that the Jesuits and Friars are his Leaders,
and that he prepares people to be papists; but I will not be so uncharitable to
judge him (...) by this rule, as he has falsely done us, though I do know in
the sight of God there is a greater concurrence in Doctrine, and practice, and
conversation, between many of our Accusers and the Papists, then there is
between the Papists and us, and the light of Christ in all consciences shall
answer me in the day of Gods righteous judgments, and the papists and him we
do deny, and see them to be of one spirit, though differing in appearances; and
what we are it is by grace, and not of our selves; and what we do it is through
Christ, and not by our selves, and to God we appeal for judgment, and tramples
upon all men's vain conceivings, false judgments, lies and slanders, and turns
them back to them again where they were hatched.

11. His eleventh Reason: He says, Our Doctrines are self-contradictory, and
therefore they cannot be of God, etc.

Ans. To this I answer, This is false, our Doctrines do agree in one, and are
not self-contradictory, though falsely he may judge of this, as he may judge of
other things; if he had been in Christ's time, likely he would have judged his
words self-contradictory, who said, Except you eat my flesh, and drink my
blood, you have no life in you; and yet at the same instant of time said, The
flesh profits nothing; with many other such instances as might be brought.
Why, but Richard Baxter tells you, We say all men have a sufficient light
within them, and goes up and down, preaching it with great zeal. This is no
more than the Apostle John did, who told the Saints they needed no man to teach
them, but as the Anointing in them, and yet preached unto them, and wrote
Epistles to them, but did John contradict himself? let wise men judge. And John
said Christ lights every man that comes into the world with the true light;
and no more then he did, do we contradict our seves herein, for we follow the
same example, and we say the Saints have the Anointing in them, and needs no
man to teach them, and yet we do exhort them as the Apostle John did. And he
asks, what do we preach, If darkness, who would have such Teachers? if light,
what needless labor is this, when all men have sufficient light already, etc.
To all this I answer, We preach light that all should believe in it, and
thereby should be lead out of darkness, and the light is sufficient, being
believed in by the creature, but all are not lead by it sufficiently, neither
does receive Christ: And we may ask him now, and say, If he preach darkness
(as it is likely he does, rather then the light, because he smites at preaching
the light that has lighted every man that comes into the world, and so in
effect denies the Lord that bought him) then who would have such a Preacher?
but if he preach the light, and not that light which does enlighten every one
that comes into the world, which is Christ, and is sufficient, (as it seems by
his own words he does not, because he condemns us for it) then is he a Minister
of Antichrist, according to his own confession. But whatever he judge, we are
sent to turn people from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to the
power of God; and herein we do as the Ministers of Christ did; but that we
revile the Ministers of Christ as blind guides, as says he, this is false
again, but such we bear witness against who preaches for hire, and oppresses
the Commonwealth, and are in the steps of the proud Pharisees, and all people
that follows them are in darkness as the Pharisees were, and in the way of
damnation, because they are not in the truth who follows not Christ, and yet
such people are lightened with the light of Christ, and that is their
condemnation because they believe not in it, and it is sufficient to the
condemnation of all such.

12. His twelfth Reason: Says he, Consider also how suitable their Doctrine is
to the interest and pleasure both of the Papist and the Devil, why, says he,
they damn all the Ministers and Churches of CHRIST, etc.

To this I answer, A lying tongue is but for a moment; though he makes lies his
refuge, yet shall they be swept away. Of the Ministers and Churches of Christ
are we, and such as are so, they we own, and are one with them, though this man
says otherwise; and it does little appear that our Doctrine is suitable to the
interest and pleasure of the papists, for we find them our enemies, and Gods
enemies, and bears our witness against them, as against the devil, and do say
that they are his offspring, and that the Priests of England are their
offspring, such as are open liars especially: But if we should reckon, we
should find their Doctrine more agreeable to the papists in many things, then
ours are, as I have instanced concerning sprinkling of Infants, and other
things; but does it follow that the papists and we agree because the papists
declare against them out of cruelty and wickedness, and out of a murderous
mind to divert people into idolatry and wicked superstition; and we declare
against them out of love to peoples souls, that they should not always be
deceived, and always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth; and has no other end to ourselves, God is our witness, but that people
may be converted to the knowledge of God; and as I said before, though the
papists may hold some truth in words, and cry against some sort of people out
of a wicked end, yet may not we therefore deny the truth as it is in Jesus,
neither must be silent in declaring against sin and wickedness; and let him
say what he will concerning any advantage the Devil reaps by us, it will but be
the overthrow of his very kingdom: Why, but says he, If we do but unchurch all
the reformed Churches, the Papists will give us a fee: I say, it is a hard
thing to unchurch them that never were truly churched; and that we seek to
unchurch such as are the Churches of Christ, this is utterly false, and the
papists fee and his reproach, we trample upon them both together; and let him
take the papists fee, as he pleads for it, for it was they first that took
tithes for a see, and it is he now that strongly pleads for them, to be
maintained in his Ministry by them.

13. His thirteenth Reason: Says he, The Doctrine and practice of the Quakers
is contrary to the experience and holy nature of the Saints; why, says he,
they have found a renewed light and life by the Scriptures and Ministry which
the Quakers make so light of, etc.

To this I answer, This is as false as the rest, for with all the Saints that
ever was upon earth, both in doctrine and practice we agree with them; and as
for the peoples sakes of England, I wish his words were true, and that they had
indeed found a renewing light and life by this Ministry; but though he may
boast of it now, in the day of Gods righteous judgments it shall be found
otherwise, when it shall be tried, that the renewing has been but in form and
appearance, from one likeness to another, and not a renewing from death to
life; and though there has been something of God sometime appearing, a zeal
and a desire after him in the Ministry of England in times past, yet from this
day has the Lord forsaken them, and such as were sober and sincere in what was
made manifest, are now become revilers and reproachers, slanderers and
persecutors of the people of God, and from henceforth shall they not boast of
many being converted by them from sin unto the way of righteousness. But
further he says, We tell the people that their Ministry does the people no
good, and none are the better for it: If we do, we tell them true: And though
he says, The experiences of many thousands does confute this, yet say I, the
experiences of ten thousand times so many more shall confirm it: It is true,
there may be thousands like himself which will not stumble to belie their own
souls, as he has done of us; yet betwixt him and I in this matter God shall be
our Judge, who has not sent this Ministry, and yet it has run, therefore it
does not, nor shall not profit the people at all: He says, It is quite
contrary to the nature of Saints to damn and reproach the Saints, and call them
the children of the Devil: This is true; but it is not contrary to the nature
of the Saints to reprove Hypocrites, such as profess that which they do not
enjoy, and speak that which they have not received from the Lord, but steal
from other men's words, such are many of the Teachers of England; and it was the
way of Christ and his Apostles soundly to reprove such: And this is our way,
and we do not reproach the Saints, nor damn them, and yet to the wicked, which
are not Saints, we dare not cry peace, but do say, The wicked, and such who
forget God, shall be turned into Hell: And for this, David is our example.

14. His fourteenth Reason: He says, The Quakers are unlikely to be better
then other men seeing they are so notoriously proud; and thus this pride does
appear: Says he, It is the supposed spirit as God, and the extraordinary
holiness, and inspiration, and abilities, that they are proud of, and says he,
They proclaim themselves perfect without sin. And this is the pride he charge
us with, etc.

To which I answer, We say that in Christ we are complete, as the Apostles said
to the Churches, and do not boast of it, neither are proud of it more then the
Churches were, but in the Lord we will golry, and in him rejoice again and
again; and it is that which we press after, and exhort all to press after, to
be perfect in him who takes away our sins, and gives power over the temptations
of the Devil. And he says, We pretend to know men's hearts: Yea, we do know
that the heart of man is desparately wicked and deceitful above all things; and
by men's words and works, we do know their hearts to be evil that acts and
speaks wickedness, For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks:
And if we should say we do not know men's hearts that acts and speaks
wickedness, we should be liars: but as I said, What we are it is by grace in
Christ, and we boast not of it in the flesh, but our glorying is only in the
Lord in spirit, that our names are written in the Book of life. And as for our
crying against deceivers, which he so much stumbles at, it is but the practice
of Christ and his Apostles, as may be read through the Scriptures, and yet we do
it not, no more then they did in self-exaltation, though he would charge us
with it.

15. His fifteenth Reason: Says he, They plainly discover a persecuting
spirit: Why (says he) what man can in reason think but that they run up and
down the world to bring Ministry into hatred, etc.

To this I answer, Little of this does appear that our spirits are persecuting
spirits, for we pray for our enemies, and does forgive them that does evil
entreat us, and renders to no man evil for evil; for if we had sought
vengeance, or prosecuted the good Laws of England against those that had
wronged and robbed us, and unjustly caused us to be put in prison, many might
have deeply suffered by true Justice before this day, if we had not forgiven
our enemies, and blessed them that hated us: Such has been the cruelty acted
upon us, that many might have been arraigned for felony if we had sought the
prosecution of the good Laws and not forgiven our enemies.

Why, but the main thing is, because we are moved to go up and down the world
and declare against the false Ministers, and holding forth that Ministry, and
truly applying it to many of the Teachers of England: But let all the world
know, this is not from a persecuting spirit, no more then Isaiah did it, and
Micha, and the rest of the Prophets and Apostles, who did zealously give their
testimony against such as went for gifts and rewards, as the Teachers of
England do; but this is that which he is offended at, and calls it a
persecuting spirit, which is not so, but in love to peoples souls, that they
may deny the evil, and follow the good: And that our Ancestors have persecuted
to death, as he says, This is also a lie, and of the Devil, for our Ancestors
were the Saints, who were called of God, and were not of the world, even as we
are not of the world, and we are persecuted, but seeks not to persecute any,
and gives our witness faithfully against this generation, and against the
sins both of Teachers and people; and this I suppose is it, even our zeal for
the Name of the Lord against unrighteousness, which he falsely calls a
persecuting spirit.

16. His sixteenth Reason is, Some Interrogatories, (says he) What reasonable
man should turn Quaker that sees the common fruit of their Doctrine? what good
do they do wherever they come, but (says he) hate both godly. Teachers and
people, etc.

Ans. To this I answer, The fruit of our Doctrine is begetting people to the
knowledge of God, and a converting them from sin and death, and from the ways
and works of unrighteousness, to be the servants of the Lord; and every
spiritual man does see this to be the fruit of our doctrine: It does condemn
unrighteousness, and bring war and a sword upon earth, as Christ's Doctrine
did. And this is the good where we come, Many are changed from wickedness,
rudeness, and ungodliness, to live soberly, righteously, and purely in this
present world, without offense toward God and men. For to say, We make people
both to hate godly Teachers and people, this is utterly false, for we endeavor
to bring people to the true Teacher, Christ Jesus, and to have fellowship with
the Saints: It Is true, in the world our Doctrine does make division, and does
set a man at varience, and does set Father against Son, and Son against Father,
even as Christ did, and his Doctrine, so he says we do. But again he belyes
us, in saying, We bring people into confusion and abominable error, or that we
cast people into a malicious mood, or tincture of bitterness, this is also
false, and this is my Answer, He that does the will of our Father, knows of our
Doctrine, whether we be of God, or of our selves, and to all the world besides
we are unknown, and desires to be manifest to every man's conscience in the
sight of God, and not to that wisdom which is of this world: And though he
scorn at such who are made to cast off their Points and Lace, yet is not this
more then any fruit that his Doctrine has brought forth? for as we do, so did
the Apostle exhort against all superfluity of naughtiness, as Points and Laces
are; and it seems that such as depart from iniquity become a prey to such
wicked men's slandering and scornful tongues, and a manner to make Books of, to
send into the world.

17. His seventeenth Reason: Says he, It is no great encouragement to us to
turn Quakers, when we consider who are their followers, very few experienced
sober Christians turn to them, (says he) but such who are ignorant, and
ungrounded, and raw professors, etc.

Ans. To this I answer, Let no man take encouragement from without, to turn
Quaker, or to own the way of Gods salvation, but let every one feel a measure
of God in his own heart, converting him from sin unto righteousness, and
drawing his mind from the vanity and hypocrisy of this world, to the truth and
singleness of heart: And he appears to be of the spirit of the Pharisees, who
said, None but a company of poor people which were accursed, followed Christ;
and so says he, in effect, None but such as are ignorant, and such like: But
what if there were not any other but such who owned the way of the Lord? this
is a confirmation of it, rather then a cause of objecting against it, when such
who are ignorant are brought to the knowledge of God: But yet his words are
false, for it is known, that very many honest, humble, sober men and people,
who have all their days been sincere toward God in what they have known of
him, have and do own us; and indeed, all that ever owns God and Salvation,
shall own us, for we are of God, and he that is of God hears us, and the
whole world lies in wickedness: And such as are self-conceited, and in pride,
and wise in their own eyes, and in the wickedness of the world, such are his
followers, and not ours, though he falsely say it; for such as follow Christ
have we fellowship with, and not with such as walk in darkness.

18. His eighteenth Reason: Says he, It is an evident judgment of God upon
these people that turn Quakers, and a punishment for their former sins, etc.

Ans. To this I answer, The Lord God, his Angels, and all his Saints and
Servants I call to record against thee, and they all shall witness that it is
mercy, and not judgment, upon them that owns the way of the Lord: And them
that owned the Quakers in truth and sincerity, have and do witness a remission
of their former sins, and forgiveness of them by Jesus Christ, and not a
punishment for them: And Richard Baxter may please himself and some others with
his reasonless Reasons, as these are, yet they are not worthy of the name of
Reason, they be so senseless and utterly false. And though he railes against
the Anabaptists as well as against us, yet any man whose eye is open, sees his
folly, and turns it upon his own head: And he may conceit himself in these
things for a moment, but the day of the Lord will declare it otherwise, and
that upon us mercy and peace shall be, and not judgment nor wrath.

19. His nineteenth Reason: Says he, They are already in division among
themselves, as the contention between Nayler and Fox, and their followers does
show.

To this I answer, Though an occasion may come and be taken against the truth,
yet woe unto him by whom it comes, and to them who does receive it, for the
testimony of truth abides for ever. But as about that division he speaks of,
it has been answered by writings several times, and now I say, It happened but
as a trial to the Lords people, and not to destroy them; though the enemy
boasts himself because of it, yet the Lord knows how to preserve his in the
midst of temptation: But these things are now at an end, though a temptation
presented it self, yet it overcame not, and truth is the same, and the
testimony thereof does never change: and all these refuges which the wicked
flies unto shall not cover them when the Lord appears.

20. His twentieth Reason: And says he, To make all their delusions more
odious wickedness, they father it upon the Holy Ghost, etc.

Ans. His words are utterly false: yet we say we have received the Holy Ghost,
which teaches us, and leads us into all truth, and by it are we lead out of
all wickedness and delusion, and all wicked speeches which he brands us
withal, and these things are his own, for he is seen to be in delusion, and
odious wickedness, and wicked speeches. And says he, They speak against the
DOCTRINE of the SPIRIT, and cries down the love of the Saints, and against the
Ordinances of the Ministers of Christ. To this I have answered, In the love and
union with all the Saints we are, and Ministers of Christ, but against
Hypocrisy we declare, such who profess what they are not, and use their
tongues, and says the Lord says, when the Lord has not spoken to them; and
sprinkle Infants, and says it is ^n ordinance of Christ; and singing David's
Experiences in Rhyme and Meeter, with many other things which the Priests has
in their practice, such things we deny to be Ordinances of Christ, and them to
be Ministers of Christ which do practice them; and this we do say by the spirit
of truth: But that we prenounce damnation against Gods Church and holy
Servants, this is false again, and is but the fulfilling the number of his
lies; and though he charge us secretly with preaching another Gospel then that
which Paul preached, is false; and if we duly examine, it will be he that will
be sound preaching another Gospel, whose practice is found in many things
contrary to them who were Ministers of the true Gospel, and so the curse
pronounced by the Apostle will fall upon him, and not upon us in the day of
judgment.

21. His one and twentieth Reason: Says he, The Quakers themselves renounce in
words the Ranters and Papists as a deluded sort.

Ans. To which I answer and say, Yea, not only in words, but in lives also we
utterly abhor the Ranters and Papists both in profession and practice, and do
know that Richard Baxter is of the same spirit, though differing in words. But
says he, The Ranters and Drunkards cries out against the same Ministers and
same exercise and godly people as the Quakers do. To which I answer, What the
Ranters and Drunkards may do in their wickedness and unclean spirits, is one
thing, and what we do in the fear of God and tender love to peoples souls, is
another thing; but how uncharitable is this man in his judgment? Let us try
him, as if I should say, The Ranters, and drunkards, and profane, and all
ungodly people, they are our enemies, and does oppose and gain say the way of
God, and the people called Quakers, and they beat them, and reproach them, and
slander them, and does much cruelty unto them; and thus does Richard Baxter of
Kedderminster, he reviles them, and reproaches them, and belyes them, and
therefore he is one with the Ranters, and drunkards, and profane people, and
he holds part of the Papists, Ranters, and drunkards doctrine and practice: And
thus he is judged with his own Rule, according as he has judged us, by the
same Rule; and now say I as well as he of us, Let any man judge that has not
for sworn all wit and reason, whether it is likely the Holy Ghost will inspire
Richard Baxter and a company of Priests of England, to acquaint them with the
same Points, Doctrines, and Practices, which the Papists, Ranters, Drunkards,
and all profane people exercise themselves in; for as all they are enemies to
the Quakers, so is he and his company. And farther I ask him, Whether the same
things be heavenly in Rich. Baxter and his company, which be hellish in the
Ranters and Drunkards? And whether Richard Baxter has not condemned himself
and the Priests of England in condemning the Papists, and Ranters, and
Drunkards, and profane people, in acting the very same things, to wit,
speaking against, reproaching, reviling, and slandering, and backbiting an
innocent people of God, called Quakers.

22. His two and twentieth Reason: And says he, If I have any reason to be
weary of the Christian Catholic reformed Religion, what reason have I to turn
Quaker more then to any other Sect? Why (says he) how do they prove they are
more in the right then any other, etc.

Answ. To all this I answer, This is according to his knowledge, who sees no
difference between good and evil, between such as serves God, and such as
serves him not; and how can this man be a Teacher of others that is so blind
himself? The true Christian Religion he is out of, and in a Sect, whose fruits
are as bad as the Papists or Familists, or any others; for I believe not the
worst of Sects could have brought forth more lies and slanders, and scoffing
words in one sheet of paper, then he has done in this which now I deal
withal. And as for our proof that we are in the right way, to every man that
has an eye to see, and an ear to hear, and an heart to conceive, it is easy to
be proved, and such are satisfied; but as for unbelievers and persecutors, such
as himself, they must hear, and see, and not perceive and understand.

23. His three and twentieth Reason: Says he, The way by which they prevail is
not producing any evidence, for they renounce that, and offers all from the
Authority of the spirit within them, etc.

Ans. The way by which we prevail is by the spirit of the Lord which is within
us, and that was the way whereby all the Ministers of Christ ever prevailed, by
the authority of that. But yet this is false, we do not deny to produce
Evidences, but is sufficiently able, and has done it, to produce Evidences out
of the Scriptures, to prove all things which we profess or practice for
Religion. But says he, They must prove their Commission by Divine miracles
before any reasonable man can believe it, etc. Many that fear God, and are in
the purest Reason, has believed us already, and does see the mighty wonders of
God brought to pass, and it cannot be believed by Richard Baxter, no more then
Christ was believed of the Pharisees, in whom the mighty power of God was made
manifest, for though he did miracles, yet that generation could not believe
them. And he tells of some that said he was blind; so might they well do, and
not lie, his blindness is made manifest at large. And says he, But can I see
the Witness in them that says they have the witness in themselves. Nay,
because thou art an unbeliever thou can not; but if thou were a believer in
Christ, thou would feel the same testimony in the Brethren; but by thee we
are not known, and therefore by thee are falsely judged; for no other testimony
do we give or hold forth, but the same which the Apostles did, which we have
received from Christ as the Apostles did, and not by any Authority of our own,
though he falsely say it, but by the Authority of the power of God; and we shall
not much seek or beg our Adversaries belief, for to God are we known, and one
to another in the spirit, and not to the wisdom of the world, which is
devilish, and knows not, nor receives not the things which be eternal.

His last Reason: They teach but such like Doctrines, and takes the like course
as many of the Heretics did; and says he, Shall we run our selves into the
fire which has consumed such Heresy through former Ages, etc.

Ans. To this I answer, The Doctrines of the Gospel we hold forth and teach to
all people, and in that way which is called Heresy, worship we indeed the God
of our fathers; but it is but such as this man with whom I deal, who is a false
witnesse-bearer, and a reproacher, and the company of Hireling-Teachers, and
such like, that does call the way of God Heresy. And though he say, presently
after the Apostles days such Heretics arose and troubled the Church. To which
I answer, Nay it is just such like as himself, who appeared in the Apostles
days, who taught for filthy lucre, and for gain made merchandise of souls; and
it was such lying Prophets which John saw the whole world run after in his
days, and they were them that troubled the Church, even such as were heady,
and high minded, and proud, and covetous men, and such as are false Accusers,
and fierce men; and his shame and folly is made manifest, and so his lies and
slanders are turned upon his own head. And in his Conclusion he does beseech
Professors to consider impartially of these 24. Reasons; to which I say, The
most of them are so reasonlesse, that they will rather turn to his own
confusion, then to his praise, to any man of understanding: And he bids all
bethink themselves, first, What a doleful thing it is that professors should be
so loose and unstable, etc.

Ans. Doleful it is indeed that after so much preaching of the Priests of
England, people should be so ignorant, loose, and unstable as indeed they are,
and this is a very shame to the Teachers, and shows that they were not sent of
God, because that the people are not profited at all, but continues ignorant,
loose, and unstable, and wicked, according to their own confession; and indeed,
people are to be pittyed that are under their Ministry, who by it can never
come to the knowledge of God, but must be ever learning fifty or sixty years,
and ignorant, loose, and unstable at their very end, and yet these are members
of this Church of England, so called, which the very Pastors thereof confesses
to be loose, and unstable, and wicked, and brands us to be denyers of this
Church, as indeed we have good reason, to see the members thereof so wicked,
loose, and unstable, as is confessed by their own Teachers, therefore we cannot
be condemned for denying such a Church. Secondly, He bids consider what a heavy
judgment it is to professors themselves, to be self-condemned, and
self-divided from the Church, etc.

To which I answer, A heavy judgment indeed, that such as are of the Church
should be self-condemned, and self-divided from it; but yet it is a blessed
thing that any that have been deceived with false likeness, now should come to
see the error thereof, and be turned to the true Church which is in God, and to
be drawn away from all windy Doctrines of Englands Teachers, and this many does
witness. Then he exhorts Christians to be serious, and be true to the light
which they have received: To which I say, All that are true to the light which
they have received from Christ Jesus, will deny this man I now deal withal,
and all his lies and slanders. Then he bids stick close to the Word of God; and
I say, All that do so will find it as a Fire and a Hammer, and will be
gathered from under the dead Doctrines of men in this Age. And he exhorts them
to stick close to a faithful Ministry: To which I say, Then must they deny all
Hirelings, and such as preaches for hire, for such are not of the faithful
Ministry, but deceivers of people.

And thus in few words return is sent in the pursuit of a Sheet of Lies and
Slanders put forth into the world, and all sober-minded people by this may come
to a good understanding between Truth and error. And though he has taken a
c^urse to spread his Books as Ballads and Fables, by having them cried up and
down the streets, which is not for his advantage altogether, but does show his
Work ridiculous to all wise men. And so hereby it may be seen that all his
Strong Reasons are confounded and overturned, that would hinder a man from
being a QUAKER.

THe main and chief things I have spoken of, and by what is written in short,
men of understanding may understand what his whole matter can be: But in the
beginning of his Book he falls a complaining of the lamentable Ignorance and
ungodliness of common People; and of the pride, and self-conceitedness of
Professors of godliness, and of the weakness, and giddiness, and unstableness of
others: To this I Answer; It is true, abundance are ignorant, and abundance are
proud and self-conceited* and abundance unstable and giddy in their minds; and
substract these from the whole Company of the Hearers of the Teachers of
England, and there is but a few left (if any at all) that are truly righteous
in the sight of God; and so to the shame of all the Teachers of England, has
he confessed the truth in this particular; and shows that indeed the People
is not profited by them: and this is a strong Argument that they were never
sent of God, but has ran and were never sent: But presently after that he
cries out of Heretics and Deceivers, even like as the Pope does; but what is
he afraid of, That they that are ignorant, and ungodly, and proud* and
self-conceited, unstable, and giddy, should be deceived, they that are in those
iniquities are deceived already, and cannot possibly fall into greater deceit,
or delusion. But it appears, That many of the Priests of England cares not how
little their Hearers profits by them, so if they can get their wages, their
Hire, their great sums of money; for one of them said (I mean a supposed
Minister of England) in Cambr^dge-shire, That he mattered not if all his
Hearers went to the Devil, so they would but give him his dues; to wit, Tithes
and Maintenance. So that by this instance, you may judge what stock they are
of, and what their endeavors are; and we desire that people may be undeceived
of that wherein they are deceived, and that they may turn from such a
generation of covetous Teachers, who care so little for their souls. And
whereas he says, The Quakers are but of a few years standing, and that they
arose from among the Papists but a few years ago, etc.

To this I Answer, The People of God received that name but a few years ago,
but the Saints were Quakers, I am able to prove, long before; for Abraham, and
Isaac, and Moses, and Habakkuk; Daniel, and Paul, and all the rest were Quakers
though they were not called so; and though our name is new, yet our Religion is
old; for it is the good old way, even the way the Apostles walked in, though it
has been over-clouded for many years in the dark night or Apostasy, which
has been over the whole world; and the Beast has reigned and made War against
the Saints and killed them, and this has been for many ages as you may read:
Yet there was a Seed which God preserved for himself in the midst of darkness,
but now is the way of the Lord made manifest again, and the same power and life
of God which was in the Apostles days, and Truth shall spring forth, and
Idolatry shall be rooted out by little and little, and Antichrist and his
kingdom shall fall, and even Christ the Son of God the same as ever was, for no
other we own, but him who was and is, and is to come; he shall rule, and his
people shall follow him. And though he says, The Quakers be an upstart Sect:
using such scornful words, not beseeming a Minister of Jesus Christ; but we are
willing to bear all his reproaches for Christ's sake. And he speaks most
foolishly, and says as if we knew not the contents of our Religion; yea, we
know the contents and foundation of it, which is Christ that good old
foundation, and him we are zealous for, and him we Preach and no other. And
though he say, The Christians Faith has been known for sixteen hundred years
ago: I say it was so, but the night has been over all, wherein no man can
work, since it has been first revealed; and Traditions, and Superstitions has
the World been exercised in, and led into; and the true Faith of the Gospel
has been departed from, and many knows it not at this day. And he says, He
abhors any Gospel, or Religion, that was not made sixteen hundred years ago,
etc. To this I Answer, Then must he abhor his own Practice; for sprinkling or
Infants, telling people it is a Baptizing into the Faith of Christ, was not so
long since, nor singing David's experiences in Rhyme and Meeter for a part of
Gods Worship; and many other things which the Priests of England practice for
Religion and Gospel Ordinances, but are not so; but an invention came in many
years since the Faith was revealed to the Apostles; and thus he has abhorred
his own practice, and is condemned out of his own mouth. And whereas he
speaks of one that lately spoke to another in these vords, He denied the God
that he Worshipped. That might be true: for thousands in England Worships the
god of this World; and that god the Saints deny: And he counts it a thing very
abominable to trust to that which is within the Saints; though it be
according to the Scriptures; for Christ is in the Saints, and God dvvels in the
Saints; and God and Christ is only to be trusted to. There is also another
piece put forth by him, called, A Sheet for the Ministry: in which also
(according to his usual manner) he Rails and Lies against the Quakers in many
things; also I might instance in many more things wherein he has belyed us,
as a man vithout fear or honesty: and much ado he makes about Tithes: And he
commends his Reader to the Quakers Catechism, for better satisfaction. And I
do commend all sober people to the Answer of the same, wherein his folly and
weakness is laid open, as in them particulars. But he says, The Tenths are
theirs as fully as the rest are ours* but this is denied; for the Tithes are
not paid out of the Lands, but out of men's labors and industrious exercises
upon the Land: for if any man let his Land lie untilled, there is no Tithes
claimed; so that it is manifest it is paid out of men's labors, and not out of
the Land: and many other things we have against Tithes, and against the
unjustnesse of them, and the oppression growing thereby. And we do know,
That never any Minister of Christ was maintained in such a way: nay, they
were so far off being maintained by a Law, that they would not make use of
their power which they had in Christ in those things as of outvvard
maintenance. But much need not be said, for thousands begins to see the
grievous burden and unlavvfulness of Tithes, and that in the Gospel
administration, these things are no way commanded by the law of God, but as
they came in by tradition, and were established by the Pope, and are now the
chief maintenance of Englands Teachers. Indeed grievous and sad to be
considered it is, how many hundreds in England of honest men are made havoc
on in their Persons and Estates in relation to Tithes, because for Conscience
sake they cannot pay to the upholding of an Antichristian Ministry, which
denies Christ come in the flesh, by upholding Tithes, which only belonged to
the first Priesthood under the Law, and was never practiced (either paid or
received by any) of them that were Witnesses of Christ come, or after his
death, who did thereby fulfill that part of the old Covenant, and put an end to
that Covenant, and the Priesthood was changed that took Tithes, and a
necessity there was also of the change of the Law as it is written. So this
is an Answer in part to Richard Baxters many Lies and Reproaches, and his
whole Work is turned by as our spoiled prey of Babylons treasure; and no more
to be recokned in the Records of Truth, but shall stand upon an account, among
the corrupted and poluted commodity, of the growth of Egypt and Babylon.

London, the 9. Month, 1657.
The End.

