MOSES HIS CHOICE,

With his EYE fixed upon Heaven: Discovering THE HAPPY CONDITION OF A
Self-denying Heart.

Delivered in A TREATISE UPON Hebrews 11. 25, 26.

By JEREMIAH BUROUGHS.

LONDON: Printed by John Field, and are to be sold by Thomas Eglesfield, at the
Marygold and at the Brazen Serpent in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCL.

To the Right Honorable, ROBERT Earl of WARWICK, BARON of LEEZE, One of the
Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable,
AS those who have been of late, and in these days yet are of the Antichristian
party, may well be accounted men born in an evil time; because howsoever
heretofore was the time of Gods long suffering toward such, the time of
permission of them to prosper, the set time of Antichrists downfall then being
further off then now it is. But now Gods time of setting his face against
Antichrist, and all the Antichristian party, is come, wherein GOD is determined
to fight against them, and to ruin them; most wretched men therefore are they
who now have spirits set for the upholding, the pleading for that which God
has set himself against. So happy especially now are those whose hearts have
been, and still are set to countenance, maintain, to further and honor the
truth of the Gospel, in the power and purity of it; These are born and raised
up by God, and for God, in a most blessed time, wherein God stretches out his
holy Arm together with them, their hearts are guided by God himself, to the
furtherance of that work which is the greatest work that God has to do in this
latter age of the world; namely, To bring in his Truth and Ordinances with
glory and power, to set up Jerusalem as the praise of the earth, to make
godliness, and the powerful profession of it, as honorable as ever it has been
contemptible. And now (Right Honorable) God has been pleased to bless your
Noble Family for many years past, with this so great a blessing, as to make it
instrumental to this great work of his, and your self have had a plentiful
share in this so great a happiness: Your Honor has discountenanced
superstitious time-serving spirits, but as for the faithful Ministers of the
Gospel, and the most sincere and godly of your Country, your Honor has cast
much respect upon them, and been the encourager of them, which reflects Honor,
as upon Gods name and his truth, so upon your noble Family; I believe there
has not ascended to Heaven more praises to God from any County in England for
any Noble Family, in regard of the placing of a godly, painful, conscionable
Ministry, as has ascended from that County, in which your Honor, and your
truly Noble Father, has had such a large opportunity of service for God, and
doing good to his people: And I may further confidently affirm, That no Noble
Family in England has more prayers of the Saints ascending to Heaven for a
blessing upon it, then that family of yours; neither is there any Noble Family
this day, shall I say in England? I may without presumption reach it further,
which the Lord has blessed, in regard of some Branches of it, with more beauty
and power of godliness then he has blessed yours; in regard whereof, it would
be the most miserable thing that could be, if ever the succession of the
countenancing and honoring the ways of godliness, should be cut off from such a
noble Family. Cursed be that man who shall be the cutter off of the succession
of so great an Honor to such an Honorable Family. Psalm, 72. 17. it is said, The
name of Christ should endure for ever; Filiabitur nomine ejus, so the words
are, it shall be begotten, as one generation is begotten of another, and so
there shall be a succession of Christ's name. It is a most blessed thing when in
a Family there is a begetting of the name of Christ, and so it is left unto the
succeeding generation, as the name of the Family is left unto it: Pliny tells
us, that it was accounted a great honor, yea the height of felicity, that in
one house and Race of the Curio's, there were known to be three excellent Plin.
lib. 7 c. 41.
Orators one after another, by descent from the Father to the Son; and that the
Fabii afforded three Presidents of the Senate, in course one immediately
succeeding the other. If this succession be so honorable, so happy, how
honorable, how happy does the succession of Religion from Father to Son, make
Families to be?

This succession in your noble Family, is the subject of the prayers of many
precious spirits, exceedingly dear to God: And my Lord, although God has made
you exceeding instrumental for much good to his people, which is one of the
greatest blessings under heaven, yet let not your Lordship rest in this: Gods
warning to Solomon, 1 Kings 9. 4. is very observable, after Solomon had
finished that glorious Temple for the honor of the Lord, after he had assembled
all the Elders of Israel, to bring up the Ark of the Lord with all solemnity,
after he had made such an excellent Prayer before all the people, after he had
offered to the Lord two and twenty thousand Oxen, and one hundred and twenty
thousand sheep, and in his rejoicing in this great work done to the honor of
God, he made a great Feast to all the people seven days, and to them he added
seven days more, and sent away the people with joyful and glad heaets; yet
after this, God says to him, If thou will walk before me as David thy father
walked, in integrity of heart, and up rightness, to do according to all that I
have commanded thee, then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom. Though
the things that you have done be great things, yet I expect walking according
to all that I have commanded thee, or else all is nothing. It were infinite
pity, and God forbid so great an evil, that any one way of sin should ever
stand up, to hinder the blessing upon a noble spirit, and such worthy services
for the Church as you have done, well beseeming that true nobility of such a
spirit.

Your Honor has appeared much for the Honor, the Safety, Peace, Liberties of
the Saints and your Country; and how many now have their consciences check
them, and shame is upon their faces for that base cowardice and vile
time-serving, that the true nobility of your Lordships spirit (scorning such
baseness) delivered you from. God has now appeared for his people more then
ever, in our or our Forefathers time, do you now appear more then ever for
them; As God has mightily enlarged the opportunity of service, so the good God
enlarge and heighten with true Nobility and Christian generousness your Noble
spirit, that you may be as a chosen shaft in the Quiver of the Lord, reserved
to these times, to be in a high degree instrumental to his praise.

It is now near three years since that your Lordship lying sick, not without
apprehension that Gods time to call you from the Land of the living was come, I
was then for some time daily with your Lordship, and all the desires you
expressed for life were, That you might live to do God service here: God then
spared your life, and now my Lord, I beseech your Honor to give me leave to
mind your Lordship of these desires, and those Covenants you made with God if
ever he restored you. Surely the Vows of God are upon you, God has now put an
opportunity into your hand to fulfill them, and all other you have ever made
unto him, and now he expects the performance of them; now there are
opportunities of that service that may draw forth all that nobility of your
spirit, wherein you may give testimony of thankfulness for all mercies so
abundantly heaped upon you, and be faithful in performing of all your vows, and
blessed be God for this opportunity: This is your honor, to account opportunity
of service for God and his people your greatest honor upon earth.

Go on and prosper, and the Lord recompense all that respect you have shown to
his servants, and amongst others to my self; Wherefore in duty to you I here
present your Honor with this Treatise of Moses his Choice, which ventures to
come to the view of the world for furtherance and encouragement in such a happy
choice, blessed with such a happy reward as the eye of Moses in this his choice
was fixed upon; And herein I gladly take the occasion to make an honorable
mention of your Name, that I might testify not only to your Honor, but to all
the world, my thankful remembrance and due acknowledgement of your Lordships
undeserved respects toward me, who am and ever shall be,

Your Honors in all humble and due observance, Jeremiah Buroughs.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. GOd will sometimes be honored, rather with the sufferings of men in
high places, then with their services, Page 1 Chap. 2. The opening of the
words, with the several doctrines in this Text, 7 Chap. 3. Gods people, though
dear to God, yet usually have been in an afflicted estate, 9 Chap. 4. What use
we should make of Gods sparing us from the woeful afflictions which have befaln,
and do befall others, 25 Chap. 5. The Reasons of the afflicted estate of Gods
people, from the malice of the Devil and wicked men, 31 Chap. 6. Many Reasons
why God order things in his providence so, as his beloved should be under sore
afflictions in this world, 38 Chap. 7. What use we should make of Gods ordering
his people to an afflicted condition, 60 Chap. 8. Eleven Rules for preparation
to suffer afflictions, 71 Chap. 9. Duties required of us, when God calls us to
an afflicted condition, 86 Chap. 10. Wicked men have pleasures in ways of sin,
while Gods people endure much hardship in ways of holiness, 99 Chap. 11.
Afflicted godliness, is better then delightful wickedness, 106 Chap. 12. Who
are the truly wise men; with encouragement to the Saints in the happy choice
they have made, 132 Chap. 13. The evil of an ill choice, discovered, 145 Chap.
14. The drawing men's hearts to a happy choice, 158 Chap. 15. The true
pleasantness of all the ways of godliness, 169 Chap. 16. A spiritual eye can
see an excellency in Gods people, though under great affliction, 199 Chap. 17.
What we are to learn from that high esteem a gracious heart has of the Saints
in their sorest afflictions, 215 Chap. 18. A gracious heart will appear for the
people of God, whatsoever sufferings may follow upon it, 228 Chap. 19.
Enjoyment of communion with Gods people is worth the enduring much affliction,
243 Chap. 20. Persuasions to draw to the joining with the people of God in the
nearest communion, 265 Chap. 21. Objections against joining with Gods people
answered, 274 Chap. 22. Instructions to those who are joined in communion with
Gods people, 291 Chap. 23. How should Gods people so walk as to draw others in
love with their communion, 293 Chap. 24. We should satisfy our selves in
communion with the Saints, and improve it to the utmost advantage we can, 307
Chap. 25. Whatsoever is but for a season, cannot satisfy a gracious heart, 314
Chap. 26. Persuasions to take off the heart from temporal things, 322 Chap. 27.
Exhortation to seek after eternal things, 334 Chap. 28. How we should know how
it will be with us for eternity, and what we should do that it may be well with
us eternally, 340 Chap. 29. The review of Moses choice, 345 Chap. 30. The
condition of Gods people is a repoached condition, 348 Chap. 31. What use there
is to be made of the reproaches the Condition of Gods people is liabe to, 362
Chap. 32. How we are to bear reproaches, 375 Chap. 33. What we should do that
we may be able to bear reproach, 395 Chap. 34. The reproaches of Gods people
are the reproaches of Christ, 404 Chap. 35. Sixteen several Consolutions
arising to the Saints from this consideration, etc. 412 Chap. 36. The dreadful
evil there is in reproaching the Saints, 424 Chap. 37. Seeing Christ makes our
sufferings his, we should make his sufferings ours, 431 Chap. 38. A gracious
heart has a high esteem of reproaches in the cause of Christ, 439 Chap. 39.
There is a glorious reward for the people of God, 477 Chap. 40. How far we may
aim at the recompense of reward in what we do, 485 Chap. 41. What is this
Recompense of Reward, 494 Chap. 42. The differences between that good we
receive here from God, and that we shall have hereafter, 501 Chap. 43. The
perfection of the bodies and souls of the Saints in glory, 512 Chap. 44. The
glory that shall be put upon the Saints at the great day, 523 Chap. 45. The
Saints enjoyment of God to be their portion. Their happiness in having his
presence, 529 Chap. 46. The happiness of the beatifical Vision discovered, 535
Chap. 47. The blessedness of Union with God, 547 Chap. 48. The blessedness of
communion with God, 554 Chap. 49. The happiness of the Saints in their fruition
of God, and their perfect rest in him, 569 Chap. 50. The Saints happiness in
communion with Christ, 579 Chap. 51. The happiness of enjoying communion with
the Saints in glory, 585 Chap. 52. The happiness of Gods people in the
perpetual Sabbath that they shall enjoy, 591 Chap. 53. Wherein the power and
efficacy of eying the recompense of reward consists, 606 Chap. 54. Gods people
to be highly honored, 653 Chap. 55. To whom the Recompense of reward
appertains, 660 Chap. 56. Christians should live and dye as becomes heirs of
such a glorious estate, 698 Chap. 57. The great things of eternity to be much
sought after, 706 Chap. 58. How the Recompense of reward may be attained, 717
Moses his Choice.
HEB. 11. 25. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.
CHAP. I. God will sometimes be honored, rather with the sufferings of men in
high Places, then with their services.
HAving finished Moses his SELF-DENIAL, namely, what he refused, together with
the circumstance of time, and the principle by which he was enabled thereunto:
Now what it was that he chose, we are to consider; his appearing for, and the
joining himself with the afflicted people of God, although he knew he must
needs partake with them in their afflictions; he saw that God would rather be
honored by him in an afflicted estate, then in the enjoyment of all his glory
that he might have had; he was willing to submit to God in that way.

Yet he might have had many reasonings in himself, that might have drawn his
heart another way; he might have thought, that in his keeping of the honor and
power he had in the Court, he might have done a great deal of service for God,
in the improving of his favor with Pharaoh and his Nobles for the people of
God; he might have been of great use for them, that it was a thing of great
consequence, for them to have a friend in the Court, that might do them so much
good, as it was probable he might have done: Yea, he might have thought with
himself, Surely God intends to use me here in some great service for his
people, for how wonderful has his Providence been toward me, in bringing me
to, in raising of me up, and continuing me in this honor? what a strange and
extraordinary Providence of God was it, to dispose of my Parents hearts, to
hide me in such a manner as they did amongst the rushes? and that the Daughter
of Pharaoh must come at that time to the River, and that I must be found by
her, and no body else; and that God should dispose of her heart so, as to
commiserate my condition, and to be so inclined toward me as she was, that she
should not only preserve my life, but have me brought up as her own Son; that
she should have care, that my education might be such, as I might be meet for
honor and advancement in her Fathers house, whereas she might have brought me
up in some base and servile manner, according to the quality of a Bondslaves
child, of an Hebrew child, so much abhorred and hated by the Egyptians; and
that God should give me that understanding and capacity, that I should come to
be learned in all the learning of the Egyptians; and that God should incline
the heart of Pharaoh to me likewise, that he should countenance me, and prefer
me; and that the favor of Pharaohs daughter, and of Pharaoh himself, should
continue so long as it does, even to my growth up to forty-years; that I should
have favor in the eyes of his Nobles, and of all the Court, none of them
seeking to undermine me, to alienate Pharaohs heart from me? surely God
intended to use me in some great service here in the Court; if I should now do
any thing to provoke Pharaoh against me, to lose that favor, that honor, that
power I have, what a loss would this be to the people of God? what would become
of them? little hope then of any good to them: yea, if Pharaoh and the Court
should frown upon me, it is like they will be more enraged against them, and
rather make their burden heavier, and their bondage sorer: Now then what a
grievous thing would it be, that such an opportunity as I have in my hands
should be lost?

But Moses seeing Gods mind, that he would rather have him venture himself in
joining with his people in affliction, and that this was the way, whereby God
would honor himself by him, he was content to let go all those reasonings, and
yield up himself to Gods own way: God will sometimes rather be honored by the
sufferings and afflictions of men in great Places (who one would think had
large opportunities of service) then in any service that they shall or can do;
and such men should be willing to submit to God herein: It is not what I or
others think, how God may be honored this way or another, but what the will of
God is, which way he will be honored; and God expects from men, not only that
they should seek his honor, but that they should seek it his own way: All the
intentions and ayms at the glory of God that can possibly be, are nothing; God
cares not for them, if they be out of his own way. It was an excellent
resolution of David, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. If I shall find favor in the eyes of
the Lord, he will bring me back again, but if he thus say, I have no delight in
thee; behold, here I am, let him do to me as seems good to him. We read of
Heman, a man of admirable wisdom, one of the wisest upon earth in his time, as
appears 1 King. 4. 31. and yet Psalm. 88. God kept him down, and low by
afflictions all his days from his youth. This God does;

First, to show his sovereignty over his creature, that he has the absolute
dispose of all, to use them as 1.
he will.

Secondly, to show that he has no need of any for his service, for the
bringing about his own ends, he 2.
has thousand thousands of ways to effect his own will, without help from men,
although in never such eminent places.

Thirdly, because he would not have us to put any confidence in man, to think
that the work must needs 3.
be done by such and such; God will cast them aside, and bring the work about
by other means, that we least thought of.

Fourthly, that he might have a proof of the selfdenial of these men, of their
absolute subjection to 4.
him; in the exercise of which grace, God takes exceeding delight.

Fifthly, that he might teach such, whilst they do enjoy their opportunities
of service, to walk in dependence 5.
upon him, humbly before him, not attributing much to themselves: wherefore let
such men learn not to set too high a price upon their condition, that God has
raised them unto above others: although it is true, that it is one of the
greatest happinesses under heaven, to have large opportunities of service for
God and his Church, yet we should not so value them, as to stretch conscience
in the least degree, for the continuance or improvement of them: look to the
word, keep close to it, and then regard not what men shall suggest, what a deal
of good you might do, how much service, what honor you might bring to God; why
will you hazard your self and the loss of all?

There is much danger in listening to these reasonings, because the
opportunities for service, and the keeping up your self in that condition in
which you are, being involved together, there may lie much selflove, under the
pretense of doing service, and that so secretly, as without diligent and
faithful search into your own hearts, you shall not perceive it your selves;
wherefore while you see God offering opportunities of service, while you see
his mind in improving you thus, follow it on with all your might, let no
opportunity slip, do to the utmost you can for God; and when you see his mind
to lay you aside, and to use you in another way, although it be of affliction,
and grievous sufferings, yet be as willing to yield to God in this, as in the
former way; and thereby,

First, you shall show the most glorious work of selfdenial that may be; it is
more to deny ones self here 1.
then in outward things, there is nothing goes more near to a true generous
heart, then to be laid aside, and to be denied to be used in service.

Secondly, it may be, if you bring your hearts to lie at Gods dispose in this,
he will use you the rather, 2.
and you shall not be taken off; this may be the means of continuance of you in
his work.

Thirdly, if you go on with such a disposition as this, it is more like that
God will bless your service, while 3.
he does use you.

Fourthly, or if you shall be taken off for a while, 4.
and put into an afflicted condition; wherein it shall not appear that you are
of any great use, (although sometimes sufferings are the greatest services) yet
your afflictions shall but prepare you for higher service afterward, as it did
in Moses: How did God use him afterward in great and high employments? few men
that ever lived upon the earth, were employed more for God then he was. The
Magdeburgenses Centuriatores think that Barnabas the Apostle was the same that
Joseph was, who was one of the two, upon whom the lot was cast for the
Apostleship, when it fell upon Matthias, and he was refused, Acts 1. which
Joseph was afterward called Barnabas by the Apostles, Acts 4. 36. in stead of
Barsabas; they making Joses to be the same with Joseph: Joseph was a gracious
man, and when he saw it was Gods mind not to use him in that work, he was
content to go on in that way which God would have him, although it were in a
far lower condition, then in the work of an Apostle, and therefore afterward
God called him to that high and honorable work.

Fifthly, howsoever, your reward shall be as great, as if you were used in the
greatest service, in the highest 5.
highest work you could have desired to be used in: But if you shall not be
willing to lay down all when God calls you thereunto, and to be put into any
low suffering condition that he shall please to put you into, it is an evident
sign that you went on before in your way with self-confidence, that you aimed
at your self, that you did not give God the glory of your service; and if so,
although God might use you for the good of others, yet there will come no
blessing of it upon your selves. This in the general.

CHAP. II. The opening of the words, with the several doctrines in this Text.
BUt for a more particular handling this verse, I shall first give a short
paraphrase of it; secondly, show the several doctrinal conclusions contained in
it. [He chose] Choice notes a comparing of one thing with another, and the
deliberating of the mind about the things compared, and at the last a free
determination of the will which way to go. Thus Moses compares the estate of
Gods people, and the pleasures of sin, one with another; he deliberates in his
mind, which is the safest, and the best way for him to go, and at last freely,
yet thoroughly and fully determines the case; He chose rather to suffer
affliction: he did not choose affliction absolutely, for affliction in it self
is an evil, but rather then the pleasures of sin, afflictions are to be chosen:
Job 36. 21. Elihu charges Job, that he chose sin rather then affliction; this
choice is an ill choice, Moses his choice was a wise and gracious choice; he
chooses affliction rather then sin. [Affliction] that is, any affliction, not
this or that affliction, but whatsoever affliction God should think fit: Many
think themselves willing to suffer affliction in the general, until they be
called unto some particular affliction, and then they think, Oh, if it were any
other we could bear it, but this we know not how to bear; whereas the true
subjection of the heart to God, is to bear what God himself shall appoint. He
chose [to suffer affliction,] not to bring affliction upon himself: Religion
teaches no man, rashly and headily to bring himself into misery. [To suffer
affliction with the people of God:] That is, either in joining with the people
of God in the ways of godliness, in which they were; or in appearing for them;
or in joining in communion with them. [Then to enjoy the pleasures of sin.] The
words are in the Original, Then the enjoyment of sin. [The pleasures of sin;]
that A (...)
is, either such pleasures as are in themselves sinful: or secondly, such as
cannot be enjoyed, or maintained but in a way of sin: or thirdly, such us would
be means to draw the heart unto sin. [The pleasures of sin for a season:] that
is, either for a short season, or for an uncertain season.

The doctrinal Conclusions in the words are these:

First, the usual condition of Gods people in the 1.
world, it is an afflicted condition.

Secondly, when Gods people in Gods way are under grievous afflictions, wicked
men in the way of sin 2.
have much pleasure.

Thirdly, afflicted godliness is to be chosen, rather then pleasant wickedness.
3.


Fourthly, a spiritual eye can see an excellency in 4.
Gods people, though they be in never such a low afflicted condition.

Fifthly, a gracious heart is willing to appear for 5.
Gods people, to be on their side, although it be with much hazard to its self.

Sixthly, there is so much good to be had with 6.
Gods people, that it is worth the enduring hard things to be with them.

Seventhly, nothing that is but for a season can satisfy 7.
a gracious heart, that which must satisfy it, must be beyond any temporary
thing, it must be an eternal good.

CHAP. III. Gods people, though dear to God, yet usually have been in an
afflicted estate.
FOr the first: Gods people, although dear and precious in his eyes, yet they
have usually been an afflicted people in all generations unto this day. When
God was making his Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 15. 12. at the going down of the
Sun a deep sleep fell upon him: and lo, a horror of great darkness was on him,
and ver. 17. a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp passed between his
sacrifice, and the Lord tells him of the bondage of his seed in Egypt. The
afflicted condition of Gods people who were to come from Abraham, was shown by
the horror of darkness, and the smoking furnace: And this is observable, As at
the first great Promise that was made for Gods choosing of a people to himself
out of Abraham's loins, their afflicted estate was set out; so where we have the
great promise of the Gospel, the largest of any in the Gospel, for the
encouragement of those who are willing to part with any thing for Christ, even
there perfecution is annexed* for so the words are, Mark 10. 29, 30. There is
no man that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands for my sake, and the Gospels, but he shall receive
a hundred fold now in this life, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and
mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions, and in the world to come
eternal life; Persecutions come in amongst all those great things that are
there promised. Israel is a people afflicted from their youth, Psalm. 129. 1.
When God appeared to Moses, to send him a deliverer of his people, he appeared
to him in a burning bush, to set out the afflicted estate of his people.

If the people of God might have a Herald to give Arms to them, as some other
Professions and Societies have, the best and most suitable, would be such as Mr.
Hooper that holy Martyr had, when he was made Bishop of Worcester, A Lamb in a
flaming bush, with rays of the Sun from Heaven shining on it: a Lamb for
meekness, in a bush burning, amongst wicked men, who are as brambles and
thorns, burning with malice, and yet the sweet influence and comfortable light
of heaven let out upon it.

When Ignatius came to the wild beasts, to be devoured of them, and his bones
crushed between their teeth; Now (says he) I begin to be a Christian: Blessed
Mr. Bradford writing to the Town of Walden, to encourage them to suffer, says,
that that Christian has not learned his A. B. C. in Christianity, who has not
learned the lesson of the Cross. A. Christian is a Cross-bearer, says Luther.
As God made the evening and the morning to be the first day, and so Christianus
Cructanus: Qui non est Crucianus, non est Christianus. Luther in Genesis c. 29
Ecclesia cst haeres Crucis.
the second, etc. So the day of Gods people, God has made to be the evening of
troubles here, and the everlasting morning of glory and happiness hereafter. It
is an expression of Mr. Calvin, The godly (says he) have their dark shadow of
troubles before them, and their brightness of glory behind to come hereafter,
but the men of the world have their brightness before them.

Men use to bring out their best first, and reserve the worst till afterward,
but Gods dealing with his people is otherwise, their worst is first with them.
The way to Canaan is through the wilderness, even after a sore and tedious
bondage; yea, and when God brought his people into Canaan, he brought them into
the worst part of Canaan first, into the southern part, which was the most dry
and barren part of the land. The way to Zion is through the valley of Baca,
Psalm. 84. 6. Many are the troubles of the righteous, says David, Psalm. 34. 19.
According to that of the Apostles, Acts 14. 22. Through much tribulation we
must enter into the kingdom of God. Psalm 22. is a prophetical Psalm of Christ's
sufferings, and the title is upon Aijeleth Shehar, which signifies the morning
Heart or Stag, such a one as the Huntsmen sever out in the morning from the
rest, to hunt for that day. Such was Christ, and such is his Church, as the
morning Stag severed out to be hunted and worried by the world. In the world ye
shall have tribulation, says our Savior to his disciples, John 16. 33. we
cannot follow Christ, and be his Disciples, but upon these terms, Mat. 16. 24.
Others use to invite Followers with promises of honors and riches, but Christ
tells the worst at first, what we are like to find; we must be content to take
up our cross, not to endure it by compulsion, and constraint, but to take it up
willingly and cheerfully: Secondly, not what cross we will, we must not choose
our cross, but what is appointed for us.

He must take up his cross. But this cross it may be shall be but now and then.

Yes, Luke 9. 23. He must take up his cross daily.

But if every day, I hope it is an easy cross.

Nay, it is a killing cross; 1 Cor. 15. 31. I dye daily, says St. Paul.

But yet I hope there may be refreshings some part of the day.

Not so neither; Romans 8. 36. For thy sake are we killed all the day long; that
is, in regard of the danger of death: Secondly, in regard of some beginnings
that we suffer: Thirdly, in regard of our willingness to undergo it.

Since the days of John Baptist the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force, Mat. 11. 12. this is ordinarily taken for the
greediness of the peoples embracing John's Ministry, but it rather seems to be
spoken of another kind of violence, namely, the violence of opposition and
persecution, in which the enemies of the Gospel seek to lay violent hands upon
it; for he tells them presently, Verse 16, 17, 18. that the Jews were as
wayward children, that nothing would please them, but said that John had a
Devil; they were therefore rather violent against his Ministry, then violent
in embracing of his Ministry.

2 Timothy 3. 12. All that will live godly, must suffer persecution: First all]
Every one must expect it, although 1.
it is true, God calls not all to the like sufferings, yet he exempts none from
some degree or other, let him be as wise, and as discreet as he will, yet if
godly, he shall not escape. Christ was the best Preacher that ever was, he
lived the most inoffensively that ever any did, and yet while he was preaching,
the Pharisees blew their noses at him in scorn and derision; (...).
for so the word signifies in the Original, Luke 16. 14. which is translated,
derided him. And at another time they would have broke his neck, by casting him
from a steep hill, after he had done his Sermon. Saint Paul the most famous
Preacher next to Christ, that ever was, and yet he was accounted a babbler, a
pestilent fellow, his Sermons were accounted factious and seditious.

Secondly, He that will live godly.] The Devil 2.
will let a man have many wishes and desires, these are not persecuted; but he
that will, if he be set upon it, absolutely resolved that he will, and nothing
shall hinder, then he must make account to suffer: When the woman in the
Revelations, Chap. 12. was ready to bring forth her Child, the Dragon sought
to devour it, he meddled not with her all the while she was a breeding.

Thirdly, he that will live.] If he keep his 3.
godliness in his heart, and not discover it in his life, he may go on well
enough, but these shows of godliness the world cannot endure. Wickedness must
appear with open face, but godliness must keep within doors: Wickedness trades
openly, but godliness must keep in as a bankrupt, that dare not be seen.

Fourthly, he that will live godly.] Not civilly only, 4.
for a man to live fairly, lovingly, justly amongst men, to keep from crying
sins, and here to rest, this man perhaps may escape sufferings; but if he
begins to live godly, to go beyond morality in his profession, then he must
expect to suffer.

Fifthly, he that will live godly in Christ Jesus: that is, in the virtue,
strength and power of Christ 5.
Jesus; The other may be done without knowledge of What it is to live godly in
Christ.
Christ, but this godliness in Christ Jesus is that which is persecuted in the
world [godly in Christ Jesus.]

That is, first real and true godliness, not the shadow 1.
of godliness: A Wolf flies not upon a painted sheep, we can look upon a
painted toad with delight: There are some forms, and shadows of godliness
entertained in the world, but the reality and truth of godliness is that which
is hated, and opposed.

Secondly, godliness in Christ Jesus, is exact godliness, 2.
it carries a soul to a higher pitch then morality does; now a man begins to
live in a higher course of Religion, to be strict in his ways, to tremble at
the least sin, to devote himself wholly to God, this man must expect to suffer.

Thirdly, the godliness that is in Christ Jesus, is a 3.
stirring godliness: if a man will be lukewarm, and as Gallio, not caring which
way things go, then many will speak well of him, he is no busie-body, not so
hot, and fierce as others are. We read Exodus 8. 28. Pharaoh was content to let
the people go, only he would not have them go far; so, many are content that
men should be Religious, so be it they do not go too far, Revel. 2. 2. Christ
says to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, I know thy labor and thy patience;
mark how these two are joined: If the Angel had not labored so much, it is like
he had not suffered so much: If Ministers and Christians will be idle and do
little, they are not like to suffer much, a little patience will serve turn;
but those who put forth themselves, who are stirring, active, who labor much,
they must expect to suffer much. It is very observable that of the seven
Churches we read of in the Revelations, there are only two of whose troubles
there are no mention; and which are they? the first is Sardis, of which it is
said, She had a name that she lived, and was dead: the other was Laodicea, that
was neither hot nor cold: These two escaped troubles, but none of the other.

Fourthly, the godliness that is in Christ Jesus, is a 4.
powerful godliness, that will not yield and give in; such as the Lord requires
in Jeremy, Let them come in to you, do not you go to them: Let men say what
they will, let them threaten, rail, flatter, persuade, yet this yields not. Now
the world judges this to be pride, stubbornness, not knowing what the power of
godliness means: A reed that yields, is not shattered by the wind: So those who
will be time-servers, whose consciences will bow any way, those shall suffer no
great matter; but if men be unyieldable, especially in things that are counted
small, as many of the Christians in the Primitive times, who would not cast one
grain of frankincense into the fire to save their lives, these are hated,
contemned and persecuted in the World: Antichrist is content to let the name
and profession of Religion alone, but he persecutes the power of godliness, it
is that which witnesses against him, Revel. 11. 8. He slays the witnesses, but
he lets their carcasses lie openly; he cares not for the name and profession,
so be it the witnessing power be slain.

Fifthly, Godliness in Christ Jesus, is world-condemning 5.
godliness; Noah condemned the world by that he did: Other men should be
accounted well of, were it not for these; but this darkens their light, and
condemns their way, which they are not able to abide, 1 Pet. 4. 12. Beloved,
think it not strange (says the Apostle) concerning the fiery trial, as though
some strange thing happened unto you; be not moved at it, as at the coming of a
stranger unexpectedly, you must entertain troubles as ordinary daily guests.

It has been, is, and will be the order of Gods providence toward his people,
that they shall be in an afflicted condition, and that many times in great
extremities; and hence, Chap. 5. 10. the Apostle prays, That the God of all
grace would make them perfect, after they had suffered a while; as if prayer
might not be made for perfection, until we have suffered a while. As soon as
St. Paul was manifested to be a chosen vessel for the honor of God, it was
shown unto him, what things he should suffer for the name of Christ, as if that
were a necessary concomitant to the profession of godliness.

Look over the whole Book of God, and consider the history of the lives of Gods
people in all ages, both in Scripture, and in other records, and you shall
find them usually in a poor afflicted condition; as soon as we hear of any
work of Religion, we hear of the persecution of Abel. Noah's Ark on the waters,
was a type of the condition of the Church in afflictions. What hard things did
Abraham, and the rest of the Patriarchs endure in their generations? How sore
was the bondage of the Israelites in Egypt? Their passage through the Red sea
and the dismal Wilderness into Canaan, was a type of the afflicted condition
of Gods people in after ages, through which they were to pass to Heaven: How
was David hunted as a Partridge in the wilderness? What bitter and sore
complaints do we hear, of the grievous suffering he met withal? Psalm. 129. the
Church there bemoans her condition, that from her youth up she had been
afflicted: What hard usage did the blessed Prophets of the Lord find? Eliah
was persecuted, and must fly for his life, while four hundred false Prophets
were fed at Iezabels table: Micaiah must be fed with the bread of affliction,
and the water of adversity.

Histories tell us, that Isaiah was sawn asunder with a wooden saw; Jeremy was
put into a dungeon, sticking in the mire (as some stories say) even up to the
ears, and after was stoned to death in Egypt; Ezekiel was slain in Babylon;
Micah was thrown down a steep place, and his neck broke; Amos was smitten with
a club, and so brained: The Story of the persecutions of the Maccabees
prophesied of, Dan. 11. 36. and recorded by the Apostle, Heb. 11. from the 35
Verse to the end, is exceeding lamentable; the Texts says, That they were
tortured, that they had the trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, of bonds
and imprisonment; they were stoned, were sawn asunder, slain with the sword,
wandered up and down in Sheepskins and Goats-skins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented, they wandered in deserts, and mountains, and dens, and caves in the
earth.

And after, for the Christian Church, we know what Christ himself, the great
leader of his people suffered, what contradiction of sinners? what contempts?
miseries? scorns? scourges? cursed, cruel, shameful death? When Stephen the
first Christian Martyr was stoned, Dorotheus witnesses, that two thousand
others which believed on Christ, were put to death the same day. All the twelve
Apostles after many sore and grievous afflictions endured, suffered many
violent deaths, John only excepted: who yet, as the Scripture testifies, was
banished into Patmos, and as some Histories, that he was by Domitian thrown
into a Tun of scalding lead, yet as they say, delivered by a miracle.

Peter was crucified with his heels upward, because he would not be as Christ
was, thinking himself unworthy of that honor: Andrew was crucified by Egeas
King of Edessa: James was slain by the sword of Herod, as we find Acts: 12.
the beginning: Philip was crucified, and stoned to death at Hieropolis, a City
in Phrygia: Bartholomew, after diverse persecutions, was beaten down with staves
as he was preaching in a City of Armenia, and then crucified, and after his
skin flead off, and beheaded: Thomas was slain with a Dart at Calamina in
India: Matthew was run through with a sword, or as some write, slain with a
spear: James the son of Alpheus, who was called the just man, was set upon the
pinnacle of the Temple, and thrown down, and yet having some life left in him,
he was brained with a Fullers club; some Histories say, that Paul before his
conversion, had a special hand in this: Lebbeus was slain by Agbarus King of
Edessa: Simon the Canaanite was crucified in Egypt, or as others say, he and
Jude was slain in a tumult of the people: Matthias that came into the number in
stead of Judas, was stoned, and then beheaded: Paul was beheaded at Rome, under
Nero.

Those ten fearful Perfecutions in the Primitive times, from the time of
Domitius Nero, unto Constantine, does set out fully unto us the truth of this
argument: for three hundred years together, the name of a Christian was death,
except now and then, the Churches had some little breathings. Brightman
speaking of the stories of those times, says, that every page, and leaf, is as
it were all red, colored in blood: the Covenant of grace is a bloody Covenant,
both in regard of the blood of Christ, first sealing it, and the blood of the
blessed Martyrs, adding likewise their seals in confirming of it. In that
Treatise that goes under the name of Cyprian, de duplici Martyrio; speaking of
that place, 1 John 5. 8. Three bear witness on earth, the Spirit, water and
blood; the third is applied to the blood of the Martyrs in those times.

It is a most heartbreaking meditation to consider the ragings, madness and
fury of the Heathens against the Christians in those times. Jerome in an
Epistle to Cromatius, says, that there was no day in a whole year, unto which
the number of five thousand Martyrs cannot be ascribed, except only the first
day of January. Vincentius reports, that at Aquileia, the Emperor gave leave to
every man that would, to kill the Christians; All the policy, wit, strength of
invention, of men and devils, were exercised and stretched out to the utmost,
for devising the most miserable torments, and exquisite tortures; as plates of
Iron burning hot, laid upon their naked flesh; pinsers red hot, pulling off the
flesh from the bones; bodkins, pricking and thrusting all over their bodies:
casting into lime kilns, and into caldrons of scalding lead: whippings until
almost all the flesh was torn off their bodies, and their bones and bowels
appeared, and then laid flat upon sharp shells and knives: their skins were
flead off alive, and then their raw flesh was rubbed with salt and vinegar:
their bodies were beaten all over with clubs, until their bones and joints were
beat asunder: they were laid upon gridirons, roasted, and basted with salt and
vinegar: one member was pulled from another; by fastening them to the boughs of
trees, they rent their bodies apieces: they were tossed upon the horns of
Bulls, with their bowels hanging out; they were cast among dogs to be devoured;
they were put under the Ice naked into Rivers; they were tortured on the rack,
on the wheel, and on the gibbet, with flaming fire under them: they made it
their sports, to see them devoured by wild beasts; and in the night, in stead
of torches, they burnt the bodies of the Saints, to give them light for their
pastimes.

To give you an instance or two, that you may see the miserable extremities the
Saints of God in former times passed through. I read of one Sanctus, upon whom
when such intolerable tortures were inflicted, as the Persecuters thought,
surely they should have heard some words of blasphemy coming from him, yet they
could get nothing but this, Sum Christianus, I am a Christian; at which they
being mad, they clapped on plates of brass red hot, to the most tender parts of
his body, wherewith although his Spirit shrunk not, but still continued
constant, yet his body was so drawn together, that it lost the proper shape of
a man; and after he lying in prison a while, they brought him forth again to
the common scaffold in the face of the people, and put him to all kind of
torments they could devise, as though he had been put to none before, as
scourgings, tearings by wild beasts; his body being thus torn, they brought an
iron chair red hot with fire, and set him in it, and so fried and scorched him
as upon a gridiron: Thus he being made the whole day a spectacle to the people,
in stead of their games and sights, they could get nothing from him, but his
firt confession, Christianus sum, I am a Christian.

The example of Romanus, who was of noble birth, but more noble in his
Martyrdom, is very famous; he was first whipped with knaps of lead at the ends
of the cords; he desired them not to spare him for his Nobility, Not the blood
of my progenitors, says he, but Christian profession makes me noble: then they
lanced him with knives, until the bones appeared white, his face was buffeted,
his eyelids torn with their nails, his hair pulled from his face; the Captain
being astonished at his constancy, commanded them to cease from tortures; he
was after brought forth and scourged again upon his old sores; they plucked out
his tongue by the roots: the Captain being yet more astonished to see him
continue constant, commanded him to be brought into prison, and there be to
strangled.

The example of Vincentius is as remarkable as any; he was first wracked, all
his joints being stretched out of their place; then his body was indented with
grievous and deadly wounds; then they tortured his flesh, by saking upon it
with iron combs sharply filed; and then they laid his body upon a grate of
iron, opening his flesh with iron hooks, they seared it with fiery plates,
sprinkling it with hot burning salt; then they drew him into a dungeon, where
the floor was spread with the sharpest shells that could be gotten, they laid
his body upon them, and so left him without all succor.

Take an example of a woman or two; one Blandina was miserably whipped,
tortured by wild beasts, tormented, and scorched upon a gridiron, and then put
into a net, and cast unto the wild Bulls to be gored, and so slain. We read of
one Eulalila a young Gentlewoman, famous for her godliness and constancy, who
was pulled away from the seat of her Persecuters by the hair of her head, then
one joint was pulled from another, and the flesh from the bones by cushes and
claws of wild beasts; then they harrowed her flesh with an iron hurdle, they
burnt her body on every side before and behind with flaming torches, and at
last cast her into fire, and consumed her body unto ashes.

How lamentable is the hearing of these things unto nice and curious women? who
now must not have the wind to blow on them, who are ready to dye if they be but
crossed a little of their wills. It was an excellent speech of a woman Martyr,
Iulitta by name, who being to be put into the fire, spoke unto other women
thus, Cease to acouse the fragility of the feminine sex: What? are not we made
of the same matter that men are? yea, after Gods image are we made as well as
they; God did not use flesh to make women of in token of infirmity, we are bone
of his bone, in token we must be strong in the living God. These were the
sufferings of those times; we shrink at every thing, at every scorn and frown.

As for after times, it pleased God to stir Constantine a Christian Emperor,
and then the Church had some rest; to which some apply that place, Rev. 20. 2.
Satan was bound a thousand years, not to rage for a thousand years after, so as
he then did, until Antichrist got strength: but the Text will not bear this
interpretation; we read Rev. 8. 1. at the opening the first seal, there was
silence in Heaven half an hour; that is, a space of intermission, wherein the
Church had some little breathing for a while, but yet continued not long; for
Licinius, who first joined in the maintenance of Christian Religion, fell off
and turned an outrageous persecuter. After that the Church endured infinite
troubles by the heresy of Arrianism, that spread it self mightily abroad, so
that the whole world almost was become an Arrian; at this time says Hilary, the
Church was so obscured, as it was not to be sought in any external pomp in
public places, but in prisons and dens; Non in tect is, and exteriori pompa,
sed potius in carceribus and speluncis. Arrius was a man of excellent parts,
and forward in good, but through pride, being disappointed of his expected
preferment, fell off. Mr. Brightman upon Revelations 8. 11. thinks it was he,
that was meant by that Star which fell, which was called wormwood, by which the
third part of the matters were made bitter, and many dyed of the waters.

After that Antichrist began to rise more and more, and to bring a fearful
darkness over the face of the Church; of which times the holy Ghost prophesies,
Rev. 8. 12. The moon, sun, and stars were smitten. The first open and bloody
persecution of Antichrist, was that of the Waldenses, in the year 1160. and
1260. and so on: there is a whole volumn written of the lamentable extremities
that these poor people endured, the reading whereof might cause the hardest
heart that lives to break. A special agent in this persecution was one
Dominick, father of the Dominicans, of whom his mother dreamed when she was
with child with him, that she had a Wolf flaming with fire out of his mouth in
her body.

In after times we read of the most famous instruments of Gods glory, what hard
things they endured: as Wickliff, Huss, Ierame of Prague, and others. The first
time that ever any Law was made for burning those that opposed the Pope in
England, was in Henry the Fourths time: so it went on to those bloody Marian
days; What imprisonments? what starvings? stranglings? gibbets? fire?
banishments were there then? What grievous miseries did Gods people endure in
France, especially in that bloody savage Massacre in the year 1572? the History
of it tells us, that near the Archbishops Prison in Lions, the blood ran warm
reeking in the streets, into the River: in thirty days space, there were an
hundred thousand poor orphans, widows, and succorless creatures, wandering about
without relief.

Thus both Scripture, and the Histories of all times, hold forth unto us the
truth of this point, that the estate of Gods people is an afflicted estate;
they cry out aloud unto us, that through many tribulations we must enter into
the kingdom of God. This has been the way of God even toward those who have
been dearest to him, and it is so at this day, but yet a great difference has
God made, between us, and those in former times, in regard of the degree of
afflictions; yea, between us and others of his Servants, in other places now:
we feel but little of those hard things that many of Gods people have felt, and
still do feel: we sit under our vines, and fig trees, in peace and plenty, not
only under the shadows of them, but we taste and eat plentifully of the fruit
of them, they are not empty vines, nor empty fig trees unto us.

CHAP. IV. What use we should make of Gods sparing us from the woeful
afflictions which have befaln, and do befall others.
NOw what use should we make of this difference? First, we had need examine
whether our prosperity be in love or not, whether it be sanctified unto us or
not; for we have a great deal more then Gods people use to have: And we shall
know it by this, if the chief thing we rejoice in, in the enjoyment of our
prosperity, be the opportunity of service for God, that we have by it.

Secondly, let us admire Gods goodness to us, and bless his name: How favorable
is the Lord to us, who spares us, that we suffer little or nothing in
comparison of what others have done? We are weak, and if we should have felt
such things as others have, what should have become of us? They endured
spoiling of their goods, imprisonment, tortures, but we may go to Heaven, and
have peace, comfort, the use of the creature, houses, lands, friends: had we
only the blessings of the upper springs, although we wanted wholly the
blessings of the nether, we were happy; but oh the goodness of our God unto us,
we do plentifully enjoy both! Though a man do lose all the world, and win his
soul, although he beg his bread from door to door, if he be saved at last, he
is a happy man, happy that ever he was born: but we may save our souls, and yet
have the good things of the world too.

But it may be said, A suffering condition is the joyful condition, why then
should we thus bless God that we are freed from it?

Answ. 1. Sufferings in themselves have no good, but as God uses them, and
turns them unto good; now God can use and turn prosperity into good as well if
he please, and prosperity has good in it self, and in the use of it too.

2. The Apostle Saint James, Cap. 1. 6. calls for joy in both conditions; Let
the brother of high degree rejoice, when he is abased, and the brother of low
degree, in that he is exalted; it seems we are not fit for sufferings, and
therefore our present condition is a mercy.

Thirdly, seeing God spares us so much from sufferings, and calls us not to
such passive obedience as formerly he has called his servants, let us
therefore labor to be more abundant in active obedience, in giving God the
glory of that peace and many liberties, and those comforts that we do enjoy,
which we might have been deprived of by the malice of men; let our strength now
be employed for God, in doing service, which might have been spent in suffering
the rage of man, yea, might have been spent in bearing the wrath of God
himself: O how much better is it, that we have it to spend it in doing service
for God in an active way, for his praise and our own comfort! The more peace
and outward comforts, the more service is due to God. It is observable that
Solomon's Altar was four times as big as Moses's. We read Exodus 27. 1. That
Moses was to make an Altar five cubits long, and five broad, and three high,
but Solomon made an Altar twenty cubits long, and twenty cubits broad. Moses
was in the wilderness, in an unsettled condition, full of troubles: Solomon on
his Throne, in a peaceable condition, full of prosperity; as our peace and
prosperity is more then others, so our service should be more then theirs, and
that in a due proportion.

Salvian writing about the condition of Gods people Contentus est Devs noster,
ut et pax nostra serviat, ut ci immaculatorum. actuum puritate et vitae
inco^taminabilis sanctitate placeamus: plus ei fides and devotio nostra debet
quia minora a nobis exigit and majora concessit, and ideo cum principes
Christiava sint and persecutio nulla fit and religio non inquietetur, qui ad
probandam fidem experimentis durioribus non compellimur, inferioribus saltem
officiis domino plus placere debemus: Demittamus ergo illa quae beatissimus
Paulces pentulit, ^ide^mus, si in illis sulte^ religiosae (...) obsequtis quae
minora atque communia, etc. Salvian. de gubernatione Dei. lib. 3.
in their suffering of affliction, answers an Objection which some might make.
But we do not live under persecuting Emperors, as formerly Christians did. To
that he says, By how much the less they were in their passive obedience, by so
much the more they should be in their active obedience. God is content, says
he, that our peace should serve him, that we should please him, in the purity
of actions undefiled, in the holiness of a life unspotted; by so much the more
is our faithfulness and devotion indebted to him, because he requires of us
smaller things, and has granted greater things unto us: and therefore seeing
Princes are Christians, there is no persecution, Religion is not disturbed, we
are not compelled to manifest the proof of our faith by harder trials, we ought
so much the more to please the Lord in inferior duties. He instanceth in diverse
particulars: as Christ (says he) commands us not to strive, and Dimicave runt
patres nostri contra asperimos dolores nos e contrario dimicimus contra
nobilissimas voluptates; vicerunt tormenta flammarum, nos vincamus ignea tela
vitiorum. Euseh. Emes. Homilia Natalis Sancti Genesii.
contend with one another, but rather to put up wrong, let us obey him in this,
seeing he frees us from such great and dreadful miseries, which others have
suffered before us. Again, Christ would have us do that to others, which we
would have others do to us, let us obey him in this. He commands us by his
Apostle, that we should not seek that which is our own, but every one seek the
good of another: he requires of us to love our enemies, and to take heed of the
occasions of evil, etc. Although duties be never so hard to flesh and blood,
yet let us set upon them. It was an excellent speech of Eusebius Emesenus, Our
forefathers did strive against sharp piercing griefs, let us be willing to
strive against the most excellent pleasures; They overcame the torments of the
flames, let us overcome the fiery darts of vices.

Fourthly, let us take heed of the least froward murmuring 4.
and repining at little crosses, that sometime we meet withal. What, are we
discontented at such small afflictions? at such light things? when as others
(our betters) have suffered such hard, such grievous, such lamentable things;
that our hearts do ache at the very hearing of. What is our flesh better then
theirs, that we must have ours so pampered, when as theirs was so grievously
tormented? How far are you from resisting unto blood? O what an unworthy thing
is this in Christians, to vex and fret at every small cross; when they read and
hear what others have suffered before them! all our troubles are but as the
slivers and chips of that cross, upon which they have been crucified.

Fifthly, be willing to abate somewhat of your delight 5.
in the creature that you do enjoy, do not give liberty to your selves, to
satisfy your selves to the full: Is it seemly that when Gods choice Servants
have suffered, and still do suffer such hard things, that you should delight
and rejoice to the utmost in giving content unto the flesh? You know how it was
with Uriah, while the Ark, and his Lord Joab was in the field, he would not go
down to his house to solace himself there. Josephus de bello Iudaico lib. 6.
reports of Titus, when he had by his conquest brought the Jews into miserable
extremities, that some of the Priests petitioning him for their lives, he
commanded them to be slain, saying, they were of degenerous minds that they
desired to live, when their people and Religion suffered so much as it did:
Titus a Heathen judged thus of them; of what degenerous minds then are those,
who not only desire to live, but to live in pomp, in bravery, in giving
liberty to themselves in all sensual delights, in abating nothing of their
carnal contentments, when they see and hear of the Churches of God suffering
grievous things, brought unto lamentable straights under the burden of most
heavy and sore afflictions? The like we find related of Anchises Aeneas his
father; when Aeneas would have saved his life, Far be it from me, says he, that
I should desire to live when Troy suffers that it does:

Absit, ut excisa possim supervivere Troia.

Far then be it from us to desire to live diliciously, Cum extrema siti
laboraret oblatam aquam accipere noluit, quia durum putabat and parum regium,
si ipse solus sitim extingueret aut levaret suam, cum alii eo tempore nihil
haberent, quo arida corpora resicerent; tunc poculo pleno sicut oblatum fuit
redito, nec solus (inquit) bibere sustinco nec tam exigu um dividere omnibus
possum. Quintus Curtius. l. 7.
when not Troy, but the Churches of God suffer such things as they do. It is
reported of Alexander, that being in extreme thirst, when a little water was
offered to him, he thought it a hard thing and not Princely, for him alone to
quench his thirst, when others in his Army had not wherewithal to abate theirs;
wherefore he gives back again the cup with this speech, saying, I cannot bear
to drink alone, and here is not enough to divide amongst the rest.

Sixthly, let us learn to be compassionate toward them that do suffer; while
the bowels of others are torn out by the rage of men, let the bowels of our
compassions work toward them, let us be even in bonds with those that are
bound, in all our peace, liberties, and comforts, let us remember them, let us
pray for them, and as much as we are able, relieve them, and help to bear their
burdens.

Seventhly, let us lay hold upon our opportunities of peace and liberties that
we do enjoy, to edify our selves in our most holy faith: let us make use of
our peace to prepare us for the times of affliction, which God may call us
unto. This was the care of the Churches, when they had got a little rest from
their enemies, Acts 9. 31. Then had the Churches rest through all Judea,
Galilee, and Samaria, and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord,
and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, were multiplied. It is wisdom while our
ship is in the haven, to mend it there, and to prepare it for storms, that it
may meet withal at sea; when storms arise, it is no time then: ships lie in the
harbor on purpose to prepare them for the dangers they meet withal afterward
in Sea. Naturalists tell us, that while the Halcyon bird is brooding her eggs,
and bringing forth her young ones, there is usually fair weather; from whence we
call pleasant weather, Halcyon days; she neglects not any of those days, but is
diligent in bringing forth her young: God gives us fair weather, much peace,
that we may be diligent in our work, to provide for aftertimes: let none of
those Halcyon days be lost.

CHAP. V. The Reasons of the afflicted estate of Gods people, from the malice
of the Devil and wicked men.
BUt what are the reasons why it must needs be, that the estate of Gods people
must be an afflicted estate? Quest.


First, as long as there is a Devil in the world it must needs be; he in his
instruments is that red Dragon, Answ. 1.
red with fury and rage; he is that old Serpent, full of poison and deadly
malice. Pliny speaks of the Si videris iliquando persecutorem tuum nimis
saevientem scito quia ab ascensore suo daemone er urgetur. Ber. de Inter. domo
c. 52.
Scorpion, that there is not one minute, wherein it does not put forth the
sting, as being unwilling to lose any opportunity of doing mischief. He is
called Satan, an adversary, the destroyer, roaring Lion, he infinitely hates
God, and sins that sin, that is the sin against the holy Ghost, every moment:
he hates the holiness of God, and the glory of God, (which especially shines in
his Saints) with deadly hatred: he is cast out himself, and therefore envies
and vexes at the Salvation of any: as one that had committed the sin against
the holy Ghost said, he wished that his wife, and children, and all the world
might be damned together with him: hence he is resolved, that if any be saved,
it shall be with as great difficulty as he can procure.

Secondly, the poison of this old Serpent, ungodly men have sucked up, they
swell with it, and by it are 2.
enraged against godliness. It is reported of Tigers, that they enter into a
rage upon the scent of fragrant spices; so do ungodly men at the blessed savor
of godliness. I have read of some barbarous Nations, who when the Sun shines
hot upon them, they shoot up their arrows against it; so do wicked men at the
light and heat of godliness. There is a natural antipathy between the spirits
of godly men, and the wicked; Genesis 3. 15. I will put enmity between thy seed,
and her seed; Prove. 29. 27. An unjust man is an abomination to the just, and he
that is upright in the way, is an abomination to the wicked. Now the
contrariety of antipathy is:

First, deep rooted, in the very natures of the things: a contrariety of act is
not so much, as a contrariety 1.
of nature; two sheep may oppose one another, but there is not that opposition
between them, as between a wolf and a sheep.

Secondly, it is an active opposition, that will presently stir at the first
appearance; the wicked will presently 2.
discern a godly man, and their hearts do quickly rise up against him.

Thirdly, it is a strong vehement opposition. 3.


For first, it breaks all bonds of nature, the bond between father and child,
between brother and brother; and all bonds of love and kindeness: we have a
remarkable example for this, Numb. 22. 3, 4. Moab was irked because of Israel,
or did fret and vex, so the words; the same with that, Exodus 1. 12. There was
no cause for the Moabites thus to fret, they were allied to Israel, for Moab
was of Lot, to whom Abraham was Uncle: Israel passed by them in peace, and by
the slaughter of the Amorites they had freed them from evil Neighbors, which
had before taken away part of their Land, and were likely in time to take away
more; yet being of a different Religion, malice breaks all these bonds. The
like ver. 4. of the Midianites, who came of Abraham, Genesis 25. 1, 2. The
Israelites had freed them from Sihons yoke, and yet they conspire against them,
and seek their ruin.

Secondly, it is mighty bitter where it is: Psalm. 7. 13. it is said, that God
has ordained his arrows against the persecutors; the word signifies, such as
burn in danger and malice against the godly; and the word translated ordained,
signifies God has wrought his arrows: he does not shoot them at random, but he
works them against the wicked. Illiricus has a story, which may be a
Commentary upon this Text, in both the parts of it. One Felix Earl of
Wartenburg, one of the Captains of the Emperor Charles the fifth, swore in the
presence of diverse at supper, that before he dyed, he would ride up to the
spurs in the blood of the Lutherans; here was one that burnt in malice, but
behold how God works his arrows against him: that very night the hand of God so
struck him, that he was strangled and choked in his own blood; so he rode not,
but bathed himself, not up to the spurs, but up to the throat, not in the blood
of the Lutherans, but in his own blood before he dyed. Saint Paul, Acts 26. 11.
says of himself before his conversion, that he was exceeding mad against the
Saints of (...).
God; this bitter malice that is in the hearts of wicked men, against the
godly, puts them upon ways of opposition against all reason and common sense.
After John Huss was burnt, his adversaries got his heart, which was left
untouched by the fire, and beat it with their staves. St. Paul in 2 Thessalonians. 3.
2. desires the brethren to pray, That they might be delivered from unreasonable
and wicked men; the word is, absurd (...).
men. The malice of wicked men's hearts against the godly, makes them break all
bounds of humanity, and go against Laws or any thing, in way of opposition
against the servants of God. In the History of the persecution of the
Merindolians, we read of the Bishop of Aix, being full of rage against them,
when the President Cassaneus would have allayed it a little, telling him that
the arrest of Merindol was not definitive, and that the Laws and Statutes of
the Realm did not permit the execution thereof without further process; then
said the Bishop, If there be either Law or Statute that do hinder or let you,
we carry in our sleeves to dispense therewithal: the President answered, It
were a great sin to shed innocent blood; then said the Bishop, The blood of
them of Merindol be upon us, and upon our successors; then said the President,
I am very well assured, that if the arrest of Merindol be put in execution, the
King will not be well pleased to have such destruction made of his Subjects:
the Bishop answered, Although the King at the first do think it evil done, we
will so bring it to pass, that within a short space, he shall think it well
enough, for we have the Cardinals on our side, and especially the most reverend
Cardinal of Tournon. We read likewise of the unreasonableness of the malice of
wicked men against Gods servants, in the History of the Waldenses: they
petitioning, that seeing it was permitted to the Turks, Saracens, and Jews,
(who are mortal enemies to Christ) to dwell peaceably in the fairest Cities of
Christendom, that pity and compassion might be showed to them, who have their
whole Religion founded upon the Gospel, and worshipping the Lord Jesus; and
that they might be suffered to live quietly in desolate Mountains, and deserts,
and valleys, protesting that they would live in all fear and reverence of God,
with all due subjection and obedience to their Lord and Prince, and to his
Lieutenants and Officers; and yet this Petition could not be granted. We read
likewise, that when that worthy Servant of God, John Frith, who was a learned
and godly Minister, was burnt at the stake, together with one Andrew Hewet;
that one Doctor Cook a Parson in London, openly admonished all the people, that
they should in no wise pray for them, no more then they would for a dog. O what
bitterness and rage is there in the hearts of wicked men, against Gods
servants! No marvel then, seeing they live amongst them, they suffer so much
affliction as they do. The Lord tells Ezekiel, that he lived amongst briars and
thorns, and that he dwelt amongst scorpions. Ezekiel. 26.
Thus all Gods people, living with the men of the world, may be said to live
amongst briars and thorns, and to dwell amongst Scorpions; no marvel then
though they be so torn and stung as they are; some have only snarling,
wrangling, railing spirits, and there is all they can do; the worst is but to
prick and tear the flesh, as a bryar and thorn; but others are scorpions, able
to do a great deal more mischief.

Fourthly, this opposition of wicked men against 4.
the godly, is an universal opposition.

As first, opposing all that do belong unto the ways of godliness: as Luke 9.
53. it is said of the Samaritans, that they would not receive Christ, because
his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem; their hearts were against any
inclination, against any thing that tended that way.

Secondly, if they can have advantage against any one, who makes any show of
Religion, they let fly against all, they rage against all, as Haman against
the whole people of the Jews, when he was provoked against Mordecai.

Yea thirdly, they even hate their children after them, they shall fare
something the worse for the forwardness of their Parents.

Fifthly, it is a secret opposition, for so Antipathies 5.
are, there can be no reason given for it, but as he said, This only can I
say, I do not love thee, but I cannot Non possum dicere quare: hoc tantum
possum dicere non am^ te. Bonus vir Caius Seius, sed Christianus.
say wherefore: they are convinced that they are better then themselves, in
their most serious thoughts, they wish to dye their death, to be in their
condition, and yet their hearts do rise against them: as they were wont to say
of Caius Seius, he was a good man, but he was a Christian. But it may be said,
there is a reason for our opposition, we do not oppose them for their goodness,
but because they oppose Laws, and we would see the Laws to be obeyed; we do not
oppose them for their godliness, but for their hypocrisy. For answer, the
Devil never opposed Religion, but under some color. Pharaoh cries out of the
people of Israel that they were idle. Haman says, that it was not for the Kings
profit to suffer the Jews. Tobiah and Sanballat cries out of them, that they
were enemies to Kings and Government. Saint Paul was accused of sedition. But
surely it is not for the execution of Laws, that men's hearts do so rise against
such as are forward in the ways of Religion, for in other things they count men
too busy, when they seek the execution of Law. It was Tertullians appology in
the behalf of the Christians against the Gentiles, who objected the same thing
against them; O says he, there Tertul. Apol. ad versus gentes. c. 6.
are other Laws more for the good of the Commonwealth, that you do not execute;
as he instanceth in Laws that were made to restrain men from sumptuousness in
feastings, and in apparel, and housholdstuff, and in their excessive costs
about their Shows and Games, yea, and many ancient Laws about Religion they
regarded not. And as for that plea of hypocrisy, take this one evidence, that
it is not that which is opposed, but Religion it self: if it were hypocrisy
that were opposed, then the better they did grow when they were in their most
serious moods, the more they would oppose it; for that which is evil must needs
be so much the more opposed, by how much the more any grows better; but it is
apparent, that howsoever men in the heat of their pride and lusts, set
themselves against the servants of God, under that name of hypocrisy, by which
they blind their own consciences; yet when at any time they are in any serious
mood, and their hearts grow into any better disposition, then they are not so
set against them as before; whereas if it were evil that they hate them for
upon their sick beds, and deathbeds, they would hate them most of all; but we
know it is not so.

Sixthly and lastly, the opposition that comes from 6.
Antipathy, is an irreconcilable opposition; it may be curbed and restrained a
little, and for a time, but reconciliation can never be made, except one of the
natures be changed; no arguments, no persuasions, no means can do any good
here, it is only change of nature that can help. Now then seeing that there is
such an antipathy between the people of God, and the men of the world, with
whom they live, how is it possible but that while they live with them, they
must needs be afflicted by them?

CHAP. VI. Many Reasons why God orders things in his providence so, as his
beloved should be under sore afflictions in this world.
BUt though it be true, that the Devil and world are malicious; yet, does not
God rule over all? why then will God suffer his beloved ones thus to be
troubled and afflicted?

Answ. Psalm. 97. 1. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice; it is well for us
that the Lord reigns, or else his people could never stand before the rage of
the world, and Devil; one or two wolves, were able to devour a flock of sheep,
what then would many wolves do amongst sheep, if there were not an overruling
hand? but as Psalm. 76. 10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, the
remainder of wrath shall thou restrain; God suffers, and orders this so, that
he might turn all to his own praise. For,

First, sometimes by this means, he scatters his people abroad in the world to
disperse his truth, to spread 1.
his Gospel further then otherwise it would be; as Acts 8. 3, 4. it is said,
Saul made havoc of the Church, haling men and women, committing them to
prison, therefore they that were scattered abroad, went every where preaching
the Word; according to the prophecy of Daniel, chap. 12. 4. prophesying of the
times of the troubles of the Church, he says, Many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased.

Secondly, this God suffers for the manifestation of his glorious power, and
that four ways, 2.


First, in the continuing of his Church, and the profession of his truth,
notwithstanding all the rage 1.
of men and devils; Gods power was seen in preserving the bush from being
consumed, though it were all on a light fire: to preserve a spark of fire
alive, in the midst of the waves of the sea, and to keep a light set up, in the
midst of storms and tempests, is a great work; there appears as great a power
of God, in preserving his Church in the midst of so much opposition,
notwithstanding their grievous afflictions and persecutions, as there did
appear in the preservation of the three Children in the fiery furnace. Eliah
would have water poured upon the sacrifice, he would have it covered with
water, that the power of God might more appear in the fire that came down from
Heaven upon it; so God will have afflictions, persecutions, troubles, to befall
his people, that he may manifest his power so much the more in their
preservation.

Secondly, the power of God appears not only 2.
in the upholding, but in the raising the spirits of this servants in their
afflictions, with what courage, holy magnanimity, heavenly cheerfulness that
appears in them: even weak women and children, triumphing over the most sore
afflictions, and grievous distresses, which made a Heathen, one Calocerius
beholding Vere magnus est Deus Christianorum. Quam suavis Dominus, quam fortis
Dominus Berde conscientia, ca. 2.
this, break forth with this acclamation, Of a truth, great is the God of the
Christians! Bernard says, Those whom God frees from troubles, have experience
how sweet the Lord is; and those whom he exercises with many troubles, have
experience how strong the Lord is. The glory of Gods power is as clear in the
raising the spirits of his servants in suffering, as if he should deliver them
from suffering by miracle. And therefore Rupertus says, that God did more
gloriously triumph in St. Laurence his patience and constancy when he was
broiled on the Gridiron, then if he had saved his body from burning by a
miracle.

3. The power of God is glorious, not only in preserving his Church, in
raising the spirits of his servants in their greatest afflictions, but in
increasing his Church by them: if it be a wonder to be upheld in Plures
effitimur quoties metimur.
them, it is much more to be increased by them; the more we are cut down, the
more still we are, says Tertullian. The Church never grew so fast, as when it
was under most affliction. Sulpitius says of the Christians in the primitive
times, that they then were as greedy of Martyrdom, as in his time men were
greedy of Bishoprics. The blood of Martyrs was the seed of the Church. Pliny
reports of the lilly, that it is increased by its own juice that drops from it:
so the Church which is the lilly that grows among the thorns, the very blood
that falls from them, multiplies them; the sufferings of one begets many to the
love of the truth. Mr. Knox in his History of Scotland, reports of a Gentleman
one John Lindsay, familiar to Bishop James Bettoun, that he said to the Bishop
upon the occasion of the burning of Mr. Patrick Hamilton, My Lord, if you burn
any more, you will destroy your selves; if you will burn them, let them be
burnt in hallow cellars, for the smoke of Mr. Patrick Hamilton has infected as
many as it blew upon. It is a report of one Cecilia a Ecclesia totum mundum
sanguine, and oratione convertit. Luth. T. 2.
Virgin, that by her constancy and exhortations, before and at her Martyrdom,
was the means to convert four hundred people. By blood and prayer the Church
converts the whole world, says Luther.

Fourthly, God shows the glory of his power, in doing such great things as he
does, by a few afflicted, distressed, persecuted, contemptible people: The
greatest things that ever God has done in the world, have been by these: the
more afflicted, the more mean and despised they have been, the more has the
arm of the Lord appeared in them. Gods power is made perfect in weakness, 2
Cor. 12. What great things has God done by a few afflicted, persecuted
fishermen, the Apostles? What great things by St. Paul? who many times had not
rags to cover his nakedness; who was whipped up and down, and put into stocks,
and counted the basest and vilest of men, the very offscouring of men, and the
filth of the earth: and yet never were such great things done in Ubi Plato, ubi
Pythagoras, ubi Stoicorum turba? Sed fuerunt apud Gentiles illustrissimi, duces
qualis Themistocles ille, qualis Pericles: puerorum, ludos, and ineptorum
studia res gestas judicabis, si cum bis, quae Piscatores gesserunt confer
volueris.
the world, by those who had the greatest learning, the most power, the most
valor, the most glory in the world, as was done by these; they did even subdue
the world unto them, and that by preaching the Gospel, a Doctrine so above
nature, so contrary unto nature. Chrysostom in a Sermon upon the 10. of
Matthew, speaking concerning this argument, calls forth Plato, and Pythagoras,
and the rest of the Philosophers, and challenges them to show what they had
done in comparison of these. But because some might say that amongst the
Heathens there have been most famous Captains, who have done great things, as
Themistocles and Pericles: If you compare, says he, what they have done, with
what has been done by these poor fishermen, all their bravest acts will appear
but childs plays, and the enterprises of simple men.

Thirdly, that which God ayms at, is the trial of the graces of his people: an
afflicting condition is a 3.
trying condition: Hence, Dan. 11. 35. Some shall fall and be tried: This is a
prophecy of the times of the Maccabees under Antiochus Epiphanes: in the
Apparet virtus arguiturque malis, Ovid.
11. Heb. we have the History of this, where verse 36. we have the like
expression: others had trials of cruel mockings and scourgings: We read of
Queen Elizabeth in her sister Queen Mary's days, when she was locked up close
in the prison, at first she was much daunted, but after she brake forth into
this speech, The skill of a Pilot is unknown, but in a tempest; the valor of a
Captain is unseen, but in battle; and the worth of a Christian does not appear,
but in time of trial and temptation. Fire tryes metals what dross is in them;
strong winds, storms, and tempests, try what our foundation is, whether we be
built upon the rock, or upon the sands: they discover what sap the leaves have
from the root; withered leaves when the wind rises, fall off, the green leaves
that have sap holds on: they try what soundness is in us: if you hang heavy
weights upon the boughs of trees that are rotten, they presently break, but if
upon sound, they bear them: hard weather tryes what soundness and health there
is in the body; so afflictions and troubles, what soundness the Spirit has.
Wooden or earthen vessels, if they be set to the fire empty, they are soon
riven, and break, but not when they are filled with liquor: so empty hearts,
when they feel the heat of afflictions, they soon break, but if filled with
grace, and the comforts of the holy Ghost, they hold sound. When a man's clothes
are on, the deformities of his body cannot be seen: but when he is stripped
naked, then all appears. In Summer time, when the trees are covered with
leaves, (...) Nemo vi^es suas in pace cogno^cit, si enim bella desunt, virtu^um
expe^imenta non prodeunt Improvidus est miles qui fortem se in pace gloriatur.
Greg. Mor l. 23. c. 18.
you cannot see the knots, and rifts, and mossiness of the tree; but in winter
when the leaves are gone, then you may see all. Hence the Hebrew word that is
used for Winter, comes from a word, that signifies disgrace and shame, because
winter takes away the glory and beauty of the earth, and puts a kind of shame
and disgrace upon it. The deformities and distempers of men's hearts, are much
discovered in the winters of their affliction: although there was much glory
and beauty on their profession before, yet now they appear most vile and base.
We read Luke 2. 35. That Christ was appointed for the fall of many, and for a
rock of offense, that is, in regard of the sufferings that should follow upon
the profession of the Gospel: and mark what God ayms at in this, it is that the
thoughts of men's hearts might be revealed; there are many secret thoughts,
secret haunts of evil in men's hearts, secret windings and turnings of men's
spirits, that are not revealed until then: when the cause of God, and our own
ends come in competition, when they must part one from the other, then is the
trial what we are: as when a serving-man follows two Gentlemen, you know not
whose he is, until they part one from the other: as we read Ezekiel. 21. 21. the
King of Babylon stood at the parting way, at the head of the two ways, to use
divination; the best divining of men, is at the parting way: although the times
of afflictions, in regard of the darkness of them, one way be called the night
of afflictions, yet they have light in them, and may be called a day, in regard
of the discovery they make of a man what he is. In prosperity a man is apt to
judge amiss of himself, not only because ignorance deceives the mind; but
because of the present contentment he has, he is unwilling to be disquieted
with any thoughts of disparagement: Adversity though it be a hard Tyrant, yet
it is a true Judge; though it speaks roughly, yet it speaks truly.

We read Deuteronomy. 8. 2. that God led his people through the wilderness to humble
them, and to prove them, and to know what was in their hearts: God knew before,
Orat. 28.
but he would make themselves and others to know. I read of Nazianzen, walking
by the Sea shore, seeing how the sea wrought in a storm, that it cast up light
and empty things, but not things solid and heavy; he applies this to
afflictions, and says, that light and empty spirits are tossed up and down by
them, and keep not their constancy; but solid spirits are like the rock that
stands firm, and abides the same: men do not know their own hearts, they find
their hearts otherwise when troubles come, then ever they thought before; they
never thought they had had so much pride, so much impatience, so much unbelief;
they thought before they could have submitted to the hand of God, that they
could have born more then is now upon them with patience and meekness; but now
they find their wretched hearts murmr, repine, fret, vex; now they find
corruptions stir exceedingly: they had thought they could have depended upon
God in straits; but now they find their hearts sinking, they find they have
base shifting hearts. When the fire comes to green wood, there comes out
abundance of watery stuff that was not discerned before; so when the fire of
affliction comes, much evil runs out that you saw not, that neither you nor
others thought to be in your hearts before. When a Pond is empty, then appears
the mud and the filth, and Toads in the bottom: so when God empties men, when
he takes from them his blessings, then much filth, many crawling lusts appear
that did not before: sometimes more grace appears in afflictions then did
before: some of Gods people are low in their own eyes, they suspect and fear
themselves, they think their graces will fail them in trouble, that their peace
is false; yet when it pleases God to bring them into trouble, they find more
peace, more assurance, more strength then ever they did before, or then they
thought they should have done; never such sweet joy, never such full assurance,
never such use of faith, and patience, and love, as in the sorest and strongest
afflictions. This indeed is very rare, there are few that find more good in
their hearts in afflictions, then they thought they had before; but where this
is, it may be a sweet seal to the soul, of the sincerity of it ever after. When
Corn stands in the field we may guess what it may yield, but we cannot know
fully, till it come to the flail, and then it yields sometime more, though
often less then we made account of. When grapes come to be pressed, then is
discerned what is in them.

Fourthly, an afflicted condition gives opportunity for much exercise of grace,
it calls forth whatsoever 4.
grace there is in the heart to the exercise of it. Rev. 13. 10. St. John
speaking of the sufferings of the Saints, Here (says he) is the faith and the
patience of the Saints; here is matter for their faith and patience to be
exercised about, this calls for the working of their faith and patience; and so
for other graces, as humility, self-denial, love to God. Physic stirs up
natural heat, and makes it active; so afflictions the souls Physic. What
mighty prayers, and lively stirrings of spirit are there many times in
afflictions? Esaias 26. 16. They pour out a prayer, when thy chastening was upon
them: our prayers do but drop out before, now they are poured out, and one work
of heart does so follow another, that there is no intermission, it is all but
one prayer they have poured out, not prayers, but a prayer; and it is
observable, the word that here is translated prayer, is a word that is used for
enchantment (...) because such words were conceived to be full of efficacy,
containing much in a little room. So the prayer now is not an empty thing, but
full of efficacy, containing much in a few words. The graces of Gods Spirit are
the most lovely things in the world in Gods eyes, and therefore God delights
much to see the exercise of them. When spices are beaten, then they send forth
their fragrant smell; so when Gods servants are in afflictions, then their
graces send forth their sweetness, in the activeness of them: when the box is
broken, and the precious ointment is poured forth, then it sends forth its
delightful savor; so when the heart is broken with afflictions, and the grace
is poured forth, then they give a sweet smell in the nostrils of God and men. A
tool that is daily used, is kept bright and shining; and so grace, when it is
most exercised, it it is most beautiful: The glory of the things of the world
minishes in the use of them, but grace is ever better for the wearing.

Fifthly, in afflictions the power of grace does much appear; the abiding
strong against opposition, is a 5.
true argument of strength: this was the honor of Joseph's strength in his
blessing, Genesis 49. 23, 24. The archers have sorely grieved him, yet his bow
abode in strength. It is nothing for a man to go on in the profession of
Religion, while all things are well about him, while he feels no trouble, but
God hedges about his way: if God should always prosper his people in outward
things, who would not be a professor of godliness? When the people saw how
Mordecai was raised, then many became Jews. I read of one Pamachius a Heathen,
that he said to the Pope, Make me a Bishop, and I will be a Christian. Every
Fac me Pontificem and ero Christianus.
bird can sing in fair sunshine weather: but here is the power of grace, not
to be offended in Christ's sufferings: Blessed are they who are not offended in
me, says Christ, to desire to know nothing, but Christ and him crucified: To
embrace Christ in his rags, in his poverty, in his shame, in his afflictions
and sorrows; this argues a power of grace indeed: it argues the power of love,
that much water cannot quench it. It is a note that Josephus has, writing
Joseph. l. 18. c. 4.
the History of the time of Christ; At that time, says he, Jesus a wise man did
many miracles, and although he was condemned to the cross, yet did not those
that followed him from the beginning forbear to love him, notwithstanding the
ignominy of his death; He notes it is an argument of great love in his
followers, as it was indeed, that they did not forbear to love, notwithstanding
his ignominious death. As it is a sign our love to sin is strong, when we have
many afflictions to quench our love, when we meet with much trouble and
opposition in a way of sin, and yet our love to it is not abated; so it argues
our love to God and godliness is very strong, when the greatest opposition
cannot prevail against it: to account Christ precious as a tree of life,
although we be fastened to him as to a stake to be burned, this is love indeed.
It was the glory of Scipio, in which he much boasted, that there was not any of
his Soldiers, but would venture his life for him, if it were to leap into the
Sea, to cast themselves from a high Tower, or any other way that he should
require of them, this argued their strong love to him; and it is the glory of
the Lord in which the Lord delights, that he has a people whose hearts are
closely knit to him, in the most afflicted distressed condition that can befall
them, who are content to suffer any thing for him, to submit to his blessed
will, to honor him any way that he shall please, though it be in the loss of
dearest comforts, and suffering the sorest and hardest afflictions.

Sixthly, by afflictions the graces of the Saints are 6.
much increased, as Israel never increased so much as when Pharaoh most
oppressed; for two hundred and fifteen years before, they increased but to
seventy; but in less time, when they were oppressed, they increased to more
then six hundred thousand men fit for War, besides women and children: thus the
spiritual increase of the true Israel of God is much in afflictions more
usually then at other times. Gods people to whom afflictions are sanctified,
never thrive so much in grace, as when they are watered with their own tears.
The Rose is sweeter in the Still, then upon the stalk. Fish thrive better in
cold and salt waters, then in warm and fresh: the largest fish are not in the
fresh Rivers, but in the coldest salt Seas. The ground is most fruitful that is
most harrowed. The most plentiful Summer, follows after the hardest Winter: The
face of Religion is never so beautiful, as when it is washed with its own
tears. The Walnut tree is most fruitful when it is most beaten: Camomel
flourishes most, when it is most trodden on, and pressed down: suffering for
truths does much confirm men in them; that which a man has bought at a dear
rate, he is loath to part with: thus we find it in men who suffer for errors,
they are ever the more stiff in them: like the Merchants, holding up their
commodity, because it cost them dear. All oppositions, if they do not overcome,
they strengthen that which they do oppose: as water cast upon the fire, it
makes that fire Toll congeriem malorum and non cri^ plenitudo virtutum.
Chrysostom Hom. de apsu. Adami.
burn hotter, that it does not quench. Wind shaking the tree, makes it grow
more steady. Thus the tribulations of the godly, and the persecutions they
suffer, do oppose their graces, but because they cannot overcome them, they
strengthen them: As we read Psalm 45. when the Church forsakes all, when she
leaves her fathers house, and her kindred, then does the King greatly delight
in her beauty, her beauty is great then, and exceeding delightful in the eyes
of the Lord: Cant. 2. 14. O my dove (says Christ to the Church) thy voice is
sweet, thy countenance is comely: let me hear thy voice, let me see thy
countenance: This is spoken of the state of the Church, after her deliverance
from great afflictions, after her return from captivity; before her captivity
she was loathsome and vile in Gods eyes; God hates her, as appears, Jer. 12. 8.
Mine heritage is unto me as a Lion in the forest; it cries out against me,
therefore I have hated it: but now she is delightful; Christ bids her arise his
love, his fair one, and come away. God before cared not for her solemn
meetings, they were a burden to him, as appears Esaias 1. 11, 12, 13, etc. but
now he expresses his desire of their solemn meetings, O my dove, that art in
the clefts of the rocks, in the secret places of the stairs, thou who
worshippest me in secret places, in holes and corners, let me see thy face, let
me see thee assembled into the face of a Church in my Sanctuary; let me hear
thy voice, let me hear thee there calling upon me, singing praises unto me,
Psalm. 66. 12. We went through fires, and through waters (says the Church) but
thou broughtest us into a wealthy place. Thus God deals with his Church
spiritually, by bringing them through the fire and water of afflictions, he
brings them to a wealthy place, a wealthy estate. The Church of Judah before
the Captivity, was as a Vine that brought forth wild Grapes, upon whom the
Lord resolved to command the clouds not to rain, and from whom he would take
the hedge of his protection, Esaias 5. but after the captivity he speaks
otherwise of it, Esaias 27. 2, 3. In that day sing ye unto her, a Vineyard of red
wine (which was the best wine) now the Lord will keep it, and water it every
moment. I have read of a Fountain, Pomponi' Mela: fons tognomento solis in
Cyrenaica regione.
that at noonday is cold, at midnight it grows warm: it is thus with many,
they are coldest in their prosperity, and the nights of afflictions contract
their heat, and intends it: fire never burns so hot as in frosty weather. The
winter time of affliction, sometimes proves to be the most fruitful time of a
Christians life; contrary to the work of nature, for all things seem dead then,
and they flourish and grow only in the Summer; but a Christians Winter is
sometime better then his Summer; grace flourishes and grows most in his Winter.
Our Benoni's, sons of sorrow, prove oftentimes our best Benjamins, sons of our
right hand: the best corn is that which lies under the clods in frost and snow;
Paul rejoiced much in Onesimus, whom he had begotten in his bonds, Philem. ver.
10. Basil in his Sermon upon the forty Martyrs, calls them the stars of the
world, the flowers (...).
of the Church. And Chrysostom upon Acts 12. speaking of those who were
praying for Peter in the night, says, That they were made by afflictions more
pure then the Heaven. And some of the Ancients, as Chrysostom and Salvian, have
called afflictions Puriores oelo afflictione facti Chrysostom. in Hom. 16. in
Acta 12. Virtutum nater.
the mother of Virtue. Manasses his chain was more profitable to him then his
Crown. Hebr. 12. 10. God is said to chastise his people for their profit, that
they might be partakers of his holiness: God communicates of his own holiness
unto the souls of his people by their chastisements, in a special manner: love
is often increased in affliction; sheep run together when the dog is set on
them: after the Church was delivered from violent persecution, it suffered much
by divisions, the very bowels were rent by their dissentions, it was then in a
worse condition then before, the fire of their dissentions being worse then the
fire of their persecutions; the one hindered, but the other furthered their
growth. John 15. 2. Every branch in me my Father purges, that it may bring
forth more fruit: as Vines are made fruitful by pruning, so are Gods people by
the pruning knife of afflictions; and hence it is, when the Lord has some
great employment, some great service for any of his people, he first sends them
unto, and trains them in the school of afflictions, as Joseph and David. And as
our Benoni's, our sons of sorrows, that which we get out of our sorrows, proves
oftentimes our chiefest Benjamins; so Gods chiefest Benjamins, whom he uses as
the sons of his right hand in special services, are first Benoni's, sons of
sorrow. There is a great deal of difference, says Luther, between a Divine in
outward Mul^u^ interest inter Theologum gloriae and Theologum crucis.
pomp, and a Divine under the cross. It is a rare thing to have any man's eyes
opened as Jonathans were, by tasting of honey, by prosperity; but in
afflictions many are: afflictions prove to them, as the clay to the poor man's
eyes that gave him sight. They Qui tribulantur sacras literas melivs
intelligunt, securi and fortunati eas legunt ficut. Ovidii. carmen.
that are afflicted, do better understand Scripture, says Luther, but those who
are secure in their prosperity, read them as a verse in Ovid. Amongst many
others, this is one special means whereby an afflicted condition comes to be
useful for the increase of grace, because in it the soul gains much experience;
experience of God and of his ways, experience of the good there is in, and
faithfulness of his word; as we read, Psalm. 107. Those who go down into the
Sea, see the wonders of the Lord; much more those who come into the seas of
troubles and afflictions, how do they see the wonders of the Lord? they can
tell their friends much of the wonders of the Lord toward them: so Israel in
the time of trouble cries out, Hos. 8. 2. My God we know thee; now we know thee
otherwise then before we did: and experience of the evil of sin. It was a
speech of a Germane Divine in his sickness, Gasper Olevianus; In this disease I
have learned how great God is, and what the evil of sin is, I never knew what
God was to purpose before, nor Hoc morbo didici quanta majestas Dei and quid
sit peccatum.
what sin meant. When God spoke to Job out of the whirlwind, cap. 38. he
answers, cap. 40. 3, 4. Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay
my hand upon my mouth. And experience likewise of our weakness, and the vanity
of the Creature more now then ever, Psalm. 39. 11. When thou with rebukes do
correct man, Vexatio dat intellectum. Schola crucis schola lucis. Cyp. Ser. 4
de. immort.
thou make his beauty to consume away like a moth: surely every man is
vanity, Selah: he can then say Surely, and that with a Selah, that every man is
vanity. It is very observable, that of all the seven churches that Christ wrote
unto, in the second and third Chapters of the Revelations, there are only two
which he charges no evil upon; the Church of Smyrna, and the Church of
Philadelphia: and these two were exercised with much trouble; as the Church of
Smyrna, cap. 2. 9. is said to have endured much tribulation, and to be in
poverty, yet Christ commends her, and says she is rich: her poverty made her
rich, her tribulations made her glorious in the eyes of Christ. And the Church
of Philadelphia, cap. 3. 8, 10. she had but a little strength, she was in a
low, poor, afflicted, contemptible condition; yet she denied not the name of
Christ, she keep the word of Christ's patience, that word for which she suffered
much, being strengthened thereunto by the patience she received from Jesus
Christ.

Seventhly, afflictions preserve from much sin, they are blessed preventing
physic: our falls into sore afflictions, 7.
keep us from falls into sin. Hosea 2. 6. God says, he will hedge the way of
his people; if the hedge of the command will not keep us from transgression, it
is a mercy for God to hedge in our way by another hedge, the hedge of
afflictions, they are blessed stumbling blocks cast in the way of sin, to
hinder us in it. I have read of Augustine, that once by wandering out of his
way, he escaped one who lay Cor Solomonis idcirco funditus Donum sapi^ntiae
deseruit quoniam ipsum nulla disciplina interius cu stodivit. Greg. in
pastorali.
in wait to mischieve him; it falls out so many times with us, if afflictions
did not put us out of our way, we should fall into the power of some sin or
other which would mischieve us. Gregory says of Solomon, that he left the
house of wisdom, because the discipline of afflictions did not preserve him.
Salt brine preserves from putrefaction: the salt marshes keep the sheep from
the rot.

Eighthly, by afflictions, decayed grace comes to be recovered: These are Gods
files, that file off the rust 8.
of security. Physicians use to cure a Lethargy, by putting their patient into
a fever: the spiritual Lethargy of security, is often cured by hot and strong
afflictions. When men are in a swound, we use to nip and pinch them, and strike
them, and cast cold Traditam nobis divi nitus disciplinam pax longa corruperat,
jacentem fidem and pene dixerim dormientem censura coelestis crexit Cyp. ser.
de lapsis. 5.
water upon their faces: Gods strokes, and the cold water of afflictions being
sanctified by him, recover many from spiritual swounds: many who have so far
decayed in their spiritual vigor and activeness, that they have seemed to be
even dead, yet they have been recovered this way. Job 36. 15. God opens their
ears in oppression; many men's ears are clogged up with the world, but when God
gives them up for a while to the oppressions of men, then their ears are
opened. It is good for me, says David, that I was afflicted, for before I went
astray, but now have I learned thy word. In the 2. Hosea, God threatens the
Church to strip her naked, and to set her as in the day that she was born, and
to make her as a wilderness, to hedge her way with thorns; and thus the Lord
did to that Church: but mark what he says shall be the fruit of all, verse 7.
Then shall she say, I will go and return unto my first husband, for then was it
better with me then it is now. When Absalom sent for Joab once and again, yet
he came not unto him, until Absalom caused his corn fields to be set on fire,
and then he comes: God speaks and calls to his people who are grown secure,
once and again, but they neglect God, until God comes with the fire of
afflictions, and then they come. Afflictions are like the prick at the
Nightingales breast, that awakes her, and puts her upon her sweet and delightful
singing. Gulielmus Parisensis says of Musk, when it has lost Muscus odorem
amissum juxta ster cora vel ad latrinam positus recuperat; fic humilitas.
Guliel. Paris. de Motibus Fol. 127.
its sweetness, if it be put into the sink amongst filth, it recovers it; this
he applied to decayed grace in the times of afflictions, in afflictions it
revives, and recovers.

Ninthly, afflictions are of great use to mortify lusts, to purge out filth
and corruption. Isa. 27. 9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and
this is all the fruit thereof. When Physicians purge the body, they purge out
that which is good, as well as that which is evil, but when God purges in the
sanctified 9.
use of afflictions, he only purges out the evil, this is all the fruit
thereof. As Aloes kills worms, so Venit tribulatio mea veniet and purgatio mea.
August. in Ps. 61.

Tribulatio est aqua salsa quae Scabiem purgat and abstergit. Guliel. Paris. de
moribus.

Qui tribulationem meis parant Balneum eis and Lavatorium exhibent. Guliel.
Paris. ibid.


do bitter afflictions crauling lust in the heart. Cold and hard winters do
destroy much vermin, which otherwise would be very noisome: so cold and hard
afflictions vermin lusts. Violent storms and thunder clear the air, strong
afflictions clarify the heart; by them we are as it were poured from vessel to
vessel, from whence the ill savor of our heart-distempers comes to be taken
away. Ier. 48. 11. Foul and stained clothes are made white by laying abroad in
cold frosty nights, so the defiled heart. Salt marshes purge rank humors, so
do the saltness of afflictions rank lusts. Men let their armor lie rusting by
them in the time of peace, but in the time of war they scour all bright, to
make fit for service: so men's hearts in the time of peace grow foul, but in
times of trouble, they are then cleansed. It is a great mercy to have the act
of sin hindered; afflictions are very useful for this, and therefore, Hosea. 2.
6. they are; as you heard, called a hedge of thorns; whereby the ways to sin
are hedged up: but to have the inward lusts mortified, this is a greater good.
All the Prophets preachings could not purge the Jews from idolatry, so as the
Babylonish captivity: it is observed, never since that time have idols been
found amongst them.

Tenthly, Gods people are often in an afflicted condition, 10.
as chastisements for their sins, they bring many evils upon themselves, by
their loose walkings, by their indiscretions, by their pride, by their
selfseeking, by their forwardness, by their wilfulness, and worldliness: God
chastens even whom he loves: the Apostle tells the Corinthians, that they were
chastened of the Lord, that they might not be condemned with the world. Those
whom God would never condemn, yet he will chasten: God will have his children
feel something of the evil of their sins, and will have them and others see how
displeasing sin is to him, in the fruits of his displeasure, upon those who are
his beloved ones, who are exceeding dear, and precious in his eyes: because the
Lord is careful of his honor, therefore if his children sin, he will chastise
them, hence the Greek word for chastisement, signifies (...). Filii sub ira,
non filii irae.
care of honor. GODS children may come to be children under anger, though not
children of wrath: yea God usually holds a more strict hand over his people,
then over any, he quickly brings them under the rod, when he lets other go on,
and rot in their sins; yet he comes not upon his children as a revenging Judge,
to destroy the person for the sins sake: but as a gracious Father, to destroy
the sin for the persons sake: he is angry that they have sinned, but especially
angry that they might sin no more.

Eleventhly, that which God ayms at in the afflictions of his people, is to
make them conformable to Christ their head, that they may enter into their
glory, as Christ did into his. Ought he not to suffer these things, and so to
enter into his glory? Luke 24. 26. We read of S. Paul, Phil. 3. 10. that he
earnestly desired to be partaker of the fellowship of Christ's sufferings, and
to be conformable to his death; God will have a conformity to the death of his
Son. We read of Godfrey of Bulloin, that he would not be crowned in Jerusalem
with a crown of gold, where Christ was crowned with a crown of thorns; because
he would not have such a great disproportion between him and Christ. It is
reported of Origin, when Alexander Severus the Emperor sent for him, he
appearing to be meanly clothed, there were diverse costly garments prepared for
him, and sent to him, but he refused them, and when he came near to Rome, there
was a Mule and a Chariot sent for him, that he might choose which liked him
best, but he refused them likewise, and would not go in pomp to the Emperor,
saying, He was less then his Master Christ, of whom he never read that he rode
but once.

Twelfthly, the afflictions of Gods people are in 12.
just judgment a rock of offense, and a stumbling block to the ungodly. Christ
in regard of the afflictions that attend the profession of the Gospel, is said
to be a rock of offense, and so appointed for the fall of many, Luke 2. 34. How
many thousands perish, because they are offended at the mean, afflicted,
persecuted estate of Christ in this life? Thy heart is set upon vanity and
outward pomp, this persecuted estate of godliness is thy stumbling block, at
which God in his wrath lets thee stumble, that thou might fall, break thy
neck, and perish for ever: hence is that speech of Christ, Blessed are they
that are not offended in me: O its a great mercy of God, not to let this be a
stumbling block, it is a mercy that God grants but to a few; here and there a
poor soul, who is able to see the beauty and glory of godliness, through all
the dark clouds of troubles, afflictions, persecutious, that attend it: but for
the generality of men, this is that which hides the glory of it from them, unto
their everlasting perdition.

Lastly, Gods people are here afflicted, that Christ 13.
in them, and they in Christ, may in the conclusion of all be the more
glorified.

First, in the overcoming of all evils, in the final destruction of all their
enemies.

Secondly, in their happiness after so many evils endured: the bitterness of
foregoing grief, commends Amaritudo prae cunt is doloris co^nendat amplius
gaudia sequutura. Hier. ad virginem in ex lium missam.
the sweetness of following joys.

Thirdly, their afflictions work to the increase of their glory. 2 Cor. 4. 18.
Our light afflictions work for us an exceeding weight of glory. Gordius that
blessed Martyr (whom St. Basil so much commends in an Oration of his) accounted
it a loss to him, not to suffer many kinds of tortures; he says, that tortures
are but tradings with God for glory.

Tertullian has an expression to that purpose, The Majora certamina majora
sequuntur praemia. Turtu! ad Scapulam.
greater the combats, the greater are the following rewards. Bernard says of
persecuters, that they are but his Fathers goldsmiths, who are working to add
pearls to the crowns of the Saints. The seeds of happiness are sown in the deep
furrows of affliction, and the deeper the furrows are, the more precious are
the seeds that are there sown, and the more glorious and plentiful will the
harvest be. When a curious glorious picture is to be drawn, the grounds use to
be laid in black, but not in dirt: so our grounds may be laid Sape per
dulcedinem fructus placet, quod amarum horruit in radice. Hieronym. ep. at
Virginem in exilium missam.
here in afflictions, but let them not be laid in sin. Here then we see, that
although afflictions are a bitter root, yet there spring from them fair
flowers, and pleasant fruit: no marvel then though God has a hand in ordering
things so, that his people should be in such an afflicted condition in this
world: from Gods determining things to be thus, let us learn,

CHAP. VII. What use we should make of Gods ordering his people to an afflicted
condition.
FIrst, that our rest is not here in this world; let us not promise to our
selves any such matter, let us not seek it here: the promise will not bear it,
the promise will bear no further, then that we should have only so much of the
things of this world, as shall be suitable to our condition; That which the
Prophet speaks in another case, Micah 2. 10. we may apply to all the things and
places of the world; Arise, here is not your rest: this is not the place, this
is not the time, here are not the things that God has appointed for our rest:
this is the Terra malis scalet adversis pelagusque redundant.
place and time for troubles, and sorrows, and afflictions, our warfare is
here. No man in his warfare, will build himself a strong and sumptuous house in
the field; if we seek for our rest here, we mistake; as if a man floating upon
the waves of the sea, upon a board after shipwreck, should think to lie down
and sleep, and settle himself there: or as a bird should build her nest in a
bush, floating in the midst of the waves of the sea.

God, says Bernard, has not cast man out of Paradise, Non ad hoc nos de
Paradiso voluptatis ejecit, ut alterum hic sibi Paradisum adinventio humana
pararet homo ad laborem natus. Ber. declamat. Ecce reliqomnia. Quid alibi
poscis quod alibi debetur? quid praepropere coronam exigis antequam vin cas?
quid cpulari gestis antequam stadium solvatur? Ambr. offic. l. 1. cap. 16.
for him to think to find out another Paradise in this world; no, man is born
to labor. Why do you seek the living amongst the dead? why do you seek for
living comforts, where you must expect to dye daily? It is only Heaven that is
above all winds, storms, and tempests; rest must be after labor, our rest is
the crown of our labor; to seek it here, is to seek it preposterously, and Why
do you require that in one place (says S. Ambrose) which is due in another? Why
would you preposterously have the crown before you have overcome? Imagine the
most settled condition you can in this world, and although you had it, yet it
were but vanity: so says the Psalmist, Psalm. 39. 5. Man in his best estate, is
vanity: the word is in the Original, in his settled estate he is vanity; not
only vain, but vanity it self.

It was a heavy charge that S. James, cap. 5. laid upon some, that they lived
in pleasure upon earth: as if he should have said, earth is not the place for
pleasure; this is the place of sorrow, of trouble, of mourning, of affliction.
Thus Abraham charged Dives, In your life time, says he, you had your pleasure:
the emphasis lies there, in your life time, that should not Quaerite quod
quaeritis, sed non ubi quaeritis. August. Confess l. 4
have been the time: let us take heed we be not too hasty in seeking our rest,
our pleasure and delight; we may perhaps have a little for the while to the
flesh, and because we will not be content with that condition that God has
appointed for his people, here we may lose our parts in that glorious eternal
Ecce, turbatus mun dus, and amatur; quid si tranquillus esset? Formoso quomodo
haereris, qui sic amplecteris foedum? flores ejus quomodo colligeres, qui a
spinis non revocas manum?
rest which God has prepared for his people hereafter. Seek for that which ye
do, namely for rest, but do not seek for it where ye do: if we seek our rest in
this world, notwithstanding we meet with so many troubles in it, what would we
do if the Lord should let us prosper? Behold (says an Ancient) the world is
troublesome, and yet it is loved, what would it be if it were peaceable? you
embrace it though it be filthy, what would you do if it were beautiful? you
cannot keep your hands from the thorns, how earnest would you be then in
gathering the flowers?

Secondly, hence it appears, that prosperity is not always a sign of love and
favor from God. Rome makes it a note of the true Church: if that were so, 2.
then the Egyptians were in a righter way then the Israelites: Non omne quod
faeliciter been, neque in hac vita omne quod been faeliciter Greg Mor l. 30. c
3.
the Philistims, the Ammonites, the Midianites, and afterward the Babylonians
and the Persians, might have pleaded that their gods were true gods, and to be
worshipped rather then the God of Israel: and when the ten Tribes broke off
from Judah, and yet often prevailed against Judah, and were more prosperous,
they might have pleaded that they were in the right, that their worshipping of
God was more accepted, then that which was at Jerusalem. And afterward the
Heathens might have pleaded this argument against the Christians; and thus
indeed they did, as we find in the 30. Epistle of Ambrose: Ambrose F. p. 30.
he answers to one Symmachus, a great man, who pleaded strongly against the
Christians, and for the maintenance of Idols, by this argument, saying, That
they prospered and flourished more in worshipping of their gods, then the
Christians did in the worshipping of theirs. Certainly, the ancient godly
Fathers could not have heard this argument of outward prosperity, of outward
pomp and glory in the world, pleaded as a sign of the true Church, and of Gods
love, but with much indignation; How cross is this to Scripture? where we find
the estate of Gods people has usually been a poor afflicted estate. And
surely, the Papists could not always plead this argument; time has been when
the Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, and Turks, have been more prosperous then they. The
Emperor, Henry the fourth, was much hated by the Bishop of Rome, and yet he was
not unprosperous in his way: when the Pope cursed him, and made another
Emperor, namely, Rodulphus King of Swevia; Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diidema
Rodulpho.
yet this Emperor of his setting up, prospered not at all, but was overcome,
and slain by Henry: The Pope after set up another, and he was slain by a woman:
yea, he set up a third after him against Henry the fourth; he likewise was
taken in a Mill, and Whitake^us de Eccles. controversia quinta. c: 16.
slain by the Emperor: at the last, the Pope himself was cast out of his Seat,
and cast into Prison, and dyed in extreme dolours of mind, for that he had so
wronged the Emperor; and as it is reported, he asked pardon of him.

And as outward prosperity has not been always an argument that they could
make use of; so we hope that time will come, when they shall make use of it no
more, when their judgments shall be altered, and this argument wherein now
they boast, shall for ever fail them; but for the present, though now she be
crowned with Diamonds, and clothed with Scarlet, yet still she is the mother
of Harlots, and the abominations of the earth. I have not, says Luther, a
stronger argument against the Papal Kingdom, then Ego non habeo aliu^ contra
Papae regnum robustius argument^ quam quod sine cruce regnat. Luth. T. ^ 323.
this, that it is without the cross.

Let none amongst us deceive themselves, by resting upon outward prosperity, as
an argument of Gods love, for their everlasting estates. Many have no other
hold to lean upon for their salvation but this; all those solemn protestations
of God against this in his word; all the works of Gods providence toward his
own people, in leading them on in an afflicted condition, and toward the
wicked in giving them the fat of the earth, will not take men's hearts off from
this false reasoning, but still they will think, if God did not love them,
surely he would not let them prosper so as he does. A painted face is as
certain an argument of a good complexion, as this is of a good condition. When
God shall come hereafter, to take up his own to himsef, he will not look so
much amongst the great ones of the earth, the rich, the gorgious attires,
sumptuous houses, furnished tables, as amongst the the persecuted, contemned,
scorned company; out of them he will find his own; Mal. 3. 17. In that day
when I make up my jewels, says the Lord: the phrase notes, that Gods jewels
now do lie scattered in the dirt, and God has his time to make them up; God
passes by Palaces, and looks in at cottages; he passes by the rich, and takes
the poor; he passes by the honorable, and takes the despised ones.

Thirdly, hence we have a confirmation of another life after this; certainly
these things cannot always 3.
continue, it is impossible that the godly should always be in this poor,
afflicted, distressed condition: it is not against the rule of justice to
suffer this for a while, that way may be made to other of Gods intentions, but
that there never should be any righting of their cause, that there should never
be seen a difference between him that fears God, and him that fears him
not; that God should never appear to judge in the Earth, that there should
never be a reward for the righteous, this cannot be. The souls that are under
the Altar, which were of those who were put to death for the Testimony of
Christ, they cry, How long, O Lord, holy and true, will it be before thou
avengest thy self for the blood of thy Saints? S. Paul reasons strongly from
this argument, 1 Cor. 15. 19. to prove the resurrection; For, says he, if in
this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. When
therefore we see the godly to be wronged, and persecuted, when we see iniquity
to be in the place of righteousness, and wickedness in the place of judgment,
let us not be offended, but say in our hearts, God shall judge the righteous
and the wicked; for there is a time for every purpose and every work; And as
Chap. 5. 8. When thou see the oppression Eccles. 3. 16, 17.
of the poor, and violent perverting of judgment, marvel not at the matter,
for he that is higher then the highest regards. If God should always prosper
his servants in this life, then it would be Quid ni terrenas divitias
possiderent Sancti cum sola adhuc terrena palam promitterentur a deo Bern.
declamat. de istis verbis
thought he intended no other for them; but he withdraws his hand here, that we
might be taught to look for another.

In the times under the Law, God did usually more prosper his people in outward
things, then now he does, and the reason may be because then Christ was but
darkly revealed, the riches of spiritual mercies were not much made known;
there was but little mention made of that eternal life, which is to come
hereafter, we have very few texts of Scripture in the Promissio corporalis est
ceu Nux quae tegit nucem Christu^ and aeternam vitam, itaque veniente Christo
testa seu cortex frangitur, inquem nucleus inclusus est, hoc est, cessat
premisso temporalis and succedit spiritualis, Luth. in Gen c. 17
Old Testament, wherein there is any clear mention made of eternal life, but in
the times of the Gospel, God calls his people to a more suffering condition
then he did then; and therefore the mystery of Christ, the glorious promises of
the Gospel, the Doctrine of the resurrection, and the ways of God in that
eternity which is to come hereafter, are more clearly and fully revealed. It is
an excellent expression that Luther has to this purpose: Bodily promises, says
he, is as the shell or husk that covers the nut, which is Christ, and eternal
life; wherefore Christ coming, the shell, the husk, is broken and taken off,
that is, temporal promises cease, and the spiritual succeed; he means in
comparison of that it was under the Law.

The Reason why the Pharisees scorned at Christ preaching against seeking the
things of the world, Luke 13. 14. was, because the promises were so large for
temporal things. Wherefore when Christ would teach them not to seek those which
they conceived the chief blessings of God contained in the promises, they
deride him; hence Christ tells them ver. 16. The Law and the Prophets were till
John, till then the promises ran much upon temporal things, but now the Kingdom
of heaven suffers violence, there is now another manner of kingdom revealed,
sought after in another way then ever formerly. I dare appeal to thy
conscience, whosoever thou art; can thou think otherwise in thy conscience,
but that those who walk close with God, subjecting their hearts and lives unto
his fear, must be most beloved of him? they must needs be nearer that eternal
good, and fountain of all happiness, then vile wretched sinners, who walk
according to their lusts, who are vile and abominable in their ways. When thou
see Gods people to be so low, so distressed, so afflicted, either thou must
be convinced strongly that there is a time, wherein all shall be called over
again, or else thou art an Atheist; God will convince thee another day by this
argument, Did you not see what were the ways of my providence toward my
people? Might you not have gathered from thence, that there was another time a
coming?

Fourthly, Learn we hence to judge wisely of the poor, of the afflicted, and
persecuted. Psalm 41. 1. Far be it from us to think they are forsaken of God:
let us not be offended at Religion, because troubles follow the profession of
it; the blessing that comes by profession of the truth, consists not in such a
peace as frees from trouble, but in giving peace and rest Pacem tu quaeris and
effect as, led praepostere, qui^ quomodo mundus dat tu quaeris, non quomodo
Christus Deus pacem suam possu it in medi um nullus pacis, id est omnium
tentationu^ sicut dicit, Dominare in medimedio inimicoru^ tuorum.
to the soul in the midst of troubles. Luther has an excellent speech for
this in one of his Epistles ad Tonitorem.

You seek and affect peace, but preposterously, such as the worlds peace, not
Christ's, who gives peace in the midst of troubles; as he says, Rule thou in
the midst of thine Enemies. Now the cause of the Church calls for a wise
judging: How many carnal people are ready to think that Popery is rather the
truth, and that the Religion of Protestants is not right, because God has of
late years so grievously afflicted his Church? What, would God suffer his own
people (say they) his own truth thus to be beaten down? As they formerly said
of Christ, Let him save him, seeing he delighted in him, so if God delighted in
this way, surely he would have saved it, he would not have suffered opposition
so far to have prevailed against the professors of it. It is no argument that
Christ is not in the ship, because tempests and storms arise. It is no argument
that our cause is not Gods, that Christ is not with us, because of our
afflictions, it may be we have not awakened him by our prayers, we are not yet
fit to enjoy the sweetness of a calm.

Salvian was fain to write a whole Treatise, above eleven hundred years ago, to
answer this argument that men had against the people of God, and the profession
of the Gospel. Turks judge all things according to outward success, and so did
the heathens of old. We read of Brutus, being overcome by Anthony, he cries
out, Whatsoever things are disputed concerning Brutus victus ab Autonio
exclamat, quacunque de virtute disputa^tur meras esse nugas, quia fortuna
dominetur in rebus humanis. Clemens Alex. Strom. l. 4. p. 495.
virtue, are but mere toys and fancies; for fortune rules in all humane things:
but it beseems not Christians to judge by this rule. Clemens Alexandrinus cites
Plato, expressing himself thus, Although a righteous man be tormented, although
his eyes be dug out, yet he remains a blessed man. Let none judge worse of
himself merely because of afflictions: before you were of the world, it may be
you prospered, it shined upon you; but now since you have given your name to
Christ, many troubles and afflictions follow you: this is no other but that
has been, is, will be the estate of Gods people in this life: we must not draw
ill consequences from, or make ill constructions of our afflictions, for this
is to charge God foolishly, which Job did not, Chap. 1. 22. There are some
kind of sufferings that a man meets with, that have a kind of sweet seal of
God with them, even in the time of suffering, by which a man is more confirmed
in his way to be from God, then ever he was before.

Fifthly, what shall become then of ungodly and wicked men? Thus Saint Peter
argues, 1. Epist. 4. 17, 18. Judgment must begin at the house of God, and if
it first begin at us, what shall the end of them be, that obey not the Gospel
of God? If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinners
appear? If it be done thus to the green tree, what shall be done to the dry?
Behold, they whose judgment was not to drink of the cup, have assuredly
drunken, and art tbou he that shall go altogether unpunished? thou shall not go
unpunished; but thou shall assuredly drink of it, Ier. 49. 12. certainly there
is shame and confusion for you, there are tortures prepared for you. You heard
what the Martyrs have suffered, but all that is nothing to the least spark of
Gods revenging wrath, when it is mingled with hatred.

That is a fearful expression that we have, Psalm. 35. 6. Let their way be
slippery, and the angel of the Lord persecuting them. It is a more fearful
thing to have the Angel of the Lord persecute, then to be persecuted by men;
but how fearful a thing is it, when God himself, that infinite Deity, when he
persecutes a man? when Divine justice follows a man from one place to another
and persecutes him? You look upon those poor despised misused Servants of God,
and you think vilely of them; let those spectacles strike terror into your
hearts every time you see them! O what is reserved for me then?

Sixthly, if this be the usual estate of Gods people, let us learn then to
prepare for afflictions before they come; although we have escaped many years,
yet we may be called to such an estate at last. Polycarpus escaped till he was
fourscore and six years old, and then he was called to Martyrdom. In the first
ten persecutions in the primitive times, the Christians in England escaped all
the nine, although the Gospel not many years after Christ was professed in
England, yet the tenth and last persecution fell heavy upon them. Julius Caesar
escaped fifty several battles, in which he was personally present, and yet at
last in the Senate house, he was unexpectedly murdered.

Now all is well with you, lay up for times of trouble: this is a gathering
time, that will be a spending time; know that that which will serve turn now,
will not serve turn then: many are not able to hold out now, what will they do
then? O what will you do in the day of your visitation? Jer. 12. 5. If the Esaias
10. 3.
footmen have wearied thee, how can thou contend with horses? and if in the
land of peace, how will thou do in the swelling of Jordan? We read of
Polycarpus, that as he lay in his bed, he saw in a vision the bed set on fire
under his head, forewarning him of his Martyrdom; we in our ease should
seriously think of our sufferings, now while Sunshine days of peace continue,
we should consider of the days of darkness which may be many. Oftentimes we are
thinking of, and seeking after great things, when we should be preparing for
suffering hard things: as Mat. 20. 20. when Christ had been speaking to prepare
for sufferings, Zebedees children most unseasonably come, seeking for the
highest places in his kingdom. This was the fault of Baruc, Jer. 45. when God
was bringing sore and grievous afflictions to his people, he was seeking great
things for himself.

CHAP. VIII. Eleven Rules for preparation to suffer afflictions.
FIrst, make account of them, do not say, I shall never be removed; although
you know not what particular afflictions shall befall you, yet make an account,
that an afflicted condition will be your portion: according to that of the
Apostle, Acts 20. 22, 23. And now I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not
knowing the things that shall befall me there; save that the holy Ghost
witnesses in every city, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me. It is
our wisdom thus to make an account of afflictions, that when they come, they
may be no other then were expected before. As is reported of Anaxagoras, that
when news came to him of the death of his Son, and it was thought he would have
been much troubled at it; he answered, I begat him mortal: so when any troubles
befall us, we should entertain them with these thoughts, I knew my condition was
to be an afflicted condition, I entered upon the ways of godliness upon these
terms, to be willing to be in an afflicted condition; this is Gods ordinary way
toward his people, it is Gods mercy, it is no worse, I expect yet greater
trials then these.

If we make use of the Scriptures, foretelling troubles beforehand, we cannot
for shame complain, when we meet with those we acknowledge we were foretold of.
It is a good expression Augustine has, in one of his Epistles to Victorianus,
We must not be so contrary to our selves, as to believe what we read, and yet
to complain when the same things are fulfilled. If we make account of evils
aforehand, we may have time to gather together the forces of our Non debemus
tam nobis ipsis esse contrarii, ut credamus quando leguntur, and queramur
^^ando complentur. Pracogitati mali nollis actus Sen ep. 67.
minds, which being united are strong, otherwise they will come upon us, when
our strength is scattered, and so be very grievous unto us, and likely to
prevail against us. Those evils, says Seneca, that others overcome by a long
time suffering, as being used to them, the wise man overcomes by thinking
before hand Quae alii diu patiendo levia faciunt, vir sapiens levia facit diu
cogitando. A Sixfold self to be denied.
.

Secondly, the rule of Christ that we have Matt. 16. 26. is of great use; If
any will follow me, let him deny himself, and so take up his cross. Where self
is renounced, the cross is easily born: it is self that makes 2.
the cross pinch: things puffed up with wind, break when they come to the fire,
so those who are puffed up, and filled with self; the soul emptied of its self,
is only fit to suffer: there is a six fold self that must be denied.

First, self-opinion: We must be willing to lie quietly under the truth, to be
convinced, and to be guided by it.

Secondly, self-counsels, and self -reasonings, must be denied; we must take
heed of conferring 1.
with flesh and blood: as it was the care of Saint 2.
Paul, Gal. 1. 16. immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood, if he had
begun to do it, he had been in danger.

Thirdly, self-excellencies; our parts, our privileges, our credits, and all
those things that are great 3.
in our own eyes, and that make us great in the eyes of the world.

Fourthly, self-will: We must not think it so grievous a thing to have our
wills crossed, we must 4.
not expect to have our conditions brought to our wills; and therefore it is
our wisdom, whatsoever our condition be, that we bring our wills unto them. As
it is reported of Socrates, that when the Tyrant threatened death unto him, he
answered, He was willing: nay then, says he, You shall live against your will;
he answers again, Nay whatsoever you do with me, it shall be my will: How much
more ought Christians to have their wills bow to the holy and blessed will of
God in every thing? the providence of God discovers his will, as well as his
word.

Fifthly, self-comforts: Those who give liberty to 5.
themselves, to satisfy themselves to the utmost, although Timeo cervicem ne
mar garitarum and sm aragdorum laqueisocc upata locum Spathae non dat. Tertul.
de cultu. soem. c. 13.
in lawful comforts, will be unfit to suffer hardship when God shall call
thereunto. Tertullian has such an expression in his Treatise de cultu
foeminarum, I fear that neck that is used to pearl chains, that it will not
give it self to the sword.

Sixthly, self ends must be denied; we must aim at God, and not at our selves,
in all our ways, and then how easy will it be for us to bear crosses,
considering that Gods ends do go on, though our ends be 6.
crossed?

Thirdly, be sure to lay a good foundation, in a 3.
through work of humiliation: the more thou art willing to bear Gods hand in
the work of humiliation for sin, the lighter will all the burdens of
afflictions be unto thee; the seed that fell upon the stony ground withered;
and although for a while it was received with joy, yet when tribulation and
persecution arises, by and by he is offended, Mat. 13. 21. Mark the expression
of the Holy Ghost there, by and by, he is presently offended, and all because
there was not depth of earth, there was not a through work of humiliation. We
read, Acts 9. 16. that God would show S. Paul, what great things he must suffer
for his Names sake: and how did God prepare his heart? You shall find in the
former part of the Chapter, that God smote him down to the ground, his heart
was smote lower then his body; he comes trembling and astonished before the
Lord, saying, Lord, what will thou have me to do? He was three days without
sight, and neither did eat nor drink; this was a great preparation of his
heart, to those great things he suffered afterward. You think the burdens of
afflictions great, because you never felt what the weight and burden of sin
meant; I dare pawn my life for that soul, who constantly exercises it self in
the work of humiliation for sin, who burdens it self with the weight of its
sins, and is willing to lie under it, for the further breaking of spirit, that
it shall be able to endure crosses, and stand under strong afflictions; and
this must needs be so,

First, because the soul is acquainted with the sense 1.
of an evil, infinitely greater then any evil it can meet withal in
afflictions; the sense whereof must needs Deep humiliation fits us to endure
great afflictions.
swallow up the sense of lesser evils: as those who are acquainted with the
pains of the stone, and strangury, and other dreadful diseases, account lesser
pains (which yet are very grievous unto others) as nothing.

Secondly, a soul exercised in the work of humiliation, by it is put under the
power of Gods sovereignty, 2.
dreadful authority, and infinite majesty: it is not man that can terrify that
soul from duty, that lies under the power of these.

Thirdly, this burden of sin, felt in the work of humiliation, mortifies those
inward lusts, pulls down 3.
the strength of them, which are so ready to rise against, and withdraw the
heart from the truths, and ways of God.

Fourthly, this soul knows how dear comfort is, if 4.
it has any comfort, it cost dear before it was got, and therefore it will not
easily be parted withal.

Fifthly, where conscience by this is thoroughly wounded, 5.
and deeply struck, it cannot easily gather any such film upon it, as not to
remain tender, but it soon feels the evil, yea it is sensible of the danger of
the least sin.

Sixthly, if ever God has manifested any love in 6.
Christ unto it, the souls love to God and Christ must needs be exceeding great.

Fourthly, be careful to preserve your inward peace, 4.
your peace with God, and your own conscience: If vapors be not got into the
earth, and stir not there, they are not all the storms and tempests abroad that
can make an earthquake; but if vapors be within, and work there, an earthquake
is caused: so where there is peace within, all troubles and oppositions
without, cannot shake the heart; but if there be no peace within, every little
thing troubles the spirit: terrors without, and terrors within, both are very
hard, Be not thou a terror to me, O Lord, says Jeremy, chap. 17. 17. for thou
art my hope in the day of evil. I care not though all the world be a terror to
me, so be it thou be not a terror; if I have peace with thee, it is enough,
what ever evil befall me: Oh therefore maintain, and keep this peace above all,
it is no matter whether you have peace or no with the world, so be it you have
the peace of the Gospel in your hearts: it is one special part of that
spiritual armory we read of, Ephesians. 6. to be shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace: that is, that blessed peace of the Gospel, which is a strong
preparation to endure any troubles or afflictions that Christians meet withal:
the reason of that phrase to be shod, is this, because we are to go amongst
briars and thorns, in our way to Heaven; we are to meet with many hard things
we are to pass through, therefore we had need be well shod; if a man be not so,
he will be as one that goes upon sharp flints barefoot, or a among thorns, or
bushes, so that the blood tricles down his feet every step he takes, surely
such a man cannot hold out long; thus it is with the soul that is not fenced
with the Gospel of peace: Be careful in nothing, let not your spirits be
divided (for so is the word) Phil. 4. 6, 7. And the peace of God which passes
all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds; the word is, shall guard
your hearts: (...)
afflictions and troubles are as enemies, compassing us about, but the peace of
God guards our hearts from the evil of them: this enables Gods children, though
not in the letter, yet in some sort to tread upon the Adder and Asp, to shake
off Vipers, and receive no hurt. Having peace with God, we glory Romans 5. 1, 2,
3.
in tribulations; we are not only patient under them, but we glory in them;
How were the spirits of those blessed Martyrs, we read, and hear so much of,
strengthened with this blessed peace of the Gospel?

Take heed therefore, that you never maintain peace with any sin. Great peace
have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 119. 165. Oh,
how many of you have broke your peace with God! at least the comfort of it is
exceedingly darkened: you would fain have outward ease, and peace, but you have
neglected the comforts of this peace, and that is the reason you have no
strength, to suffer any thing for the truth, Nehem. 8. 10. The joy of the Lord
is your strength, that joy that comes from this inward peace, but where this is
not, there is nothing to sweeten sorrows, and therefore they must needs be very
bitter. That time therefore that God gives you yet respite from afflictions,
let it be spent in making up your peace more with God then ever, and getting
clearer evidence, and sense of his love. If ever you knew what peace with God
meant, I appeal unto you, when at any time, the sense of it has enlarged your
hearts with joy; whether then, have you not found your selves willing to suffer
any thing for God? you could then go through fire, and water, your spirits
could triumph with the Apostle, I am per swaded that neither life, nor death,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, shall
ever be able to separate me from the love of God in Christ Jesus.

Fifthly, labor to see more into the fullness of all 5.
good in God: the Lord told Abraham, that he was The fullness of God discovered.
God all-sufficient, as the only means to strengthen him, against whatsoever
evils he was like to meet withal. Labor to have the insight into Gods fullness,
in these three particulars.

First, look at all the excellency, beauty, comfort, 1.
and good in the creature, and know that it is all in him, in a most eminent
and glorious manner. There is no good in the effect, but the causes together
have it in them: now God is the first cause, and so all causes have their
principle in him, and therefore all good must needs be in him.

Secondly, all possible good is in the Lord; that is, 2.
as there is no actual good, but is for the present in him; so there can be
none, but it is in him already; there is such fullness of good in him, that it
is impossible that there should be any good added to him in the least degree.

Thirdly, look at God as taking infinite delight in 3.
communicating himself, in letting out his goodness to his creature; let God be
seen thus, and let these three meditations of the fullness of good in God, be
wrought upon the heart, and they will mightily support the spirit in all
afflictions: for what is the loss of any thing to me, when I see where I can
have it made up? what is any bitterness, when I see such infinite sweetness to
sweeten all. When tempests come upon Mariners, and they be in narrow seas,
where they want sea-room, there is danger, but if they have sea-room enough,
there is no fear. Thus if we are acquainted with the infinite fullness of good
in God, we should see our selves safe in the midst of all tempests, we should
feel our spirits quiet under the sorest afflictions.

Sixthly: A sixth preparation, for the bearing further 6.
crosses, is an humble cheerful bearing of present afflictions, and an humble
submitting to the present condition: That soul that is willing to yield to God
in the present condition, God will fit it for the future: many cast about in
their thoughts what they shall do hereafter, if troubles should befall them, and
yet in the mean time they neglect the duties of their present condition. Go on
therefore humbly, and patiently in the performance of the duties that God calls
now for, and they will prepare you for whatsoever duties shall be required of
you hereafter: there is no good to be expected from any in a new condition, who
are not careful to perform the duties of the present: many are ready to
promise, When we shall be in such a condition, then we will do thus or thus;
but what do you in your present? never think to be able to suffer, if God call
you to a new condition, if you cannot be patient under the troubles you meet
with now, especially when these troubles are small and petty, in comparison of
those you are like to meet withal. Mr Bilney the Martyr used to put his finger
into the candle, to prepare him for the burning of his whole body; A patient
bearing of less troubles for the present, will prepare the heart for the
bearing of greater afterward.

Seventhly, enjoy all your comforts of prosperity 7.
as from God, and God in them, and them all for How to enjoy all our comforts
in, from, and for God.
God.

First, from God: therefore whatsoever he takes away, it is but his own; and
what are we, that we must always have comfort, and content, who are poor
beggarly 1.
creatures, who have nothing of our own?

Secondly, enjoy God in all: the enjoyment of 2.
God in all, is a mystery the world is not acquainted with, only a gracious
heart knows what it is; it looks at all creatures but as the pipe of
conveyance, the sweet, and comfort, and blessing, is God in them; therefore in
any affliction that befalls, so long as God may be enjoyed, the comfort, and
sweet, and blessing of all is not lost, although the creature be lost.

Thirdly, all for God: Why then should not God 3.
have the glory of all his own way? We in the general acknowledge God should
have glory from all that we are or have, but we would have him have it our way,
so as may stand with our ease, with our liberties, peace, and ends: but God
must have the honor of all, that way that is good in his own eye.

And again, if all we have be for God, then when he is honored by any thing we
do enjoy, it has its end and perfection: a comfort is then the most perfect
comfort, when God has the glory of it, when it is resigned to him, either in a
way of service, or suffering, as he calls for it.

And lastly, if our comforts be enjoyed for God, then our hearts are not let
out to any of them, further then leads us to God; and if so, then when God
calls for the parting with them, in a suffering way, the enjoyment of them
cannot lead to God any further, but would draw off the spirit from God; and
therefore such a heart is willing now to part with them, it is not grievous to
it to leave them, because the excellency of them is not now in the enjoyment of
them, but in the parting with them.

Eighthly, be often renewing your resignations of 8.
all unto God, and your covenant with him, to be at his dispose, that so when
any trouble comes at any time, this resignation of heart, and renewal of
covenant, may be fresh upon your spirits: the soul will be ready to suffer
much, if it be called to it, when an actual resignation, and renewing of
covenant has been a little before, and the power of it is now fresh upon the
heart: sometimes immediately after a day of solemn humiliation, where this has
been, the soul thinks then it could do or suffer any thing; but in a little
time, except this be renewed again, the heart grows drossie, and cleaves to
present things, and mingles it self with them: the often renewing of this,
keeps the heart very loose from the creature; a thing that hangs loose from
another, may soon be taken off from it, but if it cleaves to it, it is not
taken off without difficulty, it oftener rends in the taking off: thus it is
when the heart cleaves to any creature-content.

Ninthly, lay up provision against an evil day: There 9.
is a threefold provision we should treasure up to prepare How to be prepared
for any affliction.
us for our afflictions;

First, treasure up the consolations of God that he affords upon occasion, that
at any time you feel in the performance of duties, in the exercises of graces,
in the use of Ordinances.

Secondly, treasure up the experiences of Gods ways toward you, and his
gracious dealings with you in former straights.

Thirdly, treasure up soul-supporting, soul-quickning, soul-reviving,
soul-comforting promises, and that of several kinds, suitable to several
afflictions, for thou know not what kind of afflictions thou may meet
with.

Tenthly, labor much to strengthen every grace, it 10.
is strong grace that is suffering grace: a strong wing will fly against the
wind: as it is said of the horse, Job 33. because he has strength, he mocketh
at fear, and is not affrighted, neither turns he back for the sword, ver. 22.
A candle will hold light in the house, but if we go abroad in the air, there is
need of a torch, there must be a stronger light there; weak grace may serve
turn to uphold us now, but in time of afflictions it had need be strong, a
little grace will soon be spent then, as a candle is soon spent, when it stands
in the wind.

Lastly, set much before you the example of Christ 11.
and Gods people, who have endured very hard The sufferings of Christ described.
things. In the example of Christ, consider, first, who it was that suffered:
the Son of God, who was God blessed for ever, the glory of the Father; when we
suffer, base worms worthy to be trodden under foot, suffer.

Secondly, what he suffered: even the wrath of 2.
God, and the curse of the Law, he was made a curse in the abstract as the
Scripture speaks, which was another manner of thing, then any of our afflictions.

Thirdly, for whom he suffered: it was for us vile 3.
worms, wretched sinful creatures, who were enemies to him: we suffer for God,
who is infinitely blessed, to whom we owe all we are or have.

Fourthly, how freely he suffered: it was of his own 4.
accord, his own free grace moved him to it, he laid down his life, none could
take it from him: it is not in our liberty, whether we will suffer or no, we
are under the power of another.

Fifthly, how meekly he suffered: he was as a sheep 5.
before the shearer, his suffering no way disquieted his spirit, but it kept in
a sweet quiet frame in the midst 6.
of all.

Sixthly, consider how his strength is with you in Ipse luctutur in nobis ipse
congrelitur, ipse in certamine agouis nostri, and coronat pariter, and
coronatur. Cypr. ep. 9
your sufferings.

And lastly, how he is honored in them: He strives with us in the combat, he
joins with us in the fight of our agony, he crowns and is crowned, says Cyprian.

Bernard would have us never to let go out of our minds, the thoughts of a
crucified Christ, Let these says he, be meat and drink unto you, let them be
your sweetness and consolation, your honey and your desire, your reading and
your meditation, your contemplation, your life, death and resurrection: Would
you learn obedience? would you learn contempt of honors? would you see the
highest patience? set a suffering Christ before you: Sureus reports of a noble
Earl Elzearius, when his wife wondered at his exceeding patience under fore
afflictions, he answers her thus, What good will it be to be angry and
impatient? certainly none at all: but I will open my heart unto you; you know
sometimes my heart is ready to rise with indignation against such as wrong
Noveris me interdum sentiri aliquam inanimo adversus in festantes
meindignationem, sed illico me converto ad cogitan das injurias Christo illatas
dicoque mihi ipsi, cum imitari cupiens, Etiam si famuli tui, barbam tuam
convellerent, and colaphos tibi impingerent, nihil hoc totum esset prae illis
quae Dominus tuus and plura and majora perpessus est; certoque habeas (conjux
mea) me nunquam cessare a commomorandis injuriis Salvatoris mei donec animus
meus plane sit tranquillus, In vita ejus, c. 23. apud Surium To. 5.
me, but I presently turn me to the thoughts of the wrongs offered to Christ,
and I say thus to my self, desiring to imitate him, Although my servants should
pull my beard, and strike me on the face, these were nothing to those which thy
Lord suffered, he suffered more and greater things; and know assuredly, says he
to his wife, I never leave off thinking of the wrongs my Savior endured, till
my mind be still and quiet. He that is afraid to suffer, cannot be his
disciple who suffered so much, says Tertullian Non potest qui pati timet, ejus
esse qui passus est. Tertul. de fuga in persecut.
.

Certainly the example of Christ, in humbling himself to suffer so much for us,
should be mightily prevalent with us; if he emptyed himself so much, to become
the Son of man, how much more should we be willing to empty our selves, that we
may be the Sons of God? Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, he is worthy of all
honor from us, who being Lord of all, was content to be in the form of a
servant, to suffer for us, and how can we express our honoring of him, our
respect to him, better then in being to suffer for him? I have read of a Roman
servant, who knowing his Master was sought for by officers to be put to death,
he put himself into his masters clothes, that he might be taken for him, and so
he was, and was put to death for him: whereupon his master, in memory of his
thankfulness to him, and honor of him, erected a brazen statue. Christ who was
not a servant, but our Lord, yet when he saw we were like to dye, he took upon
him the form of a servant, he came in our likeness, that he might dye for us,
and he dyed; he requires not us to erect up brazen statues in memory of him, in
honor to him, but that we should be willing to suffer for him, when he calls us
thereunto; let not us put off the clothes of our Christian profession, that we
may avoid sufferings for him (as many do) who put on the clothes of our
humanity, yea of our servility, that he might suffer for us.

The example of the servants of God in all times, The best of Saints have been
in sufferings.
suffering in his cause, is likewise a special help to us in our way of
suffering: Let us warm our hearts often at the meditation of the fiery trial of
the Martyrs. Consider, what precious choycespirited men they were, how holy,
heavenly, spiritual, what service they did for God, and yet that they should
suffer such hard things as they did; what are we in comparison of them?
Chrysostom in an Oration upon two famous Martyrs, raising their honor, and
speaking how the worthies of God in former Unde tu Christian, delicatus es
miles? putas te posse sine pugna vincere, sine certamine triumphare? Chrysostom. in
orat. in Juventiuu^ and Maximum.

Memor esto vinculoru^ Pauli, and vide quam sit absurdu^ illum esse in vinculis
te vero deliciari: deliciarum concupiscentia prehenderis? recordare carceris
Pauli: velles sericis indui? memor esto vinculoru^ Pauli, and videbuntur tibi
serica indumenta faetulentis panniculis abjectiora: velles aureis indumentis
amiciri? recordare vinculorum Pauli, and ostendent tibi nibil illa coeno
protrito melius habere: vis ornari capillis formosaque videri? considera
squalorem Pauli in carcerc, and accenderis erga illam pulchritudinem, hancque
extremam deformitatem esse putabis: vis odoramenta? Coopta illius lacrymas.
Chrysostom. Hom. 12. in Coloss.


times endured hard things, How is it, says he, that thou, o Christian, must be
so delicate, a Soldier so dainty? can thou overcome without fight, triumph
without combat? And in his Sermons upon the Colossions, Remember the chains of
Paul, and consider what an absurd thing it is, that he should be in bonds, and
you should live deliciously: Does the desire of pleasures take? remember the
Prison of Paul: Would thou be clothed in silks? remember Paul's chains, and
silken clothes will be more vile to thee then filthy rags: Would thou be
adorned with gold? remember Paul's chains, and they will show you that such
ornaments are no better then the dirt under your feet: Would you be beautiful
with your hair? think of the filth of the deformity of Paul in the Prison, and
thy heart will rise with indignation against such beauty, and will account it
extreme deformity: What, would you have sweet ointments? consider of his tears.

I have read of Phocion an Athenian Captain, when he was condemned to death by
his ungrateful Country, he saw one Tudippus condemned to the same death, but
very fearful, he comforts him with these words, Non tibi satis est Tudippe cum
Phocione mori?
Is it not enough for thee, Tudippus, that thou art to dye with Phocion? so we
may say to our own hearts, Is it not enough for us, that we have such a cloud
of witnesses, such a noble Army of Martyrs before us and with us? be not
therefore so afraid of the ways of God, because of afflictions, as thou have
been, but submit thy self to God in this way of his.

CHAP. IX. Duties required of us when God calls us to an afflicted condition.
SEeing God has so ordered things, that his people must be in an afflicted
estate in this world, when God calls us to suffer afflictions, let us know
there are three duties required of us.

First, that we be willing to yield to Gods call, to come under that condition
he has appointed us unto.

Secondly, that we behave our selves Christianly with all humble submission,
patience, contentedness, in this condition.

Thirdly, that we labor to improve our affliction that shall be laid upon us.

For the first, when our cross comes, we must be 1.
willing to take it up freely, and readily to submit unto The cross should be
submitted to readily.
it. It was the honor of the three children in Daniel, that they yielded their
bodies to those fiery flames they were cast into, Dan. 3. 28. Let us not seek
to put off sufferings by distinctions; certainly the best policy in dangerous
times, is the greatest purity. The Lacedaemonians were wont to say, It is a
shame for any man to fly, in time of danger; but for a Lacedemonian, it is a
shame for him to deliberate: How much more truly may this be said of a
Christian, when God calls him to suffer? he should be such a resolved man
beforehand, that it should be a shame now for him even to deliberate.

It is argument enough for a Christian to suffer any thing, because it is the
will of God, out of bare submission to God; but when it is not only so, but in
the cause of God, in witness to his truth, in vindicating his honor, this call
to suffer comes with strength indeed: it is unworthy of a Christian, once to
deliberate the avoiding of this; How much better is it, to suffer a little to
prevent a sin, and so prevent Gods wrath, then by avoiding sufferings to fall
into sin, which being once committed, Gods Siquidem etiam si hac ratione non
affigaris, alia tamen ex causa, eaque in utili, affligio^nino necesse est: quum
igitur sive hanc siveillam sectemur vitae rationem, afflictiones perpeti
necesse est, quarquare hanc non eligimus quae cum afflictione innumeras adfert
coronas?
wrath incensed by it cannot be pacified, though we should be willing to suffer
a thousand times as much. Our condition is such, that we must suffer one way or
another, while we live here; Is it not better then to suffer for God then any
other way? This was Chrysostoms argument in his Sermons upon the 2 Cor. chap.
12. Sermon 26. If you suffer not for Religion, you will suffer for some other
unprofitable light cause: Seeing then, says he, we following this or the other
course of life, we must suffer affliction, why do we not choose such a
suffering, which with the affliction brings unspeakable glory? Certainly it is
infinitely better to suffer for Christ, then for our sin. We read of
Peace Offerings that were offered, there might be oil mixed, but not so in
Sin Offerings: in those afflictions we endure for Christ, we offer up our
selves as Sacrifices of Peace Offerings, and in them there is joy, much oil of
gladness is mixed in such offerings; but when we suffer for our sins, there is
no oil of gladness mixed there; Let us take heed, that we be not found guilty
before the Lord, when the secrets of all hearts shall be opened, of being shy
of the ways of Religion, because of affliction; many when they see they must
suffer in those ways, although they be convinced of them, yet they are ready to
say with Augustine, as Non placet transire per istas angustias.
he confesses of himself, I do not love to pass through those straits, it is
too hard and narrow away for them. If such thoughts work in thee at any time,
take these considerations, for the rebuking of thy self, and the raising of thy
heart, to a more Christian magnanimity of spirit.

First, at what a low rate do thou prize the ways 1.
of God, the glory of God, that such and such more low comforts must not be
laid down for them, that such light afflictions must not be endured for the
maintenance of them?

Secondly, consider if Christ had stood upon such 2.
terms, as to have said, I could be content indeed that these poor creatures
might be delivered from misery, but seeing such grievous evils must be suffered
for their deliverance, let them perish; I am not willing to be their deliverer
upon such hard terms; What had become of us, if Christ had reasoned thus, if
this argument had prevailed with him against us, as it prevails with us against
him.

Thirdly, thou who art so shy of suffering, may 3.
be forced to suffer in spite of thy heart; and what a sad thing will that be
to thee? What a sad thing was it to Cranmer? after he had recanted for fear of
sufferings, yet he was forced to suffer; what a darkning was it to this spirit,
his cause, and name? Mr. Fox relates of a Smith in King Edwards time, who was
the means of conversion of a friend of his, who in Queen Mary's time was cast
into prison; whereupon he sends to this Smith, who had been the means of his
conversion, wondering that he hears not of his apprehending and imprisonment;
this Smith sends him word again, that it was true, that he had taught him such
and such things, and those things were certain truths; but for his part, he
could not burn; but a while after, the house of this Smith was on fire, and he
was burnt in it; God made him burn whether he would or no: and so may he make
you suffer, whether you will or no, who refuse to suffer for his truth.

Fourthly, whatsoever prosperity thou enjoyest when 4.
God calls thee to suffer for him, is cursed unto thee, if thou blessest thy
self in thy estate, thy liberty, thy name, thy life that thou enjoyest, having
avoided the way of suffering that God called thee unto, thou deceivest thy
self, for there is no blessing in them, they are all accursed unto thee.

Fifthly, all duties of Religion that now thou performest 5.
out of a suffering condition, are not now accepted of God; thou must not think
now, having avoided suffering for Gods truth, that because thou art willing to
perform duties, to be diligent in some service for God, that God now accepts of
thee; No, it was another work that God called thee unto, a work of suffering;
seeing thou have refused this, do what thou can, God casts it as dung in thy
face and regards it not; this is a sad condition, What joy can such a man have
of his life, if he has an enlightened conscience?

Sixthly, what intolerable pride, and delicacy is this in thee, that thou will
not venture the loss of 6.
any thing, the enduring of any thing for God, and his truth? the least truth
of God is worth more then Nimis delicatus es Christian, qui voluptatem hoc
seculo concupiscis.
heaven and earth; and what is thy ease, thy liberty, thy name, thy life to it?
Thou art too delicate, O Christian, says Tertullian, who must have pleasure in
this world.

Seventhly, How vile is the unbelief of thy heart, 7.
who dare not trust God with thy name, estate, liberty? How can thou trust
God with thy soul, thy eternal estate? How lightly do thou regard all the
faithfulness, the mercy, goodness, wisdom, power of God, working for his people
in their suffering conditions? Of what little account are all these gracious
blessed promises of the Lord, for their encouragement herein? thy base shyness,
and cowardice of spirit is such, as if there were no God, no faithfulness,
mercy, wisdom, power to help, as if there were no promise to support and
relieve thee.

Eighthly, there is a necessity of thy miscarrying in 8.
the ways of eternal life; for if God has so ordered things in his providence,
as that such ways must be in ways of affliction; and thy heart cannot bear
affliction, how is it possible, but that thou must needs miscarry in them? It
is a woeful thing, to have a man's heart opposite to Gods order, in any thing,
but much more in things of infinite consequence; if afflictions be a block to
thee in the way of life, you must have this block.

Ninthly, How little love is there in thine heart to God, when thou art so shy
of any thing to be suffered for God? love rejoices in suffering for the
beloved. 9.
The avoiding hell, and the getting Heaven, are no great things, says
Chrysostom, where the love of God is: then surely the avoiding outward
troubles, Chrysostom. de amore Dei and tolerantia in adversis.
and the enjoyment of outward comforts, would be no great matter to us, if the
love of God were in us.

Tenthly, Did you never suffer affliction in your 10.
ways of sin? and will you not now be willing to suffer as much in the ways of
God? Shall your sins have a greater testimony of respect to them from you, then
God himself? Art thou nor confounded at the mention, the thought of such a
thing as this, so unreasonable, so vile?

Eleventhly, What honor should God have in the world? where would there be any
witness to truth, 11.
against the rage and malice of devil and wicked men, if all should do as thou
do? If there be any Christian blood left in thee, if any spirit worthy of
thy profession, be ashamed of thy baseness this way, and be not so shy of
afflictions.

Secondly, when thou art under afflictions, let there 2. Submission of spirit
requisite under affliction.
be an humble contented frame of spirit, as beseems a Christian; seeing thou
art now under an Ordinance of God, take heed of the least murmuring, repining
against God, as if he were a hard Master; or as if his ways were hard and
burthensom, because of the afflictions thou meetest withal: when thy spirit
begins any way to rise in such workings, charge thy soul to be silent unto God;
it is a great shame for a Christian, not to be well skilled in that art,
instructed in that mystery of Christian contentation. Say with thy Savior,
Shall not I drink of that cup my Father has given me to drink? It is Gods
appointment, that his people should be in an afflicted estate in this world; it
is the cup of my Father, and shall not I quietly, and contentedly drink of that
cup? Now thou have an opportunity to manifest the power and excellency of thy
grace, to show what thy grace can enable thee to do; strength of reason will go
far, in quieting and calming of the heart under afflictions; but grace surely,
where it is true, will go farther.

It is the most unseemly sight in the world, to see a murmuring fretting
Christian; if thy God, if Christ, if Heaven were lost, it were not much to see
wringing of hands, and sinking of heart; but to see this upon loss of a few
outward comforts, upon enduring of a few outward afflictions, this is a most
unseemly, a vile and an abominable thing in thee. S. Augustine upon the 12.
Psalm, brings in God, rebuking a discontented Haeccine est fides tua? haeccine
tibi promisi, aut ad hoc factus es Christianus, ut seculo floreres? Aug. in
enar. 2. in Ps. 12.
Christian, thus: What is thy faith? have I promised thee these things? what,
were thou made a Christian, that thou should flourish here in this world?
Well may God, and Conscience, and all the Saints, upbraid a murmuring fretting
Christian; What did thou expect in the entrance upon profession of
Christianity? what was thy aim? what, did thou make account to live at ease?
to have no trouble to the flesh? Where there is not quiet of spirit in passive
obedience, the sincerity of active obedience may be suspected: How far art thou
from rejoicing in tribulations, who have not a quiet contented spirit in
tribulations?

I will not enlarge my self in this argument now, intending a Treatise by its
self of Christian contentation: only for the present take this one argument,
which surely has much strength in it, to quiet the heart under any affliction;
It is this, God is willing to accept of thy service, that thou tendrest up to
him, though it be mixed with much sin; why should not thou accept of his ways
toward thee, though there be a mixture of much affliction? The sin of our
service should be a greater cause for God to be displeased with what comes from
us, then the sorrow and affliction that comes in the ways of his providence,
can be to cause us to be displeased with what comes from him: that surely is
worse that is mixed with sin, then that which is mixed with sorrow; yet as the
one is accepted by God from us, let then the other be accepted by us from God.

Lastly, let us not only be contented under Gods Afflictions to be improved.
afflicting hand, but labor to thrive under it, to improve all our afflictions
that befall us; Certainly, there is a blessing in every Ordinance of God, if we
have wisdom and care to draw it forth, to make it our own; and so in this way
of God toward his people, it is indeed a gracious work, to get our hearts lie
quietly under affliction, but it is too low a work for a Christian to rest
there, he must look to improve every affliction for his advantage. By improving
them we make our Benonies, our Benjamins; that is, the sons of our sorrow, the
sons of our right hand. Although waters in the Sea be salt, yet if they be
raised up to the Heavens, and sent down again, then they are sweet; so though
afflictions be brackish, yea brine-salt, yet a spiritual heart can spiritualize
them, and make them sweet, and wholesome. Afflictions are great opportunities
for spiritual advantage, if we have hearts to improve them; and the loss of an
affliction is a great loss. S. Augustine in his second book of the City of God,
cries out against such, who did not profit by Gods judgment; You, says he,
have lost the profit of the calamity: he speaks Perdidist is utilitatem
calamitatis August. de civit. l. 2. c. 33.
of it as a great loss to them, that it was over, and they had got nothing by
it: As it is a sign of great wickedness, to turn blessings into curses; so it
is a sign of great grace, to turn curses into blessings. By this improvement we
shall not only get water, but honey out of the rock.

But how should we improve afflictions? Quest.


First, be jealous of your selves, lest it should pass Answ. How to improve our
afflictions.
away unsanctified; be more afraid of the affliction leaving of you thus, then
of the continuing of it upon you; and therefore, lay out your strength more for
a sanctified use of it, then for deliverance from it.

Secondly, labor to know Gods mind in your afflictions. 2.
The man of wisdom sees Gods name upon this rod, and understands what God
intends. First, whether he sends them for sin, or for other ends; and if for
sin, for what particular.

For the first, it is true, God sends affliction sometimes 1.
for trial, and other ends, rather then for sin, yet it is sin that makes us
capable of such a way of trial; were we not sinful, God would not deal with us
that way, he would bring about his purposes by us some other way, therefore it
is good in all to be humbled for sin; you may be helped in the knowledge of
Gods end.

First, if the affliction be extraordinary, and come 1.
in an extraordinary way, and upon examination you find your self not guilty
of any special evil, besides daily incursions, then you may comfortably hope,
How to discern Gods end in afflicting us.
Gods intentions are not specially for sin, but for some other end; so it was
in Job and Joseph.

Secondly, you may know from the work of the affliction, which way it tends,
and how God follows 2.
it, whether in it God settles not sin upon your heart, for humiliation, more
then ordinary: or whether the work of Gods spirit be not rather for the
stirring up of the exercise of some other grace; for God in his dealings with
his people, will work for the attaining the ends he aims at.

Thirdly, much may be learned from the issue of an affliction; when God comes
chiefly for trial, in 3.
the issue his grace does much abound toward his servants, as it did in Joseph
and in Job; what honor was Joseph advanced unto? and Job had given him twice as
much as he had before, chap. ult. ver. 10. In all the land there were no women
so fair as the daughters Job, ver. 15. but when the afflictions is for sin, it
does not use to have such an issue, it is well if the sinner may be restored
into such a comfortable condition as he was in before: When David was afflicted
for his sin, some scars stuck by him after his deliverance, he scarce ever was
brought into that comfortable condition he was in before.

But how may we find out the particular sin? Quest.


First, look what sins and afflictions the word has Answ.
coupled together; although every sin deserves all How to know the particular
sin which causes our trouble.
kind of affliction, yet the word joins some special correction, to special
transgressions; as God sorts several promises to several graces, so he sorts
several afflictions to several sins.

Secondly, consider what sins and afflictions providence couples in respect of
similitude; God often 2.
stamps the likeness of the sin, upon the judgment, Judges 1. 7, 8.

Thirdly, enquire at the mouth of God, by prayer 3.
and humiliation, as David did, 2 Samuel 21. and Job cap. 10. 2. and those in
Jeremy, cap. 16. 10, 11.

Fourthly, hearken to the voice of conscience, that 4.
is Gods officer in your soul, especially in time of affliction, conscience
will deal impartially; and take this rule for your help herein, After much
humiliation, and seeking of God, then listen to the voice of conscience: for as
it is with an Officer whom you would have search the Records, if you would have
him diligent indeed in the search, you must give him his fee, else he will do
the work but slightly: so you must give conscience, Gods Register, his fee;
that is, let conscience have much prayer, and humiliation which it calls for,
and then it will tell you Gods mind more fully.

Fifthly, consider what truths have been most pressed 5.
upon your hearts before the affliction, for afflictions do use to come as
seals to instructions, as Job 33. 16. A writing has not that authority with it
before it be sealed, as it has after; but when the seal is set on, then it
comes with authority: so it is in regard of Gods instructions; before, they did
not come with power to your hearts, now God seals them, that they may prevail;
and by considering what those instructions were, you may be helped to find out
what God aims at in your afflictions.

A third Rule is, when you have found out your 3.
sin, stir up your heart against it with indignation: This is that which has
caused me all this woe, that has brought all this trouble and smart. As Acts
21. 28. the Jews took hold on Paul, crying, Men of Israel, help, This is the
man, that teaches every where against the people: So should we take hold on
our sin, that we have found out, and cry to the Lord, Help, O Lord, this is
that sin that has made the breach, this is that sin that has been the cause
of so much evil unto me. As we read of Antonius, after Julius Caesar was
murdered, he brought forth his coat all bloody and cut, and laid it before the
people, Look here, says he, you have your Emperors coat thus bloody and torn:
whereupon the people were presently in an uproar, and cried out to slay those
murderers, and they took their tables and stools that were in the place, and
set them on fire, and ran to the houses of those who had slain Caesar, and
burnt them. Thus the looking upon our afflictions, and considering what
mischief sin has done us, our hearts should be raised to fly upon our sin
with indignation, and not to be satisfied without the destruction of that which
would have destroyed us.

A fourth rule is, when God stirs your heart in affliction, to promise and
covenant reformation; begin 4.
the work while the affliction is upon you, do something now presently, do not
put off all till you be well, till you be recovered, and think then I will do
it: there is much deceit of the heart this way, many miscarry in their vows to
God upon this ground, because they put off all till they be out of their
affliction, and by that time, the impression that was upon their spirits is
abated, their hearts are cooled, and so the duty is neglected; wherefore do
something presently, and be always in doing, till that which is vowed be fully
performed.

Fifthly, let every affliction drive you much to God 5.
in prayer. Is any man afflicted? let him pray, says S. James. It is a
similitude of Chrysostom, As clouds Christ. in Hom 5. de in comp. ^at. Dei.
darken the heavens, and cause lowering weather, but being distilled into drops,
then sweet Sunshine and fair weather follows: so sorrows and cares in the
soul, cloud the soul, till they be distilled in prayer, into tears, and poured
forth before the Lord, then the sweet beams of Gods grace come in, and much
blessing follows.

Sixthly, treasure up all the experiences you have had 6.
of God, and your own heart in the time of your affliction, keep them fresh in
your heart, and work them upon your spirit, and make use of them as God offers
occasion.

Seventhly, what you wished you had done then, be sure now to set about, and
never rest till it be done; 7.
that when affliction comes again, it may not find it undone, if it does, it
will make the affliction very bitter unto you. It was the advice of one
Theodoricus, to Segismund the Emperor, who asked him how he should be happy,
Do, says he, that now, which when you have been tormented with a fit of the
stone or the gout, you would wish you had done: that which he said of that
particular afflictions, is true of others: We should have glorious
reformations, if this rule were well observed; surely, that which is true in
times of affliction, is true out of it, and that which conscience upon ground
judges to be right and good then, is right and good now.

Eighthly, take heed of trusting to your own promises, 8.
that you have made to God for obedience, rather then to his promises that he
has made to you for assistance.

Ninthly, often call your self to account after the 9.
affliction is over; What is become of it? how was it with me then? and how is
it now? have I more peace now, then I had then? and how comes it about? Has my
peace grown upon good grounds, so as it may-hold? I had workings of Spirit
then, what are become of them? have I been faithful to God, and to mine own
soul? And thus we have finished this doctrine of affliction, which by Gods
ordinance is the portion of his people in this world. They have been, are, and
shall be an afflicted people.

CHAP. X. Wicked men have pleasures in ways of sin, while Gods people endure
much hardship in ways of holiness.
THe second point is, that God sometimes gives wicked men pleasure in the ways
of sin, whilst Doct. 2.
he suffers his own people to endure much affliction. The Israelites make the
brick, and are under sore bondage, and the Egyptians dwell in houses, living in
jollity and mirth. Thus it was with Elijah, he must fly for his life, and live
in caves, and be fed by ravens, whilst four hundred false prophets are fed
deliciously at Jezabels table. While the King and Haman sits drinking in the
city, Shushan is in perplexity, Esther 3. 15. Job says of the wicked, That Job
21. 10. 13.
they take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ, they
spend their time in wealth; but of himself he says, that his calamity was
heavier then the sand of the sea, that the arrows of the Almighty were within
him, that the poison of them drank up his spirit, that the terrors of God did
set themselves in battle array against him. Chap. 6. 1, 2, 3. And David says of
the wicked, that they are not in trouble as other men, their eyes stands out
with fatness, they have more then their heart could wish; but for himself, all
the day long he was plagued, and chastened every morning, Psalm. 73. Christ
tells his Disciples, the world shall rejoice, but they shall have trouble.

But why does God thus suffer wicked men, to enjoy their pleasure thus in the
ways of sin? Quest.


First, here is their portion, they are never like to have any other
consolation, but that they have here, Answ. 1. Why the wicked prosper in this
world
here is their All. This is as it were their Kingdom; They are upon their own
dunghill.

Secondly, God has time enough hereafter to torment them, to make sin bitter
unto them, and 2.
therefore he does not care though they have their pleasure, and go on for a
while in the enjoyment of their delights: And God has time enough to glorify
his Saints, to give them everlasting consolation, and therefore although here
they be cut short of the pleasures of the flesh, God does not regard that.

Thirdly, God hereby would show to all the world, his own fullness, and how
little he esteems of these 3.
carnal things; they are but bones, therefore he gives them to dogs; they are
but swill, even the very cream of them, therefore he lets swine have them.
Luther in his Comment upon Genesis, cap. 21. has a notable vilifying
expression of the great things of the Turcicum Imperium quantum quantu^ est
nihil est nisi panis mica quam dives pater familias projicit ca nibus.
world, which God gives to wicked men; The Turkish Empire, says he, as great as
it is, it is but a crust of bread, which the rich master of the family casts to
dogs: When retainers, when dogs have such allowance, it is a sign of a great
deal of plenty in the house.

Fourthly, God grants pleasure and prosperity in just judgment to them, to
ripen their sin, to harden them in it. The Sunshine of prosperity ripens the
Luth. in Genesis cap. 21.
sins of the wicked apace, and so fits them for destruction; this hardens them
against the ways of God, it makes them bless themselves in their way, They
spend their days in wealth, therefore they say to God, depart from us, we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways; What is the Almighty, that we should
serve Job 21. 13, 14. Nulla verior miseriae quam falsa laetitia. Bern. Tract.
de gratia and lib. Arbit.
him? There is no truer misery, then false joy, says Bernard. There is a great
difference between the prosperity of the wicked, and that which the godly have;
God carries his people when he exalts them, as the Eagle her young upon her
wings, he exalts them to safety, according to that expression that we have, Job
5. 11. that those which mourn, may be exalted to safety; but when God exalts
the wicked, he lifts them up as the Eagle lifts up her prey in her talons, he
lifts them up to destroy them. It was a speech of Augustine upon the 26 Psalm;
Many are Multi amando res noxias suni miseri, habendo miseriores.
miserable, by loving hurtful things, but they are more miserable by having
them; it is not what men enjoy, but the principle from whence it comes, that
makes them happy. August in Psalm. 26.


Fifthly, God is a patient God, and in the day of his patience, even the wicked
are suffered to enjoy their hearts desire.

Obj. But it may be said, God is patient toward his Obj.
people, and yet they are afflicted.

Answ. Those afflictions that come upon Gods people, may better stand with the
glory of patience, then Answ.
if the same things should be upon the wicked, because in the afflictions of
the Saints, there is no revenge, there is no hatred in them, but if God should
inflict the same things upon the wicked, they would come out of revenge against
them, and hatred of them, and so there would not be such manifestation of that
glory of patience, that God has to manifest here in this world.

Hence let Gods people learn not to be greedy in Use 1. Ne magni pendamus
terrenam faelicitatem quae malis etiam perunque conceditur. August. lib. 2. de
civ. Dei. c. 23.
their desires after outward pleasures; they are but the portion of dogs and
reprobates. It is true, godly men may have them, but never as their portion,
God has afforded you better pleasures, has he not reserved better things for
you? As when we enjoy outward prosperity, we must not bless our selves in it,
because it is that which wicked men have; so when we are afflicted, our hearts
must not be dejected, because we are only deprived of that, which God gives
most many times to those that he hates most. God will keep his people from
being prevailed against by this temptation. David was in this temptation, Psalm.
73. but he says, verse 23. that God held him by his right hand: When men see
how the world lives in pleasure, and the Saints are afflicted, they are in
danger of stumbling, but God holds his own by his right hand, that they fall
not.

Secondly, let us learn, not to envy the men of the world, who live in
pleasures, who wallow in the sensual delights of this life. The reason why they
take so much delight in such things, is, because they know no better, they seek
after no better.

Ambrose in his first Book de officiis, brings in Cur impi^ leta^tur cur
luxuriantur? cur etiam ipsi non mecum laborant? Non subscripserint ad coronam.
Veni nobis. cum, etc. Laborate vos, sine nobis coronae gloria^, si viceritis
vindi cabitis. Ambros. li. 1. offic c. 16.
godly men objecting thus, Why do the wicked rejoice? why do they riot it out?
why do not they labor as well as I? He answers, They have not put in for the
crown; yea, says he, if you object thus, the wicked may answer you as the
spectators in their Olympiack games, if those that labor and wrestle in them,
should call the spectators, and say, Come you, and labor, and strive here as
well as we; the spectators would answer, You without us shall get the glory of
the crown, if you overcome.

Besides, there is little cause we should envy all their jollity, they must
give an account for it, and dear. When a Soldier was to dye for taking a bunch
of grapes against the Generals command, and going to execution he went eating
his grapes, one of his fellows rebuked him, What, are you eating your grapes
now? The poor man answers, I pray thee friend do not envy me these grapes, for
they cost me dear; so they did indeed, for they cost him his life: and so will
these vain delights of wicked men, they will cost them their lives.

And yet further consider, ere long things will turn, Gods people shall have
pleasure, and the world shall have afflictions: Affliction did I say? nay,
Misery with torment; time is at hand, when it shall be said to every wicked
man, Son, remember in thy life time thou had pleasure, and my servants who
walked faithfully with me had affliction, but now thou art tormented, and they
are comforted. Time is at hand when that Scripture shall be fulfilled, Esaias 65.
13, 14. Behold, my servants shall eat, and ye shall be hungry; my servants
shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty; Use 3.
my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed; my servants shall sing for
joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation
of spirit.

Thirdly, let not wicked men bless themselves in the enjoyment of their
pleasures; you have no other then thousands have had before you, who are now in
Hell. If that you have were of any great worth, you might be sure you should
not have it; if you knew how the Lord brings about your destruction by your
pleasures, you would have little cause to rejoice in them; Haman rejoiced, when
Esther invited him rather then others to the banquet, but if he had known that
in his banquet there was a snare laid for his life, his heart would have fallen,
it would have been but a sad banquet to him: certainly there is a great deal of
evil, and misery, and wrath, in being suffered to go on with delight and
pleasure in a sinful way.

Parcitur virga quonia^ invenitur iniquitas ejus ad odiu^ utique non ad ira^:
he calls it misericordiam omni indignatione crudeliorem. Ber. declamat. Ecce
reliquim^ omnia.
Bernard says, when God spares men in a sinful way, it is because God is not
only angry with men, but hates them, he calls his mercy more cruel then all
indignation. Origin in his Sermon upon Ex. 20. quotes Vis audire indigna^tis
dei terribi lem vocem? audi quod dicit per prophetam, Non visitabo super filias
vestras, etc. hoc est terribile, hoc est extremum, cum non corriprimur,
propeccat is. Orig.
that place, Hos. 4. 14. I will not punish your daughters when they commit
whoredom; and he has this pathetical expression upon it, God chastises every
soul whom he loves: but would you hear the terrible voice of Gods indignation,
hear him by the Prophet Hosea, when he had reckoned up many wicked Hom. 8. in
Exodus 20.
things which the people had committed, and he adds this, I will not visit your
daughters when they commit whoredom; this is terrible, this is in the height.
And O infoelices and miseros quando relinquit Deus homines sibi ipsis, nec
resistit eoru^ furori and cupidi. tatibus, sed vae illis ad quoru^ peccata
connivet Deus. Luther in Genesis c. 37. Infoelicitatis est adversa neseire;
miseru^ tejudico quod non fuisti miser Ierom ad amicum. aegrot.
Bernard speaking of the same thing, in the 42 Sermon upon the Canticles, At
the hearing only of this, says he, I tremble, then God is most angry, when he
shows no anger; God keep me from this mercy, this kind of mercy is worse then
all anger.

Luther has an expression much like, upon the 37. of Genesis, O unhappy, and
miserable men, whom God leaves to themselves, not resisting their lusts; woe to
them whose sins God seems to wink at. And Jerome writing to a sick friend, has
this expression, I account it a part of unhappiness, not to know adversity, I
judge you to be miserable, because you have not been miserable. Bernard in his
Book de consolat. cap. 3. Freedom from punishment, is the mother of security,
the stepmother of virtue, the poison of Religion, the moth of holiness. Yea,
this was seen by the purblinde eyes of the Heathen. Seneca in his fourth
Chapter of his Book of Providence, has the same words, that before was said of
Jerome, I Impunitas ^ecuritatis matter, virtutum noverca, religionis virus,
tenia sanctitatis. Ber. Nihil nihi videtur infilicias eo cui nihil unquam
evenit adversi. apud. Sen. de. Prove.
judge him miserable, that was never miserable. And Demetrius, Nothing seems
more unhappy to me, then he to whom no adversity has happened. It were easy
to multiply abundance in this kind; it may be, testimonies of men may have
some force to prevail with such, who are given up by God to their pleasures, to
the enjoyment of earthly prosperity, and sensual delights; certainly they are
not so happy as they judge themselves to be; that which God denies to another
in mercy, he may give thee in wrath. And thus much for this. I come to that
which is a main thing in Moses choice.

CHAP. XI. Afflicted godliness, is better then delightful wickedness.
NOtwithstanding both these, though Gods Doct. 3.
people are afflicted, and the wicked have pleasure; yet, afflicted godliness,
is better then delightful wickedness. It is better to join with Gods people in
a way of godliness, in all afflictions, then to enjoy all the pleasures that
possibly any man in the world can have, in any way of sin: the tears Dulciores
lacrymae orautium quam gaudia theatrorum. Aug. in Psalm. 128.
of the godly, are better then all the jollities of the wicked: it is an
expression of an Ancient, The very tears of those that are seeking of God, are
more sweet, then the joys that any have in the world; the worst part of
godliness, is better then the best part of any way of sin: though Christ be a
crucified Christ, and bring never such afflictions, hard things to his people,
yet he is more delightful to them, then all the pleasures that are in the
earth, and delightful in another way. It is a notable speech Luther has, I had
rather fall with Christ, then stand with Caesar; Malem ruere cum Christo quam
stare cum Caesarare. Luth.
rather suffer any thing in the world with Christ, then stand and enjoy all the
pleasure of Caesar's Court.

Thus a godly man, a gracious heart considering and musing of things, and
laying one thing with another, had rather have affliction with the people of
God, then enjoy all the pleasures of the world for a season. Now the main work
in this point, is to show unto you, how a godly heart does reason with its
self, and cast about its self, as it were to bring himself, and his thoughts to
this issue, to choose rather afflicted godliness, then all the pleasure of sin.

First, it casts about what the ways of godliness Why afflicted godliness is
preferred before delightful wickedness.
are.

Secondly, what those afflictions are that do attend the ways of godliness.

Thirdly, it casts about what the ways of sin are, and what the afflictions and
pleasures are, that do attend upon them, and puts them into a balance, and
compares them both together, and so makes its choice.

First, a gracious heart considers the ways of godliness. 1.
If I walk in them, then I walk with God, I live to the honor of the blessed
God, who is infinitely worthy of all honor and praise from his Creature; those
ways are the ways of infinite wisdom, they are the ways of holiness, of
righteousness, in those ways I attain to that end for which I was made.

Secondly, in those ways I enjoy peace, peace of 2.
conscience to my soul; whatsoever trouble I meet withal abroad, I am sure I
shall have peace within: a little with outward peace, is better then a great
deal where outward peace is wanting; Eccles. 4. 6. Better is a handful with
quietness, then both the hands full with travel, and vexation of spirit: A
little with outward quiet, is better then a great deal with vexation; if a man
be in a quiet family, a little there, is better then to be where there is a
great deal with frowardness and vexation; surely, a little is better with
inward peace, with peace of conscience, then a great deal without; wherefore
these ways wherein I walk with Gods people, though the world may rage and
persecute, I shall have joy in my own spirit; A good conscience will be a
continual feast: while they rail, conscience will encourage.

Thirdly, again, when I walk in these ways, my soul 3.
shall enjoy the love of God, and that little I have, I shall have it in love,
and from the love of God; Now thy love, O Lord, is better then wine, better
then all the comforts of the world. The Lord satisfies his people with love, as
with marrow and fatness; a little that the soul has that comes from the love
of God, by virtue of a promise, how sweet is it? how sweet is sleep when it
comes from that promise? Thou will give thy beloved sleep, and all comes this
way; I have all in the love of God, though I have but a little in the world,
and though I be in affliction, and am short of that which others have.

Fourthly, and in those ways, my soul shall enjoy 4.
communion with God; God will let out himself to me in a gracious manner, he
will reveal the secrets of heavenly joys to my soul, and one beam of the light
of his face, is more worth then all the world, and is able to carry through all
the hardships of the world. My soul shall have communion with Jesus Christ; and
Cursed is that man, says that noble Marquess Galeacius, that counts all the
world comparable to one days enjoyment of communion with Christ.

Fifthly, while I walk in these ways, I shall be safe 5.
for eternity, I shall not be in danger there; and when the fear of eternity
falls upon the heart, it sees it is a most dreadful thing to miscarry to
eternity; the thoughts of eternity work mightily upon my spirit, let me be safe
for eternity, whatsoever become of me in these ways. It is reported of one
Myrogenes, when great gifts were sent unto him, he sent them back, I only
desire this one thing at your Masters hand, to pray for me, that I may be saved
for eternity. Now in these ways of godliness, I shall walk with God, I shall
have peace of conscience, I shall have that I have in love, I shall enjoy
communion with the Father, with Christ, and with the holy Ghost; and I shall be
safe for eternity: surely there can be no evil that can countervail this good,
whatsoever I suffer, whatsoever I endure in this world, yet my soul shall say,
It is good for me to draw near to God; sure I shall choose, and like well of
the ways of godliness, whatsoever I endure.

But you look only upon the best side of godliness, Obj.
but turn the other side, you shall find a great many afflictions that attend
the ways of godliness, and when you see them, you will not be so in love with
these ways. A gracious heart is willing to examine both sides.

What are the afflictions you speak of, that will discourage Answ.
any from delighting in Gods ways?

First, they are but such as are upon the body, those 1.
things that do afflict the godly are bodily things, they do therefore but
bring pain and trouble to this carcass, to this body of clay, to this lump of
earth, to this body of sin, to that body that is to be beaten down in this
world: to that body of vileness, for (...).
so it is called, Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change our vile body; in the Original
it is, this body of vileness. It was the speech of a Heathen, when as by the
Tyrant he was commanded to be put into a mortar, and be beaten to pieces with
an Iron pestel, he cries out to his persecutors, You do but beat the vessel of
Anaxarchus, you do not beat me, You do but beat the Case Clem. Alex storm p.
496. ^unde vasculum Anaxar^hi. Or as others have it, ^^psam Anaxarchi.
and Vessel, that contains another thing; yea, the word in the Greek, that
Clemens Alex: has, relating the Story, signifies a husk; his body was to him
but as a husk: A Heathen counted his body but the Case, the husk; he counted
his soul himself: If a man had a precious Jewel in a Case, and the Case was
torn in pieces, and the Jewel be safe, it is no matter; and so by all these
afflictions a gracious heart knows, it is but the Case that is torn in pieces,
the Jewel is safe. Fear not, says Christ, those that can kill the body, and do
no more; Christ would have us know, afflictions that do but reach the body, are
but slight things.

And for these troubles, let them be the most terrible that can be, they are
such as may stand with Gods love, the dearest of Gods love, such as the dearest
of Gods people have met withal: says God in Jeremiah, I gave the dearly beloved
of my soul, into the hands of her enemies. Indeed if they were such as could
not fall, but from Gods hatred, it were another matter; but they may stand with
Gods love, yea, with the very same love wherewithal God the Father did love
Jesus Christ, and would you have better love then that? you may be sure that
all your afflictions that you do endure for godliness, and the ways of
godliness, they are not such but you may have them in the same love that God
loved Jesus Christ, and one would think that were enough to satisfy any soul
in the world. John 17. ult. there Christ prays, that his Disciples might be
loved, with the same love wherewith he was loved: now notwithstanding the love
of the Father to the Son, he was afflicted, and suffered as much trouble, as
you are like to suffer; and if you in suffering may be in no worse case then he
was, and may have the same love that he had, notwithstanding your sufferings,
sure your sufferings are no great matter; there is no more evil in your
sufferings, then may stand with the love of God to your souls, the same love
wherewith God loved Christ: and if a soul knows this, it will not be
discouraged from the ways of godliness, notwithstanding afflictions: indeed if
in affliction there were the venom of Gods wrath, and the curse of the Law, it
were something, but the sting and venom is taken out, and there is no great
evil.

Again, these afflictions that the world so speak of, they may not only stand
with Gods dearest love, but are such as may proceed from Gods dearest love; as
thus, they may come as fruits of the love of God, and therefore sure they are
no great discouragements from the ways of godliness; you heard what abundance
of good God brought out of the afflictions of his people, and therefore there
may be abundance of love from whence they come, they may be only but to fit,
and square, and fashion the soul, to be fit to be laid in the highest place of
new Jerusalem: The stones that are laid below in some mean place, are not hewed
and hacked, as the stones that are in the highest part of the building, or the
forefront of the building, to the view of all; those that are most for the
beauty of the building, are most hacked, and framed; and so those that God does
intend to be the most beautiful stones in that glorious Temple that is in
Heaven, God suffers them here to be fashioned and hacked, most afflicted, and
therefore they may come from love.

Besides, they are no great matter, take them at the worst, they are but little
things; these light afflictions: there is no such grievous burden in them, as
the world thinks there is, for there is the hand of Christ, to hold them up in
all their afflictions: they are but such things, as rather seem grievous then
are grievous indeed, as Heb. 12. 11. No chastening for the present seems to
be joyous, but grievous; they are things that are grievous in appearance, and
in show only, rather then in truth; as the prosperity of the wicked is but in
show, so the affliction of Gods people are rather shows, they do rather seem
grievous, then have any realty of grief in them, and therefore they are not so
much to be feared.

Again, they are but for a little time, but for a moment: 5.
As it was the speech of Athanasius, when he was banished, and his friends came
to bewail his misery, says he, It is but a little cloud, and will quickly
Nuhecula est, cito transibit.
be gone: All the time of the rage and malice of wicked men, is but as an hour;
says Christ, This is their hour, and the power of darkness; it is but an hour,
and is quickly gone. Christ's sufferings both in himself and in his Church, is
but drinking of the brook, not a spring of water for perpetuity.

Besides, the afflictions of Gods people are in their 6.
season; it is now the very season to be afflicted, and shall we be troubled to
have affliction in its season? this time of our life is appointed for this end,
it is our winter time; will a man be troubled to see frost and snow in winter
time? It is better to see frost and snow in winter time, then to see the corn
blooming or earing in January and February: so while we are in the body, the
winter of affliction is in season, it is not the time to be delivered from
affliction now, that is hereafter, and therefore why should we be troubled that
we meet with affliction?

Lastly, these afflictions that you say will discourage, 7.
they will bring forth a gracious end, they are but as a dark entry into your
Fathers house, a dirty lane to a Palace; do but shut your eyes, and there will
be a change, and as a Martyr said, Though we have an ill breakfast, we shall
have a good dinner: Now put all these together, what great matter is there to
discourage any from the ways of God?

But now come to the other part: A gracious heart Misery of a sinful way.
discourses of the ways of sin, what if I should choose the pleasure of sin,
and should go on that way? 1. If I go on in those ways, I shall be sure to go
on in a way of direct opposition against the God of all the world, and so
treasure up to my self the wrath of an infinite God. And is it nothing for a
poor creature to go on in a way of opposition and enmity to an infinite Diety?
how much better were it for me if I had never been born, then thus to do? 2. I
shall be sure to have no peace in those ways, in my own spirit, in conscience;
I shall have within me a conscience galling, girding, and lashing of me, the
worm gnawing of my heart, my conscince continually damping of my soul, telling
of me, Surely I am not in those ways an immortal soul should walk in; I shall
never have any pleasure, but when my conscience shall be stopped; and what
cursed pleasure is this for a man that he can never have it, but only when he
can stop his conscience? if his conscience had but the mouth open, he could not
have pleasure, and all the pleasure that he has, he must steal it at that
time, when his conscience is asleep, he can never have it upon other terms; if
a man's conscience be enlightened, and awaked, it is impossible to have pleasure
in the ways of sin: it is poor living, when a servant or child can get no
victuals, but as they steal it, when the master or mistress is asleep, or is on
the to side; and so it is poor pleasure that the world has, when it must be
stolen when conscience is asleep; What good is it for a man to have a broken
leg, and a silken stocking? and what great content is it for a man to have
outward pleasure, and inward dampings of spirit?

3. Again, in these ways of sin, as I shall have no peace, so do what I can, I
shall have some trouble in spite of my heart; let me go on in the ways of sin
as I will, and seek for my contentment, I shall have some trouble in spite of
me; and how grievous will that trouble be, that shall come with the curse of
God, and the wrath of God, and the hatred of God? what shall I have to support
me in trouble? A little water in a leaden vessel is heavy, so a little trouble
in an evil conscience.

4. And in these ways of sin, I shall be sure to be a stranger from God, never
to know what any communion with God means, go up and down in the world as a
forlorn, forsaken creature of God; that when as others of Gods people have
communion with God, and with Christ, and have the light of Heaven, and the joy
of Angels, I shall be set to my swill.

5. And as for my eternal estate, I shall hazard to miscarry therein; and oh my
soul, do know what it is to miscarry to eternity? Surely there need be some
great matter, that should procure the least peace to a man in the way of sin,
much more to procure delight to a man.

But you will say, You take sin at the worst side at Obj.
first, sin has a delightful side, and that will please you, and allure you,
though the other would not; therefore let us see the fairest side of sin; a
gracious heart will look on every side.

The pleasures that you speak of, what are they? Answ.
are they not fleshly? only reach to the sensual part? 1.
What, must God, Heaven, eternal life be neglected for these? What shall that
body, that must within a while be gnawn on by worms, and lie rotting as a
filthy carcass, now be so regarded, now have such content given to it, as all
that is to be had in God and Jesus Christ, must be neglected for it? When thou
shall hereafter at the great Day meet with this wretched carcass of thine, and
see how vile it is, what confusion will be upon thee? when thou shall think,
Was this the vile carcass that must have such content, for which God, and
Heaven, and all the good in Christ is now lost for ever?

Secondly, it has been the care of all Gods dearest servants to keep down
their bodies, to deny contentment 2.
to the flesh, and will thou give it all the content thou can? Daniel was
afraid of taking liberty to his flesh, in eating the Kings meat; and the time
when he had his, (...) heavenly visions, he ate no pleasant bread, neither came
flesh nor wine in his mouth, neither did he anoint himself at all. You know the
mean provision that John the Baptist, the Forerunner of Christ had, his fare
was locusts and wild honey, and yet there was not a greater born of a woman
before him. St. Paul was careful to beat down his body, to club it down, even
till it was black and blew, so the word signifies. Timothy although he was (...)
sickly, yet would not take liberty to drink a little wine, but only water,
till Paul wrote to him; and in that liberty there was but a little granted, and
that for his stomachs sake, and his often infirmities, not for his lusts sake,
and to maintain riotousness. If I should tell you of the mean provision for the
flesh, that many of the Ancients, who were the most worthy instruments of God,
the most eminent in all true excellency, were contented withal, and that before
the superstition of Popery prevailed, it would be even incredible unto you.

Basil in an Epistle to Julian mentions the mean fare he and others with him
lived withal, he ate no flesh, they had need of no Cook, the leaves of plants,
and a little bread, was all their provision. And Jerome reports of Hilarion,
that he never ate any thing before the Sun went down, and that which at any
time he ate was very mean: From the fifteenth year of his Ut coctum iccepisse
luxuria sit. Ep. 22. ^d Eustochium. Hoc me docuisti, ut tanquam medicamenta,
sic alimenta sumpturus iccedam. August. l: to Conf.
age to the twentieth, his only diet was fifteen dried figs a day; for three
years after that, only bread and water; for nine years together, six ounces of
barley bread in a day; yet he lived till he was fourscore years old. And Jerome
himself lived exceedingly abstemiously, with cold water, and a few dried figs,
so that by him, and others with whom he lived, to eat any thing boiled, was
even accouted luxury. And Augustine has such an expression concerning himself;
Thou Lord have taught me this, that I should go to my meat as to a medicine: He
meant not to satisfy his appetite, but to repair nature. Sicut ad crucem, sic
acced as ad cibum nunqua^ voluptate sed necessitate, Bern. form. hon. vit. c. 9
Cum quid a^ interrogasset Platonem, Unde, tibi sapientia tanta? respondit plus
olei consumpsi in la^pade, quam vini in calice. Miror si is quicqua^ in laudem
and decus reipubliae praestare posset. Pinguis venture non gignet tenuem sensum.
Bern. de ord. vit.


And amongst the Heathen likewise, such as have been most eminent with them,
have been most above sensual pleasures. When one asked Plato, how he got so
much knowledge, his answer was, I have spent more oil in the Lamp then wine in
the cup. We read of Cato, seeing a Roman who pampered his belly, had this
speech of him, Wonder if this man ever do any thing for the honor or good of
the Commonwealth. These who provide so much for their bellies, have their
brains sunk down into the quagmire of their bellies. Their parts, those common
gifts of understanding they were wont to have, are now as the light of a snuff
sunk into the socket, even drowned with the filth of their lusts, and what are
such as these fit for? A fat belly, says Bernard, seldom produces any witty
invention.

Thirdly, what are these pleasures, but such as may stand with the infinite
hatred of God, such as reprobates have had as large a portion in, as thou
can? And art thou so eager upon that, which is no other portion then a
Reprobate may have? To have no other portion then a beast may have, is low
enough; but to have no other then a reprobate may have, is lower: How many are
now in Hell under the eternal hatred of the infinite God, who when they lived,
had as much pleasure as ever thou have had, or ever shall have? as many merry
meetings, sat it out in drinkings, gamings, riot, chambering, wantonness,
sports, pastimes; now what pleasure is it to them to think what mirth and
jollity once they had?

Fourthly, take them at the best, yet they are such, as the excellency of true
virtue consists in the moderation Initium bonae mentis non gaudere vanis.

Nulla major voluptas quan voluptatis fastidium. Tertul. despect.

Vides conviviu^ peccatores: interrogaje us conscientia^. Noune gravius omnibus
foetet sepulchris? Intuer is laetitiam ejus and salubritatem corporis, filiorum
atque opum ^bandantiam: introspiceulcera, vibices anime cjus, cordisque
maestitudinem. Amb. offic. l. 1. c. 12.


of them, yea, in the raising the heart above them, so as to disdain and
contemn them, if they would come in as our portion; certainly if they were the
highest good, the glory of virtue would be in expatiating the heart toward
them, in letting out the heart fully to them, in enlarging the heart in
enjoyment of them, in satisfying the heart in the sweetness received from them;
but it is otherwise, much of the commendation of virtue, has been in the
ability to moderate affections toward them, to deny themselves in them. It is
the beginning of a good mind, says Seneca, not to rejoice in vain things. Yea,
there is no greater pleasure, says Tertullian, then the contempt of pleasures.

Fifthly, there is much evil in sensual pleasures; as,

First, there is much mixture of much inward sadness, many damps of heart; in
the midst of laughter the heart is sad. Ambrose has a notable expression for
this, Thou see, says he, the wicked man's feasting, but question with his
conscience, does not that stink more filthily then any sepulcher? thou see
his joy, his lustiness, thou wondrest at the abundance of his riches, children;
but look within, and see the wounds, the strokes of his soul, the sadness of
his heart.

Secondly, they keep out better delights then themselves: There is an
opposition between them and 2.
spiritual delights. Those who long after the onyons Divina consolatio
delicata, and non datur admittentibus alienam. Bern.
of Egypt, cannot taste the spiritual Manna: Divine comfort is a delicate
thing, says Bernard, and it is not given to him that admits any other.

Thirdly, there is a mixture of a curse with them: What good is there in having
a brave suit with the 3.
plague in it? Is not plain russet or leather better that is free? What delight
is there in feeding upon dainty dishes sweetly poisoned? Is not mean wholesome
fare rather to be desired? We read of Agrippina, in poisoning her husband
Claudius, she tempered it in the meat he most delighted in; poison in wine
works more furiously then in water: Poor men who are wicked, have Gods curse
mingled with the water of their poverty; and rich men who are wicked, have Gods
curse mingled with the wine of their prosperity. 4. Basil de Ingluv. and
cbrietate, concio. 16. Quod quidem eos fecisse ad significandum quod voluptuosa
craut causa mortis and sepulchri. (...), Intemperautes.(...), Valetudinarios.
Cl. Alex paed l. 2. c. 1. (...). Cl. Al. ib. Chrysostom. Phil. 3. Ser. 14.


Fourthly, there is much bodily evil comes in by these, they make the bodies of
men cinques of filth, and all manner of loathsome diseases. Basil has an
expression of the evil of intemperance, that it turns men into mire and dirt,
and makes men like vessels, rotten and putrified, fit for no use. The Romans
were wont to have their funerals at the gates of Venus Temple: This they did,
says Plutarch, to signify that lust was the hastner of death. And Clemens
Alexandrinus observes, that the Graecians called the intemperate, and those who
wanted health, by the same name, only with difference of one letter, to show
the great affinity there is between intemperance and sickness: And again in the
same place, he says, The Graecians call Gluttony by the name of Bellyphrensie;
for what greater madness, then for a short brutish pleasure to lose the comfort
of continual health, and endure the long and tedious pains of sickness, and
miserable torturing diseases? what a folly is it to fill a Ship with water, and
then to hire pumps to pump it out; so by intemperance, to fill our bodies with
noisome humors, and then to hire Damthiho minem sanum qui pinguescit et
laboribus caret, non invenies: nam licet sexcentorum melicorum turba ad^eniat a
morbis illum nequa qua^ liberare poterunt. Chapter in Act. 7. hom. 17. Nemo est
dignus nomine hominis qui unum diem velit esse in voluptate. Cicero lib. 2 de
Fin. Plut. in Lacon. Apoph l. 1 Arist. ethic l. 1. c. 5. Praeclare M. Tul. Si
nemo est quin emori malit quam converti in aliquam figuram bestiae, quamvis
hominis sit mentem habiturus, quanto est miscrius in hominis figura animo esse
efferato? Lact. l. 5. c. 11.
Physicians to purge them out? Chrysostom in his Sermon upon the third to the
Philippians, demands, What do men gain by their riches, but drunkenness,
gluttony, and absurd pleasures of all sorts, which do more hurt and torment us,
then most cruel Masters their slaves and bondmen? Give me, says he, a
voluptuous man that is idle, that has his health, you cannot find one; though
he had many hundred Physicians, it would not be.

Fifthly, There is an evil of soul-abasement, they make men become vile. Cicero
a Heathen, thought not that man worthy of the name of a man, who spent a whole
day together in sensual pleasures. And Plutarch tells of Agesilaus, that he
cast off voluptuous pleasures to his slaves, as better beseeming a base quality
and servile nature, then himself. Thou may think to live in pleasure is a
brave life, but it is the basest life that is; so God judges it: Hence the
same word which the Scripture uses for the sensual glutton, Deuteronomy. 21. 20. is
used for a vile person, Jer. 15. 19. the word is the same in the Hebrew.
Luxurious sporting people have high conceits of themselves, as if they lived
the only brave lives, but 2 Pet. 2. 13. they are called spots and blemishes,
for they are indeed base, the most base spirited men that live. These do most
vilely lowre man's nature, they are infinitely beneath the happiness of an
immortal soul.

The Heathen accounted a life of pleasure, a life of beasts: What man would not
rather dye, says Tully, cited by Lactantius, then to be turned into the form of
a beast, though he should retain the mind of a Tribulatio est aqua salsa quae
scabiem purgat, abstergit. Haecscabies luxurla est; delectabar scalpi scabiem
libidinum mearum. Facit animam humanam ulcerosam, sanie abominabili,
defluentem, propter hoc Deo Deo incred i biliter abominabilem.
man? How much more miserable is it for one to be in the form of a man, and to
have the mind of a beast, yea, of a wild beast? Guliel. Parisiensis calls
luxury a scab, and says, the salt water of tribulation must purge it; and he
brings in Augustine giving the same name unto it, confessing that he was wont
to delight in the scab of his lusts. This scab, says Parisiensis, makes the
mind of man ulcerous, running with filthy putrified stuff, and abominable to
God, above that, that any man would think, which no bodily filth does.

Sixthly, The evil of nourishing of all manner of wickedness: All sin in
Scripture is called flesh, and the work of the flesh, because the pleasure of
the flesh is the cause of so much sin in us. When Christ spoke of the servant
who gave himself to riotousness in his Masters absence, he calls him the evil
servant. There are swarms of all manner of evils in sensual hearts; they are the
fennish grounds, that breed filthy poysonsom creatures; so all venemous-lusts
are In locis dormit humentibus, hoc est in omnibus lelitiis madentibus; propter
quod Luc. 11. dicitur quod immundus spiritus ambulans per loca arid^ and
inaquosa quaerens requiem and non invenit, G. Par. de morribus p. 129.
bred and nourished by these, Job 40. 21. it is said, the Behemoth lies in the
fens, which Guliel. Parisiensis applies to the Devil in sensual hearts; he lies
in moist places, says he; that is, in those whose spirits are moistened by
their lusts: Wherefore it is said of the unclean spirit, That he walks in dry
places; seeking rest, and found none; But, says he, men giving themselves to
pleasures, they seek what they can to give the Devil rest in their hearts, and
to keep off all that may hinder his quiet. Flies and Wasps use to come to honey
and sugar, and such sweet things: The Devil who is called Beelzebub, that is,
the God of flies, loves to be in souls glutted with sensual pleasures, Honestum
ci vile cui corpus nimis carum est. Senecop. 14. Kegno. voluptatis virtus non
potest consistere. Cicero de senectute.
yea swarms of Devils love to follow such: Hence such as these are most
desperate enemies unto godliness, contemners and scorners of all Religion; That
which is honest, is vile and contemptible to him, who makes too much of his
body, says a Heathen; Where pleasures reign, virtue connot be, says another.
When the Jews accuse Christ of the worst their malice could devise, they call
him a Wine-bibber.

Seventhly, they likewise harden in all manner of evil; when men are heat in
sensual delights, their 7.
hearts are so glutted, that they never think of their pain. It is observed,
that when the people of Israel had got Aaron to make the Calf, and they set
down to drink, and rose up to play, they offered burnt-offerings, but no
sin offerings were thought of: These beset the heart, and make it even
incapable of any spiritual good. St. Paul says of the Widows that live in
pleasures, they are dead while they live, 1 Timothy 5. 6. Let us eat and drink, to
morrow we shall dye: Why do you say, to morrow? says Chrysostom, ye are dead
already. We read Ezekiel. 47. 11. that when the waters of the sanctuary flowed,
the miry places could not be healed: How seldom does the waters of the
Sanctuary heal miry souls? Augustine says of such, As the earth by too much
rain becomes nothing but Aug. de. vitanda ebriet.
mire and dirt, so as it is made unfit for tillage; so these, Whoredom, and
wine, and new wine, take away the heart, Hos. 4. 11.

Who are the most desperate enemies to the Cross of Christ, but such whose God
is their belly, Phil. 3. 18, 19. Who are they that cannot cease from sin, but
such as sport themselves with their own deceivings, Vae, v. e tibt Clerice,
mors in olla mors in ollis carniam, mors in hujusmodi delitiis est. Bern.
Declamat. Ecce, Reliquimus omnia.
while they feast amongst you, having eyes full of adultery? 2 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
Who are those that are wholly void of the Spirit, and even incapable of it?
such as walk after their own ungodly lusts, and sensual, Jude 18, 19. Who are
they that say to God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways,
but such as take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ,
and spend their days in wealth? Job 21. 11, 12, 13. Pleasures do not so much
delight the flesh, as they endanger the soul; therefore better it is a great
deal to be preserved in brine, then to rot in honey, to be fed upon the salt
marshes, and short commons, and to live, then to be glutted in rank pastures,
and so fatted up for destruction. Timenda sunt Christianis praesentis seculi
gaulia Chrysostom de Martyr. Sermon. 7.


And thus you see the evil of them, whereupon Chrysostom in one of his Sermons
concerning the Martyrs, The joys of this present world are to be feared by
Christians; and certainly so they are, rather then to be desired.

Sixthly, if there were not so much evil, yet they 6.
are vain flashy things, there is no reality in them, they Creed mihi res
severa est gaudiu^ veru^. Sen. Quid nobis cu^ fabulis. cum risu? non solum
profusos, sell etiam omnes jocos arbitror declinandos Ber. de Ordin. vitae.
are all res nihili, things of naught. The Heathen could say, Believe me, true
joy is no light thing; but what windy frothy contents are these pleasures to
the flesh? do they leave any sweetness behind them, after they are over? as it
was wont to be said of Plato's feast, his discourse of Philosophy at the table,
though the cheer was mean, was sweet diverse days after: soul-delights leave a
sweet relish in the spirit, after their acts are past; but the day after
fleshly pleasures, what is left but bitter humors in the body, and a sting in
conscience? what wise man can please his thoughts after his pleasures are over,
in thinking what pleasures he has had? much less will any man of wisdom, glory
in what he has eat or drunk, or that he has filled his sensual appetite with
all the delights he could: Who can at night, after a day of sports, and fullness
of delights to the flesh, bless God from his soul, that he has had a day so
full of pleasure in his flesh?

Plutarch in his Morals has an excellent discourse upon this argument, to
prove, that according to the Rules of Epicurus, No man can live a true
pleasurable life; not that by his Rules no man can live a virtuous life, that
perhaps would be granted by many; but that no man can have a life of pleasure
by those Rules, that is the thing that he undertakes to prove, and amongst
other arguments he has these:

First, That it is not probable for any modest and temperate men, to give way
to let their thoughts abide upon any such pleasures, he accounts them so vain
and slight; for the pleasures of the mind, men that are wise and sober,
delight in the thoughts of such.

A second argument that he uses, is, That never, as he says, to this day, were
known any that would offer sacrifice to their God, in thankfulness for the
enjoyment of their pleasures with their Minions; but wise men have offered
sacrifices, in thankfulness for the pleasures of their mind; as he instances
in Pythagoras.

A third argument that he uses, That we never heard of any so given to their
appetite, that would boast of their pleasure, that they had devoured so much,
or given to their lusts, that would boast of their lust, how they had satisfied
it: (although if he lived in these days, he might hear of such men; it seems
men are grown more sensual, then they were in those times) but for the
pleasures of the mind, many would break forth in rejoicing and glorying
expressions, that they had had them: as he instances in Archimedes, when he had
found out a Phylosophical experiment, that he was so filled with joy, that he
ran up and down, crying, I have found it, I have found it.

A fourth argument, That no man would so prize their pleasures in belly-chear,
as to be willing presently to dye, that they might be filled therewith; for the
pleasures of the mind, many have so delighted in them, so prized them, as they
have been willing presently to dye for the enjoyment of them: as he instances
in Eudoxus, who would be willing to be burnt up by the Sun presently, upon
condition he might be admitted to come so near it, as to learn the nature of
it. Thus Heathens could argue against the slightness and vanity of sensual
pleasures, and the solidness and excellency of the pleasures of the mind.

Seventhly, as they are slight for the present, so 7.
they are soon gone, they are not only vain, but vanishing The vani^y of
sensu^l deligh^s.
.

First, they vanish in us, even in the enjoying.

Secondly, they vanish from us, so that we cannot enjoy them long.

For the first, The fashion of this world passes 1.
away, and the lust of it; it does not only pass away at the last, but the
lust of it passes away, before the thing it self be gone. Although at first
sensual things delight, yet within a while they come to be used as necessaries,
not as delights, the delightfulness is over, and yet they cannot be without
them: in this, such are more miserable then other men, for those things that
are superfluous to others, are necessary to them. The more things a man wants
that he cannot be without, the more miserable he is. It is Gods infinite
happiness, that he has need of nothing out of himself: and the less need a
creature has of any thing out of its self, the nearer it comes to happiness:
all their pleasurable things do but serve to make up that imperfection in them,
which is not in others; their pleasures now are but to help against the
diseases of Nature, now these cannot be so delightful as the true natural
delights, that are surable to the principles of Nature, which others enjoy.

But secondly, they vanish from us presently: Solomon compares all the
prosperity of the wicked to 2.
a candle; How soon is the candle of the wicked blown out? All are like a
mountain, yea, like a little hill of snow, that melts away presently. Pleasure
gives us a deadly wound, and is gone, it makes us miserable, and then it leaves
us.

Eighthly, if they should not be soon gone from me, 8.
yet I must be soon gone from them. It were something if thou might abide by
them, and they abide with thee, but within a while, thou and all thy pleasures
together must vanish away, you must be dragged from them, if death draw the
curtains and look in upon thee, then thou must bid a farewell to all; never
laugh more, never have merry meetings more, never be in jollity more; All, All,
now is gone, as the Pope Adrian said, when he was to dye, O my soul, whither
go thou? thou shall never jest it, sport it out more; when thou shall be
called to eternity, then all thy delights will leave thee, and bid thee farewell
for ever: if you should call to them, O now go with me, now I have most need of
you; alas, they cannot, all now is but a shadow, but a dream that is passed
away; Alas, I was made for eternity, and what good is it for me to have such
pleasures for a season? What is it to be jocund, to trifle up and down a year
or two, and there an end? O how doleful will this sound be to you, Your season
is done, you have had your time, it is gone, it is past, and cannot be recalled!

And yet this is not the season neither, that should 9.
be for pleasure. Son, remember in thy life time, thou had thy pleasure; it
should not have been then: St. James, cap. 5. lays it as a great charge upon
those in his time, that they lived in pleasure upon the earth; this is a charge
of folly. This is a time for virtuous actions, to do the great business for
which we were born. It is a notable expression we find in that Tractate, in
Plutarch's Morals, before quoted; he puts this case there: Suppose (says he)
any man were to dye, and either God, or the King, who had power of his life,
should lengthen it out one hour, that he might make use of that hour, either to
do some famous action, or to spend it in pleasure, and when that hour is at an
end, then to dye again; What is it like that this man would do? What, would he
rather have his lust with Lais? (that was in those times a famous Whore) or
would he rather drink strong and delightful Wine? or not rather do some famous
exploit for his Country; as to slay Archias, and to deliver Athens? and he
determines the case; I am persuaded, says he, no man in such a case, but would
rather choose the latter: Surely our lives are in Gods hands, we know not
whither so much as an hour be granted us or not, we may be gone to our long
home the next hour; but what do we choose to do?

Certainly, did we know that our eternity depended upon this little uncertain
time of our lives, we would not think sensual pleasures to be in season now;
this time should be spent, in seeking to make our peace with God, to humble our
souls, to get off the guilt of sin: this is a time of suing out our pardon, of
mourning, of sorrow, and trouble of spirit, and not the time for jollity and
fleshly delights. If a condemned man had two or three days granted him, that he
might sue out his pardon, were that a time for pleasure? and sports? thus it is
with thee, the sentence of death is upon thee, only a little uncertain time is
granted thee to get a pardon; know then what is thy work thou have to do, and
apply thy self to it.

And were it that thou had thy pleasure freely, it were another matter; but
they must all be called for 10.
again and thou must give a strict account for them all; Eccles. 11. 19.
Rejoice O young man in thy youth, walk in the way of thy heart, and in the sight
of thine eyes, live after thy lusts, and do what thou will; a thing that young
men love as their lives: it is an Ironical confession: but remember withal,
there must be an account for these things; know then this is certain, it is no
fancy, a conceit; know it, be thoroughly convinced of it, as a thing most
certain: for all these things, there is not one merry meeting, not one hour
spent in pleasure, yea, not one pleasurable act or thought, but an account must
be given for it; God will bring thee, though thou be unwilling to come, yet
thou can not avoid it, God will bring thee to judgment. You think such
delights as you have, are no such things as God takes notice of, they are but
matters of sport; thou think thou have liberty in them, to do what thou
listest, thou shall never hear of them again; but assure your self, God will
bring you to judgment, to be examined, condemned and punished. Of all men,
voluptuous men least think of judgment, they put far from them the evil day,
Amos 6. 2. but above all men, God has an eye upon them, to bring them to
judgment, and therefore 2 Pet. 2. 9, 10. The Lord reserves the unjust unto the
day of judgment to be punished, but chiefly them that walk after the flesh, in
the lust of uncleanness; mark, chiefly them; if it were possible for any to
escape, it is impossible for you, for God looks at you chiefly. Thou now art
riotous, and call for all the delights thou have a mind to, but there comes
a reckoning behind that will damp all.

There are three heads, upon which the enquiry at the day of judgment will be
concerning thy pleasures.

First, What kind of pleasures they were, whether wicked in their own natures,
or not.

Secondly, What time was spent in them.

Thirdly, How far thy heart was let out upon them.

Lastly, let the fearful end of these delightful things be considered. Those
morsels which were so sweet in going down, they must come up again as bitter as
gall: Job 20. 12, 13. Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide
it under his tongue, though he spare it, and forsake it not, but keep it still
within his mouth, yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of Asps
within him. And Prove. 23. 31, 32. it is said of the wine that moves its self,
sparkling in the cup, at the last, it biteh like a Serpent, and stingeth like
an Adder. The young man that follows the enticings of the Whore, Prove. 7. 22,
23. He goes as an Ox to slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks, till a dart
strike through his liver, he knows not that it is for his life. And cap. 5.
ver. 11. he is said to mourn at the last, when his flesh and his body is
consumed; and he cries out, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised
reproof? and have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to
them that instructed me? Sensual pleasure leads to, and fits for destruction.
Esaias 5. 14. Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure,
he that rejoices shall descend into it: Job 21. 12, 13. They take the Timbrel
and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ, they spend their days in
wealth, and in a moment go down to hell.

The fish swim down pleasantly in Jordan, but fall at last into the dead sea:
the black sea of eternal horror, is the conclusion of all these sweet delights.
As Abner to Ioab, 2 Samuel 2. 26. Know thou not that it will be bitterness in
the latter end? These are they who come to a fearful end, yea many times in
this life; as Esaias 50. 11. Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass
about your selves with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the
sparks that you have kindled, this shall ye have of my hand, ye shall lie down
in sorrow. You now frame a delightful life to your self; well, walk in the
light of your fire, enjoy your delight, satisfy your selves in your own ways,
but this shall you have of the Lord, You shall lie down in sorrow, yea, and
that in proportion to your pleasure; Rev. 18. 7. How much she has glorified
her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment give her.

And how grievous will eternal pain be to thee, who art now altogether for
delight and pleasure? Thou can not now endure any sad thoughts, thou cryest
out, they make thee melancholy; how will thou endure the dismal thoughts of an
accusing tormenting conscience everlastingly? those fearful gnawings of that
never-dying worm that was bred in thy sweet delights? Now thy flesh is dainty,
delicate and tender, it must lie soft, and fare deliciously, it must have all
to satisfy it that can be devised; how will it endure those everlasting
burnings? If after every intemperate draught, there should be a draught of
scalding lead poured down, how grievous would it be? the end of thy intemperate
pleasures will be worse; for, as Job 21. 20. Thou shall drink of the wrath of
the Almighty, and this shall be the portion of thy cup, now thou delightest in
thy long sittings at it, thou shall drink of this eternally, those cursed
delights in burning lusts, shall end in eternal burnings.

CHAP. XII. Who are the truly wise men; with the encouragement to the Saints in
the happy choice they have made.
HEre you see who are the wise men in the earth; wisdom does most discover its
self in choice, for choice requires understanding to compare and weigh things:
The will of every man is for some good he would have; every man wills to be
happy; this is as natural for every reasonable Creature, as for the fire to
burn: But herein appears wisdom, to make a right choice of those means that may
bring us to that happiness that we do will; here is the infinite mistake of the
world, they would be happy, but they choose means that are quite contrary to
happiness; but those that choose right, and pitch upon the means that will
indeed bring to that happiness that an immortal soul is capable of, surely
those are wise; this is the wisdom that is from above, that can dispose of such
means, as to obtain this end, and the greater the means are, and the more
excellent the end is, the greater is the wisdom that orders thereunto, and
guides therein: every one can propound an ordinary end to himself, and means to
attain it; but if the business be of high consequence, as for a General to
manage an Army, his end is a high end, that concerns the prosperity of a whole
Country, and because his end is so high, that wisdom that can order means to
attain this end, is admired in the world, it is not an ordinary skill that is
able to do this.

Now the attaining of God himself, the being blessed to all eternity, if there
be any end that is high, this must be it; for one therefore to be able to order
and dispose of means, so as not to miscarry in such a high end as this, such a
glorious and great work as this, it must be wonderful wisdom. The men of the
world think themselves wise men, and bless themselves in their wisdom, because
they can order and dispose of means to get money and fine clothes; they are
poor, and base, and low spirits, who mind and regard no higher, and no better
things then these base things that are below; whereas the godly, because God
has let the fear of eternity fall upon them, and they regard nothing but in
subordination to that, therefore they sometimes miscarry in the things of the
world; hereupon the men of the world looking at them, and seeing no higher end
but the enjoyment of pleasure, and the like, they count them a company of fools
that will undo themselves, and prove to be beggars, and so slight them in that
respect.

But there is an infinite mistake in this; were it that Gods servants did
propound that end to themselves, and had no higher then that which other men
have, they would shift as well as they; but because they have a higher end,
therefore their thoughts in wisdom are drawn out about that: As St. Paul said,
1 Cor. 2. 12. We have not received the spirit of the world; we cannot shift and
plot in the world; but we have received the Spirit of God, that spirit that
shall order us, and dispose us to enjoy communion with God and his Angels for
ever. A swine that wanders up and down, can make better shift to get home to
the trough, then a sheep that wanders to get home to the fold: The men of this
world are indeed wiser in their generation then the children of light, but the
children of light have their ends and ways, wherein their wisdom appears to be
full of excellency and glory.

The wisdom of Politicians is seen in this, They will let go things that are
low, and be content to be crossed in things that are mean, if their great plots
may go on; so it is in all true spiritual wisdom: A gracious heart, when it
looks at the enjoyment of God in the way of godliness, so be it that great plot
may go on, it does not so much look at things that are under: and therefore let
men know that there is a mistake in this, one day God will make it known, who
are those that are wise on the earth. Surely the world did not commend Daniel
for his wisdom, that he would not omit prayer one day to save his life, but had
rather lose all: Would not the worldly-wise say, What a foolish thing is this,
not to omit prayer one day to save a man's life, and he must open his window
too; that spiritual wisdom which God gives unto his people, it is foolishness
to a carnal heart; and therefore you shall have some Parents themselves, when
children come to be strict in their way, will say, What, shall we have a fool
of you? And one neighbor to another, when they see any have a tender
conscience, who before gave himself to the pleasure of the flesh, We shall have
a fool of you now: Though you count them fools, they know your way is folly.
They think the matters of Religion are but niceties, and and to venture the
loss of so much for such niceties, what a foolish thing is it? As Pilate
wondered at Christ, when his life was in question, he talks of truth, What is
truth? Your life is in danger, and do you now talk of truth?

That which is honest and virtuous, is vile and contemptible Honestum ei vile
est eui corpus nimis carum est. Sen. ep. 4.
to him whose body and sensual part is dear to him, says Seneca. I remember
Lactantius brings in a Heathen scorning at the ways of Christians in this
manner, thinking Christians to be fools, when they see they should endure such
things, and yet they would be Christians; says he, Scorn us, contemn us,
Contemnite, ridete, si libet; nobis enim stultitia nostra prodest, non invid
emus sapientiae vestrae hanc stultitiam malumus, hanc amplectimur. Lact. lib.
5. c. 12.
and despise us, we know our foolishness profits us, let us alone with our
foolishness, we do not envy your wisdom: We do not care though you count us
fools, so you disturb us not in our way. True wisdom, says he, lies hid there,
where there is the title of folly; for God with affliction, and with the name
of folly, does hide the beauty of godliness from the eyes of men; but this is
the only wisdom, to know God, to worship God, to be Religious; and for this,
says the same Author, with the greatest voice that I can speak, I testify and
proclaim, and denounce, That this is the greatest wisdom. Let us be established
in Illic potissimum esse quaerendum ubi stultitiae titulus apparet cujus
velamento Deus thesaurum sapientiae and veritatis abscondit. Lact. lib. 4. c.
2. Omnis sapientia hominis in hoc uno est ut Deum cognoscat and colat, hoc
nostrum dogma, hoec sententia est; quanta itaquae voce possum, testificor,
proclamo, denuntio. Lact. lib. 4. c. 30.
this, that it is the only wisdom to choose the ways of God upon any terms,
let come what will come, let all sorrows and afflictions to the outward man
come that possibly can come, this is the absolute wisdom, and this, says he, is
my opinion and judgment, it is that I am thoroughly convinced of, and shall for
ever rest, and be settled in.

Mark how Solomon so glorious for wisdom testifies of grace, Prove. 1. 2, 3, 4,
5. he heapeth up several expressions to manifest what wisdom comes to the heart
by godliness, for that is the scope there; it causes, 1. To know Wisdom; 2.
Instruction; 3. To perceive the words of Understanding; 4. To receive the
instruction of Wisdom, Justice, Judgment, Equity. 5. To give subtilty to the
simple; not only understanding, but subtilty; and that notwithstanding all
natural simplicity, in those who the world accounts simple ones, yet are by
grace made subtle, they can descry the danger of subtle temptations, they
will not be undermined for their souls, they will not be cousened and cheated
by the subtle policies of Devil or World, in the matter of their souls, and
the great things of eternal life, so as the great wise men of the world are. 6.
Knowledge and discretion to the young man; of all men, young men are most
ignorant, most rash and heady; but grace gives knowledge and discretion both,
even to the young man; How many gracious young men have more understanding in the
ways of God, and can guide their way to Heaven more discreetly then many
ancient men, who have repute in the world for wise and understanding men? Yea,
7. grace teaches wise counsels; their counsels about their spiritual estates
are wise. Who now dare accuse the ways of godliness, of folly, when the holy
Ghost has honored them with so many several expressions of wisdom in them?
This then is true wisdom, to choose with Moses, rather to suffer afflictions
with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

Secondly, here is much encouragement to all Gods people in their way and
choice that they have made. Has God given you a heart to make choice of his
ways? O bless God! There was a time when you went on in giving pleasure to the
flesh, and you saw then no better thing then such a kind of life, and the Lord
has been pleased to discover better things to you, so as to make you renounce
your former ways, and to make choice of another way, in which your souls have
found other manner of comforts, and satisfactions, and contentments then ever
you did before: bless God as David did, Blessed be the Lord that has given me
counsel, and made me to understand aright: So may such a soul say, for had I
been left to the counsels of mine own heart, I know what should have become of
me. I have as vile a heart as any, and my heart did take as much delight in the
flesh as any, and I should have gone on, God knows whither, and might by this
time have plunged my self into the bottomless pit: my friends would have given
me other counsels to harden me in my ways of sinful pleasure, but blessed be
God that has overpowered my heart. How many do I see every day, whose parts of
nature exceed mine, and yet they are mistaken in the things that concern their
everlasting welfare; they mind no other things but the pleasures of the flesh,
and stumble at the meanness of Gods people, and this hides the beauty of
godliness from their eyes; and what a great mercy is this, that God has taken
this stumbling block from me, and that he has opened mine eyes to see pearls,
though wrapped up in rotten rags, and to see the excellency of godliness,
notwithstanding all afflictions that do attend upon them? Certainly it is no
other but a beam of Gods own light from Heaven, that has shined into thy heart.

It is a remarkable passage that we have Esaias 44. 20, 21. where God showing the
difference between those who forsook the true God, and his people who chose him
to be their God; stirs up his people to remember for ever this mercy of God
toward them, that they should be delivered from the deceit and vanity whereby
others were deluded, and guided in a right and safe way, to be the servants of
the blessed God; As for the Idolater, he feeds upon ashes, a deceived heart
has turned him aside that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a
lie in my right hand? Now mark what follows, Remember these, O Jacob and
Israel, for thou art my servant, etc. As if he should say, Do you see how
others have left God, and God has left them? They feed upon ashes, a seduced
heart has deceived them; but it is otherwise with you, God has put it into
your hearts to be my servants, to choose me for your God: Remember for ever
these things, O Jacob! here is a mercy indeed, never to be forgotten; How comes
it to pass that your hearts should not be so seduced as theirs? it is Gods free
grace and rich mercy toward you.

And his mercy is the greater, in that it is in such a weighty thing, that the
Lord has given thee counsel to make a right choice in: If a man makes an ill
choice in a matter that is of moment, that will bring him trouble in his life,
how is he grieved? as in marriage, when he is to make choice in that one thing,
upon which he knows, the comfort or trouble of his life does much depend; if
the Lord has so provided for him, that he has made a good choice only in
that, how does he bless God? it is that which sweetens all his life: If it be
such a mercy, to be guided to make a good choice in marriage; what a mercy is
it to be guided to make a good choice for ones soul, to be happy to all
eternity? if the Lord should leave a soul in that choice, what a lamentable
condition had the soul been in? And therefore, those that have any savor of
godliness, if they be to change the condition of their lives, they will seek
God, and be earnest that God would guide them, and not leave them to
themselves, and take advantage to punish their former sins, in their choice
now. If you be to make a choice that concerns the outward comforts of your
lives, you will earnestly desire God, not to leave you there; Now you are to
make your choice for your eternal condition, if God should leave you now, what
a lamentable condition would you be in, as he does leave most in the world?

As soon as we come to years of discretion, we come to make our choice, to go
on in the ways of God, or in the ways of death; How many young ones make a woeful
choice in the beginning, and go on, and are hardened in their choice, and
perish for ever? And has the Lord looked upon you, and considered how like you
would be to fail in your choice? And has the Lord been pleased to come in with
his Spirit, and a light from Heaven to show you the way? Have you heard a voice
from heaven, saying, This is the way, walk in it? Though God should leave you
in all outward things, yet you are made for ever; and therefore thou may say
as Judas, not Iscariot; Lord, wherefore is it that thou revealest thy self to
us; and not to the world? Lord, wherefore is it, that in this great business of
my choice, that concerns my eternal estate, thou art pleased to reveal thy self
to me, a poor contemptible creature, rather then to the world?

1. Hence it is, because thou art one of the chosen 1.
ones of the Lord, because the Lord has made a The happiness of a gracious
soul.
choice of thee, and has separated thee from all eternity, to do good to thy
soul: hence it is manifest, that thou art the chosen one of the Lord; when thou
see most in the world, to follow the pleasures of the world, if God has
given thee a heart to choose his ways upon any terms, take this as an argument,
that thou art a chosen vessel of God. Reciprocal signs of Gods grace are the
most sweet; as if I love God, this is an argument God loves me; if Gods honor
be dear to me, then my soul is near to God; so if I choose God, then God has
chosen me.

2. This choice is that for which thousands of 2.
Gods people have blessed God upon their deathbeds; they counted it a blessed
time, and blessed the means, the Word, and the Instrument that God was pleased
to work by, to incline their hearts to such a choice as this.

3. Yea, this choice of thine, though it be suffering 3.
affliction, it is that thou shall bless God for, to all eternity in the
highest Heavens; it is such a great mercy, as this little, poor, span-long life
of ours, is not sufficient to give God glory for it, therefore there is an
eternity reserved to praise God for it; when thou shall see what good comes of
thy choice, then thou shall bless God indeed. Certainly, God takes it well at
thy hands now. Jer. 2. 2. I remember the kindeness of thy youth, and the love
of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness. God takes it
kindly, that men will choose him and his ways in affliction: if there were
always prosperity in the ways of God, it were nothing, but when it is with
affliction, it is so much the more an argument of thy love to God, and thy
sincerity, and therefore he takes it so kindly. Bless God for it; and bless
him the rather, because he has begun with you betimes: If the Lord has given
you a heart when you are young to make this choice, what a great mercy is this?
what abundance of sin does such a one prevent? If one that is young, goes on in
the ways of Religion, though he suffers much in the family wherein he lives,
his brethren scorn at him, and his Parents hate him; yet he has cause to
rejoice, and bless himself in the goodness of the Lord.

4. Again, thou have further cause to bless God, because 4.
he has given thee such encouragements since thou have made thy choice: thou
made thy choice many years ago; I ask thee, Have thou not had encouragement
in thy choice? Have any cause to repent thee? O no! blessed be God, I have
found more good then I looked for.

5. And know, within a while, the end of thy 5.
choice will be attained, and then it shall appear before men and Angels, thou
made a good choice, and all the world shall bless thee for thy choice.
Blessed be that man or woman that ever they were born, to make such a choice:
and thou shall be honored of all those that do despise thee now, and they shall
wish they had made thy choice. It is reported of a young man who loved his
pleasures, standing by St. Ambrose, and seeing his excellent death, he turned
to other young men by him, and said, O that I might live with you, and dye with
him! Thou have little cause to envy them that will choose vanities for their
portion, let them have them: though thou have lost something of thy bravery, of
thy carnal delight for this choice, be content, it is made up infinitely here,
and shall be made up more hereafter.

And seeing God has thus inclined your heart to himself, be for ever
established in your choice: seeing God has shown to you his ways, say, as
Pilate in another case, That I have written, I have written; so, That I have
chosen, I have chosen. If any temptation come to tempt you from your choice, as
flesh and blood would be ready to mutter, and think, I might have lived as
brave a life as such a one, and might have had as much pleasure as such a one;
I have lost so many friends, and so much means, and brought my self into a
great many straights; indeed, they spoke much of Gods Ordinances, and I was
taken with it, and I ventured, and I have brought my self into troubles: and
upon the mutterings of flesh and blood, you are beginning to bethink your
selves again, and examine things again, and think whether you did wisely or no:
O take heed of that first degree of Apostasy, namely, that suspicion of your
choice.

Many in their young time are very zealous in the ways of Religion, while all is
well with them, and now they meet with other things then they looked for, and
they begin to think they were too forward, and wish they were not so far
engaged as they are: they begin to repent, as chapmen who have out-bid
themselves: Many go on in a profession, and suffer much, because they are
engaged in that way, and they know not how to get off; if they could get off,
they would: take heed of repentings of your choice, lest God lead you out with
the workers of iniquity, do not listen to the reasonings of flesh and blood.
Cassianus reports of a young man, that had given himself up to a Christian life,
and his Parents misliked that way, and they wrote Letters to him, to persuade
him from it; and when he knew they were Letters come from them, he would not
open them, but threw them into the fire: and so flesh and blood will come and
say, Do thus and thus, you may do well enough at last; throw away these
letters, these suggestions of flesh and blood, and do not answer them, but be
resolved in thine own heart, I know in whom I have believed, I know whom I have
chosen, I did not choose rashly, but I felt the power of God upon my heart,
before I made my choice, and I had grounds and arguments of my choice; and
what, shall I by such an argument as this be persuaded to the contrary?
Therefore go on, and be established in your choice, and the Lord confirm you in
it, and give my soul part with you in that choice you have made: let flesh, and
the world, and temptations say what they will, peace will be in the end.

You have found some good already, that might make you say with David, Surely
it is good for me to draw near to God: and though I do meet with some troubles
and temptations that do cry down this way, yet let my soul say, It is good for
me to draw near to God: it is good for me that I left such and such things; it
is good for me that I have these Ordinances, though it be with the loss of some
outward comforts, and my estate be abated, and my trading less: say as David,
in the 73. Psalm, Truly God is good to Israel; however it be, yet God is good
to Israel, though many things seem to the contrary: and therefore, conclude
with thine own heart, Though I should never see good day in the world, yet that
comfort I have received in the ways of God, it is enough to make me prize them
for ever: if now I should dye, and be annihilated, if God should deprive me of
the joys of Heaven, and turn me into nothing, yet that good that I have had
already in Gods ways, should be enough to countervail all the troubles that I
have met withal in the world, or ever shall meet withal: though God should
withdraw himself in all the course of my life, and I should be in darkness, and
have nothing but trouble, yet I have had enough in God already, to countervail
all.

Has God thus spoken peace to thy soul? remember that text in Psalm. 85. 8.
Return not again to folly: the Lord has spoken peace already to thy soul in
afflictions, and therefore, God forbid that thou should return to folly, but
continue in thy way, and go on constantly in thy way to the end, and the Lord
bless thee in thy way. And this is for the encouragement of the hearts of Gods
people, that have with Moses made this choice, Rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

CHAP. XIII. The evil of an ill choice, discovered.
IN the third place, hence those are justly rebuked, Use 3.
who have made an ill choice: this was a blessed choice of Moses, and whosoever
makes this choice, are blessed of the Lord; but how few have we of Moses his
mind? it is a woeful choice that many make. Most people are offended at the
afflictions of Gods people, their hearts are set upon pleasure and delight, and
pleasure they must have; pleasure to the (...), aut jucunde aut non omnino.
flesh is that they choose, and that they follow after; but as for the
afflicted ways of godliness, they cannot relish them, their carnal sensual
hearts do turn aside from them, they give themselves up to the pleasures of the
flesh, and satisfy themselves in the enjoyment of their hearts desires, and
God does give them up likewise to their own lusts, to let them have their
choice; so that they shall spend their time in mirth and jollity, in eating and
drinking, and gaming, and in this they bless themselves, as those who have
wisely provided for themselves, to make their lives so full of comfort, and
soul-content as they imagine: these are set upon carnal, frothy, sensual
things; as if the chief good and happiness of man consisted in them, and
therefore they give themselves liberty in them, to the utmost.

That wherein a man's happiness consists, he may desire infinitely, and he
cannot but do it, it is as natural for him to do it, as for the fire to burn,
or the stone to descend; and because men put happiness in the pleasures of the
flesh, therefore their hearts are set infinitely upon them; that is, to set, as
they give themselves liberty, without any bounds, and desire Si nunc Adam
resurgeret and videret hanc insaniam omnium ordinu^, profect^^ credo quod prae
stupore tanqua^ lapis staret. Luth. in Gen c. 3 Syono^. Patrich. p 21.
Church-Story. Arist. Eth l. 1. c. 5.
that if it were possible, no limits might be set either by God or man. If they
have means, they account the chief good of what they have, is, in that they may
have larger opportunities then others, to satisfy the flesh in the sensual
pleasures of it: and hence is the infinite excess of meats, and drinks, and
carnal delights, in those whose means afford them opportunities thereunto.
Luther speaking of this excess, has this expression, If Adam should now rise
again, and see this madness of all sorts of men, I believe he would be so
amazed at it, that he would stand as a stone.

A. Gellius tells of Caligula, that he made one supper that cost three hundred
thousand Crowns. I have read also of Vitellius the Emperor, that at one supper
he was served with Two thousand sorts of fishes, and Seven thousand several
fowls. In such profuse expenses, for the satisfying of the flesh, how many do
glory, as if it were the highest happiness attainable upon the earth? And the
baser sort of people, Plebii ma^cipiorum prorsus simules, dum p^cudu^ vitam
praecligu^t; habent autem hanc causa^ quod multi ex iis, qui reru^ haberi
potestatem, simili modo afficiantur Cl. Al l. 2 Paed. c. 1.
seeing the great ones set upon such a kind of life, in satisfying the flesh,
they think there is no other happiness to be had; therefore all their care,
thoughts, endeavors are, how they may live jocundly, and give satisfaction to
their lusts. Clemens Alexandrinus tells of a fish that has the heart in the
belly, differing from other living Creatures, which the Philosophers call the
Sea-Ass: This is like sensual men whose hearts are only set upon the things of
the belly; so as it may be said of many in regard of satisfying the flesh, as
Aurelianus said of one Bonoses, He was born, not that he might live, but that
he might drink; So do these seem to be born, Non ut vivat, sed ut bibat natus
suit.
not that they might live, but that they might eat and drink, and pamper the
flesh; the whole world is too strait to some for the pampering their Totus
orbis ventri nir^is angustus est.
bellies.

Oh, how beneath is this to the true excellency of a rational and immortal
soul! What pity is it, that an immortal reasonable soul should be of no other
use, then to keep the body alive to taste the sweet of the flesh of beasts, and
of the fruit of the earth? How many draw all their substance through their
throats, and their belly? their houses, lands, yea, and devour their posterity
like Cannibals; when men in company spend their estates, their wives and
children wanting bread at home, what do they, but even drink the very blood of
their wives and children? It was the profaneness of Esau, for which God has
branded him, That he sold his birthright for a mess of pottage; yet that was in
the time of extreme hunger; these men sell God and Heaven and all for drink,
not to satisfy thirst, but their lust.

But O thou vain man, know thou art utterly Vae illi qui tunc babuit ^erminum
luxuriae, quando vitae. Bern. de ord. vit.
mistaken in thy choice, if thou continuest in this way of thine, that thou
have chosen to satisfy thy flesh in, thou art undone for ever, thou will ere
long cry out of this thy choice most bitterly, and curse thy self for it most
fearfully: It is a seduced heart that has deceived thee, and thou feedest upon
ashes, and thou can not say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? Esaias 44.
20. It is true, not only of Idolators, but of all other ways of evil; thou
feedest upon ashes, they are but ashes thou feedest upon, and delightest in,
and it is a seduced heart has turned thee aside from the ways of God, that
makes thee offended at them; it is the God of this world that has blinded thy
eyes, so that thou should not see the glorious excellencies, and beautiful
pleasures, and sweet delights, that are in the ways of God, but that thou
should please thy self in those ways that tend to death: What has the whole
course of thy life been, but playing with the Devils bait, under which is a
hook that will snatch thee into the sorrows of eternal death? Howsoever those
that live in jollity and delight in the flesh, may bless themselves, yet Gods
people whose eyes God has opened, would not be in their condition one quarter
of an hour for a thousand worlds. There are diverse sorts that come under this
use of reprehension, Diverse sorts of evil choosers.
for that ill and woeful choice they have made.

First, such as choose to satisfy themselves in such 1.
pleasures as are in themselves sinful, such who take pleasure in filthiness
and ungodliness: these are the dregs of men, these are the basest of all, that
can take delight in the very act of sin it self: All that is said concerning
the dreadful evils of sin, and that venom and curse that there is in sin, is
so far from making sin to be bitter to them, as they account more pleasure to
be had in many sinful ways, then there is to be had in the enjoyment of all the
glory that there is in God and Jesus Christ, in Heaven and Eternity: O cursed
heart, and cursed choice is this, that when God has revealed in his Word so
much concerning the evil of sin, that might make any heart in the world tremble
at it, that thou should not only not apprehend the evil of it, or not taste
any bitterness that is in it, but should count it delightful, yea, should
esteem so much pleasure to be had in the act of sin it self, more then there is
to be had in God, in Christ, or in the Promises, or in Heaven, or Eternity.

Surely a cursed seduced heart has deceived thee, these are infinitely out of
the way. What is there in sin that is thy pleasure, that thou choosest as the
chief contentment of thy soul? Is it possible that the chief contentment of a
creature should be in sinning against an infinite God? That thy chief
contentment should be in departing from God? in striking at God? So thou do
in the way of sin: That thy chief contentment should be in incensing the wrath
of an infinite Deity against thy soul? That thy chief contentment should be in
putting thy self under the everlasting curse, that binds thee over to eternal
death? That thy chief contentment should be in that, which being committed, if
ever it comes to be pardoned, must cost more then Heaven and Earth is worth?
Thou go out in the morning, and go into thy company, and countest thy
self happy that thou have money to spend, and so take thy pleasure: This day
thou have done that, which if ever it be pardoned, it must cost more then
Heaven and Earth is worth. There must be a price paid, more worth then a
thousand worlds, to purchase the pardon of it.

Can thou choose that for thy chief contentment, which was such a dreadful
but then to Jesus Christ; that made the soul of Christ to be heavy to the very
death, that squeazed out clods of blood from him? What is the chief pleasure
and delight of thy soul in that, which a true enlightened gracious heart would
rather suffer all the torments in the world then do it? If so be it were put to
him, either such a sin must be committed, or else all the tortures that can be
devised by all the world must be inflicted upon him; A gracious heart had
rather choose all the tortures that can be inflicted, then do that which thou
make the great pleasure of thy soul: What an infinite difference is between
thy base heart, and a gracious heart? Thy wretched heart does choose this
deliberately, as the great pleasure of thy life, which a gracious heart Omnium
aliarum artium peccata artificibus pudori sunt, offenduntque de errantem vitae
peccata delecta^t. Sen. ep. 98
would rather suffer all the torments of the world, then be brought to do it.
To delight in sins against conscience, is the most desperate folly in the
world: No man rejoices in any error or fault in other things, but is rather
ashamed; only in the errors, in the rule of life and obedience men owe to God,
they rejoice in.

Secondly, those come under this reprehension, who 2.
though they do not choose things for their chief pleasures that are sin, yet
do choose to themselves pleasures that come in by sin; and though this be not
so ill as the other, yet ill enough; that is, those that shall strain their
consciences to get something in the world, to raise their estates, and when
they have got estates, and money, and things well about them, then they can be
merry, then their tables are furnished, and they can eat and drink, and this
they delight in: O poor deluded heart! what is this that can give thee so much
content? Thou have cause to look upon thy table, and every morsel that thou
eatest, as having death in it; and every draught you drink, as having the curse
of God in it: Little cause thou have, if thou knew all, to rejoice in these
pleasures that come in by sin, certainly there can be no good that comes in by
sin as sin: I know God may turn sin to the good of some, but that which sin
brings in of it self, it is impossible good should come of it; that which thou
take pleasure in, that which thou art merry and jocund in, delighting thy
self withal, is, it may be, the calamity and misery of others; and how hard is
that heart, that can make that his mirth and joy, that is the sorrow and
distress of his brother? Chrysostom in a Sermon against luxury Chr. Hom. contra
luxu^ and crapulam, Omnibus gravius est, inquit, quod ex alienis calamitatibus
collecta sunt.
and excess, cries out against those who riot in those things that they have
got by making others miserable, and says, It is the most grievous thing that
can be.

Thirdly, those who do neither of these, they choose not to themselves the
pleasures that are sin, nor the pleasures that come in by sin, but such
pleasures, in the enjoyment of which they do sin, though the pleasures be in
themselves lawful, they choose to let out 3.
their hearts unto them, and spend the strength of their spirits on them; they
think because there is no hurt in them in themselves, therefore they may give
liberty to themselves; there is a great deal of mistake in this: we may sin
exceedingly in things that are lawful; when men shall spend so much time (as
Licitis perimus omnes.
many that are professors do) in giving themselves content in some sports and
delights to the flesh, as they cut God short of his time; that time that should
be spent in examining their hearts, humbling their souls, seeking the face of
God, is spent in some slight, vain, idle sport.

Many are guilty of this, especially those that have means, and their callings
do not require such a necessity of continual attendance: How is that time spent
wherein you have liberty from your callings? Certainly, no good account can be
given of that time, much might be gained to your souls in it, and much converse
and communion you might have with God; and what ill choice do you make, when as
many poor Christians would bless God, if they could have a little liberty from
their callings? On the one side there is this liberty for you to enjoy
communion with God, and furnish your souls with heavenly excellencies: On the
other side, there is a little vain delight and carnal content, and ease to the
flesh, and you rather choose this. It may be, though God has helped you in the
main, you chose right, yet be convinced this day of the evil of this particular
choice, in giving such inordinate contentment to your selves, in giving that
ease to your bodies, liberties to the sluggishness of your spirits, and reform.
You have not honored God as you ought, and therefore your lives are not so
beautiful: In the general you continue in the ways of Religion, but there is
not that convincing luster and beauty in your lives; you do not draw others to
that love of godliness, because your hearts become so vain, and so slight, in
choosing inordinate liberties to your selves, in spending your times and
strength in the pleasures of the flesh, and therefore when you come to
spiritual employment, you have no strength, but your hearts are dead. I appeal
to your consciences, when you have given your selves leave to have content to
the flesh, when you come to communion with God, what dead flat hearts have you?
Let me speak to such this day from the Lord, this liberty you take to your
selves in the pleasures of the flesh, has been the root of the Apostasy of
many; as 2 Pet. 2. 18. those who fell off were allured through the lusts of the
flesh; even though they are said to be clean escaped from them who live in
error, yet through wantonness they were drawn aside. Wanton professors seldom
prove lasting professors, at least in any power of godliness.

Take this one note about this, That man or woman that shall not esteem the
hardest work of godliness at a higher rate, then the most delightful
contentment to the flesh, has not chosen right, and may suspect that yet he is
to choose in the way of eternal life. It is true, that the hardest duty of
godliness, may be burthensom to the flesh for a while, yet there is no gracious
heart, but esteems of this duty at an infinite higher rate, then the pleasures
of the flesh, though never so lawful; it looks upon the pleasures of the flesh
as mean low things, though lawful, but looks upon the duties of godliness as
precious things, though hard, and those are the things that are most suitable
to a gracious frame of spirit.

Again, fourthly, those come under this reprehension of making an ill choice,
who have had some stirrings 4.
of the Spirit of God, some workings of their consciences, that their way has
not been good, and right, and these have been but for some time, afterward they
have given themselves, and do give themselves too too much liberty in
satisfying the flesh. These are like the Israelites, of whom we read, Exodus 24.
11. according to the note that some have upon this place, They saw God, and did
eat and drink; That is, say they, although they had seen God, yet they turned
again to temporal pleasures, to eating and drinking, in a sensual way, as if it
had reference to that sensual eating and drinking, and rising up to play; upon
the dedication of their Calf they sat up, which was presently after.

Thus many, although they have seen the Lord, and this sight of God has
wakened conscience, their hearts have been much stirred for a while, yet they
have after fallen to eating and drinking, to sensual pleasures, all their good
beginnings has come to nothing. These when they have been in company, and come
away, they have had many sad thoughts, and next day, or in the night many sad
sighs and groans have come from their spirits, because their spirits are
enlightened, and make them fear all will not be well in the end; and yet these
continue still in giving themselves pleasure, and delights to the flesh
inordinately; if company call, they cannot refuse: when they are stirred in
their consciences, they will take a book and read, or pray; yet they are
presently weary, and cannot bear such a kind of life, they think they shall
grow melancholy, and they must again go to their former ways.

Many have the pleasures of the flesh, and their consciences struggling
together; and many times the pleasures of the flesh, and conscience struggle a
great while, before there be a victory on either side: sometimes conscience
gets the victory, and there is a gracious work upon the soul, especially if God
set on conscience, by some great affliction or sickness: sometimes conscience
is overcome, though conscience does propound a better way, and they see, and
are convinced of it, yet at length lust overcomes, and conscience yields, and
they become mere sots, hardened in the way of the lusts of their hearts; and
this is a most dreadful thing, when ever this befalls any.

Again, there are others that have had some taste of the ways of God, have
begun to make a choice, 5.
and have tried the ways of Religion, and continued a while in them, and yet
come to be weary and tired: yea, it may be some upon their sick-beds, and
deathbeds, have cried out of the folly of their former choice; and yet, when
God has delivered them again, they have gone on in the same excess of riot,
and giving liberty to the satisfying of the flesh, in the same way, if not in a
further degree then ever formerly; what a dreadful thing is this! To all those
that are thus deluded, in making this evil choice, let me speak a word or two.

First, Would thou be willing at the day of judgment, 1.
to be accused and found guilty before the Misery of a sinful choice.
Lord of this; that thou have esteemed more pleasure to be had, either in sin,
or in any lawful content, then in all the pleasures that are to be had in God,
so as it should be said before men and Angels, Lo! this is the man that made
not God his portion; Lo! here stands the man, that for many years together did
account more good to be had in the pleasures of the flesh, then in all the good
that was to be enjoyed in all the artributes of God, and all the merits of
Jesus Christ, in all the promises of life, in all the ways of grace? What do
thou think will be thy condition, when as thou shall be brought as guilty
before men and Angels, that all shall look upon thee as a cursed fool in
Israel? God and his Angels look now upon thee as a fool in Israel; when thou
shall be brought to have all the world look upon thee as guilty of such a
cursed folly as this, how bitter will it be to thee? would thou be willing to
be in such a condition as this?

Again, Would thou be willing at the great day Who are haters of God.
to be found guilty of hating the ways of God? I I hope I do not so, (will some
say) though I give pleasure to my flesh. Yes, that man or woman that chooses
the way of giving content to the flesh, rather then the strict ways of
godliness, such a one hates Gods ways, and so hates God himself in hating Gods
ways: as, mark that place in Prove. 1. For that they hated knowledge, and did
not choose the fear of the Lord; How was it proved they hated knowledge? They
hated that truth of God, and that which should bring them into the ways of God,
and guide them in it; How does that appear? They did not choose the fear of the
Lord; if thou do not choose the ways of God, thou hate the ways of God,
and so by consequent art a hater of God himself.

Thirdly, Would thou willingly have God reject 3.
all thy services, and account them as abominable to him? Thus he threatens
against those who choose their own ways, Esaias 66. 3. He that kills an Ox, is
as if he slew a man; he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck;
he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood; he that burns
incense, as if he blessed an idol; and the reason of all is given, They have
chosen their own ways, and their soul delights in their abominations. There
are not such four expressions of Gods rejecting a man's services that he tenders
up unto him, in all the Book of God, and this is given as the reason of all,
because they have chosen their own ways.

Again, Would thou not be loath, that in the time of greatest anguish of
spirit, and affliction of 4.
body, when thou shall be crying to God for mercy, that God should take
pleasure in thy misery, and be so far from relieving of thee, as to mock at thy
destruction? now thou can laugh, and be merry, and jocund; but what if it
does prove, that this way of mirth and delight to the flesh, shall procure unto
thee Gods laughing, and Gods mocking at thee in thy anguish, and greatest
distress that ever thy soul shall be in? Certainly, if thou walk in the way
thou art in, this will be thy portion: mark that place in Prove. 1. 24. what God
says, I have called, and you refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man
regarded; but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes,
etc.

Be it known unto thee, that in whatsoever sin thou blessest thy self, the more
thou blessest thy self in it, the more cursed shall it be unto thee. What
comfort will the pleasures of the flesh be to thee, when as Christ shall come
and say, Was I content to part with the pleasures of Heaven, the bosom of my
Father to redeem poor man? and was it not the pleasure of a little meat and
drink thou could be content to part with for me? Could I be content to part
with my blood, and could not thou be content to part with thy lusts? Was not
all my sufferings worthy of enduring those little things thou were called to
suffer in thy life? What, was not all that glory of mine that I revealed in my
word, and works, sufficient to show me to be worthy, that thou should have
given such a testimony of thy respect, and honor to me, as to be willing to
part with such empty, poor, slight things, and to suffer such poor little
things? When God shall bring the Saints before thee that did make a better
choice, and thou shall see them to be in a most glorious blessed condition, and
thou thy self cast off for ever; how will this confound thee another day?
Consider of this, you that have made an ill choice, now while it is time;
consider of the evil, of the folly, of the danger, of the cursedness of that
choice that you have made, in that you have chosen rather to give content to
your flesh, then the ways of godliness. Wherefore for the following of this in
a word of exhortation.

CHAP. XIV. The drawing men's hearts to a happy choice.
THe Lord then persuade thy heart to change Use 4.
thy choice; change it, or else thou art lost, better thou had never been
born, then that thou should not change thy choice; O that now thou had
wisdom for eternity! whatsoever your ways have been, now at last in this your
day, learn to know the evil of them, to renounce them, to embrace the ways of
godliness, and let it be sufficient, that you have spent so much time in the
ways of sin, and giving content to your flesh. O that this may be the day of
your new choice, that you may bless God for this day, that God did this day
dart in some truths, to turn the streams of thy soul another way, to make
another, choice! that there might be before thou go out of the presence of
God, a secret frame of spirit, surrendering thy soul unto God, being convinced
of thy evil choice, and say, O Lord, how have I lived? What has my course
been? the Lord knows my course has been to give content to my flesh, and to
live bravely in my life; now God begins to make me afraid, lest I have been in
a dangerous false way; the Lord have mercy upon me, what have I done? Is it not
time to look about me? I have all this time miscarried in the choice of my soul
for my everlasting estate, I have chosen the ways of death all this while.

O that the fear of God might fall upon your hearts this day! and then the
promise of God is, Psalm. 25. 12. Who is the man that fears the Lord, him will
he teach in the way that he shall choose. The fear of God will put you into a
teachable frame, and the Lord delights to teach such; and surely it is an
unspeakable blessing of God, to be taught in the way of our choice. How happy
were it, if the Lord would put a reasoning frame into your hearts, that you
might begin to ponder, and weigh things, and if spiritual arguments cannot
prevail, yet let us see whether they you reasonable Creatures or no; Esaias 46.
8. Remember, and show your selves men, bring to mind, O ye transgressors!
Come, let us reason together; Is there not infinite reason for Gods ways more
then those ways you have walked in? Is not God infinitely worthy of honor and
praise from you, other manner of honor and praise then he has had from you,
your own consciences being judges? Has not God given you immortal souls? and
are they not capable of better things then these things that you have chosen
for your chiefest good? Has not God made you for a higher end, then to eat,
and drink, and play? What, did the blessed Trinity consult to make a glorious
creature, Come, let us make man, according to our own image: and when this
great work is done, is he made for no other end then to eat and drink, and
commit wickedness? What, is not man to live by rule? indeed no creatures but
Angels and men, have a rule to walk by, no creature is capable of knowing a
rule but they.

What if so be that now thou were to dye, what would comfort thee? if God
should put an end to thy days, and call thee to an account for thy ways, what
account could thou give to the great and dreadful God, of thy ways and life?
would thy ways be peace? It may be thou think thou may have thy pleasure,
and that which is spoken out of the word by the Ministers, thou can avoid,
and there are no such things as thou hear; but what if those things that we
deliver, concerning the evil of sin, and the danger of that way of sin, should
prove true? then woe unto thee, if all thy comfort depends upon this, thou
hopest these things that we preach are not true; and is not this all the
support of thy comfort, which if it fail, thou art lost for ever? Certainly, if
that glory of God, and that eternal estate we preach so much of be true, it is
worth the venturing of the loss of greater pleasures and delights, then any
thou have in thy seeking after them: make but a supposition, What if it should
be so, is it not worth the venturing? You will do so in other things, the very
supposition of a great gain, or possibility of great evil, will make you
venture much: God does not call you to venture much, they are poor things that
you are persuaded to leave, and be not too confident in your way, all that is
written in the word may be true, and if it be but possible, yet be so wise as
upon a supposition to venture.

O that you would make trial of the ways of God! If once your hearts were in
them, whereby you would Non Isaac, sed Arics morietur; non peribit tibi
laetitia sed contumacia: non mactabitur Isaac, sed vivet: si vocem Domini
audicris ut offeras Isaac, id est, ut gaudium immoles, constauter obedire ne
timeas.
be satisfied, as to want none of these pleasures, it would make the moderation
of them more pleasant then the excess: You would find more pleasure in the
very act of self-denial, then in all the pleasure of your lives; and if there
be so much pleasure in the denying false pleasure, what then is there in the
enjoying true? Surely God has pleasure enough for you, if you had a heart to
trust him with your pleasure; you shall only lose your sin, not your pleasure.
Bernard has a notable expression in a declamation of his De bonis deserendis;
If you be willing, says he, to sacrifice your Isaac, which signifies laughter,
that is your pleasure, your Isaac, your pleasure shall not dye; it is the Ram,
that is, your stoutness of spirit, your self-willedness that shall dye; Ipsa
est beata vita gaudere ad te, de te, and propter te Domine, ipsa est et non
altera. Aug Conf. c. 21. Non nego indulgendu^ corpori, serviendu^ nego. Sen.
Ep. 14.
but Isaac shall live, you shall have pleasure still. Do not harbor ill
thoughts of God, to think that God is an enemy to your pleasure, and delight,
he does not delight to grieve the spirits of men; if you would trust him with
your pleasure, you should have pleasure, it may be in this world, but howsoever
in the conclusion you shall have pleasure enough, my soul for thine. You must
trust God with your souls, and eternal conditions, and will you not trust him
with your pleasures? Do you think Christ came to dye, and shed his precious
blood to bring men into worser conditions then before? O no, certainly Christ
did not come to take away any pleasure from his people, but to bring them the
pleasures of Heaven, and of earth too, so far as they are needful. Is it not
more like thou should have pleasure when thou art reconciled to God, then
when thou art an enemy?

We read of Cajus the Emperor, (Agrippa having suffered Imprisonment for
wishing him to be Emperor) that afterward when he came to be Emperor, the first
thing he did was to prefer Agrippa, and gave him a Chain of Gold, as heavy as
the Chain of Iron that was upon him in Prison: And so if any do suffer for God,
do you think that God will let him lose by him? Suppose you have a Servant
about your business, and he suffers much trouble and opposition, will you not
recompense him for that which he suffers for your sake? Do you think that God
will let his people sink in their sufferings for him? God forbid we should have
any such thoughts of him.

Do not judge of the ways of God by outward appearance, but judge according to
the true value and worth of things: Shall we in other things judge according to
the value and worth of things, and only in the ways of God, judge by outward
appearance, and not according to the worth? Do but come near to the ways of
godliness, you will find them other things then you imagine: As Peter Martyr
had a speech in his Sermon, that was the means of that Marquess Galeacius his
conversion: If so be, says he, one should see a company of Musicians, that are
playing and dancing according to their art, a great way off, he would think
that they were mad men; but if he come nearer and nearer, and hear the
melodious sound of the music, and observe their art in all they do, he will
be of another mind: And so men of the world look upon Gods people afar off,
and think them mad men to take such courses; but if they would come nearer, and
observe their ways, and see the equity and reason, and observe the excellency
and beauty that is in them, they would be of other minds.

You that have hard thoughts of Gods way, you have looked upon them as things a
great way off; Qua^ suave mihi subito factum est carctib suavitatibus nugarum!
and quas amittere metas fuit, dimittere gaudiu^ erat: cjiciebas enim a ne, vera
tu and summa sua vitas, cjiciebas, et intrabas pro it is, omni voluptate dulcior,
sed non carni et sanguini, omni luce clarior, sed non jam sedenti in tenebris,
etc. Aug. Con l. 9. c. 1.
come nearer, pry into them a little further, make trial of them a little, that
you may have experience of them, you will think otherwise of them; if it were
possible for you to enter upon Gods ways with the same base hearts that you
have, Gods ways would indeed be tedious, but if you enter into the ways of God,
your hearts will be changed, and you will be other men; and when your hearts
are changed, those things that were grievous to you, will be delightful to you.
St. Augustine in his Confessions has this notable expression: How sweet was it
to me of a sudden, to be without those sweet vanities? And those things which I
was afraid to lose, with joy I let go, for thou who art the true and only
sweetness, did cast out those from me, and instead of them did enter in thy
self, who art more delightful then all pleasure, more clear then all light, but
it was not thus with me heretofore when I sat in darkness.

Now if you have any conviction at all, tell me, Are you willing to enter into
the ways of God? Do you think them worthy of regard, if it were not for trouble
and affliction? Then so it stands, if you were not to suffer affliction, you
would embrace them; and what an ignoble spirit is this, unbeseeming a
Christian, whose spirit should have true Nobility and Magnanimity, and you come
off thus basely, If you should never suffer, if have no trouble! Truly God is
much beholden to you (as we may speak with holy reverence;) you would have God
choose you, notwithstanding all your sins that are grievous to him: Why will
not you choose God and his ways, notwithstanding the afflictions and sufferings
that are grievous to you? Do you think the sufferings you are like to meet
withal in Gods ways, are more grievous to you, then your sins are to him? Yet
notwithstanding your sins, he chooses you; Why notwithstanding the sufferings
you may meet with, should not you choose him? Suppose Christ had stood upon
these terms, and said, It is true, I see poor wretched sinful man ready to
perish, and must lie under the wrath of an infinite God, and it pities me to
see his misery, and I could be content to redeem him, but I must suffer so
much, be in the form of a servant, and be despised, and persecuted, and suffer
a cursed death, and therefore let him rather perish: If Christ had stood at
this, what had become of you? Yet you stand at this. Gods ways are good, my
ways are evil; I could be content to embrace Gods ways; but I must suffer: If
Christ did not make a stand at this, when he saw thy misery, but was content to
redeem thee, and brake through all sufferings; Why should not you be content to
embrace him in his ways through all sufferings? Why should not your hearts be
convinced by that which has so much reason in it?

It is reported of one Marinus a Soldier, when it fell to him to be preferred
in some place, he was like to lose it because he was a Christian, and he began
to stagger, and to have thoughts rather to leave off Religion, then to lose his
place: Then came one Theodistus, and brings him into the Temple, and laid by
him the Sword and the Testament, the Gospel, and bade him take his choice: Here
is the Sword, which is an emblem of thy place, and here is the Gospel, choose
the one, you must have but one: Then his heart gave in, and so left the Sword,
and chose the Gospel. The wisdom of God this day has stood, and still stands
before you, pleading with you, crying to you to come in and embrace her, to
make a happy choice for thy soul; folly likewise has her pleadings, and
persuasions to draw thee to the lusts of the flesh, both make their offers unto
thee; as they say of Hercules when he was young, he saw virtue and vice in the
likeness of two Virgins wooing him, vice like a painted Harlot, and virtue like
a sober chaste Virgin, both presenting themselves with wooing offers unto him.

It is very observable that we find, Prove. 9. concerning wisdom and the
foolish woman, both pleading to draw the hearts of men to them, and they begin
in the same manner, they both make offers to draw the heart, ver. 4. Who so is
simple, let him turn in hither; as for him that wants understanding, she
says to him; and verse 16. the foolish woman uses the same words to draw
after her: and as wisdom is upon the high places of the City, ver. 3. so is
folly, ver. 15. yet wisdom is above the foolish woman, for the Text says of
wisdom, she is upon the highest places, and of the foolish woman, it is only
said, she is in the high places: And observe further, Wisdom calls to eat her
bread, and drink her wine, ver. 5. and the foolish woman makes her offer, her
delights are sweet, she says; but they are but sweet waters, and that stolen
too; and her bread, she says, is pleasant; but it is secret, such as she is
even ashamed of her self: In the choice that wisdom presents, and that which
folly presents, you have life and death set before you; as Moses therefore said
to the people, so I to you, I have set before you this day life and death: Now
what answer will you give to God? Will you go on in the ways of the pleasure of
the flesh? Are your hearts so bold and venturous, that you dare venture to go
on in these ways? Woe unto you for the cursed hardness of your hearts. Were it
indeed that you never heard the ways of God opened to you, it were another
matter, but in that you have, and yet you go on in your choice after this
Sermon, God may say, Be it unto thee as thou have chosen; God may set to his
seal, thou have chosen vanities, and a lie, and base pleasures; and vanities,
and a lie, and base pleasures to thy flesh thou shall have.

Wherefore that thou may be delivered from this seal this night, O consider
what a mercy of God it is that thou have yet time to make thy choice. How many
has God cast off? And now it is too late to choose; God has determined the
business; O that yet there should be time! O that this would move your hearts!
We are fain thus to labor, and strive with men's spirits to take them off from
vain pleasures, to urge the strength of all arguments we can, with all our
might; were it that men's hearts were not very sensual, and hardened in their
sensuality, it would not be needful thus to strive, the very propounding some
one argument, might be sufficient to prevail. It was a speech of Gregory
Nyssen, who lived almost thirteen hundred years ago; He that does but hear of
Hell, is without any further labor or study taken off from sinful pleasures:
Men's hearts are grown harder since.

But what if I should come in now? I who have Quest.
given so much pleasure to the flesh, would God accept of me, and regard me?

Be it known unto thee, thou that have given thy self Answ.
liberty in enjoying the pleasures of the flesh to the utmost, thou that have
been most wretched, if thou have a heart to come in this day, and turn thy
choice, God is yet ready to embrace thee; we have commission to offer grace and
mercy to thee upon thy recalling thy self, yea, we have a promise, you shall
have abundance of mercy, if you have a heart to come in. Prove. 1. 22, 23. How
long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their
scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof, behold I will pour
out my Spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you. If any of you have
gone so far when we have spoken against the pleasures of the flesh, and for the
ways of godliness, you have scorned the word of the Lord; if you have been
scorners, and contemners, yet turn and make your choice better. Behold, I will
pour out my Spirit to you; When God pours forth his Spirit, he pours forth his
grace, and mercy and goodness; you see Mercy to be had for the greatest sinners
the offer of God, if you have hearts yet to make choice of his ways.

And consider, the longer you have stayed in the satisfying your selves in the
pleasures of the flesh, the more unfit will you be to suffer hard things for
God. O give in your answer, and say, The Lord forbid I should go on in my
former ways; I see other things I have to regard, peace with God, pardon of sin
that I have to look after, let God reveal to me what his good will and pleasure
is, and though I should never enjoy good day in the flesh, yet I give my self
up to that way of God. O that there might come this voice up to Heaven this
night, that your souls may be blessed for ever in this days choice! And if God
do begin to stir your hearts, now take the opportunity, choose the things that
please him, and take hold of the Covenant; if you be convinced of the good ways
of God, now close with them, cleave to them, let your hearts fasten, take such
fast hold of the Covenant, as you may never let it go. Observe how these two
are joined together, Isaiah 56. 4. Choose the things that please me, and take
hold of my Covenant; Take hold now, for it is your life.

CHAP. XV. The true pleasantness of all the ways of godliness.
NOw that you may be further convinced that in the choice of the ways of
godliness, you shall not lose, but change pleasures; you shall find pleasures
sweet and satisfying, of a higher nature in them then ever before your souls
were acquainted with; consider what Solomon says of the ways of wisdom;
Solomon, who had experience of all other pleasures whatsoever, yet of them he
says, Proverbs 3. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness.

That the yoke of Christ was an easy yoke, and the ways of godliness had ease
in them, we have spoken largely: As they have ease, so they have pleasantness,
all the ways of godliness are pleasant, to that at this time. Ordinarily we
cannot expect any dependence in these Proverbs, but yet in this you have, there
is a dependence of these words upon the 13. ver. and so from thence there is a
connextion of the several Proverbs.

In the 13. ver. you have the commendation of wisdom, and the blessed estate of
that man set out, that finds wisdom: Wisdom is commended by many arguments,
and amongst the rest, not to spend time about the other, this is one, because
all her ways are ways of pleasantness; and therefore happy is the man that
finds it out. All her ways, that is, the ways of wisdom, the ways of
godliness, they are ways of pleasantness, not only shall be, but they are so,
they are ways in themselves pleasant, and lead to pleasantness: They are ways
not only pleasant, but ways of pleasantness in the abstract. Wherefore the
point that is to be the subject of this exercise, is, as you have it plain in
the words:

That the ways of godliness are delightful ways, full of pleasure, yea, they
are pleasantness it self.

There is nothing that man's heart is set more upon then pleasure; and nothing
hinders a man from the ways of godliness, more then fear he shall not find
pleasure in them: Wherefore it is an argument of great concernment for us,
thoroughly to be convinced that there is pleasantness in the ways of godliness,
they are ways of pleasure; and I hope I speak unto such, whose hearts close
with the point as soon as it is named, who can say, Yes, and we find it so.
The ways of wisdom are either the ways of Gods Ordinances, or the ways of
exercise of grace, or ways of obedience; all these are the ways of
pleasantness. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord! they shall be satisfied
with the fatness of thy house, the beauty of holiness; And the like is said of
the Ordinances of God: The exercises of the graces of the Spirit, they are the
ways of wisdom, and are full of delight and pleasure: Cant. 7. 13. The
Mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of fruits, new and old,
which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved: In the Church of God the exercise
of the graces of Gods Spirit among them is pleasant. The duties of obedience
are pleasant: O how I love thy Law! Thy Law is my delight: and a hundred such
expressions in Scripture.

The Scripture sets out the pleasantness of Gods ways, by all manner of pleasure
that men find in the world, the pleasure of the eye, of the taste, of the
smell, of the ear. The way of the righteous is as a light that shines more and
more, to a perfect day: Now it is a good and pleasant thing for an eye to
behold the light; no such beauty as in the ways of godliness. The savor of
ointments and spices, in Scripture sets out the fragrancy of Gods Spirit. The
melody of the ear, that is also for the setting out of the joy of Gods people;
Blessed are they that hear the joyful sound. The taste, O come and taste how
sweet the Lord is. And the delight that Gods people have with the Lord in his
ways, is set out by the marriage delight, that is the greatest natural delight
amongst the children of men.

But wherein does the pleasantness of the ways Quest.
of wisdom appear? what kind of pleasantness is it?

I shall answer some quaeres about this, and make Answ.
some application of it, and so proceed. Then a Master is like to prevail with
his Scholars, and make them good Scholars, when he can make them love their
Books: and it is the duty of Ministers, not only to convince people, that they
ought to walk in the ways of godliness, but to make them love them; that we may
make you in love with the ways of godliness, The pleasantness of Gods ways.
we shall show what pleasantness is in them: Surely they must needs be ways of
pleasantness,

First, because they are the ways of wisdom: 1.
if they were but only rational ways, such ways as were suitable to the
principles of right reason, there were abundance of delight in them: certainly,
there are rational delights, as well as sensual delights; he is not worthy of
the name of a man, that does not think there are rational delights, as well as
sensual: Many of the Heathens that knew what rational delights were, those
things suitable to the rules of right Reason, scorned sensual delights, as
inferior to them; give me that man that has but the rules of right Reason, and
I dare undertake to convince him, that all the ways of godliness are suitable
to those principles, though some be above them: But being ways of wisdom there
is more pleasure, because they are not only suitable to the rules of right
Reason, but are able to elevate Reason: Wisdom does make the face of a man to
shine, and puts a luster upon a man, and puts a glory upon any thing; the
beauty and glory that wisdom has, is put upon the ways of godliness, therefore
pleasant.

Secondly, they are pleasantness, because in them 2.
the soul of a man is in the true and right temper and frame of it: Now the
delight of nature, it is the right temper and frame, suitable to the principles
of nature in every thing; And therefore, that Text that you all know, where it
is said, A good Conscicience is a continual feast; the word is in the Original,
a good heart, a merry heart, and some translate it, a heart that is in a right
temper, that is, in such a frame and temper, that is the true right temper of
the heart, that affords a continual feast to any. That place in James 5. If any
man be merry, let him sing; (...)
the word is, if any ones mind be right, if his mind be in the right temper,
then let him sing: For there is no true mirth, no true joy, but that which
arises from the true temper of the spirit. Sense has no delight, but when the
sensitive part is in the right temper; and so it is in the soul: Now the soul
in the ways of godliness is in the right temper, these put the soul into the
right frame, and so comes to be pleasant.

Thirdly, they are pleasantness, because they are 3.
the highest actions of the highest faculties, elevated by the highest
principles, about the highest objects, and therefore must needs afford a great
deal of pleasure. This is a special consideration of the pleasantness of the
ways of godliness, and will let much of the excellency of them into your
hearts. What is the highest pleasure of sense, but the highest exercise of the
sensitive faculty about such an object as is suitable to sense? as there is a
great deal of pleasure in meat and drink: Whence comes this? It comes from that
exercise of the Salinal humor in the tongue and frame of the mouth, meeting
with another humor in meat and drink, suitable to it, that is all the pleasure
in the taste, which is the special pleasure that is sought for in the world.

Now I beseech you consider, if there be pleasure in joining two such mean
things together, the exercise of the humor in the spittle, meeting with a humor
in meat and drink suitable to it; what pleasure must needs be in the
exercising, and acting of a creature, that is of the highest nature that ever
God made creature; and these creatures raised with the highest principles for
the kind that any creature is capable of, and exercised about the highest
objects that it is possible for a creature to be exercised about for the kind,
God, and Christ, and Eternity? if we see pleasure in the other that is so low,
and not in this, certainly we must pull out our eyes, and willingly besot our
own hearts, if we yield not that the pleasure herein is abundantly more, and
more glorious. So the pleasure of the eye, what is it but the visive spirit
that is in the eye? meeting with color abroad, it has pleasure therein: If
the visive spirit in the eye, which is a poor mean thing that brute beasts have
as well as our selves, meeting with such a poor thing as the color is, becomes
such delight; what delight must be in exercising the highest faculties, about
the highest objects? And so the smell is nothing but that humor in the
nostrils, meeting with another humor that is without: And so of the ear, and of
the touch; we might instance, there the delight comes from nothing but the
exercise of the faculty about mean things; but if godliness exercises such
glorious faculties, so elevated about such glorious objects, there must needs
be a great deal of pleasantness.

Fourthly, the ways of wisdom must needs be 4.
ways of pleasantness, because they are the life of God himself, the soul in
the ways of wisdom does live the very life of God: The Scripture speaks of the
Life of Grace, it is the life of God: Now all pleasure and comfort, is
according to the life that a creature lives; comfort is nothing else but the
feeding of such a kind of life: Sensitive comforts is the feeding of that
life, rational comforts the feeding of that life; and the life of God being a
higher life then any other, then sense or reason, that must have its comforts
too, and there must be delight and pleasure for the filling up of this; now the
work of Grace in the hearts of Gods people, and in their lives, it is the life
of God, and therefore there must needs be a great deal of comfort in the
exercise of such a life.

Fifthly, much pleasantness there is in the ways of godliness, because in them
the people of God do communicate unto God their souls, in all that they have or
do, by a letting out of the soul into God that is the fountain of all good: Now
there is an infinite delight in this. All the delight that there is in God, or
in the creature, is in communication. In God himself: because God would have
delight in himself, therefore he would have that that he might communicate
himself to; and because he would have infinite delight, according to his
infinite nature, therefore he would have that, that he might infinitely
communicate himself unto; and therefore the Son of God, the second Person of
the Trinity, is the infinite delight of his Father, because the Father does
infinitely communicate himself unto him.

And now because God would have further delight, though there be nothing that
he can infinitely communicate himself unto but his Son, yet that he may have
such delight as his creature may understand, he makes a world; and the special
end why God made the world, is, that he might have creatures to communicate
himself unto, in his wisdom, and goodness and glory; and therefore those
creatures that are most capable of Gods communicating himself unto, are called
Gods delight; God rejoices in the habitable parts of the earth, because there
are creatures that he can communicate himself unto, and especially his pleasure
is among his people, because there are creatures that are capable of
communicating of himself: Thus you see that the delight of Gods is
communicating himself.

And so the delight of the creature is in communicating themselves; and
therefore of all natural delights, that of marriage is the most, because there
is the greatest communication of one creature to another: Now when as Gods
delight is in communication, and our delight is in natural communication, then
much more when we come to communicate our selves spiritually to God. There is a
delight in the life of friendship, because one friend communicates himself to
another, but in marriage greater, because that communication is greater; and
according to the degrees of communication, the degrees of delight are; then the
delight in the ways of God must be the greatest, because there is the greatest,
and highest, and most glorious communication of a creature, it communicates it
self, and lets out it self fully into the infinite Ocean of all good: If there
were nothing but a letting out of it self into an ordinary good, it were
delight, but to let out it self into an infinite Ocean of all delight, this is
pleasure, and this is a mystery; this is a ground why no hypocrite has the
delight of the ways of godliness, because he does not communicate himself fully
unto God; but when the heart comes off fully to communicate it self to God,
there is infinite delight in them: The ways of godliness surely are ways of
pleasure, if this be in them, as it is.

Sixthly, the ways of godliness are ways of 6.
pleasure, because in them the soul has the presence of God, and walks with
God, walks up and down in the light of his face: There is a blessed shine of
Gods countenance, and of his love upon the soul, and influences of his graces
unto the soul in those ways; as the soul has delight in the communication of
its self unto God, so they are ways of pleasantness, because in them there is a
communication of God unto the soul: That place in Psalm. 89. 19. has a notable
expression of the sweetness of the ways of godliness, and the delight that Gods
people have in those ways: Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound,
they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance. God is in them, and
lets out himself unto them; now the quintessence of all good put together, is
in every beam of Gods face, and therefore when God shall let out himself, and
be thus the portion of a soul, it must needs be a great deal of delight.

Seventhly, ways of godliness are the ways of pleasure, because the principles
of them all is love: whatsoever 7.
comes from love, has much delight and pleasure, and the principle of every
way of God is love: God would have nothing from us but out of love, and that
may carry us unto love of God himself, and that love by which the heart is
carried unto God, is the chariot of love: There is a sweet expression for this
that we have in Cant. 3. 9, 10. the estate of the Church is set out by Solomon's
making himself a Chariot of the wood of Lebanon: He made the Pillars thereof of
silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the covering of it of purple, the midst
thereof being paved with love. A strange expression, that the midst of Chariot
should be paved with love: the chariot whereby Christ does carry his people up
and down in the world, and bring them to himself, is such a Chariot, as the
midst thereof is paved with love. At the 7. ver. he speaks of the bed of
Solomon, and here of his Chariot; Divines interpret these two places, his bed
to set out the rest and glory that the Saints shall have with Christ eternally;
and the Chariot of Solomon, that is, those ways wherein Christ carries his
people up and down in the world to himself, and the midst thereof is love;
there must needs then be delight in those ways.

Eighthly, the ways of God are full of pleasantness, 8.
because they are such as are delightful to God: Now they must be pleasant,
when they are such as God takes delight in, they are such as the Church knows
Christ takes much delight in. What admirable expressions has that Book of the
Canticles, of Gods delight in the graces of his people, and in the ways of
godliness? Now there is no man loves a friend, but accounts every good thing
that his friend loves, to be a double good: Now that which God himself accounts
pleasantness, and is his delight, must needs be the delight and pleasure of a
gracious heart, because there is so much nearness between God and a gracious
heart.

Ninthly, Yet further, there is abundance of pleasantness 10.
in the ways of God, in regard of the many encouraging delights that God has
provided for his people while they do live here, and walk with him in these
ways, to make their lives to be sweet unto them; God provides his Paradise here
for them, to encourage them, they walk in the garden of God; God has his Eden,
his garden, The Covenant of Grace, and the glorious things prepared, are as the
Eden and Paradise of God, in which the souls of his people walk, wherein they
have delightful hills and dales. In the Scripture there are the high mysteries
of godliness, and the plain and easy truths of Religion, as valleys and hills
to delight them in their way. They have the sweet springs and rivers of
Ordinances, that are appointed as sweet streams to refresh them; and the
blessed promises, delightful trees to behold, The tree of life, Christ himself,
and a feast of fat things in the Ordinances, wine upon the lees, making melody
in their hearts, they go no further for that, and therefore sure their ways are
ways of pleasantness, there being so many encouraging delightful things that
God has provided for them in their way.

Tenthly, Further, ways of pleasantness they are, 9.
because that Religion does enable them to draw out more delight and pleasure
from the creature it self, then any other possibly can do; there is no
principle that can enable to draw out delights from the creature, as godliness
does enable a man to do; for take any other carnal natural man, he can draw out
nothing from the creature but that which is carnal and natural; but Gods people
have a principle to draw out more, and we are to know this, that every creature
has a natural delight in it, and there is somewhat more in it to a gracious
heart, then a natural delight; as it was with Manna, when Manna fell, there was
a dew that fell together with it; and so with our meat, and drink, and clothes,
and estate, and delights in the world; it is true, they are Manna, and we feed
upon them as the carnal Israelites fed upon Manna, but we do not see the dew; a
carnal heart is not acquainted with the dew that falls with the Manna, but those
that are godly and religious, and walk in these ways of wisdom, they have a
principle to discern and relish the dew that falls with this Manna, a secret
blessing of God that their souls are enabled to close with in the enjoyment of
the creature; in meat, and drink, and clothes, and recreations, they find a
secret influence of GOD together with them.

Take a flower, if a fly come to it, it cannot get out that good which a Be
can do: If we take a flower, we can get out the smell, but there is a honey
dew, and if we had that principle a Be has, we might get out more then the
smell: So carnal people have many sweet flowers, which are pleasant to the
smell, but there is a honey dew that only the godly can get out: So that he
has not only the use of all lawful pleasure to the full that any other has,
but he can go and take them as his own, as those that are purchased by the
blood of Christ, as those his Father allows him: If he see the glory of the
creature, and delights in it, he looks upon it as Gods own delight that he
gives him, and looks upon all creatures as his Fathers; he sees no ground, but
he says it is his Fathers ground; and he sees springs and rivers, and delights
in the creatures as they are his Fathers.

A wicked man that takes delight in the creature, he travels and walks up and
down, and sees other creatures; but it is as if a man were walking in the
Orchard and Garden of his deadly enemy: Suppose a man have a deadly enemy, and
he has a pleasant garden, that has many fair walks and trees in his garden,
and he walks in it as others do; But where am I now? I am walking here, and
compassed in the garden that is mine enemies, and what if he meet me here? it
may cost me my life: And so it is with all carnal men in the world; but the
people of God enjoy the outward delights of the world, and see the sweet walks,
and delightful pleasures that are here, and it is their Fathers garden, the
garden of him that is their God, that they have an interest in, so that they
have more delight in the creatures then any else.

Yea not only so, godliness does not only enable to draw more delight from the
creatures then others, but raises all natural pleasures on high, and makes them
spiritual, it puts a spiritual excellency upon that which is natural, it does
not rest in having content to the eye, or ear, or taste in any natural delight,
but spiritualizeth all; there is that virtue in godliness to spiritualize all
natural things, to raise the excellency of them.

Yea not only so, but in the last place there is that virtue in godliness, to
turn all evil into good, if it meet with any thing that has bitterness;
godliness is like that wood, that made the bitter waters sweet, it has that
excellency to turn evil, and make it not only profitable, but delightful. So
that all these being put together concerning the commendation of the ways of
wisdom, we must either put out our eyes, or acknowledge we do not know what the
ways of wisdom mean, if we do not subscribe to this truth, that her ways are
ways of pleasantness: Ways of pleasantness they are, and this pleasantness that
is in her ways has abundance of excellencies in it. Very many I thought to
have spoken of, and enlarged, take only the very mention of them, (because I
must not be too long) and then we will answer to some quaeres, and apply all,
and so conclude. For the excellent properties of this pleasantness, it is that
which is the sweetest soul-satisfying pleasantness, the very rule it self is
sweet, sweeter then honey; oh how sweet is the souls acting by it! it has the
very quintessence of all other delights extracted in it, it is the most solid,
such as has not vanity and froth in it, as other delights have; it is such a
delight as ennobles the soul, it spiritualizeth the heart, it is immixt, not
dangerous as others are; it is abiding, not vanishing, it is continually virid
and fresh; though there is a fullness in it, yet it grows not to satiety by use,
but grows more and more sweet, for it raises and enlarges the faculty; it is
Heavenly, it is divine, it is independent in regard of the creature, there
needs no sharking out to the creature for the upholding it, all other delights
depend on this; there is no pleasure had but in the ways of godliness: Una
guttula malae conscientiae totum marae mundani gaudii absorbet: One drop of an
evil conscience swallows up the whole Sea of worldly joy, says Luther; but one
drop of this delight is enough to sweeten all sorrows; one drop of gall will
imbitter much sweet, but one drop of sweet cannot sweeten much gall; but here
it is otherwise, one drop of this sweet sweetens all bitterness of afflictions,
but all the bitter of afflictions cannot imbitter one drop of this delight. Yea
this pleasure is the rule of all pleasure, and the end of all pleasure,
whatsoever pleasure is not regulated by this, and subordinate to this, is evil.

But how are the ways of wisdom the ways of Quest. 1.
pleasantness? It appears otherwise, for the ways of godliness do abridge men
of abundance of pleasure and delight in many things in the world; What is so
great an enemy to the pleasures of men and women as Religion? It causes them
to be cut short of abundance of delightful things that others rejoice in.

To that I answer, first, Suppose it were so: you Answ. 1.
heard in the commendation, that the pleasantness of the ways of godliness was
exceeding great, that it has that excellency in it, to make up whatsoever
pleasure it wants: Though it should cut you short of abundance of pleasure, if
it shall put a principle that shall enable you to stand in no need of that
pleasure it cuts you short of, what have you lost? As suppose How the ways of
wisdom ar ways of pleasantness.
a man that is weak, and has little blood or spirits in him, and is chill, and
cold, and puts on many clothes to keep himself warm; if these clothes should be
al taken away, save only his inward garment, if there could be put into him
spirits, and blood and marrow, and that which should make him not to be
sensible of the want of his clothes, it is a great deal better; What man that
is weak and sickly, and is fain to have abundance of clothes to keep him warm,
would not be willing to part with his clothes, if he might have spirits and
blood put into him, not to feel the want of those clothes? So, why is it that
your hearts are set upon the delight of the creature? because you want a
principle within to satisfy your souls withal, and therefore you are fain to
seek the clothing of the creature, and to keep your selves warm with the
clothing of the creature; but if Religion take away those things, and give you
a principle not to feel the want of them, but have them made up another way and
better, you have no cause to complain of the want of pleasantness.

Secondly, I answer, that godliness abridges us of 2.
no lawful pleasure; if it abridges of any, it is delightfulness to want those
delights that godliness abridges us of: What, have thou delight in that which
is sinful? if it be not sinful, Religion does not abridge thee of it, only
such delights in which thou dishonorest God, and provokest him against thee.

But secondly, How are the ways of God ways Quest.
of pleasantness, when they require abundance of humiliation, trouble for sin;
and is not that bitter and 2.
grievous?

To that I answer, First, there is more sweetness in Answ.
that which thou call bitterness, then in all the delightfulness of the
world besides: those waters Christ does turn into wine. And to convince you
that these are not bitter waters, but that the tears of repentance and
humiliation, are sweet refreshing waters of life; consider from what fountain
they come.

First, the work of humiliation if it be right, the principle of it is the
melting work of the Gospel in the 1.
soul, the sweetness of the goodness, and mercy of God in Jesus Christ melting
the heart, and causing it to dissolve, and fall down under the hand of God;
certainly that which comes from such a sweet principle, cannot have much
bitterness in it.

Secondly, the soul in the work of humiliation, melting before the Lord, eases
it self in that melting 2.
of abundance of sin; and much sweetness there must needs be in those tears
that ease the soul of, and deliver the soul from much sin.

Thirdly, in the work of humiliation there is much delight, because the soul
has much delight in looking 3.
back to that sorrow it has had; and if godliness Si adeo dulce flere prote,
quam dulce erit gaudere de te? Ber.
makes mourning to be delightful, what does it make rejoicing to be?

But if it be said in the third place, But there are many hardthings that Gods
people do meet withal in the ways of godliness, and the ways of godliness Quest.
put them upon such things as cause them to meet 3.
with sore temptations and trials here in the world; how then can the ways of
godliness be so pleasant?

To that I answer, Here is a mighty commendation Answ.
to the pleasantness of the ways of Religion, notwithstanding the hardest, and
sorest things a godly heart meets with; there is that delight in the ways of
godliness, as upholds the heart under all, and carries the heart sweetly on.
What commendation was it to the grace in the hearts of the Martyrs, that did
uphold their hearts, and carry their hearts sweetly in the enduring of such
hard things?

Secondly, these being hard to flesh and blood, 2.
hinder not the pleasure of a gracious heart; it is the highest improvement of
all our estates that can be, the highest testimony of giving your respect to
God, whereby the soul enjoys most of God all times: The Spirit of God and glory
rests upon the soul while it is enduring such things. And how opposite is thy
heart, and what difference between Christ's heart and thine? Christ bids you
leap for joy, when you meet with such things, and you think they take away all
joy.

But we see it in experience contrary; when people come into the ways of
godliness, they do not find Quest.
that delight and joy you speak of, their spirits are heavy, 4.
and lumpish, and sad.

For answer to that, It may be it is but seriousness, Answ.
and thou think it is sadness. 1.


Secondly, it may be they are not in their element, and therefore they do not
express cheerfulness: If 2.
the fish be upon the earth, it cannot take delight; the bird does not sing
when it is upon the ground, but when it is got up to the air: Those that you
say are melancholy and lumpish, put them to religious and gracious exercises,
and get up their hearts to God, and they will be merry.

Thirdly, it may be it is your company makes 3.
them so, because they see so much dishonor to God in your company, let them be
among their own company, and they know how to be joyful.

Fourthly, it is not because of Religion, but because they are no more
religious, because they find 4.
so much want of godliness in their hearts.

Fifthly, it is not because they have so much cause of sorrow as you, but they
come to see more then 5.
you; not because their hearts are not so pleasant as yours, but because God
has discovered the danger of their condition more to them, and the things that
concern their souls and eternal estates, such things as if thou did but see,
would sink thy heart into dismal, bottomless sorrow and desperation. Thou
think much to see them so sad as they are, If thou did but see that they
see, thou would sink down into the gulf of desperation among the damned
spirits.

It is a mighty argument, they have some mighty work of God to uphold them, and
that grace comes from a mighty principle, that they have some cheerfulness,
notwithstanding they see such things, as if one that were merely natural should
see them, he would sink down into hell, and yet they can hope in God; and
sometimes, notwithstanding all unbelief, do rejoice in God. Alas, thy
pleasantness and delight is such, as every little toy is enough to damp; if
thou be crossed in the least thing in the creature, thou art damped: But
what if God should show thee all his terrors, the infinite evil of sin, and the
infinite danger thou art in, in regard of thy eternal estate, that would damp
thee indeed; and therefore acknowledge that that joy that the godly have,
considering what they see, is exceeding strong, that upholds them as it does.

Sixthly, their joy is a secret inward thing, which 6.
strangers shall not intermeddle withal, thou have no skill in it. What was it
for Nebuchadnezzar, to say, No Nobleman had such pleasure as he, when he was
among the beasts; thou have no principle to judge of it, and therefore art no
meet Judge.

For Application.

Hence we see one special and great reason, why Use. 1.
Gods people are taken off so much from carnal pleasure as they are; they have
met with better; and the sweet of the world is not so much to them, because
they have met with that which is abundantly more sweet. It is the sweet savor
of Christ's precious ointment, that draws the hearts of the Saints after him,
that makes them cry out, Draw us, and we will run after thee, Cant. 1. 3, 4.
But the savor of base pleasures draws vile hearts after them:

-- Trahit sua quemque voluptas.

The light of the Sun darkens the light of the candle, and puts out the light
of the fire; The light that Gods servants do meet with in the ways of God, do
darken all, and take away the luster of all carnal delight; and this is the
reason that Satan does not go that way to work, to tempt a gracious heart with
sensual pleasures, because he is so far above them, and therefore he is fain to
tempt them with spiritual pride, and lusts of a higher nature: It were a
wonderful dishonor for any that profess godliness, to have their hearts taken
with any pleasures of the flesh, but only in order to better pleasures that
are to be enjoyed in the ways of godliness, in the ways of wisdom.

In the second place; What infinite cause have we to bless the Name of God that
gives us such pleasant ways unto glory? Though his ways were never so full of
torment, we had cause to bless God; but for to pave our way to Heaven with such
delights, and to afford unto us such soul-satisfying contents, here while we
live in this our poor pilgrimage, this is praiseworthy: If we were to ascend
to Heaven in a fiery Chariot, we were to praise God; but this is the Chariot of
Solomon, the midst whereof is paved with love, as you heard; How are we to
bless God for this?

Thirdly, if it be so, here is an aggravation of the Use 3.
wickedness of those that shall take delight in sinful pleasures: God sees it
is impossible for any of his creatures, but they must seek for pleasures some
way, and that God might take our hearts to himself, he has provided ways
wherein we may have pleasure, and an infinite aggravation it will be to your
wickedness, to seek for pleasure in the ways of sin, in dishonoring God, when
thou may have pleasure in honoring of God: Consider this, and let thy soul
upbraid it self for abominable wickedness and ingratitude: There are ways of
delight wherein God may be honored, and my soul satisfied; there are other ways
that have delight, but such ways as God will be dishonored in them, and my soul
endangered. Now when as God does give me a cup full of all delicacy to satisfy
my thirst with, for me to take a cup of poison to satisfy my thirst with, this
is folly, and this is abominable wickedness of men's hearts. God sets his cup of
salvation, and tenders it in his ways to satisfy your souls withal, and the
Devil comes with his cup of poison, and do but speak of delight, and when you
are athirst, you rather take the cup of poison, then the cup of Salvation: the
more delight there is in Gods ways, the more abominable is thy wickedness to
forsake them.

Fourthly, hence the great scandal of the ways of godliness, that the world
stumbles at, is taken away, they call them dumpish ways: The Saints of God
never knew the mind of God if this be so. The world deals with the ways of God
in this case, as they did with the Christians in the Primitive times; they used
to put Christians into Bears and Dogs skins, or ugly creatures, and then bait
them; and so the men of the world put Religion into ugly conceits, and then
speak against them: and truly that they speak against, is only their own
conceits, and not any thing in themselves; they are lovely and excellent, and
glorious, only they appear to be sad and evil, by the conceits thou have put
upon them.

In the fifth place, by that which has been said, Use 5.
let all be drawn to the love of the ways of godliness. I have often hinted
upon such an argument as this, and therefore will pass lightly over it. Fear
not pleasure, trust God with it, thou shall find enough. Would thou never be
sad? live well, says Bernard: Tell me, would thou embrace the Vis nunquam
esse tristis? been vive. Bern. de intern. dom. c. 45
ways of Religion, if thou were sure of pleasure? I call Heaven and Earth to
record this day, that which I have spoken of the ways of wisdom are truths of
God, they are not notions, not conceits, but certain realities. God has
engaged himself to make this good, and abundantly more; Oh come and taste how
sweet the Lord is, do not stand aloof off; they may seem to be unpleasant ways
a great way off, but when you come near, you will see delight. Wherefore all
you that have been acquainted with the ways of wisdom, manifest this, that God
has brought you into blessed paths, that these things are true: Religion does
mightily suffer by the Professors of it, when those that look on, see no such
things manifested: It is our duty to rejoice in the Lord, and to walk in the
ways of wisdom, as it may appear they are ways of pleasantness, to carry ous
selves delightfully in these delightful ways. Delightfulness in the ways of
godliness puts a beauty upon them; It is an excellent similitude that
Chrysostom has to express this, As, says he, a beautiful face at all times is
pleasing to the eye, but then especially when there is joy manifested in the
countenance: joy in the face puts a new beauty, and makes that which before was
beautiful, to be exceeding beautiful, it puts a luster upon beauty; so, though
the ways of Religion be in themselves beautiful, yet when there is spiritual
joy added, they appear then beautiful with a double beauty. We have a sweet
promise, Isa. 65. 18. Oh that we could see it fulfilled! I will create
Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy; a joy even in the abstract, not
only joyful, but a joy, and God will create this, it must be Gods work; and
though to the eye of flesh and blood there be no matter of joy, yet God will
create her people a joy. You know what charges the Prophet lays upon this; what
a comely thing it is, and see that in any case you rejoice. Only take heed you
do not mistake in pleasantness; many that are godly may be pleasant in their
way upon that ground, because Christians must be pleasant, but do not mistake
natural pleasantness for spiritual pleasantness.

How shall we know the difference between natural Quest.
pleasantness in a Christian, and spiritual pleasantness.

There may be a great many of temporal pleasures Answ.
that God gives forth to Christians in its place; but Difference between
natural pleasantness, and spiritual pleasantness.
you must rise higher then that, and put another manner of luster upon the ways
of Religion then natural pleasantness.

First, if it be a spiritual pleasantness, it will be serious, such as becomes
Christian gravity; Yea, not only seriousness and gravity is to be mixed with 1.
pleasantness; but if it be spiritual pleasantness,

Secondly, it is such as can stand with fear, and the 2.
work of repentance and humiliation; these do not hinder a spiritual
pleasantness, though it hinders that which is natural: You know the Scripture
that says, Rejoice with trembling; and Blessed is the man that fears the
Lord, and greatly delights in his Commandments: That is a spiritual
pleasantness, which has a gracious mixture of seriousness and other graces of
Gods Spirit with it.

Thirdly, Again, if it be a gracious pleasantness, it 3.
is a delight in all the ways of wisdom; many can delight in some ways of
wisdom, the stony ground received some truths with joy, but others they cannot
close with; but when the pleasantness is spiritual, there is rejoicing in all.

Fourthly, Again, if the pleasantness be spiritual, it 4.
is our strength, it carries on the soul in the ways of God more fully, it is
oil that causes the wheels of thy soul to go on more freely in the ways of
Religion. I appeal to thee, Does thy pleasantness carry thee on more sweetly in
the ways of Religion? Thou have been merry in company, but does this carry thee
on more fully in the ways of God? If you have had pleasure in natural things,
and when you come to spiritual things, your hearts are dead, certainly you went
beyond your bounds.

Fifthly, Again, if it be spiritual pleasantness, it 5.
will bear up the heart in the want of all outward pleasantness, and though all
outward content be taken away. Habbak. 3. 17, 18. Although the fig tree shall
not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall
fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the
fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: Yet I will rejoice in the Lord,
I will joy in the God of my salvation. When all is dark abroad in the world,
the soul does rejoice in God alone: A soul that has but natural pleasantness
of spirit, is all amort and down when any affliction befalls him. You that have
the most delightful spirits, when you have friends, and all that you like, you
are jocund and merry, but when affliction comes, how quickly are your spirits
down? and how are you vexed and troubled? whereas if there were this spring of
pleasantness in the heatt, it would bear up the heart joyful in affliction;
though servants and friends should cross, this delightfulness of spirit within
would carry the heart on cheerfully: But those that are delightful when they
are well pleased, yet every little thing that crosses them, makes them dumpish.
This is another argument, it is not spiritual pleasantness their hearts are
filled with, it is not from the delight they have found in the ways of God that
makes them so merry. This by way of Caution.

But if we be sure that our pleasantness is spiritual, let us expatiate our
selves to the utmost: It is a work of grace to moderate all carnal pleasures,
and to keep them down; but it is the special work of grace to expatiate the
soul to the utmost in all spiritual pleasure: Therefore if God has given thee
this spring of delight and pleasure, expatiate it to the glory and praise of
God. Blessed is the man that greatly delights in the ways of Gods Commandments:
And if God takes pleasure in thee, how much more should thou take pleasure in
him! God gives out his pleasure to be joined to our pleasantness, and if we
should not carry on the ways of Religion pleasantly, it will be a dishonor to
God, and a disgrace to our selves, and we cannot expect that acceptance from
God of what we do, as otherwise we might; for as Si quid boni tristis feceris
fit de te potius quam facis Prosper
God loves a cheerful Giver, so a cheerful Server.

How shall we carry on the work of God pleasantly?

First, be sure to keep the heart right within, be sure Quest.
to keep all at peace within thy soul; you know according Answ.
to the temper within, so there is the relishing of things without; He that
has peace within, can easily go through the duties that are required without
with joy.

Further, exercise faith in the work and office of the How to carry on the work
of God pleasantly.
holy Ghost, that office that the holy Ghost is designed unto by the Father and
the Son, to be the Comforter of his people, to bring joy and comfort to them;
look upon the holy Ghost, as designed by the Father and the Son to bring joy
and delight to the souls of his people. What an infinite difference there is
between the comforts of a carnal heart, and the comforts of the godly? The one
come from a little meat and drink, and the other come from the exercise of
faith about the office of the holy Ghost that is designed to this work.

Thirdly, in all that thou do, be sure to be upright: 3.
Though thou be able to do but a little in any way of God, if thou be
upright, God accepts of it, and and thou will find comfort: Thou say thy
duties are mean; it may be so, but if thou be upright, thou may have
comfort, it becomes the upright to be joyful; whereas the most glorious
performances, if they be not in uprightness, are but abominable.

Again, sweeten all your duties by spiritual meditation; 4.
a Christian that treasures up spiritual meditation, and every duty that he
performs brings it in by meditation, and has a great many meditations to roll
his duty up and down; in this is delight: To go to duty, and to have a barren
heart to act, there is no delight; but to go to a duty, and to exercise
spiritual meditation, this is sweet.

Again, labor to principle thy heart aright in the 5.
ways of godliness, to understand what they are; if thou understoodest what
they are, they would be delightful; and the reason why many do not go on
delightfully is, because they do not understand what is in the ways of God to
cause delight.

You will say, What is there in the ways of God, to Quest.
cause delight?

First, every work of godliness, and that ability that Ans. 1.
grace has to exercise, is a beam of that infinite, choice, eternal, electing
love of God upon thy soul; if thou look upon it so, it will be wonderfully
delightful.

Secondly, look upon every duty of godliness, as 2.
having more of the glory of God in it, then the What there is in the ways to
cause delight.
whole frame of heaven and earth besides: Take all Gods works in the Creation,
in Providence, in the Heavens, the Sun, Moon and Stars, in the Earth, and the
Seas, there is not so much of the glory of God in them all, as in one gracious
action that a Christian performs; and if you looked at it thus, it could not
but have pleasure in it.

Thirdly, look at that action of grace, as that in which God attains his end in
creating heaven and earth, 3.
more then in other things besides; as there is more of God in it, so God
attains more in it; the end of God in his counsels is more attained by any
gracious act, then by any thing else that can be done, save of the same nature:
How delightful should we be in the ways of godliness, if we looked thus at them?

Fourthly, look upon every gracious act, as the seed 4.
of glory and eternal life: Every work of grace in the heart and life of Gods
people, is a seed of glory and eternal life. And these four considerations
being put upon every gracious act, do confirm that which was said in the
opening of the point, they must needs be full of pleasantness: Be not satisfied
in doing any thing in the ways of God, till you do it pleasantly; I hear the
ways of God are pleasant, I have gone on being haled by conscience, but little
have I understood of the pleasantness of them, there is more to be looked after
then I have attained to: By this thou shall come to be mightily strengthened,
and it will be a mavelous help to make thee continue in the ways of godliness:
And as I said in handling that argument of the easiness of the ways of
godliness, those that are continually thinking of the hardness of Gods ways,
will fall off; but by having them pleasant, it will carry thee on against
temptations, and the current of all arguments.

The last Use of all, is, If the ways of wisdom be ways of pleasantness, what
is the end of wisdom? If the nether springs be so sweet, what will the upper
be? If the lower Jerusalem be paved with gold, Bonus es Domine, animae
quaerenti; quid invenienti?
surely that upper Jerusalem is paved with pearls. It is an excellent speech of
Bernard, Good art thou, O Lord, to the soul that seeks thee; what art thou then
to the soul that finds thee? How sweet and pleasant are the ways of wisdom
then? How sweet and delightful is the end of wisdom? If grace be pleasant, how
pleasant is glory? therefore the Saints dye so pleasantly, because there is a
meeting of grace and glory: Grace is delightful, glory more delightful; but
when these both meet together, what delight will there then be? It is a speech
of Jerome, speaking of carnal delights; None can go from delight to delight;
but it is not so spiritually, the more delight we have here, the more we shall
have hereafter: and therefore let this be all our prayer, Lord give us evermore
this pleasure, satisfy our souls with this pleasure; if the drops be sweet,
the rivers of pleasure and joy that are at Christ's right hand, how sweet are
they?

Moses his Choice.
The second Part.
CHAP. XVI. A spiritual eye can see an excellency in Gods people, though under
great affliction.
THe fourth Doctrinal Conclusion that Doct. 4.
was raised from the words, was, That a spiritual eye can see an excellency in
Gods people, though under never so great affliction.

Moses chooses rather to suffer affliction with the people of God. Who were
this people? A despised people, an afflicted people; Yet Moses could see an
excellency in them while they were making their brick, while they were whipped
by their taskmasters, and contemptible in the eyes of all the Egyptians; yet
by the eye of faith Moses could look upon them as the most excellent of the
earth, as the most glorious people that lived in the world, and desires rather
to join with them, though in the greatest afflictions, then to abide in
Pharaoh's Court, in the enjoyment of all worldly delights; let the world cast
what dirt they will upon them, and darken their glory what they can, yet they
are precious and honorable in the Saints eyes, The excellent of the earth, and
the glory of the world. Job scraping his sores upon the dunghill, and Jeremy
sinking into the mire in the dungeon, are more beautiful and glorious, then the
great men of the earth, when they are crowned upon their Thrones; Though you
have lien amongst the pots, says the Psalmist, yet you are as the wings of a
Dove covered with silver, and whose feathers are covered with yellow gold.

We read of the Christians that lived in the time between the Prophets and
Christ, in the latter end of this Chapter, that were as mean as almost the rage
of men, and poverty, and disgrace could make them, wandering up and down in
Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, and in the dens and caves of the earth; and yet,
says the Text, they were such as the world were not worthy of: Chrysostom
carries it thus, Take all the men of the world, they are not worth one of the
people of God, though never so mean in regard of outward: But I rather take it
thus, The world was not worthy of such a privilege, to have them live amongst
them, they are fitter to be set as Stars in Heaven, and to be continually
before the Throne of God.

Many times under mean outsides, there are precious things within; in earthen
vessels, rich treasures. The Tabernacle of God, covered meanly outwardly, and
yet precious within. It is said of Christ himself, that he had no form and
comeliness at all outwardly, Isa. 53. No beauty to a carnal eye: And yet in
Cant. 5. where the Church is put upon the description of Christ, she says, He
is altogether lovely; altogether desires, so it is in the Original: See what a
different esteem is of Christ in the thoughts of the world, and the thoughts of
a gracious heart: And as of Christ, so of Christians, Christ is precious to
them that do believe; To you he is precious (says the Apostle) but Why a
gracious heart sees so mueh excellency in Gods people, under outward meanness.
to others a rock of offense; so to a godly gracious heart, the godly are
precious, though contemned of those that are ungodly. The arguments that a
gracious heart goes upon, or reasons why a spiritual eye should see so much
excellency in Gods people, under their outward means, are,

First, because they judge as God judges; it is of 1.
the Spirit of God that they have received, and therefore they must needs judge
of things as God judges. A child esteems of things usually as his father
does; if there be any of you manifest a slight esteem of any among whom you
live, before your children, your children will have the like esteem of them; if
you manifest a high esteem of any, your children will do the like: Hence it is,
if those that are profane, do despise and scorn at Gods people before their
children, their children will quickly learn to despise them: Now because Gods
people have Gods Spirit, and God is their Father, they judge as their Father
does. Righteous men and Kings, in Scripture phrase, are made all one; those who
are Righteous, God looks upon as Kings, and such as are Kings, are not
respected of God, if they be not Righteous: Compare those two Scriptures, Mat.
13. 17. and Luke 10. 24. in the one it is thus, Many Prophets and Righteous
men, have desired to see those things which ye see: But in the other it is,
Many Prophets and Kings, have desired to see those things which ye see.

God does not judge of men in regard of outward; what are outward before the
Lord? What is it to have gold, and fine clothes before God? Those things that
are braveries in the world, and take up the eyes of men to admire at them, what
are these to God? God does not esteem of men at all for these things, neither
does he disesteem them for the want of them; the want of clothes, and of money,
and of the things of the world, what is this to God? Does God look at any man
the worse for want of these things? God is no respecter of persons; if he looks
at any with high esteem, he looks at the poor, and humble, and contrite: God
delights to look down into the world upon those that are poor; he reserves a
poor people that shall trust in his name, Zeph. 3. 12. The Lord passes by the
great things of the world, he brings down the mighty, and regards the low
estate of his handmaid, the low estate of his people: It is a poor and contrite
spirit, that he that dwells on high looks at; the prayer of the destitute
he regards, Psalm. 102. 17. The word in the Original is, A poor shrub, that
which is in the Wilderness, and the beasts tread upon, that no man regards,
that seems to be altogether worthless. It may be, one comes with brave words,
and has mighty expressions, God throws them as dirt in his face: There comes
another, and can hardly groan out his meaning, and yet there being grace, God
regards him. If a proud scornful spirit, should hear a poor gracious heart
groan out his complaints to God, he would think it nonsense; but God, knowing
the meaning of his Spirit, and seeing his grace, he has respect to him.

A broken and contrite heart thou can not despise; God can despise Princes,
and Emperors of the earth, when they sit upon their Thrones, but a broken and a
contrite heart he cannot despise; let him be never so despicable in the eyes of
the world, God cannot despise him, no more then he can deny himself, and cease
to be God. It is Gods judgment of men, that the righteous is more excellent
then bis neighbor, Prove. 12. 26. Let his neighbor be the most excellent, in
regard of parts, riches, honors, and other excellencies, and the godly man
despised, and every way contemptible in regard of outward, yet he is more
excellent then his neighbor.

It is observed, that the Eagle and the Lion, those brave creatures, were not
offered in sacrifice to God, but the poor Lamb, and Dove; God regards the Lamb
and the Dove, before the Eagle and the Lion, to note that your great and brave
spirits of the world, that are as Eagles, high, and lofty, and as the Lion, God
regards not those; but your poor Lambs, and Doves, your poor meek spirits, that
are contemptible in the eyes of the world, those are precious to God.

Not many mighty, great and noble; but God has chosen the base things of the
world, the foolish, contemptible things of the world, to confound the wise, and
the great things of the world.

It is very observable, when John sent to Christ, to know whether he were the
Messiah or no, whether they should look for another, he did not send him a
direct answer, but, says he, Go tell him, The blind see, the lame go, the dead
are raised, and the poor receive the Gospel: Mark how Christ puts the poors
receiving of the Gospel amongst the rest; the other were arguments of Gods
power and glory, but what argument of Christ's glory was this, that the poor, a
contemptible people, received the Gospel? Yes, God does as much glory in the
poors receiving the Gospel, as in raising up the dead: Some would think that
this should be an offense to John, that the poor receives the Gospel; one would
rather think he were the Messiah, if the rich had received the Gospel; No, says
he, the poor receive the Gospel; he knew that John had a gracious heart, and
would esteem of things as he did, and would not be offended.

Secondly, Gods people, by a spiritual eye, are very 2.
highly esteemed, because such an eye looks at spiritual excellencies: God has
made a gracious heart acquainted with true spiritual excellencies, and such a
one beholding the beauty and the glory that there is in spiritual excellencies,
all the outward glittering glory that there is in the world is darkened: It is
true, men and women, so long as they know no better things, judge only
according to these outward mean things. Children that know no better things
then a gay coat, count it the greatest preferment that can be, to be put into
such a coat; and so a man that knows no better things then the things of the
world, he counts it the greatest excellency to have them: But when a child
comes to have reason, and sees higher things, he does not prize such things; so
a soul that comes to see the things of Heaven, God, and Christ, and Grace, and
sees into the realities of them, and not as imaginary, he will never admire at
any thing below, but only at grace; and where there is grace, nothing can
darken the light of it, it is so glorious as the light of the Sun; a little
smoke cannot darken the light of the Sun, when it shines bright; a little smoke
will darken the light of the candle, but cannot darken the light of the Sun:
And so a little affliction will darken these outward things, to those that
esteem them at a high rate; but spiritual excellencies are of such a nature,
that afflictions cannot darken them.

But what spiritual excellencies are those that a spiritual Quest.
eye sees in Gods people, that make them to be so precious in its esteem,
notwithstanding all their outward meanness?

First, the Image of God. Secondly, the relation they have to God. Thirdly,
their spiritual privileges. Answ.
Fourthly, the preciousness of that which comes from them. Fifthly, the great
use that they are of here in the world. Sixthly, their ends.

First, for the work of grace, they have the image 1.
of God upon them: Now the image of a thing, is not the representing of a thing
in some under excellency, or in some mean thing that concerns that which it is
made to resemble; but it is a resemblance of it in that which is the chief
excellency. As if I would draw the picture of a man, I would not draw it for to
resemble flesh merely, that a beast has as well as man, but as near as can be,
the very countenance, and life of man; I will not draw the back parts of a man,
but his face, and countenance to life; so the image of God is not that which
has some little likeness to God, but that which has a likeness to God in the
highest excellency, in his holiness and righteousness, which is (to speak
according The saints likeness to God.
as we are able to conceive) the highest excellency of God; so that a gracious
heart has that which makes him like unto that which is the top of Gods
excellency, that which is the image of GOD himself, and therefore it has these
four titles, The Image of God, The Divine Nature, The Life of God, and the
Glory of God. The Image of God, Genesis 1. 26. That of the Divine Nature, you have
in the 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
promises, that by these you may be partakers of the Divine Nature. And the Life
of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. Being alienated from the life of God, that is, from his
grace. And the Glory of God, Romans 3. 23. For all have sinned, and come short of
the Glory of God. The work of grace in men's souls, has that excellency in it,
that there is more of God to be seen in it, then in all the works that ever God
did make from the beginning of the world, not only if you take one single work
(only excepting the hypostatical Union of the humane nature of Christ) but
take all the creatures that God has made in heaven and earth, they have not so
much of the glory of God to be seen in them, as there is to be seen in the work
of grace; so that take the poorest, meanest Christian, that has the work of
grace, though parts be never so weak, and outwardly he be never so
contemptible, there is more to be seen in this poor man or woman, then in the
whole frame of Heaven and earth, then in the Sun, Moon and Stars, then in all
the creatures of the world besides, except Angels; and therefore surely outward
meanness can never take down the esteem that a gracious heart has of Gods
people; Yea, it is the greatest excellency that ever God did bestow upon, or
will bestow upon any for the kind, if it were grown up to the greatest degree,
still excepting that hypostatical Union of the Humane nature of Christ with the
Divine, and therefore must needs gain a precious esteem.

It is a principle of eternal happiness, it is that which will grow up to an
eternal glory: Take all moral and natural excellencies, let them grow up to the
highest height they can, they can never grow up to glory; but this is that
eternal seed, if it be let to grow up, it will grow up to the height of glory:
Now if Grace be thus, if it be that principle whereby a creature is raised to
such a high condition, no marvel though those that have a spiritual eye, and
can see into the things of God, and judge spiritually of things, must needs
esteem those very precious and honorable, that have the work of grace upon
them. Moral excellencies have been highly esteemed by Heathens; as the Fabii
and Fabritii, that were taken from their dinner and supper of Turnips, to rule
and govern great armies, because they saw such great excellencies under their
mean outsides: If so be the knowledge of moral excellencies can raise the
esteem of men in the world, much more then the true and glorious excellencies
of grace.

Secondly, in regard of the relation they have to God: Gods people have a near
relation to God; the nearer 2.
relation one has to great ones, the more high he is in the esteem of men; now
Gods people though never The saints near relation to God.
so mean, have a wonderful near relation to God; for,

First, they are the chosen of God, they are those which the Lord in his
eternal counsels, has set apart for himself; the counsels of God from all
eternity have wrought for their good; and this is manifested unto a gracious
heart, The Lord has set apart a godly man for himself, says the Psalmist in
Psalm. 4. They are those that are the consecrated ones of God; consecrated and
devoted things, though they were never so mean, were exceedingly esteemed of;
if it were but leather, or wood, or never so mean a thing that was in the
tabernable, and consecrated to God, it was highly esteemed: Those that are
superstitious, if there be any thing they think is a holy relic, though never
so mean, what a high esteem they have of it?

It is reported of Apries, a King of Egypt, who was of a base birth, for which
some despised him; wherefore of a great Basin of gold, in which he and his
guests were wont to wash their feet, he made an Image, and set it up in an
eminent place in the City, and observing the superstitious devotions of the
people thereunto, Now, says he, though the King be of mean birth, he is not to
be respected the less: It is true, the Saints of God for their outward are
mean, but their consecration puts glory upon them. I have read of the people of
the East Indies, in the Isle Zeylon, who having an Apes tooth got from them,
which was a consecrated thing by them, they offered an incredible mass of
treasure to recover it; and if so be a consecrated thing, though so base in it
self, be so highly esteemed for the consecration sake, how much more an
immortal soul, that has so many graces, as pearls set glittering in it, being
consecrated unto God?

Secondly, they are those that are entered into Covenant with God, and therefore
in nearer relation (then others) to God; therefore they are called The portion
of God, The treasure of God, The peculiar ones of God; they are those that God
satisfies himself in; what higher then such expressions as these? They are
those that God has set his heart upon, the beloved ones of God: They are the
children of the high God; The spouse of the son, that are married to the son;
In some respect nearer then the Angels themselves, for they are not in a
mystical Union so married to Christ, as Gods people are; and Gods people having
such relations to God, as in these and many other respects might be named, they
are worthy of honorable esteem.

Thirdly, for privileges; they are those that are 3.
freed from the evil of sin, the evil of punishment. The saints Privileges.
They are those that have whatsoever is in God to be theirs, working for their
good: All the Attributes of God, and the ways of God in his Providence: If
there be any thing in God to make a man happy, it is theirs. And all the good
that is spoken of in the Word, all the glorious promises are theirs: And all
that is in the world is theirs, the world continues for their sakes; says the
Apostle, All is yours, for you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. ult.
It is a great argument to show Gods greatness, that all the creatures in the
world are his, and for him; what an argument then is it, to show the greatness
of a Christian, that Heaven, and Earth, and Christ, and God, and all are his,
and for him? They have free access to the Throne of grace, and welcome too: They
have that privilege, to come and put their hands into Gods treasure, and take
what they will, God gives them the key, giving them the spirit of prayer, he
gives them the key of his spiritual treasure: They are the heirs of Heaven and
eternal life; yea, and the heirs of the world too, for being the children of
God, they inherit their Fathers riches; now Romans 4. 13. Abraham is said to be
the heir of 4.
the world. Nemo potest bona opera satis magnifice co^mendare; Quis vel unius
operis quod Christianus ex fide and in fide, faeit utilitatem and fructu^ satis
praedicare potest? Est enim pretiofius quam coelum and terra. Luth Tom. 4. 109.
And again in Genesis c. 30. and in c. 31. Sint exilia, servilia, muliebria opera
nostra, tamen idscrib^mus hunc titulum, Verbum Domini, quo fiunt gloriosa
omnia, and in eternum mansura. Sancti quantumvis exiguum and sordidum faciunt,
magnum est and gloriosum, quia omnia factunt in side. And in Genesis 29. Si
darctur mihi ottio, eligerem Christiani rustici, aut ancillae sordidissimum and
maxim agreste opus praeomnibus victoriis and triumphis Alexandria Magni, and
Iulii Caesaris.


Fourthly, consider the precious things that come from them: as there are more
excellencies in themselves, then in all creatures in heaven and earth, except
Angels; so in every gracious action that comes from them, there is the greatest
excellency the world has. Luther has many high and excellent expressions of
the worth of the acts of grace, whereby he shows, though he was a mighty
advancer of Faith, so he was no enemy to good works: No man, says he, can
commend good works magnificently enough; for one work of a Christian, is more
prcious then heaven and earth, and therefore all the world in this life, cannot
sufficiently reward one good work. And in another place, If I might have my
desire, I would rather choose the meanest work of a Country Christian, or poor
Maid, then all the Victories and Triumphs of Alexander the Great, and of Julius
Caesar. And again, Whatsoever the Saints do, though never so small and mean, it
is great and glorious, because they do all in faith, and by the word. And yet
further, Let our works be small, servile, womanish, yet let this title be
added, The Word of the Lord, and they are all glorious, such as shall remain
eternally. Surely they are precious, from whom such precious things do come; it
is a precious fountain, that sends forth such precious streams: These the
Saints of God send forth plentifully, the excellency of them a spiritual eye
sees, and therefore must needs see those to be the excellent of the earth, from
whence these come.

Fifthly, the great use that they are of in the world; 5.
What use is a poor man or woman of, that lives in a poor smoak-hole, that no
man regards? Yes, many ways; these are the only useful people in the world,
they are they from whom God has all his glory in the world, God attains his
end of making the world by them; were it not for a company of poor contemptible
The usefulness of Gods people in the world.
people, what glory should God have in the world? Now for men to be the only
people from whom God has his glory in the world, is to be of great use: They
are they that are the salt of the earth, and the light of the world; though by
some that be applied only to those Disciples and Ministers, surely it is to be
applied to any Disciples of Christ: They are they that hold forth the light of
the glory of God; the world would be as a dungeon of dismal darkness, were it
not for them: They are they that can prevail with God for mighty things, as
Jacob, he prevailed with God as a Prince: They are they that are employed about
high and honorable things; none have such glorious employments as Gods people.

Turkish History tells us, that the very Camels that are used to go to Mahomets
Tomb, are ever after of high esteem amongst them, so as they never after use
them in any mean servile way as they did before: Though things be never so
mean, yet by the use they become honorable; no use so honorable as that of the
Saints, where this is seen with a discerning eye, they are exceeding honorable.
They are the great blessing of the world: Isa. 19. 24. there is a promise that
Israel should be a blessing in the midst of the Land. Gods people, wheresoever
they are, are a blessing to that Country, a blessing to the world, howsoever
despised of the world; put all these together, and surely they are precious.

Lastly, a spiritual eye looks upon Gods people as 6.
precious, notwithstanding all outward meanness, because it looks upon them as
in their ends, though they are now incomparably above all that is in the world
besides, yet their glorious end raises their worth exceeding high, and a
spiritual eye looks much at the end and issue of things, and therefore looking
The excellency of Gods people in regard of their ends.
upon the Saints in regard of the issue of all, they cannot but have a high
esteem of them. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man, to conceive the excellent things that God has prepared for
them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. And now a spiritual eye can see these things,
which a natural eye cannot, as if they were present, the glorious things that
are to come, and the glorious condition that such a one shall be in, a
spiritual eye cannot but fasten upon such a one, and bless him, as the blessed
of the Lord.

We do use to look upon great heirs, that are appointed for great things, and
shall have great possessions, with honorable respect, though now they be meanly
clothed, in russet cloth, or eating course bread, and playing with beggars
children; so Gods servants, howsoever they are in the esteem of the world, yet
those that know what they are to inherit, what they shall receive hereafter,
cannot but look upon them as honorable: A spiritual eye sees that that body
that is now clothed so meanly, within a few years shall shine more bright then
the Sun in the firmament, and that soul that is weak in parts and gifts, it
sees it as a vessel that shall be filled to the brim with all the glory of God,
and the Image of God to be made perfect, and to have perfect knowledge of God,
and of the blessed Trinity, and the mystery of the Gospel, and all the great
works of God: A spiritual eye can see within a little while, when Christ shall
come in his glory, he will own them before men and Angels, and tell men and
Angels, These are those, for whom the eternal councels of my Father did work,
and I was content to shed my blood for them; and all that was intended in the
great work of Redemption, was for these: A spiritual eye can see, that within a
while they shall be taken up with our Savior, to judge the whole world, to
judge the Angels, with Crowns upon their heads, and palms in their hands,
triumphing, ascending up with Christ to see the Father, and to enjoy him
everlastingly. And if these things be seen, as real and certain, they cannot
but raise esteem; there is so much in Gods people here, as not only does
convince a gracious heart, but sometimes will convince one that has but
natural principles of their excellency.

Some men and women, that do sometime rail at Gods people, if we could see into
their bosoms, do sometimes bless them, and wish that their condition were such
as theirs shall be: As Balaam wished he might dye the death of the Righteous;
and John the Baptist, though he was mean for outward, yet Herod reverenced
him, because he saw some glimmerings of the excellency that was in him: And
that is observable that we have of Joash King of Israel, 2 Kings 13. 14. he was
a wicked man, yet when he comes to Elisha, and sees the Prophet was to dye,
says he, O my Father, my Father, the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen
thereof! this is the speech of one that was ungodly, he had a reverend esteem
of Elisha, and it seems he walked so, as he gained mighty esteem from wicked
men; as in 2 King. 3. 12. three Kings came down to the Prophet to speak with
him, they do not send for him; True it is, one of them was a good man, but the
other two were wicked; it was indeed in the time of their affliction, yet it
was a mighty honor the Prophet had from them. It is reported of the Emperor
Severus, when Origin came to him, he came very meanly clothed, only one
garment; Severus sent him a Chariot, and change of garments, to come in pomp to
him, he refused to come in pomp; and yet when he saw the piety and gravity of
the man, he was mightily convinced, and it gained much respect from him: The
godly will gain respect from wicked men, much more from a gracious heart, that
can judge as God judges, and see the ends of things.

CHAP. XVII. What we are to learn from that high esteem a gracious heart has
of the Saints in their sorest afflictions.
HEnce we see what a difference is between the men of the world, and Gods
people: The Use 1.
men of the world are such, as in all their outward pomp and bravery, are base
and wretched, and Gods people in all their baseness and meanness, are precious
and honorable: The wicked men are so vile, as all the glory that the world has
cannot make them blessed; and Gods people are so blessed, as that all the evil
of the world cannot make them any way miserable: If a man had his hearts desire
in all things that are here below, he may remain as a base cursed creature; but
let him be gracious, and godly, and let him have all the misery that can be put
upon him in the world, he is one that God, and the Angels, and Saints look
upon, as the glory of the earth.

That is very observable we have of Antiochus Epiphanes in Dan. 11. 21. In his
estate shall stand up a vile person, and yet he was the great King of Assyria.
And Josephus reports, the Samaritans wrote to him, because he tormented the
Jews, to excuse themselves that they were no Jews; and they writ, Antiochus the
mighty God; and his name Epiphanes in English, does signify one that is
illustrious and famous above others: Though he was the great King of Assyria,
and by flattery was called the Mighty God, and by his name called Illustrious
and famous above others, yet by the holy Ghost he is called a Vile person. But
David speaking of Gods people, whom he should do good unto, says, They are the
excellent of the earth, in whom is my delight, Psalm. 16. the word signifies,
the magnificent of the earth: The one is called The vile of the earth, in the
Psalm before, and the other called The magnificent, in this Psalm.

God has made a separation between the wicked and the godly, and therefore
Moses says in Exodus 33. ver. 16. Thou have separated between us and other
people; the word that is translated separated, is, thou have wonderfully
separated between us and other people; so God has wonderfully separated
between us and the world; that the one should be so cursed, that all the good
of the world cannot make them blessed; and the other so blessed, as all the
evil of the world cannot make them miserable. When Agrippa was so admired, that
the people cried, The voice of God, and not of man, God gives an Angel
authority to smite him, and he was eaten up with worms: John though he was mean
in the world, the Holy Ghost calls him the greatest that was born of a woman.

Secondly, this rebukes those that can see no excellency 2.
in those that are godly, more then in others: and if they be afflicted, they
look upon them, as the prey of the malice of wicked men, and a poor
contemptible people, and pass them by, and see nothing in them to be worthy of
any respect. As it was said of Herod, when Christ came to him, he thought to
have seen miracles wrought by him; and because he appeared as a mean man, Herod
slighted him; and so men that judge according to the flesh, if men be great in
the world, or have such a one to be their friend, they like that well, but if
he be ragged, and mean, they pass him by, as not respecting of him. As
Hospinian tells us of the dogs, that kept the Temple of Vulcan, If any came to
the Temple with brave clothes, they would let them alone, but if they came in
ragged clothes, they would tear them all in pieces: So men of the world, if
they see men in good clothes, and prosper outwardly, they are somebody; but for
this godliness, and preciseness, they have no skill in it, and therefore
despise it, and look contemptibly upon it. So it was with the Samaritans, as
long as the people of the Jews were prosperous outwardly, they would challenge
acquaintance, and affinity with them, but if they were in affliction, then they
would fall off: but St. Paul did not so, for (says he) Henceforth know I no man
after the flesh.

It is a great sign of a carnal heart, and opposite to the principle of grace,
to look upon things according to outward excellency, and not to see a beauty in
Gods people for want of outward excellency. Some things that are foolish, are
only weakness of reason: some things are opposite to the principles of reason,
and where we see such, we account those naturals: so some things are
infirmities, and argue weakness of grace; but other things are quite contrary
to the principles of grace, and amongst those I know none more evident then
this, For people to judge of things according to outward excellency, and not to
see the excellency of Gods people through outward means: this is an argument
that the Gospel is hid from thee, and so thou art a lost creature: if the
beauty of the Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are lost: It is true
likewise of such as profess the Gospel, if the beauty of them be hid, it is hid
to those that are lost.

Thirdly, if so that there is such an excellency in Gods people, though under
great afflictions it should 3.
teach us all to manifest our respect to Gods people that are mean: It is a
most vile thing, to have the faith of Christ in respect of persons: says
Tertullian, We do not judge of faith by persons, but of persons by Non ex
personis fidem, sed ex fide personas.
faith: So do not look at men, to judge of them according to outward, but look
to the inwards of the soul, how they are clothed within. What a shameful thing
is it for those that are Christians, that know spiritual excellencies, to look
upon those that are gay, and brave outwardly? What do those that are gay and
brave attire themselves for, but to have the eyes of men drawn after them? Let
childrens eyes be drawn after them; but if they have rotten spirits, let them
be so looked upon, notwithstanding they be in gay clothes: but for those that
are gracious, Jesus Christ looks upon them as his glory; 2 Cor. 8. 23. The
messengers of the Church, the glory of Christ; and therefore we should glory in
them much more.

The Apostle S. James speaks very bitterly to those that he wrote unto, for
having respect unto persons, says he, Are ye not then partial in your selves,
and are become judges of evil thoughts? as if he should say, Jam. 2. 4.
Do not your consciences condemn you? Can this stand with grace? to have the
faith of the Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons; Are you become judges of
evil thoughts? those evil thoughts of yours, in respecting those that are in
brave apparel; Are you judges of those evil thoughts? that is, to judge
according to them: Some render it thus; and are not judges of evil thoughts?
And so the negative, that is joined to partial, is to be applied also, to
become judges of evil thoughts: Have you such evil thoughts as these, and do
you not judge them to be evil? Noting there is so much evil in them, as it is
to be wondered, that any should have such evil thoughts, and yet not judge them
to be naught.

But how should we manifest our respect to those Quest.
that are outwardly mean, that are gracious?

First, own them, and be not ashamed of them, before Answ.
your bravest kindred, for they are precious to 1.
God and Christ, and if you be ashamed of them, you are ashamed of Christ
himself, and it is just Christ should be ashamed of you another day: Are they
the glory of God, the treasure of God, and the portion of God, and the peculiar
ones of God, and shall you be ashamed of them? O no, but those whom God honors,
let us honor; What rule can we have better for our honoring of men, then that
honor that our God puts upon them? It is given as a special reason, why the
King of Babylon sent Ambassadors, and a present to Hezekiah, after he had been
sick, to testify his respect to him, and to honor him, because he had heard,
how that miracle of the Suns going back was for him, as a sign of his recovery;
The Sun was the God whom the Babylonians worshipped; now because their God had
honored Hezekiah so much, the King of Babylon would honor him likewise.
Abulensis in 2 Kings 20. God has wrought great things for his Saints, whereby
he has put much honor upon them, he has owned them before all the world, let
us own them with honorable respect of them.

2. Again, bless God that you may have any communion 2.
with them, to have the breathing of Gods Spirit How to manifest our respect to
gracious persons, that are outwardly mean.
in them; rejoice in their communion, and fellowship, and delight more in
mourning with them in their afflictions, then in all the jollities of the
world, then to be feasting, then to enjoy all their delightful braveries.

3. Again, the more they are contemned in the world, and they suffer in the
world, the more do you 3.
respect them, and own them; So long as Gods people suffer nothing, but have
outward prosperity as well as others, some will make of them; but if they see
them in contempt, then they leave them, and look at them afar off: as it is
with a man's Ministry, when a man's Ministry is approved of by some that are
rich, and the assembly be filled with such, they count such a Ministry a
credit to their Church; but if it be spiritual, so as it may be but few of them
understand it, and so discountenanced by such as those are, then his Ministry
is not regarded: and as in the esteem of the Ministry, so in the esteem of the
saints; when they are esteemed in the world, they will esteem of them, but when
the esteem of the world is taken away, their esteem is taken away.

As it is with the Deer that is hunted, when the Huntsman goes into the Park,
he stirs up all, and all run together, but if one be shot, and they see the
blood run down, they will all push him out of their company: so while Gods
people go on, and are in credit, and esteem with the world, others that are
slight professors of Religion will esteem them, and they shall be welcome into
their company, till they be shot, and they see disgrace put upon them, then
they look upon them with a lowry countenance. If a man be traveling, and there
be a Sun-dial by the highway, if the Sun shine, he will go out of his way to
take notice of it, but if the Sun do not shine, he may go a hundred times by
and never regard it; and so when the Sun shines upon Gods people, they are much
made of, but if a cloudy day do come, and take away the Sunshine, they are not
esteemed, and many people instead of helping them in their affliction, will
add to their affliction, and say, You needed not to have been so forward, and
to have appeared so much; It was your want of wisdom brought you into this
trouble, and the like.

If you had a gracious heart, if you saw one of Gods Servants go on in the way
of God, and suffer in that way, though he had failed in some particulars, you
would pass them by, and not be ready to take advantage, to speak against him
for them: If a man do plead for the King, every circumstance is not taken up,
and aggravated against him; and so for those that are for God, every
circumstance should not be aggravated against them: It is better for one to be
forward in Gods cause, though he should fail in some circumstances, then to be
lukewarm. If a man be going earnestly, and do fall forward, there is not so
much danger in that, as to fall backward: so a man that is forward in that
which is good, though he may carry some things indiscreerly, and suffer
somewhat that way, yet his fall is but forward, and there is not so much danger
in that, as in a time-server, and apostate that falls backward, he may break
his neck. And therefore we should not aggravate the afflictions of the Saints,
if they be right in the main, we should countenance them, and appear for them,
though we venture something, as Moses here, he might have saved himself, and
yet he had such a high esteem of Gods people, as he would venture all for them:
but of this in the next Point.

Thirdly, If God does move the hearts of any, preciously to esteem of his
people, though afflicted outwardly, 3.
hearken to a word of encouragement, Certainly thou art blessed of God: It is a
note of a wonderful strong eyesight that thou have, that thou can see
Spiritual excellency, through outward meanness: there is more skill in being
able to see the preciousness of a thing, then to see the glory and luster of
it; that which is not true pearl, may have as much luster as the true, but the
skill of the Lapidary is to know, that is not precious, but the other, although
it be fullied with dirt. It is a note of sincerity of grace, that thou love
grace for grace: It is a note of the power of grace, that thou can pass by
that which is a stumbling to so many. Certainly God will know thy soul in
adversity, and will look through all thy infirmities upon thee, that can look
with an honorable esteem upon his people through all afflictions: And in that
time when thou suspectest the work of grace in thee, this may be one argument
to uphold thee, though thou can not discern the work of grace in thine own
heart, yet thou can prize it in another; it is an argument it is in thy soul,
though now thou can not see it; though people want other notes, yet this many
have.

Fourthly, You that are the Servants of God, and 4.
God has so ordered it, as you are mean in the world, mean in your parts and
estates, and mean in regard of your friends, be not discouraged, do not think,
I am a poor contemptible man or woman, no body looks at me, or regards me; God
has a high esteem of you, the Angels have a high esteem of you, the Saints
have a high esteem of you, and therefore be not discouraged. As you have it in
Isaiah 56. 3, 4. Let not the Eunuch say, I am a dry tree, for if he will take
hold of my name, and keep my Sabbath, I will give him an everlasting name,
better then of sons and daughters: Many, because they are outwardly mean, do go
on discouraged, and say of themselves, We are dry trees: If thou did but see
the thoughts of Gods people, and see the thoughts of wicked men, as if thou
could but unfold the consciences of wicked men, they do reverence thee, and
wish they were in thy condition, if they were to dye; though you have not that
respect from the godly which they seem to show to others, that they have more
use of, and are more serviceable to them to do their business, and so there is
a show of more outward familiarity, yet do not think but that you are more
highly esteemed then they are.

But suppose no man should regard you, it is enough that God does regard you;
It is a notable speech of Salvian, Such as are truly blessed in their own
consciences, cannot be miserable by the false judgments of other men: But I
say, though that were enough, yet you have more, you have God, and his Angels,
and Saints, and the consciences of wicked men, though we should not regard the
esteem of the men of the world, but go on in our way, only be careful that
they may not speak ill of our Religion; but the esteem of the Saints is not
slightly to be esteemed, for it is a blessing of God, and therefore St. Paul
was earnest with the Romans to pray to God for him, that his service might be
accepted of by the Saints.

On the other side, for one to be in such a condition, as those that are godly,
wise, and humble, shall call their estates into question, and be suspicious of
them, such need look to themselves: many that are truly godly, may be very
guilty of censuring, and so do much wrong, both to those that are godly, and to
Religion; but take those that are wise, and humble, and I say, if such should
be jealous of me, I should have great cause to be suspicious of my self; for
such have the Spirit of God, and do know the things of God, A spiritual man
judges all things, and therefore we should make good use of their opinions of
us; If they be afraid of us, we should fear our selves, as Isaiah says, There
is no peace to the wicked, says my God; that God that my soul has interest in,
says, there is no peace to the wicked; So when those that have interest in God,
shall say to a man, there is no peace to thee, it should make his heart quake.
Gods people ought so to walk, as to gain respect from the consciences of men;
Do you so walk as to gain any such honorable respect? Is there not cause of
suspicion? In the name of Jesus Christ I beseech you, let it be your care so to
walk, with such heavenly humble spirits, as to hold forth the beauty of
godliness unto others, and to force respect from them. As it is said of God,
Holy and reverend is his name; How does Gods name come to be reverend, but by
being holy? so it may be said of Gods people, Holy and reverend are their
names; if they be holy, their names are reverend, they will gain reverence from
those that are godly, and will force it from the basest wretches: and therefore
you that would have honor, and a name, here is a way; you would be the finest
in all the company, and you think to get a name that way, you seek to get
riches, and so to get a name; this is not the way, this does not cover the
filth of sin, this covering is narrower then that you can wrap your self in,
Isa. 22. 26. but if you would get a name indeed, be godly, and gracious, and
holy, and then you shall have the testimony of the consciences of men, and that
is more then all their words, for there may be flattery in their words.

Many Ministers think if they should be poor and mean, every one would contemn
their Ministry, and therefore they think the way to have their Ministry
respected, is to get great livings; this certainly is a false way: A poor godly
man that walks in his Ministry faithfully, and conscionably, will gain more
respect, then others by all their great preferments. As it was the speech of
Boniface, that was a Martyr; one asked him, whether it was lawful to give the
Wine in the Sacrament in a wooden cup; Time was, says he, when there were
wooden Chalices, and golden Priests; but now there are golden Chalices, and
wooden Priests: This was the way of Papistry, for to have outward bravery, and
thought to gain men's devotion that way; but when there were wooden Chalices,
when things were carried meanly, that did not take away the dignity of the
Ministry, but by the holiness of their lives, they were esteemed of the more,
and the Ordinances were not accounted the worse by the outward simplicity of
them, but the better. Let us that are acquainted with any thing of the mind of
God, know that there are better things to gain respect to Religion, and to our
selves by, then all the outward things; be not afraid therefore of sufferings,
be godly, and let sufferings be never so much, and your name will be precious.
Those who wandered up and down in sheepskins, and goat skins, Heb. 11. yet
obtained a good report by faith.

Lastly, if a gracious eye can see so much excellency in the Saints, in outward
meanness, how much more shall they see when they come to their glory, when all
the treasures of Heaven shall come to be opened, and all the good of Heaven let
out to them, when they shall be wholly free from sin, when the robes shall be
brought out, and the glorious garments, and they shall walk with Christ in
white? If they be so glorious when they are on the dunghill, what shall they be
when they are in their Kingdom, when the Bride shall come trimmed, when there
shall be a suitableness to that Bridegroom Jesus Christ; and God, and all the
Angels shall come to solemnize the marriage? There shall be a time here, when
wicked men shall take hold upon the skirt of a Jew, and say, I will go with
you, for I have heard God is with you: How much more afterward will the great
ones and mighty ones of the earth be ready to catch hold upon the Saints, and
say, O that we might go with you, though it were but to attend upon you? This
is the day of visitation, 1 Pet. 2. 12. in which they shall glorify God.

There are three days of visitation, and in all those days of visitation men
shall glorify God in the behalf of Gods people.

First, When the time shall come that God shall visit their souls, and work any
good upon their souls.

Secondly, the time of affliction, when they are upon their sick-beds: though
in prosperity they contemn you, and speak evil of you, yet in the day that God
shall visit them, and lay his hand upon them, then they shall say, This is the
only people that live upon the earth, and send for such a one.

Thirdly, they shall glorify God in the Day of Judgment, when they shall see
the glory of these, and they shall say, These are those we despised, and called
Hypocrites, now we see they are no Hypocrites: as those foolish Virgins that
wanted oil, when the Bridegroom came, then they asked oil of the wise Virgins;
it may be before they would not acknowledge it was oil, it was water with them
before, but now it is oil: so now they shall see they were godly, and not
hypocrites, and they were not notions that they heard of, but realities. And
thus much of the excellency that a gracious heart does see in those that are
godly, though never so mean and afflicted outwardly. The fifth Point is,

CHAP. XVIII. A gracious heart will appear for the people of God, whatsoever
sufferings may follow upon it.
A Gracious heart will appear outwardly with Doct. 5.
Gods people, and be on their side, whatsoever sufferings may follow upon it.
Many things useful for the opening and enlarging this point, fall into the
former, and therefore I shall be the briefer in it. The Point is of great use
in these times, wherein God calls for so much appearing in his cause, for his
people; but generally men seek a safe way to themselves as they think, to keep
their Religion within, and not to venture themselves, by appearing what they
are; and if any shall be so forward, to appear outwardly what they are
inwardly, these are deserted. St. Paul's complaint, 2 Timothy 1. 15. and chap. 4.
16. may justly be the complaint of many of Gods Servants in our times; Thou
know that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me, of whom are
Phygellus, and Hermogenes: At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men
for sook me. This is no new thing in the world, every age affords many examples
in this kind, and ours excels; but certainly, it is the duty of all who would
approve themselves to God, to be willing to appear with, and for the Saints in
their troubles.

First, the Saints are dear to God, therefore God Why we should own the Saints
in their sufferings.
will certainly take it well at the hands of such as shall join with them in
their affliction, and appear for them: if any should see your child in
affliction, and danger, and hazard himself in joining with your child, in his
affliction, and danger, you would take it well at his hands.

Secondly, they hold out the honor of God in the 2.
world, in their sufferings, they are Gods witnesses; Isaiah 44. 8. They stand
for God; in appearing therefore for them, and their cause, ye appear for God
himself: the cause is yours as well as theirs, if God be yours.

Thirdly, they need encouragement, especially in 3.
the time of their affliction; the best have flesh and blood, and if they be
deserted in their cause, much advantage is given to temptation; Woe to him that
is alone: If any should fail, if any should miscarry through your deserting, or
not coming in and joining with them, it will prove a sore and a fearful evil
against you. If any of Gods servants in affliction shall go to God, and make
their means to him, and in the grief of their souls tell him, how you have left
them, how they are alone in so great a cause, whereas such and such might have
afforded much help and encouragement; surely this will witness fearfully
against you, and it will go ill with you; Certainly you bring much guilt upon
your souls, in deserting the Saints in the time of their affliction: Hence Paul
prayed, that God would not lay to the charge of those in Asia that 4.
left him in his first answer. Ad aras Jovis, aut Veneris adorare, ac sub
Antichristo fidem occulture. Zuingl. ep. 3.


Fourthly, not appearing, is a betraying the truth: It is a speech of
Zuinglius, in his third Epistle; We may as well with Dioclesian, worship at the
Altar of Jupiter or Venus, as hide our faith under Antichrist: He that is not
with me, is against me, says Christ.

Fifthly, Christ appears most for his people in their 5.
afflictions, when they are at the lowest; Isaiah 63. 9. In their affliction he
was afflicted, the Angel of his presence was then with them, his love and his
pity was toward them, he bare them, and carried them: Psalm. 69. 9. The Zeal of
thine house has eaten me up, the reproaches of them that reproached thee, are
fallen upon me. You know the place is spoken of Christ, and these words were
spoken when the Church was in a very ill case, as appears in the Psalm.

Sixthly, times of affliction are the especial times 6.
to manifest our true love to the Saints, which are near to us in many bonds.
It is an ill part of a wife or friend, to forsake husband or friend when in
affliction. Josephus reports of Herodias, wife to Herod the Tetrarch, who when
the Emperor had deprived her husband of his Tetrarchy, and banished him,
annexing his Tetrarchy to Agrippa his kingdom, understanding that Herodias was
Agrippa's sister, the Emperor gave her her husbands substance, supposing that
she would not accompany her husband; but she answered the Emperor, There is a
cause that hinders me from partaking the benefit of your bounty, the affection
I bear to my husband, whom if I should forsake in this his misery, it would
very ill beseem me, in that I have been a partner with him in his felicity: the
Emperor displeased with her answer, banished her likewise with her husband: a
brother, a friend, a wife, is for the time of adversity.

Especially hence it is recorded of David's brethren, and fathers house, 1 Samuel
22. 1. When David was persecuted, and came to the Cave of Adullam, when they
heard it, they went down thither to him; they ventured the displeasure, the
rage of Saul, the forfeiting all their estates, to go down to David their
brother, both his father and mother was there, though very old now, as appears
ver. 3. Basils forwardness Chrysostom. l. 2. de Sacerd.
in appearing for his friend in danger, mightily affected Chrysostom: he tells
of him, that he hazarded himself much, to deliver his friend in danger, and
being blamed by some for venturing so much, he gave this answer, I have not
learned to love otherwise, I know Ego aliter amare non didici.
not how to manifest my love but thus.

Seventhly, when Gods people suffer most in Gods cause, it is then most
honorable to be called forth to 7.
appear for it, to assist in it. Amongst the Persians, the left hand is
accounted the most honorable. Xenophon reports of Cyrus, that those whom he
honored most, he placed at his left hand, upon this ground, because that hand
was weakest, and most subject to danger; the most honorable of the kingdom were
set to defend, where there was most weakness and most danger: If the people of
God be brought low, if they be brought under by affliction, if the cause of God
in them seem to be in danger, then to come in and appear, to stand by them, and
for them, this is honorable.

Eighthly, this appearing for the Saints, and joining with them in their
affliction, shall be highly rewarded 8.
of God. When David was in his affliction, persecuted by Saul, Abiathar fled to
him with the Ephod, and abode with him; Although self-respects might move him,
Saul having slain his father, and fourscore and four priests of the Lord, and
if he had not escaped, he had gone to it too; yet because he was with David in
his affliction, mark how Solomon respects him for it, 1 Kings 2. 26. Thou art
worthy of death, but I will not put thee to death, but go to Anathoth, to thine
own fields, because thou barest the Ark of the Lord God before my father David,
and because thou have been afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted.

Josephus reports of Agrippa, that being bound with chains, and sent to prison
by Tiberius, for wishing Caius in the Empire; one Thaumastus one of Caius his
Servants carrying a pitcher of water, met him, and Agrippa being very thirsty,
desired him to give him drink, which he willingly did; upon which Agrippa said,
This service thou have done in giving me drink, shall do thee good another day:
afterward when Caius was Emperor, and Agrippa was made King; he first begged
Thaumastus his liberty Joseph. Antiq. l. 18. c. 8.
of the Emperor, and made him a free man, then he made him his chief Officer
over all his affairs, and after his decease, he took order he should continue
in the same office with his son. This Agrippa was a wicked man, who thus
rewarded him that relieved him in his affliction: it was the same Agrippa whom
the Angel smote, and was eaten up of worms, because he gave not glory unto God:
How much more then will Christ reward those, who shall give him in his members,
cups of water in their affliction, yea, who shall so join with them, as to
hazard themselves for them? surely they shall not go without their reward, when
Christ comes in his glory, he will own them. Quest.


But how must we appear? what does this point require Answ.
of us? How to ^p^e^r for Gods people in their sufferings.


First, when Gods servants, and their cause, are accused, and condemned, you
must not be silent, you must not let it pass, as being afraid to be accounted
one belonging to them. Luther in an Epistle to Staupitius, a German Divine,
says, That when Jesus Christ is condemned and blasphemed, it is no time to
fear, but to cry out; yea he professes, that he had rather be accounted any
thing, then to be accused of wicked silence in Gods cause; Let me be reputed
Inveniar sane superbus, avarus, adulter, homicida, Antipapa, and omnium
vitiorum reus, modo impii silentii non arguar dum dominus patitur. Luth. ep. ad
Staupitium.
proud, covetous, an adulterer, a murderer, an enemy to the Pope, guilty of
all kind of vices, so I be not found guilty of wicked silence, when the Lord
Christ suffers. In Eusebius his History, l. 5. c. 3. we find a Letter that the
Christians of Vienna, and Lions in France, sent to their brethren in Asia and
Phrygia, in which they tell of a notable example of a brave Noble man, Vetius
Epagathus, appearing in the cause of the Christians, not being able to bear
their unjust dealings against them, when he heard those vile accusations
against them, and condemnations of them, he desired that he might be heard to
plead for the brethren, but those at the Tribunal being utterly against it,
because he was a Noble man, the President would not admit of his petition, but
only asked him if he were a Christian, he professed aloud, that he was, and so
was taken amongst the number of Martyrs, and called the Advocate of Christians.

Secondly, appear for them, by visiting them in their 2.
troubles; that is a special duty that Christ looks for Tame^ si multis
terroribus, minis and periculis interdictu^ crat Chr. in ^uv^ntinum. and
Maximum Orat.
, and will examine at the great Day, whether it has been performed, be not shy
of this, lest you should be suspected to be one of them. Chrysostom in an
Oration upon the praise of two Martyrs, says of Christians, that they would not
be kept from visiting the Confessors in Prison, although it was forbidden with
many threatenings, terrors, and it was great danger to them.

Thirdly, we must be ready and willing to entertain such as suffer. 3.


Fourthly, we must use all the interest we have in any friends, improve all
opportunities for the relief of 4.
such as suffer.

Theodoret tells a famous story of one Terentius, a Captain in the Emperor
Valens his Army, who returning Theod. l. 4. bist. eccl. c. 32.
from Armenia with a great Victory, the Emperor bade him ask what reward he
would; he only asked as a recompense of all his Service, that there might be
granted a Church to the Orthodox in Antioch, that they might freely meet in
public: this he knew could not but be exceeding displeasing to Valens the
Emperor, because he was an Arrian, and so it proved, for the Emperor tore his
Petition, and bade him ask something else; but Terentius gathered up the torn
pieces of the Paper, and said, This I ask as a reward of my Service, and I will
ask nothing else. How few will now improve such interest in great ones, such
opportunities for the relieving the persecuted Servants of God?

Fifthly, we must improve all our gifts, parts, abilities for them, in pleading
for them: Thus in the 5.
Primitive times, God stirred up many of great learning, of excellent parts, to
plead for the persecuted Christians, who did much service this way: as Justin
Martyr, in his Apologies; and Tertullian, and one Aristides an Athenian
Philosopher, a man admirably learned and eloquent, because the Emperor then was
much delighted in learning, he made use of his eloquence and learning, for
Christ and his Saints, making eloquent Orations before the Emperor for them:
and another Quadratus Atheniensis, when Eusebius. l. 4 c. 4. Cent. Magd. Cent. 2.
c. 3. p. 16.
Adrian came to Athens, he presented a Book to him, pleading for Christian
Religion; God blessed the endeavors of these much, for the mollifying the
Emperors heart toward the Christians.

Sixthly, we must be willing to suffer with them; 6.
we must be willing to lay down our lives for the brethren, much more suffer
with the brethren: we must be willing to have fellowship with them, not only
in their privileges, but in their sufferings, Rev. 1. 9. I John who also am
your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom and patience of
Jesus Christ: many are willing to be brethren, and companions in the kingdom,
but not in tribulation, and in the patience of Jesus Christ; Heb. 10. 33. it
was the commendations of those Christians mentioned there, that they were
companions of those that were ill used for the cause of Christ.

Wherefore for application, let us know our duty, Use.
and show our selves more ready and forward to join with, and show our selves
to the servants of God in their persecuted estate; in the times of their
prosperity there is not so much need we should manifest our selves to be for
them; this is the time wherein we are called, especially to manifest our love
to them, our siding with them; The greater their affliction is, the more we
must appear for them: When the people of God were in a comfortable estate in
Egypt, as they were in Joseph's time, Joseph did not leave the Court to join
with them, but when they were in an afflicted estate, as in Moses his time,
Moses left all to join with them; here you have a trial upon what side you will
be, now you have an opportunity to witness for God.

Those words, Hosea 11. 12. Judah rules with God, the old Latin has it,
Testis descendit cum Deo, He descends a witness with God, and so the words will
bear, if the pricks be altered, which may be, being according to the opinion of
many put in, in latter times; Ribera maintains this reading, and has two good
notes upon it:

First, Others leave the true worship of God, but Judah continues, and so
witnesses to his truth.

Secondly, He descends, he is content to be in a lower condition; though he be
fewer, and not so flourishing as Israel, yet if he may be Gods witness, he is
content. Thus should we be willing to descend to witness for the truth, to
leave the flourishing people of the world, and to join with the lowest and
meanest.

Ordinarily men deal with the suffering servants of God, as Demas dealt with
St. Paul, they forsake him, embracing this present world; but if you find any
inclination of heart that way, conceive as if Christ were now speaking to you,
Will you also forsake me? Take heed of flattering your selves, of putting off
this duty with any vain pleas, or pretenses, or excuses; God sees what lies at
the bottom. We read Judge. 5. diverse of the Tribes are blamed, for not coming in
to help to join with Barak and Deborah; and in their rebuke, their excuses are
mentioned, as some were to follow their business at sea, they could not come:
and especially Asher, he was to stand in his own breaches to defend himself,
ver. 17. Reuben must follow his business, and look to his sheep, he could not
come, ver. 16. yet these are rebuked, but Zebulon and Nepthali are commended
for a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death, they are honored for
this. The people of God were now in a low condition, in great affliction, and
no excuse could serve turn, for their not joining with their brethren;
whatsoever necessities, inabilities we may pretend, that keep us from appearing
in the behalf of, and joining with Gods people in their afflicted estate, it
will not bear us out before the Lord; In times of storm, all should come in and
help. The two Tribes and the half on the other side Jordan, must not think to
abide peaceably in their possessions, while their brethren were warring for
theirs, but they must join with them in their battles, until they were in their
possessions likewise.

It is a sore and great evil, not to join with Gods servants in their troubles;
but how great an evil then is it, to add affliction to their affliction, to
join with their enemies against them, especially when they are weak in their
suffering condition? Gods wrath against Amalek was, because he came out against
Israel in the wilderness, and not only so, but smote the hindmost of them,
even all that were feeble behind them, when they were faint and weary, Deuteronomy.
25. 18. Now you shall find that the wrath of God was never so dreadful against
any, as against the Amalekites: for,

First, observe what expressions of indignation the Lord has against them.

First, This wickedness of Amalek, and his destruction, must be wrote for a
memorial in a book, and rehearsed in the ears of Joshua.

Secondly, God will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under Heaven.

Thirdly, The Lord swears that he will have war with Amalek, from generation to
generation; all these Exodus 17. 14, 16.

Fourthly, Gods anger for many years after continued against Amalek. Numb. 24.
20. His latter end shall be, that he perish for ever: and Deuteronomy. 25. 19. Moses
gives a charge, that after Israel was possessed of his inheritance, that he
must blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under Heaven, Thou shall not
forget it. And further, although at the first, when Amalek came against Israel,
there was a great slaughter of them, yet more then four hundred years after, 1 Samuel 15. 2. God says, He remembered what Amalek did to Israel, and gave a charge
to Saul to go and smite them, and utterly to destroy all they had, not to
spare, but to slay Man and Woman, Infant, Suckling, Ox, Sheep, Camel, and Ass;
and it is observable, whereas in all other places that were not of Canaan,
though they did smite the male, yet they were to spare the women, the little
ones, and the cattle, and all that was in the City, as Deuteronomy. 20. 14. but not so
in Amalek, yet Amalek was not of Canaan; God had a more special quarrel against
Amalek, then against any of the other Countries: Yea, whereas in Canaan,
although men and women were destroyed, as in Ai, Josh. 8. Yet the cattle, and
the spoil of the City they took to themselves, ver. 27. but they might not do
so in Amalek, the destroying the Cattle, and all there was in it, was for the
greater horror, to show what an abominable, and an accursed thing Amalek was.

Yet further, although in Jericho they destroyed men, women, and cattle, and so
it was more accursed then Ai, for there the cattle were saved; yet in Jericho
the gold, silver, brass, iron, were consecrated unto God, Josh. 7. 19. but so
it must not be in Amalek, for that must be more accursed then Jericho. And God
was so strongly set upon revenge of this people, that because Saul spared Agag,
and the fat of the cattle, though in pity, though under pretense of Sacrifice,
the Lord therefore rejected him, and accounted his sin as rebellion and
witchcraft, so as he would not have Samuel so much as mourn for him, 1 Samuel 16.
1. And when Agag was brought before Samuel, because he was the King of the
Amalekites, Samuel, though he were a loving sweet natured man, yet he took a
sword, and himself hewed him in pieces before the Lord, being filled with Gods
indignation against Amalek, 1 Samuel 15. 33. And Psalm 83. 7. Ammon and Amalek is
joined together; God pronounces of the Ammonite, that to the tenth generation
none of them should enter into the Congregation of the Lord for ever; Why?
Because they met not Gods people in the way, with bread and water, when they
came up out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 23. 4. but hired Balaam to curse them.

God expects that his people in their afflicted estate should be relieved, and
not cursed; the curse of the Lord will pursue those, who deny help to them in
this condition, especially such as seek to add to their affliction. What was
the reason that Shimei must not go to his grave in peace? It was because of his
railing against David, when he was in his affliction; The Jews gave Christ gall
and vinegar when he was upon the Cross, this was a great aggravation of their
sin: take heed that you give not the servants of God gall and vinegar when they
are upon, or under the cross; God expects you should bring oil to their wounds,
not pour brine in; many think they may safely trample upon such as are down;
when the hedge is broken, when a gap begins to be made, every one treads it
down lower and lower: but know, when the day of the recompenses of Sion shall
come, all the wrong done to Gods Servants, who were not able to resist the
malice of men, shall be recompensed to the full, especially such wrong as was
done them in their affliction; God takes it ill that any should once look upon
his people in the day of their affliction, except it Obadiah 12. 13.
be to pity them, and to relieve them.

I am very sore displeased with the Heathen, says the Lord, Zach. 1. 15.
Wherefore? They helped forward the affliction; and mark it, it was that
affliction that was upon Gods people, out of Gods displeasure for their sin:
and does God take that so ill, that that affliction should be helped forward?
how ill then will he take it, how sorely will he be displeased, when the
affliction that his people suffer for his name, is helped forward? Let us take
heed of any hand in such an evil as this; but let us know that it is our honor,
and will be great advantage to us, to appear for to be helpful, and comfortable
unto the Servants of God in their sufferings; to be Obadiahs, Ebedmelechs, to
the Prophets of the Lord. Obadiah pleads this with the Prophet, 1 Kings 18. 13.
Was it not told my Lord what I did? when he was afraid of danger, that thereby
he might be delivered: And God bade Jeremiah, chap. 39. 16, 17. Go to
Ebedmelech, and tell him, Behold, I will bring evil upon this City, but I will
deliver thee in that day, thou shall not be given into the hand of the men of
whom thou art afraid.

We read likewise, 1 Samuel 15. 6. of a merciful work of Gods providence toward
the posterity of such, who had been kind to his servants in the times of their
trouble, namely the Kenites; when Amalek was to be destroyed, Saul sent to the
Kenites to depart from among the Amalekites, lest they be destroyed with them:
Why? For ye showed kindeness to all the children of Israel, when they came up
out of Egypt: Who were these Kenites? How long since was his kindeness showed?
What was this kindeness? For the first, The Kenites were the posterity of
Jethro, Moses his Father in Law; this you may see, Judges 1. 16. For the
second, This kindeness was four hundred and twenty years before this time at
the least, for so long it was from the Children of Isreal's being then in the
wilderness, and this time of Saul's reign. For the third, It is thought of some
to be the kind visit of Iethro, visiting his son in law, and Israel in the
wilderness; and besides, directing him in a way of government of the people,
that he might not wear away himself, which was a great blessing to Israel at
that time. And further, whereas Moses desired him to go with him to direct him
in the way of the wilderness, where they should go; it is like he did it in
part, but though he did not stay with him, but returned to his Country, yet it
is probable that some of his children staid, and went along with Israel, and
were helpful to them in their way: for Judges 1. 16. The children of the
Kenite, are said to go up out of the city of palmtrees with the children of
Judah, now this is by Jericho, the first City the Israelites took in Cannan, as
appears Deuteronomy. 34. 3. therefore its like that they accompanied Israel along in
the wilderness, and so showed kindeness unto them, which the Lord here
remembers. Ye who are willing to show kindeness to Gods people in their
affliction, know there is mercy laid up in store for you, and your posterity:
that child not yet born may many years hence have the blessing of this your
love.

Let no vain objections therefore, no carnal reasonings hinder you in this
great and honorable service of Christ, for appearing for, for defending of,
rejoicing in the persecuted, despised, afflicted Saints of God, be not ashamed
of them, look not shy upon them, deal not ruggedly with them, let your hearts
and houses be open to them, let their spirits be comforted, their bowels be
refreshed, their names vindicated, their cause maintained, their persons
honored, their sorrows eased, their burdens lightened, by what you have, or
can do, by your selves or others: If there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, if
any hope, any desire that Jesus Chirst should know your souls in the day of
your adversity, fulfill this truth now opened before you, applied unto you, this
duty urged upon you. It may be some of you have been Moses's, such as have been
drawn out of the water, out of great afflictions, be you now Moses's to others,
seek to draw them out if it may be, howsoever to relieve and help them, while
they are in the waters; and the blessing not of Moses, but of Jesus Christ, the
mighty Savior, the great stander up for, and comforter of his people, in times
of straights, be upon you.

CHAP. XIX. Enjoyment of communion with Gods people, is worth the enduring much
affliction.
WE are now come to the sixth doctrinal Doct. 6.
Point that we have here in this part of Moses choice, That the enioyment of
communion with Gods people, is worth the enduring of a great deal of
affliction. Moses chooses to suffer affliction with the people of God; he saw
they were Gods people, and that it was a good thing to be with them, and
therefore rather then he would not be with them, he was content to lose all the
honors of Pharaohs Court, and put himself under the sorest affliction that he
could meet withal, nothing should hinder him from joining with them.

In the worst times of the Church, wherein the hardest things were to be
suffered in joining with Gods people, yet even then would those who had
gracious hearts choose to be with them upon the hardest terms, rather then to
be from them with all outward ease, and carnal delight. It was a very ill time
when there was a separation between the ten Tribes, and the rest, when the ten
Tribes left the Temple, left the Ordinances of God, and followed after
Jeroboam; this was a very hard time, and the rather because Jeroboam set
watchers, to observe who would go from him unto Judah to join with Gods people
there, for there remained the true Church. And this is the meaning of that
place, Hos. 5. 1. Hear ye this O Priests, and hearken ye house of Israel, and
give ye ear O house of the king, for judgment is toward you, because you have
been a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor: Now these two places, were
places that were between Samaria, the ten Tribes, and Jerusalem; whosoever
should go from them to Jerusalem, to join with Gods people there in the true
worship of God, those that were set at Mizpah and Tabor, would spy them, and so
they were ready to be taken: This was the hard condition of Gods people then,
and they did mightily scorn at those that would go to Jerusalem to worship, and
to join with them in that way of worship.

And therefore Amaziah said to Amos, (Chap. 7. ver. 12.) O thou Seer, go, flee
thee away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophecy there: as
if Amaziah should say, Judah is a fitter place for you then this, you are so
precise, and strict, you had need be gone to Judah, we are Idolaters here, and
no true Church but in Judah, such as you are, had better be gone to Judah: And
so it is usual for those that are carnal and profane, to scorn at those that
are godly. Yet though things were so hard in these times, that there were
watches and spies set to watch over them, and they did contemn those that did
look toward Judah, yet those that were godly would not be discouraged, but
would go, and join with Gods people notwithstanding all this: and therefore you
have it in 2 Chronicles. 11. 16. what was the way of Gods servants in that time,
when it was such a difficult thing to join with Gods people: All such as set
their hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel: there were a company of them that
would stay in Samaria, that might have good wishes, that times were better, and
things were better, but would not suffer any thing, to go and join with Gods
people, where they might have the Ordinances in a pure manner; but all such as
set their hearts to seek the Lord, and resolved whatsoever came of it, they
would have God in the purity of his Ordinances, they went up to Jerusalem: And

So it was in the Primitive times, they were very hard times for Gods people,
and the people of God, and Christians were discovered by their meetings
together; if so be all of them would have separated one from another, and kept
their Religion to themselves, they might not have been discovered, but though
it were with hazard of their lives, they would join together, and meet
together; and therefore when any was converted, it is said, they were added to
the Church. And S. Paul, Heb. 10. 25. lays a charge upon them, though it were
at such a time as they hazarded their lives, Not to forsake the assembly of the
Saints, as the manner of some is. And Mr. Calvin in a Sermon upon that Text,
Seek ye my face, interpreting it thus, The face of God is Gods Ordinances; as a
man is known by his face, so God makes himself known in his Ordinances; and so
he urges that place, Seek my face, that all Christians in conscience are bound
to go where Gods Ordinances may be enjoyed, if possibly they can: And he says
further, It is better they should scrape the ground with their nails, then to
be any where else, where they should not ioyn with Gods people in the ways of
his Ordinances. Certainly, it is a great blessing to be with them, though upon
never such hard terms in regard of afflictions.

That is observable that we read of Jacob blessing his sons, Genesis 49. 28. it is
said, He blessed every one of them; How was that? for you shall find he rather
seemed to curse three of them, Reuben, Simeon, and Levi; he speaks only of
evil to them; but because they were not rejected, from being amongst Gods
people, although they were to be under great and sore afflictions, yet they are
said to be blessed.

Well, but why should we suffer much affliction for Quest.
the joining with Gods people? What is there in them, or amongst them, that
makes joining with them to be so desirable?

First, that point we handled before, might be Answ. 1.
enough to show the reason of this: they are the excellent of the earth, Isaiah
43. 4. I do not now speak of them particularly, though every Saint is
honorable, but especially they are honorable in a way of Church communion: Now
we know it is a credit, and privilege to have society with those that are
honorable; Gods people are so, they are the glory of the world: as for others,
God speaks of them as dirt and dross, Psalm. 119. 118, 119. but now Gods people
are called the glory of God himself, Isaiah 4. 5. now it is good being with
such as those are. Peter, when he saw but two of Gods servants together with
Christ, Moses and Elias, says, It is good being here, let us make three
Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias; he never thought
of himself, it is good being here, though he should lie in the field, and in
the rain: and so says a gracious heart, It is good being here with Gods people,
for they are precious, whatsoever hardship we suffer amongst them.

Secondly, there is no such comfortable communion 2.
in the world, as with Gods people. It is comfortable, The excellency of the
Communion of Saints.


First, in the very beholding of the shining of the graces of Gods Spirit in
them; says Heathen Seneca, The very look of a good man delights me: What 1.
is the glory of God himself, but to see his own glory Ipse aspectus boni viri
delectat.
shining in the world, in the works of creation, and providence? If God
delights so much to see the resplendency of that glory that shines in his
works, surely it must be a great delight to those that have any work of grace,
to see grace shining in others.

Besides, there is a blessed fragrancy of graces in 2.
Gods people: as the eye is satisfied in beholding the beauty of them, so the
heart is satisfied in the sweetness of them; Cant. 6. 2. My beloved is gone
down into his garden, to the beds of spices; the Catholic Church is as the
garden, and every particular Church, if it be as it should be, is as a bed of
spices, that gives forth a very fragrant smell. It is reported of Alexander,
his body was of such an exact constitution, that it gave a sweet scent where it
went: and so a Church is of so good a constitution, that it gives forth a
wonderful sweet fragrant smell to those that have their right senses.

Again, no such comfort as in communion with Gods people, in regard of the
nearness of their union one 3.
with another, their hearts join, and are one if they be truly spiritual: other
societies are but as the iron and the clay in the toes of Nebuchadnezzars
Image, they may cleave together, but they will not incorporate one into
another: The more spiritual any thing is, the more it does unite with that
which is spiritual; spiritual things are more unitive then such things as are
bodily; as if you have a heap of stones, they do not join so close together,
but now a thousand beams of the Sun will unite together in one point, because
they are spiritual things in comparison: and this is the reason why there is
such a full union between God, and a spiritual heart, because God is so
spiritual, and the more spiritual the heart is, the more union; and so
Christians having grace, and grace being spiritual, the more grace, the more
spiritual, and the more spiritual, the more union: and the reason why in
Church Fellowship there is so little union, is because they are so carnal, and
therefore the Apostle says, the contentions that were in the Church of Corinth,
were because they were carnal. If you were more spiritual, there would not be
such division between you.

As it is in wicked communion, those who are more spiritually wicked, (for
there is a kind of spiritual wickedness) they do more unite together, those
that are more fleshly wicked, do not so closely unite, as your drunkards, and
profane fellows, though they call good fellows, yet upon every cross word,
they are ready to fall out: but others that are wicked in a malicious way
against the godly, and wicked in a way of policy, to work to undermine the way
of godliness, such as those join together a great deal more strongly, then
those that join together in an outward fleshly way; Now because Gods people are
spiritual in a gracious way, therefore they have such near union, and union
causes abundance of comfort. We read Exodus 26. of two sorts of Curtains for
the Tabernacle, the one, verse 1. of fine twined linen, blew, purple and
scarlet, and the tatches were of gold to couple them; the other were of goats
hair, ver. 7. and the tatches to couple them were of brass, ver. 11. Which may
set forth the several sorts of people in the Church; some are of a finer make
then others, more spiritual, and the bonds of their union are golden, others
are more course, and the bonds of their union are not so glorious; but this is
a truth for ever, the more spiritual, the more union, the more pure the souls
of men are, and of the more excellent temper, the more close, sweet, excellent
in their union.

Again, no such comfort as with Gods people, because of the suitableness of
that disposition that is in 4.
their spirits, one with another, having but one spirit, and but one divine
nature, led by the same principles, and rules, and have the same ends, and
affections, hopes, and desires, and joys: and where there is such a
suitableness, surely there must needs be a great deal of comfort, for all
comforts come from a suitableness between the heart and the object; if the
thing be never so good, if there be not a suitableness between the heart and
it, there is no comfort; but no such suitableness as between Gods people, and
therefore no such comfort.

Fifthly, no such joy as is to be had in communion with them, because of their
entireness of love, entireness 5.
of love is a lovely sight. Dionisius seeing two entire friends together,
wished himself the third. Cant. 6. 9. My Dove is but one, and it follows, the
daughters saw her, and blessed her; an oneness of heart is a blessed thing, no
such entireness, such oneness any where as amongst the Saints: their love is
spiritual, and not upon base grounds, as the love of others is, there is not
that base aiming at self as in others: a carnal heart cannot love another, but
in some base respect to himself; but now it is not self that is the the ground
of the love between those that are truly gracious and godly, but God that is
between them, and with them, the ground of their love is more spiritual, and
therefore it is a kind of divine love, and not so drossie as others.

Sixthly, no communion so comfortable in regard 6.
of their faithfulness, they dare trust one another. Apellant se fratres and
mori volu^t prose invicem. Tertul apud ^uel. Ser. in Luc. 10. 23.
They call themselves brethren, and they will dye for another, says Tertullian:
the men of the world cry out, Of all men I would not trust those that are so
precise: Indeed, if you do take all refuse that make profession, you may say
so, but a gracious heart can savor who is godly, and will not trust every one
that talks of Religion, but such as are truly godly, they dare trust them, and
venture their lives with them: no communion in which we can ease our selves of
our burdens, as where there are a company of true gracious humble Saints in
communion one with another. So that put these together, and you see the second
reason why it is worth the enduring so much affliction to have communion with
the people of 3.
God. Why it is worth enduring of affliction to enjoy the communion of Saints.


Thirdly, it is worth the enduring a great deal of affliction, to have
communion with them; because it is in their communion, in which the solemn
worship of God is set up; now it is worth the enduring of a great deal, to be
where that is. In Judah is God known, and his name is great in Israel: he has
honor by others, but his name is great in Israel, in his Church; What a
comfortable thing is it, and blessed, and worth the enduring of much, to have
multitudes of Gods people join with one heart, in setting out the praises of
God, sitting at his Table, sitting before him, lifting up the name of the great
God, making his praise glorious: When the Saints are gathered together for this
end, in this work, Christ is there present with them, praising God, he joins
with them in this work, Heb. 2. 12. In the midst of the Church will I praise
thee; this is spoken of Christ, it is quoted out of Psalm. 22. 22. which is
prophetical of Christ: who would not be in such acts of worship, to join with
such as Christ joins with? If God be our God, and dear to our souls, his
worship is dear to us; and if there be any people in the world, among whom God
is truly worshipped, it is a great affliction not to be with them.

It is the observation of one Interpreter upon that place in Isa. 6. where the
Cherubims cried, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, the earth is full of thy
glory: the Prophet cries out, Woe unto me, I am undone, because I am a man of
unclean lips, unfit to join with those that are praising of God: howsoever the
meaning of that place be, yet thus we may make use of it, to be a great
affliction, and cause there is to cry out, Woe to our selves, when we hear of
Gods people crying out, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts; if we be not
amongst them, though it be in the wilderness, yet if Gods worship be set up,
the people of God have a feast: When the Israelites were to go from Egypt, into
the wilderness, Moses says, they must go thither to keep a feast unto the Lord;
What was that feast in the wilderness, but the setting up the worship of God?

Fourthly, no communion, no society in which there is so much profit and
benefit, as to be amongst these. 4.
As Abigail said to David, The Lord shall bind up the soul of my Lord in the
bundle of life: to be amongst Gods people, is to be bound up in the bundle of
life; much good we enjoy in them, and the more communion we have, the more
interest we have in all their gifts, and graces, and prayers: and therefore we
read of Daniel, when he had a great work to do, how he makes use of that
interest he had in the prayers of the godly, Daniel 2. 17, 18. It is a great
blessing to have an interest in the prayers of the Saints, and so in all their
gifts, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, etc. all are
yours, and you are Christ's: as if he should say, there need no such envying one
at another, to say, I am of Paul, and another of Apollos, and another of
Cephas, for all are yours; all the gifts, and graces of all the worthies of the
Lord, are all yours, they are all for your good, and you have interest in them
all: in communion with the Saints, there is watching over one another, and
quickening one another, and admonishings, and wholesome counsels, and stirring
up the graces of God that are in one another: Have you not felt your selves,
when you have come away from a spiritual communion, to come away with hearts
raised, and spirits inflamed for God, and so strengthened, that your
resolutions have been up, to do or suffer any thing for the Lord; as in Mal. 3.
16. Those that feared the Lord, spoke often to one another, quickened the hearts
of one another; and so in Acts 18. 5. And when Silus, and Timotheus, was come
from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in spirit, and testified to the Jews, that
Jesus was Christ: Certainly in their converse together, S. Paul found his
spirit wrought upon, and refreshed, so that the Text says, when Timotheus was
come, Paul was pressed in spirit.

Fifthly, it is good being with Gods servants, though 5.
it be in suffering affliction, because God takes so much delight in them; if
God takes delight in being with them, certainly there is great cause we should
take delight in them: there are admirable expressions of Gods taking delight in
them, Zeph. 3. 17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will
save thee, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love, he
will joy over thee with singing: One word is heaped upon another, to set out
the abundance of delight that God takes in his people: Hence the Church has
that name given her, Hephzibah, because God delights in her, Isaiah 62. 4.
And in Deuteronomy. 33. 3. it is said, He loved his people, there is a general love:
All his Saints are in his hand, and they sat down at his feet, that is more
particular: and in Cant. 4. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my
Spouse, etc. One would think by the reading of the words, they were rather the
speech of the Spouse to Christ; but it is the speech of Christ to his Spouse:
And so again in Cantic. 5. 2. Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my
undefiled: these are the expressions of the delight that God has in his
people; The Lord loves the gates of Zion, more then all the ling places of
Jacob, that is, God delights in the public communion of his people, more then
in all their private dwellings: If we be of Gods mind, and have Gods Spirit,
our hearts must be where God is, Gods bowels yern toward them, I am afflicted
with thee in all thy afflictions, and how shall I give thee up?

There is a notable expression in Hosea 9. 10. where God sets out much of his
delight in his Church, I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness; as a
traveller, wearied, parched in the wilderness, if he finds bunches of grapes,
O how sweet and refreshing are they to him! so, says God, was Israel to me: and
further, I saw your fathers, as the first ripe in the fig tree at her first
time: Fruit when it comes at the first, and is dainty, how is it prized? some
will give an incredible price for some kind of timely fruit, when it is rare
at the first; Thus God sets out his delight, never Longer did delight more in
some timely rare fruit, then God does in his Saints. God takes delight (you
see) in his people, above all others, and therefore it is good to be with them.

Sixthly, Consider the glorious titles that in Scripture 6.
are put upon the Saints in a way of Church communion: as,

1. They are Gods portion, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. The Lords The glorious titles of the
Saints.
portion is his people.

2. His pleasant portion, Jer. 12. 10. They have made my pleasant portion a
desolate wilderness.

3. His inheritance, Isaiah 19. 25. other people are the work of Gods hands,
but Israel is his inheritance.

4. The dearly beloved of his soul, Jer. 12. 7. He gave the dearly beloved of
his soul into the hands of their enemies.

5. His treasure, his peculiar treasure, Exodus 19. 5. Ye shall be a peculiar
treasure to me above all people, for all the earth is mine: that is called
peculium, Abulensis in Exodus 19.
which the son and heir of the house has of his own, besides the right of his
fathers inheritance, which he may dispose of as he thinks good: so though the
earth be the Lord Christ's by inheritance, by right of creation, yet he has a
special interest in his Church, above all other. God has treasure in the works
of nature, and it is called his good treasure, Deuteronomy. 28. 12. The Lord shall
open to thee his good treasure; but this is his peculiar treasure.

6. His glory, Isaiah 46. 13. I will place salvation in Zion, for Israel my
glory.

7. The house of Gods glory, Isa. 60. 7.

8. A crown of glory, Isa. 62. 3.

9. The throne of God, Exodus 17. 16. The words may be read thus, because the
hand upon the throne of the Lord, and so by many they are translated, and then
the sense is, because Amaleks hand was upon the Church, the throne, therefore
God threatens war against them: vea,

10. The Throne of glory, Jer. 4. 21.

11. The Ornament of God, Ezekiel. 7. 20.

12. The beauty of his ornament, Ezekiel. 7. 20.

13. The beauty of his ornament set in majesty, Ezekiel. 7. 20.

14. A royal Diadem, Isaiah 62. 3. Many other such expressions you may meet
with in Scripture, but put these together, and you see it is desirable to be
with the Saints in their communion.

Seventhly, There is a special presence of God amongst them; and to be there,
where God is in his especial presence, it is worth the enduring of a great deal
of affliction: God is there in a special manner, as in the last words of the
prophecy of Ezekiel, the Church is called by that name, Iehova Shammah, the
Lord is there. And the Lord filled his Tabernacle with his presence: the
Tabernacle was a type of the Church, and did typifie his especial presence with
his people in Church Communion.

And as God is there present, so observe the expressions of his especial
presence; he is said to dwell there, Psalm. 76. 2. In Salem is his Tabernacle,
and his dwelling place in Zion: Now it is good keeping house with God. You are
his house, says the Apostle; the Church of God is his house, and it is good to
be in Gods house. But though it be his dwelling, Is it a dwelling that is
lovely to him? Yes, for it is that his soul desires to be in; as if so be God
counted it a kind of honor (as we may speak with holy reverence) to have such
a habitation; Psalm. 132. 14. Here will I dwell, for I have desired it: as if he
should say, If I might have but a dwelling among my people, I desire no better
habitation in the world. Now you that are fain to be put into mean holes for
your dwellings, if you may be with Gods people, do not think it much, for God
dwells there, and desires no better habitation: It is strange that God that
has Heaven to be his habitation, should desire to dwell with his people, yet
says he, I desire to dwell there, and I will dwell there.

If a man make a house to do some mean business in, he does not take much
delight there, but in that house where the Kings Majesty is manifested, that is
the greatest place in the Kingdom: now in Psalm. 26. 8. it is, Lord, I have
loved the habitation of thy house, where thy honor dwells: as if this were
the chief house that God had, that God delights in this above all other
dwellings; his honor dwells here. But will God stay here? Yea, it is the place
that he will dwell in for ever, Psalm. 132. 13, 14. Surely our hearts may rest
where God rests, and we should not be weary where God is not weary. And he does
not only dwell here, but he has his delightful walks here: the walks of God
are amongst his people, 2 Cor. 6. 16. If a man have a house that he rejoices
in, he will have his garden as near his house as he can, that he may have some
walks to delight in: and so the Church of God is such a house, as has not
only room for God to rest in, and set his honor in, but he walks there, and
walks in them, says the Apostle. Thus the Lord is pleased to condescend to our
weakness, to express his especial presence with his Church, and therefore it is
good to be with them; these are the expressions of it.

But wherein does the presence of God with his people Quest.
appear more then with other people?

In these two things especially. Answ.


First, because there God makes himself known, reveals 1.
himself there, and makes his beauty to appear. Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I
desired of the Lord, Wherein the presence of God with his people, appears more
then with others.
that I will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days
of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple: It
is the glory of Heaven to see God in his beauty, and this is one of the
greatest promises of God to his Church,. that they shall see the King in his
majesty: We may see some glimmering light of God in the Heavens; Sun, Moon, and
Stars; but in the Church, there God shows his beauty, there we may see the face
of God; and this is that which Moses did desire; Lord-shew me thy glory: It is
much granted to us in the Church, in enjoying his Ordinances; and there is no
way to see Gods face so clearly, as this way: Every child of God that is in
the Temple, shall speak of Gods glory, for they see God in his glory in a
special manner.

Secondly, the especial presence of God with his people, is especially
manifested, in that he communicates 2.
to his people; as namely,

First, the choice mercies of God are communicated to his people: If you would
have any share in Gods 1.
choice mercies, his peculiar mercies, come amongst Gods people, join with
them: as that place is observable in Psalm. 134. 3. The Lord that made Heaven
and earth, bless thee out of Sion: He does not say, the Lord that made Heaven
and Earth, bless thee out of Heaven and Earth; but the Lord that made Heaven
and Earth, bless thee out of Sion: as if he should say, The blessings that come
out of Sion, are the choice blessings, and the peculiar mercies of God, even
above any that come out of Heaven and Earth.

Secondly, God communicates his mercies more 2.
fully then any where else: Isa. 25. 6. And in this mountain, that is, in the
Church, I will make a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat
things full of marrow, etc. and Psalm. 36. 8. They shall be abundantly satisfied
with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the river of
thy pleasures: In a private way there may be some drops of pleasure from God,
but there is not that full communication from God, as with his people in his
Ordinances: there is in the world, in the creature drops, in private communion
there are ponds, but in a pulique Churchcommunion, there are rivers of
pleasure, and that is the height of all.

Thirdly, God communicates his mercies more powerfully in the Church then any
where else: Psalm. 3.
133. 3. For there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore. God
did not only speak, and said there should be a blessing, but spoke in a
commanding way; There: Where is that? There in the Church, amongst his people,
there God commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.

Lastly, God blesses more universally with all 4.
kind of blessing, and therefore he is more present there: and in that respect
the Psalmist says, Psalm 87. 7. All my springs are in thee. This whole Psalm is
to set out the excellent condition of the Church, and he concludes the Psalm
with this, All my springs are in thee: Now this expression is very emphatical;
Spring is taken two or three ways in Scripture: The Law of God, the Doctrine of
Gods Law is compared to a spring, and heavenly knowledge is compared to a
spring; and then it is thus, All my springs: All the truths I have, all the
knowledge I come to be made partaker of, are all in the Church. Again, All my
springs; all the comforts of my heart, and that good and joy my spirit
receives, and all the graces of the Spirit that I have, and all the quickening
and strengthening I have, is communicated to me this way. And upon this ground,
the Church is called the very perfection of all beauty, Psalm. 50. 2. Out of
Zion the perfection of all beauty, God has shined: Out of Zion, there is his
glory wonderfully apparent; The word that is translated, the perfection of
beauty, is translated by some, the universality of beauty; all kind of beauty,
all kind Universitate decoris.
of excellency: as if the Psalmist should say, Put all excellencies together
that possibly you can imagine, to make a thing comely and lovely, they are all
in the Church. Thus you see it is good being with Gods people, when as God is
thus present with them, in a special manner.

Eighthly, it is good being with Gods people, because 8.
there is Gods special protection; others are but as the wilderness, the Church
is as a garden enclosed, Cant. 4. 12. A man regards his garden that he has
enclosed, and bestowed cost about, more then a wild field; the fields have
hedges to keep out the beasts, but gardens have brick walls, or wood walls. Isa.
27. 3. I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it; I
will keep it night and day: How full is this? his care over it is such, as he
threatens those which shall but touch it, Jer. 12. 14. to pluck them out of
their land. Zach. 2. 5. God promises he will be a wall of fire round about his
people; alluding to the custom of travelers in the wilderness, who used to
make fires round about them in the night for their safety, because then none of
the wild beasts durst come near them; such a defense is God to his people.

There is nothing in the Book of God, wherein God is so full in his expression,
as when he comes to this argument, to manifest his affection to his Church.
Christ is the Shepherd, and when sheep are together, they are under the
protection of the Shepherd, when the sheep are scattered, the Shepherds eye is
not so over them; And therefore in Hosea 4. 16. God threatens his people, he
would feed them as a Lamb in a large place; as a Lamb getting from the fold,
goes up and down bleating; so when Gods people are scattered, they are as a
Lamb in a large place: and when God would threaten the sorest judgment against
his people, Ezekiel 34. he says, He will scatter them, and they shall become to
be meat to the beasts of the field. And hence it is, that the condition of the
Church is so stable a condition: and therefore in Isaiah 60. 15. the Church is
called an eternal excellency, because it is under the Lords protection, and is
it not good being there, to be under the wing of God?

Ninthly, to be amongst Gods people is a blessed 9.
thing, because they have so many privileges from God: every one desires to
join with such societies as have great privileges; now Gods people have such
as are very great, Psalm. 87. 3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of
God! What glorious things? They have glorious privileges; What are they? To
them are committed the Oracles of God, as the Apostle reasons for the Church of
the Jews; So to every Church of God, is committed the Oracles and the
Ordinances of God, and those Offices for the dispensation of the mysteries of
God; which were the great gift, that Christ triumphingly ascending to Heaven
gave, and surely that gift must needs be great. The benefit but of one
Ordinance, the Ministry of the Word, dispensed rightly, is made an argument by
God himself, for the comfort of his people, in all their adversities, Isaiah
30. 20, 21. And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water
of affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed any more into a corner,
but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers. The word in the Ministry of it, in the
the right way, is a great blessing: When Chrysostom Tolerabili us fuisse si sol
radios suos retraxisset obscuratus, quam quod ^s Joha^nis tacuit.
was banished, many godly people were so grieved, that they professed it were
more sufferable for the Sun to withdraw his beams, and so be darkened, then for
the mouth of Chrysostom to be stopped. If this one Ordinance be so blessed,
what a blessing then is the enjoyment of all, and that in a right way?

Every Church Fellowship is as the pillar, to hold T. 5. ep. 3.
forth the truth to the world, as a light set upon a hill, to hold forth the
glory of God. And they have amongst them the broad seal of Heaven; To Gods
people that are together in a Church Fellowship, the seals are committed; now
this is a mighty privilege. And besides, they have the power of Christ with
them, 1 Cor. 5. 4. the power of Christ is committed to them. And amongst other
privileges, this is one of great worth, that all the promises of God made to
his Church in former ages, is the heritage of every present Church, Isaiah 54.
17. These are great and high privileges, and worth the enduring of a great
deal of hardship, to be made partakers of the good of them.

Tenthly, it is a blessed thing to be with them, though with some hardship,
because God is working 10.
more and more good for his people every day: Now he is about fulfilling the
glorious promises that we have in the Prophets, to make an end of all the glory
that he does intend in the world: Now if God be working great things for his
people, as we hope he is, To set up Jerusalem, as the praise of the whole
earth; Is it not good to be with them, that we may be partakers of the glory
that God intends to them? Isa. 58. 14. There is a promise that the Church shall
ride upon the high places of the earth: There is a time a coming, that the
society of Gods people in this world, shall be set above all societies in the
world; and Isa. 2. that The mountain of the Lord shall be raised above all
mountains: we cannot see how this has been fulfilled. Isaiah 60. 19. The Sun
shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the Moon give
light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy
God thy glory. This prophecy is spoken of the estate of the Church of God;
when was this fulfilled, that there should be so much glory in the Church, that
there need not be any Sun, or Moon, but God should be in stead of Sun and Moon,
and all the glory of his people? and to be with Gods people, when God does such
great things for them, is worth the enduring much hardship

In the former part of Isaiah 60. v. 7. God says, He will glorify the house of
his glory; and mark what follows, ver. 8. Who are those that fly as a cloud,
and as the Doves to their windows? Seeing God will glorify the house of his
glory, his people should fly to it as a cloud; Those who are of heavenly, not
of drossie sensual spirits, will do so, and as Doves to their windows; those
who are of Dove-like spirits, loving society, and purity, they will do so. And
it was the reason why some desired to live, because in a few years, they hoped
to see some great things for his people. And so the 102 Psalm is a prophetical
Psalm, into what a happy condition the Lord will bring his people; and in the
latter part of the Psalm, the Psalmist brings in a gracious heart living in
those times, bemoaning the condition of it, that it has a sickly body, and
weak, and like to dye, before God would make good those promises made to the
Church: as if he should say, Lord, thou art bringing glorious things to pass
for thy Church, and thou art gathering the Kingdoms to serve thee, Lord, then
take not me away in the midst of my days; O God let me live to see all
fulfilled.

Eleventhly, It is good to be with Gods people, because 11.
they are those people we shall live withal in Heaven: If there were a company
traveling together in a strange country, and knew when they came to their own
country they should live together, in some great preferment in the Court, how
would they delight in one another? So the godly should look upon one another;
here we have communion one with another, and these are they we must join in
communion withal hereafter, to praise God eternally in the highest Heavens.

Lastly, it is Heaven already to join with the people 12.
of God in communion: The Scripture calls the Church of God, and Church
communion, Heaven. And therefore where there is a promise of God to restore his
Church, and recover it from thraldom and misery, Isaiah 65. 17. Behold, says
God, I create new heavens, and new earth; and so in Rev. 12. where the vision
of the restoring of the Church was shown to John, it was shown that way; there
was a new heaven, and a new earth: so that the Church of God is heaven, it is
not only a company we shall live withal in Heaven hereafter, but it is Heaven
now; and therefore our Savior says, The least in the kingdom of Heaven, shall
be greater then John; the least that lived after John in the Christian Church,
could speak more of Christ then John could: The Kingdom of Heaven is like a man
sowing his field with wheat, that is, the estate of the Church is a field sown
with wheat, and after the adversary sows tares in it. The Church, says
Chrysostom in one of his Sermons Ecclesia est locus Angelorum, Regia coel^
coelum ipsum Chry. Hom. 36 in 1. ad Cor.
upon the Corinthians, is the place of Angels, the Palace of Heaven, yea Heaven
it self. And if it be so, that communion with Gods people is Heaven already,
surely it is worth enduring of much affliction to be with them.

CHAP. XX. Persuasions to draw to the joining with the people of God in the
nearest communion.
HEnce then let me speak; first, unto those Use 1.
who yet are not partakers of that good that is to be had with Gods people, I
mean in nearest communion: though we all have the name of God upon us, and have
some kind of communion with the people of God; yet, seeing there is much good
to be had in communion with them further, it should be the desire of every one,
to enjoy the nearest communion with them that can be; this is a mercy that you
should labor to seek after: for a good there is here, which none know the
sweetness and benefit of, but only those that do enjoy it, seek to have it,
for great things are spoken concerning it. If there be any realities in the
truths that have been opened to you, it cannot but make the communion and
joining with Gods people very lovely; but certainly that which I have said,
comes abundantly short of what is in it: for the most things that are used, for
the showing the excellency of this communion, were from some expressions of God
to his people under the Law, and we come short in the understanding of them;
but if we could understand them fully, they come short of the abundance of
privileges that Gods people have under the Gospel, and the reason is, not
only because ceremonies were typical, but Gods dealing with his Church, their
way in Church order, and government, was but a typical thing, to typifie the
estate of Gods people under the Gospel.

Now we know there is a great deal more in the antitype, then in the type, the
type is but a shadow of that which is typified; now if the excellency of the
estate of the Church under the Law, was but a type of the estate of the Church
under the Gospel, then all that is said of the excellency of that condition, is
but as a shadow of that which is now, Heb. 10. 1. The law was a shadow of good
things to come, and not the very image; The estate of the Church now under the
Gospel, is the image of that glory that is to be revealed, but the Law was but
a shadow of that image: as a Limner, first draws a dark shadow of a picture in
coal, and after makes the Image; look what differenne there is in the
excellency of that rude draught by a coal, and the beauty of the Image; such
there is between all the excellency of the estate of the Church under the Law,
and that there is under the Gospel: and therefore, that which is to be expected
now, is a great deal more, and should inflame the desires of all, to seek after
such a privilege.

Consider, that this good which is to be had in communion with Gods people, is
a special fruit of the loving kindeness of God; and would you not all be made
partakers of the loving kindeness of the Lord? Thriving in your Trades, and
outward blessings, are a fruit of the common kindeness of the Lord, but
communion with Gods people, is a fruit of his specialloving kindeness: Psalm.
36. 7, 8. How excellent is thy loving kindeness, O God! therefore the children
of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings. They shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the
river of thy pleasures. The satisfaction of the soul with the fatness of Gods
house, is the fruit of Gods loving kindeness, yea, the fruit of Gods excellent
loving kindeness, and his admirable excellent loving kindeness: It is worth the
seeking after, to be satisfied with the fatness of Gods house: And thou shall
make them drink of the river of thy pleasures: While you seek after the
comforts of the creature, you seek to drink in puddles, but here are rivers of
pleasures.

It is the inheritance of Gods elect ones; Isaiah 65. 9. I will bring forth a
seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains, mine elect
shall inherit it. I do not say, whosoever does enjoy communion with Gods
people, is elected; but whosoever does enjoy it, enjoys that which is the
inheritance of Gods elect, such a fruit of Gods loving kindeness, as comes to
the elect by inheritance, though some others do get into it, yet none should
but only the elect ones; and therefore if you have any hope to be the elect of
God, desire after this as part of your inheritance; A man would be loath to
lose part of his inheritance. It is an inheritance promised to those who trust
in God, and opposed to all the vanity of the world; Isa. 57. 13. Vanity shall
take them, but he that puts his trust in me, shall inherit my holy mountain.

Thirdly, it has been the only desire of gracious 3.
hearts heretofore; and if God has wrought any grace in you, sure your grace
is suitable to the grace of others, as David, in Psalm. 27. 24. This one thing
have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the
house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord: as
if there were nothing were the object of David's desires, but this one thing.
And in Psalm. 84. what abundance of expressions have we to set out his desires
this way? David was here in his banishment; we do not find him complaining, O
my Kingdom that I am like to lose! my brave Palaces, and my brave Chambers,
Gardens and attendance that I am like to lose; but the house of God. And in
Psalm. 42. As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after
thee, O God! It was not after the enjoyment of God that he might have in his
own soul privately, that his heart so panted after, but the appearing before
the Lord in his house.

Fourthly, this is the especial work of wisdom: if 4.
God has let out any beam of wisdom into your souls, to show unto you any
thing of the excellency of Christ, this will be immediately desired; as in that
Parable of the wise Merchant, as soon as he had found the Pearl, he went and
sold all to buy the field: the meaning is, when a soul comes to have any
knowledge of Christ, that Christ is the only Pearl, then it desires to seek to
enjoy him, where he is to be enjoyed; it is in the field, in the Church of God,
in communion with it; and the wise Merchant would part with any thing, that he
might have the field, that is, have communion with Gods people in his
Ordinances, and so come to enjoy the Pearl.

Yea fifthly, the reason why God puts any light or truth into the soul, is to
put forth the soul to this, to 5.
join with his people in this way of communion, Psalm. 43. 3. What was the
reason why the Prophet would have the light and the truth of God? but to lead
him to the holy hill, and to the Tabernacle.

Sixthly, by joining your self with the Saints, and 6.
furthering this work of communion, you set up the honor of God much, God is
much glorified by this, and will be more and more; Exodus 15. 2. I will build
him a Tabernacle, the Septuagint renders it, (...), I will glorify him: and it
is very observable, that as soon as Moses was delivered from the Egyptians, he
thinks of, and resolves, and promises, the building of Gods Tabernacle, which
was a type of the Church. If God has delivered you out of any trouble, out of
any sickness, in testimony of thankfulness to God for his mercy, set upon this
work, to further the building of Gods Tabernacle; Seeing God has spared my
life, this shall be one of the first things I will do, I will put in what I
can, to the furthering of the building of Gods Tabernacle.

Seventhly, we find in Scripture, that there is a 7.
fearful threatening against all those that shall neglect this, Zach. 14. 17.
And it shall be, that whosoever will not come up of all the families of the earth,
unto Jerusalem, to worship the King the Lord of hosts, even upon them shall be
no rain; that is, no blessing of God. You will say, how does this appear to be
meant of Gods people now? It appears the holy Ghost did intend the estate of
the Church in the time of the Gospel, and therefore it follows in the 20. ver.
In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses, Holiness unto the
Lord, and the pots in the Lords house shall be like the bowls before the Altar.
Now these expressions are spiritually to be understood of the glorious
condition of the Church of God in the time of the Gospel, and therefore God
takes it ill at the hands of any that shall not come to join with his people.

And further, we have a fearful threat, Isaiah 65. 11, 12. against such as
forsake, or forget Gods holy mountain, I will number you to the sword, and ye
shall bow down to the slaughter: You may think to provide for your selves, to
live securely, and safely, at your ease, enjoying house, lands, friends,
trades; you are loath to hazard your selves so as others do, to bring your
selves into so much trouble, but as ver. 13, 14. Thus says the Lord, My
servants shall eat, and ye shall be hungry, my servants shall drink, and ye
shall be thirsty, my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed.

Eighthly, if any soul have any desire to come and 8.
join with Gods people in his Ordinances, there is a blessing given to that
desire, Psalm. 84. 5. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose
heart are the ways of them. If the ways of thy Ordinances be but in thy heart,
thou art blessed, and therefore be very desirous of this blessing, be not
satisfied that God gives you outward blessings, and outward comforts in the
world, unless you have this; if you know what communion with God in his people
means, you cannot but desire to be with them, there is so much of God with
them. If you have any spiritual life, you cannot but desire this, because
spiritual life will desire to join with that which is like to its self.

If you know what the power of any Ordinance means, you cannot but desire this;
There is a great mistake of people, they think if they can but live in a place
where they may hear good Sermons, that is enough: know therefore except you
have communion with the Saints this way, though you may hear many good Sermons,
yet there is a great deal of difference between your hearing of them, and their
hearing who are in communion with the people of God, you only come to be made
partakers of a man's gifts, you cannot depend upon the gift of such a one as
being in office by God, set over you, to watch over your souls: There is a
great deal of difference between the dispensing of a gift by way of gift, and
by way of office: there may be the same thing done in the exercise of gifts,
and yet not to be so powerful, as when it is done by virtue of an office: the
ordinary Officers are Pastors, and Teachers, for the building up of the Church;
therefore if you be acquainted with the way of Christ in his Ordinances, for
the building up of the body, and if you believe your selves to be members of
his body, you cannot but desire those Ordinances that he has appointed for the
building of his body.

The Church is set up as a light, or an ensign upon the top of an hill, to draw
others that are near unto it, to come under it: And therefore as we have it in
Rev. 22. 17. The Spirit, and the Bride say, Come; and let him that hears,
say, Come; and let him that is a thirst, come; and whosoever will, let him take
of the water of life freely. The Spirit of God covincing your consciences,
says, Come; and the Bride, the Church says, Come; and let all that hear, say,
Come; all that hear what has been said of communion with Gods people, say ye
to all your friends, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord. We
have a Prophecy, Isa. 2. 3. that the people of God should encourage one
another, and shall say, Let us go up into the house of God, for he will teach
us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: O that that Prophecy might be
fulfilled now, that you might have such a desire to the ways of God, as to
encourage others to come and walk in them, that your hearts may be refreshed
with the consolations of God in the way of his Ordinances. And Isaiah 62. 12.
it is prophesied of the Church, that she should be called, Sought out: O that
it might be so, that we could see the hearts of men so set after it, that we
might give it that name (Sought out.)

The blessing that the Elders of the City desired upon Ruth, cap. 4. 11. when
she was married to Boaz, was, The Lord make the woman that is come into thine
house, like Rachel, and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel: Why
like Rachel and Leah, and not like Rebekah? did not she build the house of
Israel likewise? Yes, but all her posterity was not of the Church of God, there
came an Esau from her, as well a as Jacob; but all the children of Rachel and
Leah were of the Church of God, they were Patriarchs, and this was a special
blessing upon them; it is therefore to be accounted a special blessing to be in
the Church, and to have all our posterity to be in it.

When you have heard these glorious things of the privileges of Gods people,
if you should neglect the seeking after, the being made partakers of such
things, how will you free your selves from the guilt of profaneness, that you
should prize outward accommodations, more then these spiritual things? Esau was
branded for a profane wretch, because he set no higher price upon his
birthright, but set a mess of pottage before it: This is greater then the
birthright they had under the Law, and to prize any carnal thing before these
heavenly privileges, is to be a profane Esau. I meet with one who interprets
that place, 1 Chronicles. 4. 23. These were potters, and those that dwelt amongst
plants and hedges, there they dwelt with the King for his work; to be meant of
some baser sort of the Jews, who when liberty was proclaimed for their return
to Jerusalem, where they might enjoy God in his true worship, yet because they
got their living by making pots for the King of Babylon, they thought
themselves well as they were, and they rather choose to stay under the hedges
of Babylon, then to go to Jerusalem; the holy Ghost brands them for base
persons. God loves the gates of Sion more then all the dwellings of Jacob; take
heed you be not found guilty of loving your contentment and gainful dwellings,
more then the gates of Sion.

CHAP. XXI. Objections against joining with Gods people, answered.
BUt you will say, we could be content and should desire to join with them, but
they are so Obj. 1.
strict in admitting any into their society, that that hinders.

If any that were in communion should prove Answ.
naught, you would quickly take advantage, and say, You spoke so much of
communion with Gods people, see here is one of them, whose life is thus base
and vile: When we know the world would take such advantage if any prove naught,
yea, and you your selves will be offended, and cry out of all, for the sin of
one; can you blame us if we be careful in taking any into communion with us?

But there is much difficulty in the way. Obj. 2.


Psalm. 84. 6. The way to Zion, it was through the valley of Baca: they might
have said, We could Answ.
have been content to go to Zion, and to worship God there, but we must go
through that valley, of tears; but they were content to go through that valley,
so that they might appear before God in Zion: Surely when God moves the hearts
of men to join with his people, a little difficulty cannot hinder them: Isaiah
66. 20. They shall bring your brethren as an offering to the Lord, upon horses,
in Chariots, and Litters. A Litter is used especially for weak sickly people,
that are not able to travel otherwise; although they be weakly, and sickly,
unfit to travel, yet they whose hearts God moves, will rather come in Litters,
then not at all. What difficulty will superstition put a man upon?

It is a note of Mr. Calvin's upon that place, Seek ye my face; that
superstitious people will go on pilgrimage to the image of such a Lady, or such
a Saint, and they will go over Mountains, and through strange Countries, and
though they be used hardly, and lose much of their Estate, they satisfy
themselves in this, I have that I came for: What have they? The sight of a dumb
Idol; if they will endure such hardship for the sight of a dumb Idol, how much
hardship should we endure to see God in his Ordinances?

But it may be said thirdly, Whither shall we go to Obj. 3.
any people, but we shall find sin there as well as in another place?

For that there is likewise an answer in the same Sermon Answ.
of Mr. Calvin's; It is true, sin and wickedness will be wheresoever we go, but
the case is thus: Suppose there should be a general disease, and there should
be one place where there were Physicians, and means of cure; shall any say, Why
should I go thither, there is the disease? Go thither though, for there is the
cure; so though there be sin every where, yet in the Church, and in communion
with Gods people, there is the cure.

But may not a man go to heaven without it? Obj. 4.


It is true, it is possible for a man to go to Heaven without it, yet if God
does convince a man of an Answ.
Ordinance, and he neglect it for outward accommodations, it is dangerous: A
man may be saved without Baptism, but where there is the wilful neglect of it,
it is dangerous.

How did all that never heard of this way? Obj. 5.


It is one thing where there is not that light, and another Answ.
thing where God has revealed it. You desire Heaven at last, and do you not
desire communion with Gods people? When you fail in any thing, you plead
infirmity, but when you do neglect any opportunity of gaining strength, how can
you plead infirmity?

But how shall we join with any? there is no place Obj. 6.
but there is brabling, falling out, heart-burning, so as there is no sweet
communion.

This is a great stumbling, and I would we Answ.
could deny it: but if you will take offense at this, you must be offended; It
cannot be expected to the end of the world, but there will be dissension
amongst the people of God: where there has not been care in laying a good
foundation at the beginning, and where there is much liberty, and some are
carnal, what else can be expected? A company of sheep, when they are worried by
the dog, though they were scattered before, they will now run close together;
but in a fair Sunshine day, when there is no dog to scare them, they will one
feed here, and another there, distant from one another: and so it is with Gods
people, though it be a foul shame, and a great sin.

Again, there is no more dissension then in other places, for though in other
places there seem to be more union, what is the reason?

First, because they are in the dark, and all colors 1.
will agree in the dark; but amongst Gods people there is light, and so things
that differ are soon discerned.

Secondly, because they are chained together; as the Papists will say, there is
no such union between 2.
others, as between us; What is the ground? They are held together by an
Antichristian chain: Popery does subject the consciences of men to them: they
must believe the infalibility of the Pope, and they have no liberty to search
things by the Word; and they will not suffer them to be reasoning about the
points of Religion; they are in darkness, and when they be chained up in
darkness, no wonder though they be close together. This is just as if there
should be a couple of men chained to a block, and as they are chained together,
they see other men go at a distance from one another; and they that are chained
should cry out, See what a distance is between you, we keep close together all
the day long; Were this a plea for them? What is that that keeps them together?
It is but their chain, and if their chain were off, they would be at as great a
distance as others; and therefore though there be great evil in the dissentions
of Gods people, yet it is not for such as these are to complain of the evil.

Thirdly, false Religions have more peace, because they will admit of mixture;
but our God is a 3.
jealous God, he will admit us of no mixture, so of no partner.

But that this might not be an offense, so as to keep us from joining in
Communion with the people of God, let us know if this might have been offense
enough to keep men from joining with them, it would have kept men in all times
from joining with the Churches since Christ's time: You know what difference was
between Paul and Barnabas, two Apostles. And so the Apostles do complain of the
dissentions, and divisions in the Church of Corinth, in the Primitive times,
and if that had been enough to keep out men from joining with them, then there
had been no joining with the Church of Corinth, and other Churches. Basil
complains, I have lived now to the age of a man, and I see more union in Arts
and Sciences, then in Divinity; for in the Church, I see such dissentions, as
do dissipate it, and rend it asunder. And so between Chrysostom and Epiphanius,
the one wished the other might never dye a Bishop, and the other wished that he
might never go home alive. And between Jerome and Ruffinus; and Luther and
Oecolampadius.

There is a most sad story we have of those that fled to Frankford from England
in Queen Mary's time, and when they came there, though they fled for Religion,
and for their lives, yet there were such grievous breaches, as they sought the
lives of one another, picking out some words against the Emperor, in a Sermon
that Master Knox had preached in England long before, and now accusing him for
them to the Magistrates of Frankford, upon which diverse of them were fain to
flee. This is through the malice of the Devil, in sowing tares, and therefore
if you will be offended in this way of scandal, you must be offended

Yet we must all take heed of giving offense, for though offenses will come,
yet woe to them by whom they come: Howsoever there fall out offenses, through
the sinful distempers of men's hearts, let not the Ordinance of God be
challenged as the cause of these offenses. Joining in Church Fellowship is a
special Ordinance of God, to maintain love and peace amongst his people, yet by
the abuse of it many times, divisions and dissentions are stronger, and more
bitter in the Church, then elsewhere; let not Gods Ordinance be accused as the
cause of it, nor declined for this, but let the wickedness of men's hearts be
accused, let us seek to have it purged.

Christ came into the world to dissolve the works of the Devil, and yet the
Devil never more raged, then in Christ's time, and a while after; We never read
of men so possessed of the Devil before Christ came, as they were then; Shall
we therefore accuse Christ for bringing the Devil into the world, for being the
cause of men's being possessed of the Devil? Those who thus reason against the
Ordinance of Christ, because of this evil that falls out by accident upon it,
may as well, yea, and certainly would as readily reason against Christ, if they
lived in his time, because of such possession of Devils, which never was so
before he came, as it was then; but as the true reason why the Devil thus
prevailed upon Christ's coming, was the just judgment of God against men for
contemning and rejecting Christ, who came amongst them: so it is here the
judgment of God for the evil of men's hearts in abusing such a blessed
Ordinance of love and peace.

So likewise, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is a Sacrament appointed by
God to maintain love and peace in the Church, it is an Ordinance for communion,
it has the denomination from thence, it is called communion; Yet what has
occasioned such dissentions in the Christian world, as the controversies about
the Sacrament? Shall therefore this Ordinance be accused as the cause of
dissension? O let us for ever learn this truth, that whatsoever evil falls Qui
contentionum gratia Christinam vituperabit doctriuam, iste etiam Socraticam and
Platonicam colem nomine rejicit. Graecae superstitiones cultores pluribus
dissentionibus quam ecclesiae membra laborare.
out, Gods Ordinances be not blamed, but man's corruption, let that be
condemned, and purged. Origin writing to Celsus, says, If you will take offense
at the dissentions in Christian Religion, then you may take offense at
dissentions in other things. Valens the Emperor objected the same against
Christians, Nicephorus 11. 45. brings in one Themistius, answering, that those
of the Grecian superstition had as great dissentions amongst them.

There is dissension amongst Merchants, and other Trades, you do not say
therefore, I will not bind my child to that Trade, they dissent amongst
themselves: If there be profit and accommodations in the Trade, men will not be
hindered by this plea, but join with them notwithstanding; And so come you and
join with the Saints, though there be some dissentions, though there may be
some rigid, distempered, hot spirited men, that may cause some trouble, yet
there is not so much union and love in all the world as with them; set but
aside some, and there are a company, if you be gracious, your soul may take
pleasure in, and bless God for; and therefore away with all such stumbling
blocks, and reasonings against the Ordinances of God, come you thirsting after
the Ordinances of God, and my soul for yours, if you do not find that
sweetness in communion with them, as never was found before.

There are many objections against this way, and many are a long time ensnared
in them, but Isa. 57. 13. where God promises the inheritance of his holy
Mountain, ver. 14. he promises to make the way plain to it. And Exodus 15. 13.
God guides his people in his strength to his holy habitation; it must be the
strength of God that must carry through all objections, all difficulties, over
all stumbling blocks, to Gods habitation: Thus much to those that yet are not
joined in that nearness of communion with Gods people which they may be.

CHAP. XXII. Instructions to those who are joined in communion with Gods people.
SEcondly, if it be such a blessed thing to enjoy communion with Gods people,
then there are Use 2.
many things that are to be said to those that are joined in communion.

First, labor to approve to God and your own souls, 1.
that you are indeed Gods people particularly; you are his people in a way of
outward profession, and to men you do approve your selves, so far as we hope
you are Gods people, but you must approve your selves to God, and to your
consciences: If you be conscious to your selves of any secret filth, and yet
dare come and deceive the people of God in joining with them, you bring your
selves in more danger then you are aware. We read Deuteronomy. 22. ver. 21. that if a
damsel having defiled her self before marriage, and so deceiving a man, he
marries with her, when this is discovered, she is to be stoned to death:
Uncleanness in such as were single, was not by the Law to be punished with
death, but she must dye, although her uncleanness was while she was single,
because she deceived the man, in marrying to him in her defilement: So know
your filth in not joining to Gods people is not so evil, and dangerous, as if
you being conscious to your self, dare yet join with them; if you deceive the
Church herein, God may justly avenge himself of you, it may cost you your life:
Revel. 2. 9. I know the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews, and are not.

It is by God accounted blasphemy for any to say they are Jews, and are not, to
make profession of godliness, and not to be godly, is blasphemy; Surely then,
it is not sufficient to be with Israel, but we must be of Israel, not to be a
Jew outwardly, but a Jew inwardly, so as God may own you in the last day, when
there shall be a narrow search, who are the true people of God, that then you
may be found to be such indeed: it will be a dreadful thing for any of you,
that now seem to be of Gods people, and that have lived amongst the sheep, if
you should be found amongst the goats, standing at the left hand, when you
shall see others of Gods people stand at the right hand, looking upon you, and
say, Yonder is one who lived with us, and we could never discover him to be an
hypocrite, though sometimes we had jealousies of him, there he stands, now he
is discovered; therefore approve your selves to be of the true Israel of God.

Quest. But who is a true Israelite?

Answ. Such a one as can approve to his own heart, an inward effectual call of
God, calling him out of the world, as well as an outward call, by the
Ordinances, such a one as has testimony to his own spirit, that he is
separated, set apart for God, that he has an inward sanctification of the holy
Ghost, such a one as in whose spirit there is no guile; this is a true
Israelite indeed.

Secondly, if it be such a great blessing to be joined in union, and communion
with the people of God, hence labor to bless God for this great blessing, that
is such an amiable, desirable condition; it is your heaven upon earth, that
mercy that should sweeten all other mercies, yea, that should sweeten your
afflictions to you. Gods holy mountain, Isaiah 57. 13. is promised as an
inheritance opposed to vanity, and promised as the blessing upon trusting in
the Lord, Vanity shall take them, but he that puts his trust in me, shall
inherit my holy mountain. Let us not enjoy Men dicato pane hic vivamus, annon
hoc pulchre sarcitur in eo quod pascimur pane cum Angelis et vita aeterna
Christo and Sacramentis. Luth. in Ps. 132.
the world in all their vanity, but bless we our selves in our God, let us
rejoice in our inheritance, the mountain of the Lord. Though we beg our bread,
says Luther, is it not made up with this, That we are fed with the bread of
Angels, with eternal life, Christ, and the Sacraments, etc?

We have cause to bless God that we might be with Gods people, though in caves,
and woods, and banished from all; we have much more cause to bless God when we
can be with them thus publicly, and peaceably, and can go from Gods house, to
our own houses, and have communion there; this is the rest that the Land of
Canaan did typifie, for which the name of God is to be mganified; God might so
have left us, that we should have had communion only with the profane ones,
and drunkards; yea, we might have been cast out from God, to have had communion
only with reprobates, and that now we may have communion with the godly, it is
a wonderful mercy. Rev. 14. we read of Christ standing upon the Mount Zion, and
having so many people standing up, to join with him in Churchfellowship; for
that is the meaning of that place, there they were rejoicing at the mercy of
the Lord, that they were upon the Mount with the Lamb; though there might be
time, when our Harps hanged upon the Willows, yet if we be called to the Lamb
upon Mount Zion, Let us have our Harps in our hands.

Is there nothing in the delight that God has in his people, and the presence
of God with his people, and the great privileges they have, to raise our
hearts to praise the Lord, and let it not be verbally, but really. As namely
thus; Is it that we are Gods delight, let him be our delight; if we be his
treasure, let him be our treasure; if we be his portion, let him be our
portion, if he communicates choice mercies to us, let us give choice endeavors
to him; if he gives us protection, let us protect his truths and name; if he
honor us, let us give him his honor. And so I slip into a third particular,
which is a third branch of this exhortation.

3. If there be so much excellency in communion 3.
with the people of God, you that are such, take heed you do not darken that
excellency that God has put in communion with his people; there are three ways
especially that darkens this excellency.

First, if we rest in any Church-priviledge we have, and make that to be our
Religion, and the How the excellency of the Saints communion is darkened
strength of our spirits be let out about these things we enjoy, more then
others, so as we begin to decline in the savor and power of godliness; if
others that knew us before, when we had not those privileges and mercies, that
we have now, shall say, What good is to be had there? I knew such, and me
thinks they had more savor and relish in the ways of God then now, more
sweetness and warmth to be had in their company then now there is; Take heed of
this, of giving occasion to any to say so. It is a very evil and a dangerous
thing to rest in Church Priviledges, to make all our Religion to consist in
being in a Church Way, we may have this revealed to us, and yet little of
Heaven revealed. There were two vails of the Tabernacle, one covered the Holy
of Holies, the other the place where the Priests entered; it may be we have had
the first opened to us, but yet the second which leads to the Holy of Holies,
may still be veiled.

Many whose hearts are very carnal, may be much for Church-Ordinances. We have
in the 24. of Ezekiel, ver. 21, 22. seven several expressions of carnal hearts,
prising Church Priviledges. First, they accounted them their strength.
Secondly, the excellency of their strength. Thirdly, the desire of their eyes.
Fourthly, that which their souls pitied. Fifthly, their glory. Sixthly, the joy
of their glory. Seventhly, that whereupon they set their minds. What a noise
did they make about the Temple of the Lord? The Temple of the Lord, The Temple
of the Lord, Ier. 7. 4. and yet they were carnal: Take heed therefore you rest
not in the Church Priviledges, by this you will deceive your selves, and darken
the excellency of this blessed communion.

Secondly, take heed of darkning this by any scandalous way, as those do who
profess themselves to be the people of God, and yet by their wretched ways of
sensualities, or any other ways, are a scandal unto Gods people, this is an
evil, and a bitter thing. Christ walks amongst the golden candlesticks: Every
Church should be a golden candlestick, holding forth light in the Doctrine of
it, and golden in the holy conversation of it. We must take heed that there be
not so much as a dusting of this golden candlestick of the Lord, by the least
looseness, or earthliness of our lives. By scandals in the wicked lives of
those that are of Gods people, there is a stain and blot cast upon Church
communion; here the name of God is polluted; others that are profane, pollute
the creatures, and their own consciences, but Gods name is not so much polluted
by them; but Gods people do not only pollute their consciences, by their
scandalous lives, but pollute Gods name, and it is worse to pollute Gods name,
then to pollute your consciences: And therefore know, that joining to the
Saints is an aggravation to every sin you commit afterward; and though it be
true, that union with the people of God is a mitigation of every cross and
affliction, yet it is an aggravation to every sin.

Yea, if men were born for no other end and purpose, but to do mischief, they
could not do more then this, to join with the people of God, and then live
scandalously. O brethren, let us pray to God, that we may never live to that
day, to darken the great excellency of the fellowship of the Saints: It were
better that God should take a thousand of us out of the world, then that we
should live to darken the profession of Gods name, in union with his people;
this does more mischief, then all the persecuters under Heaven can do.

The Church of God has never been in a better condition, then when their
persecuters have raged most; the raging of persecuters have not darkened the
excellency of the Church, but the scandalous lives of members of a Church have
darkened the glory of the Church: though by persecution others may be afraid to
make profession of the truth, yet all the persecution in the world cannot take
off men's consciences, and cause them in their consciences to think such are not
in the truth, because they are persecuted; but the scandalous lives of those
that are Professors, do make men think in their consciences that this way is
not right, and therefore make them think they do God good service in hating
such men, persecuting such men, and there is more evil in this, to be an
occasion to make men think this way is not good, then to make men afraid to
venture upon this way. And therefore consider what a great deal of mischief
scandalous lives do, and if you find your hearts inclining to any sensual way,
that you are like to give scandal, take heed of it, for it is the greatest
mischief that can be devised. Those who join with the Church of God, should
walk so, as to be an ornament to it, not a stain, a blot, to cast filth upon
it; Isa. 49. 18. Behold these that gather themselves to thee, thou shall surely
clothe thee with them all, as with an Ornament: Consider how far many of you
are from being an ornament to the Church; are Malo miserandum quam erube
secudum Tert. de fuga. pers.
not your lives rather blemishes? This is a sore evil. Better it is to endure
any misery, then to do that which shall make Gods people ashamed of us.

The third thing that darkens the excellency of 3.
communion with Gods people, is dissentions in judgment or affection, this
makes it appear to be black in the eyes of the world. Sozomen reports of a
Devilish Episcopos regnante Constantio exilio addictos domu^ revocavit, eo
tantum fine ut ipse ob mutuam inter se contentione^ bello intestino oppugnarent
ecclesiam.
policy of Julian, to raise a scandal against the Church: He sent for those
Bishops that were banished in Constantius his time, on purpose that he might
cause dissension in the Church by them. Take heed you have not a hand in
darking this excellent condition, no not in this way. In the body, solutio
continui, is more dangerous then the corruption of a humor: Let us labor so far
as possibly we can, to make it excellent by peaceableness; this is that which
is prophesied of for the Church, Isa. 33. 20. Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a
quiet habitation: And mark the blessing that follows upon this quietness; A
Tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall
ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken; but there
the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers, streams, etc. In
Zech. 14. ver. 9. there is a Prophecy, that the Lord shall be King over all
the earth; in that day there shall be one Lord, and his name one: We now
profess one God, but we do as it were call him by several names; but that will
be a blessed time, when as there shall be but one Lord, so his name shall be
one; there shall be a blessed agreement in the profession of his name, oneness
of heart is a blessing of the new Covenant.

I remember Eusebius reports in the life of Constantine, that he was so much
troubled for dissentions in the house of God, as he could not sleep in the
night, and they did more disquiet him, then all his wars; yea he says, they
caused him to sob and sigh: and so they should be disquietings to our spirits,
and we should study to make up breaches. S. Augustine, ep. 15. has this
expression, speaking of the divisions of some of the Church, says he, I would
fall down Ad pedes prociderem and flerem quantum possum.
at their feet, and desire them with all the might I have they would not do
thus and thus, that they would not cast reproaches upon one another. And
observe the spirit of St. Paul, Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3. If there be any consolation
in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any
bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same
love, etc. Doves cannot endure to be amongst Ravens, but where they see
meekness and love, there those of Dove-like dispositions love to be; Isaiah 60.
8. Who are they like Doves, that fly to their Windows? Brethren, if we would
expect to grow up in the ways of godliness, it must be by love and union
together, Colossians 2. 2. Being knit together in love, unto all riches of full
assurance. When hearts are knit together in love, then a Church thrives, and
grows up to all riches of grace.

As it is in the body of a man, when the members of the body are out of joint,
they can neither receive strength from the body, nor be useful to the body. And
therefore the Apostle would have us be careful, if any were out of joint, to
set him in joint again, that is the propriety of the word. Gal. 6. 1. If a man
be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore (...).
such a one; set such a one in joint, that he may thrive, as members in joint
thrive. Christ is called the corner stone; now a corner stone is that which
joins both sides together; now Christ loves to be in the place of joining,
where there is a joining in mutual fellowship: Although there be variety in
gifts, In vest varietas sit, scissura non sit.
although the garment of the Kings daughter, the Church, be of diverse colors,
yet why may it not be like Christ's garment without seam?

For the Lords sake let us take heed of divisions and quarrels, especially let
us take heed that under the pretense of Religion, we do not maintain quarrels,
for this is to bring down the holy Ghost, from appearing like a Dove, to appear
in the form of a Vulture, or Raven; You know what S. Paul says of speaking with
several tongues, will not he that comes in say you are mad? When wicked men
hear of so many dissonant opinions, of so many dissentions among you, will they
not think you mad? And because you all pretend Religion, will they not think
that that kind of Religion which you pretend is a mad thing? So far shall you
be from making the way of Christ honorable in their eyes, which yet should be
the thing you should more desire, seek after, rejoice in, then your lives.
Religion has the name from binding, and certainly Religio a religando.
it is the best band of humane societies; there is great reason then that we
seek to keep it in the band of unity. And that is the third thing I would say
to those that are in Church Fellowship, not to darken the excellency that is in
communion with the Saints.

The fourth exhortation is, that you would walk and live so, as by your walking
you may draw others to be in love with this fellowship: as God has made it to
be glorious, so that you would set out the glory of it to others, that all that
go by you should say, Surely they are the blessed of the Lord, certainly God is
with them, and therefore we will likewise join with them; O what a blessed
thing were it, if we could by our lives convince others, that we are the plants
of the Lords own planting! The lives of men Jubeat vita, persuadeat liugua
Atha^. exhort. ad Monachos
convince more strongly then their words: The tongue persuades, but the life
commands, is the speech of an Ancient. We read in Rev. 14. Those that stood
with the Lamb upon Mount Zion, enjoying communion there, they had his Fathers
name written upon their foreheads, the glory of God shined in their foreheads;
a convincing conversation is that which God calls for at your hands. Let the
name of God be precious to you: Is it not a precious thing to live so, as to
bring honor to God? to hold forth the honor of God, is all the glory we can
bring to God; let us be known to be those we profess our selves to be,
separated from the world, by the holiness of our lives; as Tertullian says of
the Christians in his time, they were known to be Christians from the amendment
Nec aliunde noscibiles qua^ de em endatione prestinoru^. Tertul. ad Scapulam.
of their former lives. You are joined near to Christ, as a girdle about a man's
loins; take heed you be not as that girdle, Jer. 13. A rotten girdle, fit for
nothing, so were the Church of the Jews at that time; but you should be as that
girdle of Christ, Rev. 1. A golden girdle about his paps; By which the beauty
and glorious condition of the Church in the Primitive times is described.

Let us walk so, as to manifest and hold forth the beauty and amiableness of
godliness in the eyes of all, that they may see it whether they will or no, and
to force esteem from the consciences of men. Cant. 6. 4. it is said of the
Church, She is terrible as an army with banners; A Church of God that walks
close to the rule, is terrible to guilty consciences. Let us walk so, as when
the Balaams of the world look upon us, they may see our comely order, so as to
be forced to say, O how goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O
Israel! as the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the Rivers side, as
the trees of Lign-Aloes which the Lord has planted, and as Cedars beside the
waters, Numbers 24. 5. St. John Epist. 1. chap. 1. 3. expresses his desire for
those whom he wrote to, that they might have fellowship with him, and the rest
of the Saints; and he brings this as an argument, Truly our fellowship is with
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; this would be a mighty prevailing
argument indeed, if we walked so before others, as to manifest that we in truth
have fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; then our
fellowship would be desirable indeed.

CHAP. XXIII. How should Gods people so walk, as to draw others in love with
their communion.
BUt how should Gods people so walk, as to bring Quest.
others in love with their communion?

First, in the general, take heed of those sins Answ.
especially, that those which you converse with are guilty of, that they be not
able to spy the same sins in you, which their consciences accuse themselves of:
take heed of the pollutions of the world. Cant. 6. 10. Who is she that looks
forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an
army with banners? The Church of God ought to be fair as the Moon, but the Moon
has spots, and therefore it follows, Clear as the Sun, and then, she is
terrible as an army with banners: Either she will draw the hearts of others to
love her, or she will daunt their hearts. Yea, let them not see any defilement
answerwable to their defilement: for wicked men, though they cannot spy evils
in the godly, yet surely they think they are guilty of the sins which they live
in, as well as themselves: as Nero, because he was unchaste, thought all the
world was unchaste: and therefore the godly should labor to keep themselves from
such sins as the world is guilty of, that they may not spy such in them. A
godly man should not only labor to be kept from outward defilement; that may
be done by the strength of a natural conscience, without any sanctifying grace:
and it should be a shame to one that has grace, if he should not do that; if
he cannot do that, how can he purge himself from secret, and spiritual evils
that are in the heart?

Secondly, if you would walk so as to draw others in love to communion with
you, walk in singleness and uprightness of heart. Acts 2. 46, 47. They did eat
their bread with gladness, and singleness of heart, praising God: mark what
follows; having favor with all the people, and God added to the Church:
Singleness of heart makes Church Communion lovely.

But what is that uprightness, and singleness of heart Quest.
that we are to walk withal?

By that I mean this; namely, to be sure that there Answ.
be an answerableness in our conversation unto all those principles of
godliness that we profess: for take the most strict principles of Religion, and
the men of the world cannot speak against them, and when it comes to, this is
all they have to say, Ah! if it were in truth, and in sincerity, it were
something, but they are hypocrites: they acknowledge the principles are right,
but they think the principles are so strict, that it is impossible to walk up
to them: Ah! say they, give me one that does walk up to his principles, and we
will say something to you.

And therefore, you that are godly, consider of the many principles of
godliness that you profess: as namely, that the least sin is a greater evil,
then all the evils in the world; and labor that all your whole life What
singleness of heart is.
may hold out this principle, fearing the least sin, and the least occasion of
sin. It is our principle, that we must make the Word the Rule of all our
actions: Now let your conversations hold out this principle before others; And
that the peace of conscience is of infinite more value, then all the delights
of the world: Hold out this principle; That the glory of God is the thing to be
aimed at in all things. Now the care of Gods people, if they would so walk, as
to draw others in love of communion with them, is not to talk of these things,
but to hold them forth in their lives, that men that converse with them, may
read them in their lives; Gods people should so walk, that if there were no
talking of such principles, yet they may be found in their conversations.

Thirdly, if you would so walk, as to draw others in love of communion with
you, then walk so, that 3.
those that are without may see a constant evenness, and proportion in your
ways, that one action may be proportionable to another; let them take us when
they will, and where they will, we are always the same: though there be never
so much forwardness in some of Gods ways, if there be not forwardness in
others, there can be no conviction, and there is no beauty: As in nature, so in
grace; The beauty of nature is proportion; the beauty of nature is not in the
greatness of one member, or in color, but in the proportion: So the beauty of
a Christians conversation, lies in the proportion of a Christians conversation;
that there may be suitableness between one thing and another, that the men of
the world may not see us halt: Many are hot in some one thing, and remiss in
others: I condemn not forwardness in any way of God, but where a man is forward
in one thing, and remiss in another, there is a disproportion in his ways, he
goes long and short; as where one leg is shorter then another, there must needs
be halting; this is a dishonor to Religion, this takes away the beauty of
Religion, and such as these are, will never convince any of the excellency that
is in communion with the Saints.

Fourthly, if you would walk so, as to draw others 4.
in love to communion with you, then labor for to be eminent in those things
that the men of the world have skill in.

As first, the works of justice: The men of the 1.
world think men must be just in all their ways, and all their dealings; and
though it be true there may be justice where there is only morality, yet there
can be no Religion where there is not Justice, for Religion teaches Justice
more then morality does; it is a shameful thing for men that make profession of
Religion, not to be raised above moralities: now when the men of the world that
have skill in this, shall see that godliness teaches men to be just, and that
their's is a more accurate justice then that which is in the world, this
convinces men; but when they shall see men talking so much of godliness, and
Church -discipline, and yet when they come to deal with them, they are then so
cunning, and will fetch over men as well as any, as griping as any, and men
know not where to find them, these are burdensome Members to a Church, that
wrong Religion: your injustice in dealing with men, is a greater evil then the
injustice of any moral man, in this regard, the injustice of a moral man does
not make men shy of dealing with all moral men, but injustice in you makes men
shy of dealing with any that make profession of Religion, and to say, none are
so deceitful as they; and though that objection does come usually from malice,
yet it cannot be denied, but those that make profession, give too too much
advantage for it.

Secondly, labor for an eminency in performing the duties of your relations,
and your callings. As 2.
wives should fulfill their duties, and every one be faithful in the duty that
God requires of their places, and if this be not in you, you may talk your
hearts out of the excellency of communion with Gods people, they will not
believe you: And therefore the Apostle, when he urges the Church of God so to
walk as to convince others; mark how he instances in the duties of relation, 1
Pet. 2. 12. Having your conversation honest amongst the Gentiles, that whereas
they speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works which they
shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation: But what good works must
we do, which they beholding shall glorify God in the day of visitation? You
shall find he instances in the duties of relation, as between Magistrates and
Subjects, Masters and Servants, Husbands and Wives.

And therefore, you servants that are under subjection, especially under carnal
Governors, let them see, since you have joined with Gods people, that you are
more faithful and obedient then ever before, and that they never had any
servant in their lives, so subject, and obedient, and faithful as you are, that
did not make that profession that you do. And so wives, carry such respect, and
show such humility toward your husbands, though they be naught, that they may
say, Since my wife made this profession of Religion, I find it in her
carriage; and so children. It is a wonderful shameful thing that any servant or
child, that is but civil, should go beyond a godly servant or child in
diligence, and obedience, and faithfulness; says Jerome, What a shameful thing
is Ut non praestet sides, quod praestitit infidelitas.
it, That faith should not enable to do that, which Infidels are able to do?

Thirdly, The men of the world have skill in 3.
peaceable dispositions, labor to be of a peaceable disposition: Blessed are
the peacemakers; let them not see rigidness in your ways. The Jews observe upon
Exodus 25. 3. that there was no iron amongst the stuff of the Tabernacle: What
do rigid iron dispositions in Gods Tabernacle, in Gods Church?

Fourthly, they have skill in affability, and courteousness; Religion does not
teach men to be sour, 4.
but as courteousness and affability is a moral virtue, so it is to be carried
in a higher way in Christians then in others. Many men who have no grace, seem
to carry themselves like Christians; what a shame then is it for Christians,
who have grace, not to carry themselves like men?

Fifthly, the men of the world have skill in love, and therefore be eminent in
that, that they may see your 5.
love toward one another, bearing one another burdens. As the curtains of
the Tabernacle were joined together by loops, so should the members of the
Church be joined one to another by love. In the Primitive times we find the
Heathens, and enemies of the Church, did acknowledge there were no people in
the world did love one another so as Christians did. The Church of Philadelphia
is blamed for nothing; Philadelphia signifies brotherly love; when brotherly
love rules in Churches, they grow to a blameless conversation before God and
man.

Sixthly, be bountiful, and liberal: The men of the world having skill in these
things, and they seeing no 6.
eminency of these in you, they say, Let them make what profession they will in
those things we have no skill in, we believe them not, they are a company of
false hearted people.

Fifthly, if you would walk so, as to draw others in love to communion with
you, labor to manifest the power of godliness, by doing such things as the men
of the world cannot do; if the men of the world can see, that men that make
profession of Religion are able to do that they cannot do, they see now there
is some reality in Religion. You know how it was with Pharaoh and his
Magicians; all the while Moses wrought such things that Pharaohs Magicians
could do, Pharaoh was not convinced; but when Moses did such things, that the
Magicians could not do, this convinced them: and so for you to do that the men
of the world do, or can do, this does not convince them; says Christ, If I had
not done such things as no man did, you had had no sin.

What is it to do those things which the men of the Quest.
world cannot do?

First, the resisting of strong temptations; every Answ.
slight temptation overcomes them, but when they 1.
shall see you stand out against powerful temptations, they see you have a
power beyond theirs. When Wherein a Christian outstrips the men of the world.
Nebuchadnezzar saw the three Children in the fiery furnace, and they were not
touched by the fire, he was convinced; so when the men of the world shall see
you in the midst of prevailing temptations, and you keep your selves untouched,
they will be convinced, and say, Surely there is a power with these that we
have not.

Secondly, the overcoming of strong passions, this convinces them: When as
those you live withal, shall 2.
know there was a time you were outrageous, and forward at every thing that did
displease you, and since God has wrought on your hearts, you can be meek, and
patient, and those passions and temptations cannot overcome you now, that did
before. When Christ commanded the winds and seas, and they were still at his
word, they wondered and said, Who is this, that the winds and seas obey him? And
so, when you have storms and passions arise in you, and you by the word of God
can make all quiet, men will wonder, and say, Who is this?

Thirdly, if you be able to deny your selves in your wills and ends, this is a
thing they cannot do; but 3.
now the godly, if there come any word of God to show their wills are not
right, they do not only change the thing their will is upon, but their will is
bowed to Gods word. And as it was with David, when he had Saul at an advantage,
and might have had his own will upon Saul, and yet spared him, how did this
convince Saul? Who having his Enemy, would have spared him? As if he had said,
If I had had thee at an advantage, at my own will, I must have had my ends; And
so is there any thing that the men of the world can see you may have your ends
in, you should rather deny your selves in them.

Brethren, Gods people are to strive, and contend with the world above all
people, and that for God; now then, that we may manifest unto the world, that
when we do contend with them, that it is meerly-for God, when it comes to our
selves, and our own causes, we should be the most yieldable people in the
world. There is a time when we must contend with the world, our consciences put
us upon it, and the cause of God puts us upon it, and then they say we are
stubborn proud spirits; now to take off this reproach, and to convince them, it
is not self-will; therefore when it is only your own cause, yield to the
utmost you can, and this will convince them, when you do not yield, that it is
not for self, but for God, and conscience.

Fourthly, do good for evil, this is that which the men of the world cannot do.
We must labor to do 4.
some singular thing for God; if you only do good for good, the Publicans can
do so, but we must do good for evil. As it is reported of Bishop Cranmer, they
used to say of him, If they would have Bishop Cranmer their friend, let them do
him some ill turn: Do you not think how you may be even with them that have
done you an ill turn, but rather go home, and all the way you are going, be
musing, and studying how you may return some good to that man that has done
you wrong, and so you shall not be even with him, but above him; by this you
shall heap coals of fire upon his head: This beseems the people of God, that
are the peculiar of God. It was a notable speech that Balaam had in Numbers 23.
9. Lo, the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the
Nations: They are a people peculiar amongst themselves; if they be such a
people as are so peculiar, as they must not be reckoned amongst the Nations,
then they must do such things, as cannot be reckoned amongst the ways and works
of the Nations. If we should read all Authors of the Heathens, yet we may find
such things in Gods people, as we cannot find in all the Authors.

Fifthly, be joyful in affliction, rejoicing in God 5.
and Christ, then when all outward delight fails in very convincing: If people
speak so much of faith, and living by faith on the promises, and yet if they be
crossed in any thing in the world, their hearts are as low and sinking as the
hearts of any; when men of the world see this, they say, Where is all their
faith? But if they see when affliction comes, even such as would make their
hearts sink, and the people of God carry them out cheerfully, they will say,
Surely there is some real principle in them that we cannot see. As Justin
Martyr, when he saw the Christians suffer such great things so cheerfully, says
he, Surely these men have more then the men of the world, they have other
principles, and so he enquired what manner of people they were, and so came to
embrace the truth.

It is not so much to be merry and joyful over their cups; the people of God
cannot be merry and joyful in sensual delights, but put them into afflictions
and hardships, and they can be cheerful more then you, they are not so dumpish
and sad as the men of the world think they are. Christ said, I have meat to eat
of which you know not of: The light of the candle is fed with stinking tallow,
but the light of the Sun has influence from Heaven to feed it, and so is not
soon blown out: And so the joys of Gods people have other matter to feed them,
and are not so soon puffed out as the joys of the world.

Sixthly, in the people of God there should be seriousness mixed with
cheerfulness, and the mixture 6.
of both these makes Religion beautiful; for if professors of Religion will be
merry, they presently run into a lightness, and vanity of Spirit; and if they
think to be serious, they presently grow dumpish and sullen; but if we could do
so, be so cheerful in our way, as to manifest seriousness, and so serious, as
to manifest cheerfulness, this will be a mighty convincement to the world.

Seventhly, the men of the world cannot be humble in the increase of gifts; but
the more increase 7.
of gifts Gods people have, the more humble they should be. They shall see
since the people of God did close one with another, they are increased in
gifts; a poor boy, or girl, or servant, that understood nothing before, now
they can understand more, and with their understanding their hearts are more
humble then before; this is a great convincement, That in the exercise of your
gifts, there may not appear much of your selves, but much of God, is that you
should much labor after in the exercise of your gifts; let them see that God
has acquainted you with such divine mysteries, as should make them admire;
Gods people should not only labor to have words that are flat, but to have
such gifts, as that they should know the secrets of God, and of their own
hearts, and of the hearts of others. You know when he in 1 Cor. 14. that was
ignorant came into the Church, and saw gifts so exercised, as the secrets of
his heart were opened, he said, Surely God is there. We should not exercise
gifts so, as to show our parts in them, but exercise them in such an humble
manner, as to convince the world of the excellency in communion with the Saints.

O brethren, labor to practice these things: O what a blessed thing were it
that all of us might come to convert souls! Though women may not preach in the
Church, they may preach abroad in their lives, and in their families, by their
humble and godly conversations; 1 Cor. 7. 16. What know thou, O wife,
whether thou shall save thy husband? Labor so to walk, as some soul may bless
God for you, and bless God for your joining with his people: Heretofore I was a
poor ignorant wretch, and minded nothing but to satisfy the flesh, and heard
many Sermons, and they never wrought upon me, but now I see the holy
conversation of such, this works upon me; No member of a Church should satisfy
himself, until he have seen himself to work upon some by his conversation. The
people that God intends to bring to join with his Church, are said to fly like
Doves to their windows, Isaiah 60. 8. Now Doves love white, clean, and
lightsome places; wherefore such should be our conversations, so white, clean,
and lightsome, as those in whom God begins any work of grace, to be of
Dove-like dispositions, may come flying to us; and this is the fourth branch of
the exhortation.

Fifthly, if there be so much good to be had in this communion, labor to walk
so one with another, that 5.
when any come to join with you, they may find that made good which they heard
of: though they do suffer affliction to come and join with you, yet when they
are come in, they may find all made up, that they may say, Before I heard by
the speech of others, there was such a comfortable life in communion with such,
which made me venture much, and now I have found it made up to the full; yea,
half of it was not told to me: O let us not give occasion to any to go and
complain to God, and say, I heard there was much good to be had in communion
with thy people, and thereupon I was content to venture much to enjoy it, and
now I find no such thing, I find nothing but jealousies, and wranglings, and
pride, and as much earthliness as before: If you give any occasion to go to
God, and to make his moan thus, it will go ill with you; but give occasion to
others to bless God for you: therefore let there be a sweet union among you. It
is a promise in Zeph. 3. They shall serve the Lord with one consent, with one
shoulder, so the words are: So every one of you should set your selves to serve
the Lord, quickening one another spirits, careful for one another good.

And when you come together, bring your living ends together: When you lay
brands together, you do not lay the dead ends together, they will never kindle,
but you lay the living burning ends together, and so they kindle: And so when
you come together, lay your living ends together, that when you go away, you
may say, I feel my heart warmed; you should never meet together, but that you
might bless God for your meeting, and by this you shall show there is a power
in this Ordinance of God.

It is observable, the great strength that there is in a civil Ordinance, one
would think there should be more in a spiritual Ordinance: How comes it to
pass, that two, that it may be a month or two before were mere strangers, and
yet they coming to join in marriage, if it be a true joining, their hearts
close more together, then to Father or Mother, to their children, that came out
of their own bodies, or brother, or sisters that lay in the same womb, they
cannot have their hearts so knit together, as these two have: From whence comes
this? From the virtue of Gods Ordinance; if it were not an Ordinance of God, it
could not produce such an effect: If marriage, which is an Ordinance of God in
civil things, and so a civil Ordinance, have such power to unite the heart, how
much more spiritual Ordinances, and communion, which is the highest Ordinance
for uniting the heart? and therefore we should look for more then a natural
power in it: For people to love one another, and to do good to one another,
has a natural power to unite the heart; But do you look upon this communion as
having the greatest power to unite the heart, by virtue of an Ordinance, that
so all who have suffered never so much to join with you, may see all
recompensed up to the full, and never have a repenting thought for that they
have suffered and ventured.

CHAP. XXIV. We should satisfy our selves in communion with the Saints, and
improve it to the utmost advantage we can.
AGain, another branch of the exhortation is this; if there be so much good to
be had in 6.
this communion, labor to satisfy your selves in it, so as to take heed of
breaking from it; the forsaking the assemblies of the Saints, is made by the
Apostle an argument of Apostasy, Heb. 10. 25. Not forsaking the assembling our
selves together, as the manner of some is. Do not think to go and make up your
comfort with going, and joining with the world. Certainly, when men that are
members of a Church shall for form come and join with Gods people, but their
consciences tell them, when they are in the world, their hearts are more
content and satisfied; this is an argument of a carnal heart, that has dallied
with God. It is a dishonor to godly men; as men that are raised to high
privileges, count it a dishonor to company with those that are mean. Those who
were free of the City of Rome, were not to be free of any other place. It is
enough that we are Citizens of the new Jerusalem, let us satisfy our selves in
this.

Godly men, though never so poor, are to look upon those who are carnal, as
base and vile, especially to think to take satisfaction in eating, and
drinking, and playing with them, when as there are such holy Ordinances, and
high privileges with Gods people, to satisfy your selves in, and in those
your hearts withdraw from them; Certainly, your hearts must needs be very
carnal and sensual: Can God take it well at thy hands, to go and shake hands
with his enemies? Job 8. 20. God will not take the wicked by the hand; so it is
in some of your books; Why then will you? Can thou be in any place where thou
see God dishonored, and be merry? Certainly, the sight of sin, wheresoever it
is committed, should cause horror in the heart; thus it was with David, Psalm
119. 53. Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the wicked that forsake thy
Law: It should make men forbear to come into such company where they see sin
committed.

It is reported of Mezentius the Hetrurian Tyrant, that he devised this
torment, to chain a live man, and a dead man together, and so wheresoever he
went, he should have the dead man to rot before him, and stink in his nostrils,
till he was poisoned with it: Surely this was a great misery, a most grievous
death: And Gods people should count it as great an evil to have filthy dead
wretches, that are unsavory in any thing that is good, to be joined with them:
David prays in Psalm. 26. 9. Gather not my soul with sinners: Would you not have
your souls gathered with sinners hereafter? for the present take heed of
joining with them. It was the prayer once that I have heard of a good
Gentlewoman, when she was to dye, being in much trouble of conscience, O Lord,
let me not go to hell where the wicked are, for Lord thou know, I never
loved their company here: She prayed with David, Lord gather not my soul with
sinners: If you would have evidence that God will not gather your souls to
sinners, but that he will gather them to the godly, labor to satisfy your
souls with Gods people.

Seventhly, if there be so much good in this way, labor to improve it to the
utmost: Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool? This is a great
price; if many had seen the days that we have seen, how would they have blessed
God? what use would they have made of them? Seeing God therefore has given you
this opportunity, improve it: if you have any advantage in your trading, you
will improve it. Take heed of such things as may hinder that good you may have
in communion with the Saints: What are they?

The first thing that I would forewarn Christians What hinders our profiting by
the Saints communion.
of, it is sullenness of spirit, that makes them love solitariness rather then
communion; and this is amongst many that have true grace: and certainly it
comes sometimes from abundance of pride, for if they come among others, they
think they shall discover their weakness, and rather then they will discover
their weakness, they will deprive themselves of all that good which they might
have. Consider how unfaithfully you deal with God, God has given you a talent,
and you are not to wrap it up in a napkin, but to use it for God. Again, it is
a wrong to the Church, for your gifts are not your own, but the Church has an
interest in them, and therefore you are to use them for their good. Again, you
do much wrong to the Ordinance of God, when you do prefer the contenting of a
pettish humor, before the Ordinance of God. God threatens it as a judgment,
Hosea 4. 16. To feed his people as a Lamb in a large place; that is, to scatter
them from the fold, that they should go one and one, as a Lamb bleating alone
in the wild wilderness: take heed you do not bring it upon your selves.

Again, there is a great deal of danger in this solitariness Danger of
solitariness.
of spirit.

First, there will soon grow a wonderful dryness, and barrenness of spirit: It
is just with God to deprive 1.
men of gifts, that have not hearts to improve the gifts that God has given
them.

Again, you will be ready to run into error, and 2.
strange conceits; for if you observe the workings of your hearts, you have
strange opinions of things, and think you are sure of them, and when you come
amongst others, though you could not see the weakness of your opinions, others
can quickly see them, whereas if you will not come amongst them, but be stiff
in your opinions, you may run into errors.

Again, you will be liable to the temptations of Satan; immoderate
solitariness, is joined with immoderate 3.
melancholy, which is the common shop of the Devil for to forge his temptations
in, and it is a great evil to keep the Devils temptations close; and therefore
come into communion with the Saints.

And secondly, when you do come into communion, take heed of pride; pride
sometimes keeps away 2.
from communion, and pride is a great hinderance to the benefit of communion:
As round things do not join but only in one point, but take flat things, and
they join in every point; and so hearts swollen with pride cannot join with
others, but only in such particulars as will serve their turns, but if we have
plain hearts, we will close in all things. If a bladder be blown with wind,
when you touch it or handle it, it goes away, but when it is pricked, it falls,
and you may handle it: so hearts that are swollen with pride, will not close as
low humble hearts will. A swollen member is fit for nothing, but all members must
serve that; As a gouty leg, all the members must tend that, but it is unfit to
be serviceable to any: and so a proud heart, it expects every one should attend
it, but when it comes to be serviceable to any, it is unfit.

Thirdly, take heed of envying at the gifts and graces of one another; the
wicked men of the world 3.
do envy one another, because the good they look upon as their last end, is so
strait, that if one have much room, the other is straightened; but the godly need
not be straightened, their good is in God, and they have place enough to expatiate
themselves, and satisfy themselves. If men were riding or sailing in a narrow
passage, they would envy him that were sailing before them, that hinders; but
in the Sea they do not envy them, because they have room enough to sail: So in
Christians that place their happiness in God, where there is room enough, there
should not be envy.

Fourthly, take heed of pettishness, and frowardness, or passions, these do
darken communion: the meek 4.
spirit is fit for communion. Moses suffered much for communion with Gods
people, and indeed he was fit to get good, and to do good by communion, he was
the meekest man upon earth.

Fifthly, take heed of self ends in communion: when men are so politic, as to
wheel about their 5.
own ends, and not seem to aim at such things, this hinders the sweetness of
communion, and though such may carry things a while, as not to be discerned,
yet at last they will be discerned to have self ends, and all will be shy of
them. If you would have sweet communion indeed, labor for open hearts to one
another, that you may trust one another.

Sixthly, labor so to improve your communion now, 6.
as every time you do enjoy it, it may make your hearts to spring, putting you
in mind of that blessed communion you shall have with God, and his people; and
think thus, If we find so much joy, in enjoying communion with Gods people
here, what will there be in that communion our souls shall have in Heaven, when
we shall not only have communion with some few of Gods servants, but with all,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets, and Patriarchs? As Cicero has
a notable O praeclarum diem, cum ad illud animoru^ Concili um coetumque
proficiscar; and cum ex hac turba and colluvione discedam: proficiscar enim non
ad cos solum viros de quibus ante dixi, sed etiam ad Catonem meum, etc. Cicero
de senectute.
speech concerning the happiness of his death; O famous day, that I shall go to
the counsels of those famous men, that I shall go from this rout of people, and
go and converse with those famous men! But brethren, for us to think that we
through Gods mercy, here have communion with Gods people, and shall hereafter
enjoy communion with the Saints of God for ever, what is it worth the enduring?
if it were but the enjoying of communion with Moses alone, it were worth all
you have endured; and therefore comfort your selves for the present in that you
have, and let your hearts be raised in hope of better things hereafter, when
you shall have them perfect. Now we rejoice that we are with Gods people, if
they be conferring about any thing of God and Christ; but hereafter we shall
see nothing but God in his Saints, we shall see the full glory of God shining
in them; then the very bodies of the Saints shall shine more glorious then the
Sun; How glorious shall their souls be then? There shall then be no more danger
of fallings out, and frampold carriages, no more jealousies and suspicions, but
we shall see the image of God perfectly in them; and we shall have perfect love
to rejoice in the salvation of any as in your own salvation, and then we shall
be with them in all holy exercises: It is good to be with Gods people, to trade
with them, but better to be with them to pray with them, to receive Sacraments
with them; the better the exercise is, the better it is to be with them: Then
what is it to enjoy communion with them, and to be always in holy exercises,
always singing praises to the Lamb, and giving glory to him that sits on the
Throne for evermore, blessing God for the great Mystery of the Gospel? And
therefore improve your communion so here, as not only to put you in mind of
your communion hereafter, but to prepare and fit your souls for it: And thus is
this point finished; and now we are come to the seventh and last Doctrinal
point, out of Moses his Choice, which is from the last words of the Verse, Then
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

The Doctrinal Conclusion is this:

CHAP. XXV. Whatsoever is but for a season, cannot satisfy a gracious heart.
THat whatsoever is but for a season, cannot satisfy a gracious heart: Or,
Nothing but that Doct. 7.
which is eternal, can satisfy a gracious heart.

Moses, if he would have been satisfied with any thing that abided but for a
season, he might have had satisfaction enough; but his heart was set upon
eternity, and therefore could have no satisfaction in things that were but for
a season. St. Paul says in 2 Cor. 4. 18. We look not at things that are seen,
but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. We do not so much as
look at things seen, for they are temporal, but there are other things that our
hearts are upon, which are eternal; we look not at things that are seen, but at
things not seen: The word notes these two things especially, not only that we
believe things that are not seen, eternal things, but we look at them, we mind
them; we do not much mind things that are temporal, but eternal things are
minded of us.

Secondly, we do not make things that are seen, (...)
that are temporal, to be our scope and aim; that which satisfies the heart, is
that which is looked at as the end, and aim, and scope of the spirit: so that
if a man could look at things seen as his aim and scope, they would satisfy
him, but nothing that is seen can be the scope and aim of a gracious heart, but
eternal things are his scope and aim, and therefore they satisfy him.

That nothing which is but for a season, can satisfy a heart rightly
principled, appears: No temporal thing can satisfy a spiritual heart.


First, because there is no proportion between an immortal soul, and fading
transitory things; indeed the sensitive soul that does depend upon the present
temper of the body, that is satisfied only with present things, and the reason
is, because it depends upon that which is present; but the rational soul being
immortal, and not depending upon any such thing, whatsoever it be that
continues not for ever, cannot satisfy it.

Secondly, a gracious heart knows the things of 2.
eternity after another manner then any other does, God has revealed eternal
things to it, and upon the sight of those eternal things, it comes to know it
is taken off from all temporal things; for all temporal things, be they never
so glorious, yet in comparison of eternal, they are but as the point of a
center to an infinite circumference: Indeed while a man knows no better then
temporal things, the heart is let out upon them, as the greatest good, but when
it comes to know the things of eternity, the heart is greatned, and all
temporal things are but small to that soul; when it comes to know what an
eternal God is, and what an eternal crown is, and an eternal inheritance, when
it knows that God does intend to communicate himself eternally to his creature,
it cannot be satisfied, unless it knows it shall live to enjoy those things
that God shall communicate eternally.

Thirdly, a gracious spirit has received an eternal principle within it, that
does work the heart beyond things for a season, that works the heart all to
eternity; for the work of Grace that is in the soul, it is begotten of the
immortal seed of the Word, and it is an eternal principle, that is infused by
God into it, and therefore it works beyond things that are for a season; every
creature works according to the nature of its principles; as sensitive
creatures according unto sensitive principles, and rational creatures according
unto rational principles, but grace is beyond reason, and is of an everlasting
nature, and therefore it works the heart beyond all that is but for a season.

Fourthly, a gracious heart cannot be satisfied with things that are but for a
season, because God 4.
has loved such a heart with an eternal love, and there is the impression of
the same love in the soul, that carries the soul to God in some measure with
that love wherewith it is loved, that causes the soul to love God with an
eternal love, and not to be satisfied with any work of love that it can work in
time; and therefore grace must have eternity for to manifest the love again
that it has to God, or else it has not a love proportionable in its measure
to the love wherewith God has loved it, but that is in every gracious heart.

Fifthly, there is a kind of image of Gods infiniteness in the souls of men,
and according to this 5
print of Gods infiniteness, the enjoyment of God is desired, where the heart
is gracious: though it is true, our souls are not infinite creatures in
themselves, yet having a print of Gods infiniteness upon them, they manifest
this in their infinite desires; and because they cannot enjoy an actual
infinite good in themselves, therefore they desire an infinite good in duration
at least; let there be never so much good, yea, as much as an infinite power
can let out for present good, yet this does not satisfy the soul, unless it
can have it infinitely for duration; for an enlightened soul knows that it is
not capable to hold that good that an infinite God can, and has a purpose to
communicate to his creature, if it should come all together, therefore it
desires to enjoy communication of what good it is capable of to all eternity.
To receive good from God is not sufficient, except it be received in an
infinite way; now it cannot receive any thing infinite for the present, and
therefore it must have it in an infinite way in regard of duration.

Sixthly, there is nothing that is but for a season, 6.
can satisfy a gracious heart, but it must be some eternal thing, because such
a one has received light from God to understand the infinite consequence of
eternity, to make any good to be infinite, or any evil to be infinite: When as
one enjoys any good, and knows it shall continue infinitely, it makes that
present good to have a kind of infiniteness in it; and and so for evil, if
there be any evil upon the heart, though the evil should be never so little,
yet if it be an evil, and the soul knows it must continue infinitely, it puts a
kind of infiniteness to every moment; and that is the principal thing that
makes the misery of the damned to be so miserable, and the happiness of the
godly so happy; they are not only happy and miserable, because they shall be
happy and miserable for ever, but because they know there is continance in
happiness, and in misery; their knowledge of this is that which puts infinite
weight upon every moment.

Suppose a beast should have happiness suitable to its nature for eternity,
that would come infinitely short of the happiness of a rational creature, that
knows wherein happiness consists, and what eternity is; for the beast enjoys
nothing but the present happiness, but a reasonable creature it has happiness
for the present, and it can by the thoughts of the mind fetch in the
infiniteness of the duration, and put it upon the present content it receives,
and so have infinite satisfaction every moment: And so for misery; it were not
so much if God by his power should hold a brute beast in the fire eternally, as
if a man were in misery; because though it has pains, yet it has no thought
of future pains, but what it now feels: But if a rational creature be in
misery, by the thoughts of his mind, he can fetch all the pains that shall be
in hundred thousands of years, and put them upon that instant, and this makes
it to be miserable indeed, in a kind of infiniteness, beyond that which any
other creature is capable of.

You think to be tortured with fire is miserable, and to be so eternally is
miserable; but there is something more, every instant you shall be in misery,
there shall be a kind of infiniteness, because you shall by your thoughts
bring whatsoever is to come, and put it upon the present moment, and nothing
can swallow up a man's spirit so much as this, if he understands eternity. Now
then a gracious heart that knows this, that knows what the consequence of
eternity is, cannot be satisfied, except it has made good provision for
eternity; whatsoever it enjoys for the present, cannot satisfy the soul,
unless it has made good provision for that which it understands, to be of such
infinite consequence as it is. A soul that understands the consequence of
eternity, sees it as an infinite Ocean, that it is lanching into, and must for
ever swim in: Now if a man were to go a voyage in the vast Ocean, that he must
go thousands of miles, could he be content that he had made provision of such a
Vessel, that he could make shift to get over some narrow water with? so it is
here; yea, this similitude comes short of the expression of the folly of any
that knows any thing concerning eternity, to think to satisfy themselves in
any thing that is but for a season; for any thing that is but for a season, let
it be for as long a season as you will, if it were for Methuselahs season, that
is but as some small Brook, and what is this to the going of many thousand
miles in the infinite vast Ocean? and therefore a gracious heart knowing the
vastness of it, except it has made some provision for it, can never be quieted
with what it can enjoy for a season.

Seventhly, a gracious heart cannot be satisfied in 7.
any thing that is but for a season, because there is nothing that is but for a
season, but it can make the end of it as really present; If so be that the end
of things that are but for a season were present, they could not satisfy: Now
a gracious heart makes the end of all things that are but for a season to be
really present: If grace enables a man to make the things of God, and eternal
things to be present, much more will grace in the heart make the end of all
worldly things to be really present: Now a gracious heart being wise, and
considering, and looking upon these things that are but for a season, as if the
end now were; hence it is that it has the same judgment of things that are
but for a season now, as it shall have when the end of all shall be: Now when
the end of all things we enjoy for a season is come, No love can be satisfying,
when I love tanquam osurus.
then every man will see the vanity of them, and cry out of them, and say they
will not satisfy: Yea, we shall not only see the vanity of them, but in some
respect see it a greater misery, then if we had never enjoyed them; now that
thing which will not only fail us, but when it shall fail us, it will be a
greater vexation to us that we had them, then if we had never enjoyed it,
certainly they which know this cannot be satisfied with it.

Eighthly, a gracious heart makes use of all the experiences that it has had
of the vanity of the creature 8.
, of all things that are but for a season; when God in the way of his
providence gives to one that is gracious, experience of things, he will
treasure up his experience: vain light hearts, though God do give them
experience of the vanity of the creature, and of things that are but for a
season, they do not treasure up their experiences, but though they cry out of
the vanity of the creature at some time, yet they run out again as greedily in
their desires after it as before: but a gracious heart finds when God takes
away the creature, wherein it had placed a great deal of confidence, God has
showed it how fading it was, and the settled condition of it is nothing but
vanity: and so the experience of the vanity of former things, does take off his
heart from any thing that it looks upon as abiding for a season.

Lastly, that which is but for a season, does want an especial ingredient in
it, which is required for satisfaction 9.
: the special ingredient unto satisfaction, is security, that there may be
soul-safe security. Augustine says, The soul cannot enjoy any thing freely with
satisfaction, unless it can enjoy it with security: Now when the soul enjoys a
thing for a season, it cannot be satisfied, because it must be solicitous to
provide something when that is gone, which it has for the present. So that
these arguments being put together, you may see evidently, Nothing that is for
a season can give satisfaction to a gracious heart. Having laid these things in
the explication of the point, all that we have to do is to apply it.

Hence we may see the excellency of a true gracious Use.
spirit: where there is grace in the soul, it puts a wonderful excellency upon
the soul, as in many other respects, so this one does wonderfully declare the
excellency of a gracious heart, that it is so raised, so enlarged, so greatned,
that nothing that is for a season can satisfy it, but it looks for things
beyond a season. Let all the world, the things that are in Heaven and Earth,
present themselves to the soul to satisfy it, the soul will say, What are you,
temporal or eternal? If the answer be given temporal, the soul rejects them,
and puts them off as too mean things to be satisfaction for it; If you had
brought eternity with you, says the soul, I could have embraced you, and closed
with you, and have been satisfied in the enjoyment of you, but if the
inscription of eternity be not in you, you are too mean for me, my happiness
Pecuniam da quae permaneat ac co^tin^o duret, gloriam quae semper floreat.
Basil in 40. Martyrs.
is not here, I must look higher, I am lost for ever if I do not look higher
then these things. When Basil was offered money and preferment to tempt him, he
answers, Give money that may last for ever, and glory that may eternally
flourish.

CHAP. XXVI. Persuasions to take off the heart from temporal things.
SEcondly, hence let us all make use of this Argument, to take off our spirits
from all earthly 2.
things that are here below; Let us look upon all things in the world as under
this notion, that they are but for a season, and let us improve this argument
to the utmost that possibly we can, for the working our hearts off from the
things of this world. The beauty of all worldly things is but as a fair picture
drawn upon the Ice, that melts away with it; The fashion of this world passes
away. When Alexander saw himself wounded, and in danger of death, he then saw
the vanity of those flatterers that would have persuaded him he was a God: So
when we see those things upon which we set our hearts, as if our chief good, as
if a Deity were in them, to be wounded, and ready to perish, let us learn to
alter our thoughts of them, to take off our hearts from them.

Much may be done in the improving of this argument, of the fading vanishing
nature of creaturecomforts: the Scripture makes much use of it, to take off the
hearts of People from them; Why will thou set thy heart upon that which is not?
Riches have wings and will fly away. It charges them that have riches, that
they trust not in uncertain riches: Man that is made in honor abides not; They
sing to the Tabret and Harp, and make merry, and in a moment they go down to
hell. This Moses argument, is the strong Scripture argument: there is nothing
but uncertainty, mutability, vanity, upon every creature that is here below.
The fashion of the world passes away, and the luster of it; there is no
enduring substance here: Those in the Hebrews were content to part with any
thing that endured but for a season, so they might have an enduring substance:
and so Abraham looked for a City that had foundations, Heb. 11. 10. these
cities have no foundations.

All earthly things are like the earth it self, it hangs upon nothing, Job 26.
7. and therefore there can be no certainty in them, no continuance in the
enjoyment of them: neither will the things of this world Nulla res longa
mortalium est, omnisque foelicitas seculi dum tenctur amittitur. Hieron. in
Esaias 38.
abide, they perish in the using of them, and that which perishes in the using,
we must not set our hearts upon. Its the expression of Gregory Nyssen, The
things of the world are as if a man were writing upon the water with his
finger, as any thing is written, the impression vanishes, and nothing appears;
not as one were writing upon the sand or dust, which although any little wind
blows smooth, yet it stays a while till the wind rises: So the creature is not
vain only, because it leaves us after a while, but the comfort of the creature
leaves us in the using.

Seneca says, We live amongst things that are perishing Inter peritura vivimus.
Cur cae quae ad usum diuturna esse non possunt, ad supplicium diuturna
deposces? Ambrose in Luc. 4. T. 5.
. We hear much of the vanity of the creature, and we can speak much of it, but
how is it improved? how if you perish eternally for setting your hearts upon
these things? and notwithstanding all your talk, this dreadful noise shall be
heard from you, We have lost eternity, for setting our hearts upon things that
were for a season. It is a notable speech that Ambrose has; Why will you make
that which cannot be eternal for use, eternal for punishment? It is fading, in
regard of the use, but it proves to be eternal in regard of the punishment.

Therefore when any temptation comes, to draw your hearts to any thing that
gives content to the flesh for a season, O that you might improve this Argument
to resist the temptation! What, shall I while away that time I have to improve
for eternity to seek after you, and take content and pleasure in you? you are
not only temporal your selves, but you do hazard the loss of eternal things,
and hazard the bringing of eternal evils. And therefore do not think it much
that I press this argument, because it is ordinary: all that perish, perish
because they set their hearts upon that which is for a season: and therefore
though the knowledge of this in some general notion be ordinary, yet the truth
is, to know it powerfully indeed, and effectually, it is a riddle to the world.

It is a notable place we have in Psalm 49. 3, 4. The whole scope of the Psalm,
is to show the happy secure estate of the godly in all troubles, and the
vanishing condition of all ungodly in prosperity; now mark how he calls to us
in the beginning of this Psalm, to hearken to this argument: We might say, this
is an argument we have heard a hundred times, and know what it is, Why should
we hearken so? Though you think this is an ordinary Theme, yet this is the
great wisdom, and understanding of a gracious heart to know; this is the dark
saying that I will open, so says the Psalmist, My mouth shall speak of wisdom,
and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding, I will open my dark
saying: So when you hear us speaking of this argument, you say, This is an
ordinary argument; but the true knowledge of it is a dark hidden thing to the
men of the world, and it is the work of the Spirit of God, to make men know
this truly: and when God works any saving work upon the soul, he begins in this
way, to settle upon the soul this truth, That all the things that it has
satisfied it self in, are fading; and what is a year or two, to enjoy all the
contentments my heart can desire, if then I must be gone, and bid farewell to
all? have not I an immortal soul? and when shall be the time that I shall
provide for eternity? And therefore I beseech you look into this argument, and
ponder it a little more.

There are three worms that are in every thing of the world, to eat out the
strength of it, and make it fading.

First, the worm that is bred in the natural principles; the things that we set
our hearts upon, are made of fading principles.

Secondly, there is the worm of the general curse that is come upon them by
man's sin.

Thirdly, there is another worm, and that is the particular curse that we bring
upon the creatures, by our own proper sins, as especially when we set our
hearts upon any fading transitory things below: all things in the world are
subject to vanity by the general curse, but the particular curse makes them
more vain: and shall we think to satisfy our selves in the things of the
world, that have these three worms, feeding upon them continually, to eat out
the strength of them?

What are your hearts upon? I urge it upon you as in the name of God, and
answer in your secret thoughts, What are your hearts upon? either upon
Abulenfis in 2. Regu^ c. 15. Q 20. and in c. 17. q. 21
things that are for a season, or eternal? Things that are eternal, you look
upon them as high notional things, that never took up your thoughts much: but
to go into company, and eat, and drink, and laugh, and get money; these are the
things that are but Quoties juxta sepulchrum divit is transit is, rogo vos ut
diligenter inspiciat is, Ubi sunt eoru^ divitiae vel ornamenta, ubi gloria, ubi
luxuriae, ubi voluptas, etc? Attend ad me et intellige, considera me, and vel
fic tibi horreat luxuria tua, vel araritia tua, hoc quod tu es ego fui, et quod
ego sum, modo tu eris; vide pulvere^ meum, and relinque defiderium tuum. Aug.
Sermon. 66. ad fratres in Eremo
for a season, and these your hearts close with, and bless themselves in. What
are become of all those that have had as great dealings, and as many merry
meetings as you, and have satisfied the flesh as much as you? they are gone,
rotten in their graves, and their souls it may be crying under the wrath of an
infinite God, and all their bravery and delight at an end; would you be in
their condition? It is a good observation of Abulensis, to show to us the
vanity of all worldly excellency, that those who have been the most glorious,
in what man accounts glorious and excellent, have had inglorious ends, by which
their glory has been stained; and thereby our hearts might be taken off from
such things, and set upon those things which are so glorious as they will make
us for ever glorious. He instances in Sampson for strength, and yet what a
contemptible end had he? So Absalom for beauty; Achitophel for policy; Asael
for swiftness; Alexander for great conquests, and yet after twelve years
poisoned. He instances likewise in Kingdoms; the Chaldaean, Persian, Grecian,
Roman, how soon were they gone? It is a notable speech Augustine has: Go,
(says he) and mark and attend the Sepulchers of rich men, and when you see
their rotten bones, consider who they once were, and know they do cry unto you;
O you men, why do you seek so much to satisfy your selves in these fading
things, and heap upon your selves vexation, to attain happiness for your selves
in these things? Consider our bones here, and be struck with astonishment, to
abhor your luxury and covetousness; for, says he, they cry thus to you, You now
are, and we were, and time will be, when you shall be what we are.

And then consider with your selves, what a doleful condition that man is in,
that has set his heart upon things that are for a season: When those are at an
end, he may say, Now the thoughts of my heart, and all my hopes are at an end;
now I must bid an eternal farewell to all my comforts, to husband, and wife, and
neighbors, and friends, and companions; I shall never meet with you more, and
never have mirth and jollity, and sporting, and gaming any more, but I must bid
farewell to all, the Sun is set, and the season is at an end for all my comfort,
and before me I see an infinite vast Ocean, and I must lanch into it; Lord,
what provision have I for it? What a dreadful shreek will that soul give, that
sees an infinite Ocean it must lanch into, and sees no provision that it has
made for it? Indeed those that dye, and are besotted, and know nothing of this
infinite Ocean that they must lanch into, they are never troubled; but those
that dye, and their consciences are enlightened, they have given a most dreadful
shreek, to see themselves lanching into an infinite Ocean of scalding Lead, and
must swim naked in it for ever.

And therefore improve this argument, to take off your hearts from things
below, and say, What good will it be to me that I have been merry, and would
have my will? I came to hear the word, and that was working to pull my lust
from me, but my heart was set upon my lust, and I would have it: When my lust
shall be at an end, what good will it be to me, to remember I had my lust and
pleasure, and delight? This will afford little comfort after it is gone: You
may live a year or two, and be drunk many a time that while, and have pleasure
in uncleanness, and besot your selves; consider, many have had pleasures in the
flesh, that now are gone, and within two or three years it may be said of you,
Such a one was at such a Sermon, and heard, That all things that endure but for
a season would not satisfy, and now he is gone; and if you will satisfy your
selves in these things that are for a season, you may cry out in the anguish of
your souls, and say, Such a day such an argument was treated upon, and I heard,
Nothing that is but for a season will satisfy the heart, and how I should
hazard my eternal happiness, if I set my heart upon them; And I heard, I had
not only a little River to swim over, but an infinite Ocean to lanch into, and
yet I have sought after these things that are but for a season, to satisfy my
flesh in them; now my season is gone, and I am lanching into eternity, the Lord
knows what shall become of me.

It was the sad expression of Lysimachus, who had lost his Kingdom for one
draught of water, For what O Dii, qua^ brevis voluptatis gratia ex rege me feci
servum?
a short pleasure have I made my self a servant? So consider what a
soul-sinking thought this will be to think hereafter; O God, for how short
pleasure have I made my self a bond-slave to Hell for ever! One who was made
according to the Image of God, who had means for eternal life, yet now am
undone for ever! It is reported of Pope Sixtus the fifth, that he sold his soul
to the Devil, to enjoy the glory and pleasure of the Popedom for seven years:
What infinite folly possesses the hearts of the children of men, who were made
for eternity, to venture eternal miscarrying for a few years, yea, a few hearts
contentment to the flesh! The Lord keep us from this desperate folly.

Wherefore when we find our hearts beginning to be let out upon any temporal
good, make use of this argument, and let us muse with our selves, This content
and pleasure we have, but will it abide? I was made to abide for ever, I was
made for that good that must abide for ever. What are a few years here? Those
who abide longest in the enjoyment of health and prosperity, their time is but
as a bubble, they are gone, and the memory of them is perished. Pliny says,
there was a miraculous example of one Xenophilus, who lived a hundred and five
years without sickness: But what is this to eternity? lib. 7. cap. 5.

There is a notabe story of Theodorus a young man, there being a time of great
festivity and jollity in Egypt, and there was a great deal of feasting and
music, and delight in his fathers house: The young man withdrew himself from
all the company, and got alone, and fell a meditating thus, Here is delight and
content to the flesh, I may have what I will desire, but how long will it last?
And upon this meditation, thinking with himself* this will not hold long, he
withdrew himself into a room private, and fell down upon the earth, and with
many tears cried out thus unto God in prayer; O Lord, (says he) my heart is
open unto thee, I indeed know not what to ask, but only this, Lord let me not
dye eternally; O Lord, thou know I love thee, O let me live eternally to
praise thee! And when his mother came to him, and would have had him come to
the rest of the company that were bidden, he made an excuse and would not,
only upon this meditation, because he saw this would not hold.

O that God would fasten these thoughts upon you, when you are in the midst of
your delights; But will this hold? Is not this one thing that is spoken of
amongst the rest, that is but for a season? Think also upon this consideration;
These things that are in the world, if they were a thousand times more then
they are, yet being but for a season, this is enough to take off our hearts;
but now when we consider they are but for a season, and but slight things,
empty vanities besides, this should take off our hearts abundantly more; if
they had a great deal in them, yet not being eternal, they are not very
desirable. How vain then is man's heart, in being set upon such vain things?
Well may man be said to be lighter then vanity; no vanity is so vain, as the
trusting in vanity; all the vanity in the creature amounts not to so much
vanity as the trusting in vanity.

And yet again consider, that the emptiness that is in these things, would make
the eternity of them to be miserable. You will say this is a riddle, how can it
be made out? Certainly it is so, there is such an emptiness in the things of
the world, that they are fain to borrow succession to make them comfortable,
and it is the end of some, and the beginning of others that makes them
comfortable, and not the continuance of any outward comfort; as now the laying
in a soft down bed, is easy and comfortable, and delightful; but if one were
condemned to this, to lie there forty years together, and never to come out, it
would be a torment, but to lie eternally it would be more, so that eternity
puts a misery upon the comfort: And so take any one comfort, and to be tied to
that, if there were not a ceasing of one, and the beginning of another, the
comfort would be miserable; and the reason is, because the comfort is so empty:
But the enjoying of God, the eternity of it makes it comfortable; we shall as
much delight in the comforts we have enjoyed of God, after we have enjoyed them
hundred thousands of years, as we did at first moment we entered upon them.

Yet further, let us turn the consideration of this so far, to take off our
hearts from the things below, as not to be troubled much for any affliction and
misery we have here, for they are but for a season; the Qui aeternitaten mente
concepit, null los horret exercitus, non terretur turba, null is ad timorem
minis agitur. Sen. ep. 103.
being for a season, takes away the comfort of the creature, and the being for
a season, takes away the bitterness of affliction: Is there any affliction upon
you? think this is not eternally though, this is not hell. This is the great
complaint of a soul in the time of trouble, O how long shall it be? for ever?
But so we cannot say of any afflictions here in this world, that they shall be
for ever. In Dan. 11. 25. speaking of the great affliction of the Church, this
is brought to alleviate all, yet the end shall be at the time appointed; so
long as a man can look to the end of an evil, it is not much, it is for a
season; if he can but see banks, he is well.

Yea, and the evils that we do endure here, as they are but for a little
season, so they are but in the due season, they are in this season, and that is
that which should comfort us; because there is not so much danger in any thing
we suffer here, while we suffer it in this season. Suppose any of you had your
Ship leak, if it leaks when it comes into harbor, though it be an evil to you,
and brings trouble, yet you comfort your selves in this, It is not in the main
Ocean though: If I had had this leak in the main sea, what had become of me?
and so for troubles and sorrows, you may say, It is upon me, but blessed be
God, it is upon me here; Indeed if it should prove to be upon me eternally
hereafter, it were a great evil, but it is here. S. Augustine said, Here Lord
cut me, do Hic ure, sc ca; Ibi parce.
what you will with me, but spare me hereafter; It was the prayer of
Fulgentius, Lord grant patience here, and pardon hereafter: though I have never
so much affliction here, it is no great matter, so I shall have pardon
hereafter.

Yea, the enduring of affliction in this season, shall be that which may
deliver us from enduring evils eternally hereafter: God ayms at it, and he has
no other end, but only to deliver from eternal sorrows, We are chastened, that
we might not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11. And that he does by
causing a man or woman, when any afflictions are upon them, to think thus;
Lord, is this evil and pain so grievous to me that lasts but for a while, what
will eternal evils be to me? Drexelius reports of a young man that was given to
his lust, and pleasure, and could not endure to be crossed, but of all things
he could not bear it, To be kept from sleep, and to awake in the dark; and
being sick, he was kept awake in the night, and could not sleep, and he began
to have these thoughts, and think, What, is it so tedious for to be kept from
sleep one night, and to lie a few hours here in the dark? O what is it to be in
torments, and darkness everlastingly! I am here in my house upon a soft bed in
the dark, kept from sleep but one night; O to lie in flames, and in darkness
for ever and ever, how dreadful will that be? And this was the means of the
conversion of that young man, that was given to all manner of lusts before.

O that the Lord would settle this argument upon you, so as to work it every
way to be useful; for your pleasures, they are but for a season, why should I
set my heart upon them? And for sorrows, if those be grievous, if a fit of the
Stone, or of the Strangury, or the Fever be so grievous, what will that be to
be eternally scalding in the wrath of God? Thus you see the consideration, That
things are but for a season, how useful it is for to take our hearts from them,
and to uphold our hearts in any evils and troubles that we should endure.

CHAP. XXVII. Exhortation to seek after eternal things.
THe last Use, is an Use of Exhortation, that seeing nothing that is for a
season, can satisfy the heart, what remains but that we should seek after that
which is beyond a season, for the satisfaction of our hearts? Look at the
things that will satisfy an immortal soul, let it be of the largest extent
that can be, these cannot upon this ground, because they are but for a season:
Then let our hearts be after eternal things. I am this day to speak to diverse
hundreds of you here, that must every one of you live in eternity one way or
other, young and old, you must live in a time beyond this season: Now having to
speak to you that must live eternally, this is that which I have to do, To get
your hearts up, to seek after eternal things; and O that this might be done, if
I should never preach more, and you should never hear more, yet if this should
be obtained, that you should live eternally, that you should have your hearts
got up to eternal things, you should be blessed, and I should think my self
happy.

Philip King of Macedon, would have a man come and cry to him every morning,
You are mortal; this is that which I should rather choose, that you might daily
here a voice, that You are immortal; The better part of you must live
eternally: Were it that eternity were presented to us in the reality of it, how
mightily would it work to draw our hearts to eternal things? Certainly our
thoughts are not upon eternity; the thoughts of eternity are mighty prevailing
thoughts, they are over-awing thoughts, soul ballacing thoughts, that would
ballast our hearts; they are infinite pertinent thoughts, that do infinitely
concern us. You that have had a company of slight thoughts, and have set the
strength of your spirits in thinking of chaffy things; O this day here is an
object presented to you, to help you against slight thoughts: This one word
Eternity, and the thoughts of this word, may be enough for you, to banish vain
and chaffy thoughts away for ever; it concerns us to have the strength of our
spirits busied about this.

There is a request that I have to every one of you, and I will put it as fair,
and easy, and low as may be, because I would not have it denied; that is, That
every one that God by his providence has brought this day here into this
Assembly, would resolve in their own thoughts, and covenant with God, to spend
but one half quarter of an hour in meditating of eternity every day; there is
no such great difficulty in it, to have such thoughts as these renewed every
day: This body of mine, though frail and mortal, it must live for ever, and
this soul of mine, it must live eternally; I have spent a great deal of time in
seeking after contentment to my flesh for the present, but, O Lord, what have I
done to provide for eternity? The renewing of this daily, and settling of this
daily upon the heart, what might it do? It cannot be imagined what it might do:
Precious are the thoughts of eternity, so precious, that there is many a soul,
that would not for a thousand worlds, but have had those thoughts to be settled
upon them; so precious, as many souls are now in Heaven, magnifying and
blessing of God, that they had such serious thoughts of eternity, before they
left this world.

Certainly, until you come to have your thoughts settled in some measure upon
this, you do not understand wherefore you were born, nor unto what you were
born; you never have done any thing to purpose about the great business that
God has sent you into the world for, until you come to have serious working
thoughts about eternity: you have had all this while a seduced heart, that has
deceived you, and all your life has been a dream. If God should begin to dart
thoughts into your hearts, and stick them upon your mind, about this argument,
now you begin to live, and to awake, it were not possible that any lusts should
stand before these thoughts: you complain often of weakness, and that you meet
with temptations that are very strong, behold here a means to resist strong
temptations, to strengthen you against the strongest temptations that you can
possibly meet withal in the world, namely the serious thoughts of things that
are beyond this season. It is reported of the customs that have been observed
amongst the Rites and Ceremonies, in making of Bishops, they had this speech to
them, Have eternity in your minds: O that this speech were renewed upon us, in
all our conditions and businesses, that so it may prevail with us, to seek
after that which is eternal! And to that end, that what I speak this way, may
not vanish, and come to nothing, (for it is a serious argument that we are
about, and I am loath that it should come to nothing) consider these motives.

First, it is only the rational creature that knows 1. Motives to mind
eternity.
any thing that is beyond this season: this is the excellency of a rational
creature, that it has any notion about any thing that is eternal: Now that God
has made us of such a nature, and no creature else, but us, and Angels, surely
there is something in it: Men's hearts do naturally desire eternity, and think
this is good if it might last. That is very observable therefore that we have
in Hos. 14. 5. concerning Gods expression of himself to his people; where he
would express himself so as to satisfy his people, he says, I will be as the
dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his roots as
Lebanon. The dew and the Lilly are sweet things, but the dew though it be sweet
is quickly gone, and the Lilly is sweet, but it is observed by the Naturalists,
that the Lilly does not take much root in the earth, therefore mark what
follows, and he shall cast forth his roots as Lebanon; you shall have the
sweetness of the Lilly, but you shall have the roots of Lebanon; Lebanon was
the place of Cedars, and the roots of Cedars are deep. They that dwell under
his shadow shall return, they shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine.
It might Hos. 14.
be said the corn lasts but a year, therefore God adds, and grow as the vine;
the Vine does not only bud, and send forth his branches and grapes one year,
but the next year, and the next year it continues: therefore that God might
present his mercies fully to the hearts of his people, he does present them in
this satisfying way, that his mercies shall be abiding mercies. Why should we
be as Children, to run after bubbles? Men seek after inheritances, and to have
things made sure for perpetuity, so it should be with us.

Secondly, let us look upon things that are beyond 2.
this season, that are eternal, because that in these times of the Gospel, God
has revealed eternity, and eternal things abundantly more clearly then ever
they were revealed in the Law: in the time of the Law there was little made
known concerning eternity, but the times of the Gospel being renewed, now the
treasures of eternity are opened; Immortality is brought to light by the
Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. Now the glorious things of eternity are set before our
eyes, and we the Ministers of God are commanded to present them to you, and you
living under the Gospel, where you hear so much of eternity revealed, it would
be dreadful if you should be deceived with things that are but for a season.

Thirdly, every one of you as you are born, are born with your backs upon Gods
eternity, and your 3.
faces toward hells eternity, and therefore you had need look beyond things
that are but for a season, and mind the things of your eternal good with all
your might.

Fourthly, all your eternal good does depend upon 4.
the short uncertain moment of your lives; if the third be but cut, and you
have not provided for your eternal good, you are lost and undone for ever, you
do not know but upon every moment depends eternity.

Fifthly, know you may be far nearer to the Ocean 5.
of eternity, then you are aware, and therefore you had need have your thoughts
fastened upon eternity; Who knows but that before the morning some that are
here may understand what eternity means, and be lanching into the infinite
Ocean of it: there is many a man that is in his jollity, strength, and health,
that is called forth by God, suddenly to lanch into this Ocean; If God call you
suddenly before you be ready, what will become of you? now you may be near it.
You that are old are certainly near it, within a few years you must know what
eternity means, you shall know a great deal of difference between things that
are for a season, and beyond a season: and young ones may, as we have daily
examples; now you that are young, consider those examples, and put the case,
Suppose I had been called to la^^h into eternity, when such a one was called,
had I been ready? what had become of me? O consider how near you may be unto
it, and therefore look not upon things that are temporal, but let your hearts
be after things that are eternal.

Again, consider how happy those souls would 6.
think themselves that are in their eternal estates, and are miscarried, if
they had time to provide for eternity again. Many are gone, and snatched away
from all things that are for a season, and are swimming in the infinite Ocean
of eternal misery, and they look about them, and see vastness, no limits, no
end, no land: If they could but come back again, and have their time again, how
do you think would they carry themselves about things that are but for a
season? do you think temptations would draw their hearts again? If company
should come to draw them to drinking, and uncleanness, would they yield then?
they would with indignation cast away those temptations, and say, God forbid I
should be drawn with these things, that are but for a season, I know what
eternity means. O now you have time, improve this argument, and labor to
provide for eternity: now prayers and tears may do you good for eternity;
within a while, if you could let streams of blood issue from you, it can do you
no good, and if this argument prevail to get off your hearts beyond things that
are for a season, there will arise these two questions: O that I did but know
how it should go with me eternally! O how shall I get eternal things to be my
portion!

CHAP. XXVIII. How we should know how it will be with us for eternity, and what
we should do that it may be well with us eternally.
IF you say, How shall I know how it shall be with 1.
me for eternity? shall it be well, or not well with my soul when I am beyond
things that are for a season? You may have some guess by those thoughts you
have had upon things for eternity: you that have given liberty to your selves,
to satisfy your selves in the things of the flesh, and your hearts have been
fully satisfied in the things of the world, and this point is a strange point
to you, you have cause to conclude with your selves, that you are in a
miserable condition for eternity; but if your consciences can testify that
this point, the getting of your hearts from things that are but for a season,
and setting them upon the things that are eternal, is that which the Lord has
settled upon your hearts for many years, when you wake in the night, or in the
morning, the same thoughts that are presented to me by the Word, the Lord has
presented to me by his Spirit, the strength and chief of my thoughts have been
busied about this argument. It is a good sign, that God does intend good for
that soul to eternity, whom he is pleased to possess with the thoughts of it so
deeply for the present.

Again consider, could you not wish in your hearts, 2.
that you might live always? and that the content and delight in this world, in
meat, and drink, and sports do satisfy you, and you think your selves happy in
the enjoyment of them; certainly God has not yet savingly made known the
things of eternity to you. Those that God does prepare for his eternal mercies
in Heaven, God does take off their hearts from all things in the world; that if
it were put to your choice, though you might have a thousand worlds, you would
not have them for your portion; no, there are more glorious, more excellent
things for my soul to have, and therefore God forbid I should have my portion
in these things, though they were to endure.

Augustine brings in Plotinus, acknowledging it the mercy of God to man, that
his soul is in a mortal De civ. Dei lib. 9. c. 10.
body, that the body is not immortal, but that after a little time the bodies
of men may be dissolved, and so their souls be there for ever where the soul of
the world is; that is his expression.

3. A third Argument that it shall be well with 3. Ut ipsae ibi forent semper,
ubi est anima mundi. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l 9. Ca. 10.
you for eternity, is this, To know what seeds of eternity God has begun to
plant in your hearts. This is a certain truth, There is no soul that God
intends eternal life unto, but God begins eternal life in this world. You know
what St. John says, He that hates his brother, has not eternal life abiding in
him. Eternal life is begun in this world in all that shall be saved; therefore
think with your selves, What seeds of eternity have I put into my soul? All
common graces, and moral virtues are not a seed that will grow up to eternal
life, but saving grace will; though it be under the clods for the present, it
will grow up eternity.

Fourthly, Examine the Scriptures, look into the book of God, and see whether
the Scripture speaks 4.
well on your side, because that in this Book, in this Scripture, there God
has revealed the eternal counsels of his will, and the great things about man's
eternal estate: there is little in all the Book of the Creature, the Book of
Creation, revealed of the counsels of Gods will, about bringing man to his
eternal estate; but in this Book of the Scripture he has revealed his will
concerning this; and therefore confider, does this speak well of your side?
Thus by these How to get eternal things to be our portion.
arguments you may know how it shall be with you for eternity.

But what shall we do to get a portion in those things Quest. 2.
that shall be eternal?

First, labor to bring all things in subordination to eternity, do not make
other things your scope, make 1.
them an underling, and take no further content in them, then that they may
further your souls to eternity. Suppose you have an estate increasing more then
another, what will you do with it? how will you use it? wherein do you count
the good of it to consist? that by these things I have coming from God, I hope
to make use of them, to fit me for eternal mercies, and to treasure up eternal
mercies by a sanctified holy use of these things; but when temporal things come
in, and your hearts rest upon them, without subordination to eternal things,
this is infinitely dangerous.

Secondly, make conscience of the little time you 2.
have; O it is but a little time you have, let that be consecrated and devoted
to God: it is eternal happiness that you look for hereafter, why should you not
be willing to spend as much of this little time for it as can be?

Thirdly, labor to be exact in all that you do, for 3.
you are working for eternity. As Zeuxis the Painter, when he was asked, why he
was so accurate in his Painting, says he, I Paint for eternity: Let us in
Aeternitati pingo.
our Christian profession be exact in our way, because we live for eternity;
There is nothing that does make men so accurate in their way as this; and let
the men of the world know, that this is the reason of the exactness of the ways
of Gods people, because they know they live to eternity. Hypocrites, who in
Religious duties aim only at some present, some temporal good, they are not
exact, they rest in outsides; but the Saints who make eternity their aim, are
exact in all things, especially those things that have a more immediate
influence into eternity.

Fourthly, be sure all you do, you do upon divine and eternal grounds, take
heed of being carnal, and 4.
earthly in your spiritual services; but in all duties in Gods worship, look to
an eternal God, and let your principles, aims, grounds, and intentions be
eternal. The Temple was called Bethgnolam, the house of Eternity; do all you do
in the house of God, in his Ordinances, in order to eternity, that it may
indeed be an house of eternity unto you.

Lastly, be sure you be constant, abide constantly to the end, do not only
begin, and now and then in a good mood, have some thoughts of a good life, and
providing for your souls, but abide, be constant. And if you take these ways,
by this you shall come to choose Moses Choice. O that now in my winding up of
all, by all that has been said, some soul or other may have cause to bless God
in being inclined to choose the same Choice: If you would choose Moses Choice,
use Moses argument; and this is the special argument that moved Moses to make
this Choice, he looked upon all these things as for a season, and he looked
upon eternity: O that you being moved by Moses argument, you may this day be
brought to choose Moses Choice, that you may sing Moses Song, Rev. 15. 3, 4.
Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy.
O that that Choice by this argument were made, that so you might sing hereafter
this part of Moses Song; O Lord, there was a time that I never saw thee in thy
glory, and never minded thee, but now Lord I see, worthy thou art to be feared,
and glorified for ever, for thou art holy: The Lord give us hearts upon this
argument, to make this Choice.

Moses his Choice.
The third Part.
Heb. 11. 26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the
treasures of Egypt, for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward.
CHAP. XXIX. The Review of Moses Choice.
WE have finished the Choice of Moses, the argument upon which Moses went in
his Choice, and now we are come to this 26. verse, where we have the Review of
Moses choice, looking back to see what he had chosen, to the consequent of it.
He sees that while he joins himself with the people of God, and suffers
affliction, he is like to meet with nothing but reproach and scorn for his
labor; this he sees, and yet he repents not: his judgment still is not only
for his choice, but he does esteem of it highly, as accounting that reproach of
Christ that he was to suffer, great riches; and the argument that here he has,
is the greatness of the recompense of the reward, He had an eye unto the
recompense of the reward.

[Esteeming the reproach of Christ:] Reproach is taken either materially, or
formally; materially, so it may be taken for the affliction that he did endure
with Gods people, that outward mean wretched condition that he was like to
suffer with the people of God, this was the matter of the reproach. Or
otherwise formally, the scorn, contempt, reviling, railing, and all the evil
that should be spoken of him when he had left the Court, and joined himself
with Gods people; and this formal kind of reproach is that which is especially
meant.

[The reproach of Christ:] How could that reproach Quest.
that Moses suffered, be the reproach of Christ? for Christ was not then born,
it was a long time after before Christ came into the world.

Christ was present unto Moses by the eye of Answ.
faith, though he were not yet come into the world, Christ is the same to day,
yesterday, and for ever; he was the same to the Patriarchs and Prophets, that
he is to us.

[Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt]
Moses was not only content to suffer patiently the reproach of Christ, but he
counted it his glory, his riches, greater riches then the Treasures of Egypt.
Egypt was a rich country, and full of treasures; and therefore in Psalm. 87.
Egypt is called by the name of Rahab, and the reason is, because of the pride,
and power, and insolency of Egypt; because Egypt was a fruitful rich place,
therefore they had a great deal of strength, and power, and were lift up with
pride; So Isa. 51. 9. vide Hieronym. upon the place. The King of Egypt is
called a Dragon in the waters: and the chief horses that Solomon had, in 2 Chronicles. 9. they came out of Egypt; and the Whore in the Proverbs, had her fine
linen out of Egypt. Egypt was a very fruitful Prove. 7. 16
Country, Genesis 13. 9. The fruitfulness of that place to which Lot turned aside,
is described to be the garden of the Lord, like the Land of Egypt: it is called
by many Horreum caeterarum regionum, the Granary of other Countries: hence
Abraham, when famine was in Canaan, went into Egypt; and after, Jacob in time
of famine sent his sons into Egypt; it is said of it, that they sow almost
every month. And being such a flourishing place, all Genesis 13.
kind of learning was there; and therefore in 1 King. 4. 30. where the
greatness of Solomon's wisdom is set out, it is said, it excelled the wisdom of
Egypt. In Egypt was treasures of riches, and treasures of strength, treasures
of the riches of the earth, and treasures of merchandise, and treasures of
learning, and yet Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ, greater riches then
all the treasures of Egypt. Now the points that arise from these words, are
these:

First, that the people of God have been, and usually 1.
are a people under reproach.

Secondly, the reproach of Gods people is the reproach of Christ. 2.


Thirdly, a gracious heart is not only willing to bear reproach when God calls
unto it, but in the cause of 3.
Christ, triumphs and rejoices in that reproach it suffers.

Fourthly, the strong argument that moves Gods people thus to do, is the eye
that they have unto the 4.
recompense of the reward. To begin with the first, and that is this:

CHAP. XXX. The condition of Gods people is a reproached condition.
HAving now to handle this Doctrine, concerning Point 1.
the reproaches that are cast upon Gods people, before I speak a word
concerning the point, I desire to put this caveat, That none upon hearing the
estate of Gods people being reproached, shall think to wash away all just
reprehension and accusation, and think to answer whatsoever they are accused of
with this, That all Gods people have been reproached, and therefore think their
condition to be but the same that usually Gods people have been.

First, if that were enough to answer any accusation 1.
upon this, then there should never be any reprehension and accusation, the
Church of God should never proceed against any for any evil.

Secondly, such as think to put off just reprehensions 2.
and accusations thus, have their consciences reproach them more then others do
or can reproach them.

Thirdly, it is not for all to make use of this that I am speaking of, but
only such, whose constant 3.
and general way is gracious, and inoffensive; now if they meet with unjust
accusations, and reproachful slanders, they may have the benefit of this, to
think it is the usual condition of Gods people to be reproached; but if any
have been offensive, and evils break out, they cannot have the benefit of this
point, for more evil may be in them then appears; and thus I lay this caveat to
pull up evil weeds, before I sow good seed. And now to the Point.

The condition of Gods people is a reproached condition. They have been a
people subject to all manner of evil speaking of them. This the Church of God
complains of in Psalm. 79. 4. they were not only a reproach, but God himself
gave them over to be a Ps. 44. 13.
scorn and reproach. Isaac that was the son of the promise, we know how he was
reproached and contemned by Ishmael: and it is observable, when the Apostle
speaks of the reproach of Isaac, in Gal. 4. 29. it is said, Ishmael persecuted
Isaac; now that persecution was nothing but his mocking and reproaching of
Isaac. We read of Job, a holy man, how liable he was to reproach and contempt,
Job 16. 9, 10. there you may read of the bitter reproaches he had from the
abjects, such as he would not set with his dogs, that had not bread to eat, and
were driven from men to live among bushes and nettles. In Psalm. 35. 15. David
complains, the abjects of the people made a scorn of him; the basest wretches
that are, can find a taunt, and mock at Religion; reproachers are the most
base spirits. In Nehemiahs time, those that sought to build the Temple were
scorned; in Nehem. 2. 19. it is said, Tobiah the servant, one that had been but
a slave, a base wretch, he comes and laughs them to scorn. And so in great men's
houses, if the Masters do scorn at the godly, the basest servants will do so
too.

David has many bitter complaints of the reproach he suffered, I was a
reproach among all my enemies, Psa. 31. 1.
but especially among my neighbors. Now the reproaches of professors one
against another, are the bitterest, and most vile reproaches: and the reason of
it is this, because usually reproach arises from some contestation about
excellency: for a Prince that is The reproaches of Professors the bitterest.
a great deal above another, has not contestation with beggars, he does not
reproach them, nor they him, for this distance is too great; but reproach is
between equals, when one stands in the light of the other; or from inferiors,
who have others by them who are above them, and their excellency stands in
their light, and they cast dirt upon their excellency, that theirs may appear
the brighter. Now those that have a contestation about Religion, have a
contestation about the greatest excellency, and where their hearts are
unsavory, their reproaches will be the bitterest reproaches. In Psalm. 109. 25.
I became also a reproach unto them, when they looked upon me, they shaked their
heads; and in other places the drunkards made songs of him. David was a man of
such an admirable spirit, the sweet singer of Israel, and God had blessed him
with all things that might make him honorable, and had he not been religious,
it were impossible that such a man as he should have endured such reproaches.

And we have the Church complaining in Lam. 3. 30. He gives his cheek to him
that smites him, he is filled full of reproach. So all the Prophets that were
the most eminent were reproached, as Isaiah; in Isa. 28. Precept upon precept,
line upon line, that was a scoff they put upon Isaiah; we have nothing but line
upon line, and precept upon precept; the very sound of the words as they are in
the Original, carries with them a taunting, reproachful expression, Zan la Zan,
Kan la Kan, manda remanda, manda remanda; as scornful people by the tone of
their voice, and ryming words, scorn at such as they despise. And so Jeremy
complains in the bitterness of his spirit, that Ier. 20. 28.
the word of the Lord was made a reproach to him. And Ezekiel, see how he was
scorned, Ezekiel. 33. 30, 31, etc.

And as they did the Prophets, so Christ, and the Apostles; when they were
filled with the Spirit of God, they mocked them, and said, they were filled
with new Wine; And Christ tells them, they shall revile them, and speak all
manner of evil unto them. And so St. Paul, a man of most admirable parts, yet he
says of himself, and of the other Apostles, 1 Cor. 4. 13. Being defamed, we
entreat; the word translated defamed, signifies blasphemed. We are made as the
filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things to this day. We are
made the filth of the world, as if we were scraped out of the filth of the
filth of the world; There is an emphasis in that word, the filth of the world;
why the world lies in filth, is even nothing else but filth, as in 1 John 5.
19. the whole world lies in wickedness, as a carrion in the slime of it; to be
accounted the filth of such a filth, is a most vile esteem of one indeed, that
filthiness must needs be great. Mundus has the name a munditie of cleanness,
but as lucus a lucendo, as mons a monendo, quia minime lucet, minime monet, so
quia minime mundus est. And further, the offscouring of all things; to be the
offscouring of some things, is not so vile, but of all things, the most base,
and contemptible things, how vile is that? The word signifies the dungcart that
goes through the city, into which every one brings his filth, and casts in:
every one had some filth to cast upon Paul and the rest of the Apostles.

And in the Primitive times, the people of God were then a people under great
reproach: What strange things does Tertullian tell us they reproached them
withal; as that in their meetings they made Thyestes suppers, who invited his
brother to a supper, and presented him with a dish of his own flesh; they
charged them with uncleanness, because they met in the night, (for they durst
not meet in the day) and said, they blew out the candles when they were
together, and committed filthiness: they reproached them for ignorance, saying,
they were all unlearned; and therefore the Heathens in Tertullians time used to
paint the God of the Christians with an Asses head, and a book in his hand, to
signify, that though they pretended learning, yet they were an unlearned silly
people, rude and ignorant. Bishop Jewel in his Sermon upon Luke 11. ver. 15.
cites this out of Tertullian, and applies it to his time: Does not our
adversaries do the like, says he, at this day, against all those that profess
the Gospel of Christ? O say they, who are they that favor this way? they are
none but Shoomakers, Tailors, Weavers, and such as never were at the
University. They are the Bishops own words. He cites likewise Tertullian a
little after, saying, that Publici hostis.
The Christians were accounted the public enemy of State. And Josephus tells
us of Apollinaris, speaking concerning the Jews and Christians, that they were
more foolish then any Barbarian. And Paulus Fagius reports a story of an
Egyptian, concerning the Christians, who said, They were a gathering together
of a most filthy leacherous people; and for the keeping of the Sabbath, he
says, they had a disease that was upon them, and they were fain to rest the
seventh day, because of that disease. And so in St. Augustines time he has
this expression, Any one that begins to be godly, presently he must prepare to
suffer reproach from the tongues of adversaries: and this was their usual manner
of reproach; What shall we have of you, an Elias? a Jeremy? And Nazianzen in
one of his Orations, says, It is so ordinary to reproach, that I cannot think
to go free my self. And so Athanasius, they called him Sathanasius, because he
was a special Instrument against the Arrians. And Cyprian, they called him
Cyprianus, Co prianus
Coprian, one that gathers up dung, as if all the excellent things he had
gathered in his works were but dung.

And if we look into the ways of Gods permissive providence in these latter
times; what reproachful, and scornful blood has run in the veins of wicked
men, and what horrid things has been invented upon the most famous persons of
our latter times? As Luther, this report came to him, he being yet alive, That
Luther upon his deathbed had recanted, and he desired the Sacrament, and after
he was dead, there was a fearful Earthquake that shook the place where he lay,
and they saw the Host he had taken, hanging in the Air, and when he was put
into the Grave, they heard a great noise, but they saw nothing, but a filthy
stink arose, and his body was taken away. And so of Calvin; though he had a
sweet death, yet was it said by the Popish Party, that he was eaten up with
worms, (as those said of David, An evil disease cleaves fast to him:) and then
when he was to dye, he called upon the Devil, and blasphemed the name of God.
And so Oecolompadius, that he slew himself; and others reported, that the Devil
slew him. It were endless to name the reproaches that we find of the servants
of God that were most eminent. Yea, I remember Seneca has Nondu^ foelix es si
nondu^ te turba deriserit. Si beatus vis esse hoc cogita primu^ contemnere ab
aliis co^temni. Sen. lib. de moribus.
such an expression concerning Philosophy; says he, You are not yet happy, if
the rout of people do not deride you; if you will be happy, prepare your selves
to contemn being contemned. And an other Philosopher says, If one does but
begin to set himself to the study of Philosophy, he must expect to be scorned
and derided. Now if this be the wickedness of men's hearts, as they cannot so
much as endure moral Philosophy, much more if a man begins to walk according to
the rule of God. This is that which many fear, and they bring it to keep others
from Gods ways, and say, If you embrace Religion, you will be derided at, and
scorned: and by this many are kept from the good ways of the Lord; and
therefore I being fallen upon this argument, I shall labor to take away this
stumbling block, that it may not hinder any. Thus you have seen the thing it
self, that it is so, that Why Gods people are so reproached ^n the world.
Gods people are a people under reproach. Now the reasons for it:

First, because the men of the world look upon the servants of God, as having
very poor low spirits; now those are men that are liable to contempt and
reproach. Gods people are not for the braveries of the world, and the glory of
the world; and when they see their hearts are taken off from that which they
count the bravery of the world, they contemn them.

Secondly, they look upon their ways as irrational: 2.
There is no reason why men should be so afraid of the least sin, they are
stricter then they need, and do more then they need: so that the more earnest
Gods people are upon their way, the more wicked men will scorn them, because
they see them earnest upon that which they see no reason for.

Again, they think the ways of Religion are but imaginary things, and notions,
and there is no certainty 3.
in them, and think it strange men should suffer for things that are to come
they know not when, and are they know not what: and therefore one gives that
reason, why Cyprian was called Coprian, because he gathered such fables and
tales, (meaning the Gospel) as they termed them, which they saw no reason for.

But especially it does proceed from the pride and 4.
malice of wicked men; from pride, and swelling, and Eusebius. eccl. hist. l. 4 c.
13.
envying one at another; a proud and envious man will seek to cast disgrace
upon that excellency that himself wants, as Licinius who was joined with
Galerius in the Empire, being ignorant himself, not being able so much as to
write his own name, he was an enemy to learning, and as Eusebius reports of
him, he called the liberal Arts, A public poison and pestilence. What was the
reason that should cause Sanballat and Tobiah to make such a stir to reproach
Nehemiah? Certainly the ground was this, Sanballat and Tobiah were in Samaria
with a mixed people, and they had got a Temple, and endeavored to magnify that;
Now they thought that the Temple of Nebemiah would darken the glory of their
Temple, and therefore they sought to cast disgrace upon them, to bring them
into contempt. And the malice of men's hearts, when it cannot vent its self by
open persecution, then it will vent its self by the persecution of the tongue;
malice makes men very watchful, to observe any thing whereby it may gain matter
of reproach, and malice will make men exceeding inventive to find out strange
ways of reproach, and exceeding bold in venturing upon reproaches.

For the first, that place is remarkable in Proverbs 16. 27. An ungodly man
diggeth up evil, and in his lips there is a burning fire; if things be not
plain and fair enough, because he has an evil spirit, he will dig up evil, if
he can dig up any old business to reproach them for.

Now the ways of invention, that malice has to 1. Malice is fruitful in
inventing reproaches.
reproach upon the ways of God, are many: As the straining of any word to the
utmost, and putting glosses, and false interpretations upon words; and thus it
is easy to make any man a transgressor for a word, yea, for any word, as it
was with those, Isa. 29. 21. They make a man an offender for a word, and lay a
snare for him that reproves in the gate.

A second way is, by casting out doubtful 2.
speeches; they will not accuse one directly, because it will be a shame to
them, if it be false, but they cast out doubtful speeches, they know some will
turn them the worst way, and if they be examined, they can turn them another
way, to save themselves.

Another invention, is some secret intimations that others may gather, and it
cannot be said they spoke 3.
any thing, but by some gesture or the like, others may gather something.

Fourthly, to speak things as from others, and not 4.
from themselves, and in the speaking of them to say, I believe such things are
not true, and yet they spread the report.

Another way is to speak evil, and yet so, as to manifest 5.
a great deal of grief and sorrow for such reports, and secretly desire that
they may spread, and take where they come.

Sixthly, when they want apparent matter for reproach, 6.
they will pretend some love to get matter for reproach: so you may read in
Ezra 4. 1, 2. when the adversaries of Judah could not reproach them apparently,
they pretended love, and this and that, they sought the same God they did, and
would sacrifice to him, and therefore would build with them. So Sanballat and
Tobiah desired to meet lovingly with Neh. 6. 7.
Nehemiah to take counsel together, but in this they intended his reproach.

Yea sometimes, to speak some truths with reproach, to make it to be believed
the more. It is said, 1 John 7.
2. 21. that there is no lie of the truth, these men make the truth to be
serviceable to a lie, they raise the strength of a lie, even out of the truth.
We might be abundant in showing the ways of invention that malice has, to cast
dirt and shame upon those that it has an evil eye upon.

Eighthly, if there be any show of suspicion of evil, to 8.
make it a certainty, and so to carry it in the report, as if it were surely
so, this is a great wrong; for every man is in possession of his good name,
until the contrary Iudubiis melior est conditio possessoris.
be made out, and in doubtful things the possessor has the advantage, but in
this way of malice, this his privilege is taken away?

Ninthly, if there be any thing conceived evil, that 9.
has any nearness or likeness to that which is done, malice will fasten that
evil upon what is done, as if it were that; as appears notably in the example
we have Ezra 4. of Rehum the Chancellor, and Shimshai the Scribe, and the rest
of their companions, as the holy Ghost calls them, ver. 9. in their reproachful
accusation of the people of God; whereas the Text speaks only of their
building the Temple, yet they accuse them for building the rebellious City,
that thereby they might free themselves from subjection to the King. Thus while
Gods people seek to build the Temple, to set up the Ordinances of Christ, they
are accused for disturbing the Commonwealth; because they cannot do as others
do, because they cannot subject their consciences to men, therefore they are
reproached and accused, as disturbers of the State, enemies to Government, etc.

Tenthly, Malice will teach men to draw consequences 10.
a great way off from the premises, that it may fasten reproach upon those they
have an evil eye upon, although in truth there be no dependence of that which
they affirm upon that which they draw it from: As in the former example, Ezra
4. ver. 16. Certify the King, that if this City be built again, and the walls
thereof set up, by this means thou shall have no portion on this side the
River; It was a consequence that they could not conclude from what they
affirmed of them. Thus it is with many in their reproaches and accusations of
Religious men, if they be suffered to have their way in that which they pretend
is for conscience, they will grow Rebels, they will not live under government:
surely there is no dependence of rejecting government upon Religion, upon
subjection to the truth in a conscientious way. And as it is inventive, so it
is bold to venture strangely upon such things that men know they may be easily
found in. It was the speech of the Jesuit Campian, Reproach Fortiter calumniare
aliquid haerebit.
valiantly, somewhat will stick, though it may be easily answered by those who
know the matter, yet the noise will go further then the examination, and much
will stick by it.

A fifth reason of the reproach of Gods people, is from the malice of the
Devil, because the Devil 5.
knows there is no such way to darken Religion, and to damp the hearts of
people from embracing it. And therefore it is observed of Julian, he would not
go the way that other Emperors did, to oppose Religion by open persecution, but
sought all means to cast reproaches and contempt upon Religion, and by that
means many were drawn from Religion: and certainly, where we see that
reproaches are cast upon such as are religious, this is the end, to suppress
Religion, there the Devil has a great hand, and hopes to prevail much.

Again, God (sometimes) has a special hand in 6.
this. Why does God suffer this? sometime for the The sins of Gods people, often
punished by Reproaches.
correction of his people; sometime for the good of his people.

First, for the correction of his people: there are seven or eight sins
punished in Gods people by reproaches that are cast upon them.

First, that they have not been so tender of the name of God as they should
have been, you have not been 1.
affected with the wrongs that have been done to the name of God, and therefore
God suffers you to suffer in your names.

Secondly, the inordinate desire of a name, because 2.
we are so ready to desire a name abroad, and to have esteem in the world, and
are more solicitous about credit with men, then credit in heaven, therefore God
sometimes crosses his people, and suffers filth and dirt to be cast upon them,
to correct this sin.

Thirdly, it may be you have not done that good to others which you might have
done, therefore God 3.
uses them as a scourge to you this way.

Fourthly, it may be it is because you have not 4.
been tender of the name of others, and therefore God suffers you to suffer in
the same kind. Says Si quid simile aliis tu unquam fecisti. Si libenter alios
talia Aicentes audisti, quod absque culpa esse non potest.
Chrysostom, When you hear any reproach you, you should think, have not I
reproached others? Or, have not I heard the reproaches of others, and been
delighted with them? or, not affected with them, to grieve as I ought?

Fifthly, God suffers this, because many times you have taken ill the
reprehension of your sins by Gods Ministers, and have thought your selves
disgraced, and therefore God may justly punish this, by casting disgrace 5.
upon you, you shall be disgraced indeed by the tougues of wicked men.

Sixthly, because many times Gods people will put 6.
fair colors upon evil actions, hence God suffers their enemies to put foul
colors upon good actions: we are ready to say, Good Lord, that ever we should
suffer such things, when we labor to walk so strictly, and our consciences
witness so well for us, that yet there should be such aspersions! God punishes
this; you have done evil with fair pretenses, and therefore now though your
actions be never so good, you shall have foul colors put upon them; your evil
actions you made seem to be glorious, now your good actions shall appear as if
they were foul.

Seventhly, because the people of God have not 7.
been careful to find out the secret evil and filth of their hearts, therefore
God will cast outward filth upon them, this is usual.

Eighthly, though we be conscious of a great deal of 8.
evil between God and our hearts, we many times are not ashamed of that, and
therefore because God will have us ashamed of our filth, he suffers filth to be
cast upon us outwardly.

Secondly, God intends good to his people, that they 2.
might know themselves; and though the world have The benefit Gods people reap
by reproaches.
not sufficient reason to accuse them as guilty, it may be a slander from
another, and yet I know my self guilty; and though not guilty of that, yet by
this I may be put to search some other evil that I am guilty of that is as
great.

Again, they may make them watchful for time to come; though they be not guilty
now, they may be guilty of that evil afterward. Now what a mercy of God is this
to stop our way, though it be by filth? If a man be stopped from falling into a
dangerous pit, though it be by a heap of dirt, he accounts it a mercy.

Thirdly, they recover them out of much evil: So that I may compare the
reproaches of Gods people 3.
to the rags of Jeremy, when Jeremy stuck in the mire in the dungeon, he was
pulled out by rags, and so these reproaches of wicked men are rags that may
pull us out of evil.

Fourthly, God sanctifies these to his people, to make them more fruitful; they
may be compared 4.
to the dung that husbandmen cast upon their ground, they scrape up filth and
dung together to lay upon their ground, whereby it is more fruitful; so God
suffers wicked men to gather up all the filth that can be, and cast upon his
people, which is but as dung to make fat the soil, the hearts of Gods people,
to make them to be more fruitful in their way; as indeed never do Gods people
more thrive in the way of godliness, then when many enemies are set to watch
them. And thus we have done with the Explication of the point.

CHAP. XXXI. What use there is to be made of the reproaches the condition of
Gods people is liable to.
IF it be thus, that the estate of Gods people is an estate liable to
reproaches, then you that have any Use 1.
inclination to the ways of God, examine whether you can take his way upon
these terms: Can you be content to be made a byword and reproach, and to have
men cast all manner of filth upon you? He is like to hold out in the ways of
godliness, that can be content to be made a byword and reproach for godliness,
it is an argument that the soul is resigned up to God for ever: The reason that
some give of that order of the Law, concerning the servant that would serve his
Master for ever, that he must come to the door and have his ear bored, was that
he might give an evident demonstration, that he was indeed willing to be his
Masters for ever, if he would be content to endure such a reproach as that was
Ut si non horreret servitutem horreret saltem ignominiam publicam. Ut multos
habeat inspectores and testes. Use 2.
esteemed to be amongst the Jews: Boring the ear was a note of ignominy; His
ear was bored, says Cajetan, to that end, that if he feared not perpetual
servitude, be might at least be afraid of public ignominy, and therefore he
was brought to the door, that he might have many to look on him, and be
witnesses of this his shame.

Secondly, it should teach the godly to be accurate in their way: you live
amongst those that will observe you, and cast filth on your faces, take heed
you give no just occasion; it is enough we shall suffer without any just cause,
let us take heed they take no filth out of our own bosoms, and cast upon our
faces, that will be grievous indeed, when our consciences shall join with their
reproaches. God threatens, Hos. 7. ult. as a great affliction, that his people
shall be derided by the Egyptians, this shall be their derision in the land of
Egypt; to have the wicked deride us, and that for our sin, is a grievous
misery; Make me not a scorn, says David, to fools: It is a great evil for a
professor of Religion to make himself a scorn to the fools of the world; if
they will reproach us, let it be for forwardness in Gods ways, and not for our
sin; sin is only a just reproach, and therefore when Joshua circumcised the
people, it is said, He took away their reproach, therefore the place was called
Gilgal, because their reproach was rouled away; bodily uncircumcision was a
reproach, much more is spiritual uncircumcision: Let us take heed we do not
manifest any filth to them, being you live among The evii of a reviling tongue.
those that will revile you, whose tongues in Scripture are compared to three
things, a Rasor, a Sword, and an Arrow: A Rasor that will take off every little
hair, so a reviling tongue will not only take advantage of every gross sin,
but the least thing that another can hardly see. Secondly, it is compared to a
Sword, a sword that wounds, so the tongues of revilers do a great deal of
mischief: but a sword can do mischief only near hand, it cannot do mischief
afar off; and therefore, Thirdly, it is compared to an Arrow, that can do
mischief a great way off, as far as one can see a man, and so revilers do not
only mischief to a man in the Town where they live, but a great way off in
other Towns: Now if men's tongues be Rasors, and Swords, and Arrows, the people
of God had need take heed how they walk, and walk accurately, to give no just
cause of reproach, that so the reproach may fall upon themselves.

The third Use of the point is this, Gods people are a people liable to
reproach: Let those who are such, Use 3.
from hence be exhorted, that they do not further this, I mean by reproaching
one another; it is enough that the servants of God are liable to reproach from
the world, and from those that are without, let not this be furthered by those
that are within, upon every pettish humor, or every discontent, presently to be
casting filth one upon the face of another, this is a thing unbeseeming
Religion. Hereby you come to deprive your selves of that evidence of the truth
of grace, from whence many of Gods servants receive so much comfort, love to
Gods people: While they are in your way your hearts are toward them, but if
they do cross you, your hearts are as perverse and froward, and appear as
malicious as the hearts of any: So that the love you had to them, was because
they were in your way, and not because they were the servants of God: Now if
you have a heart, though you becrossed by them, to put it up without casting
dirt upon their faces, your evidence will be strengthened, that you love them
though they be opposite to you. Do not you tear the flesh of one another by
reproaches? it is enough that the briars and thorns of the wilderness do tear
our flesh and our names; let there not be briars and thorns amongst our selves
to tear our flesh. If children be casting mire and dirt upon the faces of one
another, how unbeseeming is it? and if the father sees them, how provoked is he
to correct them both? And so if we upon some pettish mood, cast dirt upon one
another, expect some severe judgment from God: If children be casting dirt
upon one another, this is enough to make them leave, Your Father sees you: And
so you that are brethren of a Church, and are casting filth upon one another,
know your Father sees you: We should not cast reproaches upon an Enemy. It is a
notable speech reported of one Memon, that was General of Darius Army, when he
was fighting against Alexander, one of his Soldiers reproached Alexander; the
General came to him and smote him, says he, I did not hire you to reproach
Alexander, but to fight against him: If a Heathen cannot endure the reproaches
of his enemy, how much less should God endure his children reproaching one
another? It was a brave speech of Calvin, Though Luther call me a Devil, yet I
will honor him as a servant of God: and so though those that are our brethren,
do cast reproach upon us, we should honor the grace of God in them, and not
cast reproach upon them again, for these reproaches are bitterness.

But the main Use of the point is an Use of Direction, Use 4.
how to carry our selves under reproach; this is the estate of Gods people, it
has been so, and does continue so, and is like to continue so; it should teach
us, as to make account of them, so when they befall us, to behave our selves
Christianly under them. This is a lesson of Use, wherefore in this lesson of
bearing reproaches, take these things.

First, labor to bear your reproaches Christianly, not Stoically, insensibly;
for certainly they are afflictions: How to carry our selves under reproaches.
1.
A good name is a precious ointment, and therefore reproaches, though never so
wrongfully, are afflictions, and not to be born insensibly.

Secondly, not to bear them desperately, not to 2.
care what become of your Names, as many desperate wretches will do. Let men
speak the worst of me, I care not, I must appeal to God: Though it is true,
Innocence is a good bulwark, yet we are not only to care to approve our selves
to God, but we are to care to approve our selves to men; and not only to have
a good esteem in Heaven, but to have a good esteem in the world, To provide
things honest before all men, especially amongst the people of God, and the
Churches of God; for to have an evil name, is a great judgment of God, Isa.
65. 15. Ye shall leave your name for a curse. For people to say, they care not
what men say of them, it is a great evil, for by this it appears they are not
affected with shame; and those that are not affected with shame before others,
they are deprived of a special bridle that should keep them from evil, and a
special means to further repentance. And besides, it is an argument there is no
worth, no good in thee who art so careless; those who have any true worth, will
be careful to preserve it, but others are desperate: As a man that has a good
garden, full of good flowers and herbs, will be careful to pull up every weed,
but if the place be a dunghill, or overgrown, he neglects it: Wherefore let us
labor to behave our selves Christianly, not carelessly, desperately under
reproach.

Again, we must not carry our selves passionately 3.
under reproach; though it is true, it is good to be The evil of being
Passionate under reproaches.
sensible of the wrong done to our names, more then the wrong done to our
estates, yet neither are the wrongs to our names nor to our estates to be born
passionately. There are five evils follow upon this distemper of heart.

First, there is a great disturbance to the spirit, and 1.
that is a greater evil to have the heart disturbed, then to have a great deal
of dirt cast upon us: To have a disturbance within the body, is worse then a
violent motion without.

Secondly, we are made liable to discover a great deal of evil in us, that
though we are unjustly reproached, 2.
yet we may discover so much evil, as to be a just cause of reproach.

Thirdly, we do feed the humor of those that reproach, they have part of their
end to see us so disturbed. 3.


Fourthly, we show the baseness of our spirits, to be 4.
so soon put out of frame. Seneca speaking of the complaint Qui vocem nisi
querelas animi nauseantis. Sen.
of those that are under reproach, They are, says he, the complaint of
squeamish spirits.

Fifthly, it is a means to make others to think we are guilty: There is no
means whereby I would think 5.
one were guilty of what he is reproached, as that, namely, a mighty inordinate
passion at hearing of those things. If you hear a couple disputing, commonly he
that wants arguments for his case, will fall into giving ill language, and
passion, and therefore those men that have power over their passion in
reasoning, do what they can to bring those they reason withal into passion, for
then they have them at their will: And so those that are brought into passion,
when they are reproached, gives a great suspicion of the weakness of their
cause, and are thought to be guilty.

Fourthly, let us not carry our selves revengefully under our reproaches, not
to desire the reproachers 4.
might have an evil name in the same kind: It is ordinary for people that are
reproached to do thus, but many though they dare not say so, yet secretly they
would be willing that those that do reproach them, might have an evil name. But
where have we those Innocence seeks not revenge.
that do labor to clear the innocence of those that do reproach them? it would
be the glory of Christians, to be so far from revenge to those that reproach
them, as to clear their innocence, and to speak well of them as occasions
serve, as the Apostle says, We being defamed, we entreat, and are not glad if
they fall into any evil: Many people if any have spoken evil of them, and they
fall into evil, how does it please them? Let us suffer never so much, God
forbid we should think the evil of our reproach so great, as to be glad to have
it wiped away with any sin against God: Such and such have sinned such and such
sins, and by those sins my reproach is wiped away, and therefore I am glad: God
forbid we should have the wiping away of our reproaches at so dear a rate. We
read in Hosea 4. of the great charge that was laid upon the Priests, they eat
up the sin of the people, because the Priests had some advantage by the sins
that the people committed, for they brought Sacrifices for their sin, and the
Priests had part, upon this they set their hearts, upon the sin of the people;
this is an abominable thing, to be glad of the sin of another, because of any
advantage that comes to us by it. True it is, God shall have a great deal of
glory by clearing the innocence of his servants, but we must not desire that
God may have his glory this way by the commission of any sin, nor rejoice in
such a way of Gods glory.

But the special and most ordinary revenge in the bearing of reproaches, is
reviling again, speaking evil The danger of reviling again.
for evil, if they call you one ill name, you will call them another, this is
unbeseeming Christians: And consider what evil is in it.

First, this is that which is most opposite to the Spirit I.
of Jesus Christ, and the Spirit of Gods people; that place you know, 1 Pet. 2.
23. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; if you profess your selves to
be Christ's, you must not revile again when you are reviled: And so the spirits
of Gods servants, as St. Paul and the Martyrs, when they were reviled, they
would not give ill language again.

Again, by reviling you come to harden those that reproach you in their sin;
when they sin and see the 2.
same sin in you, they think they do not worse then you, so they come to be
hardened in their sin, and you come to be guilty of their sin, you turn their
sin to be yours, because you harden them in theirs.

Thirdly, you by this means stir up more corruption, and more sin; whereas
those that know what sin 3.
means, and are tender of it, they should by all means labor to suppress it,
and beat it down, as when a neighbors house is on fire, we will labor what we
can to quench it, and not to put more fire to it; shall we have more care of
our neighbors house, then of our neighbors soul? his heart is on fire, and his
tongue is on fire, and will you bring more fire? this is abominable.

Fourthly, you come by this means to add your sin to his sin: What, is not God
dishonored enough 4.
by his reviling, but must you add to Gods dishonor?

Again fithly, here you show your exceeding folly, 5.
that you do not apprehend a greater evil in the evil of sin, then in the evil
of suffering: for if we did apprehend the evil of suffering to be less then the
evil of sin, we would never labor to deliver our selves from the evil of
suffering by the evil of sin; let a man come and cast dirt in your face, the
worst that can be in this is an evil of suffering at first, till you make your
selves guilty, but how will you deliver your selves by the evil of sin? what
ignorance is this? Are you acquainted with the ways of God? Is this the way to
clear your selves, by defiling your selves more? That filth that comes out of
you, defiles you more then that which is cast upon you from without.

Again further, another evil that comes from this 6.
reviling, is this, you show a vile, base spirit, as if you had no other means
to deliver you from an ill name, but an ill tongue; those that know any
excellency that they have in themselves, will know that there are a great many
other ways to deliver themselves from an ill name, rather then an evil tongue.
But you are put to your shifts, you have evil cast upon Neque prudentiae
quicquam in se esse, nec fiduciae obstendit, qui contumclia afficitur. Sen. in
Sap. non cad. injur.
you, and you have no way to deliver your selves from this evil but by your
reviling tongue. It is a sign there is no excellency in you, nothing but
baseness in you. Seneca says of those that are disorderly affected with
reproaches that are cast upon them, They show that there is no wisdom, nor no
confidence of any excellency in themselves to oppose that evil.

Again, hereby you come to be injurious to your selves, you deprive your selves
from any help of 7.
God to clear your names: If you had hearts to commit your selves to God, he
would provide for you; but when you seek to clear your selves this way, you put
your selves from any care that God should have to provide for you. That we read
of David, Psalm. 38. 12, 13, 14, 15. is very observable, They which seek my
hurt, says he, speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day long,
but I as a deaf man heard not; and again, verse 14. I was as a man that hears
not; but mark verse 15. In thee O Lord do I hope, thou will hear: The less he
heard, the more confidence he had in God that he would hear, and could the more
comfortably commit his cause to him; but if he had been too quick to hear
himself, God would not readily have heard for him, and what had he got by that?
Now by all this you cannot but be convinced in your thoughts, that it is a
great evil to revile again, and you that have been guilty of this, let your
hearts smite you, and know what cause you have to be humbled before the Lord.

But is it possible not to revile again? Who can but Quest.
do so when they come and give such ill language, so injurious, so false?

Those that have the Spirit of Christ can do otherwise. Answ.
Those that know the evil of sin to be a greater evil then the evil of
suffering, can do this. And those that are wise, and will not mischief
themselves, can do this. Can any by reproaches force you to take a knife and
cut your selves! If they force you to commit sin, they force you to worse.
Certainly you think every man is in bondage; consider what miserable bondage
men should be in, for to be in the power of their enemies, when they list to
make them to mischief themselves, can there be any worse bondage? for an enemy
to draw any body where he will, is not so much, but to make me to hurt my self,
this is a Nolim te^u^ in hoc genus certamiais descendere, in quo qi vincitur,
ipso victore est melier.
great and a sore bondage indeed. Wherefore there is no contending with
reproaches this way by reproaching again, here the overcomer is the loser. When
Demosthenes was reproached by one, I will not, says he, strive with thee in
this kind of fight, in which he that is overcome is the better man.

Fifthly, take heed you be not hindered in your way, or 5.
break off your course when you are reproached: what though there be filth cast
in the way, shall we decline our way? though the clouds do arise, and darken
the light of the Sun, does the Sun cease in its course, and cease shining
because it is darkened? no, it goes on its course and shines till it breaks
forth: so you are going on, shining in a good conversation, some (...). Epict.
Enchirid. c. 27.
come and cast reproach upon your way, and darkens your course; What, shall you
cease? No, go on, and in time you will break through the clouds. Was there ever
such a fool as to be jeered out of his inheritance? A man has an inheritance
worth a thousand pounds a year, and a company shall go and scorn him, and
contemn him, and reproach him, and he shall be rather willing to part with his
inheritance then to be thus jeered; Was there ever any such a fool? Is not our
way of Religion a greater inheritance to us, then an inheritance of a thousand
pounds a year? If you should be moved to go out of your way upon reproaches,
know that this will be infinite more reproach to you, then if all the men of
the world did cast reproach upon you; this will reproach you to your
conscience, and that before God and all the Angels and Saints, before all Gods
people. And then besides, this will further reproach you before wicked men too,
you will be the more scorned and vilified.

I remember a speech of a Heathen Philosopher, If any man begin to embrace
Philosophy, he must be reproached; They will say, What, we shall have a
Philosopher of you by and by, what pride and conceitedness is this? But do you
still go on in your way, and those who reproached you before, will after admire
you: But if you fall off, after you have begun (not being able to bear
reproach) This, says he, deserves a double reproach: Your reproachers will
reproach you much more, they will say, Here is a time-server, who will do any
thing as the times serve for his turn. None so much contemned as Apostates.
Those that opposed Nehemiah, and sought to hinder his work, did it to reproach
him, if he had left his work for reproaching, they would have reproached him
much more: How would this cut you to the heart, that those that did reproach
you, if you go out of the way, should reproach you much more? Consider, does
this beseem the spirit of a Christian? Had you ever any experimental knowledge
of the evil of sin, or any good in the ways of God? Will this be an answer
before God, when you come to give an account why you went out of your way?
Lord, I suffered so much reproach, I could not bear it. And again, will it not
be just with God, for to suffer you to fall into some vile scandalous sin to be
reproached for, after another manner? because that you would not suffer reproach
for his name, you should suffer reproach for your sin. These are the things we
are to be warned of.

CHAP. XXXI. How we are to bear Reproaches.
BUt how are we to bear reproaches? We are to bear our reproaches wisely,
patiently, fruitfully, joyfully, and to return good for evil.

First, we are to bear them wisely: there is a great deal of wisdom required in
bearing of reproaches and evils 1.
that men are accused of, the exercise of wisdom does appear much in the
bearing of reproaches, though we should not be insensible, yet not to take too
much notice of every reproach that is castp on us. It was the speech of a
Philosopher, when one was reproaching Derident te; At ego non dtridcor.
of him, some told him they deride thee; but says he, I am not derided, I will
not take to my self that which is cast upon me: It is wisdom for people to go
away, and take but little notice of any thing Sapiens a nullo connemnituditem
suamnovit. Sen. in Sap. non cad. injur.
that is cast upon them, and therefore when upon every idle reproach, there
come a company tatling, and say, Such a one says thus and thus; such should be
sent away with an angry countenance, it is a dishonor to you to receive them,
as if you would take notice of every word, and as if you had no other things to
take up your thoughts. Dionysius having not very well used Plato at the Court,
when he was gone, he feared lest he should write against him, therefore he sent
after him, to bid him not to write against him, says he, Tell Dionysius, I have
not so much leisure as to think of him: so we should let those that reproach us
to know, that we have not leisure to think of them; as S. Paul, when the Viper
came upon his hand, he shaked it off, some would have swelled, and almost dyed
at the very sight of such a thing but he did but shake it off: And so should we
do by our reproaches; when reproaches are opposed they The evil of much
stirring when Reproaches are upon us.
do grow, as hair the more it is cut the more it grows, when they are despised
they will vanish away; there is a great deal of evil comes by making much ado
about reproaches.

First, by this means they are kept up in the mouths 1.
of people, and so the evil is worse, as a dunghill stirred stinks the worse.

Again, it may occasion those that reproach us, to 2.
raise up things that were dead a great while ago, and add that to our
reproach.

Again, it may occasion abundance of new matter, 3.
though false, to make our reproaches greater. If a Est enim Satanae pectus
faecundissimu^ mendaciis. Luth.
man should undertake to answer every reproachful speech, there would be no
end; for the Devils breast, says Luther, is very fruitful with lies:

Again, our making much stir, does but stir them the more that do reproach us,
and by making ado 4.
and stir, it comes to be more divulged.

Lastly, when we do stir, if we do not clear every 5.
little minute to the utmost, it will be a means to make us suspected of all,
and therefore do not take much notice of reproaches. It is a notable example
that we find of one Pericles as he was sitting before others in a meeting, a
foul-mouthed fellow railed upon him Plutarch in vita Peric.
all the day long; at night when it was dark, and the meeting broke up, the
fellow followed him and railed at him even to his door, and he took no notice
of him what he said, but when he came at home, this is all he said, It is dark,
I pray let my man light you home.

But men will take me for guilty if I let it pass quietly. Object.


Not so, we know many times Christ himself Answ.
took no notice of a great deal of evil that was Convitia si trascare, agnita
videntur; spreta exlescu^t Tacitus lib 4. Qui cito injuria movetur fecit se
dig^u^ videri contumelia su^ vult ca indignus probari: melior est itaque qui
conte^nit injuriam qua^ qui dolet. Ambros. de offic. l 1. c. 6. Psalm. 51. 4.
Nec prudentiae quicqua^ in se esse nec fiduciae ostendit, qui contumelia
afficitur. Sen. in Sap non cad. injur.
said against him, so that the Rulers wondered, How is it that they lay these
things to your charge, and you answer nothing? Again, rather the other will
show us guilty; it was a speech of Ambrose concerning those that cannot suffer
reproach, while they clear themselves guilty, they approve themselves to be
more guilty of that evil which is said against them.

Obj. But we shall hearten them more in accusing of us.

Answ. No, it will rather be a means to hearten them by keeping a stir, for
then they have something to feed upon.

Obj. How shall we stop their mouths?

Ans. First, walk innocently, innocence will clear all, and overcome in time;
hence David says, that thou may be clear when thou judge. St. Paul
quoting this, Romans 3. 4. he has it, That thou may overcome when thou
judge; he puts overcome for clear, because those who are clear will overcome.
But more then this in the second place, you must labor to be eminent in that
which is quite contrary to that which you are reproached for: Perhaps he
reproaches you for one that is a dissembler, labor for the greatest eminency of
plainness of heart and sincerity: If it be for covetousness, labor to be
eminent in liberality, and doing good wisely, not where they would have you,
but in a gracious way, ordering your affairs by discretion: If it be for pride,
clear your selves not by yielding to their humor, but labor for an eminency of
humility another way, that those that can judge right may see there is humility
in you: thus labor to entertain reproaches with wisdom.

Secondly, labor to bear reproaches patiently. And therein first I shall labor
to take away those pleas whereby men are hindered in their patience. Secondly, I
will show what powerful arguments there are for bearing reproaches. Thirdly,
give some means how to bear them patiently.

First, to take away the pleas and objections that 1.
people have against patience. Some will say, if it Obj. 1.
were not wrongfully, I could bear it, it would never grieve me.

One would wonder that ever there should come Answ.
such a foolish speech out of the mouth of a reasonable creature; if there be
any thing that should uphold your hearts, it should be your innocence,
therefore let not such a speech be heard out of a man or woman's mouth, much
less out of a Christians mouth; if your guilt would increase the burden of the
reproach, as most certainly it would, then it would be harder to bear it being
guilty, then now it is being innocent.

But this is that which sinks my heart, it is a reproach Obj. 2.
that takes away my Name, even from those that are godly, and they come by
these reproaches to have hard thoughts of me; and this is the greatest
affliction, for an outward affliction, under Heaven.

It is true, Zedekiah feared more to be mocked of Answ.
the Jews then of the Chaldeans; it is certainly a sorer Ier. 38. 15
affliction to be reproached by the professors of Religion, then by any others;
but yet God is pleased to exercise his people many times with this affliction
also; and it may be God sees this to be the most seasonable and suitable to
exercise you withal, because he would wholly take off your hearts from other
things, and satisfy your souls with himself alone; and blessed is that man
that can make this use of it, to get his heart the more close and fully to God.
It is the blessing of God upon you, that your heart is above the reproaches of
other men; if God will exercise you with an affliction that you are sensible
of, it is fit you should yield your self unto him in it: Would you have God
exercise you in such afflictions as are only easy to be born, of which you
should not be sensible? it is the bitterness of them that causes them to work,
if they were not bitter, as to make you sensible, it is not like they would be
profitable.

Thirdly, some cannot tell how to bear their reproaches, because it is not
only a disgrace to their Obj. 3.
name, but it hinders their service in Gods Church, by this means they come to
have ill esteem, and are not like to do so much good in the Church of God,
which I confess is a great matter.

Let no man lay so much upon his service he shall do, but let God have his work
his own way, and God Answ.
expects this humility from us, that he may have his work done his own way, and
if God pleases he may make use of us to do so much work for him, as if our
names were never so clear: The Prophets were scorned and reproached, and did
they never do service? and St. Paul, never any man in the world that ever did
God more service, and yet no man that ever was so much reproached as he; he was
whipped up and down as if he had been a rogue, and he was fain to go about in
tatters, not having wherewithal to cover his nakedness, and had not bread to
put in his body, and was called a seditious fellow, and counted the filth of
all things; and yet this St. Paul was used as the most worthy instrument of
Gods service that ever was since the world began, next Christ himself.

Secondly, the arguments that may move us to bear Why reproaches should be born
patiently.
reproaches patiently.

First, a Christian is called to do and suffer great things for God, and strong
and glorious is the grace of God that is in a man where it is true; now if
Christianity 1.
shall not enable to bear reproaches, what will it enable you to do? Does not
the Scripture speak of the excellency, and the glory, and the power of the
grace of God? What excellency, and power, and glory is in it, if it cannot do
this? Now Christians that are called to do and suffer such great things, should
be above the reproaches of the world. Seneca would not have them called
miseries, but Sapiens a nullo concemnitur, magnitudinem suam novit, omnes bas
quas non miscrias sed molestias dixerim non vincet, sed ne sentit quidem. Sen
in sap. non cad. injur. c. 10.
trouble some things, concerning which we cannot say a wise man overcomes them,
but he is so far above them, as he is scarce sensible of them; if it be not out
of stupidity or discontentedness, but out of true magnanimity of spirit, that
one is not sensible of such things, this beseems a Christian well. Now if a
Christian having received the grace of God, should not think much of any misery
that he is capable of in this world, then surely he should not have his heart
sink when there is but a troublesome thing befaln him. It was the speech of
Xenophon, when one came and reproached him, says he, You have learned how to
reproach, and I have learned how to bear reproach. And Aristippus the
Philosopher said, You are fit to cast Tu proferendis ego audiendis co^tumellis
idoneus
reproaches, and I am fit to hear reproaches.

Secondly, what are you? or what is your names that you should think much to
bear reproach? when as others that are your betters, that are not 2.
so vile, not so guilty as you, not so liable to reproach as you; when as
others of Gods servants, that have been most eminent in grace and parts, have
been under exceeding reproach; yea, others whose names have been far more worth
then yours, there have been more use of their names, and credits, and honors,
then of yours, and yet God has so ordered it in his providence, that
reproaches and aspersions have been cast upon them, and do you think so much to
be reproached? What do we think of our flesh better then others, that we should
not endure trouble in it? and what do we think of our names, that we cannot
endure reproaches in them.

Yea, not only others that are better then you, but God and Christ is
reproached: How is the 3.
name of God slighted? the basest wretch that will tremble before his Master,
thinks himself good enough to blaspheme the name of God: How is the majesty,
sovereignty, and authority of God contemned in the world? How are the dreadful
threatenings of God, and the revelation of Gods wrath scorned in the world? When
as we hear out of the word such dreadful manifestations of Gods wrath against
sin, which calls for trembling hearts, yet how are they slighted in the world?
thus God is reproached, and Christ: No man is able to bear so much contempt as
Christ bears daily, says Luther: Not to speak of the reproaches that Christ
endures in his Nullus homo potest far tantu^ contemptum sui, quantu^ Deus
fert quotidite. Luth. in Ps. 122.
people, but the reproaches that he endured in his person, in his preaching;
how was he contemned in Luke 16. 14. when he preached against covetousness, the
Pharisees scorned at him; the word signifies, They blew their noses at him: you
know how he was called a Devil, a Samaritan, a wine-bibber, a friend of
publicans and sinners; What worse can be imagined then was cast upon Christ?
they spit on his face, that In faciem illam quam fluctus maris reveriti sunt,
quam sol in cruce vivendo radios occuluit. Chrysostom. Hom. 86. ex cap. 26. in
Mat.
blessed face of his, that the waves of the Sea were afraid of, and that the
Sun withdrew its light from, as not being fit to behold it, and yet they put
thorns upon his head, and bowed to him in reproach; yea, in his misery how was
he reproached, when he was upon the Cross, they nodded their heads at him, and
said, He that could save others, let him come down and save himself.

Again, consider the great mercy of God in concealing the secret sins of your
thoughts: there are none, let them be never so innocent in the world, yet there
is so much filth and baseness within the heart, that if God should but turn the
inside outward, and discover all to the world, certainly it would make them
ashamed of the society of men, make them ashamed to come into the Congregation;
what confusion, and what matter of reproach would there be then? Now, seeing
God in his goodness favors his people so far, as he keeps in much secret evil
that he could discover before the world: if he should withdraw himself a little
from you, he could let you fall into such sins, as your secret sins should be
discovered; but God favors your names, so as that he has kept in that secret
evil that you have had secret inclinations unto; now the consideration of Gods
goodness in tendering you so far, may very well quiet your hearts when you begin
to be troubled for every reproach that is cast upon you: Now I see my
adversaries are fain to watch and search, and pry for occasion of reproach, God
might have given them matter enough, and therefore its mercy they have such
little matter as they have. It is a great work of nature to keep the filth of
the body when it is in a man from being unsavory unto others; so the filth of
the soul, though it be unsavory to God, yet it is Gods mercy that keeps it from
that unsavoriness that it might be to men.

Fifthly, consider how much reproach the name of 5.
God has endured for your sakes; and is it so great a Perditione nostra multo
pejus est quod dominus noster propter nos vitamque nostram blasphematur. Chris
Hom. 6 and variis in Mat. locis
matter for your names to be reproached for his sake? It is a notable speech
Chrysostom has, That for us and for our life our Lord should be blasphemed, is
worse then if we perished; Has not the name of God been reproached for your
sakes? not only in the time of your ignorance, but since; have there not been
occasion given by you, to cause others to reproach the name of the blessed God?
and if God comes to you in your names, do you take it so ill?

Again, consider who those are that do reproach 6.
you, and for what it is. It is the speech of an Ancient, Ille quidem homine
pejor, hic Angelis par. Chrysostom. in Act. Hom. 14.
That a reproacher is beneath a man, but the reproached that bear it well, are
equal to the Angels. The Hebrew word that signifies scorners, has many other
significations which set out the vileness, the dangerous evil there is in a
scornful spirit; the Seventy, besides that of scorning, have five other words
to (...)
show the signification of it, as first, (...), in the first Psalm, in the
chair of scorners, they translate it by a word that signifies the plague, in
the chair of plagues, because scorners are a plague to the place where they
live, and do infect many; a second word that they use to express it by, is
(...), Prove. 20. 1. which signifies incorrigible, that which cannot be tamed,
because scorners are such; Wine is a scorner, res indomita, an unruly thing
that cannot be tamed, because it makes men to be so, and so are scorners, there
is little hope of such: Thirdly, sometimes they translate it (...), Prove. 9.
12. as such as are given up to all kind of vice, and so are scorners: And
fourthly, by a word that signifies proud, (...), Prove. 3. 34. for such likewise
are scorners: Fifthly, by a word that signifies to deal unjustly, (...), Psalm.
119. 51. because scorners are injurious. Thus you see what kind of men those
who scorn and reproach the ways and professors of Religion are.

But besides, they are especially such as have been brought up superstitiously
or profanely; such as have been bred in superstitious Popish families, are
many times bitter scorners and reproachers of those who are most forward in the
ways of godliness. We read 2 Kings 2. 23. when Elisha went to Bethel, there
came forth little children out of the city and mocked him, and said unto him,
Go up thou bald head, go up thou bald head; that is observable, they came out
of Bethel, which was that idolatrous city in Israel, where the Calf of Jeroboam
was set up, that place was full of scorners at the Prophets of the Lord; you
may know the temper of the place, by the disposition of the little children,
they usually heard their parents and those who were elder scorn at the Prophets
of the Lord, they were brought up in that way, and because it was at Bethel,
the curse of God was the rather upon their children to destroy them, although
they were but children, yet two and forty of them were presently destroyed.
Hosea 7. 5. we read of those who were elder, the great ones in that City, even
Jeroboam himself, and his Courtiers, what scorners they were, In the day of our
King, the Princes have made him sick with bottles of wine, he stretched out his
hand with the scorners. The Princes, Nobles, Officers, great ones of the
Country, jeered and scorned at those, who would not yield to that way of
worship that Jeroboam had set up, namely of the Calves; O they must be so
precise, as no worship will serve their turn, but going up to Jerusalem to
worship there; such as ventured the loss of their estates, their offices, their
liberties, they accounted them fools, and reproached them as a company of
simple silly people.

And as superstition is a cause of this, so profaneness and sensuallity
causes it likewise; that is observable in the forenamed place of Hosea, when
he was made sick with wine, then he streched out his hand with scorners; when
wicked men pamper themselves with good cheer, and their hearts are hot with
wine, then they scorn at Religion, and reproach such as are more strict and
forward then others, blessing themselves in the brave life they live,
contemning the ways of godliness, and the professors of them, as such who want
those brave delights they enjoy, and in regard of that they scorn at, and
reproach the ways of God and his people at those times. Psalm 35. 16. with
hypocritical mockers, in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth; the
most cruel scornful reproaches against the Saints are at feasts. That place is
observable, Deuteronomy. 32. 33, 34. Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the
cruel venom of asps, because of the bitterness of their spirits, against those
who are godly, when they are at their cups: but mark what follows, Is not this
laid up in store, and sealed up among my treasures? to me belongs vengeance,
and recompense, their foot shall slide in due time. God will remember this, it
is laid up in store with him, it is surely sealed up, and shall certainly be
brought forth one day.

And yet further, Who are your reproachers? They are those that are weak, or
ignorant, or such as are malicious. Weak and ignorant, for any one that has
wisdom, to be troubled at the reproaches of those that are weak, it is a
wonderful disgrace: Will any man care that is a workman, to have an unskilful
man reproach his work? It is a notable speech of Seneca, Some are possessed with
such great folly and madness, to think they may be reproached by a woman. A
malis vituperari laudari est. Sen.
And for the malicious, alas! they reproach themselves a great deal more then
they reproach you, they do but discover their own filth in it, and therefore
are compared to swine; swine will leave other things, and continually be
rooting in dung; and so those that love to be reproaching, leave the good that
is in any, and will always be rooting in their filth, here they show their
swinish dispositions. One compares a reproacher to the stone that struck down
Nebuchadnezzars Image, whose head was of gold, and the breast and upper parts
of silver, and the feet of clay, the stone came and struck the feet, the clay,
and so struck it down: so reproachers do not look at the gold and silver, the
parts and graces of Gods people, but if there be any clay, any infirmities or
sins, they strike at them, and so fell them down. The godly had need fence
their feet of clay and infirmities, that they do not lie open to malicious men.
Erasmus tells of one who collected all the lame and defective verses in Homers
Works, but passed over all that were excellent: So these, if they can spy any
thing defective and evil, they observe it, and gather all they can together,
but will take no notice of that which is good and praiseworthy; like the Kite
who flies over the fair meadows and flowers, and lights only upon the carrion,
or like flies that love only to be upon the sore galled places of the horses
back.

And what is it you are reproached for? it is either good or evil; if it be
good, you have no cause to be troubled, if it be evil, it is threefold, the
evil of sin, or natural infirmities, or outward meanness. If it be the evil of
sin, then either you are guilty or not guilty; if you be guilty, it is not
reproach, but right judgment of thy condition, and if there be such a great
evil for others to speak of it, what a great evil is it for thee to be guilty
of it? and therefore you should turn all the trouble that you have for the
notice which is taken of it, upon your guiltiness in it: and many times
although the thing be true they say of you, yet it is so poor and mean a thing,
that you may comfort your self in this, that surely they cannot perceive worse
in you, for if they could, they would make use of that. Latimer in his last
Sermon before K. Edward, says, He was glad when any objected indiscretion
against him in his Sermons, for says he, by that I knew the matter was good,
else they would soon have condemned that. And if you be not guilty, innocence
is bulwark enough. Says Seneca, He is to be ashamed that does unjustly, and
shall you be ashamed that are innocent?

Yes, others think I am guilty. Obj.


But if you go on in an innocent way, whosoever Answ.
do think so, do disgrace themselves: for suppose one Die queso, si quis sole^
tenebrarum autorem existimet, soline an sibi detraxit? sibi, viz. ipsi, cum
furiosi et insanie^tis opinione^ co^sequatur eodem profecto modo qui bonos
pravos esse putant seipsos vituperant Chrysostom. Hom. Mat. cap. 27.
should say the Sun were dark, and another should believe it, who is disgraced?
the Sun, or the man that either said it or believed it? so if an aspersion be
cast upon those that are godly, and they walk in a shining conversation before
others, it will be such a reproach to any that raises the reproach, as it will
keep others from believing of it. But if the evil be some natural infirmity,
weakness of parts, or the like, then thou may comfort thy self in this, that
there is no dishonor in natural infirmity, it is only sin that brings shame,
there is a relation between sin and shame, but between nothing else and shame;
it is a sign also they want other things, when they reproach thee for natural
infirmities.

Seventhly, consider what honor God has put upon you, and what he intends to
put upon you: if you be godly, he has put honor enough upon you, and that may
be enough to uphold the heart under all the 7.
reproaches and stains that men and Devils can cast upon you. Has not the Lord
been pleased to bring you into the honorable estate of sonship? and has put
his glory upon your souls, and has honored you by that near relation you have
to Christ? he has honored you by the glorious privileges of the Gospel, he
has honored you by giving himself and Christ to you; he has honored you in
the hearts of his Saints, men of precious spirits, who know much of Gods mind,
who are able to judge wherein true excellency consists, their hearts are with
you, they bless God for you, the esteem of one godly man is more to be regarded
then thousands of others, your name is precious amongst the Saints, and that is
enough. When Doeg reproached Satis magnum alter alteri theatrum.
David with devouring words in Saul's Court, yet David blessed himself in this,
Psalm 52. 8. But I am a green Olive Tree in the house of God; Doeg flourishes
in the Court, and my name may be blasted there, but In the house of God, there
my name is precious; I am there as a green olive tree, and that is more to me
then flourishing in Saul's Court. Now shall the reproach of an evil tongue take
away the comfort of a godly heart that has so great honors? We count it a
great evil, and exceeding was the baseness of the spirit of Haman, when he was
so honored by the King and his Nobles, yet that he should be vexed, because
Mordecai would not bow to him, that all his honor should do him no good: so is
it not the baseness of the spirits of Gods Servants, (truly it is to be called
by no other name) when as God has raised them to such glory, when as God has
made them Members of, and Coheirs with his Son, and they are invited to the
Banquet of the Lord, to the great Supper of the Lamb, and the Lord has
provided for them all the glory of Heaven, and there are such glorious things
spoken of them in the word, yet for all this if they come into wicked company,
and have but an evil tongue speak against them, they are so discouraged and
cast down, as if all the honor that God had put upon them were nothing: What an
evil thing is this? And how do you derogate from the goodness of God, to walk
thus unbeseeming Christians?

If you had never so much filth upon you for the present, being there is so
much honor to come, what need you to care? If a man be going to be crowned, and
to be glorified, and those that do not know him, as he goes contemn him, what
cares he? He knows that within a few days he shall be honored by those that do
reproach him. As David said to Michal, 2 Samuel 6. 22. when she told him of
being vile in the eyes of the handmaids, Of the maidservants which thou have
spoken of, of them shall I be had in honor: so even of those men of the world,
which now you say do so reproach you, even of them hereafter shall you be had
in honor: If we believe there are such things to come, that we shall sit with
Christ, and judge the Angels, and judge the reproachers, why should we be
troubled?

There is a famous passage I have met with in Chrysostom, to this purpose; he
brings in Christ comforting his Disciples against reproaches, speaking thus
unto them: An gra vis injuria est quia seductores ci Magos vos voca^t? certe
non multo post salvatores vos benefuctoresque totius orbis praedicabunt. Tepus
enim quod obum brata o^nia declarat illorum adversus vos eme^tittita verba
redarguet, virtutis vestre sple^ dorem accendet; sic illi menda ces, maleduci
falsique aliorum accusatores videbuntur vos autem vel sole ipso clariores atque
illustriores testcsque claritatis vestrae universos habebit is homines.
What, is the wrong grievous unto you, that now they call you seducers and
conjurers? it will not be long before they shall openly call you the Saviors
and blessings of the whole world; that time that shall declare all things that
are now hid, shall rebuke them for their lying words against you, and shall
kindle the splendour of your virtue; so they shall be found liars, evil
speakers, false accusers of others, but you shall be more clear and illustrious
then the Sun, and you shall have all men witnesses of your glory.

8. Again, consider what abundance of reproach and contempt justly many do
suffer for their sins and wickedness that indeed they are guilty of, sin
carries many men through infinite shameful things: as take one that is given to
a base lust, and so as he may enjoy his lust, he cares not what shame he
endures, though he be counted the shame of their friends, and the scum of the
place where he lives. Who are so basely looked upon as base drunkards? they are
looked upon as more vile then the filth and dung of the earth, and yet they go
on and bless themselves in the pleasure they have in their lusts,
notwithstanding the reproach. If one should be content to go on in his lusts,
and please himself therein, notwithstanding all the reproach he endures, what
cause have we to go on in the ways of God, and keep close to him, though all
the world reproach us?

9. Again, consider the goodness of God in delivering of you from everlasting
reproach. In Dan. 12. 2. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. We
might have been amongst the company of those that shall have all their
wickedness opened at the last day of Judgment before God himself, and might
have had the Lord himself mocking at us.

10. And yet futther, consider that the greatest evil of reproach it is from
him that receives it, it is according as we take it. It is a speech of
Chrysostom; As it is with meat, so it is with reproaches, it is not the
goodness and sweetness of the meat in its self that makes it to be good and
sweet to me, but according as my stomach and body is affected: And so in all
reproaches, it is not as it comes from him that casts it, that makes it evil,
but it is as he that receives it makes it: cast dirt upon dirt, and it will
stick, cast dirt upon Voluptas non in ciborum apparatu, sed in comedentium
affectu fita est, hoc de contumelia dico, quod contumelia non e con
tumeliantium sententia, sed a petitentium affectu constituitur vel destruitur;
si contum^liam deri seris, co^tumelia non passus es. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. ad Pop.
Antioch.
on a piece of polished brass or iron, and it will fall off; the greatest part
of the evil of reproaches, comes from the affection of the receiver; then it is
in our power to make reproaches to be as nothing, if we can but take pains to
get our hearts so affected, as that the reproach may not stick: It is not in
the power of any man in the world to stain us, if we by some evil do not make
the stain to stick upon our selves.

Again, if you consider that God has the care of your names, that may be a
great argument to help you to bear reproach: God has taken the charge of the
names of his people, as truly as of their souls, and if God has the charge of
your names, why are you troubled at any thing that befalls you in regard Pars
major constat vitio interpretantis. Senec.
of your name? If you be in Gods way, you are to commit your selves to God, he
has charge of you; when Gods Servants are meek and quiet, and do not hear
reproaches against themselves, yet God 11.
hears them, it is no great matter then though they hear them not themselves.
It is an excellent place we have for this, Psalm 38. 12, 13, 15. They speak
mischievous things, says David, but I as a deaf man heard not; but mark verse
15. In thee O Lord do I hope, thou will hear, O Lord my God; What need David
hear, God will hear: the less we hear in this case, the more will God hear, Job
5. 21. Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue: Now there is a twofold
hiding from the scourge of the tongue, either by delivering us wholly from it,
or otherwise delivering us from the evil of it: As a man may be said to be hid
and delivered from a thing that can do him no hurt, and so in this sense at
least thou shall be delivered from the scourge of the tongue; it may be that
God will wholly free us from the scourge of the tongue, or it may be it is fit
thou should be scourged, yet thou art hid from it so as it shall do thee no
hurt, no not to thy name in the conclusion. And so in Psalm. 37. 5, 6. Commit
thy way to the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass, and he
shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noon
day. This was the argument O altitudo prudentiae! O altitudo patientiae! o
devorandae contumeliae grande inventum! Ambr. Apol. de David. c. 6.
that upheld David when Shimei cursed him; Well, says he, it may be God bid him;
my name is in his hand, and he may do with my name what he please. Upon this
Ambrose has this speech, O the height of the wisdom, prudence, patience of
David! what a worthy plot had he to deliver himself from the evil of reproach.

Again, it is a greater mercy that God keeps you from the evil of the hands of
wicked men, if God beat out the teeth of wicked men, that they only can 12.
bark and not bite, that their tongues and not their hands can only reach you.
The complaint of Job might have been thine, chapter 16. 11. God has delivered me
to the ungodly, and turned me over into the hands of the wicked; this would
have been grievous indeed. Although they send a flood of reproaches after you,
as Rev. 12. 15. the Dragon cast out of his mouth a flood after the Church, yet
thou art far from their reach as she was, therefore be patient under
reproaches. It is Non vacat haec notare cui pejora instant; nimio otto ingenia
infirma and muliebria and inopia verae injuriae lascivientia bis commoventur.
Sen.
through the wantonness of our hearts that we are so sensible of the evil of
reproaches, because we are not accustomed to suffer greater evils; those who
are in danger of greater evils, have no leisure to think on these things, says
Seneca, but minds weakened with too much idleness, and wanton and effeminate
through want of sufferings.

Yet further, consider what a great deal of good there is in bearing reproaches
patiently.

First, there is a great deal of honor in it: There is 13.
more honor in bearing reproaches patiently, then 1.
there is disgrace in having them cast wrongfully The benenefit of bearing
repoaches patiently.
upon you; now what do you lose then? Suppose there be hot water, and I put so
much cold to it, it loses its warmth, but if I put more warm then cold to it,
then the water has lost nothing of its warmness: So suppose you be reproached,
and God brings more honor then the reproach did scandal, then you have lost
nothing; Every fool can cast reproach, but it is the part of a wise man to bear
it well.

Again, if we can bear reproaches patiently, what 2.
a quiet will it be to our hearts? otherwise we should never be quiet, for we
live amongst those that will cast reproaches, and unless we can get power this
way, we shall never have comfortable lives, and we should think it much, that
the comfort and quiet of our lives should lie at the mercy of others.

Thirdly, the bearing of reproaches patiently is a mighty help to the progress
of godliness in us: As 3.
those that have overcome the evil of shame in a way of sin, grow mightily
hardened in their sins; so those that have got that strength, to go on in the
ways of God, so as not much to regard any reproach that is Haud vclim Erasmi
gloria aut nomine vehi; major est mihi timor in laudibus, gaudium vero in
maledictis and blasphemiis Luth. ep. ad Nicolaum Hansmannum.
cast upon them in that way, they will mightily grow in those ways.

Lastly, consider there is much danger in being honored by men, and in many
regards, the honors of men are as much, if not more to be feared then their
contempts and dishonors. Luther writing to a friend of his, says, He would not
have the glory and fame of Erasmus; my greatest fear is the praises of men, but
my joy is in their reproaches and evil speeches.

CHAP. XXXIII. What we should do, that we may be able to bear reproach.
BUt you will say, these arguments may move us to do it, and convince us we
should do it, but how shall we do it? 1.


First, be sure to keep conscience clear, that that Been sibi co^scius falsis
non debet moveri necastimare plus po^deris in alieno esse convitto, qua^ in suo
testimonio. Ambr. off. l. 1. c. 5. Qui sibi nihil conscius est, plurimum
laetabitur, ita ut quo amjorem dixeris tribulationem, hoc majorem dicas
voluptatem. Chrysostom Hom: in Acta 14.
do not upbraid thee, be careful of what you do, and then you need not be much
careful of what men say; if conscience do not reproach you, reproach without
will not much move you; consciences testimony for thee, is more then ten
thousand slanders against thee: As the storms and winds without do not move the
earth, but vapors within that causes earthquakes: As Ambrose says of David, he
was not much troubled with Shimei's railing, because his Non ergo movebatur
convitiis qui abundabat bonorum operu^ o^ scientia. Ambr de off l. 1. c 6
Conscia men's recti famae men dacia ridet
conscience did abound with good works. If thou can say with Job, Chap. 27.
6. My heart shall not reproach me as long as I live, thou art safe enough from
the evil of reproach.

Secondly, if you be failing in any thing, begin with your selves before any
begin with you, accuse your selves before God first, so some interpret that
place in Psalm. 119. I am wiser then my enemies; though my enemies are witty,
and do plot, and their malice 2.
do help them with invention, yet I am wiser, I can find out the ways of my
own heart, and my own evils, better then all my enemies.

Thirdly, Christians should exercise themselves in great things, in the things
of God, and Christ, and Si magnanimus fueris nunqu a^ judicabis tibi
contumclia^ fieri. Sen, de. 4. virt.
eternity, and labor to greaten their spirits in a holy manner, and be above
reproach. It was a speech of Seneca, Men that know their greatness, are not
troubled with reproaches, he will think himself above reproach; And therefore,
if our spirits be truly greatned (not with pride, but with the exercising of
our spirits in things that are above the world) reproaches would be nothing in
our eyes. It is a notable Si quem verbis lcvibus nugisque delectari, ac agree
far se contemni, scito hunc non esse perfectum etiamsi miracula faciat.
expression that St. John has against the evil tongue of Diotrephes, Ep. 3.
ver. 10. He prates against us with malicious words, in the Original it is, he
trifles, although his words were malicious, and Diotrephes a great man, yet all
was but trifles, so high was St. John's spirit above them. Aquinas gives two
figns of a weak spirited man; one, that he delights in light and foolish words;
a second, that he cannot endure contempt; such a man, says he, although he
should work miracles, yet he is beneath the perfection of virtue, his spirit
has no true greatness in it.

The sinking of the heart under reproaches, or to be put out of the way by
them, argues too vile a pusillanimity, such a poor low spirit as is not
consistent with the true magnanimity of a Christian. Non solu^ magna, sed etia^
modica, interdu^ and nihila (ut ita dicam) dejiciunt: Modica enim in rebus sunt
vani loquorum hominum, qui ergo hujusmodi verba timent metu eorum vel mala
facientes, vel bona facere dimittentes, omnium hominum imbecilliores sunt. Hi
sunt milites, qui non vento valido, sed levi sibilo tenuissimoque susurro
dejiciuntur atque vincuntur. Hi ridiculofiores sunt and in numero bellatorum
nullatenus habendi, nec hominum nomine censendi, qui vorbis quae Hecdum dicta
sunt, quasi vento qui nondum flavit, depulsi cadunt, bona facere, vel mala
dimittere metu hujusmodi non audentes. Guliel. Paris. de virtutibus.
Gulielmus Parisiensis in his Treatise De virtutibus, has notable Expressions
to this purpose, Little things, says he, yea mere nothings cast down poor weak
spirited men. The words of vain men are small things, whosoever fears such
words so as to do evil, or to leave off good, are the weakest of men; these are
like unto Soldiers who are cast down and overcome, not with some violent strong
tempest, but with some small weak puff of wind, these are the more ridiculous
and not to be reckoned amongst Warriers; nay, they are not to be reckoned
amongst men, who fall off for fear of words, which yet have not been spoken, as
if a man should fall for fear of the wind which yet blows not, such are those
who dare not do good, or leave evil, for fear of reproaches.

Fourthly, another means is to make your moan to God, and lay your case before
him, as Hezekiah, when Rabshekah came and reviled God, and the people of God,
he went and spread the letter before God, and made his moan before God; If we
can do so, there will be that satisfaction to our souls that is unspeakable,
and that will be a great argument of our innocence; Many will say, Oh they are
innocent, and God knows their hearts, but can you go and make your moan before
God when you are reproached, and acquaint God with the cause, and receive
refreshment that way, as Job 16. 20. My friends scorn me, but mine eyes pour
out tears to God: And David, Psalm. 109. 1, 2. Hold not thy peace, O God of my
praise, for the mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of the deceitfal are opened
against me, they have spoken against me with a lying tongue; they have
compassed me about with words of hatred, they are mine adversaries, but I
prayer; for so the words are in the Original, not I give my self, but only
thus, but I prayer; as if he should say, as for my part, all that I do to help
my self withal, is to pray to God, and make my moan: Others have their evil
tongues to help them, and run to this witness and that witness, to seek to help
themselves, but I prayer, Psalm. 57. 2, 3. I cry unto God most high, he shall
send from heaven and save me from reproach of him that would swallow me up,
Selah; God shall send forth his mercy and truth: A carnal heart has no way to
deliver it self, but by reproaches again, by running up and down from one
witness to another, but a gracious heart has other ways to help it self, it
cries to God most high, and looks for help from Heaven; God sends forth his
mercy and truth to help, and there is help indeed.

Fifthly, another help is this, if you can but get your 5.
hearts quietly and kindly to lament the condition of your reproachers, this
will be a mavelous means tosweeten the heart, and to help to bear reproaches.
It was the answer of Socrates to one who wondered at his patience toward one
who reviled him, If we should meet one, says he, whose body were more unsound
then ours, should we be angry with him, and not rather pity him? why then
should we not do the like to him whose soul is more diseased then ours?

The folly of our reproachers should cause us to pity them, to be patient
toward them, and pass by the wrong they do unto us; this was one of the
arguments that Abigail brought to David, to quiet his spirit that was so
stirred against Nabal, because of that reproach he cast upon him; Nabal, says
she, is his name, and folly is with him, it is his folly, rather pity him, it
is too low a thing for such a spirit as David's is to be stirred with it.
Instead of being troubled with the reproaches that are upon you, your spirits
should be most troubled for their sin: Now there is infinite cause we have to
be troubled for their sin more then for any evil that befalls us. An evil tongue
devours, and is an abomination, and in Prove. 8. 13. God says, The froward mouth
he hates: Now if you have any love you should think thus, This poor man what
has he done? he has brought himself under the hatred of God; now this should
mightily affect the hearts of the godly. As he is an abomination to God, so he
is an abomination to men, Prove. 24. 9. The scorner is an abomination to men;
scornful spirits love to cast shame and ignominy upon others. And in Prove. 18.
7. A fools mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul; we
should think, he has but ensnared his own soul, and so fall a lamenting of his
wretched condition. And so in Isa. 33. 10. Your breath as fire shall devour
you: If the breath of any man devours him, the breath of revilers, and
reproachers, and slanderers does. The Heathens called a reproacher A three
tongued man, because he hurts three at once, he hurts him that he reproaches,
and him that heard the reproach, and himself worst of all; do but get power
over your hearts to bewail this sin, and your reproach will not be so
troublesome. Trilinguis Gallesius a writer upon Exodus 22. ver. 28. observes the
exceeding patience of those three Emperors, Theodosius, Honorius, Arcadius,
toward those who spoke Si ex levitate co^temnendum, si ex insania miseratione
dignum, si ab injuria remittendum.
evil of them, they would have them subject to no punishment, for they said, If
it comes from lightness of spirit, it is to be contemned, if from madness, it
is worthy of pity, if from injury, it is to be pardoned, wrongs are to be
forgiven.

Again, labor to possess your souls with the reality of the sweet of, and the
honor there is in the ways 6.
of God, so no reproach will be grievous to you: As it is said of the covetous
man, when some told him, Such and such hiss at thee, but says he, I care not, I
rejoice in what I have at home, that I have so much Mihi ipsi domi plaudo,
nummos in area.
money in my chest: So it should be with a gracious heart, he should say, I
have sweet enough in my own heart, what need I trouble my self with what others
think or say?

Seventhly, labor to satisfy your souls in the glory of God and Christ: Though
my name be cast out as 7.
filth, yet the name of God and Christ is blessed and glorious, and so shall be
for ever, let Devils and wicked men do what they can against it; It was a good
speech of Luther, writing to his friend Spalatinus, bemoaning his condition to
him, because of the Prorsus Satan est Lutherus, sed Christus vivit and regnat
Amen. Luther ad Spalat.
scorn and contempt he suffered, yet comforting himself in this, that Christ
lived and reigned, Luther is accounted even a Devil, but Christ lives and
reigns, he adds his Amen to it.

Thirdly, it is not enough to bear reproaches patiently, but we must bear them
fruitfully: a christian should think he has not done that which belongs to 3.
a christian, unless he has got some good by them; How to bear reproaches
fruitfully
a christian should not think it enough to free himself from the scorn of the
tongue, but he must improve it for good by it.

First, consider what ends God aims at by it, and labor to work them upon your
selves, that you may 1.
attain to those ends.

Secondly, labor to draw what good instructions you can from the reproaches of
others: As namely 2.
thus, when I hear men reproach and revile, O what a deal of evil is there
secretly in the heart of man, that is not discovered till it have occasion? I
did not think that such and such could ever have been reproachers, if they had
not been provoked. Again, do I see another so vigilant over me to find me out
to reproach me; how vigilant should I be over my self to find out what is in
me to humble me? Again, is there so much evil to be under the stroke of man's
tongue, what a great evil is it to be under the stroke of Gods justice?

Lastly, to be fruitful, that is, set upon what duty God calls for at the
present; surely this is one great general 3.
duty, that the less credit I see I have in the world, let me labor to have the
more credit in Heaven; I see there is a breach of my name here, let me seek to
make up my name in Heaven.

4. And then they must be born joyfully, but we shall speak of that afterward
in the third point, that a gracious heart is not only willing to bear reproach
when God calls unto it, but in the cause of CHRIST to triumph and rejoice in
his reproaches.

5. Lastly, we should return good for evil; then you come to the top of
Christianity. This is a sign of Mihi infirmo siquis injuriam facit forfican
licet infirmus donem injuria^ meam; si vero is sum qui proficiam and si nondu^
perfectus, non retorqueo contuneliam, etsi influat ille ^onvitiis et invadat au
^es meas ^ontumeliis go taceo et ^ihil respo^leo: si vero perfectus sim
benedi^o maledipenti, ficut and Paulus Malediei^ur and be^edi^imus. Ambr. off
^. 1. c. 48.
great progress in Religion: If I be weak, says Ambrose, perhaps I may pardon
one charging me falsely; but if I have profited, although not altogether
perfect, though he flows in upon me with reproaches, I hold my peace and answer
nothing; but if I be perfect, I then bless him that reviles me, according to
that of St. Paul, Being reviled, we bless. If you can do thus, if you can
heartily pray for your reproachers, and desire good to them, and be willing to
take notice of any good in them, to clear up their innocence where there is
just cause, if you can be ready to offer any offices of love, and respect, and
kindeness to them, and so heap coals of fire upon them; this is a great sign of
grace, you have made a good progress indeed in Gods way: Mat. 5. 44, 45. Bless
them, says Christ, that curse you, pray for them that despitely use you, that
ye may be the children of your Father, etc. Why, were they not children before?
Yes, but this declares it, now God owns them for his children: If we behave our
selves thus, we shall have the comfort of this, that our reproaches come to us
as to Gods people, whereas others cannot have the comfort of this, you cannot
have any comfort from this argument, unless you behave your selves under
reproaches after this manner: Now what a great evilis this to cut a man off from
that comfort which has been spoken of in this argument? and if you do behave
your selves christianly under reproaches, God is more and more engaged to stand
for your names, and you are more prepared for glory. As he is not fit to
govern, that is not fit to serve, but he that is fit to serve, is so much the
fitter to govern; so those that can bear disgrace are fit to be honored, and
the greater glory will be afterward; As the Sun that shines through the clouds
shines the brightest, so when honor shall come through dishonor, it shall be
the greatest honor. And then you shall come to know that honor is sanctified to
you, and that it is in love, and you shall be more able to rejoice in the honor
that God shall bring to your names then you would have done, and so your
reproachers shall be servants to you.

There is only one place of Scripture that I shall add, and so I have done
with this point: Job 17. compare the 6. verse with the 8. and 9. verses; ver.
6. He has made me also a byword of the people: Job was a godly man, and yet
he was made a byword: What then? at the 8. verse, Upright men shall be
astonished at this: How? Two ways, either they shall be astonished at the
horrible wickedness of men that shall contemn so godly a man as Job was, and
say, Lord, what boldness is in the hearts of the wicked, that shall presume to
dare to contemn such a servant of thine? or the upright shall be astonished,
they shall admire at the wonderful way of God toward his people, that the Lord
shall suffer wicked men so far to go on in wickedness, as to reproach his
people: The innocent, the godly man shall see those that are hypocrites, for
not only gross profane ones are reproachers often times, but hypocrites: The
innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite, he shall not be damped,
but stir up his thoughts against the hypocrite: The righteous also shall hold
on his way, shall not decline; and not only so, but he that has clean hands
shall be stronger and stronger: And so I pass to the next point.

CHAP. XXXIV. The reproaches of Gods people are the reproaches of Christ.
IF you take the reproaches either materially or formally Point 2.
; materially, that is when all the sufferings of Gods people for which they are
meanly esteemed and looked upon as contemptible, all their sufferings are the
sufferings of Christ: Formally, and that is the very scorn that is cast upon
them, is the scorn of Christ. I intend to handle this point in both these,
materially and formally: So that the thing we have to handle, is, That all the
sufferings, and contempt, and disesteem of Gods people, are the sufferings, and
contempt, and disesteem of Christ. So that Gods people may turn the speech of
Christ concerning his Father, The reproaches of them that have reproached thee,
have fallen upon me: But we may say, Lord and blessed Savior, the reproaches of
them that have reproached us, are fallen upon thee; and mark therefore in Heb.
13. 13. the reproaches of Christ's people are called the reproach of Christ, Let
us go forth unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach: And the sufferings
of Gods servants are called the sufferings of Christ. Colloss. 1. 24. and fill
up that which is behind of the afflictions of CHIST, they are the afflictions
of Christ, and every one must make account to fill them up; not the
satisfactory sufferings of Christ, but the sufferings of Christ in his mystical
body, in his members: And so every member is to fill up a share in his
sufferings. And so Isa. 63. 9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted: The
sufferings and troubles of Gods people are the sufferings and troubles of
Christ, he is sensible of them; and therefore in Acts 9. 4. Christ cries out,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Further, compare two places together in
one, Psalm. 79. ver. 4, 12. at the 4. verse, says the Text, We are become a
reproach to our neighbors; a scorn and derision to those that are round about
us: And at the twelfth verse it is, Render unto our neighbors sevenfold into
their bosom, their reproach wherewith they have reproached thee, O Lord: He
goes on in the same argument, and first he calls them the reproach of the
Church, and then the reproach of God.

But is it said here the reproach of Christ? It may be asked, Why not the
reproach of God the Father, or the reproach of the Holy Ghost?

The reproaches of Gods people are the reproaches of Christ in a special manner;
because Christ is the head of the Church, and it is from the fullness of Christ,
that they have that grace conveyed which is reproached; and the union they have
with God, and with the Spirit, is by Christ; and therefore it is the reproach
of Christ here named, according to the several workings of the Father, and Son,
and Holy Ghost: so the three persons are reproached by man's sin: There is a
reproach unto God as God, and unto Christ as Christ, and unto the Spirit as the
Spirit.

There is a reproach unto God as he is Creator, the preserver of the world, and
governor of all things: When the work of God, the first Person of the Trinity,
is reproached, then he is reproached, Prove. 14. 31. He that oppresses the
poor, reproacheth his maker: It is a work of the Father to order things so, as
to make one poor, and one rich: And you take an advantage to mock at the poor
upon this difference which God has made in the world, when as you should honor
the work of God in making any difference between you and others: but in stead
of honoring of it, you cast an aspersion upon his work, and despise others,
because God has put them in a low condition; you reproach your Creator in
this. And when the work of Redemption is despised, when that is opposed, and
when the profession of the Gospel has dishonor put upon it, then Christ is
reproached: Heb. 6. 6. the Apostle says, Those that fall off after they have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and the good word of God, and the powers of the
world to come, they put the Son of God to an open shame. And when enlightening,
and drawing, and the quickening and comforting work of the Spirit is reproached
and vilified, then the Spirit is reproached, Heb. 10. 29. They do despite to
the Spirit of grace: So that you see both Father, Son and Holy Ghost, all three
are reproached by man's sin; not that the sin of man is able to cast the least
stain upon the glory of the blessed God, or make God to be less glorious, no
more then a little dust cast up into the air can darken the brightness of the
Sun shining in its strength; but it keeps the glory of God from shining upon
others, and upon himself, so as he and others shall not see it, and admire it,
and adore it as they ought.

If you ask why the reproaches of Gods people are Object.
called the reproaches of Christ?

I answer, First, as Chrysostom, because they do Answ.
suffer the same things that Christ suffers; you shall find the reproaches of
Gods people, and the reproaches of Christ are just alike one another. In Psalm.
42. 6, 7, 8. there are three things upon which Christ seems to be reproached,
and they are the three special things upon which Christians are reproached: As
first the outward means of Christ in the world, I am a worm and no man, so the
outward, mean and low condition of Gods people subjects them to reproach.
Secondly, Christ bore the world Why the Reproaches of Gods people are called
the Reproaches of Christ.
in hand that he trusted in God, and depended upon God, and no outward help;
and therefore they said, Let us see whether he will deliver him, being he
trusted in him; so the men of the world scorn at Gods people, because they
speak so much of God, and trusting in God. Thirdly, they reproached him,
because he said, God delighted in him; so because the Saints of God do profess
their relations to God, and do expect an especial love of God, therefore the
world reproaches them.

Secondly, it is the reproach of Christ, in regard of the near relation, and
close union that is between 2.
Christ and his people: As the reproach of the Wife is the reproach of the
Husband, and the reproach of the Husband is the reproach of the Wife, because
of their union, and therefore in 1 Cor. 11. the Apostle calls the woman, the
glory of the man: Either in regard that the man may glory in her if she be
godly and good, or else because the woman does honor the man, the Wife is to
honor her Husband, and to give glory to him; as the people of God are called
The glory of God, partly because God does glory in them, and partly because
they do give glory to God: so the woman should be such a one as the man may
glory in her, and such a one as may give glory to her husband: Now the Church
is the glory of Christ, as the wife is the glory of the man; and therefore it
is said in 2 Cor. 8. 23. speaking of Titus and others which were messengers of
the Church, he says, they are the glory of Christ, then certainly their
reproaches must be the reproaches of Christ.

Nay, there is a nearer union then this, for this is only by convenant, but
there is a union between the head and the members, that is a nearer union; the
Church is not only flesh of Christ's flesh, and bone of Christ's bone, but it is
the flesh of Christ, and the bone of Christ, it is the very fullness of the body
of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 23. it is a high expression: Yea, and besides this, the
Church is called Christ, mystical Christ: 1 Cor. 12. 12. For as the body is
one, and has many members, and all the members of that one body being many,
are one body, so also is Christ; that is, The Church having many members, ought
to be joined in union as the body; yea, there is yet anearer union between
Christ and his people, the in-being is mutual, Christ is in them, and they are
in Christ, John 14. 20. You in me, and in you: The arm is in the body, but the
body is not in the arm; the branch is in the vine, but the vine is not in the
branch; but here as the Saints are in Christ, so Christ is in them: and in
regard of this near union between them, their reproaches may well be esteemed
the reproaches of Christ.

Thirdly, because they are reproached for the sake of Christ: if a dog be
abused for the sake of his master, 3.
it is the abuse of his master: much more when Gods own people are abused for
the sake of Christ; and therefore we find that this has been the plea of Gods
people, for thy sake have we been killed all the day long; it was for Christ's
sake rather then any evil in themselves. And therefore though they be
reproached for their sins, it may come to be the reproach of Christ, namely
thus, When as men shall take advantage the rather against them, because they
are professors of Religion; and were it not for this reason, they might justly
reproach them; yet when as they put in this reason, They could bear well enough
with the sin, were it not they were professors of Religion, then the reproaches
that they justly might suffer for their sins, do come to be the reproaches of
Christ. And further, when in these they will take advantage to reproach the
shows of Religion, which in others they cannot bear well enough; as when one
that is a Professor expresses devotion in lifting up his eyes, or his hands to
Heaven, they will reproach him for making shows of Religion, and presently they
are Hypocrites: and yet there are others can make mighty shows, and they are
commended.

Again, they are the reproaches of Christ, because they are reproached in the
work of Christ: 4.
As when David sent messengers to the children of Ammon, to congratulate their
King, and they cut off their garments half way, and cut off half of their
beards, David presently counted it his reproach; and so when Gods people are in
Gods work, and reproached, surely it Christ's reproach. So Nehemiah was in Gods
work, and he suffered a great deal of reproach; and mark how God is more
provoked then Nehemiah, Nehem. 4. compare the third verse with the fifth.

Lastly, it is the Spirit of Christ that is in them that is reproached: As if
so be that the skill or influence 5.
that comes from a skilful Attificer, that is put into one that has learned,
that does as it were but act his spirit, if he shall see him reproached for
that work which is done by virtue of that influence which he had of his spirit
in him, then he counts himself reproached: so all the gracious works of Gods
people are by the influence of the spirit of Christ; and therefore when they
are reproached, Christ is reproached: we have not received the spirit of the
world, but the Spirit of God, says the Apo^stle: this is the reason of all
opposition, because of the difference of spirits; now the spirit of God and the
Spirit of the world are opposite. But to come to the application of the point.

First, if the reproaches of Gods people be the reproaches Use 1.
of Christ, then certainly Christ is wonderfully reproached in the world; none
so reproached as Christ is, because he is not only reproached himself, but all
the reproaches that fall upon all his people in the world, not only since
Moses time, but from the beginning of the world, they are all the reproaches of
Christ, none suffers so much as he: consider we then with our selves, how we
can love this Christ, a reproached Christ? Is Christ notwithstanding all his
reproaches dear and precious to us? howsoever he be to the world, yet can your
souls say with the Church, He is altogether lovely, as the Apostle Peter says,
1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. He is a rock, and a stone of offense to those that do not
believe, but to you precious; and so Christ, though he be a reproached Christ,
yet to you he is precious; to a godly and gracious heart how precious is Jesus
Christ? There is a notable place concerning the reproaches of Christ, and yet
of the high esteem that Gods people have of him, notwithstanding he is
reproached, Isa. 52. 14, 15. His visage was so marred more then any man's, and
his form more then the sons of men: what then, is there none therefore that
shall prize him? yes; at the fifteenth verse, So shall he sprinkle many
Nations: the Kings shall shut their mouths at him, for that which had not been
told them shall they see, and that which they had not heard shall they
consider; that is, there shall yet come a time when as the Lord shall sprinkle
many nations by the work of his Spirit, and draw many Kings, so as they shall
shut their mouths; whereas they contemned him, and despised him, now they
shall shut their mouths in a way of admiration, that that had not been told
them which they see: as St. Paul, he knew Christ only after the flesh, but
when he came to know him after another manner, he thought otherwise of him: So
when God does sprinkle any with his Spirit, that they know Christ, though his
visage he marred more then any man's, and he is reproached more then any man,
yet they shall prize him, and delight in him, and the more he is reproached,
the more they shall delight in him: It is a notable Quanto pro me vilius, tanto
mibi charius. Bern.
speech of Bernard, By so much the more Christ is vile for me, by so much the
more he is dearer to me.

CHAP. XXXV. Sixteen several Consolations arising to the Saints from this
consideration, That their sufferings are Christ's sufferings.
SEcondly, the consideration of this point is of Use 2.
admirable use for the consolation of all the people of God, in all their
sufferings and reproaches. If reproaches and sufferings be the reproaches of
Christ, Christ is engaged in them more then you; there may be many branches of
comfort to Gods people from hence, That Christ is so engaged in all their
sufferings, as they are accounted Christ's own: it is a great matter, when any
one suffers any thing, if they know this, that any great man is engaged in
their sufferings: if a subject should have a King so engaged in any thing he
undertakes, that he can say, Whatsoever I suffer in this, is the suffering of
the King, this is a great comfort to him; so here there are several branches of
comfort that may be drawn from this, Our sufferings are the sufferings of
Christ.

First, it is a great deal of comfort, that God does 1. Comfort against
reproaches.
take notice of our reproaches: This was the comfort of the Psalmist, in Psalm.
69. 19. Thou have known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonor, my
adversaries are all before thee* If a man suffer reproach, and disgrace, and
trouble for his friends, while he is abroad from them; O says he, Did but my
friends know what I suffer, and suffer for them, it would comfort me: If it be
comfort to be known, much more when they shall be accounted their own; Christ
is acquainted with all the sufferings of every member: and therefore do not
say, I am a poor creature, who takes notice of my sufferings? Heaven takes
notice of your sufferings, Christ takes notice of them better then your selves.

Secondly, if they be the sufferings of Christ, they are no other but such as
are predetermined for 2.
you from the beginning of the world; for certainly the sufferings of Christ
are determined: It may be said of these sufferings, as truly as of those he
suffered in his own person, Act. 2. 23. They are by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God: and therefore it is not in the liberty of man to reproach
you as he pleases, but all is by the fore-determinate counsel of God.

Thirdly, certainly you do not want compassion in 3.
your sufferings neither; for one to suffer much, and to be reproached, and no
body to have compassion, is grievous; but surely you have compassion enough,
Christ must needs take compassion on you: and it is not a forced compassion,
but a natural compassion: was there ever any that was not sensible of the
sufferings of his own flesh, unless it be dead? Indeed if you be a dead member
of a Church, it may be Christ does not compassionate your sufferings, but if
you be a living member, Christ does compassionate your sufferings, and pity you
in every lie and slander that is told of you: many times when we hear of the
servants of God (and especially those we know to be godly) to have such strange
reports of them, our hearts begin to break, and to yern toward them. If one
member have compassion of another, much more the head; the head is more
sensible of the evils done to the body, then the other members are.

Fourthly, all these reproaches and sufferings do not 4.
argue your rejection, they may stand with the infinite love of God: many of
Gods people are ready to draw sad conclusions from their reproaches, surely*
God would not suffer this if he loved them: they may stand with the same love
wherewith the Father loved the Son, for they are the reproaches of the Son.

Fifthly, they must needs be sanctified to you: those that are the sufferings
of Christ, are fanctified sufferings; 5.
certainly Christ will not suffer them to go away unsanctified; Christ is so
holy, that if they come near to him, he will make them holy: and therefore your
bodies and souls having union with Christ, they come to be sanctified: so all
your conditions and sufferings come to be sanctified by union with Christ: he
is the blessed one of God, and therefore all your sufferings must be blessed
from him.

Sixthly, if they be the reproaches of Christ, then 6.
you are not left to bear the burden of them alone, you have but the lighter
end of the staff: if a burden be never so heavy at one end, and a strong man
is under that, and the other be light, though a weak man be under that, he does
not care: so the weight and burden of reproaches lie upon the shoulders of
Christ: and therefore when you think it is hard for one reproach thus to follow
upon another, and for one evil to follow another, it will break my heart; ah,
if you did bear it alone, but Christ bears the weight of our reproaches.

Seventhly, if they be the reproaches of Christ, then for that part you do
bear, although it be but little, 7.
you may expect his strength in, you are not left to bear that little by your
own strength; Christ gives out his own strength, to bear his own reproaches; if
the burden be his you bear, you shall have strength from him to bear it.

Again, this is an eighth stream of comfort, if they 8.
be the reproaches of Christ, they are the reproaches of all the members of
Christ, who sympathize with you, and help to bear the burden with you.

Ninthly, it may be comfort that your names shall 9.
be vindicated, your names are as dear to Christ as his own, and it does as
much concern Christ to vindicate your names as to vindicate his own.

Again, if our reproaches be Christ's reproaches, 10.
and Christ is content to own our reproaches; surely, he will not leave us to
take our sins upon our selves: if his love be such as he will take the burden
of our sufferings upon himself; surely his love is such as not to see us sink
under the burden of our sins: No, our sins are upon him as well as our
sufferings; not that he takes them upon him to be guilty, but only by
imputation: the Text says, He was made sin; what abundance of consolation is
this, that Christ is willing both to take off our sins and sufferings? there
are nothing but these two that should trouble us in the world, our sins and
sufferings, and Christ takes them off both.

11. And yet further, if Christ will own our reproaches, 11.
proaches, then he will own our services: there is no great difficulty of
believing the one, if we believe the other: we may comfortably go to Christ and
say, Blessed Savior, will thou own upon thy self, the dirt cast upon our faces,
and wilt not own the work of thine own Spirit? though we may stain the work of
Gods grace by our sin, yet Christ that is so indulgent to take reproaches, will
surely own our services; he will own our active obedience, as well as our
passive obedience.

Again, then we may be assured there will come good of them, and that we shall
be carried through 12.
them; consider three or four things here for our help in this, to assure us of
a blessing in these our sufferings. First, were it that we only did know that
God had a love to us, and were merciful to us, that were enough to assure us.
But, secondly, God may have love and not bind himself by promise; but as he
has love, so he has engaged himself by promise to help his people in
sufferings, and that is more. But, thirdly, we have the experience of Gods
dealings with his people, that he never left them in suffering. And fourthly,
we may rise higher, it is Gods own case, we have further assurance by this: If
a man love me, I hope it will be well with me; if he promise me, that is more;
if others have had experience, I am more assured: but if it be his own cause, I
am sure enough. If a man go to sea, and he knows the Mariner has skill, and he
loves me, and the Mariner promises he will have care, and others have had
experience of his care, this is much: but when I consider, my life is the
Mariners life, if I perish, he perishes; this assures me, that as far as the
Mariner can do it, it shall be well with me. Luther writing to Melancton
troubled with fears; If we fall, says he, Christ Si nos ruit mus ruet e
Christus, says Luth.
falls.

Again, here we have a notable ground to go to God in prayer in all sufferings,
because we can go with 13.
this argument, Lord it is thy own Name: that was the plea of Moses, Lord, if
thou destroyest thy people, what will become of thy Name? our names are
nothing, what though ten thousand such as we are come to naught, and rot? but
if God put his name to ours, and twist them together, there is abundance of
safety, then our names are a strong argument.

Yea, suppose we be in such a condition as we cannot 14.
pray, yet here is comfort in this, our sufferings are the sufferings of
Christ; and the sufferings of Christ do present themselves as a mighty prayer
to God: The sufferings of Christ, have a mighty cry in the ears of the Father,
and they will be heard.

And yet further, if so be our sufferings be the 15.
sufferings of Christ, then surely Christ's sufferings are our sufferings; if
Christ have an interest in our sufferings, then we have an interest in his
sufferings: for how come our sufferings to be Christ's, but by virtue of our
relation to him; and therefore his sufferings must be ours, by the relation of
Christ to us.

Lastly, there will be an end of sufferings, they cannot last always, for they
are the sufferings of Christ 16.
; and it cannot stand with infinite justice, that Christ which has undertaken
for us, should be eternally under suffering; and if he shall not suffer always,
we shall not always suffer; for so long as we suffer, he must suffer: the time
therefore is a coming, wherein Gods people shall be too high for to be
reproached, they shall be in such a condition, as it shall be impossible for
any to reproach them: for reproach comes from some kind of apprehension of the
reproacher, to be in some measure above the reproached: no man can reproach
another for a thing that he fully knows, and certainly believes that he is
above him in that thing: and therefore the people of the world do reproach the
people of God, because they apprehend themselves to be above Gods people in
wisdom, or the like; but time will come, that the dignity of Gods people shall
be raised to such a height, that though wicked men do hate them, they shall
not be able to reproach them, they cannot possibly have a conceit to be above
Gods people in any thing.

And these are the consolations that arise from this point, that our sufferings
and reproaches are Christ's: and these considerations being put together, why
should we distract our selves, and take immoderate care what shall become of
us; if we be unbelieving, Christ will count it a dishonor to him, and say, Is
it not my case? we need not take any shifting courses to help our selves; a man
that has an enemy surprise him, if he have no weapon in his hand, it may be he
will take up stones and dirt, but if he have his weapon, he uses that, and
scorns to take up stones and dirt: when people are reproached, that have no
interest in Christ, reproaches come upon them and take them unarmed, and they
take up any thing near hand, and reproach and revile again: but those that have
interest in Christ, have this weapon; they know all their reproaches are the
reproaches of Christ, and we shall not need to depend upon any outward comfort
for to comfort us; much less have we need to help our selves by reviling again.
The comfort of a Christian, is this, That his reproaches are the reproaches of
Christ; this is enough to quiet his heart: you need not comfort your selves in
your parts, or estates; this is enough alone: do but answer all your
distractions and troublesome workings of your hearts with this, and this will
quiet them.

Quest. But how shall I know that my reproaches How to know that our reproaches
are the reproaches of Christ.
are the reproaches of Christ?

Answ. First, if you be reproached for the sake of Christ; though you be not a
member of Christ, yet if your adversaries reproach you, because they take you
for a member of Christ, there is some comfort 1.
in this. Secondly, if you can under all reproaches 2.
bring your hearts in subjection unto Christ, and quiet your hearts under
reproaches in obedience unto him. Thirdly, if you find the rule by which you
are guided 3.
and acted in that condition to be the rule of Christ. Fourthly, if you find
the chiefest comfort that you gather in to help you, to be the comfort of 4.
Christ. Fifthly, if you find the end you do aim 5.
at in your bearing them, is the honor of Christ; and that you do desire rather
that Christ may be in the conclusion honored, then your selves cleared.
Sixthly, take this as a special note, if you make 6.
those reproaches that Christ suffers in his cause, his truth, his people,
yours; then he makes yours his: how does your hearts stand affected to the
reproaches Christ suffers in others? Zeph. 3. 17, 18. God promises much mercy,
to such to whom the reproach of the solemn assemblies were a burden. That
heart that is burdened with the reproaches of Gods ways, shall find ease in
the comforts of Gods Spirit. If these things be in you, certainly these come
from the Spirit of Christ; and if from the Spirit of Christ, then you are
Christ's; and if you be Christ's, then your reproaches are Christ's.

A third Use is this: Seeing Christ suffers for us, and 2.
all our reproaches are the reproaches of Christ, Let us take heed that he do
not suffer by us. Now Christ may come to suffer by us two ways: First, if so be
that we cause the name of Christ to be spoken evil of. Secondly, when we come
to be actors our selves in speaking evil of Christ, or of his people.

First, if we cause Christ or his people to be spoken evil of by any sinful,
way of ours, this is the reproach of Christ (but not in that sense I spoke of
before.) Christ does not only suffer in you, but he suffers by you. This is
the charge that the Apostles lays upon the Romans, For your sake is the name of
God blasphemed: we had need look to our selves in this. Mark Romans 2. 24.
what charge the Apostle lays upon women, 1 Timothy 5. 13, 14. that they should
take heed of tatling, and carrying themselves unchristianly; and that they give
none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully. That was the reason why
Nehemiah was so careful in his business, in Neh. 5. 9. Because of the reproach
of the Heathen. And so I say to you that are Gods people, Is it not enough that
Christ has suffered for you and in you, but must he suffer by you? O that the
fear of God might be upon you, because of the reproach of your adversaries: Is
Christ dear to you? did Christ ever do any thing for you? Is it not better a
thousand times that you were crossed, and your lives were taken away, and you
laid rotting in the grave, if your names could wash away any stain that is upon
the name of Christ? know there are many that Christ have fuffered reproach by,
and you cannot clear your selves of it, and know what an evil and bitter thing
it is, that after all the goodness and mercy of Christ to you, and the near
relation that he has taken you into; will you abuse all this mercy, and this
near relation? if Christ had never taken you for his own, had you been never so
vile, Christ had not suffered reproach by you; but now in regard of your near
relation to him, he suffers reproach by you; and is this the use you make of
your near relation?

When therefore you find your hearts begin to stir, How Christ is reproached
by us.
and corruption boil; consider the name of Christ lies prostrate before you,
and will you trample upon the name of Jesus Christ: if one were set upon going
to a place to do mischief, and his Father and Mother should throw themselves in
the path, that if he goes on he must tread upon them, and they should say, You
shall tread upon the bowels out of which you came, upon the loins that begat
you; this would be a great stop: and so you that are Professors of the Gospel,
if you have a temptation to a lust, the name of Christ calls Stay, and says, If
you go you shall trample upon me, and my blood, and bring reproach upon me;
will not this stop you? Never think that gain that you get by the reproach of
Christ. It is true indeed, if we be going on in our duty, and do that we
should, though men say the name of Christ shall be reproached, we are to go on,
and do our duty, and let Christ vindicate his name if he will: but if it be any
thing that concern out selves, and the satisfaction of our own wills and
desires, whereby Christ may be reproached, this is a mighty argument to keep us
from it: the word has scarce a stronger argument to keep us from an evil way,
then this, The name of Christ shall suffer by it: for the people of God to
suffer reproach by you, is an evil thing: for a man to have but his kindred
ashamed of him, what an evil thing is it; but that it may be said of one that
is a Professor of Religion, that he is not only a reproach to the Church of
God, but a reproach to Jesus Christ, if you have any ingenuity in you, this
might strike to your hearts.

It is reported of Alexander, having a Soldier of his name, and his Soldier
being a coward, he came to him, and said, Either leave off the name of
Alexander, or be a Soldier: and so we have the name of Christians, but when we
are vile in our lives, Christ says, Either leave off your profession, your
name, or be a Christian indeed: do not come in amongst the number of
Professors, to let profession suffer by you. And so Alexander Severus the
Emperor, seeing a company of Christians fighting together, he commanded them to
leave off the name of Christians; for says he, You profess your selves to be
Christians, and yet you are thus contending: this is not the spirit of him whom
you do profess. It is a lamentable thing that we should profess such a glorious
name as we do, and that we should handle the matter so as that it should suffer
so much by us. It is said of the high Priest, Numb. 6. 7. He shall not make
himself unclean for his father, or for his mother, or for his brother, or for
his sister, because he had the holy oil upon him, the consecration of his God
was upon him: So I may say unto you, You have the holy oil of the profession of
the name of Christ upon you; and therefore take heed what you do, says St.
Paul, It were better for me to dye, then to lose my glorying: were it then not
better for us to dye, then to have the glory of Christ suffer by us. Know,
though the name of Christ be not dear to you, he will defend his name when you
shall rot and perish for ever; and though it be defiled by you for the present,
he can clear it otherwise: but woe to them that be the causes of reproaches that
come thus upon Christ.

But as we must take heed that Christ be not reproached by us in this regard,
much more that he be not reproached by our selves, so as to speak evil of the
ways of God: as we may hear it of those that have been forward in profession of
Religion, if profession of Religion do not come to serve their turns, they are
ready to speak evil of that way, and all the professors of it. Take heed what
you do in reproaching of a member of Christ, the name of Christ is upon him;
take heed you do not reproach him that the name Christ is upon; the people of
God do bear the name of Christ upon their foreheads; take heed you do not spit
upon their faces, for it may be you may spit upon the name of Christ: as many
unskilful hunters will shoot at wild beasts, and shooting at random may kill a
man; and so many shoot at Christians, but they hit Christ, they reproach Christ.

CHAP. XXXVI. The dreadful evil there is in reproaching the Saints.
FOurthly, the consideration of this calls for a trembling heart unto all those
that have been Use 4.
guilty in any degree of casting reproaches upon the people of God. In this Use
we have three branches: First, those that have done it themselves: Secondly,
those that rejoice in the reproaches that others cast upon Gods people:
Thirdly, those that are the divulgers and spreaders of the reproaches of Gods
people. In Zeph. 2. The Holy Ghost there rebuking Moab for reproaching his
people in the eighth and tenth verses, at the eleventh verse it is said, The
Lord will be terrible to them: there are some of you, that howsoever God have
shown you better things now, yet heretofore you have been guilty, and it may be
some of you are guilty of this still; and if you be guilty, the Lord will be
terrible to you. God has contempt and dishonor for you, as you have cast
contempt and dishonor upon Christ: suitable to your sin shall be your
punishment. That is observable that we have in Psalm 59. verse 6. their sin is,
They return at evening, they make a noise like a dog, and go round about the
City: thus is their sin, and it is their sin of reproach and scorn, as appears
in the following words, verse 7. They belch out with their mouth: and observe
ver. 14. their judgment is expressed in the same words, And at the evening let
them return, and let them make a noise like a dog, and go round about the City.
Did your reproaches reach no further then the Saints themselves, yet in regard
of that excellency there is in them, it is an abominable wickedness. Mark with
what indignation the Spirit of God speaks against such as are guilty herein,
Isa. 57. 3, 4. Draw near hither ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the
adulterer, and the whore, against whom do ye sport your selves? against whom do
ye make a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of
transgression, a seed of falsehood? What, you who are so vile and filthy your
selves, will you presume to reproach the Saints of God, such as are so precious
in the eyes of God, and so near to Christ? Know, you have not to deal with them
only, but with Christ in them. You think you have to do only with a company
of poor weak creatures that are not able to right themselves; but know, you
have to do with Christ himself. Mark that expression we have in Isa. 37. 23. it
is spoken concerning Rabshekah, Whom have thou reproached? it is not against
Hezekiah, it is against the holy One of Israel: Those that have done thus, have
lifted up their mouths against heaven it self: They set their mouths against
the heavens: Thou have reproached Psalm. 37. 9
him that is the brightness of the glory of the Father; The character, The
engraven image of the Father; he that is the glory of heaven, that has all the
treasures of all good in him; Thou have cast reproach upon him that must be thy
Judge; At whose mercy thou lie for thy present and eternal estate; Him that
is God blessed for ever, that is the infinite delight of the Father. You
mistake, you have shot at Christ all this while: As we read of Oedepus, he
killed his father Laius King of Thebes, taking him for his enemy; your mistake
is worse you strike at, you reproach Christ, while you think it is but a poor
man, yea your enemy.

O that ever you should be born to do so much mischief as to cast dirt upon the
face of Christ; surely you kick against the pricks: It is an argument that you
are not a son of the promise, that you are a successor of Ishmael: Thou have
cause to fear that God will laugh at thy destruction, and mock when thy fear
comes: Thou have cause to fear that thou art reserved for everlasting shame
and contempt, unless God does humble thee for this dreadful guilt that is upon
thee. When you take advantage upon the meanness of Gods people for to reproach
them, you are the men and women that are found guilty in heaven for to reproach
Christ.

But you will say, There are none so vile as to reproach Object.
Christ, nor the people of Christ for their godliness, it is for their
hypocrisy.

Let no man deceive himself thus; for there never Answ.
was any Devil or man that did reproach godliness under the name of godliness,
but they would put some other name upon it, under which it might appear vile
and contemptible; and in this the men of the world do as the persecutors did in
the Primitive times with the Christians, they put the bodies of Christians into
the skins of wild beasts, and then they would set dogs upon them, and other
wild beasts, to tear them: So men do to this day; they put the profession of
godliness into the shapes of their own conceits, and their own slanders, and
their own apprehensions, to make it ugly, and they fall a reproaching and
tearing, and run upon them like a company of wild beasts: And that which thou
say is hypocrisy, is but the skin of the wild beast, thy own unshapen
conceits, to make thy self and their adversaries run upon them, that you may
the more freely venture; because the wild beasts would not venture upon the
body of a man so freely, but when they saw the body of a man in the shape of
such a beast as they hated, they ran upon it freely: And so thou dealest with
Gods Saints in putting an unshapen form upon them, to let out thine heart more
freely upon them. But what if that which thou call hypocrisy, God account
godliness? yea know, that this thy aspersion upon godliness, to say it is
hypocrisy, and upon the people of God, to say they are hypocrites, is the
reproach of Gods people, and there is a great deal of evil in it more then thou
art aware of. In Mark 3. from verse 22. and so on, when Christ cast out devils,
they said, He casts them out by Beelzebub the Prince of devils: well says
Christ, All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies
wherewith soever they shall blaspheme, but he that shall blaspheme against the
Holy Ghost, has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation: So
that it seems these Pharisees had sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost, in
that they said, He had an unclean spirit, because they attributed that to an
unclean spirit, which was done by the Spirit of Christ; only they did this
against knowledge, and in malice: I do not say that all reproachers do sin
against the Holy Ghost; but if it be against knowledge, and in malice, consider
how near it comes: as their attributing that to an unclean spirit which came
from the spirit of God was it; so does not thy attributing that to hypocrisy
which comes from the Spirit of God in sincerity come near it. But lastly, if it
be for hypocrisy that thou reproach, and not for godliness, then it is for an
evil; if it be for an evil that thou do reproach them, then the better thou
art, and the better mood thou art in, the more thou will reproach them. But we
see the contrary evident: Wicked men they reproach the godly for hypocrisy, as
they say, but they do it when they are in the height of their lusts; but if
they be in a good mood, when they are on their sick beds or death beds, and in
their best condition, they reproach them least; therefore sure it was the good
they reproached, and not the evil. But thus much concerning the first branch.

The second is this, it calls for a trembling heart from those that shall
rejoice at the reproaches of 2.
Gods people: Perhaps thou art one that wilt not reproach thy self, yet thou
may rejoice at the reproaches of Gods people: There is a great deal of evil
in this: Surely thou have no love to them, for love does not rejoice in
iniquity, 1 Corinthians. 13. 6. When the Devil does sow the seed, thou do come
with the harrows to cover the seed, when thou do rejoice in their reproaches.
Proverbs 18. 8. The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into
the innermost parts of the belly: It may be translated, The words of a
talebearer are as the words of them tbat are wounded: That is, The
tale-bearers that come and tell you things, they come with expressions of a
great deal of brokenness of heart, as if their spirits were grieved at that
they hear, and they speak as if they spoke in the defense of them, and then
they are as wounds; not the wounds of them they speak of, but the wounds of the
wounded: And if any come in this way to cast reproaches upon Gods people, they
are taken down into the belly, and they go glib down: This is a slight of the
Devil to make them pass without the least questioning; for those that reproach,
seem to speak out of wounded troubled hearts.

But we do not rejoice in this, that we hear any evil Object.
of Gods people, but we rejoice that they are discovered, and this is the work
of God.

1. If so be thy conscience be convinced, that through Answ. 1.
the concealing of such and such things, there was a great deal of mischief
done before, and there is a great deal of good like to come to the public
cause, and the name of God in the discovery, then you may rejoice.

Secondly, I appeal to conscience: Suppose the discovery do a great deal of
hurt, Gods name does 2.
suffer by it, is there a proportionable measure of grief in thy heart, for the
suffering of Gods name, unto the joy that is in you for the discovery?

But thirdly, suppose it were one that were near to you; suppose it were your
Father or Brother, the 3.
Wife of your bosom, the dearest friend you had that were discovered, would
your hearts rejoice then? if you rejoice because God has glory by the
discovery, then would you rejoice, if the dearest friend you had were
discovered?

Fourthly, yea, suppose you did suffer much by this 4.
discovery, that it were much to your prejudice, you should lose something that
your hearts are much set upon, would you rejoice then?

Fifthly, if so be that it were for the discovery that 5.
you rejoice; then you would not rejoice, that they are discovered to such as
will not honor Gods name: You are glad that any know of it, that Gods enemies
know of it, that will not make a good use of it, but will be hardened in their
sin, and dishonor Gods name: Take heed you do not deceive your selves, to
rejoice so in the discovery of the people of God; there is a great deal of evil
in it, more then you think of. Joseph he feared Mary, but he feared the name of
God might suffer, and therefore he would not make her a public example.

The third branch is to those that are divulgers of the reproaches of Gods
people. Consider what 3.
you do, they are the reproaches of Christ; take heed you do not divulge the
reproaches of Gods people. Suppose they prove false, do you think that after
Gods people have suffered so much, this will be enough to answer God and
Christ, for all the dirt that has been cast upon his face, I heard so; that
the names of Gods people may suffer much, when they are under false reproaches.
As it is with a stick; a stick when it is in the water, it looks as if it were
broken, pull it out of the water, and it is straight: So it is with the names
of Gods people; when their names are under reports that go abroad in the world,
they look as broken; but when their names are pulled out from the reports of
the world, they appear whole: And therefore take heed of divulging the
reproaches of those that are godly; You may in this do the Devils work, and
carry the Devils pack. The Apostle in 1 Timothy 3. 11. speaking of women, says,
That they must be grave, not slanderers; The word in the Original is, that they
must not be Devils: So that to carry slanders and evil reports up and down, is
the work of the devil. Again, will thou spread the reproaches of Gods people,
when as it is the great work of God to cover the sins of his people? And
further, consider, do thou stand in need of so much covering of thy own
sins, and will thou have a hand in spreading abroad the sins of others? How
just will it be with God to let thee fall into some gross sin, and spread
abroad thy shame, seeing his name and the names of his people are not dear in
thine eyes?

CHAP. XXXVII. Seeing Christ makes our sufferings his, we should make his
sufferings ours.
FIfthly, if Christ will take our sufferings and our reproaches, and make them
his; then we are Use 5.
to take Christ's sufferings, and Christ reproaches, and make them ours. It was
the burning love of Christ, and his zeal to his people, that made him take the
reproaches of his people to himself; and so our burning love to him, and zeal
for him, should make us take his reproaches upon our selves. Christ is many
ways reproached in the world, not only in his person, when he lived upon the
earth, and in his people; and so we are not only to take the reproaches of
Christ upon us in these regards, but in any particular, whatsoever reproach
falls upon Christ any way, let us account of it as our own: When the Doctrine
of the Gospel is reproached, then he is reproached; when the ways and light
that God has discovered to his people is reproached, he is reproached; when
the Ordinances are slighted, when as the blood of Christ is counted a common
thing, and every base lust is preferred before it; when as the blessed
authority of Christ is villified and slighted, either when it is slighted
openly or secretly, if the authority of Christ be cast off, then he is
reproached, Numb. 15. 6, 30. When you put a reed into the hand of Christ, and
bow to him, and say, Hail King of the Jews: when you shall profess obedience
and subjection unto Christ, and in stead of a Scepter, put a reed into his
hand, then he is reproached. Again, when Gods people walk unworthy of Christ,
then Christ is reproached. And when Christ is reproached in any of these, let
us take them to heart, as thoroughly, as if we were reproached; yea, take them
more to heart, because the reproaches of Christ are far worse then our
reproaches: Those that are first upon Christ, and then upon us, are worser then
those that are first upon us, and then upon Christ: To spit upon the face of a
man, is more reproach to the body, then to spit upon some other member of the
body is a reproach to the face; and so the reproach of Christ that is the face
of the Church, is more then the reproach of any other member: And therefore
confider, whether your hearts be more broken when Christ is reproached, then
when you your selves are reproached, this is a good sign of grace. And if you
demand what should be the behavior of a gracious heart, when he is in any
company that he hears Christ reproached in;

I answer, First, thy spirit should rise in indignation against such desperate
evils and wickedness as 1.
this, that any should dare to be so bold as to reproach How a gracious heart
behaves its self, when he hears Christ reproached.
the holy One of God, such a blessed one as Christ is, that is so infinitely
dear to thy soul, and has done so much for thy soul; though in our own causes
we may be quiet and give way, yet when it comes to the cause of Christ, it is
good for the heart to rise. It is the speech of Oeclampadius to his fellow
Minister, Let our Zeal be hot and burning, not when scorns and reproaches are
cast upon us, but when the truth is endangered, and the name of God is
blasphemed. Ye have heard that of King Croesus his son, who though he were dumb
all his life, yet when one would have struck at his Father, the affection to
his Father broke the bars of his speech, and he said, Take heed of killing the
King: And so though we be dumb in things that concern our selves, yet when
Christ comes to be reproached, let our hearts swell in us and break out.

Again, look upon them with trembling hearts, that ever the patience of God
should suffer such 2.
wickedness as this: As they did admire at Mordecai, when he would not bow to
Haman, they held their peace, and wondered what would become of that matter.

Yea, we should, if it were possible, labor to wipe off all the reproach of
Christ, and take it upon our selves 3.
that we might rather be spit upon and contemned then Christ. It was a brave
speech of Ambrose, he wished it would please God to turn all the adversaries
from the Church upon himself, and let them satisfy their thirst with his
blood: This is a true christian heart. And therefore if it be for our sakes,
and we have any thing in the business by which Christ is reproached, we should
be willing rather to sacrifice our selves, then that Christ should be
reproached: And as Jonah, when he knew that the tempest rose for his sake, says
he, Cast me into the sea: And so Nazianzen, when contention rose about him,
says he, Cast me into the sea, let me lose my place, rather then the name of
Christ should suffer for me.

Again, the behaving of a Christian should be this, it should take his heart
from his own name, so long 4.
as Christ is reproached: What though I have esteem? Christ is not esteemed, he
is contemned. I have these comforts, and I through Gods mercy want nothing, and
my friends cleave to me, and prize me; but Christ is not cleaved to, he is not
prized: and what are all my comforts to me? they are Ichabods, the glory of all
is departed from me.

And further, we should be willing to interest our 5.
selves in the cause of Christ: when we hear any of Gods people reproached, we
should not say, What have we to do with them, let them clear themselves? but be
willing to interest our selves in it, and take it upon our selves, as if our
own name were to be cleared.

And lastly, we should labor to wipe away the reproach of Christ, in laboring
to express the convincing 6.
power of that grace which is contrary to their carriage for which Christ is
reproached: Such a one is scandalous, and Christ's name suffers in that, let me
labor to make up the breach in being so much the more faithful, and walking in
the contrary grace: Such a one is proud, let me be more humble; such a one is
covetous, let me be more liberal, that there may be somewhat to answer: As it
is said of the wise son, when his father is reproached, he carries himself so
as his father has wherewithal to answer from his good carriage, Prove. 27. 11.
So let Christ have wherewithal to answer his reproaches from your godly
convincing conversation. Suppose others have cast an aspersion upon the ways of
godliness, because such are false and covetous, yet walk thou in the contrary,
that Gods people may answer, Though such and such be so, what say you to such
an one? is not the breach made up in those? And so much for that Use.

Sixthly, we must not only labor to wipe away Use. 6.
the reproach of Christ: But if Christ have suffered so much in us and for us,
let us labor to honor Christ as much as we can in the world, and set up the
name of Christ, as much as others pull it down. How are we to set up the name
of Christ?

First, in holding forth the beauty and glory of 1.
the Spirit of Christ in our lives, that though Christ How we may honor Christ
in the world.
be reproached in others, he may be glorified in us: Others may be forced to
say in their consciences, Blessed be God that ever I saw such men: I never saw
the graces of Christ shine more brightly in any, then in them. And then set up
Christ, in speaking 2.
all the good we can of Christ, in bringing others in love with him: As they in
the Canticles said, What is thy beloved more then another beloved? says she, My
beloved is the chiefest among ten thousands. Again, let us set up the
Ordinances of Christ, 3.
therein appears the honor of Christ, and let the beauty of his holiness appear
in his Ordinances, that men may say, Blessed are the people that are in such a
case. Fourthly, let Christ have the honor of our 4.
names, and of all our comforts: Surely if he have the shame of our reproaches,
he should have the honor of our honors: If he have the pain of our sufferings,
surely he must have the praise of our comforts: Christ has a share in our
sorrows, shall he not have a share in our comforts? when we are reproached he
is reproached; when we are honored, let him be honored too. What a sad thing
will it be, that when you go out of the world, it should be said, Christ has
had more dishonor by you, then he has had honor?

Seventhly, If Christ suffers in all our sufferings, Use 7.
hence we learn not to rush into sufferings, before we be called to them, nor
to withdraw from sufferings, when we are called to them. Christ suffers in all
our sufferings, then it is not in our liberty to rush into sufferings when we
please, though it should be in the cause of Christ. Indeed if we suffered
alone, we might venture, but because Christ is interessed in it, we must stay
till we know whether Christ be willing to suffer; though our time be come, yet
it may be Christ will say, My time is not yet come; because it is in a good
cause you think you may suffer in it, but consider, is Christ's time come? In
Proverbs 10. 10. it is said, He that winketh with the eye causes sorrow, but a
prating fool shall fall. when a man is loath to stand for those truths of God
that shall bring him into suffering, he winks: He that winketh with the eye,
causes sorrow, he will bring sorrow to his heart. But others will say, We will
not wink with the eye, it is the cause of God, and we will stand for it, but a
prating fool shall fall. A true man may ride in the rode, and fear no danger,
yet he will not willingly ride into dangerous places, and so a man is not to
ride into danger. As now if you be partners with another, you cannot give what
you will, because it is not your own, but it is your partners too. If a man
have a cottage of his own alone in a field, he may set it on fire, but if he
set his own house on fire in the town, it may cost him his life, because others
are interessed in the damage as well as himself. Again, if Christ do call, we
must go freely, because they are the sufferings of Christ, It is reported of
Peter in Ecclesiastical Story, that he was coming out of Rome for fear of
suffering; and as he was coming out of the gates, he met Christ, and he asked
Christ wherefore he came; says he, I come to be crucified, then he thought
Christ came to be crucified in him, and therefore he went back and resolved to
suffer, and so he was crucified. And so though we be shy of suffering, yet if
we know Christ calls to it, we must yield, as being willing to suffer in us.

But when are we called? Quest.


There is an ordinary call, and an extraordinary call. The extraordinary call
is by the Spirit: And that is Answ.
first, when there are none that will stand for the cause of God in an ordinary
way. Secondly, those that God calls extraordinarily, are such as have
extraordinary graces: They act not their own natural boldness, but are carried
beyond it by a mighty work of Gods Spirit: And therefore thou may suspect
thy self, that thou art not called extraordinarily, but after much humiliation,
and much abilities to deny thy self.

But for an ordinary call* First, then we are called when if we do not suffer,
Gods cause will suffer. Secondly, when God does take away the means and helps
of delivering us from suffering. Thirdly, the more helps are taken from us, the
more we find the consolation of Gods Spirit come into us.

But when helps are taken away, and the Spirit of God does absent it self,
shall we fear then that we are When we are called to suffering.
not called?

Some think, surely they must not suffer, then they shall betray Gods cause: If
they do, because they do not find God present with them: If God do give you a
fair way to escape when his presence is gone, you may take it; but if he shut
you up that you cannot escape, you may comfortably go on; though now he be
gone, he will return again; as it was with Mr. Glover, who wanted the presence
of God even till he came to the Stake, and then he clapped his hands and cried,
He is come, he is come.

The last Use of the point is this, If Christ suffer Use 8.
in his people, and if all the evil you cast upon Gods people is Christ's, then
all the good you do to them is Christ's: If when you speak evil of Gods people
and reproach them, you reproach Christ; then when you speak well of Gods
people, you speak well of Christ: If when you persecute Gods people, you
persecute Christ; then when you relieve Gods people, you relief Christ; Christ
will own the good that is done to his people, as well as the evil: And
therefore as the argument once was, Relieve all strangers, for some unawares
have done good to Angels; So now, do all the good you can to Gods people, for
unawares you may do much good to Christ. And thus I have finished the second
point from this Verse, That the reproaches of Gods people are the reproaches of
Christ. Now we are to proceed to the third.

CHAP. XXXVIII. A gracious heart has a high esteem of reproaches in the cause
of Christ.
THat a gracious heart has a high esteem of Point. 3.
the reproaches of Christ, he highly esteems of every disesteem he suffers for
Christ: And not only bears reproaches and sufferings patiently, but
triumphingly; he is not only contented with them, but counts himself enriched
by them. This is a great riddle and mystery to the world, that Sufferings,
Troubles, Miseries and Reproaches should be rejoiced in, and esteemed highly
of. We are to understand by reproaches is this point likewise, not only
slanders, and mocks, and scorns, the sufferings of Gods people in their names
formally, but materially their sufferings, they suffer for Christ, upon which
they come to be contemned: So that whatsoever Gods people do suffer in the
cause of God, and for Christ, they have high thoughts of it: If God should give
unto them all the riches and honors of the world, they could not count
themselves so enriched as they do by their sufferings. For men to be enriched
by the glorious things of heaven, this is no wonder; but to be enriched by
their sufferings and reproaches, this is the great wonder of the world, that
only those that have the Spirit of God are acquainted withal. Says St. Paul in
Romans 5. 3. We glory in tribulations: There is a patient bearing of tribulation,
and a rejoicing in tribulation, and glorying in tribulation; now they did not
only bear them patiently, and rejoice in them, but they did esteem them their
glory. It is a notable speech in Acts 5. 41. It is said of the Apostles when
they were called before the Council, and were very ill handled, They departed
from the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for
his name; to be worthy of shame, is a strange kind of phrase: But in the
Original it is, They counted it honor (...).
to be dishonored. In Luke 6. 22, 23. you have another Text to show forth unto
us this truth clearly, Blessed are you when men shall hate you, and when they
shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out
your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake: Here is an expression of the
greatest dishonor that can be to Gods people: What should they do then? Rejoice
in that day, and leap for joy, for, behold your reward is great in heaven: As
if Christ should say, I do not bid you bear it patiently, but joyfully, and
more then an ordinary joy, leap for joy. And that is remarkable of St. Paul, in
2 Cor. 11. where he reckons up many things to vindicate his Apostleship,
wherein he was equal and above others; you shall find they are his sufferings
principally he endured for Christ, at verse 23. Are they the Ministers of
Christ, I speak as a fool, I am more: in labors more abundant, in stripes above
measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often: now this is brought to show
the dignity of his Apostleship; and therefore in the conclusion at verse 30.
when he was put upon glorying, he shows what he most gloried in: If I must
needs glory, I will glory in things that concern mine infirmities: by
infirmities we are not to understand the infirmities of sin, but his weakness,
and evils that he endured for Christ. And so in chap. 12. ver. 10. (...)
Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in persecutions, in
distresses for Christ's sake.

And thus the people of God in former times Crudelit as vestra, glorea nostra,
Tertul. ad Scapul. Spectabat laeta fileoru^ funera tot trophia and morientium
vocibus tanqua^ psallentium cantibus delectabatur. and pietatis barmoniam
pulcherima^ veutris sui either am in filiis cernens omni lyrae numero
dulciorem. Ambros. offic. l. 1. c. 36.
have much gloryed in that they have suffered in the cause of Christ. It is the
speech of Tertullian, Your cruelty is our glory. We read of tender mothers
beholding their childrens suffering death for Christ as their Trophies and
Triumphs, and delighting in their last breathings, as in most melodious music.
And it is reported of Balilas, when he was to dye, he required this favor, to
have his chains to be buried with him as the ensigns of his honor. It was the
manner of the Romans, when any had received any wounds for their country, they
would show the scars and places of their wounds for their glory. Pliny tells us
of one, because he got forty five wounds for his country, by that he got
immortal honor amongst the Romans. Thus Saint Paul seems to argue, Let no man
put me to business, I bear about me the marks of the Lord Jesus. And Ignatius
professed, he had rather be a Martyr then a Monarch. And Prudentius tells us of
the Martyrs in his time, and especially of Vincentius, that the great Tormenta
carcer ungulae stridcnsque fla^ mis Lumina atque ipsa paenaru^ ultima mors
Christianis Lu dus est. Prudentius hymno in laudem Vincentii Sanctus Vincentius
ridens occisores suos dixit nortem and cruces esse Christianis quaedam
jocularia and ludicra and super prunas incide^s gloriabatur se super Rosas ire.
S Agatha ad epulas and ^^p^ias ire se dixit cum id carceres and torment^ iret,
Lutherus To. 4. p. 315. "Corona Martyrii.
torments that were presented to them, were but sports and plays to them, they
delighted themselves in those things they suffered for Christ, they trod upon
burning coals as if they had trod upon roses. And so in the Primitive time they
were wont to call Martyrdom by that name, The "crown of Martyrdom. I desire to
know nothing, says St. Paul, but Christ and him crucified. And we know how
superstitiously they did use the Cross of Christ in former times, and how high
respect they would give unto a piece of wood that Christ was crucified upon;
yea, if they had but that piece of wood in imagination: what a deal of business
was there made by Constantines mother about the Cross of Christ? Certainly it
grew upon this, it was but the abuse of the high esteem that the people of God
had of sufferings. The Emperor Baldwyn thought himself blessed, if he had but a
piece of the Cross of Christ; that he would carry about with him in his arms.
It is reported of one King of England, that he bestowed as much upon a Cross,
as the Revenues of his Kingdom came to in a year. And that esteem which they
had of a piece of wood, the Martyrs in the Primitive times had of the Cross of
Christ; namely, of the sufferings they endured for Christ.

Quest. But you will say, wherein does it appear, and how comes it to pass,
that Gods people do so esteem of their sufferings for Christ?

Ans. There are great riches in them: First, the riches of evidence: Secondly,
the riches of preferment: Thirdly, the riches of employment: Fourthly, riches
of improvement: Fifthly, riches of experience: Sixthly, riches of promises:
Seventhly, riches of comforts: Eighthly, riches of glory.

First, they are great riches, because they have rich evidences from them, and
that in these four or five 1.
particulars.

First, by the sufferings they suffer for Christ, they have an evidence to
themselves, that the way they are 1.
in is the right way: They have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed:
there was a time when they walked in the ways of sin in their footsteps, and
then they were never reproached; but now they have changed their way, and walk
in the footsteps of the anointed, now they are reproached. If a man being Dura
videtur, sed ipsa est tuta via alia forte deli^ias habet, sed latronibus plena
est, Aug. in Ps. 36. Ego nisi illos tumultus videre^, verbu^ Dei in mundo nou
esse dicerem. Luther.
going in a way, the end of which is of great consequence, and if he should
miscarry in his way, he were undone: If one should tell him some marks of the
way; as you go you shall meet with such a dirty lane, and such a craggy
mountain; though he would be glad they were not, yet when he comes at them he
is glad, because they are signs of the way he must go. Straight is the gate,
and narrow is the way that leads to life. Master Bradford made use of that
place when he came to the Stake, and looked upon his sufferings as an evidence
to him that he was in the right way.

Secondly, they are an evidence to him of that difference that God has made
between others and him: 2.
there was a time, when as other men could close with me, and agree with me;
now see what a difference there is, they nothing but contemn me and despiseme:
I might have gone on and have been a scorner and a mocker as they are; O the
difference that God has made between me and them! that God should call me from
them, who was as vile as they; and suffer them to be reproachers of godliness,
and make me a sufferer for godliness! Jerome Quod signum major is gloria est
omnes Haretici letestantur Hyeron. ad August Epist. 25 inter Epistolas
Augustini.
writ to Augustine, that it was a great sign of glory to him, that all
Heretics did hate him.

Thirdly, it is an evidence of the sincerity, and the power of his grace, and
his love that he bears to Christ: and this is great riches; for a gracious
heart says, Lord try me, Lord prove me: he would fain have an opportunity to
manifest the truth of his love to Christ: all the while I go on in a way of
prosperity, 3.
and have the desire of my heart, wherein appears my love to Christ? but now
when I am called to suffering, and to part with much for Christ, here is an
opportunity to show I love Christ for himself, that my love to him does not
depend upon any thing that I gain by him in the world. The Apostle says, The
trial of your grace, he speaks of faith, is more precious then silver and gold:
and not only your grace is more precious, but the trial of grace is more
precious then gold and silver. A gracious heart does rejoice much in evidencing
love to Christ; as any dear friend rejoices much in any opportunity of
manifesting his love to another friend, and the greater the opportunity is, the
more does he rejoice. And likewise the power of grace is manifested: as David
said to the King Achish, Thou shall know what thy servant can do; and so a
gracious heart thinks here is an opportunity to manifest the strength and power
that is in grace.

Fourthly, they are an evidence that much good is done, 4.
that Satan's kingdom is shaken; in sufferings we see the rage of the Devil, and
he rages then most when he sends most opposition to his kingdom; wherefore
those against whom he rages most, may have hereby evidence that they were most
instrumental against him: I rejoice, says Luther, Gaudeo sic Satana indignari
and blasphemare quoties a me tangitur. Luther 2. Epist. ad Amsdorsium.
That Satan does so rage and blaspheme, as often as I do but touch him: he took
it as an argument that much good was done, otherwise the Devil would not have
been so vexed, he would not have raged so much.

Fifthly, a gracious heart has an evidence to it self, that God will spare him
when others shall suffer from 5.
his wrath. Certainly, the more any one is called to suffer in the cause of
God, and when he finds his heart ready and willing to yield to God in
suffering, the more evidence may he have to his soul, that when others shall be
called to suffer from Gods wrath, he shall be spared: and this is the bottom of
the prayer of the Psalmist, Psalm. 89. 50. Remember Lord, the reproach of thy
servants; how I do bear in my bosom the reproach of the mighty people. I read
of one Escelus, being condemned to be stoned to death, and all the people were
ready to cast stones at him; and his brother came, and run in, and showed that
he had but one hand, and the other hand he had lost for the defense of his
country, and then none would stone him: and so the marks of the Lord Jesus,
are notable marks to safeguard thee in the time of trouble: when the Lord goes
out in his wrath, he will set his mark upon those that he will save; and none
more notable marks, then the reproaches and sufferings they bear for Christ.
This was Jeremiahs plea before the Lord, chap. 15. ver. 5. O Lord thou know,
remember me and visit me; know that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke.

Lastly, it is an evidence of salvation, Phil. 1. 28. not that all that suffer
shall be saved: but a gracious 6.
heart that suffers in a gracious Christian manner, has God sealing to him by
his spirit in his sufferings, his salvation. Put these together, and we see one
cause why we should count the reproaches of Christ great riches, yea, this is
greater riches then the riches of Novam gloriam nibi annu^^ias quod Aduter
principum vocer quales mihi glorias hi^ ^nnis Satan ^xcitavit. Amajori
^raeaorum ornamenta ^unt vuln^^a. Hiero ^ym. ad ^micum ^grotum Est enim ^edra
dig^atio etiam contumelia ^ffici and ligari Chry^ost. in Acta Hom. 39. ^s
consessor ^erus and ^llustris de ^uo non c^ubescit Ecclesia, sed gloria^ur.
Cyp. Ep. 6.
Egypt.

Secondly, the reproaches and sufferings which we endure for Christ, are riches
of preferment. It was a speech of Ignatius, when he was to suffer, It is better
for me to be a Martyr, then a Monarch. Epist. 12. ad Romanos, Eusebius. l. 8. c.
7. To be preferred to honor, is counted great riches: now there is a preferment
of Gods people here, these three or four ways: Basil upon that famous Martyr
Bar-aam, says, he rejoiced in stripes as in honors, he exulted in the severest
punishments, as if praeclara bravia acceperet.

First, the Saints look upon this as high preferment, because it is a testimony
that God has a high esteem of them: God does not use to call those that are
weak and mean to great sufferings, but his servants that are most eminent; God
will dispose of the conditions of his people, suitable to their dispositions,
therefore he will not call those to the strongest work that are weakest. A
Captain does not call out his mean Soldiers to a notable enterprise, but he
calls out his most able courageous Soldiers; and the more desperate the
enterprise is, the more honor the Soldier thinks it to be called out: so the
greater work God calls one to, the more preferment is in it; and we have cause
to admire that God should deal so with us his poor creatures, rather then
others; as if we were fitter then' others: though we cannot say we are fitter,
because we are conscious to our selves of so much weakness; but God honors us
as if it were so.

Secondly, by this we come to be honorable in the eyes of the Churches, and the
Saints of God: nothing makes Gods people more honorable in the eyes of the
Saints, then when they are called to suffer much for God. And so in the
Primitive times, they esteemed much of the Martyrs, even too much. Chrysostom
Magnus atque admirabil is vir si modo viri nominc disignare ^llum fas ^st
Chris. Oratione contra gentiles.
speaking of Babylas the Martyr, calls him a great man, a man to be admired,
and says, if I may call him a man: and Tertullian Non ^antus sum ^t vos
alloquar.
writing to some of the Martyrs, says, I am not worthy to speak to you: he
writes that it was a custom of some in those times to creep to the Chains
Reptare ad vincula
of the Martyrs, in a way of honor to them. Basil O Beatus linquas que sacra^
voce^ istam imiserunt qua^ ^er quidem ^ecipiens, sacer fictus est. Basil Hom in
40 Marty^ Thirdly, the honor they have in conformity to Christ.
speaking of the forty Martyrs, breaks out into this expression, O blessed
tongues which put forth such a confession, as the air receiving it was even
made holy by it. You must suppose the expression to be hyperbolical, yet so as
shows how honorable the Martyrs were in their professions of Christ.

Thirdly, it is a greater dignity in some degree then God puts upon the Angels
in Heaven; the Angels glorified God in a way of service, but the Angels and
Saints in Heaven have not this way to glorify God, they are not called to
suffer in the cause of God*

Thirdly, the reproaches we suffer for Christ, are riches of employment: in
this they are called to be employed in the greatest work that God has to do in
the world: there are no people in the world employed so to set out Gods praise,
as they are that are called to suffer; this is the lowest subjection that can
be to God, but the highest honor.

And they are called to be maintainers of the truth of God. Says Calvin upon
this argument, What are we poor worms, full of vanities and lies, that we
should be called to be maintainers of the truth? The great cause of Gods truth,
is maintained especially in Hi sunt utilissimi credentibus qui sunt cis
nocentissimi, modo recte fera^tur, Luth O beatem Ecclesiam, quam temporibus
nostris gloriosus Martyrum sanguis illustrat, erat in operibus fratru^ candida,
nunc facta est in Martyrum cruore purjurea; floribus ejus nec lilia uec rosae
desunt, de operibus coronae candidae, de passione purpureae, Cypr. Ep. 9.
Gods peoples suffering for the truth: Here is a glorious contending for the
faith of God that is delivered to the Saints. Those who are in Prison, says
Cyprian Gloriosa voce Deum confessi qui in carcere, Cypr. Ep. 5.
, Confess God with a glorious voice.

Again, they are employed in bringing credit to the Church of God; Gods people
that suffer, are a great honor to the Church of God: whereas Apostates do
disgrace the Church of God; those that stand out in the defense of the truth in
suffering, make up that honor that the Church has lost: these are great
employments. A gracious heart accounts it as great riches to bring honor to the
Church, as to have honor himself: of which before. It is a notable expression
that Cyprian has, to set out the honor the Church has by such who suffer for
the truth; O blessed Church, which in our times is made glorious, by the
glorious blood of the Martyrs; it was white by the works of the brethren, now
it is purple by the blood of Martyrs; there are neither Lillies nor Roses
wanting in her flowers; white garlands from their works, and purple from their
sufferings.

Fourthly, they are riches of improvement: First, grace is improved; grace is
never so improved, as it is at that time when a soul suffers for Christ; Mihi
maxim prosunt, qui mei possime mimineru^t. Luth. Ep ad Spalatinum.
they most profit me, says Luther, who speak worst of me? as opposition of sin
in the wicked improves their sin, so opposition of grace in the godly improves
their grace: Lutherus pascitur convitiis, Luther made reproaches his food, he
was nourished by them: virtutem intelligo animosam and excelsam quam incitat
quicquid infestat, Sen. Ep. 72. Secondly, here is improved whatsoever Gods
people do enjoy, that they are willing to lose; no such improvement of a man's
credit or estate, as the loss of it for Christ: if we would devise how we
should improve and lay out all our talents for God, we cannot lay them out
better; we shall quickly gain from five to ten here: If men know how to improve
their stocks to the utmost, they count the knowledge of that way, more then if
a man had given them many hundred pounds: we come to improve all that we have
in a glorious manner, when God calls unto suffering. Thirdly, by 3.
suffering Gods people come to improve the malice and wickedness that is in the
Devil and men; that is a great improvement, when I can turn the malice of the
Devil and wicked men into my riches. It is a notable speech that one Vincentius
had of his Persecutors, Never any man did serve me better then you serve me;
and he told them what a great deal he did get by their malice in persecuting of
him: if a man were able to turn dirt into riches, how would that enrich a man?
but to have that which can turn the dirt of wicked men and the Devil into our
riches, that must be a rich thing. Again, a child of God 4.
never improves his time so well, as when he is suffering for God, when he is a
doing good, he is improving his time, but when he is suffering, he does as much
in a little time, as he was doing a great while before; God does much reckon
upon the time of his people in suffering.

Fifthly, sufferings and reproaches are riches of experiences. 5.
As first, when they are called to suffer for 1.
Christ, to be reproached for Christ, they have experience of Gods power in
upholding them. Secondly, 2.
experience of the ways and many passages of the providence of God toward them
in all their sufferings. Thirdly, they come to have experience of the 3.
working of their own hearts. And lastly, they come 4.
to have experience what it is to be in a suffering condition: men have another
apprehension of a suffering condition before they are called unto it, then when
they are called to it; and therefore they are ready to say, I never knew what a
prison meant, and what reproaches meant till now, I do not find that in them
that I was afraid of; and these experiences are great riches.

Sixthly, reproaches and sufferings bring in rich promises, and they bring in a
great deal: O that Christians 6.
did but know their riches in regard of the precious promises, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Every promise is a pearl to enrich Gods people withal, and where there is true
grace, that soul does count it self more enriched by the promises, then by any
trading. Now the promises that are so rich unto a gracious heart, they are of
diverse sorts; As first, the promise of Gods presence with them, and they count
those promises to be rich things: as the promise of Gods gracious presence, 1.
and the promise of his glorious presence, and the promise of his abiding
presence. For his gracious promise, in Isa. 43. 2. When thou passest through the
waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee; when thou walk through the fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall
the flame kindle upon thee. Again, his glorious presence and his abiding
presence, for that you have one promise take in both together, 1 Pet. 4. 14. If
you be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of glory
and of God rests upon you; there is the Spirit of God in all the Saints, but
there is the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of glory on those that are
reproached for Christ, that is, The glorious Spirit of God, the Spirit of God
in a glorious manner. Secondly, the Spirit of God and of glory rests upon you,
it does not pass away, but rests upon you: now what a rich promise is here; and
what is in all the world that may be named with this promise.

Secondly, promises of direction: says Christ, Take 2.
no thought when you are called before rulers for my names sake, how or what
you shall speak, for it shall be given you in that same hour what you shall
speak. Thirdly, there are promises of assistance; I will be 3.
with you to the end of the world. Fourthly, there is 4.
a promise of acceptance; He that forsakes houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my names sake, shall
receive a hundred fold, and inherit eternal life. Fifthly, a 5.
promise of blessing; Blessed are you when men revile you and persecute you,
and say all manner of evil falsely on you for my sake. Sixthly, a promise of a
Kingdom; If we suffer with him, we shall likewise reign 6.
with him, Luke 22. 28, 29. Ye are they which have continued with me in my
temptations; and, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my father has appointed
unto me: the appointing of a Kingdom follows upon their continuing with Christ
in temptation. Brethren, God promises much to those that shall be sensible of
the reproaches of others, much more when thou thy self suffer in the cause
of Christ. In Zeph. 3. 18. I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn
Assembly; time was, when the solemn Assemblies of Gods people, their gathering
together to hear a Sermon was their reproach, and they were contemned by many:
were you ever in any place where the Assemblies of Gods people were
reproachful, and was this a burden to your souls, and grievous to you? mark
the blessed promise, I will gather them together: but to be reproached our
selves, and to bear our reproaches in a Christian manner, great and rich
promises are made unto it.

Seventhly, in reproaches and sufferings for 7.
Christ, there are rich consolations; never such consolation let out to a
gracious heart, as when it is under reproaches and sorest persecutions: if ever
Christ does turn water into wine, it is the tears of Gods people that are
turned into wine of consolation. Basil Has epulas ego semper desideravi,
Guliel. Paris. de moribus. Ad epulas and nuptias ire se dixit, cum ad carceres
and tormenta iret, apud Lutherum T. 4. 315.
in his Oration for Barlaam that famous Martyr, says, He delighted in the close
Prison, as in a pleasant green meadow, and he took pleasure in the several
inventions of tortures, as in several sweet flowers. And Vincentius the Martyr
speaking of the great things he suffered for Christ, has this expression, I
have always desired these dainties. Luther reports of that Martyr, St. Agatha,
that as she went to Prisons and Tortures, she said, she went to Banquets and
Nuptails. And James Bainham said when they kindled the fire at his feet, Me
thinks you strew roses before me. And Mr. Saunders has a most full expression
of his consolation, he felt a wonderful sweet refreshment flow from his heart
unto all the members of his body, and from all the parts of his body to his
heart again. And that Martyr Hawks, lifts up his hands above his head, and
claps them together when he was in the fire, as if he had been in a triumph:
this is a special fruit of the Spirit of God, and of glory, of which St. Peter
speaks, 1 Pet. 4. 14. If ye suffer reproaches, happy are ye, the Spirit of God
and glory rests upon you, and one consolation, one beam of Gods face is worth
all the riches of the world. The Sun enlightens the world, says Cyprian, but he
that made the Sun is a greater light to you in prison; that darkness which is
the horrible deadly darkness of the place of punishment to others, he
irradiates to you with his bright and eternal light. Vobis idem qui Solemn fecit
majus in carcere lumen fuit horribiles caeteris atque funest as paenalis loci
tenebr as aeterna illa and candida luce radiante, Cyp. Ep. 16.

Eighthly, in reproaches and sufferings there are riches of glory both before
the day of Judgment and after: riches of glory before; if so be that opinion
of some be true (which I dare not altogether deny) of Christ's coming to reign
in the world here before the day of Judgment; though I will not affirm it as a
truth, yet if there be not a truth in it, I confess I cannot make any thing of
many places of Scripture, Rev. 20. 5. But the rest of the dead lived not again
till the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection. Blessed
and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection; on such the second
death has no power, but they shall be Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall
reign with him a thousand years. I know this is ordinarily interpreted of the
resurrection from sin to grace, and reigning with Christ a thousand years, that
is, reigning with him in Heaven: but this cannot be the meaning of the Text;
this thousand years must be before the day of Judgment, because Satan must be
loosed after: now if this prove to be true, O the riches of glory, that those
that suffer for Christ shall have! all those that have suffered for Christ,
they especially shall be raised up to reign with Christ on the earth; and
therefore you have it in ver. 4. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them,
and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not
worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon
their foreheads, or in their hands, and reigned with Christ a thousand years.
Suppose it to be so, then the more any do suffer for withdrawing himself from
Antichrist, the more glory they shall have when Christ comes to reign upon the
earth. Some are loath to receive the mark of the Beast upon their foreheads,
openly to appear for Antichrist; yet they will have the mark of the Beast in
their hands; but here is a promise to them that shall refuse both: and it is
not meant only of those that suffer death in their lives; the death in our
liberties, and death in our estates, and other kind of deaths shall not go
unrewarded; it is a point that was spoken of in the Primitive times, and
afterward it was condemned upon this ground, because many grew to be sensual,
and thought the Kingdom of Christ should be for a thousand years in pleasure to
the flesh: but take the Kingdom of Christ to be spiritual in the glory of his
Ordinances, as I am confident that Christ shall reign Personally, in his flesh
I will not say, but Spiritually, far more gloriously then he has done.

But then at the day of Judgment, O the glory of those that suffer for Christ,
they shall have Crowns upon their heads, and Palms in their hands, and all
their persecutors stand as base creatures before them! O the imbracings that
there shall be then. If a father send his child abroad about business, and the
child meet with much difficulty, and comes home in a rainy tempestuous day,
how gladly his father receives him, and all are busy to tend on him, and to
make a fire, and get him dry clothes! So when the people of God meet with such
hardship in the world, when they shall come and meet with Christ for whom they
have suffered, how shall they be entertained? What riches of glory shall they
enjoy in the highest heavens for ever hereafter? our sufferings are but the
seeds of our glory; and the deeper the furrows are, the more plentiful will the
Harvest be: and therefore Gordius Majora certamina majora scqu untur premiae,
Tertul. ad S^^pulam
the Martyr said, It is to my loss, if you bate me any thing in my sufferings.
Are you reproached for Christ? Blessed are you; for the Brand of reproach (says
Basil Propter-Christ no nen afficeris ignominia, Bea^us es, quouiam injusta
tibi ^gnominiae labes in Augeli gloria^ co^mutabitur, Basil. orat de pat.
) shall be turned into the glory of an Angel. A gracious heart counts it more
riches to be conformable to Christ, then to have Crowns upon his head: As in
Phil. 3. 8. he counted all the things of the world dogs meat, for the
fellowship of Christ's sufferings; he did not count all the world dogs meat, for
the glory he should have by Christ only; but for the fellowship he should have
in the sufferings of Christ. Truly happy is that Neque nobis ignominia est pati
equod passus st Christus Cypr. Ep 55.
soul, and to be equalled with Angels, says Jerome, who is willing to suffer,
if it were possible, as great things for Christ, as Christ has suffered for
it. Vera est illa anima faelix, and Angelis aequanda quae pro nomine and opere
Christi tanta quanta pro nobis ille sustinuit, voluit sustinere, Hyeronym.
Epist. ad Oceanum. Such as have been followers of eminent men, they highly
esteemed to be like their Masters, though in things that were some dishonor; As
Plato was a man of a crooked back, and his Scholars counted it an ornament for
to go crooked. And Aristotle had a lisping speech, and his Scholars thought it
an honor to have a lisping speech. And Alexander had somewhat a wry neck, and a
harsh speech, and his soldiers thought it an honor to be like him: how much
more should the godly count their sufferings an honor, because they are
comformable to Christ? For Application.

In the first place, hence we see the excellency of grace, what an excellent
and glorious thing it is, Use 1.
wheresoever it is, that it does conduce so far to increase riches out of any
thing: great must needs be the gain of godliness, when it gains from their
sufferings and reproaches; grace is such a thing, as can turn dust into gold:
The Philosophers stone is counted a rich thing, because it turns dust into
gold, grace will do it, the dirt that the world casts upon Gods people, is
turned into gold: well may it be called the Divine nature; for as God brings
light out of darkness, and comfort out of sorrow, and riches out of poverty,
and glory out of shame, so does grace. How does grace conduce to the
comfortable life of Gods people? as for the service that God employs them in,
they count that honorable; and the sufferings that God calls them to, they
count them comfortable; we need not therefore be so afraid of sufferings;
indeed, if we have not a principle to change the nature of them, we may be
afraid, but if God do put a principle into us, to turn our shame into glory,
and sufferings into riches, we need not be afraid: If any did see Moses his
Serpent, he would be afraid; but if he had Moses hand, he would not be afraid,
because Moses hand had a divine virtue with it to turn the Serpent into a rod;
and so if we look upon sufferings as a Serpent ready to devour us, we may be
afraid, but when we consider the excellency of grace, that it has a divine
power to turn the Serpent into a rod, you need not be afraid; labor to prize
this jewel of grace, that can do such great things: It was the curse upon the
wicked, that God would turn their glory into shame; It is the blessing of
grace, that it will turn shame into glory.

Secondly, we see a reason of the meekness and quiet behavior of Gods people in
sufferings: Though they are persecuted, they carry themselves meekly, and are
ready to forgive, they are not discouraged, and sink in their sufferings,
because they look upon sufferings with another eye then the men of the world
do, they look upon their sufferings as their glory and riches: When a man has
riches coming in, he is quiet; and though he were angry, passionate, and vexing
before, yet when riches come in, that quiets his heart, and he is ready to do
any office of love then; this is the reason why Gods people are ready to do any
office of love to them that do persecute them, because they look upon them as
their glory. St. Paul was a man that had a high esteem of his sufferings, and
therefore when he suffered much, and from those that were his friends, in Gal.
4. 12. see his behavior, Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am, for I am as you
are, ye have not injured me at all; As if he should say, How soever you have
carried your selves, yet be as I am, I am as you are, let our hearts close and
join together; you have not injured me at all: Thus his spirit was carried in
this quiet and meek frame, because he had a right understanding of the nature
of sufferings. And so we read of Stephen, when they were stoning him, says he,
Lord forgive them: What was the ground of this? He saw the heavens opened, and
Christ stand at the right hand of his Father, he saw a great deal of glory that
was in his sufferings when he suffered thus for Christ; he could pray for his
persecutors: What was the reason Christ endured all so quietly? he knew the
good that was in his sufferings. Indeed, as for those that see no good in them,
that find nothing but trouble and vexation, no marvel though their hearts fret
and revile again; but where a gracious heart finds sweetness and good in
suffering, surely there need not be that fretting and vexation of spirit in
them as in others. And why should we vex and fret, when we suffer any thing for
God? it must be upon one of these two grounds; either because of the evil that
we do endure, or the evil of those from whom we do endure. The evil that we do
endure cannot cause fretting, because it is turned to such great riches. But
you will say, The suffering it self I do not care for, but the base malicious
hearts of those from whom I suffer, that troubles me. To that I answer, It is
reported concerning Socrates, being once reproached, and yet behaving himself
meekly and quietly, one came and asked him how he could be so meek and quiet,
when he was reproached by such a one as he was that did reproach him? Socrates
answered, If as we go along we should meet with a man that had a diseased body,
more diseased then our bodies, more weak then ours, should we fret at him
because we see the disease of his body more grievous then ours: No, this should
make us pity him; then says he, if as we go along, we see the spirit of one
more diseased, and more distempered then ours, should this make us fret at him?
it rather calls for pity and commiseration: so if that be the thing that makes
thee fret; namely, the malice of them from whom you suffer, it should rather
turn your vexation into commiseration, and look upon his spirit as diseased,
and sickly, and weak, and bless God that has given you a more strong and hail
spirit.

Thirdly, if Gods people account sufferings and reproaches Use 3.
greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, then here we may see to what a
height a gracious spirit is raised to, how high above the world; in that it
looks upon the riches, and glory, and sweet contentment of the world, as under
the meanest and basest thing that does attend godliness; namely, as things
under reproaches, and under scorns and sufferings; Gods people do not only
look at Christ, and grace, and heaven, as above the riches and glory of the
world, that they are infinitely above them; but mark how a gracious heart is
raised above the world, take the very dirt that is cast upon the ways of God,
and he counts that very dirt to be higher then all the riches, and glory, and
dignity of the world; surely then a gracious heart has a very low esteem of
the world, and the riches and glory of it, howsoever other men that know no
better things, esteem highly of them: A man that has rich Revenues, plentiful
comings in, he blesses himself in this, and counts himself a great man here;
but know, while you are blessing your selves in these things of the world, that
do glitter in carnal eyes, a gracious heart is so far from looking at that
which you do so highly esteem of as great matters, as he accounts the very
baseness that attends the ways of godliness, as a higher preferment by far then
all your glory, and rejoices more in it, and blesses God more for it; yea,
blesses himself more in the very basest and meanest things that attend
godliness, then in all your riches; so that a godly man's feet are where a
wicked man's head is.

The head of a worldly man, that is, the chief of his desires, and joys, and
endeavors, it is in the riches of the world, and there a godly man's feet stand,
and he counts them so low, as he counts the dirt of his feet better: Surely it
is but a little room that riches have in the heart of a godly man, when as the
very reproaches of Christ are more to him then all the riches of the world: The
very filth that is cast upon him while he is in his way, he does count better.
When we would express our most vile esteem of any thing, we use to say, We
prize it no more then the dirt under our feet; then surely a godly man must
have a vile esteem of the things of the world, for he does not so much prize it
as the dirt that is cast upon him. And so the Psalmist in Psalm. 119, 118.
speaking of the vile esteem that God has of the wicked, says he, He treads
them down under his feet, and puts them away as dross: Gods servants are
compared in Mal. 3. 17. to jewels that are scattered up and down in the dirt,
for so the phrase does intimate, but the dirt that is upon his jewels, is
highlier esteemed by Gods people, then all the jewels of the world: The
scrapings and washings that come from the trenchers of men, is the sweetest
food unto a Swine; so that which is the sweetest and most delightful things of
the men of the world, it is meaner then the basest thing that does belong unto
the sufferings of Gods people. O the advantage that the Saints have above the
men of the world! Were there any great matter in the things of the world,
howsoever esteemed by men, it could not be that the very reproaches of Gods
people could be counted better; but whatsoever esteem the men of the world have
of them, it appears by this there is no great matter in them.

Riches in Scripture are compared to thorns, there How riches do resemble
thorns.
are five or six things wherein they are like thorns; First, thorns are the
vilest plaints, so riches are to a gracious heart. Secondly, in regard of the
suddenness 1.
of their passing away, if the fire do but touch them, 2.
they are quickly gone, so riches soon pass away, it is said, They have wings
and fly away. Thirdly, in regard 3.
of their unfruitfulnes, thorns bear nothing fit for man, so riches are very
unfruitful, they make men unfruitful. Fourthly, in regard that thorns are such
hindrances to better things; and therefore the Scripture 4.
says, the seed of the word that was sown among thorns it was choked, they
will not let better things grow by them; so the riches of the world and cares
about them, choke up all, and hinder other things that are good. Fifthly, they
are compared to thorns, in regard 5.
of the prickly nature of them: So there are many snares in riches; says the
Holy Ghost, They pierce themselves through with many sorrows: It is hard for a
man to go through thorns, and not to pierce himself; he may be in the outside
of them, and not pierce himself; so though a man be busy in the world, he may
keep himself from pricking, but if he be over head and ears in the world, he
will be pricked; as the sheep that is got into the thorns will lose part of her
fleece, so Gods people will lose part of their good amongst the world. Lastly,
many venomous creatures, as 6.
Snakes and Toads, and the like, are creeping and crawling in the thorns, so
many venomous lusts are hidden by riches, an outward glorious estate does hide
many filthy lusts. These arguments may for ever teach us to look upon these
things as very mean and low.

Fourthly, if sufferings and reproaches for Christ be Use 4.
greater riches then all the riches in the world, O how are they mistaken, how
are they deluded that look upon these things as the greatest evils! that are so
shy of sufferings and reproaches for Christ, as that they will lose the
greatest riches, rather then they will be enriched by them, rather then they
will endure them, when as they are so great a good: As first, is not peace of
conscience a rich jewel, more then all the riches of the world; and yet how
many are there that will lose the rich jewel of peace of conscience, rather
then endure reproaches, rather then be enriched by reproaches? though they be
convinced in their conscience, such ways are according to Gods mind, that they
are bound to do them, such things ought to be done, and such things ought to be
left undone; yet rather then they will endure reproaches, they are content to
part with the riches of the peace of conscience.

Secondly, is not the truth of God a rich jewel, a precious jewel? O any one
truth is rich, we should prize 2.
it above our lives! O that faith that was once delivered The benefit of
sufferings.
to the Saints, how should we prize it! Buy the truth, sell it not: Buy it at
any rate, sell it not upon any terms. The truth is that, that the blood, the
lives of so many dear and precious Saints of God that were the glory of the
world, have been laid out for the maintenance of, and well laid out too: For
though God does esteem of the blood of his Saints, and precious in his eyes is
the death of the Saints, yet God esteems highlier of his truth, that is worth
the blood of all that have been spilt for the defense of it. The truth of God
is the especial end for which the Son of God came into the world, and took man's
nature upon him, to testify to the truth. The truth is more worth then rubies
and all precious stones, then gold and silver: Whatsoever thou can desire, is
not to be compared to it; and though there be so many riches in the truth of
God, yet how many are there that will rather betray the truth of God, lose the
truth of God, rather then suffer reproaches.

Thirdly, is it not a rich thing to enjoy communion with God? It was an
expression of that truly noble 3.
Marquis Galeacius, that parted with all for Christ, when his friends that were
very rich, offered him bags of gold and silver to return to them again, he put
them all away with this expression of indignation, Cursed is that man that
counts all the gold and silver in the world, worth the enjoyment of communion
with Jesus Christ: This is riches, yet some had rather lose this then endure
reproaches.

Fourthly, is not the blessing of God upon us, the protection of God over us,
the love of God unto us, the 4.
care of God for us, and the brightness of the face of God shining upon us, and
brightning all our ways, are not these riches? and yet behold how many are
there that are so far from counting reproaches riches, as they will lose these
riches, rather then bear reproaches.

Fifthly, is not the inheritance of the Saints, that 5.
kingdom of glory, that incorruptible undefiled crown that is reserved for
them, riches? and yet how many are so far from esteeming reproaches riches, as
they will venture the loss of that too, rather then they will endure reproaches.

Lastly, are not the Ordinances of God riches, that 6.
are the especial conduits and means of conveyance of the choice mercies of God
unto his people; those mercies that have such an immediate dependence upon
eternity, are not these riches worth all the world? yet how many are so far
from counting reproaches riches, as will rather lose all the riches of the
Ordinance, then be reproached: Though their conscience tell them, You might
enjoy abundance of blessing in the Ordinances, were it that you might have them
in the power of them, and they have a good mind to them: Ah, but my friends
will scorn me; and upon this ground, they forbear coming to the Ordinances: And
thus they are so far from counting the reproaches they shall endure, riches, as
they deprive themselves of all the riches in the Ordinances of God, rather then
they will endure them: Like unto Asa, in 1 Kings 15. 18. he took all the gold,
and silver, and riches of the treasure of God, to send them unto Benhadad, that
he might free him from the King of Israel: So men are willing to part with the
gold and silver, and all the riches of Gods house, and of Gods Ordinances, so
they may be freed from reproaches and sufferings, and from enduring trouble;
was there ever delusion like this delusion, to lose such riches, rather then
endure that which in it self is riches? were it that reproaches were as great
evils as you can imagine, suppose you might go to live where you might enjoy
the Ordinances, though it were in such a place as Job speaks of, in Job 22. 10.
A land of darkness, as darkness it self, and of the shadows of death, without
any order, and where the light is as darkness; yet that subjection that your
souls do owe to God, does call for a willingness to yield to that, and to yield
to reproaches and sufferings, though there were no good in them: but now, when
there is so much good, such glorious things mingled together with reproaches,
for you now to be so afraid of reproaches, as to be willing to lose so much
riches rather then to endure them, how is your heart besotted? Suppose
reproaches had such shame in them as you think they have, cannot God put honor
upon them? man can put honor upon mean things: As the Garter that is counted an
ornament of the highest Nobility, that Kings wear about their necks as an
ensign of their princely order: A Garter fell from a Lady, and she blushed for
shame, the King took it up, Well, says he, I will make this an honorable
ornament ere long; and upon that came the Order of the Garter. If man can put
an honor upon that which is mean, surely God can do it: And therefore Calvin
speaking of sufferings and reproaches, says, They are the ensigns of heavenly
nobility; and if God has put this honor upon them, shall you be so shy of
them, as to lose so much, rather then to endure them?

First, if they were evil, you are to endure them, in 1.
regard of your subjection to God.

Secondly, if there were nothing lost by your drawing 2.
from them, and your unwillingness to endure them, it should be a great deal of
evil; but first considering that there is good in them, and so much lost by
your unwillingness to endure them, what folly is here? there is an art and
skill in Christian Religion, that would show you other things then you see: You
would never have such low esteem of reproaches, if you had the skill of
Christianity: If a man did fling bags of pearls and gold at a dog, he would be
afraid of them, and run away, but a man would not, but be ready to catch them;
and so men of the world and base hearts, that are not acquainted with this
skill of Christianity, they will run way at reproaches and sufferings, but a
heart that knows what they are, does not run away.

But are you shy of sufferings, and run away? what a difference is there
between the disposition of your hearts, and the disposition of the most worthy
servants of God in all ages? you are afraid of them, as if they were evil like
hell it self; Gods people earnestly desire them. I remember a speech of Jerome
upon Qu is post hujusmodi vocem tentari se non sinat? quis ab bominibus ersequi
se justitiae causa non optet? quis se non maledici desi deret? Utinam ob Domini
mei nomen atque justitiam cuncta infidclium turba me persequatur et tribulet:
utinam in opprobrium meum stolidus hic mundus exurgat.
that, Blessed are you when men speak evil of you, and revile you; says he, Who
would not be willing to suffer? who would not wish to be persecuted for
righteousness sake? who would not desire to be reviled? O would all the rout of
unbelievers did persecute and trouble me for the name of my Lord, and for
righteousness sake; I would this foolish world would all rise up against me to
reproach me.

Secondly, Gods people have been greedy of them. Origin was so earnest to
suffer with his father, when he was a youth of sixteen years of age, that if
his mother had not kept his clothes from him, he would have run to the place
where his father suffered, to profess himself a Christian, and to have suffered
with him. And so the story of the poor Woman in the book of Martyrs, that made
haste to the place where many Christians were to be burned, and meeting with
the Persecutor, says he, What need you make such haste to that place, there are
many to be burned? Ah, says she, that I know, and I am afraid all will
Hieronym. ep. ad Ocean.
be done before I come; I and my child would fain suffer with them: And many
blessed the day of their suffering. Alice Drivers expression was, That never
Ambienda bominum maledictio quae acquirit Domini benedictionem. Amb Ep. 25.
lib. Ep. 3.
neckerchief became her so well, as that chain did: and are you so shy of them?
what difference is between you and their spirits. Again, what unthankfulness
and dishonor is this to Christ, that has suffered so much for you. Christ has
gloried in the sufferings he suffered for you, and why should you be afraid of
sufferings for him? it was a notable speech of an Ancient, Acceptable is the
reproach of the Cross to him that is not unthankful to him that was crucified
upon the Cross. And what confusion will it be upon Grata ignominia crucis qua
ei qui crucifixus fuit non cst ingratus. Use 5.
you another day, when you shall see those that suffered are so glorified, that
their sufferings are crowns of such immortal glory? O consider what you do;
deprive not your selves of such glorious riches.

Fifthly, let us labor to get this Christian magnanimity of spirit, namely, for
to glory in all that we suffer for Christ: Heathens can be patient in
sufferings, but Christians must go beyond them, and glory in their sufferings.
You have been bold in suffering for sin, if you might have your mind and will:
now if you may have your mind and will for Gods glory in suffering in a good
way, why should you not suffer? Mark the expressions that we have of Job, Did I
fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families Job 31. 34, 36.
terrify me, that I kept silence, and went not out of the door. O that one
would hear me, behold my desire is, that the Almighty would answer me, and that
mine adversary had written a book: let them say what they can against me, and
write a book against me, Surely, I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it
as a crown to me: Thus it should be with the people of God, they should take
their reproaches as an ensign of honor: This indeed is truly in a spiritual
sense to tread upon the Asp and the Adder, that when the Asp, and Adder, and
the old Serpent does spit out her venomous poison, a gracious heart should
tread upon them. There How to get a suffering spirit.
are three things that will put a spirit of suffering, and so a holy
magnanimity into us: All the arguments in the world will not do it, unless we
have a suffering spirit; and these three things will put a suffering spirit in
us. First, if you had a full satisfaction of your own spirits in the cause of
God you maintain, and the ways of God, you walk from your own experience you
have in them; if you take upon you the profession of Religion by the reports of
others, and be carried by the example of others, that will not do it; but if in
your own experiences you find that sweet and only satisfying content in the
truths and ways of God, this will do it. It was a notable resolution of Luther,
My purpose is not, says he, to maintain my life or name in respect what men
say, or can say of me for my manners, but my purpose is to maintain the cause of
God; let whosoever will tear my life and name in this regard: Propositum est
mihi neque vitam neque mores tueri, sed solam causam; lacerent mores meos
quicunque velint. Luth. ad Nicolau^ Hansman.

Secondly, if you get your hearts inflamed with love 2.
to Christ: Love delights in opportunities of expressing it self, and it has
never such a full opportunity of expressing the strength and heat of it, as in
suffering much for the Beloved.

Thirdly, if you have an eye of faith, and can behold 3.
God the Father, and Christ, and the blessed Angels looking upon you when you
are in your sufferings; By the eye of faith look up to heaven, and see God
looking upon you, and saying, Here is a servant of mine is called to suffer for
me, now you shall see his behavior; and Christ and the Angels looking upon you
to see your behavior, and this will do it; not only make you patient, but
glory in them.

Sixthly, if there be so much glory, and such riches Use. 6. Encouragement to
Sufferrs.
in suffering: Hence we have an Use of abundance of comfort and encouragement
to them that are willing to endure reproaches for Christ. There are five or six
branches of consolation to Gods people in this Use. First, are you willing to
suffer reproaches, and 1. Foelix palatum tali^ saporare potest.
to glory in them? I remember a notable speech of Gulielmus Parisiensis, O
happy pallat that can taste such delicates! O it is a blessed thing that God
has given you such a taste! Again, know, if you glory 2.
in your sufferings for God, God will glory in doing for you: None shall glory
in suffering for him, but he will count it his glory to be doing for them.
Thirdly, 3.
if you glory in your sufferings for Christ, God will count it his glory to
uphold you in his sufferings. Fourthly, do you glory in the low condition you
are put into for Christ? certainly God will own your 4.
souls, and glory in you when you are in the lowest condition, when your souls
shall be in adversity, God will know you then. Fifthly, can you glory in a
suffering Christ, when Christ comes in glory, he 5.
will own you, when he shall be glorified, his glory shall be yours: Those that
are ashamed of me, I will be ashamed of them (says Christ) before my Father and
the Angels: But those that glory in Christ, Christ shall be their glory.
Lastly, now you glory in 6.
Christ's sufferings, you shall glory in his praises.

Seventhly, if so be that Gods people account Use 7.
themselves so enriched by sufferings and reproaches, let us take heed we do
not despise any that do suffer Sufferers for Christ not to be despised.
for Christ, that we have not low esteem of them, because of their sufferings:
God has high esteem of them when they suffer, and they themselves see cause to
glory in their condition; and are you that are standers by ashamed of them? and
do you disesteem of them for their sufferings? while the Saints of God flourish
in the world, they are esteemed of by many carnal hearts; but let them suffer
any thing and be disgraced, and they withdraw themselves from them, they are
despised as a lamp in the snuff, but who do despise those that are ready to
fall into trouble? those that are in ease: When a lamp is bright and shining,
every one esteems it; but when it comes to be in the snuff, men despise it: and
so in outward prosperity, many do esteem of them, but when they come into
trouble, then they slight them: O let not those that are like to fall into
trouble be despised by you: I pray what service do you for God, that you should
despise them? such a one as suffers in the cause of God, does more service for
God, then you have done in all your lives, and God has more honor by him; and
will you despise him, and look with an evil eye upon such a one? behold him,
look upon him, see whether the presence of God be not more with him then ever;
see whether the glory of God does not appear more upon him then ever? and will
you despise him? It is said, God will not withdraw himself from the righteous,
however others do withdraw themselves; (that is) let the righteous be inany
condition, though in the poorest meanest condition, God withdraws not himself
from him, and shall you withdraw your hearts from him? you should embrace them,
and the more they suffer for God, the more you should delight in them, and be
in their company the more, and not be shy of their company, and ashamed to own
them.

In Rev. 1. 9. you see how St. John does boast in his tribulation; he does not
say, I John that am an Evangelist, who am an Apostle, who have revelations
revealed unto me, but, I John, who am also your brother and companion in
tribulation: This he rejoices in, that there is a company of Gods people that I
may join with in tribulation for Christ. And so it is spoken of the honor of
those Christians in Heb. 10. 33. that they were companions of those that were
reproached and persecuted: It is therefore well taken at Gods hand, when any of
Gods people are in trouble, that others are willing to be their companions, and
not to despise them, but to embrace them. And Constantine the Emperor, when he
came to Pagnutius, that had lost his eye for Christ, he embraced him, and
kissed that eye.

Eighthly, if Gods people do so glory in their sufferings: 8.
Hence there is discouragement to all wicked men to meddle with them; certainly
they will get nothing by it. You think if they will not do thus and thus, you
will make them do it: Alas, you are infinitely deceived; what will you do to
make them do it? you will reproach them, and cast disgrace upon them, and take
away their estates, and hunt them up and down: This is that which they glory
in, and they count their riches; you enrich them by this: And therefore if
there be any policy in you, leave off this way; for when are the people of God
more settled in the way of godliness, and against the way of Antichrist, then
when they are persecuted? Nazianzen in his Oration upon Basil, tells of a
famous contestation that Basil had with Modestus, the Emperors Lieutenant:
What, (says Modestus) what do we seem to be to you? Nothing, says Basil. What,
do you not fear our power? Why should I fear? what will it do? what shall I
suffer? What shall you suffer? (says he in indignation) then he reckons up a
company of scaring things, Losses of goods, Banishment, Tortures, Death: then,
says Basil, if you have any thing else, threaten it, for these things are
nothing. How is that, says he? Basil answers, for loss of goods, I have nothing
but a few torn clothes, and a few books; for Banishment, I account the whole
earth mine; for Death, that will be a benefit to me, you will send me sooner to
God, to whom I live, and to whom I hasten; and a little after he says, Fire,
Sword, Prison, Famine, are all a pleasure, they are delightful to me.

We read likewise of a notable speech of this Lieutenant to the Emperor Julian:
While they suffer, they deride us (says he) and the torments are more fearful
to them that stand by, then to the tormented. Gulielmus Parisiensis Coqui mei
sunt omnes Tyranni, sive Imperatores, sive Reges sive, Principes in his apparet
gloria mea and magnifice^tia and sublimitas meorum in eujus coquina servierunt:
servire non cessant toto to studio and viribus qui toto mundo imperare and
dominari videantur.
in his Tractate de moribus, brings in the patience of the Saints triumphing
over Persecutors, saying, The Emperors, and Kings, and Princes of the world are
but Cooks to prepare dainties for me, in whose rage appears my glory; the
magnificence and sublimity of those who are mine, and those that seem to
dominier in the world, do serve in my kitchen to prepare food for me. And
Tertullian speaking of the patience of Job, and Guliel. Paris. de morib. Armant
nos Haeretici, dum putant nos sua comminatione terrere, Ep. 55.
the Devils coming to strike him, says, The Devil with his own hands did but
make a crown for Job. And (says he) here is the glory, and magnanimity, and
sublimity of patience, that it does glory in those things that the world think
to get them off from the ways of godliness by. Heretics, says Cyprian, do arm
us, when they think by their threatenings to terrify us. Do you think
reproaches from you will take off their hearts from all the good they had
experience of Gods ways? you know not their hearts.

In Jeremy 23. 7. says God, They think to cause my people to forget my name by
their dreams, which they tell every man to his neighbor, as their fathers have
forgotten my name for Baal: because a company of base Hypocrites are taken from
the ways of godliness, and from the profession of truth by scorns and
reproaches, the men of the world think to get Gods people to forget his Name,
but they are infinitely mistaken: although you prevail with hypocrites, do not
think to prevail in like manner with gracious hearts. The answer of Basil to
Modestus, that Nazianzen in his former Oration mentions, is very remarkable;
When Modestus heard his bold answers, says he to him, Never any man answered me
thus, thus boldly as you do: It may be, says Basil, you never had to deal with
a Bishop before. So although perhaps others who make shows of Religion, yet not
well grounded, will yield to you; yet if you meet with a true gracious heart,
you shall find another manner of power there to resist whatsoever you can do.
Do what you can, those who are truly godly, will be above you in whatsoever
sufferings they endure from you. It was a notable speech I have read of one
Cyrus Theodorus, to the former Modestus, concerning Basil: O Modestus, Basil is
above you, you are but a poor Pismire to him, though you roar as a Lion! Luther
likewise reports of Vincentius, that he laughed Ridens Occisores suos dixit
mortem and cruces effe Christianis quaedam jocularia and ludiera, and super
prunas incedens gloriabatur se super Rosas ire, apud Luther. T. 4. 315.
at those that slew him; saying, that to Christians tortures and deaths were as
sports, and he gloryed when he went upon hot burning coals, as if he trod upon
Roses.

Ninthly, If we are to glory so much in the sufferings we endure for Christ,
then certainly we are to glory in the sufferings that Christ has endured for
us: if there be riches in our sufferings for Christ, what riches are in Christ's
suffering for us? I have shown in eight particulars the riches of sufferings
for Christ; I might in as many particulars show the riches of Christ's
sufferings for us. First, riches of the infinite deep wisdom of God. Secondly,
the riches of the infinite love of God to mankind. Thirdly, the rich pattern of
humility. Fourthly, there is riches of honor that is put upon the Children of
men, such a price is paid for them, and such great things are done by the Lord
for them. Fifthly, there is a rich fountain of mercy, cleansing of all
pollution, and the healing of all souls in Christ. Sixthly, there are the
riches of the springs of all graces. Seventhly, there are the riches of the
rich treasure of all consolations. Eighthly, a rich purchase; thus our
sufferings for Christ are riches, and Christ's sufferings for us are riches.
Chrysostom Haec pull cherima and gloricsissima sunt, in his ego summopere
glorior nec minus me hi sui dolores. sublimem efferunt, quam mill mortui quos
excitavit, Chrysostom. Hom. 86. in cap. 26. Mat.
speaking of Christ's reproaches, has this expression, These things which we
suffered, are most beautiful and glorious to me, in these I do principally
glory; neither is my spirit less raised by the thousands that be raised from
the dead, then by the dolours that suffered. How rich is a Christian in regard
of sufferings; as men use to look at their riches, and be thinking of their
riches, so let us be viewing and looking at our riches, the riches of our
sufferings; and Christ makes us to glory in our riches. It is an expression of
Chrysostom upon the Sermon in Matthew 26. speaking of the sufferings of Christ,
says he, They are glorious things, he glories more in them, then in raising
thousands from the dead, Christ glories in them; And that is observable in the
ninth of the Acts, where Christ appears to Saul, says he, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? says Paul, Who art thou? I am Jesus of Nazareth; why does
he say, Jesus of Nazareth? does any good come out of Nazareth? he does not say,
I am the second person of the Trinity, the Son of God, the King of the Church;
no, but I am Jesus of Nazareth, that was a reproach that was cast upon Christ,
and Christ glories in that, surely we should glory in it then.

Lastly, if there be so many riches in suffering Use 10.
for Christ in reproaches, what riches are there in the Crown, in the reward of
the reproaches, and sufferings? men do dig riches out of dark holes and mines
in the Earth; here is a hole, though it be dark, yet it is a mine, where-out
you may dig great riches, if you have wherewithal to dig, if you have a true
Christian Spirit; you see out of this deep dark pit you may dig riches.

CHAP. XXXIX. There is glorious reward for the people of God.
BUt what was the ground that made Moses thus esteem reproaches? He had respect
unto the recompense of reward: From whence the point of Doctrine is this, That

There is a glorious reward for the people of God, the respect unto which is a
great encouragement to Gods Point.
servants, to go on in a way of suffering and hardship for him.

It was this that helped David in the midst of his sore temptation, that did
arise from his affliction in the way of God, Psalm 37. 24. Thou shall guide me
mith thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory: as if he should say,
Howsoever it be with the men of the world, who enjoy their prosperity according
to their desires; and howsoever it be with me, that I am afflicted, and must
endure hard things here, yet this is that which upholds me through all, Thou
shall afterward receive me to glory. This is that which upheld the Spirit of
Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 17. where he brings in a most notable and high expression
of the glory that is to come, for the upholding his spirit in his suffering;
For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. This is that which Saint Paul propounded
unto Timothy, to uphold his heart in all his sufferings, 2 Timothy 2. 12. If we
suffer, we shall also reign with him. This is that which strengthened the
Spirits of the Christians, that suffered in the times of the Maccabees, Heb.
10. 34. As those clusters of Grapes that were brought from the land of Canaan,
that showed to the people, what the fruitfulness of that land was, was an
encouragement to them, to pass through all difficulties that they were like to
meet withalin the possession of the land, to fight against the children of
Anak; so that which God has revealed of Heaven, is like those clusters of
grapes, those little things that we have made known to us (in comparison of the
glory that is to come) are to that end revealed to encourage us in our way
here. In the handling of this point, there are these five things we shall
endeavor to do: First, to show that there is a reward for the righteous.
Secondly, how far a Christian may have an eye unto this reward. Thirdly, show
somewhat what this reward is. Fourthly, wherein lies the power of the believing
of this, to help us to endure any hardship. Lastly, make Application of all.

That there is a reward. Certainly, there is a more blessed condition for Gods
people hereafter, they have 1.
not received that which is prepared for them, there are other manner of things
to be revealed, then those that you see. Psalm. 58. 11. Verily there is a reward
for the righteous; surely it is so: notwithstanding a carnal sensual heart does
not see it, yet verily there is a reward; though the ways of Gods providence do
seem outwardly to work otherwise, yet surely there is a reward: notwithstanding
our unbelieving hearts are ready to question it, yet surely there is a reward,
verily there is a reward for the righteous. There is a great deal of power in
this one thing to raise up our hearts from the creature, from grovelling here
below, to make us at least to look upward to know our happiness is not here, to
know that there are glorious things to be expected, and that appears:

First, God has infinite riches of glory, infinite treasures of happiness,
there are infinite great things in God, and God takes infinite delight to
communicate himself, and let out himself unto the creature: now if there be
such infinite riches with God, such glorious treasures of happiness, and he
delights to communicate himself, certainly there are great things to be
communicated then; for wherefore is it that God has such infinite riches in
him, but that in due time he will make them known, and reveal them, and
communicate them? it is but little that is revealed and communicated for the
present; therefore there are other things to be revealed and communicated from
God.

Secondly, God has made mankind to be of such a nature, as to have a kind of
infinite capacity, whereby it is made capable of happiness, beyond that which
any creature, besides Angels, is capable of: Properly no creature but the
rational creature is capable of happiness at all, but besides it has a kind
of infinite capacity, whereby it is made capable of the highest happiness that
belongs to the capacity of a Creature: and certainly God has not made this in
vain, God does intend to fill this capacity.

You will say, An infinite capacity of happiness, how is that? Thus; for there
are two things in the rational part of man, his understanding, and his will:
now the capacity of this part, must be judged according to the objects that are
suitable unto these two faculties in man's soul: For the understanding, it is
not any particular thing that is the object of it, but truth in general: take
truth in the utmost latitude of it, in the universality of it, that is the
object of man's understanding; and therefore the understanding is infinite,
because it is not satisfied in this or that particular, but truth in the utmost
extent. And for the object of the will, it is good in the general, it is not
this or that particular good, but good in the universality of its nature; and
therefore till it come to enjoy God, that does eminently contain all good in
him, it can never come to have full satisfaction. And here observe the
difference between the capacity of man's nature, and the capacity of other
Creatures: as for other Creatures, their faculties can extend no further then
some particular good, and they are limited within the narrow bounds of their
own nature; and therefore if so be the eye have color, it goes no further; and
if the ear have sound, it goes no further; and so taste, it goes no further
then some particular good; but the intelligent soul, the rational soul goes
beyond all particulars. Now God having made man's nature of such a capacity for
good and happiness, certainly God intends great things for the children of men,
other manner of things, then there are in this world; and if for any, surely for
the righteous.

Thirdly, surely there is a reward, because it is the 3.
great design that God had in the making of the world, in all his works to lift
up, and advance the glory of the riches of his mercy and grace: now if this be
Gods great design, to advance the glory of his infinite mercy, then certainly
there must needs be a glorious condition for some of the children of men, for
that is not yet done; though there be something of Gods mercy manifested, that
we have cause to admire at; yet certainly, God does not reveal that in the
world, whereby he should attain to the great design, of lifting up of the glory
of his great Name.

Fourthly, the chief of the deep infinite counsels of God, and the works of his
wisdom, that have been 4.
from all eternity, have been, and are yet exercised about this especially;
namely, to bring mankind to his eternal estate, and to communicate unto the
children of men, that glory that he has appointed for them, that it might be
in the most glorious way that can be: now if God have set his infinite wisdom
on work from all eternity about this; namely, what might be the most glorious
way of communication of himself in the riches of his goodness unto mankind,
certainly, when this comes to pass, that God should communicate himself as much
as he does intend, it must be infinitely glorious: certainly, there are great
things, and glorious things to be communicated hereafter.

Fifthly, the power of God has been already exercised, in subserviency to
other attributes of his, to 5.
make known his wisdom, and his bounty, and his general goodness; the power of
God have been wonderfully manifested in the works of creation and providence:
now certainly, the power of God is as well to be put forth in a way of
subserviency unto his grace and mercy; now if there be such a time, as Gods
infinite power is to be let out, and work unto that end, that it might be
subservient unto the infiniteness of his mercy, then certainly there are
glorious and great things to be revealed and made known.

Sixthly, certainly there are glorious and great things 6.
for mankind, in that God has raised the nature of man unto such a height,
as he has done in Christ; namely, to unite man's nature unto himself, unto the
second person of the Trinity, and that with the nearest union that possibly can
be; namely, an hypostatical union: certainly then God intends great things for
the children of men, for that nature, that is one person with the Divine
nature. This is such a great work of God, as all other of the works of God are
darkened in the honor of this great work.

Seventhly, the great purchase that Jesus Christ has made, in that he has
been content to leave so much 7.
glory, certainly this was to purchase great glory; and in that he was content
to be made a curse for mans-sin, and to shed his blood, and to give his life
for man, surely this was not only to purchase outward comforts in the world,
it was to purchase higher things; and therefore great must needs be the fruit
of the purchase of the blood of Christ; and therefore great are the things that
are to be revealed hereafter.

Eighthly, there are in Scripture many glorious promises which yet are not
fulfilled, abundant rich and 8.
glorious promises, that have infinite treasures of good in them, there must be
a time of fulfilling of them all, to the utmost extent of them: and therefore
certainly there are great things to be revealed hereafter. Thy word O Lord is
settled for ever in Heaven, Psalm. 119. 89.

Ninthly, the great things that God has done for his enemies, is a
demonstration that there is a glorious 9.
condition for Gods people afterward, in that God has filled their bellies
with his hid treasure: what treasures has God to fill the souls of his own
people with, when as he does fill the bellies of the wicked, whom he does
intend to cast out as accursed?

Tenthly, it appears there are great things for the people of God hereafter,
because of the great hopes 10.
that are wrought in the hearts of Gods servants, by the power of the Holy
Ghost. Now surely such hopes as are wrought by the power of the Holy Ghost,
they must attain unto glorious things: Romans 15. 13. Now the God of hope, fill
you with all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in hope, through
the power of the Holy Ghost: the hope of Gods people is that which is not only
wrought by the Holy Ghost, but by the power of the Holy Ghost; and such an
hope, as God is pleased to style himself the God of this hope; and therefore
certainly glorious things are to be revealed.

Another demonstration is this, the very natures and 11.
excellency of grace, is to take off our hearts from these present things in
the world, and from all the good that is here in the creature, God does give
grace for this end; now then I reason thus: if the chief excellency of grace be
to take the hearts of the Saints from the things of the world, and to settle
them upon higher and better things, then certainly there are glorious things to
come.

The last demonstration is this, because there are 12.
such glorious first fruits of that which is to come, that Gods people do find
for the present; those blessed rays of heavenly consolations, and those
beginnings of Heaven that they find here: if there were a thousand worlds
filled with that glory that this is filled with, they would not take it for one
ray, one beam, that is made known unto them, as the first fruits of that glory
they shall have hereafter: now put all these together, and we may conclude,
Verily there is a reward for the righteous; verily there is a glorious
condition for Gods servants; happy are they that shall be made partakers of
these things, certainly there are great things to come.

Before we go any further, me thinks the thoughts of these should raise our
hearts: what do we here minding such poor empty things? are these the things
that God has made us for? are not the thoughrs of God concerning the children
of men, higher and more glorious then these outward things? surely there is
something else, that God has made man's immortal soul for, above any thing that
it has seen in the world: men do live for the present, as if there were no
other condition for them, no greater good, but only to cat and drink, and have
money, and brave clothes, and the like: O know there are better things for us
to look after! but thus we pass from the first thing, that there are blessed
things for the children of men hereafter.

CHAP. XL. How far we may aim at the recompense of reward in what we do.
IT is true, will some say, there are glorious things prepared for some of the
children of men; but whether may we look after them? may we have a respect to
the reward? Is not this a mercenary thing, and hypocrisy? we are not to serve
God for reward, but for himself: and therefore how is this that Moses had a
respect unto the recompense of reward, and how is this a thing that should help
us on in our way?

First, this is granted, that we are bound to serve the 1.
Lord, and to walk with him, and obey him; if there were no reward to be
expected hereafter, God is infinitely worthy of himself, of all our services,
of all that we are able to do in this world; and whatsoever we have, the Lord
has more interest in it, then we have in it our selves; and therefore we owe
all that we are, or have, unto him, and righteousness it self is sufficient to
cause us to perform the works of it: In the keeping of thy Commandments there
is great reward, Psalm 19. 11. Not only for keeping them, but in keeping them
there is great reward, and the excellency of our work would be sufficient
reward for our work; though there were no reward that were to come hereafter,
we are bound to do all we do.

But yet secondly, notwithstanding this, God is 2.
pleased to give leave unto us his poor creatures, to help and encourage our
selves in the expectation of that reward that is to come; yea, to make it our
aim (though I will not say the highest aim) for so the word signifies in 2 Cor.
4. 18. While we look not at things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen; the word signifies, While we make things that (...).
are not seen our scope and aim, so that God gives us leave to have such
respect unto them, as to make them our aim: and so the people of God have
looked at the recompense of reward, as a great encouragement to them in their
way, Psalm. 119. 112. I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always,
even to the end: the same word that signifies end, signifies reward also,
because reward is to come at the end of all our works, and therefore the same
word is translated reward in Psalm. 19. 11. and so the word seems to carry more,
then to the end: as if David should say, I have inclined my heart to perform
thy Statutes always, looking unto the reward. In Heb. 12. 3. it is said of
Christ himself, That for the joy that was set before him, he endured the Cross,
and despised the shame: Now if Christ made use of the joy that was set before
him, and that was a help to him to endure the Cross, and despise the shame,
much more may we make use of it, and it may be a help to us; so that we have
leave to look at it.

Yea thirdly, we have not only leave to look at it, 3.
but it is our duty to seek to help our selves in eying the reward; we sin
against God if we do it not: and the reason is, because we are bound to make
use of the word, in that way that God has revealed it to us: now God has
revealed the glorious things of the recompense of the reward in a way of
encouragement; and therefore we sin against God if we do not encourage our
selves in it. Some think, why should we look at the reward, we must look to the
rule, and see that our obedience be accordingly: but know, if you do not look
to the reward, you do not only hinder your selves of the good you might have,
but do sin against God in it. Here you deceive your selves, as Ahaz did deceive
himself in Isaiah 7. 11. where God bid him ask a sign; he was modest, and
bashful, and would not ask a sign, he would not tempt God, he would believe the
Lord without a sign, see how the Lord is angry: Is it a small thing to weary
man, but will you weary God also? When as the Lord in favor toward you will
vouchsafe you a sign, and you refuse it, as if you had no need, why will you
weary God? so as when God for the help of our weakness, will grant us an
argument to help us in our way, and we think it is modesty, or what you will to
leave it, in this we sin against the Lord our God.

Fourthly, I never find that the Scripture does accuse any of Hypocrisy, of
unsoundness, and not 4.
to have truth of grace merely for this, because that they did aim at the
reward which is in Heaven, for that they did; you shall find in Scripture many
are discovered for hypocrites, for looking at the glory of the world as their
aim, for seeking of riches and credit; but give me an instance where any is
accused for unsoundness, for seeking of immortallity, and eternity, and
happiness; this is that which troubles many Christians, that which they do is
out of selflove, and they aim at themselves; God did never discover any to be
unsound upon this ground, and therefore we should be cautious in accusing our
selves of this, as many do, because, for the present they cannot see how they
go further then seeking of themselves, though we cannot see how we do go
further, yet it is an argument we do go further, if we get up to this. Paul
made it a mighty work of grace in him, that he could have his heart taken off
from all temporal things that are seen, and to look at eternal things that were
not seen.

Fifthly, yet we ought to look at God, and to lift up 5.
God beyond our selves, or any thing that concerns our selves, and not to aim
at God more then any worldly thing only; but to aim at God more then at the
glory of Heaven.

But yet further, though we are to aim at God beyond 6.
our own good any way, yet it is the will of God that he would not have us to
part with any of our spiritual good, no not for any glory to his own name: if
you look at your reward in Heaven as spiritual, you may so far look at it, as
not to be willing to part with it, for any glory that you conceive may come to
God: by spiritual good, I mean grace. Now if it could be supposed that God
should have never so much glory by my abating the least degree in grace, yet I
am so bound to the work of grace, as I must not abate the least degree for the
highest glory that can come to God; yea, though it is true I am to desire the
glory of God, and that others should glorify God: yet I should more desire the
furtherance of grace in my own soul, so as I should not be willing to part with
the least degree of grace, though thereby all the world should glorify God.

But here lies one objection: Paul seems to go Object.
otherwise; for he wished himself accursed, or anathamized from Christ for his
brethren, his kinsmen after the flesh, so that it seems St. Paul did wish the
glory of God in others, more then any grace in himself.

To this I answer, That separation from Christ we must understand rightly; we
are not to understand by Answ.
separation, that he should be separated from the Spirit and grace of Christ,
but that he might be separated from the comforts of Christ, that he might not
have that comfort and that happiness that comes in by Christ: If he had desired
to be separated from the grace of Christ, he should have sinned in it; Gods
glory and our good are so annexed together, that though we may suffer much for
the good of others, yet we are not to desire to be in any sinful condition,
though it could save all the world: If it could be conceived, unless I sin the
least sin in thought, all the men of the world should be damned, I should
suffer them all to be damned, rather then to sin the least sin. I remember St.
Augustine has a tractate about an officious lie, to tell a lie for no hurt,
but for good; says he, We are not to tell such a lie, though it were to save
all the world: Christ had rather all the world should have been damned, then
that he should have committed the least sin.

In the next place, whosoever does understand what 7.
the true reward is that is in heaven, it is impossible, if he desire heaven
aright, but he must desire the glory of God above himself: What is the height
and top of heaven? it is not any carnal good, any carnal content that is the
height and top of the glory of heaven? It is that our souls being in the
perfection of them, might live to the praise of God for ever: Now if this be
the end of all, we shall receive from God in heaven that we might live for
ever, to reflect the glory upon God again in our praise; then it is impossible
to desire heaven, but in our desires of heaven, we do desire God above our
selves: Surely we may freely aim at our reward in heaven, for if we aim at our
reward, and know it aright, it is such as we cannot but aim at God above our
selves; yea further, so near is Gods glory and 8.
our reward joined together, that we cannot aim at God above our selves, but we
shall by that means in the best manner provide for our selves; and the more we
strive to aim at God above our selves, we come in the best manner, that possibly
can be, to provide for our selves.

And yet lastly, there is a great difference between 9.
a gracious heart looking to the reward, and a carnal heart looking to the
reward: As

First, the difference lies here, a gracious heart does 1. Difference between a
gracious man's aim at the Reward, and one that is carnal.
love the reward for the works sake; a carnal heart does only love the work
for the rewards sake: As a gracious heart loves heaven, and loves the glory of
heaven; but it loves heaven, and the glory of heaven the better, because there
is such a blessed way to it. If a man were to go home, and had an ill way, he
would love his home; but if he have a fair smooth way home, he loves his home
the better for the ways sake; therefore many men are at great cost to have a
fair going to their houses: And so a gracious heart loves the way, that God
does reveal to come to heaven by, and loves heaven the better because of the
way: A carnal heart may love heaven, but he does not love heaven the better for
the way, but wishes the way to heaven were otherwise; he looks upon the way to
heaven as a necessary burden to him: As a man that is going out a journey, and
must go through a dirty lane, he goes through it, but complaining; and so,
though they desire heaven, yet all the while they are complaining of the way:
Certainly there is a great deal of difference between the desires of heaven in
a carnal heart, and the desires of it in a gracious heart.

Secondly, the eye that a gracious heaat has to 2.
the recompense of reward, is another manner of eye then any carnal heart can
have. What kind of eye is it? First, the eye that a gracious heart has to the
1.
reward, it is a clear discerning eye; he does not take the things of heaven as
guesses, and imaginary things, but looks upon them as certain substantial
realties: For my own part, I much doubt whether any man in the world be able to
see the glorious things in heaven, as certain substantial things, that has not
the truth of grace: The truth of grace it is partly in this thing, in having
that principle in the soul, that makes the soul able to look at the things of
heaven as the only real, substantial, excellent things, so as to darken all
the glory of the things of the world; so that when you come thus far, whereas
before you heard something of heaven, and they were but imaginary things; and
now there is such a light set up in your souls, as you see the things of heaven
as the only real, substantial, glorious things; certainly there is the work of
grace: The ground of it is that of Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the evidence of things
not seen, so that the work of faith is there seen: Whosoever speaks of the
reward that is in heaven, if the glory of the world be not darkened in their
eyes, it argues there is no true saving faith.

A second difference is, a gracious heart looks upon 2.
the reward by some experimental sweet, and good that he finds in himself, as
the beginning of that eternal good he expects; whereas others look upon the
reward as a thing only to come unto them hereafter: He reads in the word, and
hears Preachers say so, and so he can speak of them, but it is not from any
experimental sweetness that he finds of the beginning of eternal life wrought
in him: That place is very remarkable for this, in Heb. 10. 34. Knowing in your
selves that ye have in heaven a better and enduring substance: Other men may
know in others, in books, that there is a reward; but a gracious heart knows in
himself, by that experimental sweetness of the beginning of eternal life that
he finds in himself.

A third difference is, The eye that a gracious heart 3.
has unto the recompense of reward, is a fixed eye, a settled constant eye:
Another man that is an hypocrite may have a flash of lightning, even from
heaven it self, that may discover something unto him of the glorious condition
of the people of God; as Balaam, Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let
my last end be like his: This was more then natural, I may call it a
supernatural work that was upon Balaam, yet not saving and gracious: It
appeared not to be saving, because it had not a saving power went with it, and
it was not constant; and so many hypocrites that are unfound, when they have
enlargement in prayer, they may have some flashes of lightning let into their
hearts, they may have some glimmerings of the glorious things of heaven; and as
the Holy Ghost speaks in Heb. 6. 5. they may have a taste of the powers of the
world to come; but a gracious heart has it not as a flash of lightning, but as
a constant light that is set up in his soul, and as that light which does
transform his spirit into light, and makes him to be a child of light.

Fourthly, there is a great deal of difference in this, 4.
the eye that a gracious heart has is truly spiritual, the other is but
carnal. A spiritual eye, what is that? that is, he looks at the reward as a
spiritual thing, a carnal heart looks at it carnally: O the flashes of joy to
have a crown and a kingdom! but a spiritual heart looks at the reward
spiritually; time is coming when I shall be wholly free from the body of sin
and death; time is coming, when as the image of God shall be made perfect in my
soul; time is coming, when I shall behold the blessed face of God, and live to
the praise of that blessed God, without any intermission, joining with those
blessed creatures that are eternally blessing God: Now the heart that looks at
it thus spiritually, and looks at the top of it to be a spiritual good; such an
one sees the reward after another manner then any carnal heart does.

The last difference is, the eye of the gracious heart is a believing eye, such
an eye, as he looks upon 5.
the glorious and blessed things of heaven, as the things that his soul has an
interest in, as the things wherein his riches and happiness does consist;
another may look upon them as glorious things that may be desired; but for an
eye to be fixed upon the promise, so as to be content to venture all upon the
bare word of God for such great things, so as to count his riches to consist in
these things that he has but a bare word for; such a believing eye as this is
not the eye of a carnal heart.

CHAP. XLI. What is this recompense of reward.
NOw the third thing that we are to come to is, De illa ineffabili letitia and
mansione aterna nunc ex part narrantes evangeliza vimus, tanqua^ si quis e
pelagomaris aquaegutta^ digito suo auferat. S. Ephraem lib. de Iud. cap. 5.
to show what this reward is; we can but give you a little glimpse of it:
Whatsoever will be said, it will rather even darken it then otherwise, in
regard of the wonderful excellency of it; all the stars in heaven, if they were
all Suns, they would be but a dark shadow to set out this reward, and therefore
it is reserved to eternity to be known; but yet, because the Lord has been
pleased to let out a beam of light unto us in his word, we shall endeavor to
give a little glimpse of it to you, so that the hearts of Christians may be
revived in their way, and they may gather up their feet to go on cheerfully in
their course, having respect with a discerning, experimental, spiritual, fixed,
believing eye, unto the glorious recompense of reward.

First, take all the beauty, excellency, the sweet and 1.
good that there is in all the world; if there could be a confluence and
extract of the quintessence of all good, in all creature in this world, and all
to be communicated to one man, yet it were but as a dark shadow of the glory
that is to be revealed.

Secondly, this reward, certainly it is that which is 2.
beyond all the expression that we have in Scripture of it: Great things are
spoken in the word, but there is more to be revealed and to be enjoyed, then is
yet revealed in all the Book of God, Isa. 64. 4. For since the beginning of the
world, men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen,
O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for him. And
therefore in 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. it is said, Christ shall come to be glorified in
his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe: Now the cause of
admiration, it is the sight of something more then was known before, that was
not thought of, and was not understood; even then at the first coming of
Christ, he shall appear in so much glory, as he shall be admired; as if the
Saints should say, We heard much concerning Christ and his glory, but we never
thought that there was so much glory in Jesus Christ, as now we find; and
therefore we stand admiring at the glory of Christ.

Thirdly, all those consolations, those admirable 3.
soul-ravishing comforts that the Saints of God have ever had in this world,
have all been but the first fruits of those glorious things that are hereafter
to to be revealed, they are but as the Clusters of grapes that that blessed
Land of Canaan is so full of.

Fourthly, then all the expressions that man can give of those things that are
to be hereafter, must 4.
needs be but dark resemblances of what shall be revealed hereafter: As the
infant in the womb knows not what the light, the glory and beauty of the world
is; so we, while we are in this darkness, know little of the beauty and glory
of heaven. St. Augustine speaking concerning what we can say of it, says, It is
but as a little drop of the sea, and a little spark of the Quicquid homo
dixerit, quasi stilla de mari, quasi scintilla de foco: Bonavitae eternae, tam
multa ut numerum, tam magna ut mensu^a^, tam pre ciosa, ut estimationem omnem
excedant, August. de triplicihabitu, cap. 4
great furnace: Those good things of eternal life are so many, that they exceed
number; so great, that they exceed measure; so precious, that they are above
all estimation. Augustine in one of his Epistles has this relation, That the
very same day wherein Jerome dyed, he was in his study, and had got pen, ink
and paper to write something of the glory of heaven to Jerome, suddenly he saw
a light breaking into his study, and a sweet swell that came unto him, and this
voice he thought he heard, O Augustine, what do thou? do think to put the
sea into a little vessel? when the heavens shall cease from their continual
motion, then shall thou be able to understand what the glory of heaven is, and
not before, except you come to feel it as I now do, this therefore is beyond
the expression of man.

Fifthly, all the desires of all the souls of Gods 5.
Saints in the world, they come infinitely short of that which shall be
hereafter. We are straightned here in our spirits, in our desires; if we could
enlarge our desires in a spiritual way, it would hereafter add much to our
glory; our desires are not only straighter then that we shall have, but the
straightness of our desires here hinders much the capacity of the good that
hereafter is to be revealed and communicated; and therefore Christians should
labor in a spiritual way to enlarge their desires to the utmost, to get their
hearts to be working after great things here, so that they may by them
engreaten their hearts, and extend their hearts, to prepare them for the great
things that are to be revealed. I may say concerning our straight desires, as
the Prophet did to Joash, 2 Kings 13. 18, 19. where the Prophet bade him strike
upon the earth, and he struck thrice; the Prophet was angry, and said, You
should have struck five or six times, and so often should thou have smitten
thy enemies: So according to the truth and spiritual working of our desires
here, shall we be made capable of glory hereafter; but now if we be
straightened in our hearts, and we desire to be in heaven, and to have some
good thing there, but our hearts are not after great things, not enlarged in
our desires, it will be in some measure, in some proportion according to our
desires, and therefore it is an evil thing for Christians to have their desires
straightned here. There are glorious things to be had in God, and therefore our
desires should be more enlarged then they are. It is an excellent expression of
Basil, (...). Basil Coust. Mon. c. 1.
It grieves, it irks, it is tedious to our most munificent, great, glorious
King (he has one word that expresses as much as all these) if we ask any thing
little of him; he would have us ask great things of him.

Again, they are beyond all our hopes: It is said of Abraham, He believed above
hope; we cannot believe above hope in this sense, that is above the great
things that are hoped for, and yet God loves to have his people raise their
hopes high. 6.


Yea lastly, it is beyond all imagination; if men and Angels should set
themselves to imagine what 7.
they would have, they would think if such and such things were, that would be
a glorious condition, this reward shall be beyond imagination; we may imagine
that which we could not almost desire, but whatsoever you can invent or
imagine, you shall have that happiness, or that which is beyond it: sometime we
think, what a sweet thing will it be in Heaven to meet our Father, our Mother,
our Brother or Sister, our Husband or Wife? these relations shall cease there;
but we may conclude, though we have not that there, we shall have that which
shall be better, and that which we would rather choose.

But then if it be thus, that all the world be but a dark shadow, if that which
is revealed in the word be but a glimpse, if all the comforts of the Saints
here be but the first fruits, if all the expressions of men come beneath, if
all our desires come short, if all our hopes reach not to it, if all be above
the imagination of men and Angels, what is it then? what is that which is thus
great? we can tell you somewhat of this recompense of reward negatively, and
somewhat comparatively, but very little of it positively; yet somewhat that way
too.

First, negatively: There shall be no evil, there 1.
shall be such an estate of Gods people, wherein What the recompense of reward
is.
they shall be fully, absolutely, everlastingly free from all kind of evil; in
this world evil sticks to every Christian, but there they shall be in an estate
beyond all evil. When the Sun is got to the height, there is no shadow; so
when Gods people come to the top of their blessedness, there shall be no shadow
of any evil at all: that God that is infinite in good, certainly will not
suffer evil to be always in his people: Freed from all evil of sin, and that is
the greatest evil of all; never troubled with any hard heart any more, never
pestered with an unbelieving straightned heart any more, never dull and heavy
in Gods service any more; there shall never be any more blindeness and
ignorances, any unconstancy, any mistake, any weariness in Gods service,
delivered wholly from sin; yea, delivered not only from the sin that we have,
but from the very savor of sin, and from all the remainders of sin: A man may
be delivered out of prison, but he may smell of the prison; men may be healed
of a wound, and yet have a scar remain; so it is with Gods people here, they
are delivered from the guilt and power of their sin, but they smell of their
prison garments, and there are some scars upon them, but all the smells and
scars of our sin shall be taken from us; yea, delivered from the very
possibility of sin: To be in an estate without sin, is a blessed estate, but to
be in an estate wherein there shall be no possibility to sin, that is a blessed
condition indeed: It is a kind of misery that a godly man counts himself to be
in, not only that he does sin, but that he may sin, that he has a possibility
to sin; but to be free from that, that is a blessed condition: And this is the
happiness of God himself, that there is no possibility that he should do any
thing in the least degree to sin.

And as they are delivered from sin, so from sorrow, for that is the immediate
consequent of sin: All tears shall be wiped from their eyes. And as from moral
evil, so from natural evil; from external and internal evil, from all weakness
of parts, and from all pains, and sickness, and deformities, from all labors,
all encumbrances here in the world; freed from the company, and madness, and
opposition, and tyranny, and injustice of wicked men; they shall be above
Satan, and above the men of the world. Gal. 1. 4. It is said, that Christ has
given himself to deliver us from this present evil world; it is a part of the
purchase of Christ, to be wholly freed from all the evils of this present
world; and this purchase of Christ we shall have. Under the highest regions are
the tempests and storms, but above there are none; so in this world the Saints
meet with tempests and storms, but above are none. As the Psalmist says, In thy
light O God we shall see light: so in the light of God we shall see nothing but
light: now when Gods light does shine into us, it does discover darkness; but
time will come, though Gods light shall shine never so brightly, we shall see
no darkness, but altogether light. We read concerning Moses and Elias in Luke
9. in the transfiguration of Christ, the Text says, They did confer about his
decease that should be accomplished at Jerusalem: the Saints of God shall meet
together, and Moses, and Elias, and the Patriarchs, and shall confer no more
about deceases, about troubles and sufferings that shall be accomplished; all
those evils shall be done away. We may say of evils all, as Moses did to the
people of Israel concerning the Egyptians, Those your enemies that now you see,
you shall never see any more: So we may say to Gods people that go out of the
world to partake of the recompense of reward; be quiet, be still: those evils
of sin, of sorrow that now you see, and feel, you shall never see, never feel
any more; that is something though it be negatively.

Secondly, comparatively, and herein are three 2.
things. First, to compare the good, the happiness that shall be hereafter,
with all the good and happiness that we have here. Secondly, compare it with
the condition of Adam in the estate of innocence. Thirdly, compare it with the
happiness of the Angels.

CHAP. XLII. The differences between that good we receive here from God, and
that we shall have hereafter.
FIrst, we will compare that we have here, with that we shall have hereafter:
Brethren, though 1.
we receive many mercies from God, yet look what difference there is between
that close place of the womb, that the infant is in before it be born, and this
space of the world that the child comes into when it is born; such difference
is between all this world, and any good and happiness here, and the world that
is to come; this, and much more then this.

First, here we receive good from without: First 1.
unto our outward senses, and by them it comes into the soul; but now hereafter
God shall first let out good unto the soul, unto the rational part, and from
the redundancy of that good and glory that God shall communicate unto the
rational soul, there shall flow glory, and sweetness, and good to the body, and
outward senses: whereas here we see from without, and so it comes in; there
shall be a spring, and a fountain of good within the soul; the kingdom of
heaven shall be within, and more good shall be in the heart, and flow from
thence outwardly, then to be received from without, and so to come inwardly;
for us to receive something in our senses, and so to convey it to the soul,
this is but a low way; but to have a spring and fountain of all good and
happiness to be within the soul, and so spread it self and flow out, this shows
wonderfully the blessedness of Gods people, when God shall communicate himself
to them in that way.

Secondly, here the excellency and eminency of an 2.
object does destroy the faculty, if the faculties of our souls be exercised
about objects, that are very high above us, that are full of excellency and
glory, they destroyed the faculty; as now though light be the most pleasing to
the eye of all things in the world, yet the excellency and glory of light
destroys the eye; so sound is the proper object of the ear, but if the sound be
too great, it makes one deaf, but it is otherwise in heaven, the more excellent
the object is, the more perfect will the faculty be; the object shall not only
delight the faculty, but perfect and strengthen the faculty. nature as in a
glass, but thus far, that as we see good in the creature now, then we shall see
them by knowing God himself, more then by knowing the creature. And the reason
is, because all excellency and good that is in the creature is eminently in
God; for all the good of the effects must needs be eminently in all the
principles, and the good of all principles in the first principle: If all good
in the creature be eminently in God, and the souls of the blessed shall come
perfectly to know God, so far as their created understandings shall be capable
of, then they must needs see the excellency of the creature in God. We shall
know as we are known, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Upon this a learned man has this note, We
shall know as we are known; now God knows all his works, by knowing himself, by
knowing his own power, and will, and nature, and so we shall know as we are
known, because we shall know the creatures by knowing God.

Fourthly, here the mercies and good that we have from God are sweetened unto us
by the sense of our wants: But hereafter we shall prize them, and have the
sweetness of them in regard of their own fullness: not from such a low relation,
as our wants and our necessities; when God would have us prize any mercy here,
he first makes us sensible of the want of the mercy, and so it comes to be
sweet to us, and scarce any mercy comes to be sweet, unless we feel the want of
it first, for else we would prize the mercy at any time, but in that we do not
prize all mercies always alike, it appears the great commendation of Gods mercy
is from our wants: but hereafter the prizings, and the relish, and the sweet of
all shall be from the fullness of the goodness that we find in God: Gods
goodness to us here, is but the supplying of some defect, but hereafter Gods
goodness shall be the glorifying of perfect nature.

Fifthly, here when we do enjoy any comfort from God, we are much sensible of
it at the present enjoyment, 5.
but after we have had it a little while, we grow to be less sensible, we begin
to be cloyed with it: as the most beautiful sight that we did admire at first,
if we see it every day, it does not affect us; as who is affected at the sight
of the Sun, because he sees it every day? but suppose we had lived all our days
in a dark dungeon, and this had been the first day we were brought out of the
dungeon, and now see the Sun, and the Earths and Seas, how mightily would we be
taken with the sights that we see? but now it is not so with us, because we
have the Sun every day: and so the melodious sound to the ear, first we are
ravished with it, but when we are used to it, it is nothing: and so for the
taste; the taste of sweet things is mightily pleasant to us at first, but
afterward it is no more pleasing to us, then the taste of ordinary mean fare is
to poor people, who have as much content in their mean fare, as rich men in
their delicious fare, because rich men are used to such delicious things; but
this is the excellency of Gods manner of communication of himself to his people
hereafter, they shall be to all eternity as exactly and fully sensible of the
glory of heaven, as they were in the first moment they came into it.

The sixth difference between Gods communication 6.
of himself to us here and hereafter, is, here we have much good from God, but
much good is in the habits, and is not always in action: there are many habits
of grace, that are not always acting fully, but sometime the act of one habit
is called forth, and sometime the act of another; but here is the blessedness
of Gods people, there shall be no habits lying still no instant, but every
minute to all eternity, they shall act to the utmost of them, so far as may any
way conduce to their happiness; for the end of the habit it is action, and in
the enjoyment of our happiness we shall ever be enjoying to the full the
highest and last ends; and therefore there shall always be the utmost activity
of the habits of grace: There is a necessity here of cessation of actions,
because we grow weary quickly of any action, though it be a gracious action, we
must unstring our bows and cease, that some actions may give way to others, for
the heart to be always up, it is not able to bear it, but then there shall be
no need of any cessation any moment.

Again, here we are not able to exercise our selves in the works of God without
some difficulty: there is 7.
difficulty in raising our hearts unto any thing that is good, and to keep our
hearts up; but hereafter there shall be that communication of God unto his
people, that they shall be exercised about the highest things, in the highest
manner, without any difficulty, but as freely, and readily, and fully as the Sun
shines: the Sun does shine without any difficulty, and the fish draws in water
without difficulty; so there shall be that perfect working of the soul about
the highest object, without any difficulty or labor.

Again, here in this world there cannot be an intention in one faculty, but it
does hinder the intention 8.
in another; as if man speak to me, and I be intent in looking upon an object,
I do not hear him that speaks: and so in all faculties, the intention of one
faculty does hinder the intention of another; but in Heaven, all the faculties
of the soul shall be intens'd to the highest intention, and the intention of
the one shall not hinder the intention of the other.

Again, the good we receive here is in the root, in 9.
the promise, in election in great part, but that we shall have hereafter shall
be in the fruit, in the actual communication of God: as before all our actings
shall be acted upon God, so all the good shall not be contained in the root of
his electing love, or in the promise; but shall be in actual communication.

Again, here we receive many mercies from God, 10.
that we do not understand our selves, that we know but little of, we do not
see into the large extent of the mercy that we have from God: but there we
shall have no mercy from God but we shall know it fully, in all the
circumstances of it, in all the principles of it, and in all the appertainances
that do any way concern the mercy we have, and we shall know the issue of it,
and the like.

Again, here we receive great mercies from God, and we know not how to manage
them; Gods mercies 11.
lie and sour in us, we turn our mercies many times into afflictions for want
of skill: but hereafter we shall have the full improvement of all mercy that we
receive from God.

Again, here we see and desire many good things 12.
that we do not enjoy and possess; but hereafter we shall see no good, nor
desire any good, nor will any good, but we shall have it: And as God said
concerning the Land of Canaan, unto the children of Israel, in Deuteronomy. 11. 24.
Every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread, shall be yours; so in
heaven, whatsoever the Saints see they shall have: Here we may will a thing,
and will it lawfully, and yet it may be cross unto Gods secret will, and it
shall never come to pass; the reason is, because the rule of our wills is Gods
Commandment, and not his secret will; as David did will to build God a house,
and God commends him for it, and yet God did not will it: And a child may will
the life of his parent, and yet God may will his parent shall not live, and yet
he is not to be blamed, because he wills according to the rule; but hereafter
God shall so far reveal his will to us, and our wills shall be so fully united
to God, that there shall not be the least crossing between any thing that we
will, and that God wills.

Again, here it is one especial excellency of the 13.
work of grace, for us to keep in our hearts and affections, to restrain them
that they be not let out too far in that we do enjoy: but hereafter when we
come to the recompense of reward, we shall not need keep in our hearts, we
shall have liberty to let them out.

Object. But we may not let out our hearts too much upon the Saints, to love
them above God.

Ans. Then we shall love nothing but in God, all shall be swallowed up in God
himself, that we shall not need fear the letting out of our hearts to the
utmost: Though I may love the creature, yet I may let out my heart fully upon
it, because I love it only in God.

Here many times a thing is more prized before we have it, and when we come to
enjoy it, we do not see so much excellency upon it, and so do less prize it;
but though we may set a prize upon Heaven, and say, O the blessed time, when we
come there, we shall infinitely more prize it and rejoice in it then we can
here.

Yet further, here we can enjoy nothing that we 15.
can be so certain of, but that we can lose it wholly, or in some part; but the
Saints of God hereafter shall be so certain of that they have in enjoyment,
that they shall not lose any thing of it in the least degree.

Lastly, that we have from God here, is mediately 16.
conveyed through many Channels, through the Pipes of Creatures and Ordinances,
but that we shall have hereafter, shall be let out immediately from God; and
this is indeed the special difference of all, from whence flow many excellent
consequences, which would even require a particular of it self: I may hereafter
enlarge my self in this, in some other Treatise.

And thus you may see the blessed condition of Gods people, when they come to
the recompense of reward. We have something here, and we rejoice in it, and
bless God for it; but those ways that God has to communicate himself to his
people hereafter, are glorious ways. O that our hearts were raised to look
after that communication of God that we shall have hereafter! O those base and
drossie spirits that we have! Because we receive some goodness of God here, we
are ready to be quieted here, and rest here, as if God had nothing to
communicate to the Children of men, but that we have here. See the vileness of
our hearts, we are here ready to rest upon the lowest things that God
communicates, and do not so much as rise in our hearts to the highest things
that are communicated here; but a christian heart should rise higher then the
most excellent things that are here in the world; namely, to the most blessed
things that are hereafter; let us show our selves that we are men of hopes to
enjoy God after another manner then here.

Many do not desire enjoyment of God; let them have the creature, they never
think of any communication of God so much as through the creature, whereas a
true Christian that has grace, he receives nothing in the world, but he thinks
with himself, how have I God here? how does God communicate himself to me in
meat and drink, and clothes, and friends, and the like? it is well if you go
thus far, but you must go higher; are there not choice mercies? O yes, there
are blessed things communicated through the ordinances, through prayer, and the
word, and sacraments, there are blessed things; few men's hearts look so high as
to look to the communication of Gods choice mercies in this world; but a
gracious heart rises higher, and does as it were bathe it self with those
refreshments that are to come: through Gods mercy I have the creature, and the
communication of God through that; and I have the ordinances, and Gods choice
mercies communicated through them; but there are glorious things to be
communicated hereafter, and those my soul rejoices in. Now God does communicate
himself only in that way which is suitable to our condition; now we are but
narrow vessels, and have but narrow mouths, and are not capable of that
greatness of Gods communication; but time will come when as God will
communicate himself in a more glorious manner, and in that I bless my self; and
therefore I will not regard any of Gods communication of himself to me here,
but in order unto that glorious communication of God to me hereafter. And thus
we have seen something of the recompense of reward, comparing it with what we
have here. Now secondly, we are to compare it with the condition of Adam in the
estate of Innocence.

As for the estate of Adam in Paradise, it was a 2.
blessed condition, yet far under the happiness of the Saints in the recompense
of the reward. For Adams body was but natural, and his Paradise was but a
natural Paradise; and a possibility there was he might lose his happiness: and
if he should have stood, there should not have been that glorious distinct
working of the three Persons of the Trinity about man's happiness, that there
now is: and therein especially lies the difference.

Thirdly, compare it with the Angels, and you shall 3.
find in Scripture some expressions of the happiness of the Saints, beyond the
happiness of the blessed Angels themselves. For the union that the Saints shall
have with the Deity, is a nearer union in diverse respects, then the union that
the Angels have with the Deity: and the righteousness wherewith the Saints
stand righteous before the Lord, is an higher righteousness, then Adam or the
Angels should have been in.

First, the union that the Saints have with the Deity, 1.
is a nearer union then that of the Angels. First, the humane nature in
general, that is advanced to an higher dignity then all the glory of the Angels
put together: Because there is an Hypostatical union between the humane Nature
and the Divine in Christ. Again, we have many expressions in Scripture of the
union of Saints with the Deity; whereby it appears, their union is nearer then
the union of the Angels: They are called the friends of Christ; They are said
to have fellowship with Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 9. They are the Brethren of
Christ, They are Coheirs with Jesus Christ; There are no such expressions of
the Angels. And yet, there are nearer expressions of their union; they are the
Spouse of Christ, the Bride; the Angels are but as the servants. They are the
members of Christ, and are made one with Christ: They are those that are to be
one with the Father, as the Father and the Son are one: John 17. 21. Christ
there prays, As thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one
in us: he never prayed so for the Angels. Lastly, they are said to be loved of
the Father, with the very same love wherewith he loved the Son: now though God
loves the Angels, yet it is not said that he loved them with the same love that
he loved his Son: These are the expressions we find in Scripture, concerning
the near union that the Saints have with the Deity in some respects beyond the
Angels; but of the union of the Saints with the Deity, we shall speak of more
when we come to speak of the reward positively. And then the righteousness
wherewith they stand righteous before God, is greater then the righteousness of
Adam in Paradise, or the Angels; because it is the righteousness of the second
Person of the Trinity; and that is of an higher nature, and a more glorious
righteousness, then the righteousness of any mere creature. Now the
righteousness of the Angels, though it be perfect in its kind, yet it is not a
righteousness of such an high nature, as that righteousness which is the Son of
God. And thus of this recompense of reward comparatively.

CHAP. XLIII. The perfection of the bodies and souls of the Saints in glory.
NOw thirdly, let us consider it positively; now in this positive
consideration, these things are to be followed: First, the perfection of their
natures that they shall be raised to: Secondly, the glory that shall be put
upon them at the day of Judgment: Thirdly, the possession of Heaven: Fourthly,
the having God to be their Portion: Fifthly, their blessed communion with Jesus
Christ: Sixthly, their communion with the Saints and Angels: Lastly, the
eternal Sabbath that they are to keep in Heaven. Under these seven heads, all
that we have to say concerning the positive reward of the Saints, may be
contained; First, the perfection that their natures shall be raised unto; and
in that consider these three things: First, the perfection of their bodies:
Secondly, the perfection of their souls: Thirdly, the perfection of the whole
man. First, the perfection of the bodies of the Saints is no little matter; and
because so long as we are in the flesh and live by sense, they are bodily
things that do affect us; therefore I will show a little the perfection of the
bodies of the Saints: they shall have much of the recompense of the reward in
their bodies. In the general, their bodies shall be made like the glorious body
of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 21. Certainly the body of Christ is very glorious; in
the transfiguration of Christ, which was but a little glimpse of his glory, how
glorious was the body of Christ? In Rev. 1. Saint John had a little glimpse of
the representation of Christ, and how glorious is it set forth? the body of the
meanest Saint shall be like the glorious body of Christ: What is that? I will
go no further then that I find in 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44. and there are four
things that set forth the glory of the bodies of the Saints, when they come to
attain the recompense of reward: First, it is raised in incorruption: Secondly,
it is raised in glory: Thirdly, it is raised in power: Fourthly, it is raised a
spiritual body. First, every Saint of God shall have an incorruptible body,
there shall be no more death: it shall be made incorruptible in regard of that
fullness of the presence of God with it: If spices, and enbalming of dead bodies
can keep them so long as they do sometime from smelling; surely the glorious
presence of God with the body, shall have infinite more power to keep the
bodies of the Saints incorruptible. What would we give if a Physician were able
to give us a potion to make our bodies incorruptible, that they should never
dye? yet as they are now, it is hardly worth the desiring to have them
incorruptible; but when they shall be glorified, and incorruptible too, that is
glorious. They shall be incorruptible, not subject to any suffering: as God is
able to bind up the active power of a creature that it shall not be able to
act, so he can bind up the corruptible power, that it shall not work to
corruption: as in fire God can bind up the power of fire, that it cannot burn;
so God can bind up the power of any creature that has any corruptible power,
that there should not be the least passion that tends to corruption. Omnis
passio fit per victoriam agentis super patiens, impossible est aute^, ut quid
dominetur super patiens, nisi in quantum debi itatur Dominium formae pro priae
super materiam patientis: Corpus autem humanum and quicquid in eo est, erit
perfect subjectum animae rationale sicut anima per fecte subjecta crit Deo.
and i deo in corpore glorioso non poterit esse aliqua mutatio contia
dispositione^ illam qua perficitur ab anima; and hac ratione corpora erunt
impassibilia, Thom. in Add. q. 82. Art. 1.
All sufferings come from the prevailing of the stronger agent over the
patient; and when any suffer, it comes from some kind of inability of the form
of the patient, whereby it begins to leave the matter in some degree: now the
bodies of the Saints shall be so formed with such an excellent form, and so
filled with the glory of it, as that there can be no power external or
internal, that shall prevail against this form to weaken it. And besides, the
reason that is given why the Heavens are incorruptible, may be given why the
bodies of the Saints shall be incorruptible: the Heavens are of so excellent a
form, that the capacity of the matter is fully filled up; and there may be
truth in that reason: so the bodies of the Saints being in their blessed estate
into which they shall be raised, they shall have such full satisfaction with the
form wherewith they are informed, that there shall not be the least propension
to receive any other from.

Secondly, it is raised in glory, and that consists in these two things: First,
in the admirable beauty of it: Secondly, in the wonderful luster and splendour
of it: First, in the admirable beauty of it, having all parts in proportion and
exact temper, whatsoever can make one beautiful shall be in the bodies of the
Saints; if we could extract all the beauty of all the men and women in the
world, and put them into one, it were but as a deformed thing in regard of the
meanest of the bodies of the Saints in Heaven; and much of the beauty will be
not only from their exact temper and comeliness that God shall put upon them;
but likewise from the excellency of their souls within them, and from the
unspeakable joy, and cheerfulness of the heart; And then the splendour and the
luster of their bodies, says 2.
the Scripture, They shall shine as the stars in the Firmament: look what
splendour is in the stars, such shall be in these clay bodies of ours, Daniel
12. 3. Yea, they shall be in greater splendour then the stars, they shall be as
the Sun, Matthew 13. 43. He that has ears to hear let him hear, and believe
this, that it shall be so, that the bodies of the Saints shall shine more
glorious then the Sun in its strength. You will say, How is it possible that
this should be? yes, this is but according to that expression in Phil. 3. 21.
Who shall change our vile bodies, that it may be fashioned according to his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things
unto himself. It does not require a greater power to raise from the least
degree of glory to the highest possibility, as it is to make a thing out of
nothing; and therefore the making of the least creature out of nothing, will
argue more power, then making the bodies of the Saints to shine brighter then
the Sun in the Firmament. Now certainly, God in the glorifying of the Saints,
will manifest that power that he did in the creating of the world; and if it
does not require so much power to raise their bodies into such a glorious
condition, as to create a creature out of nothing; then there is no reason why
we should not believe this. We know when Moses had been but forty days on the
Mount with God, when he came down among the Israelites, his face did so shine,
that they were not able to behold it: surely the glorified bodies of the
Saints, being eternally present with God, shall shine far more gloriously then
Moses face did: and that is for the splendour of them.

Thirdly, it is sown in weakness, and raised in power: now the strength and
power of them appears in these 3.
four things: First, in that the body shall be able for to attend the soul in
the most high operations; 1.
here if the soul be exercised about any high and glorious object, the body
presently fails: as in the ecstasies of the Prophet, when God revealed himself
extraordinarily to Daniel, his body failed; He fainted, and was many days sick,
Dan. 8. 27. But there shall be that power in the body, as it shall be
serviceable to the soul in the most high and glorious operations that it shall
have, when God shall manifest himself in the fullest way that possibly can be.

Secondly, in that it it shall every moment to all eternity, without any
intermission, be exercised in the 2.
highest things that a body can be in, without any weariness.

Thirdly, there must be a great deal of power to be able to bear the weight of
glory that shall be put upon 3.
them: 2 Cor. 4. 17. Our light affliction which is but for a moment, works
for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory; such a weight, as
certainly if the body were not by the power of God upheld, it were impossible
it should bear it: here we find, when there is great joy in the heart, the
body is not able to bear it; but then there shall be a power to bear the weight
of glory they shall have.

And the last, is that which I find expressed in Luther, namely, The bodies of
the Saints shall have 4.
that power, as to toss the greatest mountains in the world like a Ball. And I
find it in an expression of Anselem, It shall be such power, as they shall be
able In futuro seculo sic justus fortis erit, ut etiam si velit, terram
commovere possit; et sic e converso injustus imbecillis ut nec etia^ vermes
amovere queat ab occulis suis Ansel. li. de simil. cap. 52.
to shake the whole earth at their pleasure: and we cannot think this
incredible upon that ground that was named before: there is not so much
difference between the raising a thing from the lowest degree of power, to the
highest possibility; as in raising a thing from nothing to the lowest degree of
power. Suppose a creature had but so much power now, as to stir the least mote
that is in the Sun; to raise this power so high as to stir the whole earth,
does not require so much power as to make a thing out of nothing: and if God do
intend to manifest his power in glorifying the Saints, and in making of them
powerful; why should we not think, that God will extend that possibility of
power that is in the body to that height? certainly, glorious shall be the
power of the bodies of the Saints: and that is the third thing.

Fourthly, it is sown a natural body, and it shall be raised a spiritual body;
not that it shall be turned into 4.
a spirit: It shall remain a body; but the spiritualness consists in three
particulars.

First, that it shall be in a spiritual condition; they shall have no more need
of meat, or drink, or clothes, 1.
or marriage, or the like, that now the body stands in need of: the Angels
themselves shall have as much need of meat, and drink, and clothes as their
bodies shall: so says Christ; They shall not be married, nor given in marriage,
but they shall be as the Angels in Heaven.

Secondly, the spiritualness of the body consists 2.
in the absolute subjection of the body to the spirit, as to be fully and
absolutely serviceable to the spirits of the Saints, which here they are not.
Here many times is a strife between the spirit and the flesh; the spirit is
willing, when the flesh is not; but then there shall be an absolute subjection
of the body to the spirit: As here the spirit of a carnal man is called flesh,
because his soul is serviceable to the flesh, to make provision for the sins of
the flesh, his soul is counted carnal, the wisdom of the flesh is enmity
against God: As the soul now is as it were carnal, because it is serviceable to
the flesh, so the body shall be spiritual, because it shall be serviceable to
the spirit: for you to have such a body as to be serviceable to your souls, as
you would desire, it were a great blessing, time will come when it shall be so.

Thirdly, the spiritualness of the body consists in 3.
the agility of the body; the ability it shall have to move up and down which
way it will, and that suddenly; they shall move in the Heavens, as the birds do
in the air. I remember an expression that Luther Ubi velit spiritus ibi
protinus crit corpus Aug. li. 22. de Civit. cap. ult.
has, that the body shall move up and down like a thought. And Augustine
says, They shall move to any place they will, as soon as they will. These
words we do not find in Scripture; but lay this for a ground, that whatsoever
we can expect for the excellency of a body, it is that we speak of, or beyond
it; and then we have a great deal of liberty to invent what expressions we can
for our comfort: certainly there shall be that happiness of the body that shall
come to that we speak of, or to more.

Fourthly, some make the spiritualness of the body to consist in the
transparency of it; Aquinas says, 4.
It shall be so clear and transparent, that all the veins, Corpora beatorum non
tantum fore extrinsecus splendida sed etiam intrinsecus diaphana ac
transparentia; ut occulis intuentium appareant venae humores, viscera, ^ervi,
ac tota omniu^ partium harmonia. Thom. in Ad. q. 85. Art. 1. ad 2 Vlp.
and humors, and nerves, and bowels shall be seen, as in a glass.

Now brethren, the reasons why God will reward the Saints in this part, are,
First, because humane bodies, as well as humane souls, have an hypostatical
union with the second person of the Trinity; and therefore God rejoices to
raise humane bodies, as well as humane souls unto happiness. Secondly, Christ
suffered so much in his body; therefore God will glorify the bodies of the
Saints. Thirdly, our bodies are part of the members of Christ; our bodies are
joined in a mystical union with Jesus Christ. Fourthly, our bodies are the
temples of the Holy Ghost, and God will glorify his own temples. Fifthly, our
bodies are in part sanctified as well as our souls, and therefore shall also be
glorified. Lastly, our bodies shall be glorified, for the further terror and 4.
confusion of the damned; because they in their bodies 5.
shall see the glory of the Saints, and be confounded. 6.
Here you see a way to get your bodies in a blessed condition: here is a stir
for clothing of our bodies, but there shall be a clothing with immortality:
you that have sickly and weak bodies, remember this, you shall one day receive
your bodies in another manner then you have them now. Eusebius tells us of one of
the children of the Macchabees that were put to death for the profession of the
truth; when they cut off his members, says he, I have received these from
Heaven, and now I do give them unto the God of Heaven, and I hope I shall have
them again: Let us be willing to put our bodies to pain; if our bodies suffer
hunger, or thirst, or nakedness, or be tired, or suffer Imprisonment, or any
violence be offered to our bodies in the cause of God, What great matter Ne
vincat caro iu sua^ perditione^, el vincatur in gloriam.
is it? we shall receive our bodies in another manner. The overcoming of the
flesh is the destruction of it, but the overcoming the flesh, is the glory of
it.

When we speak of the happiness of our souls, we are not so capable of it; but
when we speak of the happiness of our bodies, we are sensible of that. Now
certainly, there shall be much more for our bodies, here is a way to provide
for your bodies: Lay up provision for your flesh, is spoken as an argument of a
carnal heart, in Romans 13. 14. the Apostle exhorts them, not to make provision
for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof: but there is a way of laying up
provision for the flesh that is lawful, and that this day I exhort you too. If
you love your bodies, be godly: if you did believe these things were so, would
not these make you love godliness? if I should come unto you, and show you how
you might get some good for your bodies, then I should prevail with you: give
some credit to that we say now, if you will not believe these things, I may say
unto you as the Prophet said unto the Noble man that would not believe there
could be great plenty, says he, Thou shall see the great plenty with thine
eyes, but thou shall not eat of it; so if you will not believe the great things
that the Ministers of God speak of in his name to you, your eyes shall one day
see those despicable, contemptible bodies of the Saints in this glory, though
you shall not be partakers of any of it.

Now for the perfection of the soul: As the soul is of a far larger extent then
the body, so it is more 2.
capable of happiness then the body is; and that being the proper seat of
godliness, so it shall be the more rewarded: What splendour shall the soul have
Qualis erit splendour animarum cum solis splendorem habebit lux ^orporum?
(says Bernard) when the body shall shine gloriously as the Sun? All that we
can say for the soul for the present, because we understand so little of the
soul, is, That the soul shall not depend upon the body, as it does now for its
operation. And the soul shall no way be hindered by the body, as now it is
hindered here. And all the faculties of the soul shall be extended to the
utmost: Now if an infinite power can extend the least degree of power to such
an height in the members of the body; much more can an infinite power extend
the faculties of an immortal soul, that is capable of a great deal more power
then the body is. Besides, as the faculties are extended, so all the graces of
Gods Spirit, that the Saints of God have here, shall be extended to the
height, and they are capable of a higher extention then any thing that is
natural; for the more spiritual a thing is, the more capable it is of
extention. As the plant is more capable to be drawn out to an higher excellency
then a stone, and the sensitive creature to an higher excellency then the
plant; and the rational creature to an higher excellency then the sensitive,
and grace, which is supernatural, can be extended to an higher excellency then
the natural: Besides, what increated excellency we might imagine could possibly
be put upon it shall be; who could have thought that the humane nature should
have had an hypostatical union with the body of Christ? and as God has done
for the bodies of men, more then all the Angels could have invented: so there
is to be communicated to the soul more then can be invented.

Thirdly, the perfection of body and soul, does consist in the majesty of the
person being united together: you know when Christ was here in the flesh, in
the estate of his humility, when he did let out but one beam of his majesty,
those who came to apprehend him were not able to stand, but fell backward; if
Christ by letting out some small beams of his majesty, could make men fall
backward, how glorious must he needs be, when those full beams of his majesty
shall be let out? the majesty of the Saints shall have some proportion with
his, and that very great, which must needs follow from that which has been
said. We read of Stephen, that when he stood before the Council arraigned as a
malefactor, it is said, They looked upon his countenance, and it was as the
face of an Angel: O what majesty will appear in the countenances of the Saints
hereafter! And as in Adam in the estate of Innocence, there was such majesty in
his countenance, that all the beasts were afraid of him, what will be the
majesty of God in his Saints then, as they shall be hereafter? It is said of
Basil, when he was sent for to be taken by his Persecutors, being in holy
exercises, there appeared such a majesty in his countenance, that those that
came to take him, were not able to stand before him. There is a majesty in the
countenance of Gods people, when they walk close with God; but how much more
will there be majesty in their countenances hereafter? So that you see Gods
people shall not only be glorious within, as the Kings daughter is glorious
within; but Psalm. 42.
they shall be glorious outwardly. And so much for the first thing, The
perfection of the natures of the Saints.

CHAP. XLIV. The glory that shall be put upon the Saints at the Great Day.
SEcondly, the glory that shall be put upon them at the day of Judgment.

First, the glory of the day it self shall be their glory; for it shall be
nothing else, but the solemnity of the marriage of the Lamb: Here there is a
contract between the Lamb and his Bride, but the solemnity of the marriage is
reserved to that great day, and all the glory of the day shall be to set out
the solemnity of it; and God himself shall appear in his glory to make the day
glorious. As the Parents upon the marriage day, appear in as much glory as they
can, that they may honor the day; so God shall appear in his glory in the
solemnizing of the marriage between Christ and his Spouse: And as the
Bridegroom comes forth in his glory, so Christ will come in his glory, with all
his Angels in their glory. As all the servants of the Bridegroom put on their
best array upon the marriage day, so all the Angels shall appear in their
luster and beauty; and this sets out the wonderful glory of the Saints that
shall be at that day, notwithstanding all the glory of the Father, and Christ,
and the Angels that shall be then, yet they shall not lose their glory. The
Stars lose their shining luster when the Sun rises, because their light is
nothing in comparison of the great light; but the luster of the Saints shall be
bright shining and glorious, even in the presence of the glory of the Father,
and of Jesus Christ, and of all the blessed Angels.

Great things will be done that day; there will be the Great Supper that God
will make for the solemnizing of the Marriage, and the great meeting of the
Saints with Christ: O what salutations can you imagine will there be between
Christ and his members! and being met, the sentence of Absolution shall be
pronounced before men and Angels: Christ shall honor the Saints before all the
world, and say, These are they, these are the men for whom the eternal counsels
of my Father did work to make them glorious; these are they for whom I came
into the world, and shed my blood, and laid down my life; these are they in
whom I am to be glorified for ever. Again, the glory of the day shall be in
setting of the Saints with Christ upon thrones, in judgment, to judge the
whole world, the Monarchs and great ones of the earth; and so to be honored in
the eyes of those that were their enemies, and contemned, and reproached them,
and vilified them before; and likewise their glory shall be in this, to rejoice
in the execution of the sentence that is pronounced upon those that are
condemned. Lastly, their glory shall be in their glorious ascension with Christ
into the highest heavens, ranked in their comely order, with triumph and joy,
singing, Stand open ye gates, and be ye open ye everlasting doors, that the
King of glory and all his redeemed ones may come in.

Thirdly, the possession of heaven, the Kingdom of heaven shall be theirs, the
heaven of heavens; great 3.
things are spoken of that; there are these things considerable in it.

First, it is the third heaven; there is the heaven, that is the space between
the visible firmament 1.
and the earth; the second heaven is the Orbs wherein the Sun, and Moon, and
Stars are; and then there is an heaven above them, which is the seat of the
blessed, which is of an infinite height above all: now it as a sweet
confideration for the people of God, when you are going out in the evening, and
seeing the firmament spangled with the Stars, to have such thoughts as these,
What shall one day this body of mine be lifted up beyond yonder place? Though A
description of of heaven
now you lie low in some dark hole, there is a time when God shall lift you up
to be above that spangled firmament; that spangled firmament is but the
pavement of your Fathers house, it is but the outside; and if the outside and
footstool of Gods house be so glorious, how glorious is it within? how glorions
is the presence Chamber? This world is made for Dogs, for the Enemies of God,
and those that are more vile then any creatures: he does not think much to have
swine live here, but you do not suffer swine to come into the presence Chamber,
or into the Dining Room: now heaven is the presence Chamber and Diningroom, for
that eternal feast to be solemnized in, and that must needs be glorious.

Secondly, it is called our Fathers house: This is 2.
not our Fathers house; though we should be caught up where the Stars are, that
is not our Father house, that is but the out-room: Says Christ, In my Fathers
house there are many Mansions: God was from all eternity a heaven to himself,
before the world was; then he created the highest heavens to be the place of
his presence, not that he is comprehended there, but that he would have a place
for his glory more fully to shine in.

Again, it is a place prepared from the beginning of the world, and Christ is
gone to prepare it for us: If 3.
there were such a building here, that all the men of the world had been
building from the beginning of the world, and they had all the pearls and
jewels of the world to set into it, and all the inventions and strength of men
and Angels to help them to build, it would be glorious, but in comparison it is
but a dungeon to this. The brightness of this is exceeding glorious, says
Chrysostom; when you see a sumptuous palace, you look upon it, and are taken
with it, but it is but as a dungeon to your Fathers house.

The light of that shall be of another nature then 4.
the light of the world; the light that we have here is a material light, but
the whole body of heaven is of an higher nature then the body of the Sun; and
there shall be such a glorious presence of God, as there shall need no Sun, Moon
and Stars to enlighten it; and then with the brightness of the body of Christ,
and the brightness of the bodies of the Saints, there shall be a glorious
luster.

And for the large extent of it: the lowest heavens 5.
are but as a prick of the center, in comparison to the starry heaven; and the
starry heaven is but as a prick of the center, to the highest heaven. Men boast
here, if they have but a few clods of land; as Socrates put a scorn upon
Alcebiades that boasted of his lands, he brought him to the Map of the whole
world, and prayed him to show them there, and there was not one prick
vouchsafed for them in it: What is a little land to a country? and what is a
country to the world? and the world is but as a prick to the lowest heaven,
and the lowest heaven is but as a prick to the starry heaven, and the starry
heaven is but as a prick to the highest heaven, and the Saints shall possess
all that. You that have no possessions here, know there is a possession
hereafter, that is more then if you had all the Lands in the world.

Besides, it is of an incorruptible nature, it is an inheritance 6.
incorruptible: The reason why the heavens, and so the soul is incorruptible,
is because it is not made out of pre-existing principles; it was made out of
nothing, and nothing but an infinite power can annihilate a thing, as well as
make a thing out of nothing. Much is said of that place for the description of
it, Jerusalem was but a Type of it, and the Land of Canaan was but a Type of
it, and Paradise was but a Type of this glorious place, that is provided for
the Saints of God. Let us therefore raise up our hearts to consider of this.
And as we read in Genesis 13. 14, 15. where God showed to Abraham the Land of
Canaan, says God, look Northward, and Southward, and Eastward, and Westward;
for all the land which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed: So
consider the vastness of the Heavens, and the exceeding extent of them, and
consider this is the Inheritance of the Saints.

We know we have an abiding, eternal inheritance; our bodies shall abide
eternally, and the Heavens themselves are eternal: this should quiet our
hearts, when we find any discontent in our habitations: it is no matter in
what Country we are here, there is a glorious Country we are going to; Christ
our elder Brother is already gone, and has taken possession of Heaven for us:
as if so be there were some great inheritance did befall you here, and you
cannot go to possess it; and if you hear one is there for you, who has taken
quiet possession for you, and you shall be sent for in time convenient; will
you not be content? So we are not fitted for Heaven, but Christ is gone before
to take possession; and within a while we shall go and live with him. The earth
is too mean a place for the Saints, and yet the world is not worthy of the
Saints of God in a mean condition; then the world shall not be worthy of the
Saints in their glorious condition; and therefore there must be a place above
the world.

Yet know, Heaven is not enough for the Saints: the Saints of God are of such
spiritual raised spirits, as that they cannot be satisfied with any thing, but
God himself. Suppose God should cause all the Emperors and Kings of the world,
to come and cast down their Crowns before the Saints, and say, All these are
yours: An heart that is truly raised, would say, This is not enough, this is
not God himself. Suppose God should bring all the splendors of all the
creatures in heaven and earth, and they should be cast at the feet of the
Saints, they would say, This is not enough, for this is not God. Suppose God
should cause all the glory of heaven, not only of Sun, Moon and Stars, but of
the highest heaven, to be laid before the Saints, they would say, This is not
enough, this is not God. If all the Angels should come, and say, We are sent to
put all our glory upon you, they would say, This is not enough, this is not
God; and therefore when God has given them heaven, he must give them himself
to, or else they are not happy: And that is the fourth thing.

CHAP. XLV. The Saints enjoyment of God to be their portion, their happiness in
having his presence.
GOd himself will be the portion of the Saints. Augustine says of the happiness
of the Saints, If God gives such good things to wicked men, does he keep
nothing for the Saints? Yes, he keeps heaven it self; but says he, Surely I
speak of too low a thing, when I speak of heaven, he will give himself to them.
Heaven is beautiful, but more beautiful is God himself, the God of heaven:
Therefore God must give himself to them, or else their souls are not satisfied.
It is a sweet and excellent expression that Bernard has, Lord, as whatsoever
we give unto thee, unless we give our selves, cannot satisfy thee; so Lord,
Whatsoever thou give to us, unless thou give thy self, we cannot be
satisfied. The Lord said to Abraham, Fear not, I am thy exceeding great reward;
but says Abraham, What will thou give me, seeing I go childeless. Surely he had
respect to Christ, or Guliel. Paris. exhorting to sobriety, if we would
understand the happiness of the Saints in heaven; and inweighing against the
pleasures of the flesh, says, Ista enim sunt quae subvertunt, inebriant,
captivant, maculant, obtenebrant, deprimunt and absorbent mentem humanam and
palatum ejus inficiunt, and transvertunt. Tractat. de retributionibus Sancto
rum.
else it could not but be a fault, that Abraham should not be fully satisfied
in what God said; for as God does make the Saints to be his portion, so God is
the portion, and the inheritance of the Saints. The enjoyment of God is Heaven
it self, and therefore in Scripture God is called heaven: I have sinned against
heaven. In this there are these seven things: First, the presence of God.
Secondly, the blessed vision of God. Thirdly, the happy union with God.
Fourthly, the glorious communion with God. Fifthly, the fruition of God.
Sixthly, the rest that their souls shall have in God. Seventhly, the enjoyment
of themselves in God.

O beloved! for preparation to hear these things, that we had spiritual hearts,
says one, It is not for your carnal, base, sensual, voluptuous spirits to hear
of those things: For those that know no better things, then to eat, and drink,
and to be unclean, what is it for them to hear of such excellent things? As for
the pleasures of the flesh, they do infect and defile the soul, and make it
unfit for the hearing of such things, we had need of spiritual ears to hear
them. God says to Abraham in Genes. 13. 16. I will make thy seed to be as the
dust of the earth: afterward in Genesis 15. 5. he says, He will make his seed as
the stars of heaven: The seed of Abraham are of two sorts. Some are of the seed
of Abraham that are visible members of a Church, and yet have earthly hearts:
but there are others of his seed, and they are as the stars of Heaven, of
spiritual hearts: now as we are of the seed of Abraham outwardly in profession,
let us not be of that seed that are of the dust of the earth, only fit to hear
of earthly things; but let us show that we are of the seed of Abraham, that are
as the stars of Heaven, and shall hereafter come to enjoy the God of Heaven.

For the first, the presence of God, that glorious presence that the Saints
shall have of God in Heaven, is a great part of their happiness: Heaven, it were
not Heaven without the presence of God: The presence of God in the most
miserable place that can be, were a greater happiness then the absence of God
in the most glorious place that can be. David would not be afraid, though he
walked in the valley of the shadow of death, so that God were with him, Psalm.
23. Luther would rather be in Hell with Gods presence, Malim present Deo esse
in Inferno quam absente Deo in Coelo Luth. in Genesis cap. 30. Quid tibi videbitur
prima lux, cum illam loco suo videris.
then in Heaven God being absent. If the presence of God takes away the dread
of the shadow of the valley of death, and makes Hell to be more desired then
Heaven, what will the presence of God make Heaven to be? The three Children in
the fiery furnace with Gods presence were happy? how happy then are the Saints
with Gods presence in Heaven? The Saints desire Gods presence even when he is
angry, they are loath to be out of his presence then. It is very observable that
we have recorded of David, Psalm. 51. ver. 9. he cries to God to hide his face
from his sins, for Gods face was then an angry face against him: yet ver. 11.
he cries again, Cast me not away from thy presence; he was not willing to be
out of Gods presence howsoever, upon which St. Auguhath this expression, Whose
face he fears, even his face he invocates. God made rich promises to Cujus
faciem timet cjus faciem invocat.
Moses, yet he could not be satisfied without the presence of God: If thy
presence be not with us, bring us not hence. And the Apostle, when he would set
out the misery of those that are damned, in 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. says the Text, They
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord;
now the presence of God must needs be the happiness of the Saints.

First, because this must needs draw out all their 1.
graces, in all the sweet savor of them, Cant 1. 12. While the King sits at
his table, my spikenard sends forth the smell thereof: As it is with the Sun,
it draws forth all the virtue that there is in the plant, and makes a sweet
savor in things; so the presence of God must much more draw forth the fragrancy
of all the graces of his Spirit, in the souls of his Saints.

Secondly, the presence of God must needs quicken 2.
all the comforts of the souls of his people, and keep them always in vigor and
activity; for as we know, the Sun it does quicken things that lay dead; so the
presence of God has a wonderful quickening power, it keeps the comforts of Gods
people fresh, so long as we have the presence of God, all our comforts are
green and lively. The Saints in heaven have always the presence of God, and
therefore their comforts are always vigorous and lively. When they shall be
presented faultless before the presence of his glory, it shall cause exceeding
joy, Jude 24. the word there signifies, leaping, springing, exalting joy. (...).


Thirdly, the presence of God in heaven shall be 3.
the accomplishing of all that sweet and good that ever they have had in Gods
presence in this world; they have had by pieces, many sweet manifestations of
God unto them; but often God has been absent, and they have been fain to seek
for their Beloved; but now all those pieces (as we may so speak) which they
have had, some at one time, and some at another, shall be all joined together;
and they shall have the accomplishment of all in one, and the perfection of all
in one, and so for ever enjoy it.

Fourthly, the presence of God must needs fill their souls and bodies with
glory, for it fills the heaven 4.
with glory; much more it must needs fill an immortal soul with glory, because
that is more capable of glory then the heaven: If the Sun can put a glory upon
these poor dark creatures here below, much more can the presence of God put
glory upon the glorified bodies and souls of the Saints.

Further, the presence of God must needs be very glorious unto the souls of the
Saints, in regard of 5.
the manner of the bringing into Gods presence, for they shall be brought into
it by the hand of Christ the Bridegroom; he shall, as it were, take the Saints
by the hand, and lead them to the Father; he shall say, Come now, I will show
you my Father that I have spoken so much of to you before, to that end that the
Father may delight in you. As suppose the Prince were married to one, and upon
their marriage he takes his Spouse by the hand to lead her unto his father, to
that end his father may take notice of her, and manifest respect unto her; so
this coming into the presence of God shall be by the hand of Christ. There is a
glorious leading of our souls into the presence of God in this world, Ephesians. 3.
12. In whom we have boldness and access; the word signifies, A leading by the
hand: and in Canticles 1. 4. it is said of Christ, That he brings the Spouse
into the Chambers: He brings the Church, the souls of his people into the
Presence Chamber, and that makes the presence of God sweet unto the Church: but
hereafter there shall be a more glorious leading of the Saints unto God by
Christ, how much more shall the presence of God be sweet unto them then?

Sixthly, what a blessed security must there needs 6.
be to the souls of the Saints in the presence of God: To be under the shadow
of the Almighty is a secure condition, to be hid in the secrets of Gods
presence is a secure condition, but to be in the glorious presence of the
Almighty, as it shall be in heaven, O the happy security then! A child when it
is gotten into the presence of his father or mother, thinks it self safe; the
Saints then that shall always be in the presence of God, must needs be in an
happy security.

Lastly, hence will follow an holy boldness: the Saints of God shall stand in
the presence of God 7.
with an holy boldness, they shall have nothing whereof they shall be ashamed:
though the light of God shall shine most gloriously upon them, yet it shall not
discover any thing in them that shall cause any shame or fear in them. It is
the promise of God to the diligent, They shall stand before Kings: Those that
are now diligent in making their calling and election sure, in providing for
their eternal estate, this is the blessing of them, they shall stand before the
King of glory, before the King of heaven with an holy boldness: And this is the
first thing which the Saints shall have in having God to be their portion, The
presence of God.

CHAP. XLVI. The happiness of the beatifical vision discovered.
SEcondly, they shall have the Beatifical Vision of God, we shall be where he
is, and we shall see his face. Says Christ, Father, I will, that those which
thou have given me, be where I am, that is a blessing; but in Rev. 22. 4. it is
said, They shall see his face, and that is more, They shall know as they are
known, 1 Cor. 13. 12. It is the promise of the Mat. 5. 8.
pure in heart, that they shall see God: 1 John 3. 2. Behold, now we are the
sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know, that
when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. It
is the happiness of the Angels that Mat. 18. 10
they behold the face of God; so it shall be the happiness of the Saints to
behold the face of God in heaven: As for me, I will behold thy face in
righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness, Psalm. 17.
15. and so we may have the help of diverse Scriptures to show, that this is the
happiness of the Saints. The glory of this may appear in these particulars:

First, to see God as the first being of all, or the principle of all good, is
a most blessed thing, to see 1.
Adam the first father, or Eve the first mother of mankind, or for a child to
see his father, or mother, out of whose loins and bowels he came, whom he has
not seen in many years, this is a joy and comfort; but to see the Creator, the
first Principle of all things, that must be a great, an infinite contentment;
and to see him that has done all the good in the world, has much satisfaction
in it. We would rejoice to see a man that has been an instrument to do great
things in some Country, as the King of Sweden, or the like; but to see God
that has done all the great things in the world, what a blessed joy and
contentment will that be? The rational creature does naturally desire to know
the causes and principles of things, no other creature looks at the principles
and causes of things, but the rational creature. If other creatures may have
that which is suitable to sense, they look no farther; but a rational creature
cannot be satisfied in whatsoever it has, unless it knows something of the
principles and causes of the thing it has, and when it knows the cause of one
thing, it would know the cause of that, and nothing will quiet it till it comes
to see the cause of all; and when it comes to know that, it has full
contentment: Show us the Father, and it suffices.

Secondly, they shall see God in his unity; whereas now we understand God only
according to his 2.
several Attributes, as the manifestation of the Infinite Simple: First, being
in one way we call Power, in another way we call Mercy and Bounty, in another
way Justice, and so we apprehend God according unto the several Attributes that
God has manifested himself in; whereas there are not many things in God, but
all those several Attributes that we apprehend diversely, are but one excellency
in God: as one beam of the Sun shining through a red glass, causes a red
reflection; and the same Sun shining through a blue glass, causes a blue
reflection; and so the same excellency of God shining one way, and working
after one manner, we call by one name; and the same excellency of God working
another way, we call by another name, and yet it is all one in God; and though
we cannot apprehend it now, yet we shall see God in his unity afterward.

Thirdly, we shall see God in the Trinity: though 3.
there be but one God, yet there are diverse persons: to see how the Father
begot the Son, and how the Spirit did proceed from the Father and the Son, and
the difference between the procession of the Spirit, and the generation of the
Son; the sight of God in the mystery of the Trinity, is a most glorious thing.

Fourthly, we shall see God in his glory, in Isa. 33. 4.
17. there is a promise, They shall see the King in his beauty, or in his
glory; there is a great deal of difference between seeing the King at an
ordinary time, and seeing of him when he is in his Robes, with his Crown upon
his head, and his Scepter in his hand, and set upon his Throne, with all his
Nobles about him in all his glory: so God does manifest himself a little now,
but this is not all that he does intend: and for to see God now as he does
manifest himself, is somewhat, but to see God in his greatest glory that ever
he shall manifest himself in, that must be a great happiness.

Fifthly, to see God in his eminency; that is, they 5.
shall see how all excellencies that are in the creature are eminently
contained in the absolute perfection of the Divine nature; all the good that is
in the effect, is in the causes, and the good of those causes in their causes,
and so at length they come to the first principle: so all the good that we can
see in all objects that give content, we may see all eminently in God, and see
God in all. The latitude of the object of man's understanding, is such, as it
comprehends all beauty, all excellency, all truth in it, and therefore cannot
be satisfied till it sees into all; in God it finds all united, and therefore
in him only it finds blessedness: it is eternal life to know him.

Sixthly, they shall see God as he is, 1 John 3. 2. now there is a great deal
in that to see God as he is; 6.
and for explication of that, there are these five branches.

That is first not to see him only negatively, that is, not to see him as he
is: the most that we see of 1.
God now, is by way of negation, rather then any positive sight; when we say of
God he is incomprehensible, that is, he is such a God as cannot be
comprehended, that is but negation: when we say of God that he is infinite, that
is, such a God as has no bounds of his being, this is still a negation, to say
what God is not: and when we say God is a spirit, though the expression seem to
have an affirmation in it, yet it is but the apprehension of God rather by
negation, that is, that God has no bodily substance in him; for to speak
properly, God is not a Spirit; but only that is the most excellent thing that
we can conceive of, and by way of negation, that he is no body, and is
invisible, one that we cannot see, and feel, and the like: when we say he is
holy, he has no spot of sin, this is by way of negation, but now in Heaven we
shall not see God only by negation, but we shall see that positive excellency
of God, we shall see him as he is.

Secondly, we see God much by relation unto other 2.
things; as when we speak of God, and would open the excellency of God, we say,
God is the King of Heaven and Earth, and our Father, and the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and Creator and Governor of all things, and these are but
relative expressions, and a great part of our knowledge of God is by way of
relation; but hereafter we shall see him as he is.

Thirdly, you shall see God as he is, not by framing 3.
any representations of him in our minds; there shall be that immediate
presence of God to the mind, that there shall not need be any representation,
that we now form in our minds; as in the sense of Seeing, the object of the
eye being absent from it, there must be a species to represent it: so there are
some kind of representations of God to our understandings here; but there
shall be that immediate union with God in the understanding, that there shall
need no kind of representation of God, but we shall see him as he is.

Fourthly, we shall see him, not in his effects in the creature; the greatest
part that we see of God now, 4.
is in his effects, and not as he is in himself, we do not see the face of God,
but his back parts. We look upon the Sun, and there we see somewhat of the
power of God, but it is but the effect of Gods power, and not Gods power it
self; and when we look upon the world, we see much of Gods wisdom, we see the
effect of Gods wisdom, and not the wisdom of God it self.

Fifthly, we shall see God as he is distinguished 5.
from all creatures; here now we see almost nothing of God, distinguished from
created things. Say what you will of God, that he is a Spirit, that he is a
created thing, that he is wise, or holy, or just, or merciful, there is
somewhat of all these in the creature, only he is infinitely above all, and
that is by way of negation. But we do not see him in that positive excellency
which does difference him from all created things; but now it will be a blessed
thing to see God, as he is differenced from all created things, to see him as
he is.

Sixthly, the Saints shall see the counsels of God, 6.
and all the ways of God, what have been, and what shall be to all eternity
about election; what his counsels were about creating of things, before they
were created, and what the workings of his counsels were about the several ways
of his providence, before there was any manifestation of them in his creature;
and so all his counsels about rejection of so many thousands of men and Angels.
It is an expression of S. Augustine, We shall see the reason why one is
reprobate, and one elected; why one is rich, and one is poor: we do not see the
reason now, but by seeing God we shall see all things that may make for our
happiness: we shall know all the works that ever God did, and that ever he will
do to all eternity. It is a great thing for a man to know what is done in his
generation: but to know all the ways of God since the beginning of the world,
must be a glorious sight. It is not yet Six thousand years since God did any
thing out of himself, and what is six thousand years to eternity? and if God
have done such great things in Six thousand years, what may God do in the next
Six thousand years, and so in the next, who now can tell? A Workman does his
meanest works at first, and this world is but the beginning of Gods works, and
for a creature to see what God shall thus work for ever, is an infinite blessed
thing.

The seventh thing, wherein this blessed vision of the Saints appears, is, that
they shall look upon all 7.
the ways and works of God, as to see their happiness consisting in them: there
is a great deal of difference in seeing an object that is excellent in its
self, and to see an object that is excellent, wherein consists my happiness. As
in riding over a Land, one that is a Stranger rides over it, another that is an
Heir; the Stranger rides over it, and takes delight to see the Trees, and Fruit
to grow; but the Heir looks upon it after another manner, as the Land for which
my Father laid out much, and all to enrich me, as the Land that is mine
Inheritance: so, were it that we were but admitted to this glorious sight of
God, merely to have the view of God, it were a great privilege to the
Creature, but to see all the shine, and all that excellency that is in God, is
to make me happy; and all the counsels and ways of God are working for my
happiness and glory, this is blessedness indeed. There is difference between a
Stranger looking upon the King, and the Queens looking upon a King. A Stranger
may see Beauty and Majesty in the King; but the Queen looks upon the King, and
his Beauty and majesty, as her own; and so the souls of the Saints shall see
all in God as their own, to make them happy.

Eighthly, the blessedness of the sight of God consists in this, that it shall
be a transforming sight, 8.
such a sight of God, as shall be a transforming, perfecting sight, not only a
perfect sight, but a perfecting, transforming sight: The light that shall come
from God upon the mind, shall perfect the mind, and transform the mind into
the same likeness with God: It shall not be a mere notional sight; as men may
speak much of God, and have a notional vision of God; but there is a great deal
of difference between the notional vision of God, and the Deifical vision of
God; for it is not only beatifical, but Deifical, for it does transform a man
into the likeness of God. A deformed man may see a beautiful object, and that
sight shall not make him like that beautiful object; but the sight of God shall
make the soul glorious, as God is glorious, as you shall have it in 1 John 3.
2. We shall be like him: what is the ground? We shall see him as he is.

Ninthly, the sight of God will be a full sight, a sight whereby the mind shall
be raised to that height 9.
of excellency, as it shall be able to see God in his excellency: we cannot
look upon the Sun now in its excellency, if we will see the Sun, we must see in
its reflection; but the understanding of the Saints shall be raised to that
height, that they shall be able to look full upon the face of God, and this
will be the reward especially of Faith; for those that are godly do believe
above reason. Now because the Saints are willing to fear God so far, as to
captivate their reason, and to believe upon bare testimony above reason;
therefore hereafter God will give them this rereward, to see things fully, and
the reason of things.

Again, it shall be such a sight of God, as shall be 10.
without any discourse, or labor, but there shall be the present vision of God,
at the opening of the eye. We are glad if we can come to understand the
creature with labor; but to come to understand God the Creator without labor,
is a great happiness.

Again, to have the sight of God so, as never to lose it, that adds much to
the happiness of the 11.
Saints: To have but one glimpse of the face of God, though it were gone
presently, it were a great happiness, beyond all that the world affords, but
God shall not only pass by, but stand still: so as the soul shall never lose
the sight of God, but it shall have it to all eternity, and the eyes of the
soul shall be eternally opened to see God. If a man looks upon a delightful
object, he is loath to have the eye drawn from it; you shall never have your eye
drawn from God.

Further, in the sight of God you shall see all things that do any way concern
your selves in ordering of 12.
you to all eternity: and this is made by some the ground, why it is impossible
for the Saints in Heaven in the least degree to fall there; because they shall
have a continual view of God, and in him see fully all circumstances of all
actions, and all things that any way do or shall concern them to all eternity.
For there is no falling, or declining from God, but it comes at first from some
Beatus se^per videt in Deo omnes res and ^ctiones ad se pertinentes; and omnes
circumstantias quae possunt voluntatem rectam officere, and ad malum inclinare,
est enim principium Phylosophiae, non posse voluntatem peccare nisi praecedente
aliquo defectu in intellectu practico, vel speculativo errore, vel
inconsideratione. Quia ergo illa viso excludit omnem defectum, tum erroris, tum
considerationis circa res agend as ideo facit voluntatem impeccabilem. Suarez.
de Bear. Disp. 10. Sect. 1. N. 6.
error in the theoretical or practical work of the understanding, or in some
inconsiderateness; but there cannot be the least error in the mind, or the
least inconsiderateness; because the soul shall be so fully taken up with the
sight of God: what an infinite delight must this needs be? It was the desire of
a Philosopher to see the nature of the Sun, though it were to be burnt by it,
he could be content; so if God should grant us this happiness, You shall come
to see me, but the sight of me shall destroy you, this were a desirable thing;
but to have a sight of God that is a perfecting sight, and such an excellent
and glorious sight, in which our happiness shall consist for ever, how glorious
must this needs be?

Lastly, to see God in our selves: It is an happiness to see God in the
Creature, but much more to see God in our selves: the chiefest of the glory of
God, next to that which appears in Jesus Christ, shall appear in the Saints,
and the chief excellency of God that the Saints shall see, shall be within
themselves: they shall see more of the glory of God within themselves, then in
all the Heavens besides. The Heavens are glorious now, the Sun, Moon, and Stars
are glorious; but to see the highest Heaven, that were more glorious. But the
meanest Saint of God in Heaven, shall see more of God, and of his glory in
himself, then does appear in all the Heavens beside, and then much more then
does appear in all the World. We might make it out, there is more of the glory
of God in one Saint, then in all the Heavens and Earth besides; for the Heavens
and the Earth are but Gods footstool, not his image, but the Saints of God are
are his image, and this shall be their happiness, to see the glory of God in
themselves. A man may delight to see beautiful colors, but you take more
delight, if you can by looking in a glass see your selves beautiful, and see
those beautiful colors in your own clothes; but if we could have the glory of
the Sun, and the Moon, and all the creatures in heaven shining within our
bodies, that would be counted glorious indeed; but to see the divine
excellency, and the top of the divine excellency of the infinite God shining
within us, this will be a mighty happiness. Base sensual carnal hearts think
there is no content but in satisfying the flesh. What sweet and content have
many, but in their eating and drinking? and their palate is pleased, and in
that their other senses are satisfied, and they think this is the excellency of
man: But take a scholar, that has but the exercise of his understanding to
find out truths, and those things that are suitable to the rational part, and
he sees more excellency there, then in any sensual thing, and he can scorn
sensual delights. If there be so much content to the mind in viewing the
things here, what content will there be to the mind in beholding God, and his
glory? There are two reasons of content in seeing things; In regard of the
Visio est delectabilis dupliciter; uno modo ex part objecti in quantum id quod
videtur delectabile est, alio modo ex part visionis in quantum ipsum videre
delectabile est: delectamur enim cognosendo, mala, quam vis ipsamala nos non
delect ent: quia ergo visio beati fica est perfectissima, ideo utroque modo
delectabilis. est. Tom. Aquin.
object, or in regard of the act of seeing it self. Let the object be what it
will, there is delight in the act of seeing and understanding: For a man to
understand that which is evil, it gives delight to the mind, and it is one of
the perfections of God that he understands evil as well as good, so that there
is content and delight in the act of seeing, though there be no delight in the
object: but when the object is pleasing too, that adds much to comfort and
delight, therefore content in the sight of God must be the highest content,
because there is the highest act of understanding, and the highest object to
see that can be.

And thus I have endeavored to open unto you the second blessed thing that the
Saints shall have in Gods being their portion, they shall see God. Blessed are
your eyes, says Christ, That you see those things that you see; and blessed are
your ears, that heard those things you hear: So, blessed are the eyes of Gods
people that do see any thing of God here, and hear any thing of God here; but
blessed are the eyes that shall see God hereafter. That which I labor for in
pressing these things, is to take off your hearts from these things below, and
that you may see what you are capable of; and if your hearts be mad upon your
sins, and you will perish, you shall know what you lose: methinks if men did
know what they lose by their sin, they would cast it off with indignation, and
therefore when your sin comes and tempts you, say, What, shall I lose all this
for such a way of sin?

CHAP. XLVII. The blessedness of Union with God.
THirdly, they shall have union with God. Sight is higher then presence, and
union is higher 3.
then sight. John 17. 21. Christ prays to his Father, That they may be one in
us, as thou art in me, and I in thee. For the opening of this union with God,
you are to know that there is first an union that God has with all creatures
in general. Secondly, an union that he has with the humane nature of Christ.
Thirdly, the union that he has with the Saints. First, the union that God has
with all creatures in general, and that union is twofold: An union 1.
of dependence; or an union of his immense presence: Of dependence, because all
creatures in the world depend upon God for their being, and continuance of
their being every moment, therefore there must be an union of God with them;
for if the union of dependence were broke, evey creature would fall to nothing.
As the beams of the Sun have an union with the Sun, and the beams could not
continue if they were not united to the Sun; so all the creatures have an union
of dependence with God, without which they cannot continue. And then the union
of immense presence, that must be, because God is in every thing, and every
where; there is not the least spire of grass or stone, but there is a way of
Gods immense presence in that. Secondly, there is another kind of union that
God has with the humane 2.
nature of Christ, and that we call an hypostatical union: for the humane
nature, and the divine nature to be united in one person, this is that the
Saints and Angels of God shall be adoring God for to all eternity; that ever
there should be such an union between the Deity and the Creature, that if it
were not revealed to us in the word, it were impossible to be imagined by any
creature. It is a great work of God to unite an immortal soul with such a base
creature as our flesh is into one person; I do not know any one work of God in
creation so great as this, and this is to be admired at: but if this be so
great a work to unite a rational immortal soul into one person, with a
corruptible piece of flesh, then to unite man's nature into one person with the
second person in Trinity, this is a great work.

Thirdly, there is an union of God with the Saints, 3.
and that is in this World, or in Heaven. In the World, there is a fourfold
union that God has with the Saints. First, there is an union of the
inhabitation 1.
of the Spirit; for the Saints of God in this World, are the Temples of the
Holy Ghost, and the Spirit of God is said to dwell in them; and so there is a
glorious union by the inhabitation of the Holy Ghost in them. The second union
that the Saints of God have in this world, is the union 2.
of similitude; the Saints are like God here in some measure, they have the
image of God stamped upon them, God sees his face in the Saints. The brightest
glass in the world to show Gods face, is the souls of the Saints; and there is
not only some likeness of God in the Saints, but the likeness of God in his
very life. A glass may represent my image, but that image has not that life
that I have, but the image of God in the Saints, does not only represent God,
but they have the life of God: those that are converted live the life of God,
and by sin we are estranged from the life of God: they work as God works, God
understands himself the highest and infinite good; and God wills himself as the
highest and infinite good; these are the chief actions of Gods life. Now the
Saints of God live this life, they in their measure do here understand God, as
the highest and infinite good, and do will God as the highest and infinite
good. A third union that the Saints have with God, is a union of love; love is
an uniting grace, and there is a most entire love between God and every Saint,
and so their hearts are close united, and mingled by love.

Again, in this life there is a mystical Union, and that is an union higher
then any other; an union with Christ, being made members of the Son of God, and
so they come to have union with the Son of God, according to that expression,
in 1 John 1. 3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye
also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father,
and with his Son Jesus Christ. There is a mystical union between us and Christ,
and so we come to have union with God the Father also, and to be joined to the
Lord, we are one Spirit with him. Impossible est Deum uniri speciali modo
substantiae animae nostrae nullo interveniente domo, vel effectu ereate, quem
Deus in anim a efficiat, ratione cujus dicitur specialiter esse in illa,
essentia Divinitatis intime. Est in essentia animae vi immensitatis, now this
presence of God cannot be greater or less, sed so lum ratione alicujus novi
effectus, Suar. tract. de beat. Sect 1.
Now for the union that the Saints have with God in Heaven, there are many
intricate notions that some of the Schoolmen have about this; as, that the soul
shall be turned into the same Idea that God made it of; and that there shall be
an Illapsus of God into the soul; but we must know there can be no union with
God, but it must be by virtue of the influence of some good from God; for speak
of what union you will, God cannot in his Essence be more present with the
creature then he is here, but only in regard of some manifestation, or
communication of himself, in some gift or good thing; but certainly, there will
be a wonderful glorious union between God and the soul in Heaven, and that upon
these four grounds.

First, there is not such distance between God and the soul, but that it is
capable of union with God. One would think how is it possible that God should
be so united to the soul, being there is such an infinite distance between God
and it: but there is not such an infinite distance between God and the soul of
man, as that there should not be a glorious union between them: there is a
great deal of likeness between God and the soul; First, in the spirituality, 1.
God is a Spirit, the soul is a Spirit. Secondly, in 2.
immortality, God is immortal, the soul is immortal. 3.
Thirdly, in the high excellency of God, the understanding and will, the soul
is endued with understanding and will; the perfection of God as we can
conceive, is his understanding and will; and so it is in the soul. Fourthly, in
the several operations 4.
that the soul has; and herein there is more likeness between God and man's
soul, then is between God and Angels, in that one rational soul should perform
so many works, as the same God, the same Excellency, working upon the creature,
works in one thing one way, and in another thing another way; so the soul
represents God in this, in that one rational soul has such variety of workings
in the body, for understanding, for sense, for vegetation, which Angels have
not. Again, the soul resembles God in the infiniteness; the soul is not only
infinite in duration, but in regard of the infiniteness of the working of it:
and here is a mighty difference between the soul of man, between rational
creatures, and all other creatures: for the sensitive creature that only works
about some particular thing that concerns its own preservation, and its own
good within its narrow compass, but the object of man's soul is universal,
infinite: it is not any particular truth, that will satisfy the understanding,
let there be never so many truths revealed, yet the understanding desires
infinitely more; if there be any truth that is not revealed, it would have
that. Let Impossible est sensum corporeum elevari ad Deum, prout in se est,
quia nullo modo comprehenditur Deus sub objecto ejus; hac enim ratione non
potest visus elevari ad percipiendum sonum, nec auditus ad percipiendu^ colorem
and fic de aliis potentiis, in quo multum differt intellectus a sensu; nam
intellectus absolute continet Deum sub objecto suo; and ideo elevare potest ad
percipiendum illum perfectius, quam naturaliter posset; quia tota illa elevatio
est intra latitudinem objecti intellectus, Suarez. de Beat. Disp. 6. Sect. 3.
the sense have some particular object before it, suitable to sense, it looks
no further; as if the eye have color, it goes no further, nor the ear goes no
further then sound, but the understanding has desire to all truth: And so for
good, the sensitive creature has no desire of good, but only that which does
preserve sense, but the will of man is for good in general: and this shows how
capable the soul is to be raised to such an excellency, as to have communion
with God: if we knew what our souls were capable of, we would not think we
could satisfy them with such things as bruit beasts are satisfied with.
Secondly, there may well be a glorious union between God and and the souls of
the Saints, because God shall see nothing but himself in the souls of the
Saints: now when God shall see nothing but his own in such a creature, this is
a full ground of Gods near and most glorious union with it: as when a man comes
to see in another much of his own, his heart is united to him; things that are
of a like nature do unite: Bring an hot firebrand to the fire, and it does
unite presently, because the fire does find something of it self there; if
there were some moisture in the brand, it would not so fully unite: And so here
we cannot have full union with God, because though God sees somewhat of his own
in us, yet there is a great deal in us, that is not Gods: but when we shall be
wholly free from sin, and God shall see nothing but his own in us, that must
needs be a ground of a most glorious union.

Thirdly, in Heaven there shall be nothing in God, but shall be suitable to the
nature of a glorified 3.
Saint, and suitableness is the cause of union: if there be not a suitableness,
there cannot be union. There cannot be suitableness between God and other
creatures; but between a glorified Saint and God, there shall be an infinite
suitableness, and therefore an infinite glorious union. Again, there shall be
an infinite inflamed love; here is an union of love, but 4.
in Heaven there will be a further degree of love, and love being enflamed,
there must needs be a most glorious union.

Fifthly, if you consider what the bond of connection 5.
of the soul and God together is, namely, the mediation of the Son, the second
person of the Trinity, there must needs be an infinite close and glorious union
of the Saints with God. This vision and union with God, is enough to cause the
souls of Gods people to be so satisfied, as to say, Let all things be taken
from me, it is enough; I have somewhat of Gods presence here, but I shall have
the glorious presence and vision of God, and union with God hereafter; and
though my eyes should never see good day after, or never see comfortable object
in the world, this is enough, I shall see God, and have full union with God:
Though there be a separation between me and all temporal comforts in the world,
though God should rend this creature or that creature, the dearest husband, or
the dearest wife, or the dearest comfort in the world, and those things that my
soul do most cleave to here, from me; yet it is enough that God and my soul are
somewhat united, and that God and my soul shall have a glorious union
hereafter. O that God would raise our hearts to these things, that we may know
what is the business we have to do in the world: If you do not know these
things shall be your portion, never give satisfaction to your selves in the
flesh, till your know these things shall be your portion.

CHAP. XLVIII. The blessedness of communion with God.
NOw we come to the fourth thing, Communion with God, and this is more then the
other three things. Union is the ground of communion; communion is that which
rises from both parts being united, and the Saints shall have a glorious
communion with God and the Trinity; in this life there is a communion that the
Scripture speaks of, that we have with God the Father, and the Son, and the
Spirit, 1 John 1. 3. Our fellowship is with the Father, and his Son Jesus
Christ; and in 1 Cor. 13. 14. The communion of the Holy Ghost be with you, says
the Apostle; so that there is a fellowship with the Father and the Son, and
communion with the Holy Ghost; but certainly, it shall be another manner of
communion that the Saints shall have with God in the world to come. Now this
communion, it stands either in regard of the work of God, upon and toward the
Saints, or the work of the Saints upon and toward God; for communion is on
both sides, and that in these four things: First, in the delight they have one
in another. Secondly, in wishing all good to one another. Thirdly, in the
communication of themselves one to another. Fourthly, in the blessed familiar
converse that they have one with another.

First, communion consists in the delight they have 1.
in one another: There is a full, actual, mutual, everlasting delight between
God and the Saints in heaven: First, there is a delight: Secondly, full:
Thirdly, actual: Fourthly, mutual: Fifthly, everlasting.

First, there is a delight: God here rejoices in them, the Scripture says, He
rejoices in the habitable parts of the earth, and his delight is with the sons
of men, Prove. 8. 31. why does God delight in the habitable parts of the earth?
there are other glorious works of God that are not in the habitable parts of
the world; but God delights in the habitable parts of the world, because there
are rational creatures there; but he has more delight in his Church in this
world, then in any other part of the habitable parts of the world; as Isa. 19.
25. Assyria is the work of Gods hands, but Israel is his inheritance; but there
will be a delight far higher: The delight that God has in heaven it self, is
in regard of the Saints that are there, without which heaven were not heaven.
First, it is delight in their persons, God takes infinite delight and content
in the persons of the Saints; 1.
howsoever their persons are mean here, yet as they shall be hereafter, God
will take an infinite delight in them. Secondly, he delights in conferring
blessedness upon his people; there is much delight in the 2.
communication of good, as well as in the enjoyment of it: what good has a man
who has a great estate more then another, but that he may communicate more
good then another. Thirdly, he delights in the glory that he has conferred
upon 3.
them: As those that have true communion one with another, delight in any good
that one another has, God delights in the glory that is in his Saints, and
takes much pleasure in it, his soul is satisfied in the glory that he sees upon
his own people, and that because he loves them: The former arose from the
pleasure in himself in the act of communicating; this from the love to his
people, to see their good. Fourthly, God delights in their presence to have 4.
them with him, and by him, as the Father delights in the presence of his
Children to have them round about him. Fifthly, God delights in their love,
that he has these creatures to love: as a man delights 5.
to have love from others; What pleasure could a man have in all the world, if
none loved him? If he should live in a Family or Town, and none loved him, he
could have no pleasure in his life; but if a man live where he is loved, it
makes up a great many wants, so God is not contented in any thing else he has
to delight himself in, but that which must make up all, in that he has his
people to love him. Sixthly, God delights the more in his own 6.
glory, because his Saints are partakers of it; it is so much the more sweet
unto him, because they have a share in it; thus it is between entire friends,
who have intimate communion one with another, their own happiness pleases them
the more, because the other has a part in it.

Secondly, it is a full delight that God takes in his people: It is said of his
people in this world, in Zeph. 17. 3. 2.
he will rejoice over them with joy and with singing; the delight that God has
with his people in Heaven must needs be full: First, in regard of the near
relation that his people have to his Son, and because he takes such infinite
delight in the Son; and they being one with him, thence flows that full
delight. Secondly, because he shall see so much of his own Image; now that is
infinitely delightful: that is the reason why the father or mother does delight
in their children, because they see themselves in them: so God shall see
himself in his people, and that will cause full delight. Thirdly, because of
the glorious works of God upon the souls of his people, because he shall see
his own handiwork to be so glorious and full in them. As a man that makes a
work that is very curious and glorious, he takes abundance of delight to look
upon it; and if the work be full and perfect, then his delight is full and
perfect. Now the great work of God is in the glory of the Saints: God loves to
look back to the creatures, therefore when he had made the world, he looked
upon what he had made, and saw it was good: As a workman when he has brought
his work to some perfection, he will look upon it: Now when God shall see what
he has done, in raising such a poor worm to such high excellency, God will
take full delight in viewing this full work he has done. And this is more then
all the former; for besides the delight in the act of communication and
delight, because of the love to those to whom good is communicated: This is the
delight in his own work, done in the beholding the beauty and glory of it.
Fourthly, the delight of God must be full, because in them God attains his
highest end, the 4.
highest end of his greatest design, the highest end of his deepest councels,
the highest end of his most glorious work: It is a great delight to a man when
he goes about a work, if he have his end; though a man have some benefit by his
work, yet if he be crossed in his last end, all his joy is taken away; and this
is the evil of sin, sin seeks to cross God in his highest end that he aims at,
but the Saints in heaven shall give God his full end: God shall have the
highest end that he did aim at, he shall see it accomplished and fulfilled in
them; now those objects in which Gods highest end is fulfilled, he must needs
take delight in, and that shall be in the Saints. Again, the delight of God
must be full, because God has no other object, but rational 5.
creatures, Angels and Saints to let out his delight to; if God does take any
delight in any creature here, it is in order to the Angels and the Saints: Now
when God has no other object to himself, and his Son, and his Spirit, to let
out his delight unto, but the rational Creatures, Saints and Angels, joined in
one (for the Lord Christ shall be the head of the Saints and Angels) surely his
delight in them shall be full.

Thirdly, this delight shall be actual; and that is necessary to communion; for
though there be delight, 3.
yet if it should lie dead in the habits, there is no communion: If two friends
have habitual delight one in another, they are not said to have communion, but
when it is actual, so this delight shall be actual; the nature of delight is to
be lively and active, even in us, though it be but an affection in us; but God
being a pure act, there will be an infinite activity in his delight, and it is
always vigorous and fresh, so as God shall make the souls of his people to be
sensible of the activity of his delight. Fourthly, this delight shall be
mutual, it shall be on the Saints part, 4.
as well as on Gods part. As God delights in the persons of the Saints, so they
delight in God himself, not in that they receive from God, but their greatest
delight is in the being of God himself; and as God delights in their glory, so
they do delight in all the glory of God, in essential glory that they see in
God, and in all the glory that is reflected upon God by his creatures; and they
delight in his presence in being with him, and in his love, and in that they
can give any glory to him; they delight in all they have, more because God has
glory by it, then in that themselves are blessed in it. And it is full
likewise; the delight of the Saints of God is full, as 5.
well as the delight of God in the Saints is full; and that for the very same
grounds that the delight of God in them is full; namely, The fullness of Gods
delight in them is their relation to Christ; so the ground of their full
delight in God is, because God is the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
because they see their likeness in God; what ever excellency they have in
themselves, they see it to be infinitely in God; and as God delights in them,
because of his works he sees in them, so the Saints shall see all the good that
ever they have done, does redound to the glory of God; howsoever, the works of
Gods people for the present seem to be mean, yet it shall appear, all the
gracious works of the people of God shall be the most glorious things in the
world: For God shall own them for the setting out of his glory, as the greatest
things in the world; and this should be an infinite encouragement to us, to be
abundant in good works, because God will glorify our good works: and as the
fullness of the delight of God in the Saints is, because God attains his end in
them, how full must the delight of the Saints in God be, because the Saints do
attain their end in God, the end of all their thoughts, and ways, and
performances? and they shall have no other object to let out their delight to,
but only God: here, though we have some grace, yet the stream is divided, we
let out so much to one creature, and so much to another; the children so much
to the Parents, and the Parents so much to the children; and husband so much to
the wife, and the wife so much to the husband, and so much to our friends, that
the stream we let out to God is but little: but when all the delight that we
let out to the creatures, shall be taken away, and God shall be the only
object of our delight, then our delight must be full.

And as this delight is mutual, so it shall be continual: for being withdrawn
from all other objects, 5.
it will work upon that, both of them, Gods delight in the Saints, and the
delight of the Saints in God, shall be for ever: the Saints shall be an eternal
excellency, in which God shall delight, and God shall be an eternal excellency
in which they delight, they shall be always keeping that feast of the Lamb. We
read of Ahasuerus, he kept a glorious feast, and the gloriousness of it is set
forth by the continuance of it, Esther 1. 4, 5. it is observable, the
difference between the feast that he made with his Nobles, and the feast that
he made with the common people, and that may lively set out the difference of
the goodness of God that he lets out to his own people, and that he lets out to
other common people; he made a feast of a hundred and fourscore days to his
Nobles, and but seven days to the common people: so when God comes to make a
feast of joy to his people, it shall be everlasting. Men in the world have some
content, but it is but for a little time; but the comfort and joy that is to be
between God and the Saints in Heaven, is to be eternal, because it is such a
feast as is made to his Nobles, and to show the riches of his glorious Kingdom,
and the honor of his Majesty.

Secondly, in communion there is a mutual wishing 2.
and willing of good to one another; now God shall will all good to the Saints,
and they wish all good to God: It is true, that God from all eternity did will
all good unto his people, but here his people are not of a capacity to receive
much; there is a great deal of difference in willing and determining good to
them, before they were in being, or before they were capable of receiving this
good, and willing good to them when they shall be made vessels fit to receive
good; the bodies and souls either of the Saints or the wicked being united
after the resurrection, they shall be vessels infinitely enlarged, capable of
abundantly more then they are here, and then to have God will good to them, is
far better then to have good willed to them here: The men of the world would
fain have good here, while their hearts are narrow, and they cannot receive
much from God; but the Saints look for good hereafter, when their hearts shall
be enlarged; when as the wicked, when their souls shall be enlarged, they shall
have nothing but misery. There is a twofold love, when one Amor amicitiae, Amor
been volentiae.
shall will only good to himself by another, or will good to another; now the
love of good will is most glorious in God, and it is mutual; God shall will his
good to the creature, and the Saints shall will all good to God: What good can
they will to God? It is true, there can be no addition to the essential
goodness of God, but they can will that this his goodness be honored and
praised; and this shall be in the blessed communion between God and his Saints
in the mutual working of their wills.

Thirdly, in communion, there is the communication of what one have unto
another; where there is 3.
right communion, there is a communication on both parts; if on receive good,
and the other do not labor to communicate, it is not communion. Now there is a
glorious communication on Gods part: First, immediate: Secondly, full: Thirdly,
free: Fourthly, everlasting. First, immediate; whereas here God communicates
himself through creatures, or through ordinances, there are conduits of
conveyance; for there is such distance between God and us, that we cannot
expect that immediate conveyance of Gods goodness, and of himself to us here,
as we shall have in heaven.

Secondly, the fullness of Gods communication: 2.
Suppose that God should draw out all that beauty, sweetness, goodness, and
power that he has communicated in all creatures in the world, and bring the
quintessence of all, and communicate that unto the soul of one Saint, certainly
it would not serve the turn, for the happiness of one Saint, there must be a
greater communication: But conceive, if we see one creature have so much power
in it by its influence upon the dunghill, as to produce such a glorious creature
as life, which is the most glorious thing that ever God did make. Saint
Augustine says, There is more glory in the life of a fly, then in the Sun in
the Firmament: Now if the Sun have such power to produce life from a piece of
dirt, what power shall the influence of an infinite God have upon a glorified
soul? No marvel though the Scripture says. That eye has not seen, neither ear
has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, to conceive what God
has prepared for them that love him.

Thirdly, it is free, as free as the Sun lets out its 3.
beams: It is natural to a good thing to communicate, much more for goodness it
self: certainly, God being goodness in the abstract, his communication must
needs be free.

Fourthly, it is everlasting; the letting out of himself 4.
to the Saints, shall preserve their strength, that he may let out himself unto
them; as if there were that power in some excellent liquor that is let out into
a vessel, not only to sweeten it, but perpetually to preserve it, that it may
be letting out it self into it; so God does everlastingly in communicating
himself unto his people, preserve them that he may communicate himself. And
then the Saints of God do communicate to God in the same way that God does to
them. They are always worshipping God immediately, not through ordinances; as
they shall not receive any thing of God through ordinances, so they shall not
worship God through ordinances; but as they receive immediately, so they shall
worship God immediately, and their communication shall be full: but as they
cannot will any essential good to God, so they cannot communicate any essential
good, but they shall communicate themselves, and all that they are or have to
God; or if they were able to make a thousand worlds, they would make them all
for the glory of God; but because that is beyond the power of any creature,
therefore they communicate themselves, and all that they are, or have, or can
do to God: as a drop of water is let out into an infinite Ocean, so they are
let out unto God, as into an infinite Ocean: And then the communication is
free, having the divine nature made perfect in them, that do flow to God, when
they see his divine nature: and this communication shall be everlasting, God
letting out himself to them, and they letting out themselves to God: This is
the reward of the Righteous, and this is that which Moses had an eye unto, and
all Gods people that have an eye beyond the vail, behold it with infinite
soul-satisfaction.

Fourthly, in communion with God, there is a familiar 4.
converse between God and the Saints: And herein are these particulars:

First, God manifesting himself in a suitable way to the conditions of his
people, so as it were condescending 1.
to their condition, that though his Majesty be infinite, yet it shall no way
be a terror unto them: Here if a Saint of God sees but an Angel, he is amazed;
but because God would have his people enjoy holy familiarity with himself,
therefore he will manifest himself so, as though there be an infinite glory,
yet there shall be no amazement; but that they shall be able familiarly to
converse with him, as one friend does with another. The Scripture speaks of the
familiar converse that God has with his people here, that they are called
friends: Abraham was called The friend of God, and the Disciples were called
friends, but hereafter the friendship shall be much more full and sweet; Job
shall have his desire, O that the terror of God may not fall upon me: Here when
God spoke by himself, many of the dearest of his Saints have been afraid; but
when we come to be made partakers of this blessed Recompense of reward, all
such fear shall be done away.

Again, another thing in familiar converse, is the 2.
mutual opening of themselves one to another; much is said of Gods opening of
himself to his people here, Psalm. 25. 14. Prove. 3. 32. 1 Cor. 2. 16. John 15.
15. and that is the reason why they are brought into the Chamber spoken of in
Cant. 1. 4. because their secrets are discovered; as they said to the King of
Judah, concerning the Prophet, The Prophet that is in Israel, does reveal
whatsoever thou do in thy bedchamber, because in them Kings reveal their
secrets: The mysteries of the Kingdom are revealed to the Saints here, much
more in heaven, there are many secret things that God has to tell his people,
when they come to have familiarity with him. When a man comes to a woman a
stranger, he does not tell her his secrets; but when she is married to him,
then he tells her his secrets; so in heaven, God will reveal his secrets, and
they shall not only see his face, but they shall see Gods heart. And they
shall open their hearts to God, for they shall have nothing in their hearts
that they shall be ashamed of. As the Sun-flower, when the Sun shines, the
flower is open, but when the Sun is down, it shuts: So here when Gods face
shines, their hearts are open to God, but often they lose the shine of Gods
face, but in Heaven Gods shine shall be always upon them, and their hearts
shall always be open to God.

Again, in converse there is discoursing one with another, 3.
it is much here, 2 Cor. 6. 16. I will dwell in them, and walk in them: walks
of friends are for discourse, in Canticles 7. 5. The King is held in the
Galleries: Galleries are made for converse, and walking; so the Church is
compared to the Galleries in which Christ is held: There is converse with God
here, but much more in Heaven.

And then in familiarity there is abundance of delight, not only in one
another, but in receiving 4.
one from another; when men do converse, they delight in being receiving, and
being useful to one onother; so God will rejoice in any thing that they shall
be able to give him, as they shall rejoice in what God does give them. And the
ground of all, is because they live the same life of God; as now there cannot
be a converse between plants and beasts, because they do not live the same
life; but between one beast and another, there may be converse, because they
live the same life; and so there cannot be converse between beasts and men,
because they do not live the same life; nor between God and man, unless they
live the same life; but there shall be a glorious life hereafter, fitting the
souls of the Saints for converse with God: no creature is capable of converse
with God, but the rational creature, because no creature can live the life of
God, but the rational creature: and the ground the converse that the Saints
have with God, is from the near familiarity that God has with Christ. Zach.
13. 7. Awake, O Sword, against my Shepherd, and against the man that is my
fellow; it is the voice of God concerning Christ: now because there is this
familiarity between Christ and his Father; this is the ground why the Father
has such a sweet familiar converse with the Saints. And from all this
communion that is between the Saints of God, and God himself; hence it is that
the Saints are carried to God, as the universal latitude of good; it is as
natural for the will to will good in general, as it is for the fire to burn, or
for the Sun to shine; but here is the mistake, some mistake good, they will
good in general, but they look for good in this creature and that creature, or
in this lust or that lust: but here is the happiness of the Saints; as it is
natural for their wills to will good, so it shall be as natural for their wills
to will God as an universal good! this is the blessed communion that the Saints
shall have with God, and this is the accomplishment and issue of all the
communion we have with God here.

CHAP. XLIX. The happiness of the Saints in their fruition of God, and their
perfect rest in him.
THe fifth thing in the Saints having God to be their portion, is fruition of
God, enjoyment 5.
of God: Gods people shall not only be in his presence, and see him, and have
union with him, and communion with him, but they shall have fruition and
enjoyment of him: The fruition of God consists in these four things.

The first is, The reflect act of the soul, whereby it comes to know what it
has; it has a God, and it 1.
knows it, by a reflect act; and upon this it is, that there is no creature can
be said to enjoy a thing properly, but the rational creature; the beasts and
plants have many things communicated to them, but they have no reflect act to
know what they have, this is proper to the rational creature. If one have never
so great a good, if he were ignorant of it, and did not know it, he could not
be said to enjoy it: As one that has an inheritance given him, if he knows not
of it, he is far enough from the enjoyment of it. This will add much to the
happiness of Gods people, they shall be filled with happiness and glory, filled
with God, and they shall know all their happiness: There are many excellencies
that other creatures have, but they know not of their excellency; and many of
Gods people have abundance of mercy from God, God communicates much to them
here, but they cannot be said properly to enjoy it, because they do not know
it; but time will come, though God lets out himself fully, yet he shall let out
himself no further then we shall know him.

Secondly, there is in fruition the having use of all 2.
; if a man be never so rich, and have never so great possessions, if he have
not the actual use of what Videbit Deum ad voluntatem, habebit ad voluptatem,
fruetur ad jucunditatem, Ber. Sermon. de Tripl. Genesis Bon.
he has, he cannot be said to enjoy them; a man may have right to a thing, and
yet for the present not enjoy the use of it. But now the people of God, as they
shall have God to be their portion, so they shall enjoy God fully, to have what
use they will of all the Attributes of God, and all that is in God: And this is
an infinite good and happiness to the people of God, that they shall have as
much use of Gods infinite wisdom, of the infinite power of God, and of the
infinite mercy of God as they will; and they cannot will it so soon, but they
shall have it, nor so easily, as they may enjoy it: Then we do enjoy the
benefit of friendship, when one friend says to another, Make use of all I have
as your own, as you will: So God shall come to his people, and bid them make
use of all his riches, and glory, and excellency as they will: Hence it is,
that God is not only the happiness of his Saints, causally or effectually, but
he is formally the happiness of the Saints: He is not causally the happiness of
the Saints; that is, That he should cause some good to come from him to the
Saints; but he is formally the happiness of the Saints, because they have God
himself to enjoy, and have the use of himself. The Sun is causally great good
to the world, it causes the herbs and plants to grow; but it is not formally
the good of the creature here below: But God is not only causually good to the
Saints, but formally: God is theirs, to be used unto the utmost that they are
capable of.

The third thing in fruition, is to have the sweet and comfort of all that we
do use, or else we do not enjoy 3.
that we have. If a man should have the use of his estate, and meat, and drink,
if he have not the sweet and comfort of it, he cannot be said to enjoy it; but
when the comfort is let out, that the soul is sensible of it, then he may be
said to enjoy it: And hence it is that God is said to give all things to us
richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. 17. There is no creature can give us to enjoy
another; another may give a man such and such things in which may be comfort,
but he cannot give him comfort in the thing, it must be God that must give to
enjoy; no creature can properly give the enjoyment of another, because though
it gives the thing, it cannot give the comfort with it, but God gives the
thing, and he gives the comfort with it, and so a man is said to enjoy it.

Fourthly, it is such an enjoyment, as the having of it does perfect that which
does enjoy it, and by 4.
that we shall understand the difference between other creatures attaining to
their end, and the rational creature attaining his end; the other creatures,
when they attain their end they perish, so as they cannot be said to enjoy
their end; the plants and beasts that God has made for the use of man, when
man comes to have the use of them, then they come to have their end, but they
do not enjoy their end, because in having their end, they are destroyed; but
the rational creature, when he comes to have his end, then he comes to have the
highest perfection; and so he may be said to enjoy it, because when he comes to
have his end, he is made the more perfect; so take these four together, and you
may know what I mean by fruition of God: and that is the fifth particular.

6. The sixth particular, in having God to be their 6.
portion, is the Rest that the foul has in God: The term of all motion is
rest, every thing that moves, moves that it may have rest: Now here in this
world the creature is altogether in motion, and especially man, because he is
not here in his proper place; every thing moves to its center, till it comes to
its place, Psalm. 38. 10. My heart pants; the word in the Original signifies,
such a kind of motion, running up and down, as Merchants run up and down, from
one Country to another; and it is observable, there is the two last radical
letters double; and that is to (...)
note, That it is more then an ordinary stirring and motion of the spirit,
because it is not come to its rest; but when the foul comes to the term unto
which it moves, then it comes to have rest. God has let out good things to
other creatures, and they never return back again directly to him; but the good
that God lets out to mankind, and to his people, it returns back again to God:
The Saints are made by God, and they come and return to the first fountain from
whence they came, whereas other creatures do not: As the wicked, they come from
God, but do not return to God again as their rest: And therefore it is an
expression of Jeremy, Those that seek only after the satisfying of their
senses, they go out from God like unto rivers that run from the fountain, but
there is no regress of them, they do not return back again; but the godly come
from God, and have their returns back again unto God, unto their fountain,
there to rest, and to have their happiness, Psalm. 12. 9. The wicked walk on
every side; the wicked move up and down in a circle, but never unto the center,
only keep their round from one creature to another, but never have any direct
motion unto God, to come to him as their center, and so to find true rest in
him: Return, O my soul, unto thy rest, Psalm. 116. 7. The word translated Rest,
is in the plural number, Return, O my soul, unto thy rests: God is the rest of
the souls of the Saints. Rest and glory seldom meets in this world; they who
are in glory have not the quietest life, and they who have most rest, are
furthest off from being glorious: Issachars condition likes some, Genesis 49. 14.
Rest was good to him, though under burdens; and if a man will have a name
amongst the great ones of the earth, farewell rest; but in heaven rest and glory
do both happily and perfectly meet together.

The Rabbis have a note from the name Jehovah, that all the letters of that
name are quiescentes, and they say, There is a mystery in it, to show that all
our rest is in God. Some creatures God has made so, as there is no other good
they are capable of, but to continue in their beings; and therefore they only
seek for their place, and no more, and there they rest; as the Fire, and Air,
and the Earth, these creatures have no other good, but to continue in their
beings: and you shall observe, if they be out of their places, with what
violence will they move to their proper place: As if there be fire or air got
into the earth, it causes earthquakes, it moves there with that violence, that
it shakes the whole earth, that it may come to its proper place, because it
has no other good but that. Then I would reason thus; If those creatures that
have no other good, but only to be in their proper place, if they be out, to
get that good shall move with such violence; then considering what a good man's
soul is capable of, if he have not obtained that good, with what violence
should he move? how should the kingdom of heaven suffer violence? how should we
work toward God, who is our proper place and center, in whom is so much good?
But there are other creatures that have an higher good then being in their
place; as the plants have a Vegetative place, and therefore they grow to it,
and if they have attained that there, they rest; then the sensitive creature
has an higher good, and that moves till it has got its end; namely, to all
things that are agreeable to sense, and they go no further. The rational
creature looks to that which is suitable to reason. And where there is grace,
grace looks to attain that which is the proper perfection of the life Domine
fecisti nos pro te, and inquietum est cor nostrum donec veniat ad te. August.
of grace, and there it rests, and never else: Therefore it is the expression
of an Ancient: O Lord, thou have made us for thee, and our hearts are unquiet
till they come to enjoy thee; and when the soul comes to rest in God, that is
glorious, and that is the Saints happiness to attain the end of their motion,
and the more glorious is the rest, when the end is attained: and the glory of
the end may be discovered much, by the glory of the means that tend to it: As
if a man will bestow a great deal of Cost and Charges to get his Health, then
he accounts health worth all those charges; and the greater charges are laid
out for health, argues his greater esteem of it; and so if a man be at great
charge about a Voyage, it is because he accounts much of the excellency of the
end of his Voyage: and if this be so, how excellent is the end of Gods people,
if we consider the most glorious means that are used to attain this end and
rest? as namely, the work of God in sending the second person in the Trinity to
take man's nature upon him; and all the works of God in Election, in Redemption,
in Adoption, in Justification, in Sanctification; yea, all the works of God in
creation, in providence, the designing the Holy Ghost to that office he is
designed to, and all the Ordinances of God; look what preciousness is in all
these works of God and means, it sets out unto us the preciousness, and
excellency, and glory that there is in the last end, whereunto Gods people
shall attain, and that rest they shall have.

The seventh and last thing in having God to be their portion, is the enjoyment
of themselves in God: 7.
as they shall enjoy God, and God in themselves; so they shall enjoy themselves
in God, living in God continually: the fish does not more truly live in the
water, and move in the water, then the souls of the Saints shall live in God,
and move in God: Col. 3. 3. Your life is hid with Christ in God: the life of
Saints here is an hidden life, and it is hidden in God, but then it shall be a
revealed life, and revealed in God, and enjoyed in God. Hence is that Phrase,
Enter into your masters joy; that enters not into you, but you must enter into
it: it is your masters joy, not only that joy that your master gives, but the
same joy your master has, that you shall enter into and live in. It is said of
Saint John, in Rev. 1. that he was on the Lords day in the Spirit; it is not
said that the Spirit was in him, but it is said, he was in the Spirit; that was
as a beginning of the glorious condition of the Saints of God, that they shall
be in the Spirit of God, not only God in them, but they in God, as a drop of
water in the Sea, swallowed up in it. Put a drop of wine into the Sea, it is
changed into the nature of the Sea; and so though we cannot be changed into the
Divine Nature, yet we shall be swallowed up in God, so as we shall not any
further mind our selves, our own good as a created thing, nor our selves as
creatures, but altogether God: our minds shall be so wholly upon God, as if
they were wholly emptyed of any created good, and had nothing to do but with an
increated good; it shall not will any thing to it self, nor to any other
creature, but all to God, and so wholly taken upon with God, and upon that
ground, because they have that likeness unto God, and partake of the Divine
Nature: Here we do good to others, because of their likeness to our selves; But
the Saints shall will all good to God, not because God is like them, but
because they are like to God, so that they shall love themselves for God.

There are three degrees of love to God, loving The discovery of our love to
God.
of God for our selves, and loving God for himself, and loving our selves for
God: the one is but a natural love, the second is a gracious love, the third is
a love of the glorified Saints: First, to love God for our selves, so an
hypocrite may love God, because he has gifts and many blessings from God, this
is but a natural love. But grace goes further then nature, that is to love God
for himself; though we should never have any thing, yet if we be gracious, we
love God for himself: but the glorified Saints go further then grace, and that
is to love themselves for God, whereas heretofore we did only love God for our
selves, or for himself, now we come to love our selves for God: and in this
kind of love of God, and enjoyment of our selves in him, the soul shall be
ravished with God, and be in a kind of ecstasy eternally.

Now there is a twofold ecstasy, one that is through the weakness of the
inferior faculties of the soul; when the mind of a man is taken up about an
high object seriously, the other faculties being weak they fail, and so men
come to be in a trance and ecstasy; many have had great joy, that they have
even dyed Spiritual extasic, how discerned.
with it; the heart has so dilated it self, as the vital spirits have flown
out. But there is an ecstasy comes from the excellency of the object, that the
mind is busied about, but without any weariness of any inferior faculty. If
then we put all together, that has been said about God, and the enjoyment of
God, and having God to be the portion of the Saints, you see the principal part
of Heaven, and the spiritual part of the glory of the Saints. Here is faith
called for, and why should not our faith go beyond reason to rectify reason,
as reason rectifies sense? these things be high, and great mysteries. When as
reason says, How can this be? as when Christ was speaking of the new birth,
says Nicodemus, How can this be? let but faith get as far above reason, as
reason has got above sense, and we may easily see how they can be by sense.

If a man look up to the Firmament, and see the Sun shine, he would think it
were little bigger then a Bushel, or the like, now reason will tell men
otherwise; reason that tells men that this creature, that appears to be but in
this bigness, it is many hundred times bigger then the Earth; now if reason can
rectify sense so far, Why should not faith go beyond reason as far? Now reason
will tell us of much happiness that may be had: We may conceive by reason, by
understanding, that the rational creature is capable of abundance of glory: but
when you hear things delivered by the word, which are more then reason can
conceive, let us get faith to rectify reason, and we shall not call those
truths into question, and yet know that our glory will be beyond our faith, as
our faith is beyond our reason.

Here you may see that most people in the world The great mistake of Heaven,
and whence it arises.
mistake Heaven, and look at Heaven in a sensual manner: when we speak of
Heaven, where have we a man or woman that looks at Heaven, in these spiritual
excellencies, about enjoying God in this manner? As the Jews looked for a carnal
Messiah, whose Kingdom should be in the earth, and whose glory should be
external, not considering the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ: so most in the world
look but for a carnal Heaven. It is a good evidence of the truth of grace, if
you can look to Heaven with a right eye, in a right manner, to look at the
spiritual part, and spiritual excellency in Heaven. But that which makes people
to call these things in question, is; first, because they are not acquainted
with God, but are sensual, their hearts are acquainted with nothing but sensual
and earthly things, and therefore their hearts are not raised to these things,
but they look at them as notions; but that soul that is acquainted with God,
and the counsels of God, and knows the mind of God, that soul can know how to
savor these things, and know the reality of them. Again, another reason why
these things are above the reach of most people, is, because 2.
they are not acquainted with the mysteries of the Gospel, and what in them is
revealed concerning mankind: If we were acquainted with the mysteries of the
Gospel, we would not think these things strange that are revealed. Thirdly,
because men's hearts are not enlarged with Gods image for the present, therefore
3.
they cannot savor any thing, but that which has some savor of the creature.
Fourthly, because they are not acquainted with the first fruits of Heaven; 4.
whereas those that are godly, have some beginnings of eternal life wrought in
them here, and upon that, these things are not so strange to them, their hearts
can close with them, and suck out abundance of comfort from them. And thus we
have finished the fourth thing of the reward, namely, To have God for their
portion.

CHAP. L. The Saints happiness in Communion with Christ.
NOw the fifth particular in the reward of the Saints, is the communion that
they shall have 5.
with Jesus Christ, God and Man: there are diverse things in which the happiness
of the Saints consists in having communion with Christ, God and Man. It was one
of Saint Augustines three wishes, To see Christ in the flesh: It would be a
great delight to you to see Christ in the flesh. Many make much of the Picture
of Christ, and if they had it right, they would make more of it; but if Christ
should come to any of your houses, as he did when he lived upon the Earth, in
his mean condition, would it not greatly delight you? but when we come to enjoy
communion with Christ in Heaven, it will be another manner of communion, then
that upon Earth: We accounted the Apostles blessed men, that lived with Christ
upon the Earth; what a blessed condition will it be, to live with Christ in
Heaven? If there were such virtue in Christ upon Earth, that there came such
virtue from the hem of his garment, what glory will there be in Christ, in his
full glory? If Christ were so glorious when he was in his transfiguration, how
glorious is he, being glorified before men and Angels eternally in Heaven, With
the glory that he had with his Father, John 17.
before the beginning of the World! If there was so much virtue in the Apostles
of Christ, in regard of the reference they had to Christ, as from the shadow of
Peter, and the Napkins that were taken from Paul's body, there was such power as
to heal diseases, what virtue must needs come from Christ, when we shall come
to enjoy him, when we come to see Christ that was the author of all our good?
We read of the poor Cripple, when he was healed by the two Disciples, he ran
and catched hold on them, and was loath to go from them, who had been the
instruments of so great good to him; but for the Saints to come and be with
Christ, who has been the instrument of so great good to them, as Christ has
been, what an infinite happiness will this be? we read of many that would go
long journeys, to see those men that had any excellency in them; as some would
go from the utmost parts of Greece to Rome, to see Livie, Themistocles: to see
Christ then, in whom is so much excellency, will be glorious. And then to have
communion with him: it is he in whom God the Father takes full satisfaction;
surely he must be the full satisfaction of the Saints: this is that which
Christ prays for; First, he prays for his own glory, and then he prays for the
Disciples, and all Believers, That they might be with him to see his glory.

O to see the Lord Jesus glorified as he shall be glorified, must be a glorious
thing! As to see his glory in regard of the luster of his Divinity, through his
humanity; when Christ pleased to let out any luster of his Divinity, through
his humanity here, men were not able to bear it; as those that came to
apprehend him, when he said, I am he, they fell down backward: now in Heaven
the luster of Christ's Divinity, shall shine mightily through his humanity; so
in him our bodily eyes shall come to see God as much as it is possible for any
creature to see him; because God shall be let out through the humanity of
Christ, as much as it is possible for the Divinity to appear in any corporeal
substance, or in any creature: We shall see him with these our eyes, as Job
says. We shall see how the power of an infinite God can convey the luster of a
Deity into a creature. Certainly, Angels and men will be continually viewing of
Christ, he shall come to be admired of the Saints, he shall be admired at the
day of Judgment in the Saints, but in Heaven they shall see such excellency in
Christ, God and Man, as they shall be admiring at him to all eternity, as much
as they did at the first moment; here if we see any thing that is excellent, we
admire at first, but after a while we do not so: but there will be so much
excellency in Christ, as we shall so admire at it, to all eternity, as we did
at the first moment; for there shall be no abatement of our being taken with
the glory of the sight of Christ. Blessed are your eyes, says Christ, that see
those things you see; and blessed are your ears that hear those things you
hear: It is a blessed thing to see the things we may see here; but to see the
Divinity shine through the humanity, this will be a great blessing.

And we shall see him in the glory that the Father will put upon him;
Certainly, God will put an infinite glory upon his Son, because the Lord was so
infinitely well pleased with the satisfaction of his Son: Because he subjected
himself to the death of the Cross, therefore He has given him a name above all
names. And we shall see the glory of Christ, when all the Angels shall be
worshipping of him, and all the Saints shall be singing with Praises and
Hallalujahs to him. And this shall be the business in Heaven, eternally to be
admiring Christ, and praising God for Christ. And then we shall see him in his
glory triumphing over all his enemies, in bringing them down; and in his glory
when he shall have brought to perfection that great work that he did undertake:
Now to see Christ thus glorified, and for us to enjoy communion with Christ
thus in his glory, this will be a glorious reward for Gods people. This glory
of Christ, will be made the glory of the Saints: as a Queen that sees the
Prince in his glory, she delights in it, because it is her glory: and so the
Church, when she shall see Christ her husband in his glory, she shall rejoice
in it, because she looks upon it as her own, I speak of the Triumphant Church:
The Angels shall admire at it; O that these poor worms should be raised from
this low estate to such a glorious condition! they pry into the mystery of
Salvation. Then the love of Christ shall be enflamed to his people, that love
which caused him to plead with God for his people from all eternity, that
caused him to undertake this great work for his people; from this love, there
will be most glorious embracements. If at one salutation of the mother of our
Lord, John Baptist springs in the Womb for joy, how shall the heart of a
glorified Saint spring at the glorious embracements of Christ himself, when he
is in his glory? And when we shall be in such a condition as we shall be fitted
for communion with him, we shall be able to understand Christ in another way;
we shall know the hypostatical union of his two natures, and know Christ fully,
and be fitter to entertain the manifestation of his love, whereas here we are
not able to entertain much; Christ looks through the lattess, and we have but
some few drops of his love, but then when his love shall be enflamed and fully
let out, we shall be fitted for it.

And it shall be such a communion with Christ, as we shall never leave, but
follow the Lamb wheresoever Rev. 14. 4.
he goes: There shall be no moment to all eternity, wherein Christ shall be out
of the sight of so many thousand thousands of Saints: And though that Text in
the Revelations be meant of the Church in this world, and the following of
Christ wheresoever he goes here, following of him in the ordinances; but if it
be an happiness here to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, much more in
heaven: You that are willing to suffer any thing, to follow the Lamb in his
ordinances here, know there is enough to pay for all, you shall be always
following the Lamb in heaven, and you shall always be in the company of Christ;
and this is the fifth particular, namely, The communion that the souls of Gods
people shall have with Christ. There are yet two things to be opened in this
branch, to show what the recompense of reward of Gods people is; and they are
the enjoyment of communion with the Angels and Saints, and the keeping a
perpetual Sabbath in Heaven.

The enjoyment of communion with the Angels and Saints: The Angels and Saints
are joined together 6.
under one head; the Angels rejoice here in being ministering spirits unto the
Saints; O what rejoicing will there be then in communion with them! the Saints
of God shall enjoy communion with the Angels in a familiar way, they shall be
fitted for communion with God and Christ himself, much more fitted for
communion with Angels; yea, the Angels shall account it part of their happiness
to have communion with the Saints: The sight of an Angel to us now in the
flesh, though he comes to bring good tidings, is a great amazement; but then
the sight of the Angels shall be no amazement, but we shall look upon them as
our fellow creatures, to have communion with them, Heb. 12. 23. Ye are come
unto Mount Sion, and to the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and
to the company of innumerable Angels: This is spoken of the privilege of the
Gospel; before by the Law there was nothing but terror, that made Moses to fear
and quake; now we are not to come to Mount Sinai, but to Mount Zion, and unto
the City of the living God: Before, without Christ we were vagabonds, wandering
up and down in the wilderness of the Word, but by Christ we are gathered unto
the City of the living God, and the heavenly Jerusalem; there were nothing but
troubles before, but now they are gathered to Jerusalem into peace, and to an
innumerable company of Angels: Before the Angels were as Gods Host, ready to
revenge the quarrel of God upon us, but now we are come to the innumerable
company of Angels, who are ministering spirits to us here, and we shall enjoy
communion with them: The Angels are full of wisdom, and therefore when the
Scripture would set forth the excellency of wisdom, it sets it forth by the
wisdom of the Angels. Doctor Tailor the Martyr, rejoiced that he came into
prison with Master Bradford, that Angel Bradford, though he was but one that
had the likeness of an Angel, and in prison, yet he rejoiced in being with him:
What rejoicing will there be to be with all the Angels that are Angels indeed,
and that in our Fathers house? The way and manner of the converse of Saints with
Angels is very obscure; how spirits do converse one with another, we know but
little; we converse one with another by speaking, there can be no such way of
converse with Spirits. The Schoolmen say, By the act of their wills, they come
to make known what is in their minds, but we shall know more of the manner of
converse with them afterward.

CHAP. LI. The happiness of enjoying communion with the Saints in glory.
BUt it is more familiar to us, to know our excellency in the converse with the
Saints, Heb. 12. 23. To the general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn,
which are written in heaven, etc. To enjoy communion with the Saints here is
sweet, to enjoy communion with all the Saints, with all the Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and Moses, and Aaron, and Joshua, and all the good
Prophets, and the good Kings, and all Martyrs, and Worthies of the Lord: If to
have communion with one or two be sweet, then to have communion with all at
once must needs be sweet; it is worth the enduring much to get to heaven, if it
were only to have communion with the Saints.

Secondly, to have communion with none but them: to have communion with the
Saints is sweet, 2.
though we are forced to have communion with the world, but to have communion
with the choicest of Gods servants, and with none else, that is sweet indeed.

Thirdly, to have communion with them made perfect: The best now have many
weaknesses, and many 3.
frampold moods, and offensive carriages, that there must be a great deal born
in communion with the best; but then we shall be delivered from imperfections,
there shall be no ignorance, but we shall have communion with those that are
knowing, and perfectly glorified. The life of my Lord shall be bound up in the
bundle of life; it is the blessing of Abigail to David: Now Interpreters
expound it thus, It is a Metaphor, taken from binding up of young plants that
are removed from one place to be set in another: Now there is a great deal of
difference between a bundle of plants laid in the water, to preserve them till
they be set in the garden, and those plants growing and flourishing in the
garden: It is a great blessing to be bound up amongst Gods people here, that
are plants that have life; but we are here but as plants, bound up and laid in
water, reserved till we shall come to be planted in Heaven, and there to
flourish: There is much difference between Gods people, what they are here, and
what they shall be in Heaven, as there is between a plant that is bound up, and
laid in water to be kept alive, and when it is in the Orchard, green and
flourishing, and bringing forth fruit.

Fourthly, to have communion with them, when we shall know one another
perfectly: It is an opinion 4.
of Thomas, as you heard, That the bodies of the Saints shall be so
transparent, that they shall be able to see through one another bodies, as
through a glass: Howsoever that be, yet the souls of one another, and the
graces, and goodness of one another, shall be fully made known to one another:
If now we did converse with a company of people, that we knew certainly had all
true grace, and were all elected from all eternity, what an admirable comfort
would this be? our communion is comfortable, because we have some hopes of
their election, and we see some signs of grace; but if we were certain of this,
if God should speak from Heaven concerning the poorest member of a Church, and
say, This man, or woman, is the man or woman that I have had thoughts upon from
all eternity, and have elected to everlasting glory; would we not prize such a
one, and rejoice to have such a one in our families and houses? Now when we
come to Heaven, we shall certainly know every one was elected from all
eternity, and so shall live with us to eternity; we shall never have any fears
or suspicions of them, lest they should be hypocrites, as there are fears and
suspicions given of one another now.

And then to have communion with them, when 5.
there shall be perfect love and union of heart to one another, that one shall
love another as well as himself, and rejoice in the glory and prosperity of one
another, as well as his own: If one have more glory then another, he that has
least glory, shall rejoice in him that has more glory, as if it were his own,
and therefore there shall not be any want of glory to any; says Anselm, Every
Saint shall love Iusti diligunt Deum plusquam seipsos, and anvicem tanquam
seipsos and Deus illos plusquam illi seipsos, quia illi illum, and se, and
invicem per illum, and ille se and illos per seipsum, Anselm. in prosol. c. 25.
God above himself, and love one another as himself, and God shall love them
all, more then they either love themselves or one another; and he gives the
reason of it, says he, They love both themselves and one another for God, and
by God, and God loves himself and them for himself, and by himself; and
therefore as they shall love God above themselves, so they shall love one
another like themselves, and rejoice in the happiness of another, as in their
own happiness: Now what an heaven upon earth is it to have brethren live
together in unity? if it be in family communion, or in Church communion, to
have entire love without any breaches, this is a blessing; but howsoever, while
we are in this world, there will be breaches, yet there is an heavenly
Jerusalem coming, where we shall live without breaches.

And then likewise to have communion one with another always in holy exercises:
To have communion one with another in our civil converse, to eat, and drink at
one another tables, and in recreating our selves, this is sweet; but communion
in holy ordinances, and holy duties, that is sweetest. Men love communion and
society here, that they may play together, and eat and drink together; indeed,
if it be in a moderate Christian way, there may be some delight in it; but
know, it is an evident sign of a carnal heart, when as thy chief affections
shall be let out in the exercising thy self that way: If the chief joy of your
hearts be not in exercising your selves in holy duties, your hearts are carnal:
There is a great deal of difference between that day, in which a company of
gracious men have communion with one another in recreating themselves, and that
day wherein they shall have communion with one another in exercising themselves
in holy ordinances, in praying together, and hearing the Word together; and
therefore examine whether you find a day of communion with Gods people in holy
exercises, better then a day of communion in outward society.

Again, it is such a communion as we shall never 7.
part with, such a communion as we shall always enjoy: Here we have communion,
but it is often darkened, because we are often in our dumps, and many times
there is an occasion of sorrow given; but to have communion where there shall
be always joy, continual being at the feast, the supper of the Lamb, that must
needs be sweet. Therefore that Text you have of Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, sets
out the continual feast of the Lamb that the Saints shall have, because that
was the manner of the Jews feasting, to lean in the bosom of one another; and
therefore John when he sat to eat with Christ, he leaned in his bosom, noting
that the Saints shall be always as the children of the Bride-chamber: There is
a question made by some, of the knowing of one anoanother in heaven. It is
reported of Luther, the night before he dyed, he was reasonable well, and sat
with his friends at the Table, and the matter of their discourse was, Whether
they should know one another in heaven or no, whether the father should know
the child, or the child the father? Luther held it affirmatively; and this
was one reason he gave, As it was with Adam, as soon as he saw Eve, he knew
what Eve was, not by discourse, but by the Spirit of God, telling him what she
was; and so we being filled with the Spirit of God, we shall come to know one
another, we shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; we shall have
communion with them, not only as godly men, but as with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, and if with them, why not with others? This we have in Scripture, that
spiritual relations shall add much to the glory of the people of God in
Heaven, though natural relations shall be taken away; as the Father, if he know
the child, there shall not be that natural affection to the child as is now;
yet the Scripture seems to speak of spiritual relations, that they shall
continue even in Heaven for the glory of the Saints; and therefore St. Paul
says to the Philippians, You are our crown, and our rejoicing in the day of
Christ: It shall be known, who were converted by such a Ministry, and it shall
be a crown to a Minister, that such were converted, and edified, and built up
by him.

But we need not trouble our selves about this question, because we have one
thing that will satisfy us, about all questions that are not clear: Either we
shall have all that happiness we do think in our thoughts, or can think, or
else we shall have that (we being our own judges and choosers) that shall be as
good or better: so that if a Parent thinks what an happiness were it for me to
see my child in heaven; and the child shall think, what an happiness were it
for me to see my Parents in Heaven, you think so here: We guess at things thus
childishly, but yet either this shall be, or that which is as good or better
then this. As suppose I should think, how glad should I be if such a one would
give me a shilling, if after I come to know he will give me this, or a Twenty
shilling piece, I do not trouble my self to know whether he will give me a
shilling or no. And so much for Communion with the Angels and Saints.

CHAP. LII. The happiness of Gods people in the Perpetual Sabbath that they
shall enjoy.
NOw the last thing in the Explication is, to 7.
show wherein the happiness of the Saints consists, is that Perpetual Sabbath
that they shall keep with God, whereof this Sabbath is but a Type, Heb. 4. 9.
Sabbaths here are comfortable, and we have felt some sweet, and some comfort in
some Sabbaths; but take all the comfort that ever you had in all the Sabbaths
you have had here, and put all into one, that would be a comfortable Sabbath;
but that perpetual Sabbath that shall be hereafter, will be the accomplishment
of all those Sabbaths, and that will be sweet. Now I shall express my self in
these six or seven particulars, to show the happiness of Gods people in that
perpetual Sabbath.

First, they shall be exercised in the highest employments 1.
that any creature can be exercised in, or that they are capable to be
exercised in: The happiness of a creature consists much in that which it is
exercised in; as there is a great deal of difference between the happiness of a
Nobleman in Court, and the happiness of one that is employed only in
cleansing channels, and the meanest employment that is, because their exercise
is different; the one is exercised about business that concerns a King, and a
State, and the other is employed about mean things; therefore according as the
exercise is, that any creature is raised to, so is the dignity and excellency
of that creature: Now we are exercised in mean things here, in comparison of
what we shall be hereafter, and yet our business here in making provision for
the flesh, in getting meat, and drink, and clothes, and money, is sweet; but
though out of obedience to God, we ought to go on comfortably in our callings
and places wherein God has set us, because God calls us to these low mean
things, yet we are to account them a mean condition, in regard of that which
our natures are capable of, it is but a sore travel that is laid upon man, and
this shall not satisfy us, as if we were capable of no higher things; but when
we shall be raised to be busied about the highest employments that a created
substance is capable to be busied about, that must be comfortable; as the
Psalmist speaks, The high Psa. 145. 6
praises of God shall be in their mouths: They shall be always busied in the
high contemplations of God, and of the Trinity; and they shall be always
singing praises to God, and to him that sits upon the throne, and to every
Verse of the Song that they shall sing to the Lamb, there shall be a Selah put
to it; it must be glorious, because this is the highest glory that God has,
not only from his works here, but from all the counsels of his wisdom about
the great mystery of redemption, from all his works in Heaven, and the highest
glory, that he has from all the communications of himself to the Saints in
Heaven, in his praises that they shall be exercised in: all the happiness that
we have from God here, is a way of subserviency unto the actual praising of
God; there whatsoever God communicates to his creature, the top of all is not
that the creature should have it, but that it should reflect the praise of all
upon God. The end of all that God does in the world is his glory that he shall
have in Heaven, and the end of all he does in Heaven, is the actual working of
the souls of his Saints upon himself.

Secondly, the happiness of the perpetual Sabbath, 2.
may be expressed in this, in that the souls of Gods people shall be always up,
and fit for these high works: God calls us many times to most excellent things,
to be exercised about himself, but our hearts are not fit for these exercises;
sometimes we find our hearts enlarged, and when our hearts are up, we take
delight in holy exercises; but at other times, how hardly are we drawn to them?
and we are weary in obedience, and count it a slavery, those exercises are
heavy to us; but there is a time coming, when our hearts shall be always up,
never to seek, but shall be always upon the highest pin, enflamed with heat
continually: as it is an heavy curse for a man's heart to be suitable and fitted
for temptation, when a temptation shall come; so it is a wonderful blessing to
be fitted for any holy employment, when we are called to it; this there shall be
always in the Saints in heaven, in keeping this their perpetual Sabbath. It is
reported of Anselm, as he was walking out of his house, he saw a bird, that was
fluttering to fly up, and could not get up, but fell down, and looking upon it
wishly, he saw a string tied to the leg, and a stone at the end; upon this his
heart broke, and he bemoaned himself, This is my condition, says he, though
sometimes I would fain get up in holy exercises with God, O but this burden of
sin, and weight of sin, is like a stone, and presses me down, when I am got up
a little way, I am pulled down again, my heart is seldom fitted for holy
exercises: So it is with us usually, though through Gods grace there are some
wings to move up a little, yet this weight and burden of sins presses us down,
and makes us unfit for holy duties; let us go humbly a while under that sore
burden, but know we shall be freed from it ere long.

Thirdly, the happiness of the Sabbath consists in this, there shall be no
intermission, but they shall continue 3.
day and night (though there shall be no night) then we shall not go to duty
and break off again, and go again, and break off again, no, there shall be no
other employment; though the duties of Gods worship here be of an excellent
nature, yet we are not to spend all our time in them; but then there shall be
nothing else to spend one moment of time in to all eternity.

Fourthly, there shall be no weariness; though we do spend some time in holy
exercises here, we are 4.
quickly weary before we have done, Though the spirit be willing, the flesh is
weak; but when we shall have been praising of God millions of years, we shall
be as fresh at the end of them, as at the first moment; when we are exercised
in holy duties with others, it is good to consider of their weakness, whether
they be able to hold out, and join with us; but there we shall not need fear
weariness in our selves, or any others.

Again, we shall see nothing else done by no body else: Here we get together,
and sing, and pray, and 5.
hear the Word, and this is comfortable; but we see the Sabbath broken by
others, and that damps our hearts; but there is a Sabbath coming shall be so
kept, as we shall see none break it, but every one we have to deal withal shall
keep it: But yet by the way, it is better in a place where it is not altogether
so well kept, and is in a rising way, then in a place where it is better kept
for the present, but is in a declining way; but though it be a grief to us to
see the Sabbath broken, yet know, there is a Sabbath coming that we shall keep,
and none shall break it.

Again, the happiness of the Sabbath consists in this, to keep this Sabbath in
these high exercises, 6.
when so many thousands shall be yelling and roaring under the wrath of an
infinite God; they shall consider, we are now in the presence of God, keeping a
Sabbath unto him, as the children of the Bridechamber, singing songs of triumph
to him that sits upon the throne for ever; whereas others are cast out from
God, and are roaring and yelling under the burden of the wrath of an infinite
God, and that might have been our portion: This adds to the glory of the
Saints; and therefore the Scripture has this expression, Without shall be
dogs: That expression is taken from the manner of the Jews marriages, usually
they were in the night, and the Bridegroom and his Bride and their company were
taken in with torches and delight into the Bride-chamber, others were without
without light, and not taken into the chamber: so in Heaven, some shall be
taken to be exercised in these glorious things, and others are cast out: as
would it not add much to ones happiness, to think thus with ones self; I am
now going into a place where I shall have abundance of mirth and joy with my
friends; and others in the mean time lie in the cold, starving in the dungeon,
and I might have been there as well as they: if a man should go along with the
King in triumph, and be at the right hand of the King in glory, and as he goes
by, he should hear a company of poor wretches out of a dungeon, crying,
yelling, this sets out his glory: so to be at that time, thus exercised in
those heavenly employments, when as others shall be cursing themselves, and the
time that they were born, and blaspheme the name of God: it is a comfort to a
company of gracious hearts when they are got together in holy exercises, to
think there are others in the Tavern, drinking and swilling, and blaspheming:
what difference is between our condition this day, and their condition? this
does mightily refresh ones heart, and enlarge it to praise God for his mercy;
and so in Heaven the Saints shall know every instant when they are keeping this
Sabbath; others are howling under the wrath of God, and cursing the time they
were born.

Lastly, this Sabbath is to be kept in our Fathers house: we shall not sing the
songs of Zion in a strange Land, but in our Fathers house. Those godly persons
in the times of the Maccabees, accounted themselves happy, that they might
worship and serve God though in the Dens, and Caves of the Earth; it will be
more happiness to serve God in Heaven, and in our Fathers House. I remember I
read of one Marcellus a godly man, being cast into a stinking place, he did
make that his Temple to God, and perfumed it with his prayers, and after the
Christians built a Temple in that place; and so we may make a filthy dungeon a
Temple; but if it be comfortable to be exercised in holy duties in the most
filthy and vile places, much more comfortable shall it be when we come to
Heaven, in our Fathers house. In Rev. 15. we read of those that sung the song
of Moses, they stood upon the sea of glass mingled with fire; to sing the song
of Moses, though it be upon the sea of glass, this uncertain life of ours full
of trouble, it is comfortable, but to sing it in our Fathers house, will be
comfortable indeed; though we do meet with troubles here, yet if we can enjoy
the Sabbath, we comfort our selves, but we shall have a better Sabbath then
these, even a perpetual Sabbath in our Fathers house; put these together, and
you shall see what this perpetual Sabbath is that Gods people shall have O
gaudium super gaudium, gaudium vincens omne gaudium, extra quod non est
gaudium, Aug. Sol c 35.
in heaven. Now put all together that we have said negatively, comparatively
and positively, the perfection of their natures, their bodies, and souls, and
whole persons; their glory at the day of judgment, their possession of heaven,
their having God to be their portion, their communion with Christ, their
communion with the Angels and Saints, and this perpetual Sabbath that they
shall keep, and do but apprehend what infinite joy must flow from all these;
these are as the several streams of this Paradise of God. In Genesis 2. we read of
Paradise that God made for Adam, and there were four streams that were to water
it; this Paradise of Heaven have these seven streams to water it, to make the
Saints happy; do but consider what infinite joy must flow from all these put
together; every one does cause joy, but put The excellency of the Saints joy in
heaven.
them all together, and the joy that comes from hence is a most pure joy, and a
most spiritual joy, and a full joy, and a divine joy.

First, pure; that is, not only free from any mixture 1. Usque adco nulia cst
sincera volupts, Sclicitumque aliquid lae it is interve ait.
of sorrow, but without any thing that should sully it, without any sin: Here
all our pleasures are mixed.

And spiritual: If it were to rejoice in the good that our bodies shall have,
it were admirable joy, but the joy shall not be so much in regard of the
happiness of our bodies, but in regard that God is our portion, it shall be
spiritual; yea, the happiness of our 2.
bodies shall be spiritual and supernatural.

And it shall be full: How full must it needs be, 3.
they shall enter into their joy, because the joy cannot enter into them: We
rejoice in believing with joy unspeakable and glorious: If the seed time be so
glorious, how glorious will the harvest be? says Cyprian, Non gustabunt, sed
satiabuntur and implebuntur.
They shall not taste, but they shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness
of thy house: The fatness of Gods house in the world does abundantly satisfy
the souls of Gods people, but the fatness of Gods house hereafter, how will
that satisfy them? The people of God shall have such objects to rejoice in, as
is the essential glory of God, and all the glory that is put upon him by all
his creatures, and all the good they have by Gods communication of himself to
them, and all the glory of one another: Look how many Saints shall be in
heaven, they shall rejoice in every ones happiness as in their own; their own
happiness will cause joy, but so many Saints as shall be happy, so many times
shall their joy be double, and therefore it must be full joy: Comfort proceeds
from the suitableness between the faculty and the object; now here is the
greatest suitableness between the faculty and the object that can be, because
here is not only good in the Concreat, but goodness in the Abstract; and union
with goodness it self, is more then union with a good thing. Surely the joys of
heaven must needs be great, because a little taste of them here that the
Martyrs have had, has made exquisite tortures, grievous and dreadful pains,
not only tolerable, but comfortable.

And it is Divine joy: It may be said to be Divine in three respects: First, it
comes from God: Secondly, 4.
it is in God: Thirdly, it is with God. First, it comes from God, being caused
by the Spirit of God, 1.
and that is another manner of joy then the men of the world have. Secondly, it
is in God, rejoicing in 2.
God, and that is other manner of joy then rejoicing in meat and drink: Look
what difference there is between the excellency that is in God, and the
excellency that there is in meat, and drink, and idle sports, so much
difference is between the joy that Gods people have in God, and the joy that
wicked men have in the creature: And it is divine, in regard that it is joy
with God, it is the same joy that God himself has; 3.
carnal hearts rejoice one with another in sensual things, but God does not
rejoice in those things you rejoice in, but the Saints in heaven shall be
exercised in the same joy that God himself has, and rejoice in the same things
that God shall rejoice in; to have the beams of our joy mingle with the beams
of Gods joy, and so to have Gods joy and ours put into one, that must needs be
admirable joy. Notwithstanding this joy of the Saints shall be thus glorious,
yet the utmost happiness of man consists not in it; though joy be a necessary
concomitant to man's blessedness, yet man's blessedness consists not in it. We do
not seek Si delectatio sit ultimus finis, tum actus aliquis elicitus voluntat
is potest esse ultimus finis, sed non -- Nam objectu^ voluntatis est finis,
sicut objectum visus est color, it a ut impossible est, quod primum visibile
fit ipsum videre, quia omne videre est alicujus objecta visibilis, ita
impossible est quod primum appetibile quo^ est finis sit ipsum vell^ Tho. 1.
2. q. 1. Art. 1. ad secund. Apprehensio sensitiva non attingit ad communem
rationem boui, sed ad aliquod bonum, particulare quod est delectabile, and ideo
secundum appetitum sensitivum operationes sunt propter delectationem, sed
intellectus apprehendit universalem rationem boni ad cujus consequutionem
sequitur delectatio, unde principalius intendit bonum quam delectationem. Thom.
1. 2. q. 4. Art. ad. 2. second.
the enjoyment of God, that we might delight in this enjoyment, but we seek
delight in the enjoyment, because the enjoyment is the greatest good.

And besides all this, there are some circumstances that serve to set out all
that I have said yet further, and to make the happiness of Gods people yet more
glorious.

First, it is a prepared happiness, that happiness that God has had his
thoughts upon from all eternity, and laid the ground of it from all eternity,
God has been working from all eternity to provide this.

Secondly, in that it comes to the people of God, by such a glorious way, as
the purchase of Jesus Christ, that I have it, and that I have it by such a
glorious way, that will be exceeding comfortable.

Thirdly, that we who are so vile, and so wretched, and so abominable as we are
in our selves, that we who by nature are but firebrands of hell and fuel for
eternal wrath, that we should be raised to such a height of happiness.

Fourthly, that we are so few: Not many wise, nor rich, nor noble, but the mean
ones of the world, that there should be so many of the world, and the great
ones of the world cast out, and a handful of poor contemptible people should be
raised to this glory, this is a mighty aggravation of the happiness of Gods
people.

Fifthly, that this should be a reward for that which 5.
we owe in a way of obedience; we owe all our services in a way of obedience to
God, and we may say, When we have done all, we are unprofitable Servants; and
that we do, we are bound to do as creatures, and yet that God should reward
that which we owe to him in a way of obedience, this aggravates the happiness
of the Saints: as if a Master should give his Servant all his estate for doing
that which he is bound to do: We have more then wages here, then how much more
is that we shall have hereafter?

Again, that which God is pleased to reward, it is 6.
but poor mixed service: take our duties at the best, they are such as deserve
Hell; there is no one act, but if God should observe what is amiss, you deserve
to be cast from God for ever for it; now when we rather deserve that God should
cast us down to Hell, yet that God should reward us with all this glory, what a
glorious thing is this?

Again, that the Lord is pleased to make this sure to us: if God had left it to
uncertainty, and bidden 7.
us work, it might be well with us, and may be he will think of us, this might
have been a comfort to us: but that God is pleased to bind himself thus, and
to make all sure: As if a King should make his Crown and Kingdom sure to a poor
wretch, in the way of reward for a poor service; so does God, he makes this
glory ours by reward, in a way of Covenant and Testament; by Covenant, such a
Covenant as he does not only cause to be written in his word, but in our
hearts; and we have witness of this in heaven and earth, three bear witness in
heaven, and three in earth; and he gives us seals to confirm this Covenant, and
he confirms it by an Oath, he swears by himself, because there is no greater to
swear by; and he makes it sure by way of Testament: Covenant we think we may
break, but that which is given by Testament, and confirmed by the death of the
Testator, that is sure, and thus has God made it sure unto us.

Again, all things that do befall us in this world, 8.
and all the ways of Gods providence, do but tend to the furtherance of us to
our reward, and to the increase of our reward, and that is the wonderful
happiness of Gods people, this should sweeten all conditions: If I be in a
meaner condition then another, yet this is in order to my reward, and this is
more then if I had a Kingdom in the world, if it were not in order to that; but
whatsoever I have in the world, though never so hard to flesh and blood, it is
in order to this, this satisfies.

Again, this reward is near, we shall not stay long 9.
for it: If God required of us to be burning a thousand years, and then to have
it, we had yet cause to rejoice; but it is at hand, and nearer at hand to us in
this latter age of the world, then to our Forefathers; God has but a few
things to do in the world, to gather but a few more of the Gentiles, and his
own people the Jews, and to pull down Antichrist, and then all is done: The
time is short, says the Scripture; the word that is translated short, in 1 Cor.
7. 29. is a Metaphor taken from a piece of cloth that is (...).
rolled up, only a little left at the end; so God has rolled up all his
works, only he has a little left at the end, and then all this glory shall
appear; the frame of Heaven and earth does but stand till that time, and if
that time were come, the frame of Heaven and earth should presently be
dissolved, and the ways of Gods providence in this world should be at an end,
the Heavens and earth groan for this time. It is said of Doctor Tailor, when he
was near at the stake, he fetched a leap, and said, I have but two styles to my
Fathers house. We in our way here are as Travelers, some ride it may be a
little faster, and get to the Inn first, and then another comes a quarter or
half an hour after, but it is but a short time in comparison; he has promised,
and he will come quickly, with the glory of his Father, and all the glory of
Heaven with him.

And then this shall be after all our troubles: As Painters first draw all
black, and then the other 10.
beautiful colors; so all our troubles here are but as the black groundwork,
to make our glory the more Italiam, Italia^ primus conclamat Achates, Italiam
socii laeto clamore salutant.
beautiful hereafter: To see land after a long and dangerous voyage, how joyful
is it? As the Trojans, after they had been wandering a long time in the
Mediterranean and Aegean Seas, as soon as they espied Italy, they cried out
with exulting joys, Italy, Italy; how much more the Saints after they have
passed 11.
this troublesome world, and come to Heaven, what Semper erunt, quod sunt
aternae gaudia vitae, Gaudenti quoniam causa erit ipse Deus, Prosper in Epigram.
acclamations of joy will the heavens ring of? Heaven, Heaven.

Lastly, all these things are eternal; this puts an infiniteness of worth upon
every particular: How was Haman puffed up by Esthers inviting of him to one
Banquet? How shall the hearts of the Saints be taken with that eternal Supper
of the Lamb? Obed-Edom was blessed in having the Ark but three months in his
house, how blessed they who shall have Gods not only gracious but glorious
presence eternally? And so I come to the fourth particular, which was
propounded in the handling of this point; namely,

4. Wherein lies the power of the consideration of the recompense of reward to
help a man through sufferings. Much has been said, but more may be said, to
show that there is a mighty power in it to enable the heart to suffer any thing
for God; it is that which has mightily wrought upon the Saints of God
heretofore: That is an observable place that we have concerning Christ's
Transfiguration, and Christ's Agony: when he was transfigured upon the Mount,
and his glory was showed, even a glimpse of the glory of Heaven; Christ took
with him only three Disciples, Peter, James and John; afterward when Christ
was to come to his Agony, when his soul was heavy to death, and he sweat clods
of blood, he only took those three Disciples that had seen him in his glory,
to see him in his sufferings; to show, that those that know what the glory of
Christ means, those are the fittest to join with Christ in his Agony, and to
endure the greatest sufferings that they can meet withal. See in Dan. 7. there
is mention made of a cruel Tyrant that should make War with the Saints, and
should persecute Gods people, that devoured and brake in pieces, yet there were
some that should bear out all, that should have the Kingdom given them, and God
should reward them gloriously; Who are they? at the 22 verse, The Saints of the
most high: so you read it, or, The Saints of the highest; not only of the
highest God, but of the highest places, of the highest things, they are those
to whom the Kingdom shall be given, those Saints that did see the most glorious
things of the Kingdom of God, they had the reward, for they held out in
sufferings, but others, whose hearts were low in the earth, they did not hold
out.

So those that should hold out in the time of Antichrist, and should not
worship the Beast, Rev. 13. 6, 7, 8. were such as dwelt in Heaven. He opened
his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name, and his Tabernacle,
and them that dwelt in Heaven: in many places of the Revelations, Heaven is
taken for the Church of God, and the People of God, and so Interpreters take it
here: And it was given to him to war with the Saints, and to overcome them: but
though he prevailed against the Saints to kill them, yet he could not prevail
against them that dwelt in Heaven to worship him: but all that dwell upon the
Earth shall worship him; all that know no higher good then the Earth, they
shall follow Antichrist and worship him. Here we see the reason why people will
not endure the sufferings inflicted by the Beast, but follow the Beast, and
have his mark either upon their foreheads openly, or in their hands secretly,
because they do not apprehend the glory of Heaven; but if they can come to see
those glorious things of Heaven, though Antichrist do persecute them, they
would not worship him: in these latter times of the world Antichrist will
prevail to get many to worship him, but the sight of these glorious things will
keep us we shall not worship him. In Rev. 12. the Church who is compared to a
Woman that was clothed with the glory of the Sun, she had the Moon, and all
sublunary things under her feet: When the soul is seeking after the glory of
Heaven, and that is always in its eye, this causes it to have the Moon, by
which is signified all things below that are subject to changes, under its
feet. I read of a Martyr that was whipped, and almost scourged to death, and
then being led to the execution, he met with his Mother, who being a godly
gracious woman, did not fall of tearing her hair, and rending her clothes as
other women used to do; but cried, Son, Remember eternal life; look up to
Heaven, and see him that reigns there: Hence we see that having an eye to the
recompense of reward, does make the heart to choose the Choice of Moses, To
suffer affliction with the people of God, and to esteem the reproach of Christ
greater riches then the treasures of Egypt; you see there is a great deal of
power and efficacy in it; but wherein does this power consist? In diverse
particulars.

CHAP. LIII. Wherein the power and efficacy of eying the recompense of reward
consists.
FIrst, there is a great deal of power in looking to this glorious recompense
of reward; because 1.
the glory of this does so much darken all the glory of the things of the world
that we are called to part withal, when we are called to suffer any thing: Now
then the argument lies thus; That which darkens all the glory of the world, and
makes it appear to be nothing, that must needs have a great deal of power to
enable the heart to part with any thing in the world in the cause of God: those
who by the eye of faith are able to behold the reality and certainty of those
glorious things, they look upon all things below as poor, mean, slight,
contemptible things: As we know the glory of the light of the Sun, darkens the
glory of the light of a candle; the light of a candle is comfortable in the
night, in the dark, but when the light of the Sun rises, that is nothing: So
long as the men of the world are in darkness, the light and comfort of the
creature is a great matter to them; but when God lets the glory of the things
of his Kingdom appear to them, then the comfort of the creature is nothing. A
Glowworm glisters in the dark, but when the day comes, the brightness and the
glistering of the Glowworm is not seen: so all the brightness and glistering
of the creature that takes the hearts of men, is gone when God lifts up his
light upon them, and shows them the greatness of his Kingdom.

And the reason why people are so hardly brought Mala vitae presentis tanto
durius animus sentit, qua^to pensare bonu^ quod sequitur, negligit. Greg Moral.
l. 10. c. 1^.
to suffer any thing for God, is because they have such high esteem of these
things; that which a man has high esteem of, he is loath to part withal; but
when a man's heart is taken from them, as there is no longer a high esteem of
them, he is willing to part with them. As Saint Paul said, I am ready not to be
bound only, but also to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus; his life was not
dear to him, he accounted it not worth the least degree of glory to God: A
gracious heart, as it accounts nothing low in any duty that tends to this
glorious reward, so it accounts nothing high to part with for the recompense of
reward. It is a notable passage we have of Joseph to his Father Jacob, Genesis 45.
20. Regard not your stuff, for the good of all the Land of Egypt is yours: It
may be Joseph thought his Father Jacob might think, I have many Goods here, and
what, shall I leave all that I have here to go to Egypt, into a strange
country? he might think this might be some let to his Father; but Joseph calls
it all stuff: you have a deal of stuff and lumber, but let it not grieve you to
leave your stuff and lumber, all the good of the Land of Egypt is yours: So God
says to a gracious heart, when it looks upon any thing it should part withal,
and it is loath to part with it, says God, Regard not your stuff, and lumber you
have here; for not the good of all the Land of Egypt is yours, but all the good
that is in Heaven is yours, and the good that is in the God of Heaven, and the
good that is in Christ is all yours: That soul that understands the glory of
Heaven, and the Interest that it has in it, shall hear a voice tell it, That
all the good in Heaven, and in God, and in Christ, is its own; and therefore he
will not regard any thing here: if we knew no better things then these, we
would be loath to part with them; if we had never seen the light of the Sun, we
would have accounted the Moon a glorious creature, and as a mighty Ornament to
Heaven, and to the world; but when we come to see the glory of the Sun, that is
nothing to us in comparison. Children that are born in a dungeon, and know no
better things, would be loath to part with that they have there; but when they
come to know what is in the world, then all they had before is nothing to them;
greater glory diminishes that which is less. So that we may apply that the
Apostle speaks concerning the comparison of the Gospel with the Law, to this we
are speaking of, 2 Cor. 3. 10. That which was made glorious, had no glory in
this respect, by reason of the glory that excels; though there was some
glory in the administration of the Law, yet it is no glory in comparison of
that which excels: So though there may be glory in the outward comforts of
the world, yet there is no glory in comparison of that glory which excels,
in comparison of that glory which has been opened; and that is the first thing.

Secondly, as the glory of the world is darkened by 2.
having respect to this glorious recompense of reward, so all the evils of the
world are wonderfully lessened: You know what the Apostle says, in Romans 8. 18.
Non sunt condignae passiones ad praeteritam culpam quae remittitur, ad
presentis consolation is gratiam quae immititur, ad futuram gloriam quae
promittitur. Bern.
That the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with
the glory that shall be revealed in us: As we use to say, It is not to be named
the same day, not to be reckoned with the glory that shall be revealed in us: A
Father upon that place has a notable gloss, says he, Sufferings are not to be
compared and looked upon, in respect, first of the punishment that we have
deserved, which is passed by, and pardoned; and then not to be compared and
reckoned with the present grace and comfort that Gods people have here: But
then much less is to be compared and reckoned with the weight of glory that is
to come, that is promised to us. And so in 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. While we look at
things that are eternal, not temporal, this light affliction; all is but light,
and nothing in comparison: What is it for one to have a rainy day, who is going
to take possession of a Crown? there is no man would be much sensible of a
little cold in his head, if it were uncovered a while to have a Crown of gold
put on. I have read of a foolish woman that was afraid her Son should get cold
by putting off his nightcap to have a Crown set upon his head; but no wise man
would much consider the cold he should get in his head upon that ground: Great
things swallow up small things, and great joys will swallow up small evils;
there is no comparison between the evil we suffer here, and the glory that is
to come; What is a drop of vinegar put into an Ocean of sweet wine? it is not
so much as taken notice of; here when a man receives a great good, he is not
affected with lesser evils: As for example in Saul, when Saul had the Kingdom,
some did despise him, 1 Samuel 10. 27. but Saul held his peace; he was not
troubled at that, though he was a man afterward froward enough; he thought,
this good of the Kingdom is enough to take away the apprehension of any evil in
being despised; what though a company of poor people despise me, and speak
against me when as I have the Kingdom, and am anointed of God, and have this
dignity put upon me? A man that knows any thing of his own worth, and that God
has bestowed much upon him; this takes off any other evil, that appears to be
in others prating of him; but now when men do not understand any great good in
themselves, then they account the evil of the world despising them a great
evil: Many men judge of themselves rather by the esteem other men have of them,
then by any good they know in themselves, and no marvel though these men be so
much troubled at other men's despising of them. If a Merchant have a Ship come
home laden with many thousand pounds worth of rich Commodities, though his
Servant should do something amiss that day, he would not be froward at it, but
pass it by, because he has such great profit and good coming in; so the evils
of the world are nothing in comparison to that soul that knows the great things
of the Kingdom of God to be its own.

Thirdly, there is a mighty deal of power in it; because this respect unto the
recompense of reward, does so much take up the faculties of the soul, the
intention of the mind being taken up about so great an object, other things
are not minded in comparison; and this is the reason why those that are in a
frenzy, are insensible of what you do unto them; because their minds are
taken up about that which they apprehend so strongly, as nothing else is minded
by them; and if there was any object made known to take up the mind of man, it
must be such great things as these, made certain and real to the soul by faith.
It is a property peculiar to God, that though he has many glorious things that
he exercises his wisdom about, yet he does mind the least thing, the least
creature in the world, as much as if there were nothing else to mind; but no
creature can do so, no creature can mind great things with intention of mind,
and yet mind inferior things with any strength of intention too, but if he
minds great things with intention, other things must be lightly minded. An
Ecclesiastical Historian tells us of the Christians they did so mind the glory
of God, and the glory of Heaven, as that the pains they suffered were as in the
bodies of other men, and not in their own bodies. It is reported of Archimides,
who was a great Mathematician, that when the City was taken wherein he was, and
the Warlike instruments of death clattering about his ears, and all was in a
tumult, yet he was so busy about drawing his lines, that he did not know there
was any danger, and heard no noise: If such objects as these can take up the
intention of the mind, so as not to mind other things, then much more such an
object as eternal life, and eternal glory and happiness. And therefore that
place is very observable, in 2 Cor. 4. 16. We faint not in our sufferings,
because we look not at things that are seen, but at things that are not seen:
We are so intense about Heaven, and the glory of God, that we do not give a
look at things that are seen. So in Heb. 11. 15, 16. They were not so much as
mindeful of that Country from whence they came, because Pericula non respicit
Martyr, coronas respicit; plagas non horret praemium numerat; non videt
lictores inferue dagellantes, sed Angelos superne acclamantes. Bas. Hom. de
Barlua^ Martyr.
they sought a Country that was better, and heavenly. It is a notable
expression that Basil has concerning the Martyrs, says he, They do not look at
the danger they are in, but at the crown: And again he says, They do not look
at the Officers, and Executioners that are whipping of them, but they look to
the Angels that are giving acclamations, and that are encouraging of them. As a
carnal heart, a man that minds earthly things, his mind is so taken up about
them, because they are an object suitable to him; as when all the glory of God,
and of Christ, and of Heaven is set before him, he lets it pass without any
minding; so a gracious heart that by faith can see into the reality of the
glory of Heaven, and eternal life so taken up with them, as not to mind
earthly things; and that is the third particular.

Fourthly, the respect unto the recompense of the reward has a mighty power to
carry on the soul in 4.
a way of suffering, because the soul by this comes to see how infinitely well
pleased God is with it, and with that it undertakes for his names sake, in
suffering any thing in his cause; and this does mightily prevail with a
gracious heart. If God does but give his command to do a thing, this might be
enough to show Gods good pleasure in that action; but when with command God
reveals such infinite glorious things that he will reward that action withal,
this discovers more of the infinite good pleasure of God; so that the soul in
this does not only see its own happiness, but sees the infinite good pleasure
of God in it; and reasons thus, How has God set his heart upon me? And what
infinite good pleasure is it that he takes, in that I poor worm shall suffer
for his names sake, when he does not only tell me it is according to his will,
but he has such infinite glorious things to reward that I do, except his heart
were much upon it, and taken with it, there would never such great and glorious
things have been for the rewarding of it; but in that these things are so
revealed, and I in some measure see them, I cannot but think God takes infinite
delight in these sufferings, for his names sake, and God forbid that any thing
in the world should take off my heart from that which I see God takes such
infinite pleasure in: when a gracious heart shall see God holding forth a crown
to set on his head in suffering, it sets the soul on fire in suffering for God;
if thou had only given forth thy command, it had been enough to make all
creatures obedient to thee; but that thou should manifest thy self thus to
crown them with this glory, and to lay up these treasures of the riches of thy
glory for them, Who would not do and suffer any thing in thy cause, O blessed
God!

The fifth particular, wherein the power of this argument consists, is the
abundance of sweet that there is 5.
in the hope of this reward, to fill the heart with joy and peace; the more joy
and peace the heart is filled withal, the more certainly it is able to do great
things. So Nehemiah tells the people when he would have them rejoice, The joy
of the Lord is your strength, Neh. 8. 10. When as the heart is strengthened with
joy, it is able to do mighty things; now the hope of these glorious things do
mightily fill the heart with joy, and so strengthens the heart: A man that has
his body strong, he can endure cold, and bear great burdens that a weak body
cannot bear; and nothing strengthens the heart more then this joy of the Lord,
where the heart is filled with it. Vessels that are empty will soon be broke
with the heat of the fire, which they will not be if they be full: this hope of
the glorious reward fills the heart with precious liquor, that you may set it
by the fire, and put it into troubles, it will not break. As a Giant refreshed
with wine, has great strength to undertake any thing, so the soul that is
filled with this comfort of the hope of Heaven and glory, can go forth as a
Giant refreshed with wine, and make nothing of those things that others make
great matters of. When the heart is filled with joy and hope of believing, and
so filled with light within, whatsoever darkness is abroad it cares not. As
Oecolampadius when he was to dye, and they spoke of the light without, says he,
What is the light without? Hic sat lucis: Clapping his hand upon his breast.
I have light enough within; And so a gracious heart says, there is enough
within to strengthen me, let there be without what there will. When Alexander
gave away great things, almost all he had, one of his Officers aked him what he
would have left for himself, says he, Hope: so says a gracious heart, though
all things be gone, yet it is enough to fill my heart with joy, that I have
hope of the glory that is to be reveald.

A natural cheerful spirit can be able to undergo great things, that one that
is naturally timorous cannot; the Wise man says, The Spirit of a man shall
sustain his infirmities: A man that has a natural cheerful spirit, is able to
sustain many infirmities that others cannot; As for melancholy spirits, every
thing that comes cross to them is ready to sink them, and they cannot undergo.
those troubles which a cheerful spirit can, because they want the sweetness
within; What strength is there then in the filling the heart with joy in
believing of these things? As a man that has his bones filled with marrow, and
has abundance of good blood, and fresh spirits in his body, he can endure to
go with less clothes then another, because he is well lined within; so it is
with a heart that has a great deal of fat and marrow, joy and peace within,
though such a one has not many clothes, and outward comforts to strengthen
him, he will go through troubles well enough; Proverbs 14. 14. A good man is
satisfied from himself: And it is enough for good men to know within themselves
that they have an enduring substance, Heb. 10. 34. A tree that has a great
deal of sap within, can bear great weights and burdens that others cannot; and
that is the fifth ground, because the hope of these things does fill the heart
with joy, and so strengthens the heart.

A sixth thing wherein the power of having respect to the recompense of reward
appears, is in that it 6.
has a great deal of power to resist any temptation of Satan, and to quench
the fiery darts of Satan. In Ephesians. 6. where the spiritual armor is spoken of,
the helmet, the armor that is for the head, and keeps that from being hurt with
any stroke, is the hope of salvation, and the hope of glory; so that whatsoever
temptations of the Devil comes, by this helmet they are kept off, that they do
not so much as take the judgment: As we might instance in the several
temptations that the Devil has to keep one from sufferings; as when he comes
and says, Why will you undo your selves in such a way as this? Presently the
hope of salvation is held up, and the soul answers, It is so far from undoing
of me, that it is the only way to provide for my self; He that will save his
life shall lose it, and he that will lose his life for my sake, shall save it.
If the Devil comes with this temptation, Surely God does not require such
things of his people, to be brought into such straits, and suffer such hard
things: The soul that has the hope of his glory, holds it up, and makes this
answer; Why, seeing the Lord has laid up such glorious things hereafter, why
should I not think that God may require hard things for the present? If he
comes with this temptation, Why will you go on in a singular way from others? A
gracious heart upon this argument, answers, I expect choice and singular
mercies from God, and why should I think much to go on in a way that is
singular? though others do otherwise, it may be they shall never be partakers of
such singular things. If the Devil comes and say, Surely God does not love you,
if he did, he would not suffer such great calamities, and sore troubles to
befall you, and if it were his cause, he would assist you in it: the soul
answers, Has the Lord laid up such glorious things for me hereafter, and shall
I call Gods love in question, because I am deprived of these mean things, and
undergo such afflictions as these? certainly those things that God has laid up
for me shall so uphold my heart, as that I shall never call in question Gods
love, though I suffer never so much here; and that is the sixth particular.

Seventhly, there is a great deal of power in this argument to help on the soul
in a way of suffering, 7.
because by looking at this recompense of reward, the soul comes to see what
glorious things sufferings do prepare for, hasten unto, and work to the
increase of. First, what glorious things sufferings prepare for: As it is a
notable expression Mr. Hawks has in a Letter he writ to encourage Mr. Philpot,
being cast into the Bishops Cole-house, says he, This Bishops Cole-house is but
to scour you, and make you bright, and to fit you to be set up upon the high
shelf, meaning Heaven; as when you would set up vessels of brass, or iron, you
first take cinders or ashes and scour them, and by rubbing them with such
things, they are fit to be set up; so all sufferings are but the means that God
uses to scour his people to make them bright, to set them up on high; God will
not set up his servants on the high shelf, till first he has made them bright,
and he uses this way to do it, and then they hasten to great things; the more
one suffers, the nearer he comes to glory, and to Heaven: Let the world do the
worst it can, it can but take away your estates, and meat, and drink, and put
you in the cold, and hasten death, and the hastening of death is the hastening
of glory: The greatest sufferings of Gods people, are but as the fiery Chariots
to carry Gods (...).
people home in. This was the answer of Basil to the Emperors Lieutenant, when
he threatened death to him, Death is a benefit to me, it will send me sooner to
God, to whom I live, to whom I desire to hasten. And then they do increase
glory, it is but a trade of less things to increase greater; all sufferings are
the seeds of glory.

Eighthly, there is a great deal of power in this to carry on the soul in a way
of suffering, because it does mightily inflame the soul with love to God, and
Jesus Christ; it seeing that the bottom and ground of all this glorious
recompense of reward is in the free and eternal love of God in Jesus Christ,
that did work about this before the foundation of the world was laid; this does
mightily inflame the heart with love to God, and therefore it wishes as that
Martyr did, O that I had as many lives as I have hairs on my head to lay down
for Christ. And it is sorry that it has no other opportunity to testify its
love to God, the soul says, I have but this little time to testify my love to
God, and I can but testify little in doing: O what a happiness is it, that
that which I want of testifying my love in doing, I have it in testifying my
love in suffering! Shall a dog that has but a few crumbs or bones from his
Master, be willing to venture his life in defense of his Master; and shall not
a gracious heart, that expects not crumbs and bones, but Crowns, and
unconceiveable glory in Heaven, be willing to venture life for God in the cause
of God?

Ninthly, there is a great deal of power in having 9.
respect to the recompense of reward to carry on a soul in suffering: because
according to the things that are apprehended, there is the like impression left
upon the spirit: As a gracious heart apprehending holy things is made holy, and
apprehending spiritual things, is made spiritual, and apprehending great
things, is made great, thee is a holy gracious magnanimity put into the heart:
A man that is lift up on high upon a high Tower, or a high Mountain, he looks
upon things below as little things: The apprehension of this glory lifts the
soul on high, and puts an impression of greatness and glory upon the heart, and
so causes an heroical spirit in the heart, to look upon all things below as
small: as the Martyrs, though they were weak spirits by nature, even women and
children, yet apprehending such great things, they had heroical magnanimious
spirits, and looked upon their sufferings as small things, because they had an
impression of the object they beheld left upon their spirits, and in some
measure were made like it.

Lastly, there is a mighty deal of power in looking 10.
to the recompense of reward to help in sufferings, because it has much power
to cleanse the heart: every one that has this hope purges himself, 1 John 3.
And hence the Christians in the Primitive times fering. Those that write the
stories of Egypt, report that there is no country in which there are more
venomous Creatures then in Egypt; and also they write, there is no Country has
so many Antidotes to help against poison: so godliness brings with it many
troubles and sufferings, but then godliness has much in it to help against
troubles and sufferings.

Thirdly, hence we come to see the reason why so many are overcome in a way of
suffering, and do 3.
yield, and so basely Apostatize, rather then they will go on in a way of
suffering for God: they have not an eye to look up to Heaven, and to see all
the glory that is revealed: they do not know within themselves that there are
such things, as it is said of those in Heb. 10. 34. They knew within themselves
what they had in Heaven; they look upon these things as conceits and
imaginations. In Phil. 3. 18. the Apostle speaks of some that were enemies to
the Cross of Christ, but what were they? They were men that minded earthly
things: but says the Apostle, Our conversation is in Heaven. What was the
reason that Demas forsook Paul? It was for this present world; he was not
acquainted with the powers of the world to come, and therefore he forsook Paul,
rather then he would suffer in the cause of God with Paul. Certainly, those
that fall off in the time of suffering, are such as never had a taste of the
powers to come, or have lost it: this dew of Heaven has not fallen upon their
hearts to moisten them, and therefore every suffering does scorch up the root:
If the root be kept moist, though scorching heat come, it does not dry up the
plant, but it is green and flouwere so able to suffer, because they had their
hearts so purged by faith, Acts 15. 9. Take a man that was strong, if he have
many ill humors in his body, all his strength is gone, but if the Physician
gives him something to purge out his ill humors, though he have no Cordials
given him to strengthen him, yet he is strong, and he is able to endure, and to
do more then before: So those spirits that are full of distempered humors, that
are unsound, they can bear nothing, undergo no difficulty, but when there is
any thing to purge the heart and make it clean, then it is able to do or suffer
more: sin lies rotting at the heart, and by rotting does weaken; a rotten rag
has no strength to bear any thing, so those that have old sins lie rotting,
they can bear nothing: The spirit of power, and of a sound mind is put
together, 2 Timothy 1. 7. now the hope of this glorious reward purges the heart,
and makes it sound, and so carries it on in power. Now put all these together,
and no marvel that Moses by having an eye to the recompense of reward could
suffer so much: many are afraid of suffering hard things in the cause of
Christ; but you see what will enable you to endure all. Now I should apply this
in many particulars.

First, If there be such power in this to help to 1.
suffering, then surely there is power in this to help to service: you that
know what these things mean, be ashamed to complain of any difficulty in any
service.

Secondly, hence we see cause much to bless God that reveals such things to us,
to carry us through 2.
sufferings; though godliness brings much suffering, yet it brings that which
will strengthen against sufrishing still: It is the dew of Heaven, the hope of
the glory of Heaven that keeps our root moist, and so we shall hold out in the
time of suffering: It is given as the cause of the seed in the stony ground not
come to perfection, Luke 8. 6. Because it wanted moisture; many froward people
in Religion prove like the stony ground, they have not moisture, this dew of
Heaven lies not at their hearts: And the reason why many do not hold out, is
because they want the Anchor of hope: In a tempest if there be not an Anchor
well fastened, the ship will be carried upon the rocks or the sands: Now Hope
is the Anchor that must hold the soul in all affliction, if that hold, let
storms and winds be never so loud, yet the heart will be kept from being split
upon the rocks, and swallowed up in the sands: but many have but a paper
Anchor, a conceited hope, not a strong hope fastened upon the infallibility of
God in his word and promises, and therefore they cannot hold out in the time of
danger. To conclude all, we see what will do it, what will carry us through
sufferings.

Let us make use of this argument, and not look upon the greatness of our
sufferings, to think my sufferings are greater then others, but rather let us
look up on high to our God, and the greater things that are prepared for us. As
St. Augustine speaking to Noli attendere quam poenam habeas in flagello, sed
quem locam in testame^to, August. in Ps. 102.
a Christian that was to suffer, Do not so much attend what punishment thou
have, what share thou have in the whip, or in correction, but what thou have in
the Testament, in Gods Word, what is revealed there for tby encouragement. And
labor to have the light within you, or else all will never do; though many
things have been revealed to your eyes, and so you may have light outwardly;
yet if you have not the inward light, this outward light will never strengthen
you to hold out: And labor for faith to put life in all these arguments that
have been spoken of; unless faith come and breathe the breath of life upon
them, they will all lie dead. Labor that nothing be between your eye and
Heaven, and if any thing of the world, or vain reasonings shall come between
your eye and Heaven, labor to remove it, keep all clear, that upon the turning
of your eye you may see beyond the vail; and be not only thinking of these
things, and make them lively by faith, but let your conversation be much in
heaven, sending up your spirits to heaven, and opening your hearts to receive
the influence of heaven, and then you will be able to endure what God calls you
to: Who knows what God will call us to? God is stirring in the world, as if he
intended to do some great things in the world, and therefore we had need of
strong arguments to keep our hearts close to him, when many thousand hypocrites
shall fall. And thus we have finished four things in the opening of this point:
First, that there is a reward for Gods people. Secondly, how far they may have
respect to this reward. Thirdly, what the reward is. Fourthly, wherein the
power of having respect to this reward lay to undergo any suffering. Now the
fifth thing that remains, is, the Application of all that has been said.

And if there be such a glorious reward for the people of God, then in the
first place the offense of the cross is taken away; let us be ashamed ever to
be hindered in the way of God, because of the cross, because of any thing we
shall suffer in the way of God, when as there is such a glorious reward
hereafter. No storm of the raging Sea should terrify us, Nec illa nos
insurgentis pelagi debet terrere tempestas, cum ventura nostra sit nunqua^
finienda tranquillitas. Hiero ad Virg. in exilium missam. Non per istas
transire angustias.
considering that everlasting calm that is a coming, says Jerome: Let no man
speak hardly of Gods ways any more. I remember I read of St. Augustine before
his conversion, he said he was convinced of the ways of God, but says he, I did
not like to go through those straits: He found the ways of God difficult, and
that he was like to suffer much, and that hindered him; and so it does many,
they see straits, they must deny themselves, and suffer hard things, and upon
this they are hindered; but let us never be hindered more by this, seeing there
are such great things revealed of the reward of Gods people hereafter: Why
should we be so shy of the way, afflictions that lead thither; is not here
enough to pay for all? God will not, says Lactantius, have the Noluit Deus
hominem ad immortalem illam beatitudinem delicato itinere pervenire, Lactant.
de Officio Dei. c. 19.
path that leads to this immortal blessedness, be a delicate path. Certainly,
if any of you should be hindered from the ways of God by any hardship you are
like to meet withal, how will this confound you, when God shall come and say,
Did not I show unto you those glorious things I intended for my people? and was
not all that sufficient to draw your hearts over these difficulties?

In the Primitive times, the offense of the cross was taken away, after once
they came to be enlightened in such glorious things as these; in Heb. 10. 32.
Call to remembrance the former days, in which after you were illuminated, you
endured a great fight of afflictions; before they were not able to endure that
fight of afflictions, but after they were illuminated they were; so howsoever
you might have some hard thoughts of the ways of God before, yet now being
illuminated, having the light of this blessed truth of the reward that is to
come, revealed to you, be willing to endure any fight of afflictions; do not
look at this stumbling block, look up to Heaven, and that will keep you from
stumbling. When men walk upon the earth, if they look upward, they may stumble
upon stones and blocks; but it is otherwise in our walking in Religion, our
looking upwards to heaven does keep us from stumbling: Wisdom is on high; the
way of the righteous is a high way, he is lifted above all stumbling blocks by
looking at this recompense of reward. St. Paul when he had his thoughts about
this, says he, Neither life, nor death, principalities, nor powers, nor any
thing should be able to separate him from the love of God.

Secondly, if there be such a glorious reward, consider Use 2.
, that this is a mighty aggravation of the evil of sin, that when God has
revealed himself so gracious, as to lay up such glorious things for those that
walk in the way of obedience, for any after this yet to embrace the ways of
sin, must needs aggravate the horrid and desperate wickedness of man's heart:
There is evil enough in sin, though we should lose nothing by it, that it is a
disobedience to God, a breach of the Law, and going against the mind of God;
but for men to venture upon the ways of sin, although they know they shall lose
such an infinite good as this is, here is not only desperate wickedness, but
desperate folly; it is a sign that man's heart is desperately set upon sin, that
he will go on in sin, though it be with the loss of all this glory, and these
blessed things. I remember Ambrose reports of one Theotimus, that having a
disease upon his body, and the Physician told him, Except he did abstain from
intemperance, drunkenness or uncleanness, he was like to lose his eyes; his
heart was desperately fet upon his sin, that he said, Farewell sweet light then;
as if he should say, Vale lumen amicum
I must have my pleasure in that sin, if I must lose my eyes, then farewell
eyes, farewell the light. I suppose there is none of you dare reason thus
desperately, when we come to you in the name of God, and speak of some
particular sin that your consciences tell you you are guilty of, and profess
unto you as in the name of God, that that way you take cannot stand with
eternal life, that you must eternally perish, and lose all that happiness that
God has prepared for the Saints, perhaps none dare say, Farewell God, and
Christ, and eternal life, and all, I must have my sin: Though you do not say so
directly, yet if after you have heard all this, you go on in a sinful way, you
do in effect say so; for the Scripture says, Know you not that no drunkard, nor
whoremonger, nor covetous, nor unclean person, nor extortioner, and the like,
shall enter into the Kingdom of God: You know this, it is not possible that any
should be so ignorant, but he knows such shall never enter into the Kingdom of
God; you going on then in such a way, you do as it were say, Farewell God, and
heaven, and farewell all that Christ has purchased by his blood, rather then I
will lose my sin: How will this confound you another day? how will conscience
accuse you? when it shall tell you what you have heard, and what you might have
had, and you have lost all for your lust: God shall say, I revealed to you what
my ways and counsels were concerning man, that this was the great work and
design, that I intended to make wretched man happy, to bring vile dust into
glory; and was that my great masterpiece, that I intended nothing in your
eyes, but must it be despised for the satisfying of your lusts? Christ shall
plead against you, Was I content to leave the bosom of my Father, and to be in
the form of a servant, and to be made a curse, and to lose my precious blood,
and my life, to purchase glory for man, and must this be slighted for your base
lusts? How will the Spirit of God plead against you? What, was not I in the
mouth of my Ministers to reveal these glorious things, and deep things of God,
that now in the Gospel are made known, and must all that work of mine be
neglected and slighted for your base lusts? Yea, how may all the creatures in
the earth come to plead against you? Lord, thou did not make us capable of
any such happiness as thou did the children of men, and yet we did honor and
serve thee in our order, but thou made this creature capable of eternal
happiness, and yet all is despised for the satisfying of their base lusts. Yea,
how may the Devils come and plead against thee? Lord, when we were once fallen,
thou would never enter into covenant with us, to give us any hope of any
mercy at all, much less hope to receive any such great things; there was hope
for these wretched creatures to be eternally happy, and yet they neglected all
for their lusts, and therefore shall their punishment be no more then ours?
shall their fire be no hotter then ours?

These things that I have delivered, though they be comfortable to the people
of God, they will be terrible things to the wicked, and will be a dreadful
aggravation to sin, as Heb. 10. 29. Of how much sorer punishment do you think
those worthy of, that in neglect of these things do even tread under foot the
blood of the Son of God, as cap. 2, 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation? If the salvation that we speak of were not great salvation, it
would not deserve such great punishment for the neglect of it: See how great
the mercy of God is in revealing such great salvation, so great shall the
punishment be of those that neglect such great salvation: We use to say to some
that will be bold to venture upon such ways as others will not, They may say
and do what they will, they have nothing to lose, but if a man have any thing
to lose he is more wary; it is true, if we had nothing to lose, it were not so
much for us to go on boldly and carelessly in our way, but know we are capable
of abundance of glory, that we are in danger to lose if we go on carelessly:
Consider what you are like to lose, and let that raise your heart against the
ways of sin, nothing can make it up. For one to do any thing that shall
prejudice the right to a Crown, this is counted a great offense, and is not
past by without blood: Sin seeks to deprive us of a Crown, of Heaven, of
immortality; O the mischief that is in sin! let our hearts rise against it with
hatred to death: when any temptation comes, let us use this argument as a help
to answer temptation, O in this temptation there is that will deprive me of all
my hope of heaven, and of glory, and of my crown, and of all my good, if I take
not heed; and therefore now shall I sin? will any sin do you that good as will
countervail the cutting you off the hope of all this glory? will it make you
amends for this evil?

If a man might have a whole world given him for to lose his eyes, no wise man
would lose the benefit of his fight for the whole world; will thou venture the
loss of the sight of God, and of Christ, and of all communion to be had with
them for a lust, and for a base pleasure? what worth is in it to make thee so
venturous? When a temptation to sin comes, make use of this argument, as Saul
did to his men, What, can the son of Jesse give you vineyards, and oliveyards?
So you may say to every temptation, to the ways of sin, What, can my sin give
me Heaven, and glory, and immortality? can my sin reward me as God will reward
me if I walk in his way? If a Chapman should come to you who are Merchants, and
offer you for a commodity twenty times less then it is worth, your hearts will
rise against him, in disdain and contempt of him: Now when sin comes to offer
any pleasure or content to the flesh, let your hearts rise in disdain against
it, it offers you infinitely to your loss, base momentary pleasure for Heaven,
and all the glory that has been opened to you. As one said when a Harlot asked
a great price for pleasure with her one night, I will not buy repentance Non
tanti emam Poenitere.
at such a rate: And so when sin comes, say, I will not buy pleasure at such a
rate. It was an aggravation of the sin of Israel, that they would return into
Egypt, because the Land of Canaan was so good a Land; So it argues base hearts
in people to despise all that is in Heaven, and the glory of it for to turn to
Egypt, to some base lust.

Thirdly, if there be such a glorious reward for the Saints, this rebukes all
base worldly drossie spirits Use 3.
, that seek for no higher good then merely to enjoy the use and comforts of the
creature, and content to their flesh for a while: How many are there in the
world that would bless themselves in these things? Might I have but such an
estate, and such content in the world, it were enough, they should think
themselves happy. As that Duke of Burbone in France, if he might have his
Palace in Paris, he would not change it for Paradise. A company of base drossie
spirits that could be content to have the things of this world for their
portion, it argues you have low thoughts of an immortal soul; you know not what
an immortal soul is capable of, who can think your selves satisfied in any
creature. You have but low thoughts of God; are there no richer treasures in
God then only a few outward delights, meat, and drink, and sports here? Has
God nothing else to communicate to the creature? what mean thoughts have thou
of Christ, and of all the purchase of the blood of Christ? What, has Christ
come and laid down his blood to purchase nothing but this, to have content in
the creature? Certainly the God of this world has blinded thine eyes, that
thou should not see into the glorious things of eternal life that are in the
Gospel, and in the Word: How many would frame to themselves a kind of Heaven
here, an imaginary Heaven? As I have read of a King of Persia, that he would
have an imaginary Heaven, and therefore he made a brave Palace, and in the top
he made the heavens, and painted Sun, Moon and Stars, and underneath Clouds,
that with Art moved up and down, and distilled rain, and made thunder, and he
had a brave Throne glistering above those clouds, this might be sufficient for
a Heathen; and yet how many Christians are guilty of this, to imagine Heaven to
themselves? If they had but this and this, that were Heaven. Certainly thou will find the loss of these things a hell, if there were no pain; but know,
thou can not lose Heaven, but thou must of necessity be plunged into hell;
you cannot lose all this glory, but you must of necessity be under that misery
which is contrary to this glory; whosoever loses the one, though that be ill
enough, he must be under the misery of the other.

And know, whatsoever thy heart is set upon in this world, if it be not in
order to this reward, it is cursed to thee, for the blessing of all comfort
does consist in order to this last end. O that men were thoroughly principled in
this one principle, namely, That the The good of all things here consists in
subordination to the supreme good hercister.
good of all things in the world, consists in the subordination they have unto
the highest and last end for which they were made: Now whatsoever a man has,
if there be not a subordination of it unto the last end, it is all cursed: O
know thy folly, that have sought to satisfy thy self in the things of the
world! Know thy folly, that thou have in this, like a Swine sought to take
contentment in swill and husks, when as you hear there is bread enough in your
Fathers house. Mark what the Psalmist says in Psalm. 4. 3. How long will you
turn my glory into shame? how long will you love vanity and seek after lies? By
your loving vanity, and seeking after lies, you turn the glory of God into
shame; so all carnal hearts that seek for their portion in this world, put a
shame upon all that glory that God has opened to you in this recompense of
reward: O be not guilty of this, when as you have heard of these glorious
things in the recompense of reward, do not you cast shame and filth upon them,
as if they were all imaginations. Know those things that you esteem to be real
and substantial, are vanities and imaginations, and all substances and
realities are in this recompense of reward.

Fourthly, if there be such a glorious recompense of reward for the Saints,
those also are to be rebuked Use 4.
who seem to go on in those ways that might bring this reward, and yet through
the wickedness of their hearts do deprive themselves of this reward, and these
are hypocrites. There are three sorts of these:

First, such as though they go on in the hearts same ways that Gods people go
in, yet there are so base and vile therein, as they seek no greater things in
them then their own base ends, and so lose all.

Secondly, such as go on in the ways that tend to this reward, and yet perish
at last for some one base lust.

Thirdly, such as go on in those ways, and are in a good forwardness, and yet
prove to be Apostates, and so lose all their labor, and all their reward.

First, such as go on in the ways that lead to this 1.
reward, the ways of Religion and godliness, they do the same things that Gods
people do for this reward, but only this, their ends are different; they pray
as much, hear as much, and receive Sacraments, make a great profession in
Religion, and their hearts seem to be mightily up in duty; yea, perhaps they
suffer much in the ways of God, and are resolute in the ways of godliness, and
yet lose all in the conclusion upon this ground, because though they be in the
ways that lead to this reward, yet their ends are so base and low, they do not
look at the glorious reward in these actions, but look at some under thing; as
to give content to men, and applause of men; and to be accounted some body in
the place where they live, and to gain some outward respect from such and such,
and this is the highest pitch their hearts rise unto in the duties of Religion:
If ever there were any sottish desperate delusion of heart, this is it, to
undertake to do that which others do, that come to enjoy all this glorious
reward; and though you do as much as they, and take as much pains as they, yet
you in the conclusion miss of all, and lose all upon your base ends: you follow
Christ as others do, but a gracious heart follows Christ for Christ, but you
follow him only that A gracious heart follows Christ, for Christ.
your own minds and wills may be satisfied, it may be you know not how to
live: and this is that you aim at in following Christ, and in prayer, and in
speaking of good things, all that you aim at, is that you may be accounted
those that have parts and gifts; and in giving of alms, you only look upon
some low and base ends which you shall attain, and this is like to be all your
reward, so says Christ, Woe to you hypocrites, you have your reward: And woe
indeed when this shall be said, You are forward in Religion, to gain to your
selves such base things, you shall have them, says God, and this is all the
reward you shall have. O be ashamed and confounded in your own hearts, that you
should perform the duties of Religion, and take such pains in the ways of God,
that do lead to such glorious things, and yet your ends are so low; by having
such low ends in religious duties, you make Earth your throne, and Heaven your
footstool, whereas God says, Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my footstool;
Why should you be so cross to God in the foolish ways of your vile hearts?

Some there are that perform these duties to satisfy natural conscience, and
so they may be unsound, and Natural conscience a spur to duty.
their consciences not accuse them; but these hypocrites are the basest that
can be, their consciences cannot but accuse them, that they undertake the ways
of Religion, to employ them for no more then for the attaining such low ends.
Yea, many that are now in Heaven, and have this glorious reward, did not find
so much difficulty in the ways of Religion as many Hypocrites do. There are
three Reasons for it.

First, that they do is by their own strength, and 1.
when one comes to perform the duties of Religion by his own strength, they are
hard to him; a gracious heart has strength from Heaven, and from Christ; now
when a man has received strength, he can do that with ease that was difficult
before: A man that has a base unclean heart, the ways of Religion must be
tedious to such a one; as a man's body being corrupted, whatsoever he does is
tedious to him, if he were sound it would not be so tedious; and so the ways of
Religion are tedious to an hypocrite, because he does all in his own strength,
and his soul is corrupted.

Besides, the ways of Religion are not suitable to his principles, but he is
fain to force himself to them, 2.
and all forced things are tedious; but a gracious heart goes on in the ways of
Religion as suitable to his principles.

Besides, an Hypocrite has not those comforts as 3.
those that are gracious have in their ways, they have the assurance of Gods
acceptance, and the light of God shining upon them, which Hypocrites have not;
so that the ways of God are more difficult to Hypocrites, then to the godly;
and yet they get nothing by them but some base ends, and the godly that do not
endure so much difficulty, get Heaven, and immortality, and a Crown of glory,
and all because their ends are different: O be sure your ends be right, you see
what vast difference men's ends may make!

As if two should go to sea, it may be they go out both together, and one
endures as much tempest and storm as the other, and they are at the like
charge; perhaps yet the one comes home richly laden, and the other brings
nothing but Cockle shells, and a little gravel; when he that brought home the
Cockle shells and the gravel, shall see the difference between him and the
other, when as they were at like charge, and endured the same difficulty, how
will he be ashamed? This is the difference between a gracious heart and an
hypocrite, both go out in Religion, the one makes as much stir as the other,
and suffers as much disgrace and contempt as the other; the one enjoys all the
riches of the Kingdom of God; the other, what does all his profession come to?
he gains a little respect from some, that this body or that body says, He is a
man of good parts, and here is all. O miserable voyage that such as these are
have made, when all their profession comes but to this! Yea, it may be they do
not so much as gain respect from those that are wise and judicious, but only
from a company of pratlers, that will speak well of you when you please them,
and when you do not please them, they will speak as ill of you: like a great
blaze that a little fire will make in straw for the present, and when it is
past, you see nothing but a few black ashes; so many Professors make a great
blaze, and a great noise and show, and all that it comes to, is, that they get
a little esteem in the world; or, like Kites they will flutter up a little, but
their eye is upon the carrion; so many seem to be above in the air in the
profession of Religion, and yet their eyes are upon the carrion, they make
things below their aim.

What dishonor is this unto the ways of godliness? those ways that are the most
precious things in the world, all the world is nothing to the profession of
godliness; and those ways that God has appointed to lead to such glorious
things as these are, how are they vilified and abased? you do not only vilify
your selves, but you vilify Gods ways, when as they tend to such a glorious
end, you put them under your base ends: If a man were a Nobleman by birth, what
greater dishonor could be done to him, then to make him serviceable to a
drudge? So the ways of God that are so glorious, to make them serviceable to
your base ends, what dishonor is put upon the ways of God in this? Certainly
God cannot take it well at your hands; to make the meanest creature of God, our
own civil actions serviceable to our lusts, is a great sin; but to make Prayer,
and the Word, and the Sacraments, and the ways of godliness to be serviceable
to our lusts, this is most horrible impiety. Again, how do you pollute that
which is holy? The way of God is a holy thing, and take heed of polluting of
it, by having such low ends in it. Again, consider how you do take the name of
God in vain; the name of God is in the ways of Religion, and for you to have no
higher ends in Religion, but such base ones, you take Gods name in vain, and
God will not hold you guiltless.

These two men, a gracious heart, and a hypocrite, may be compared to two men
that follow the King; one that follows the King for some Dukedom, and place of
Office, to obtain some great thing from the King; and a beggar that knows not
the King, but runs after him for an alms, and if he may have six pence or a
shilling, he goes away quieted: So in the ways of Religion, both seem to follow
God, a gracious heart follows God, and knows what God is, he knows that God is
a blessed God, a glorious God, and that there are wonderful great and glorious
things to be communicated from God to the souls of his people, and therefore he
follows God for great things, for heaven, and eternity, and glory, and
immortality; an hypocrite, he knows little of God, and he follows God that he
may have a little credit and content for a while, and he looks no higher: O
base ignoble spirits, that have no higher thoughts in the ways of God! though
we must take heed of high thoughts of our selves, yet in the ways of God we
must lift up our selves, and have high thoughts, and high ayms. O what
difference is there between an hypocrite and a true gracious heart! A gracious
heart has high ends for God in the meanest actions, in eating, and drinking,
and an hypocrite has low ends in his highest actions, in the most solemn
duties of divine worship.

Secondly, those hypocrites are to be rebuked 2.
that go on fairly in the profession of Religion, and make conscience of secret
sins, and not only in shows, but really are escaped many pollutions of the
world, and yet at last lose all for cleaving to some one sin: but there is a
great deal of difference between a real escaping, and true sanctifying
escaping; many may really forsake many pollutions, and many sins, and yet at
last lose all this reward for closing with some secret sin. O take heed lest
this be any of your portions, you have been vile, and you have reformed your
ways in many things, and are not guilty of such and such sins as you were
before; but look to your selves that you do not lose all this reward for some
one sin at last: let them do what they will in profession, if their hearts do
not come off from every sin, it is all nothing; not but that there may be some
remainders of sin, and yet the heart be taken off from every sin; but if there
be any secret closing with any sin, all your profession, and the leaving of all
the other is to no purpose, it will never bring you to this reward: As suppose
a wife should be very serviceable to her husband in many things, and forsake
many lovers, yet if she entertain but any one lover besides her husband, her
husband does not care for all her service and respect; and so it is with those
that make profession: Look that there be no one secret sin lodge in your
hearts, if there be you will lose all. It was a vexation to Lysimachus a King,
that his staying to drink one draught of water, lost him his Kingdom: And so it
will be a vexation to any that have gone on in the ways of godliness, that he
has lost Heaven for one sin.

It was a grievous affliction upon Moses, that he came toward Canaan within
the sight of it, and yet for one sin, not sanctifying Gods name at the water of
Meribah, he was deprived of it, it went to his heart; and so it will be a
grievous thing when you shall come toward Heaven, and for one sin, not
sanctifying Gods name as you ought, you shall be deprived of heavenly Canaan.
Many Prodigals have an inheritance, and at one cast of the Dice lose it; to
lose this Inheritance at one cast, is a grievous thing. A man may escape many
wounds, and shots in the Wars, and yet may be killed at last with the wound of
a Penknife, or the wound of a pin or needle: so many that have escaped many
gross sins, may by some little secret lust be deprived of the glory of heaven.
You that are going on in this way, that tend to the reward, take heed you do
not lose all for some one sin.

Thirdly, those that apostatize are to be rebuked; 3.
Apostates go far, and lose all this reward, because they do not endure to the
end, but go back and decline: You were once in a blessed way, and had a blessed
gale, and you were going on apace to heaven, and now you are turned back again;
O what have you done! it may be you were near your end, as Christ said to the
young man, He is not far from the Kingdom of Heaven: as the Israelites were
within a few days journey of Canaan, and yet lost it; so many, though they be
near in their profession, and have had as it were the taste of heaven, yet
turning back again, they lose all. As if a man were going a rich Voyage, and
just as he was entering into the Haven, there should come a gust of wind and
blow him home again, how does it grieve him? I was just at the Haven, and if I
had entered I had been enriched for ever: So many have gone on in the profession
of Religion, if they had continued, who knows but that they might have had all
this reward? but for want of continuance they have lost all, and they are come
short of the glory of God. We may say to them, as the Angel said to Hagar;
Hagar, from whence come thou, and whither go thou? So it may be said to an
Apostata, Poor creature, from whence come thou, and whither go thou? Thou
come from heaven and eternal life, and thou art going to hell and eternal
death. You know how earnest the Apostle was with the Galatians, when they had
once received the faith, and drew back again, says he, Who has bewitched you?
Was there ever such wickedness like this? to receive that faith that brings
such happiness, and after you have received it to turn back again; Who has
bewitched you? And this is the fourth Use.

Fifthly, if there be such a glorious recompense of reward for the people of
God; this should then encourage Use 5.
such as are looking toward, and such as are walking in the ways of God.

First, it may encourage to begin betimes in Gods 1.
ways: It is your wisdom to begin to work at the first hour, seeing God will
reward so richly. If you were to work for another, and you knew he would give
you a great sum of money for every hour you wrought, you would be sure to be
betimes at work that day: You that are young, you are deferring, and putting off
your repentance; what a sottish delusion is this? What do you lose, you lose a
great deal of the reward you might have: Therefore you little ones, as soon you
come to know any thing of the ways of God, embrace them, for you shall be
rewarded abundantly for every minute of an hour: Therefore the losing the time
of youth, yea, the losing of any opportunity of doing any gracious action, is
an eternal loss: for if God reward every one according to his works, then the
loss of an opportunity to do a good work, is an eternal loss; they that have
neglected opportunities, let them consider what they have lost, and you that
have your time before you, begin betimes; if a man were working, and knew not
when he should be paid, or how he should get his wages, he would come late to
work, and would be negligent, but God would not have you come into his vineyard
upon those terms, but promises he will reward you, and therefore begin betimes.

Secondly, here is an encouragement to Gods 2.
people to be strict, if we look for such a glorious reward, we had need be
accurate; many cry out, What need men be so strict? Indeed if they had no
higher ends then your base ends, you might say so; a base hypocrite what need
he be so strict? but for a gracious heart, that has such high, and noble, and
glorious ends as these are in his work, as a crown, and glory, and the like, he
had need be strict and precise. In ordinary pieces of work, by which workmen do
not expect much, they are not so strict and exact; but if a man be about some
curious work, that he expects some great matter for, then he will be very
strict: and so because Gods people do expect such great matters for Religion,
no wonder that they are so strict and precise.

Thirdly, if there be such a glorious reward, here is an encouragement to be
very fervent and zealous 3.
in the ways of God, because they serve such a God, and shall have such reward,
says the Apostle, in Romans 12. 11. Be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord; as if
he should say, Do you know whom you serve? You serve the Lord, the high, and
mighty, and glorious, and infinite God; and therefore you had need be fervent
in spirit; do that you do with all your might and power, for it is for that God
that will do such great things for you. As David when he danced before the Ark,
he did it with all his might: Michol not knowing his meaning, scorned him in
her heart; but says he, It was before the Lord that chose me before your
Fathers house, that has bestowed such mercies upon me, and will bestow more
mercies, and if this be to be vile, I will be more vile. Carnal hearts cannot
endure earnestness, and fervency in Gods service; as the wild beasts cannot
endure fire, so beastly carnal spirits cannot endure fire, fervency, and zeal
in Gods ways; but suppose they should oppose you for fervency in Gods ways, you
might answer them, If this be to be vile, I will be more vile; It is for that
God that has done great things for me, and that I hope to receive great things
from hereafter eternally.

Fourthly, if there be such a glorious reward, be 4.
encouraged to be abundant in Gods service; this is the Argument of the
Apostle, in 1 Cor. 15. 58. Be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know your labor is not in vain in the Lord.
By that which has been said, you may know your labor is not in vain with the
Lord; be abundant in service, there shall not be one tear, nor one sigh, nor
one prayer lost; many say, Why do you so much, will not less serve? The godly
do not only aim at the reward, that will require abundance, but they would
have the height of the reward, and therefore they think they never have done
enough. It is an expression of Austin, If a man should serve the Lord a
thousand years, it would not deserve an hour of the reward in Heaven, much less
an eternity: Though it is true, the grace of the Lord is glorious, and he does
accept of his grace, as the most glorious thing in the world, yet considering
what our actions are, how much corruption is mingled with them, it would not
deserve a moment in Heaven, and therefore we had need do as much as we can. 2
Peter 3. 11. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner
of persons ought ye to be in all manner of holy conversation and godliness? We
should be ashamed and confounded in our thoughts that we can do no more; and if
there should be shame in Heaven, when the Saints shall see and enjoy so much
there, would they not be ashamed that they have done no more for that God so
glorious in his bounty and goodness here?

Fifthly, if there be such a glorious recompense of reward, then let us labor
to be faithful with God, because 5.
we have such a good Master, that is so good and gracious to us. Princes make
account they engage the hearts of their subjects that are about them, to be
faithful with them by their great rewards, and by keeping of them in
expectation of great things: The great things that God has prepared for us, do
lay more engagements upon our hearts to be faithful with him: Let us not be
false to such a God as this is; God expects we should be faithful upon this
ground, Isaiah 63. 7, 8. There are large expressions of the goodness of the
Lord unto his people; and what follows, Surely they are my people, children
that will not lie: As if he should say, These are a people that I expect should
be satisfied with me. In Psalm. 36. 5. there God joins his mercy and his
faithfulness both together: As Gods mercies and faithfulness are joined
together, so let the hope of Gods mercies to us, and our faithfulness unto God,
be joined together. It was an argument of God unto Abraham, I am God
All-sufficient, and I am your exceeding great reward, walk before me, and be
upright: As if he should say, You need not go and shark unto any other
creature, you have reward enough in me, therefore walk before me, and be
upright: So by all that which God has revealed unto you concerning this
glorious reward of his people, God says, You need not go and seek any thing
else, you need not be sharking up and down after the creature, Is there not
enough in me to satisfy any creature living? The ground why any depart from
God in a way of unfaithfulness, is because they have distrustful thoughts, and
think there is not enough to be had in God, but they had need shift for
themselves another way: If we understand this glorious reward, and our hearts
close with it, this temptation could not have power to draw our hearts from it:
Therefore God is so plentiful in the manifestation of his goodness, because his
people should not have any shifting thoughts; there is enough in God, and in
the treasures of his grace to make up all.

Now by that which has been said, be encouraged to go on in those ways in
which you have no present encouragement; there are many ways in which you have
no encouragement from God or men; you pray, and hear, and perform duties, and
do not find God come in that way, let the reward that is to come be enough to
encourage you. You do many good things, and men are ungrateful, and will not
requite them; well, let this quiet you, There is a glorious reward to come. I
remember a speech of Luther, That servitude to men, though it be to ungrateful
men, does please God, and God, says he, will abundantly reward you for it, and
that should be more sweet to us then all the treasures in the world. In Isa.
49. 4. says the Prophet, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for
naught and in vain; yet truly my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with
my God. It is a speech of Latimer, speaking of Ministers that would leave their
flock because they did no good; says he, It is very naughtily done, we must
look to that which God commands us, and leave the issue to God: Christ says,
Follow me, me, me, (three times he has it) and not your own lusts; let us do
our own work, and leave the reward with God: Though it be a sweet encouragement
for the Ministers of God to see something of their labor, yet if they do not,
it is enough to make them go on in a way of obedience for the present, because
God commands it though there were no reward, but when we do obey God, and
please God for the present, and it shall be rewarded so gloriously hereafter,
let not this be any excuse, We can do no good: if you be convinced of a duty,
whether there be good or no good come of it, whether there be present
encouragement or not, it is enough that it shall be gloriously rewarded
hereafter.

Sixthly, if there be such a glorious reward, such 6.
blessed things as these reserved for the people of God: hence then let us
dwell a little in admiring at the goodness of God, at the infinite treasures of
the riches of the glory of the grace of God toward the children of men:
Certainly, Brethren, great are the thoughts of God toward mankind, wonderful
are his ways to this poor creature of his: What is man, says the Psalmist, nay,
what is man indeed? when as we consider what God has done for him. In Romans 8.
31. after the Apostle had spoke of glorification, and of the blessed estate of
Gods people hereafter, says the Apostle, What shall we say to these things? So
seeing these things are so that are revealed, What shall we say to these
things? O the height, and length, and depth, and breadth of the loving
kindeness of the Lord! how unsearchable are his judgments! shall we say, How
unsearchable are his mercies? and his mercies past finding out. O how great is
thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which thou have
wrought before the sons of men! Psalm. 31. 19. If ever God wrought about any
thing, it was about the communication of his goodness to mankind; yea, how
great is it before the sons of men, before us that have but a little made known
to us? How great is it before Angels then, and before God himself? In Psalm.
113. 6. it is said, God humbles to behold things that are done in heaven: It
is much that God should vouchsafe to behold any thing in heaven; but now that
God should vouchsafe to behold such a poor wretched creature as man is here
upon earth, and not to behold him only, but to work thus gloriously for him,
and that from all eternity, to make it his great work to communicate himself to
man; O how does God humble himself here, and how is his mercy and goodness to
be admired and adored by the sons of men! God is to be praised for the least of
his mercies here, but he is to be admired in the glory of his rich grace in
heaven. We read Psalm. 136. God is praised twenty five times for his mercies,
but the conclusion of all is, Praise the God of Heaven, for his mercies endure
for ever; his mercies, as he is the God of heaven, they are the glorious
mercies indeed. When the Scripture would set forth the excellency of a thing,
it expresses it by heaven, as the excellency of Christ, He is the Lord from
heaven, 1 Cor. 15. 47. The excellency of God, the God of heaven, Jonah 1. 9. It
is made the top of Christ's glory, that he is made higher then the heavens, Heb.
7. 26. When Christ would show the excellency of the bread of life, he says, It
is bread from heaven; the excellency of spiritual blessings is set out in this,
that they are blessings in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1. Because gold is the most
precious metal, therefore we lay it over other things, not only wood and
cloth, but silver it self: so because heaven is so excellent, the Lord gilds as
it were his choicest blessings with this adjunct, and all to show the wonderful
excellency there is in heaven it self.

Brethren, God has therefore revealed these things to us, to that end that the
glory of his grace might be great in the world: God would have us have high,
and honorable, and glorious thoughts of his goodness; God would have the high
praises of his grace to be in the hearts and in the mouths of his Saints; it
is a great evil to have low and mean apprehensions of the glorious grace of God
to mankind; you do not know what dishonor you bring to God in it: If your
hearts be not raised on high, and enlarged in the thoughts of the free and
glorious grace of God to mankind, it is an exceeding dishonor to him. To see
the riches of Gods glorious grace to the children of men, it is a mighty work
of faith, and such a work as the soul is enabled to do only by a mighty and
glorious work of the holy Ghost in it; indeed there is in the world a base, and
poor, and mean apprehension of the grace of God in Christ, such as does not
work at all to raise, and enlarge, and glorify the heart of a man, but the
true sight of the riches of Gods glorious grace, it has a mighty power to
raise, and enlarge, and glorify the hearts of the children of men while they
are here; as mark the expressions of the Apostle in his Prayer for the
Ephesians, 1 Ephesians. 17. 18. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of glory, may give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him; The eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints: not the inheritance of the Saints, but the
inheritance in the Saints, and the glory of the inheritance, and the riches of
the glory, and they must not only have understanding to know this, but the
eyes of their understanding must be enlightened, and this must come from the
knowledge of Christ, from the Spirit of wisdom and Revelation, and from the
Father of glory, the God of our Lord Jesus Christ. The sight of the excellency
and riches of Gods grace here, it is that that is the work of God shining into
the heart, 2 Cor. 4. 6. For God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ: The unsearchable truths of the Gospel
are in that which has been revealed so far as we are able to wade into them.
The sight of Gods rich glory, is that which the Princes of the world have not
known, it is that which requires a work of the Spirit of God, Of that Spirit
which searches 1 Cor. 2. 10.
the deep things of God.

O brethren, if you had a true spiritual sight of the richness of the goodness
of God in the way of his communication of happiness and glory to the children
of men, then you see into the great design of God, into the deep counsels of
his wisdom, then God has laid open his heart unto you, God has brought you
into the treasures of his riches, and given you a view of them; the very
secrets of Gods soul are imparted to you, and blessed are your eyes that have
seen these things: if the sight of Gods glory in his grace toward mankind be
seen in true beauty and height, and glory indeed, there is no fear that they
should do hurt to any soul; it is true, the apprehension of the grace of God in
a natural way, is the cause of security or presumption in many, but there was
never any in the world that was furthered in a way of security and presumption
upon the spiritual sight and view they have had of the height and depth of the
riches of the glory of the grace of God in the face of Jesus Christ: That sight
of Gods grace that is the cause of security in people, is that which is
grounded merely upon a natural light, which has no efficacy to raise, and
enlarge, and to purge the heart: But this true spiritual sight of Gods grace,
it has a mighty efficacy, and nothing more, to raise, and enlarge, and purge
the heart. In 2 Corinthians. 3. 18. says the Apostle, We beholding the glory of the
Lord as in a mirror: What then, are we secure and presumptuous upon this? No,
We are changed into the same image from glory to glory. What was that glory
that the Apostle did behold? the glory of God in the mirror of the Gospel, the
glory of God in the riches of his grace toward the Saints: Now says he, While
we behold, as in a mirror, this glory of God, this is the fruit of it, We are
changed from glory to glory. People talk of Gods mercy, but how few ever had a
spiritual sight of Gods mercy? they would have Ministers preach much of Gods
mercy, but if people had eyes to behold it in the glory of it, how would it
change their hearts? wherefore then, I beseech you, labor to have more then a
natural sight of Gods mercy and goodness toward mankind. A man by a low
apprehension of Gods mercy and goodness may think thus: So long as I serve God,
it shall be well with me, God will bless me, and be merciful to me; but that
spiritual and supernatural sight of the riches of the glory of Gods mercy, is
this, for a soul though it sees it self a base vile wretched worm, a lump of
filth, and sees it self standing guilty before the Lord, and God seems to look
with an angry face upon it, and conscience within it accuses it, and the
threats of the fiery Law come out against it; yet for a soul to be able to look
into the deep bowels of Gods infinite compassion that are in Christ, and in
them to look upon it self for all this as an heir of glory and eternal life, so
as to have the soul raised, and enlarged, and devoted to the magnifying,
praising and adoring the riches of Gods grace, and to venture all upon this,
this is more then a natural sight of Gods grace, and of his mercy toward
mankind.

You will say, We could admire Gods grace and Object.
mercy toward mankind, and praise him, and bless him for it, and our hearts
would be enlarged, If we were sure these things did belong to us, and that we
had any interest in them; there is enough in them to enlarge and raise our
hearts, but this is that which hinders, We do not know that we have an interest
therein.

To that I answer, That this very work of God it Ans.
self, that gives this sight of his grace to raise up the heart to close with
it, and to make the soul venture all upon it, that does bring the soul to
devote it self to the praise and honor of it; this very work of it self does
interest your souls in it, therefore do not say, If I were interested in these
things, then I could praise and magnify God for them: If you can do this, you
are interested in them, for this is an immediate work of faith, and it is from
a divine principle to be able to do this, and therefore though you know no good
at all in your selves before, and you had no arguments to encourage you before,
and you had no preparation in your own apprehensions before, yet if you have
but this work of grace, it does interest your souls in all that which has been
revealed concerning the recompense of reward of the Saints of God.

But may we not presume to think that such great Object.
things belong to us?

To that I answer, Where ever presumption is, Ans.
it is built upon a natural sight of Gods grace, and that is a poor low flat
dead thing, that has no such efficacy to raise the heart to such a glorious
work as this is, and therefore if the heart be raised to such a glorious work
as this, by the appprehension of the riches of the grace and goodness of God
toward mankind, that is not presumption: And this is the sixth Use.

CHAP. LIVE. Gods people to be highly honored.
SEventhly, if there be such blessed things reserved 7.
for the people of God: Hence let us look upon all the servants of God as
honorable in our eyes, and let them be honored in our thoughts, for great are
the thoughts of God upon them and toward them, and therefore great and
honorable should be our thoughts of them, though they be never so poor and mean
in the world. We use to look upon great heirs with admiring thoughts, and
blessing of them every time we look upon them. Do you see one walking in the
ways of God? whatsoever he be for his outward, let your hearts bless him, and
say, Here is one indeed born to great things, other manner of things then any
the world affords. Did we know what were the things that the people of God
should be possessed of within a while, we would say in our hearts, O blessed
that ever they were born, blessed is the womb that bare them, and blessed are
the paps that gave them suck: Did we with a spiritual believing eye behold what
things they should have, and saw them as now possessed of them, we would see
cause to fall down and kiss the ground upon which they tread: The blessed
Angels look upon them as great ones, as the glory of the world, and therefore
do joyfully minister unto them, because they know they are the great heirs of
Heaven, for whom such great things are prepared: Great things are spoken of
thee, O thou City of God, says the Psalmist; Great things are spoken of you, O
ye Saints of God. If Heaven must be so glorious to entertain the Saints, how
glorious are those for whom heaven is prepared? Says Ahasuerus, What shall be
done to the man whom the King will honor? O what shall be done to those whom an
infinite God has set his heart upon to raise to honor, and to manifest to
Angels, and to all the world, what his infinite power is able to do in raising
of a creature to glory: In the Saints there is a meeting, as it were of the
beams of Gods grace and goodness as in a center, and that must needs be very
warm and hot indeed. The beams of the Sun in the circumference scattered in the
air, are warm; but in a glass, where they are united together as it were in a
center, there they warm after another manner, there they burn; so all the works
of Gods grace abroad in the world, they are as the beams of the Sun in the
circumference, that are scattered abroad; but in his people there is the center
where they are united together, and there they burn, and are glorious indeed,
and therefore high and honorable thoughts you ought to have of the Saints. It
is a great argument to show Gods greatness, that all the creatures in the world
are his, and for him. What an argument then is it to set forth the greatness of
a Christian, that Heaven, and God, and Christ, and all are his and for him? and
this has been shown in this glorious recompense of reward: How great and
honorable then should they be in our eyes?

Eighthly, if there be such a glorious reward, and 8.
great things prepared for Gods people, then what love is due to Christ, and to
the Gospel, and to the ways of godliness?

First, love to the Lord Christ, who is the cause of all this. 1.


Secondly, to the Gospel that reveals these things 2.
to us.

Thirdly, to the ways of godliness that leads to all 3.
this: great and blessed are the things of the Kingdom What love is due to
Christ.
of Heaven; from whence is all this? It is the Lord Jesus Christ, from whom all
this comes, another reward was due to us, we were wretched guilty creatures,
firebrarnds of hell, children of perdition, cast out unto an eternal curse; but
the Lord Christ, who was the wisdom of the Father, set his heart upon us, and
spoke for us from all eternity, and would not satisfy himself in delivering of
mankind from that miserable and lost condition in which they were, but so set
his heart upon them, as he intended to make it his great work for the
manifestation of the riches of his grace, to raise this poor wretched creature
to a height of happiness and glory, that it might appear to Angels, to the
world, yea to the blessed Trinity it self, what the Son of God is able to do,
to raise a creature from misery unto glory; and so his heart was set upon
mankind, that though it must cost him the eclipsing of his own glory, though
he must come to be made a prey to the world, and if a man, a man of sorrows,
yea, made a curse it self in the abstract, that man might have this glory and
happiness, and yet he was content with all; and at last this is all he prays
for as a fruit of his sufferings and merits, Father, I will that they also whom
thou have given me, be where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou
have given me; as if he should say, If I can but have this, I am well, I have
enough for all the sufferings that I did endure. This indeed is called a
reward, but it is the reward of another manner of righteousness then our own;
were it that there were no other righteousness but our own, though our own
should be true righteousness, the reward would never come to this height; but
this is first the reward of the merit, of the death, of the blood, and of the
perfect righteousness of the Son of God, and so in him it comes to be our
reward, therefore it is Christ that is our life, and happiness, and glory. O
let us join with those blessed Elders in Rev. 5. 8, 9. that fell down before
the Lamb, having all harps in their hands, and golden vials full of odours, and
sung, Worthy art thou who wast slain, and have redeemed us unto God by thy
blood, to receive honor, and blessing, and glory; and that we might join in
that blessed melody that St. John heard in that Chapter, in Verse 13. He heard
all creatures in heaven, and on earth, and under the earth, and in the Sea,
saying, Blessing, honor, glory and power, be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever; that we might say Amen to this. If
any man wish good to us, we count it worthy of love; but the Lord Christ having
wrought such infinite good for us as this, how should our hearts be enflamed to
him, and that none should be dear to us, and prized of us in comparison of
Christ: Let us cry out with that blessed Martyr, None but Christ, none but
Christ.

Again, how should our souls love the Gospel, and prize the Gospel, that has
revealed all this to us? In 2 Timothy 1. 10. it is said, Life and immortality is
brought to light by the Gospel: These are the things that in comparison were
kept hid from the beginning of the world, before the manifestation of the
Gospel, but now they are revealed: O blessed be God that we had the preaching
of the Gospel amongst us, to open the treasures of grace to us in this manner.
What poor low thoughts should we have had of the happiness of mankind, had not
God made known these glorious things in the Ministry of the Gospel? Many wise
men by the light of nature have risen high in the contemplations of happiness,
that man's nature is capable of, but how far beneath these things have their
highest thoughts been? It is a great part of the glory of the Gospel, that it
sets out unto us these high and glorious things.

And then the ways of godliness, those we should 3.
love, because those are the ways that lead and tend How we should love the
ways of godliness.
to all this; godliness has the promise of the life to come, as well as the
promise of this life annexed to it: Were the ways of godliness never so hard
and rough, never so difficult, yet they are glorious ways, and to be loved,
because of the glorious end they tend unto: Great is the gain of godliness, if
these things be believed. You that are Merchants love and prize trading and
merchandising that brings in great gain; as some in a way of trading and
merchandising, by a bargain in a morning will bring in a hundred pounds, when
as many other poor people are fain to work hard to get a shilling or eighteen
pence a day; now you prize that trade that with a few words can get in so much:
O prize the trade of godliness then, there is gain to be had. I may compare all
the works of morality, and common grace, to the poor mean trade of the laboring
man, that is fain to work hard for a shilling or eight pence a day, they work,
and get but some few outward blessings from God, but godliness is the trade of
merchandising, that brings in hundreds together, and that our hearts should be
upon; God would have our hearts to be after great and glorious things. It is an
expression of Cleopatra to Marcus Antonius, It is not for you to be fishing for
Gudgeons, but for Towns, and Forts, and Castles: And so those that are
acquainted with the ways of godliness, it is not for them to be trading for
poor things, but for eternal life, glory and immortality.

The ninth Use, is an Use of Examination, to know who those are that have
interest in these glorious 9.
things, to the answering of that question in Psalm 15. Who shall abide in thy
Tabernable? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? I confess that Psalm does
principally aim at communion with the Church of God; such as are fit for
communion with a Church, are fit for heaven, and therefore the question may be
true, Who shall dwell in thy holy hill? who shall be partakers of these things?
Blessed are they that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God; But who are they?
It is necessary you should labor to make this sure, because it is a matter so
great, and so glorious, and not to lay the weight of that which is of infinite
consequence, upon poor, weak, slight, and sandy foundations; certainly we do
not know what the grace of God toward mankind is, if we content our selves
with slight hopes; but if God has enlightened your souls to know the reality
and glory of them, they will never be at rest, till you have got certain and
infallible grounds for them. In things of small consequence we are content with
slight evidences, but if a man have to deal in any business upon which his
whole estate depends, he would not have any man think it ill if he does make
sure, if he will have bonds and seals: so we should make sure of heaven, and of
glory, because it is such a great matter.

Some I suppose, that merely upon the hearing of the greatness of these things,
cannot but have some misgiving thoughts; If these things be so great, surely
they concern not me, they belong not to me; Can I think in my conscience that I
am that man or woman that God should have such great thoughts upon, and should
look upon me, so as to make it the greatest design that he has to glorify the
riches of his mercy upon me? What work of Gods grace have I ever had upon me? I
would not have those that are affected with the greatness of Gods grace to
mankind, think that these things do not belong to them because they are great.
But those that never had their hearts affected with the excellency and glory of
Gods grace toward man, when they hear of the greatness and glory of those
things that are reserved for the Saints, they may justly have their consciences
misgive them, and think surely they do not belong to them. Can thou that art
a base drunkard, that prizest nothing but a little drink, and some outward
things, think that God should make it the greatest work that he has in the
world, for to communicate the riches of his grace and goodness unto thee? The
greatness of these things may be enough to cast thee off; As it is with a
Beggar, a Beggar comes and asks an alms, if a man put his hand in his pocket,
and take out a penny or two pence, he has hope to have that; but if he take out
a piece of gold, he has no hope of that, because it is so much: So when men
have but natural thoughts of heaven and happiness hereafter, you think you
might have that, but when you come to have heaven opened to you, and you see it
is such a great and glorious thing, your hearts may justly think it is not for
us. Cast a bone to a Dog, he falls to it presently, but set a joint of meat
before him well dressed, in a large dish, and he goes away, he dares not venture
upon that: So for these things in the world, the ordinary favors of God, these
bones that God casts to Dogs, you may fall upon them, and think these are for
you; but when you come to the dainties, and infinite treasures of God, can such
a swinish heart, such a base, filthy, unclean spirit as yours is, that never
minded nothing but the satisfying of your base lusts, think that these are for
you? you cannot but have misgiving thoughts, and think either these things are
but notions, or else I have no part in them.

CHAP. LV. To whom the Recompense of reward appertains.
BUt how may any know that they shall have Quest.
this glorious reward?

Carnal and sensual hearts, because they have Ans.
no principles of Gods grace, to show them the great things of God, and the
mind of God, they think no man can know; we must have hopes, and hope well,
but who can know what God has in heaven for us? Those that are acquainted with
the mysteries of God in the Gospel, they know what Gods mind has been from
all eternity concerning them, and what God will do for them to all eternity.
How do they know?

First, would you know whether you shall have this 1.
Recompense of reward? Have you made Moses Choice? Certainly, those that have
made Moses Choice, shall have Moses Reward: What Moses Choice was you have
heard, Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: Moses might have had honor and esteem
enough in Egypt, but he accounted afflictions with the people of God, in Gods
ways a great deal better; He esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches
then all; so I may have Christ and communion with his people, let me be
reproached, and contemned, and despised, I care not. Now do you find this?
Though there was a time my heart was taken with the glittering shows of things
here, and I saw no excellency in the ways of God, they were but notions to me;
at length God wrought mightily upon my soul, and showed me the vanity of all
things that I accounted for glorious things, and showed me a beauty in Gods
people, and began to knit my heart to them, so as I was willing to part with
any thing to have communion with them, and to venture all upon the bare word
and promise of God, for those glorious things that are revealed in it, and this
choice I have made, and my soul is settled in it, whatsoever befalls me in this
world; has there been such a work upon your souls, that you have made Moses
Choice? then you shall have Moses Reward.

Secondly, are you begotten unto the hope of 2.
these glorious things? Whosoever shall be partaker of this glorious reward,
must be one that is born to it. There are some dignities in the world that are
got no way, except they be born to them; so if you have this reward, you must
be born to it, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who according to his abundant mercy has begotten us unto a lively
hope: Whosoever has the true hope of Heaven, it is one that is begotten to it,
that is, There must be a mighty work of God upon your hearts, a new birth, a
regeneration in you, otherwise there is nothing you have done or can do that
can get this reward. In Mat. 19. 28. says Christ unto his Disciples, after
Peter had spoken what they had left for him, Ye that have followed me in the
Regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye
shall also sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel: As if
Christ should say, Peter, you have forsaken all and followed me, but know, the
bare forsaking is not enough, but you who have felt the work of God
regenerating your souls, upon which you have followed me, you shall sit upon
twelve thrones: Some do interpret this place Regeneration, the estate of the
Gospel, and so make it not to be the work of God upon the soul, but the work of
God upon the world, to make a new world; as the glorious estate of the Church
under the Gospel is called a new heaven, and a new earth, and so take it, Ye
that have followed me in this new world, ye shall sit upon twelve thrones, etc.
but I rather take it the other way, not wholly excluding this, they are only
those that follow Christ in the Regeneration, that shall have this reward.

It is called the new birth, because there is such a strange change; there is a
new spirit, and a new life put into a man: Suppose a rational soul were put
into a beast, what a change would be in that creature? Suppose an Angelical
nature were put upon us, what a change would there be? By the change that is
wrought in regeneration there is a greater difference; the highest degree of
glory in heaven is not so different from the lowest degree of grace here, as
the lowest degree of grace here is different from the highest excellency of
nature, because the difference between the highest degree of the glory of
heaven from the lowest degree of grace, is but a gradual difference, but the
difference that is between the lowest degree of grace, and the highest
excellency of nature, is a specifical difference. Therefore you that hope for
glory, know there must be a regeneration, that work of God upon your souls that
must cause a greater difference in you from that you were by nature, then there
is in the glorified Saints, that have the highest degree of glory, from the
meanest Saint in the world; as the reward is a mighty glorious thing, so the
work of God in preparing a soul for this reward is a mighty glorious work. And
therefore do not content your selves in every poor slight thought of heaven,
know heaven lies upon that which is a mighty work of God in you.

Thirdly, if you ever come to Heaven, there is a principle of heaven put into
your souls here, that is, 3.
a heavenly principle that carries you heavenward, I mean the work of God,
causing you to have heavenly minds, and heavenly hearts; Our conversation
Phil. 3. ul^
is in heaven, says the Apostle. In Cant. 3. 6. the Church is compared to
pillars of smoke that ascend upward to heaven; Though the Church be black and
dark in regard of her infirmities, yet it has a principle to carry it upward
to heaven. The Saints are compared to Eagles that fly aloft toward heaven,
though their bodies are not there, their hearts and souls are there; if our
treasures be in heaven, our hearts are there already. I read of Edward the
first, who had a mighty desire to go to the holy Land, to Jerusalem, and
because he was hindered, and could not get thither, he gave his Son a charge
upon his deathbed to Fox Acts and Monuments, de Edvardo primo.
carry his heart thither; and he prepared Two and thirty thousand pound to
carry his heart thither: So the Saints, though they have not their bodies in
heaven, their hearts are there, and they take much pains, and are at great
charges to get their hearts thither.

All things in nature have a principle to carry them to their proper place;
because the place of fire is on high, therefore fire has a principle to carry
it on high; and because the place of earth is below, therefore earth has a
principle to carry it downward: So if the place and center of the heart be in
Heaven, then certainly it has a principle to move naturally thither, to move
upward to heaven; and therefore that soul that has nothing but a principle to
carry it downward to the earth, and to the lusts of it to these things below,
heaven is not the proper place for such a soul, and when the soul goes out of
the body, it will not go to Heaven: Take earth, and close it in a vessel, and
take fire, and put into a vessel, open the vessels, and let them out, and they
go both to their places; so the souls of men when they are gone out of the
body, they go to the place whither they had a principle to carry them,
therefore do not think the principle shall be put into them when you dye, but
you must have a principle before: if your hearts be pressed down by earthly
things, when you dye they will fall down; and therefore observe which way your
souls work: Can you say, as in the presence of God, My soul works heavenward,
though I have weights of corruption that would weigh me down, yet I have a
principle that does work to Heaven? But the consciences of many tell them their
souls work downward, to vanity and sensuality, and you have no other principle,
and therefore when your souls depart, they fall downward.

Fourthly, what soul soever has an interest in heaven, heaven is in that soul
already: The kingdom of 4.
God is in them, and they have taken hold of eternal life, now eternal life
abides in them; Whom he has justified, he has glorified already, they have
the glory of heaven begun; you heard what that was. In heaven there is the
perfection of our natures, the image of God shall be renewed; now is the image
of God begun? has God marked you, and set the stamp of his image upon you?
There is no soul that God does intend to put glory upon, but he marks that
soul, and stamps his image upon it in the work of conversion, and says, Here is
a soul I set the stamp of my image upon, because I mark it out to glory: if
ever you come to Heaven, God must see his own Image and Superscription upon
you. As the Beast set his mark upon men, and would suffer none to trade but
those that had his mark: so God will set his mark upon his people, and none
shall come into his Kingdom but those that have his mark: now a man's Image is
upon a thing, when by beholding of it I am put in mind of him that it is an
Image of; so if you have this Image and stamp of God, a man that knows God, as
soon as he looks upon you, as soon as he beholds your conversation, he is put
in mind of God, and he says, I have heard and read much of God, of the
holiness and righteousness of God, and by this man's conversation I am put in
mind of that holiness and righteousness of God, the brightness of which I see
shining here.

Again, in Heaven you know God himself is the portion of the Saints, they have
the presence of God: What presence of God do you enjoy here? Were your souls
ever acquainted with the presence of God in the Ordinances? What blessed vision
have you of God here? Those who come to Heaven, God gives a sight of himself
here. And what union have you with God? What union of grace? What mystical
union between God and your souls? And what fruition have you of God? Is it God
that you enjoy in the creature? and God in all things? God in the Ordinances?
and what rest do your souls find in God? though you be tossed up and down in
regard of the uncertainty of the creature, yet is God your rest: yea, do you
enjoy your selves in God? the beginning of all these are now for the present.
And likewise for communion with Jesus Christ, what communion and converse is
there between your souls and Jesus Christ? Is it not a riddle to you? Are you
delighted in the communion of the Saints? Are the Sabbaths your delight, as a
beginning of the eternal Sabbath you shall keep in Heaven? Therefore now do you
ask, Who shall have Heaven? and, Who shall ascend into the Mount? Those whom
the Mount now comes down unto. Many hope they shall have God when they dye, but
surely if God be not so merciful as to give you spiritual mercies for the
present, he will not be so merciful as to give you eternal mercies hereafter;
if he do not give you mercies of grace here, he will not give you mercies of
glory hereafter.

Fifthly, what are the apprehensions that you have 5.
of this reward? there may be a special note drawn from thence, whereby you may
see whether this reward shall be yours or no. What is it that you apprehend to
be the height and excellency of that reward and glory that you expect? Is it
that spiritual and supernatural good that is in Heaven? Do you not apprehend
Heaven after a carnal and natural way, when you hear speaking of Crowns, and
dignity, and happiness, and glory, and the like? but has God showed you that
the height and top of all consists in those spiritual and supernatural things,
in the image of God, and in communion with God, and those things that have been
opened? are your hearts more after these then after any thing else? then it is
like that Heaven is for you, for these things are kept hid from those that
Heaven is 6.
not for. How to discern the truth of our hopes for heaven 1.


Sixthly, consider what your hopes are for this recompense of reward.

First, where hopes are true, they are such as are wrought by the power of the
Holy Ghost.

Secondly, they are purging hopes.

First, they are such hopes as are wrought by the 1.
power of the holy Ghost, Romans 15. 13. Certainly, hopes of such great things as
these, must be raised by a great power, they are hopes that could never be
raised by any natural apprehensions, by any work of Reason: you have hopes of
Heaven, and of the glorious reward; How came you by them? What almighty power
of the holy Ghost have you felt that has raised these hopes? If you have no
other hopes but those that may spring out of nature, natural conceits and
apprehensions, you are far short of this recompense of reward: but this
recompense of reward being glorious, it has a glorious principle to raise
hopes, such hopes as can bear down strong difficulties that shall oppose them:
the holy Ghost does stretch out the hopes of the soul beyond that which nature
can do. In the Hebrew that word that signifies hope, signifies a line, because
by hope the heart is stretched out as in a line to the thing it hopes for: now
the hopes that nature raises is but in a short line, and they stretch out the
heart but a little way, but the hopes that are wrought by the power of the holy
Ghost, are such hopes as the heart is stretched out very far by them; and there
must be a mighty stretching out of the heart, and that by a mighty power, to
make it hope for such great things as these, that God should bring such a poor
worm to such high things as these are: Ordinary base drossie hopes that have
nothing in them, they are not stretched out to these things, they have some
confused apprehensions, and slight opinions about heaven, and they are loath to
think they should be damned for ever, and cast from God, and therefore they
will have some conceits it shall be well with them, and they hope well; but to
have their hearts stretched out to expect these blessed things as the happiness
of their souls, and as the real, substantial, and only good, this is by the
mighty power of the holy Ghost.

Secondly, they are purging hopes; 1 John 3. 3. 2.
And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is
pure: It is a lively working hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be God who has
begotten us again to a lively hope. As a fountain that has dirt cast into it,
it being a living fountain, it works, and works, and never leaves till it has
got the dirt out; cast dirt into a puddle, and it lies there, and putrifies:
And this is the difference between the sin of one that is natural, and one that
has hope of eternal life: When sin comes into a carnal natural heart, it lies
there and putrifies; but where sin comes into a gracious heart, that has hope
of eternal life, such a heart by these hopes are as a living fountain, that
will never leave working till it be pure again: Such a soul as apprehends it
self a vessel of such rich and glorious mercies as these, do labor to cleanse
it self to the utmost: if you have a vessel that you put ordinary water into,
you care not though there be some dust in the bottom, but if you will put in
some precious liquor, you will cleanse it again, and again, and will not suffer
any dust to be there: So carnal hearts that do not know what great things God
has laid up for his people, that are not vessels of mercy, but only look for
some common things, they can suffer their hearts to filled with noysom lusts,
but where the soul does apprehend it self a vessel of mercy, such a one as God
will fill with these glorious things, it would not have any filth and
corruption abiding in it. In 2 Timothy 2. 21. The Apostle speaks of two sorts of
vessels that are in Gods House, that is, in the Church, Vessels of honor, and
Vessels of dishonor; But how shall we know we are vessels of honor, or of
dishonor? if therefore a man purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel of
honor; a vessel of dishonor is an unclean vessel, a vessel of honor is a clean
vessel: If therefore your hopes be such as can stand with any beloved sin
against knowledge, you are vessels of dishonor: And here is the liveliness of
this hope; if thou have a hope to be a vessel of honor, it purges you from
filth, and by that purging from filth, there comes to be a readiness and
preparation to every good work, here is such a one as shall ascend up into the
holy Hill of God. This is the sixth note.

Seventhly, examine what thy claim is, whether 7.
thy claim to Heaven, and eternal life, and this recompense of reward do lie
right in the point of Justification or no? If you look at nothing but the works
that you do, though they be never so glorious and good, and do not lay your
claim first right in the point of Justification, you will mistake and miscarry,
and be disappointed of all this recompense of reward. Therefore Paul, in Romans
8. 30. says, Whom he has justified, them he also glorified; so that
Glorification does depend upon Justification: Now then the first thing that a
soul is to look after for the assurance of its portion in this recompense of
reward, is to make sure in the point of Justification, for there lies the claim
to heaven, and all the rest comes but as a consequent of this. Now the laying
our claim right in the point of Justification consists in this, When a soul
comes to apprehend the infinite need it has of a perfect righteousness of a
Mediator, and looks upon that righteousness of the Mediator as well pleasing to
God, as sufficient to absolve it from former sins, and to discharge it from
former guiltiness, whereby another reward was due to it, and by faith applies
this righteousness, whereby it comes to be perfect before God, and lays the
weight of all its confidence of Heaven, and of glory upon this; then you may
hope to have interest in this recompense of reward: but if your claim come in
any other way then this, it does not give you any interest to heaven; and
therefore look much to the point of Justification, and be sure that your hearts
have laid the claim and interest it has to heaven and eternal life right
there, and then there may be great hope of the recompense of reward, though
afterward there be many failings in your works and services: And if you will
look at any work whereby you should have the reward, especially look at the
work of believing, closing with the righteousness of Christ in the apprehension
of your own unworthiness; This is the greatest work that any man is able to do,
that shall have the greatest reward in heaven.

You think if you were able to perform duties, and do such and such things, to
keep your hearts up for God, you should have this reward; but the greatest work
of God that ever any creature did, is when it apprehends its own unworthiness,
to venture upon the righteousness of Christ; if you were able to perform full
obedience to every particular of the Moral Law, it were not so great a work,
not so accepted of God, not so well pleasing in his eyes, nor should not be so
gloriously rewarded in Heaven, as this one work of believing in his Son. God
takes such infinite delight in his Son, as he looks more at that work of the
souls believing in his Son, and venturing it self and its eternal estate upon
his Son, then he does upon all works besides: and therefore look upon the point
of Justification by faith first, and if that be right, the assurance of the
reward will come in: diverse objections will rise, that can never be answered,
till the heart be settled in the point of Justification. All the Objections that
rise from our weakness and sinful infirmity comes from this, because we do not
settle our selves well in the claim we make to the recompense of reward in the
point of Justification, in the righteousness of Christ by faith.

Eighthly, examine what your works are, see whether they be such as shall
attain to this recompense of 8.
reward: If all the excellencies of all the moralities of all the men in the
world were put into one, these could never reach to this reward; it is a
supernatural thing, and therefore if you would know whether you shall have it,
there must be something supernatural in you.

But when is a work supernatural, so as I must have some comfortable hope, that
it shall reach unto this Quest.
supernatural reward?

A supernatural work has, First, supernatural Principles. Secondly, it has
supernatural Answ.
ends. Thirdly, it is performed in a supernatural manner.

First, the principles are supernatural; first, they are above nature; and
secondly, they are fetched from a fountain that nature has no skill of. For
the first, there is something above nature, that puts you upon duties; you do
not only go on in the ways of godliness, because you know you are bound to
them, you cannot be saved else, but because you find a new light let out by
God from heaven, that shows an infinite excellency and beauty that is in the
way What a supernatural work is.
of godliness. And you find a principle of Divine nature put into you, that
makes the ways of godliness agreeable to you; and the more Spiritual and Divine
they are, the more suitableness you find between your souls and those ways.

And secondly, do you find that you draw your principles that enables you to
any good work from a Mediator? The natural principles come at highest but from
reason, it sees reason for such and such things to be done; but a supernatural
principle is drawn from a Mediator, from God-Man, from God in Christ, and by
virtue of the promise, and so it comes to be an Evangelical obedience.

And it has supernatural ends, beyond self, and all 2.
self, and creature respects: That work that is natural rises no higher then
nature in its ends; as the water ascends no higher then from the place it
descends: so all natural works have some self or creature respects, but when
you find your hearts are raised above self and creature respects in your
obedience to God, there is a supernatural end.

And then they are performed in a supernatural 3.
manner. Seneca has this expression of desires; You may know it is not a
natural desire when it rises beyond bounds: He applies it to evil desires, when
a man desires things without bounds, that is no natural desire: Now that which
he applies to the corruption of nature, we may rather apply to the perfection
of nature. All the desires of nature are such as are limited in a narrow
compass; no natural man in the world does go on in the ways of obedience with
an infinite desire to dilate himself infinitely as far as he is capable, but is
always limited in a little narrow compass, so far he will go, and no further;
but when the soul comes to walk with God in a way of supernatural obedience, it
comes to be without bounds, all those bounds that did limit the soul are taken
away, and there is a letting out of the heart to God in the ways of godliness
in an infinite manner; and this is a most clear evidence of a supernatural work,
that will go for current in Heaven, and shall be rewarded there; there is the
impression of Gods infiniteness upon the heart in every work that is performed;
examine whether your works be not like those that the Apostle speaks of, in 1
Cor. 3. 15. where he speaks of the works that shall burn; therefore let us
consider whether our works be such as when they come to the trial, shall be
found to be stubble, and burn.

There are a great many whose works are like to burn, and themselves too: Many
of the works of Gods people are like to burn, but look too your selves for your
main and principal works, whether they will hold when they are examined by the
rule of heaven, and shall be rewarded: It is nothing what your works are before
men, the people of God may highly esteem of your works, but when they come to
be examined in heaven, they shall be examined strictly, and unless God see a
supernatural stamp upon them, they will burn; and therefore look to your works,
see whether they be supernatural in the principles, in the ends, and in the
manner of doing of them: and examine by these rules the assurance of this
reward. Mr. Latimer says, the assurance of heaven, is the sweet meats of the
feast of a good conscience: In great feasts there are good meats and banquets:
There are other dainty dishes in this feast, and the assurance of heaven is the
sweet meats and the banquet. Now that we may have the feast of a good
conscience made full, let us take pains in examining whether this recompense of
reward be ours: if we did but apprehend this reward to be ours, it would make
us go on with power in our way, whereas now every little thing is ready to turn
us aside.

Again, if upon examining by these arguments 10.
you find some comfortable hope that the recompense of reward is yours, what
concerns you, but patience to wait for it; and in the mean time to live as
those that shall have these things, and labor to dye so?

First, patiently to wait; St. James says, The Husbandman waits for the
precious seed till the harvest 1.
come: Though it be precious seed, the Husbandman casts it into the earth, he
is not discontent because he has not harvest next Week, but he is content to
let the winter, the frost and snow go over it; and so we must be content to
have many troubles between the hope of the reward, and the possession of it. We
must work in the vineyard of the Lord, and endure the heat of the day, and not
expect our penny till night. Mark how the Apostle would have those to walk who
have the hope of heaven, Romans 2. 7. To them, who by patient continuance in
well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life. Great
things are to be expected and waited for; If a man have a great venture at Sea,
that he expects some mighty profit by, he is content to wait two or three
years, because he thinks it will make amends for all: So in your way of
merchandising, if a man go and buy a commodity of five or ten shillings, he
lays down present money, but if the commodity come to a great sum of many
hundred pounds, he does but give something in earnest, the great pay is to come
many months after: so when men will bargain with God for their obedience to
have credit and esteem in the world, yea, those men that aspire after the
greatest things in the world, these are poor trifling matters, and God gives
them presently: but because the Covenant that is between God and Christ, and so
between Christ and us, is about great matters, and God intends to reward his
people with glorious things eternally in the Heavens, they have but the
first fruits of them for the present, and they must not expect the fullness of
them suddenly.

Great men have two kind of Servants usually, some servants that they hire by
the day, or the month, or the year, that they shall have so much wages, and so
their wages is paid them, it may be every night, or every week; other servants
have not their wages presently, but that which they serve for, is the
expectation of some great office or living that their Lord should give to them
after many years service, and therefore they go on in their service, though
nothing come presently. Here is the difference between the men of the world and
others, I speak of those who live the best lives who are not truly gracious;
they in some measure are the servants of God, they do God some service, only
such service as poor laboring men do that are hired in a great man's House, that
have their pay every week, or day; so you have your pay every day, you have
meat and drink, and the comfort of the creatures; but God has other greater
Servants, godly people, Christians, and though they have not so much pay
presently, as wicked men have, yet there are reversions, and some glorious
things that they expect hereafter, and therefore they go on patiently, though
for the present they have not so much as others. And you have no cause to envy
others: If there be two Servants in a great man's House, the one sees the poor
laboring man have his shilling given him, shall he envy him, and say, I have
served many years, and have not had a shilling? No, he does not envy him,
because he expects some great things: And so when you see the men of the world
have the great things of the world, do not envy them, because you serve God for
greater things.

Queen Elizabeth, she envyed the milk-maid when she was in prison, but if she
had known what a glorious Reign she should have had for four and forty years,
she would not have envyed her. Wait therefore patiently, because the things are
great, and the longer you wait, the greater they will be: as it was the speech
of the Son of an Emperor, says he, The longer the Cooks are preparing the meat,
there will be the better cheer, meaning, The longer he staid for the Empire,
the greater it would be; so go on in your way, wait patiently, the longer you
wait, the better it will be at the last: and it is sure enough, Christ is gone
before to take possession, and God never so wrought to make any thing sure, as
he has wrought for the assuring of the good in the Covenant of grace. Yet long
after it and desire it. In Romans 8. 21. it is said, The creature groaneth to be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, to come into the glorious liberty of
the children of God; and therefore we our selves should much more desire it,
and pant after that time, we should cry out with David, though with patience,
When shall I appear before God, the living God?

CHAP. LVI. Christians should live and dye as becomes heirs of such a glorious
estate.
SEcondly, learn, if there be such a glorious reward, 2.
to live and dye as becomes such glorious heirs: this is the Exhortation of the
holy Ghost unto us by St. Paul, in his Epistle unto the Thessalonians, As you
know how we exhorted, and 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12.
comforted, and charged every one of you that ye would walk worthy of God that
has called you unto his kingdom and glory: here is an exhortation, and in the
name of God a charge upon every soul that does expect to have the portion of it
in these great things, that they would walk worthy of God, who has called them
unto his kingdom and glory: it is a great charge to walk worthy of God, but to
walk worthy of God who has called us to his kingdom and glory, this is great,
but the life of a Christian must be thus. Now consider, what life have I? Is my
life such as may be said to be worthy of God, and that God that has called me
unto his kingdom and glory? Surely great things must be in the lives of Gods
people: people talk much of strictness, and preciseness, that they may be too
precise; what do you think must this life be that must be worthy of God who
has called us to his kingdom and glory?

It must not be a dead-hearted life, go on with a holy and heavenly
cheerfulness and courage in Gods ways: It becomes the children of the
Bride-chamber to be joyful: see that in any case you rejoice before the Lord;
comfort your selves and one another by these sayings. We belie the truth of
God, if we do not walk joyfully: Rejoice in this, that your names are written
in the Book of life; says Christ, they rejoiced that the Devils fell down
before them: If there were any thing in the world to be rejoiced in, one would
think they might rejoice in that, but Christ would not have them rejoice in
that, in comparison of this. Caesar when he was sad, he said to himself, Think
thou art Caesar, that that might take away Cogita te Caesarum esse.
his sadness; and so say I to a Christian, Think of your Crown and glory, let
your lives be such as may make it appear you have your portion in these things.
I may say to some, as Jonadab said to Amnon, Why art thou lean from day to day,
being the Kings Son? So may I say to every child of God, Why is thy heart so
troubled, and Why walk thou so dumpishly in the ways of God, being the King
of Heavens Son? Possibilities of heaven is enough to take away the sting of
afflictions, but having comfortable hope of these things, this should take away
even the sense of them, at least, so far as that they be no way disturbing to
us; Seneca says, That virtue does not Quo tendat, non quid passura sit,
cogitat. Sen. de gubeanat. mundi.
consider what it suffers, but whither it tends. It beseems them well enough,
but not you, it beseems Swine to follow the trough, but not the heirs of a
Kingdom. Plutarch tells of Themistocles, that he accounted it not to stand with
his state to stoop down to take up the spoils the enemy had scattered in
flight, but says to one of his followers, You may, for you are not
Themistocles. Thus may it be said to (...).
worldly spirits, You may be greedy of these things, for here is your portion,
your names are written in the earth, you are not the heirs of the kingdom.

Secondly, walk above the world, above all things that are here below, take
heed of ensnarling your 2.
hearts, and of too much mixing your selves with them. There is a generation
whose names are written in the earth, Ier. 17. 13. and it beseems them to look
after the things of the earth, because their portion is there, it is their All:
but Gods people have their names written in heaven, and therefore they should
not regard the things below as they do. Whosoever was free of the city of Rome,
might not accept of any other freedom in any other city; they counted it a
dishonor to the freedom of Rome, to take freedom any where else: So those that
are free of the kingdom of Heaven, should not seek to be free here, but they
should be satisfied with a mean condition here, and take heed they do not
entangle themselves too much in the things below.

Besides, those that have hopes of Heaven, they 3.
should labor to have their lives like to Heaven: It is that we pray for, that
the will of God may be done in earth as it is done in heaven: How is it done in
heaven? The Saints and Angels there do it fervently, universally, readily,
constantly, and therefore the Angels are called by the name of Seraphims, it
notes burning, because they burn with zeal for God; labor to conform your life
to the life of Heaven.

Again, labor to be much trading for heaven in this 4.
world, let there be much intercourse between you and Heaven, let your
conversation be in heaven, Phil. 3. 20. If a man intend to live in another
Country, he will have much traffic in that Country before he goes; and if
we believe we shall come to Heaven, let there be much trading that way. Our
conversations should be so in Heaven, as all the mercies we enjoy here should
raise our hearts to heaven. We read Exodus 25. that upon the Table of Shewbread
there was set a crown of gold. In those provisions that we have here for souls
and bodies, our hearts must be raised to that Crown of glory reserved for us;
for the Shewbread set before the Lord was to signify Gods provision for us,
and the dedication of our bread of all our provision to God.

Again, let us labor to increase heaven in our hearts, and to bring as much of
heaven into them as possibly 5.
we can.

And keep your selves in a continual readiness 6.
whenever God shall call you to such a glorious recompense of reward as this
is. It is said of Daniel, though he was in Babylon, he opened his windows
toward Jerusalem, he kept his heart in a readiness to go: So you should do,
keep your hearts in a heavenly frame ready for heaven, waiting upon the
Bridegroom with your lamps burning, that when he comes you may open immediately
to him. There is a difference between a wife that has been faithful to her
husband, and waits for his coming home, and another that has been unfaithful
to her husband, and has other lovers in the house when her husband knocks; if
her husband knocks, she does not go immediately, but there is shuffling up and
down, and she delays the time, till she have got the other out of the house;
but a faithful wife, she immediately opens; it is true, though the wife be not
unfaithful, yet if the house be not handsome, and things be not prepared, she is
loath to open: So Christians they have been dallying with their lusts, and their
hearts are out of frame, and they are loath to open to Christ; but we should
keep our hearts in such a readiness, as immediately to open to Christ, and to
be willing to dye.

And when we dye, to dye as heirs of such things, not to respect things below,
house or lands, or any thing here. We read of Pope Adrian, when he was to dye,
he laments his condition, because he was to leave all his delights and pompous
vanities, and cries out, O my soul, whither go thou? thou shall never be
merry more; he was loath to leave these things, because he did not know whither
he went; but a soul that knows what inheritance it shall have hereafter, it is
not loath to go hence: Many are loath to dye, because they have treasures in the
world, as those ten men said, in Isa. 41. 8. Slay us not, for we have treasures
in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and of oil; but a godly man is willing
to dye, because he has treasures in Heaven. Keep open the eye of faith,
exercise faith to see God that is now sending for his child home: And look
upon Christ as having that prayer granted, Father, I will that those whom thou
have given me be where I am: by faith you shall see Heaven opened, and the
crown prepared, and see God in his glory, that you may express cheerfulness of
heart in going to take possession of that glorious recompense of reward; behold
the Angels of God coming to take you up into Heaven. It was an expression of
the honor of one Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, that King John and his Nobles would
carry him to the grave; more honor shall the Saints have, for God to send his
Angels to convey them to that place of glory.

And further, let you spirits work mightily after Heaven; now when they draw
near to it, as the nearer any thing is to the center, the more strongly and
swiftly it moves; As a stone that falls down from a high place, it moves more
swiftly when it is nearer the ground, then when it was higher; so at death, the
soul is nearer its center, grace is changing to glory, and when grace and glory
is to meet, there must need be a mighty working of heart, and mighty shouts: As
it is reported of the Duke of Bulloin and his company, when they went to
Jerusalem, as soon as his company saw the high Turrets, they gave a mighty
shout, that the earth rang: and so when the soul sees the turrets of this
heavenly Jerusalem, and when you see your selves ready to go and possess it,
what mighty workings and shoutings of your heart will there be?

And when you are to dye, speak well of God, and of the ways of godliness to
all that are about you. Christians should now labor so to live, as there may
appear a mighty difference between their deaths, and the death of others;
whereas ordinarily such is the vanity and drossiness of the hearts of
Christians in their lives, as when they come to dye, they are so heavy and sad,
as if no such things were prepared for them. In 2 Pet. 1. 11. the Apostle
having exhorted them before to add one grace to another, and to give all
diligence to make their calling and election sure, says he, So an entrance
shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Christians should labor so to live, as when they
come to dye, they may not only have an entrance into the everlasting Kingdom
of our Lord administered unto them, but that they may have an entrance
administered unto them abundantly: Many make shift to get to heaven, but they
have not an entrance administered abundantly. As a Ship may make shift to get
into harbor, but with the Anchors lost, and Cables rent, and Sayls torn, and
the Masts broke; another Ship comes in with the Sayls up, and the Flags up, and
Trumpets sounding, and comes bravely into Haven; so much difference is sometime
between true Christians; some through carelessness, and unbelief, and sadness,
and sullenness of Spirit, although they make shift with much ado to get into
Heaven, yet so as their anchor of hope was even gone, and they had little or no
comfort at all; but those that have added one virtue to another, and have been
diligent to make their calling and election sure, they come to Heaven with much
glory and joy, and that should be our care so to live in adding one grace to
another, that when we dye our deaths may be glorious.

Yet further, from the consideration of this glory Use 11.
revealed, which God has prepared for his Saints, we are to draw this
meditation, If Heaven be so glorious, then we had need fill up the comfort of
our lives by doing and getting as much good as we can while we live here, that
we may as much as possibly we can recompense that which we suffer in the
staying from the possession of such glorious things reserved for us; when we
hear of such things as these are, we cannot but think in our selves, it were
better for us many ways to be in Heaven, this life is but a bondage to us while
we are absent from such things, and therefore we had need have something to
recompense this bondage; we had need do much good, and get much good, while we
live, to pay the charges of our lives; what a tedious thing is it to us to live
so much to sense as we must necessarily do here, when we are heirs of such
glorious things? if we do not do much good, and get much good here, what have
we to sweeten and recompense this tediousness? If a man be from home, and by
his absence suffers much loss of what he might have had at home, he is the more
diligent and careful in his journey to get something that may recompense this
loss; so it should be with us: It costs us dear (as I may so speak) to live in
the world, for it costs us the forbearance of such glorious things; if we fill
not up our lives with service for God, what have we to pay our charges to
countervail this that our lives here cost us?

CHAP. LVII. The great things of eternity to be much sought after.
THe last Use is an Use of Exhortation to all, now to set your hearts to seek
after these 12.
great and blessed things of eternal life that have been opened: O that now the
hearts of people that have been wandering after other things might be brought
in, and set upon eternal life and Heaven: Let every soul reason with it self:
Are there indeed such things to be had? has God such intentions to communicate
himself thus to mankind? And am I the man or woman that shall lose all this?
that shall never be partaker of this? O woe unto me that ever I was born! In
Luke 16. 16. The Law and the Prophets, says Christ, were till John, but since
that time the kingdom of God suffers violence: The Law and the Prophets did
but darkly reveal the things of the Kingdom of God, but St. John he did more
clearly reveal the things of that Kingdom, and since that time the kingdom of
heaven suffers violence: O that it might be said concerning any man or woman
that have heard this argument opened; since that time that the recompense of
reward was opened, the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence: Surely there
is strength enough in that which has been said to draw forth the heart with
violence after it. I remember Plutarch reports in Fugiendu^ est ad clarissimam
patriam ibi pater, ibi omnia Plotinus. apud August. lib. de Civit. 9. c. 16.
the life of Camillus of the Gauls, that after they had once a taste of the
sweet wine of the grapes that grew in Italy, they inquired in what Country
such sweet wine was, and after they understood where the grape of that wine
grew, they would never be at rest till they got to that Country where such
sweet and pleasant things grew. I have endeavored in the opening of this point,
to bring unto you some of the Clusters of Canaan, and some of that wine which
is to be drunk in the Kingdom of Heaven; now if you account it to be sweet and
good, let not your hearts be at rest till you come at that Country, till you
come to enjoy the sweet and good of that Country.

It is reported of one Adrianus, who seeing the Martyrs suffer such grievous
things in the cause of Christ, he asked what was that which caused them to
suffer such things; and one of them named that Text, Eye has not seen, nor ear
has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive what
is laid up for those that love God; and the naming of that Text converted him,
and had such an effect as made him to profess Religion, and so to profess it,
as to be a Martyr for it: You have not only one Text named, but many have been
used about this argument, let not all be in vain. We read in Mark 10. 17. of a
young man that came running, and kneeled before Christ, and asked him, Good
Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? O that God would move
the hearts now of some young ones, that hearing what eternal life means, they
may now come running to get part in it, that that activity and vigor of their
youth may be exercised and spent about this, What may I do that I likewise may
be partaker of eternal life, and of these glorious and blessed truths that are
here revealed? You that are in a poor condition in the world, that have little
here, here are great things for your hearts to make after, here are glorious
things that are as obvious for you ac for the greatest in the world; you cannot
expect to have great matters in the earth, but here you may expect to have
great matters. You that are old likewise, though you have not been acquainted
with the excellency of the Kingdom of God, now bless God that you may yet
further know more concerning it. If a man come to know more of an inheritance
that did befall him, or of any outward gain then before, he is glad that he
lived to that time; so bless God that you may know yet more concerning eternal
life before this life be at an end. What is it that your hearts are set upon?
There are none but their hearts are set upon some good that they apprehend to
be good; Now what is that good? Certainly there is an eminency of all good
contained in this.

It was a charge of God unto Baruch, that we read of in Jer. 45. ult. Seek
thou great things for thy self? Seek them not, for I will bring evil upon all
flesh, and that which I have planted I will pluck up: The argument runs thus,
Seek thou great things for thy self in any outward matter? do not seek them,
for I am about to bring evil upon my people, the time of public calamity is
coming, and do thou seek great things for thy self? But when we are about
this argument, the glory of the Kingdom of God, Do thou seek great things
for thy self? We cannot say, Seek them not: God would have his people seek
glorious things for themselves, seek them to the utmost that possibly you can:
So follow these things as not to be satisfied with any thing under these.

God would have his servants to be of such spirits, as though content with the
least mercies they do enjoy, Gods people are satisfied with no worldly good for
their portion.
to acknowledge themselves unworthy of them, yet not to be satisfied with the
greatest things in the world for their portion. What, will a reprobates portion
serve you? Certainly, the glory of the world, if you had it all, it were but
the portion of a reprobate. What, will a Dogs portion satisfy you? All the
things of the world are but Dogs meat, so the Apostle calls them in Phil. 3. I
account all things in the world as dross and dung, or dogs meat; and will (...).
this satisfy you? Is there nothing else for you to seek after? First seek the
Kingdom of God (says Christ) and the righteousness of it, let that be your
first endeavor: Strive to enter into the strait gate, though it be never so
strait, yet if it be the way unto life, and unto these things, strive to enter:
We have not spoken more then that is real. It is a saying of one, Neither
Christ, nor Heaven can be hyperbolized; Nec Christus, nec Coelum patitur
hyperbolem.
that is, there cannot be more said of the excellency of Christ, and of Heaven,
then it is in its self, and therefore do not think any thing that has been
spoken is an hyperbole, but a real expression of some little glimpse of the
glory of the recompense of reward.

It may be some of your hearts when you hear much of the wrath of God against
sin, and the dreadfulness of Gods displeasure, your hearts are ready to rise,
and belk, and these are hard things, and hard sayings, and who can bear them?
but now you have not heard so much concerning that, but you have heard of the
goodness of God, and of the glory of God, and of the riches of the grace of
God, and of the wonderful thoughts that God has for the everlasting good of
mankind, how do your hearts work now? Shall your hearts stir when you hear
Gods wrath, and when you hear of Gods grace shall not your hearts stir then? If
God does intend good to any soul, he will cause that soul to see into the
reality and excellency of these things, and that all things should be neglected
(in comparison) in seeking after these.

Consider that God has given unto you natures capable of these glorious
things; God might have made you worms or bruit beasts, and there would have
been an end of you presently, you had not been any way capable of these things;
but God has made you of such a nature, such creatures, as ye are capable of
the highest excellency that ever any creature that God made was capable of, and
therefore being of such a nature, of such a large extent, it concerns you to
seek after those things which might fill it; they are not little things that
can fill large capacities, now man's nature an immortal soul, is of a large
capacity; and when the time shall come that God shall discover to any soul what
it was capable of, how infinitely will it be confounded in it self, when it
shall know what poor things it sought after and minded? Men live here in the
world as though they were capable of no other happiness but meat, and drink,
and clothes, and such kind of things, as if there were no higher things that
concerned the souls of men. Heathens were mighty inquisitive what should be the
true happiness of man, they did think surely man was made for higher things
then those that are here, and there were mighty disputes about it what it
should be, there were fourscore Opinions that were amongst them about the
happiness of man; they did but beat the bush, God has given us Christians the
bird, and we have the Gospel that reveals glory, and immortality, and happiness
unto us.

The Heathens would have counted it a great good to have known wherein the true
happiness of man did consist: And those who had most wisdom did come near that
wherein we seek happiness, and yet wavered in their thoughts, but we are
assured of it, we have God himself revealing from Heaven, wherein our true and
utmost high good consists, and therefore if we should not seek after that
happiness which God tells us is happiness, but should follow our own ways
still, how just will our condemnation be.

Again, this is not the time that God will communicate much of himself in, and
therefore we must look beyond this life. It is a witty elegant speech Bernard
has, God reserves his new and best wine until afterward. Amongst the Latins
they call prosperous Res secundae.
things second things, because they are to be had hereafter, they are not the
first things. So true prosperity is not to be expected here in the first way of
Gods communication of himself to the creature, but in the second way, in the
life that is to come: If a man have good wine, he reserves it till the last; so
God reserves the riches of his grace, and the treasures of his goodness, his
best wine, till they shall come and drink with him in his own presence before
him continually.

And know further, that Christ has wrought hard to provide happiness for
mankind; and shall we neglect it? In his working for the glory of mankind,
and this happiness of the children of men, he sweat at it, and so sweat, as
clods of blood trickled down his flesh in the garden, though it were in the
winter time, and a cold night, and he lay upon the ground, and shall it now be
neglected by us? You that have neglected this all this while, who might justly
have had your reward amongst those creatures that are cast out from the
presence of God: yet know there is a possibility for that tongue of thine that
has been guilty of so many blasphemies, to be singing Allelujahs to the Lord,
and to the Lamb that sits upon the throne for ever. Who knows but that body of
thine that has been so intemperate, and but a sink of filthy lusts, may be
made glorious like the body of Christ? and what is it that God requires of you
for all this? Nothing but only to work his own work in you, and it is not a
dishonorable work, but a glorious work, that in which there is more excellency
then in any thing in the world: were it that there were no reward of godliness,
the very excellency of godliness it self, has more in it then the whole world:
but take godliness with that excellency which it has in its own nature, and
take it with its glorious end, and who would not come into this way? Many men
care not what base thing they do, so they may be a little regarded, but now to
have the highest reward that ever God will communicate to any creature, and
that for doing those things which are the highest honor for the present, this
would encourage any living to come into this way.

Alexander inviting many to a supper, he provided a Crown of a hundred and
eighty pound to be given to those that did drink most, and in that he did like
a Heathen; but though it was such a base work, and so dangerous to themselves,
yet there was one and forty that killed themselves with drinking to get that
Crown: Thus we may see the baseness of men's hearts, that to get a little honor
in the world, will not only do somewhat that is base, but the basest things of
all, and that although they be dangerous too. What shame and confusion will
this be, that any should do more for the things of the world, yea more for a
lust, then we shall do for Heaven? How shall we ever think to get Heaven, when
this may be said, You do not so much for Heaven and Glory, as many will do for
their lusts, for their filthy sins. I have read of the Panther, that it does
love the dung of man so much, as if it be hanged a height from it, it will skip
and leap up, and never leave till it have burst it self in pieces for to get
it, and that is the way they get that creature: we may apply it to the filthy
base lusts of men's hearts which are like dung, and yet so are many men set upon
them, that they will venture all for them, and labor after them, though they
burst themselves, and damn themselves eternally for them: what an infinite
shame is this, that men should be content to labor, and suffer so much for
their lusts, and that we should do no more for glory? If men do so much for the
things of the world, why should we be backward in doing for Heaven? How will
men endure the cutting off the members, and much pain for health and life, and
yet for this reward, and this inheritance, how little is done in the world?

Sorun, says the Apostle, that you may obtain, not a corruptible, but an
incorruptible crown: Those that run a race for a corruptible crown will be
temperate, and deny themselves in their diet, But we, says the Apostle, strive
for an incorruptible crown; therefore let all our ways be such as it may appear
to all the world that we are striving for an incorruptible crown, and that God
has shown us glory and salvation to draw our hearts more then any thing in the
world; and strive, for now by striving you may come to the reward, but if you
stay but a while, you must be eternally receiving the reward of sin, then
though you would do a thousand times more, God will not care for it; if then
you should say, Now Lord I will seek thy face, and do any thing thou will have
me to do, God will not then regard it. As one Lamachus a Commander said to one
of his Soldiers that was brought before him for a misbehavior, who pleaded, He
would do so no more; says he, No man must offend twice in war: So God will Non
licet in bello his peccare.
not suffer men twice to neglect the day of grace; if it be neglected once, it
is neglected for ever, if you lose this reward here, you lose it eternally; and
therefore now look about you to attain this here, that you may not cry out in
the anguish of your spirits hereafter, That God, and Christ, and Heaven are
eternally gone.

CHAP. LVIII. How the Recompense of Reward may be attained.
BUt what is to be done that we may attain to Quest.
this glorious recompense of reward?

I answer, Are your hearts serious in asking Ans.
this question? Do your souls ask this question indeed in the earnestness of
them? as they did, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? so as to be
willing to yield to whatsoever God shall reveal: If you have such a resolution,
know this comes from Heaven, and if it be followed to purpose, it will bring
you to Heaven: But for direction, if you would make your selves partakers of
this reward,

First, consider the infinite distance that is between I.
you and Heaven naturally. That blessed Martyr Mr. Hooper, though he was a
gracious man, yet he cried out, Lord, thou art Heaven, and I am hell; If he
cried out so, how much more may many of you, whose consciences may accuse you,
Lord, thou art heaven, but I am one not only that deserve hell, but that am
hell it self? What ever wickedness is in hell, is in every man's heart
naturally; when as any are cast into hell, certainly hell puts no new sin into
them, there is but the venting of that sin which was there before, and all the
wickedness of men's hearts that was restrained, is now let open: Now look what
infinite distance is between hell, and all this glory, and the glorious
thoughts of God for the salvation of a poor creature, the same difference is
between this glory and that condition a man is in naturally: O labor to see
this, and be convinced of this, and work this upon your hearts, what is that
reward that you do deserve, make your hearts truly sensible of that.

Secondly, it concerns us much, if we would not 2.
miscarry here, to acquaint our selves with the mystery of the Covenant of
Grace, for it is upon that your eternal estate depends more then any thing
else; only in the Covenant of Grace is revealed the counsels of God concerning
bringing mankind to eternal happiness, and how he will bring about this glory,
and without some knowledge of the Covenant of Life and Grace in Christ, all
that can be done in the world, can never bring any soul to Heaven; and that
soul is in a very good forwardness to eternal life, that is acquainted with the
Covenant of Grace.

Thirdly, consider what is the special sin that your 3.
heart is naturally most inclined unto, and you find the corruption of your
hearts vent it self most in, and look to that, take heed that be not your bane
in the conclusion, let there be a renouncing of that, or else all is to no
purpose, all your serving of God is nothing. St. Paul when he spoke concerning
his running the race, and attaining an incorruptible crown, says, I therefore
so run, not as uncertainly, and so fight I, as not one that beats the air; as
if 1 Cor. 9. 26, 27.
he should say, I hope my labors and endeavors after Heaven and this
incorruptible Crown shall not be in vain, as one that beats the air: How so?
because I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any
means when I have preached to others, my self should be cast away. He was
afraid of that body of his, wherein corruption did stir, and his giving way to
some bodily fleshly content that he found stirring in him should disappoint
him, and therefore says he, I keep down my body, in the Original (...)
it is, I beat my body black and blew, I club it down: his conscience was
convinced of Gods ways, but he felt the flesh and body of his working in some
sinful way, and his conscience began so far to reflect upon himself, as to
think if I do not look to this body of mine, I shall lose this incorruptible
crown, and I shall but beat the air, therefore says he, I keep under my body.
What shall St. Paul, such a glorious Apostle, so filled with the grace of God
as he was, have such thoughts, for fear he should labor after Heaven and the
incorruptible crown, as one that beats the air; what shall become of a
company of wretched creatures, that do nothing but satisfy the flesh, and
mind nothing but to give full satisfaction to the desires of the flesh every
way, their thoughts are after nothing else but to make provision for the flesh.
If you will not labor after heaven as one that beats the air, beat down your
bodies; if you do not beat down your bodies, there is little hope of the
salvation of your souls: it was St. Paul's care, let it be yours.

Again further, if you would have this recompense 4.
of reward, labor to unsnarl your selves from the creature, labor to get your
hearts loose and untangled from whatsoever is in the world, from all earthly
engagements. It is a speech that I have read of one Demades, when the Emperor
sent to his Countrymen of Athens, to give him Divine honor, and they were loath
to yield unto it, but consulted about it, says he, Take heed you be not so
busy about heavenly matters, as to lose your earthly possessions; that indeed
is the voice of a carnal heart, Let not me look after the high conceits of
heavenly matters as to lose my earthly possessions: but rather turn it the
other way, Take heed you be not so busy about earthly matters, as to lose your
heavenly possessions.

I have read of Antipater King of Macedonia, that when one presented him a Book
treating of happiness, his answer was, (...), I have no leisure; you have been
presented with Sermons, and now with a Book treating of heavens happiness, take
heed that no earthly entanglements so take your heart, that you should put off
all with such a thought, I must mind and follow my occasions; let no other
things take up your heads or hearts, that you should have no liberty to your
spirits to seek after these glorious things, or at least not so to seek after
them as becomes things of such a high and glorious nature as these are.

The Apostle in 1 Timothy 6. 19. says, They that will be rich, fall into a
temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition: they that set their hearts upon the creature,
they must have so much of the creature, they drown themselves in the creature.
As a man when he is drowning, he catches hold of any thing that is next him,
and by fastening upon that which is next him, he loses fastening upon that
which might save his life: So those that have their hearts engaged to the
creature, and resolve they must have so much of the creature, they are drowning
in perdition, and they catch hold upon that which is next them, some present
content and pleasure; and though something be cast to deliver them, they let
that go: We in the Gospel cast forth a line to you to help you from drowning,
(for every man naturally is sinking in perdition) but because your hearts are
set upon the creature, and engaged there, you falling down to the ground, catch
hold upon that which is next you, some contentment in the creature, and that
drowns you in perdition, and all our preaching is not available to such a soul
that has fastened it self upon any creature contentment here, you take not
hold on our line that we throw out to you, and so you drown in eternal
perdition, take heed therefore of all creature earthly engagements. 5.


Again, if you will obtain this recompense of reward, follow that Scripture,
and make much use of it, in Psalm. 73. 24. Guide me with thy counsel, and
afterward receive me to glory: Would you be brought to glory? Be willing to be
guided by the counsels of God: What do you think in your consciences are the
counsels of God concerning you? Take heed it be not said of you, as it was of
the Pharisees., They rejected the counsels of God: Never talk of hoping and
trusting in Gods mercy, if you neglect the counsels of God revealed in his
word: those counsels of his which were in his heart from all eternity, that
should be the way of bringing men to happiness. It is all one with that of the
Psalmist, in Psalm. 17. 15. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness,
I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness; as if he should say, I
look to receive satisfaction from the likeness of God, by beholding his face in
righteousness. Now I appeal to thee, Can thou behold the face of God in
righteousness? Are they such righteous ways as thou walk in, as thou can
look upon his face, and behold him with comfort? this is the way to come to
this recompense of reward, for so the Scripture says, God has called us to
glory and virtue; if you would come to glory, go on in the way of virtue.

Lastly, be willing to endure any difficulty, any 6.
hardship in the world; The stone will fall down to come to its own place,
though it breaks it self in pieces: so we, that we may get to our center which
is upward, though it be to break our souls in pieces, that should suffice us.
It is said of Cyrus, one day he set his Soldiers to hew wood, and to do hard
work; the next day he feasted them, with a great deal of delight and pleasure,
then he asked them, which day they had rather have? they said, the latter: he
says to them, If you would always have such days, you must be willing for a
while to strive with your enemies, and then you shall have the spoil, and
always have such merry days: and this he did to put heart into them. Shall
eating, and drinking, and a little pleasure here, put heart into men to suffer
hardships, to endure difficulties? How much more should the obtaining of this
glorious recompense of reward, put heart into us to endure any difficulty? We
read of the Devil, he came to Christ, and showed him all the glory of the
world, and said, Fall down and worship me, and all this will I give thee: but
here is another manner of invitation to worship God; God says to every man and
woman, Fall down and worship me, and all the glory of heaven will I give thee:
It was but the glory of the world that the Devil showed, and he could not give
it him; it was but the Devil that offered it, and it was by worshipping of the
Devil to get it; but it is the God of glory that has all glory at his dispose,
that calls to you this day to worship him, that is so infinitely worthy of all
worship; fall down and worship me, and not only the glory of this world, but
the glory of heaven, and of an incorruptible crown, will I give unto you, I
will make it sure to you. God does outbid all the world: when sin and
temptation comes to offerany thing to you, know that God out-bids them, they
cannot give that which will reach this. If a chapman come and bids for a
commodity, and another man comes and out-bids him, he carries it away: Has any
temptation come to draw away your hearts from God? God comes and out-bids all
temptations in the world, to that end you may come and fall down and worship
the Lord. O do not stick in the dross and mire of your filthiness still. I have
met with a Text in 1 Chronicles. 4. 23. which one interprets to be meant of the
baseness of people, that regard base things, rather then joining in
Church Communion with Gods people, God speaks of them in away of disgrace,
These were the potters, and those that dwelt, etc. When the people of God
should return to Jerusalem, they would still dwell with the King of Babylon,
and live amongst their pots, so they might have maintenance, rather then return
to Jerusalem, where the true worship of God was, their own country, and a type
of heaven, these are those base spirits. It may be applied to many, if they
live in places where they may follow their callings, make pots so as to get a
livelihood for themselves, and their families, rather then they would venture
any thing to join with the people of God, they would stay there. But how much
more base is it, for people still to stick in the mire and dross, rather then
to seek after these glorious things?

Wherefore for conclusion of the Exhortation; as St. John preached, and so
Christ himself, Repent, repent, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: So say I;
Repent, repent, break off sin, reform, for the kingdom of heaven, not only the
kingdom of the Gospel, and of grace, but the kingdom of glory is at hand. And
therefore what remains, but as we read in Romans 1. 18. the Apostle speaking of
the glory of heaven, says, There is glory to be revealed in us. We have had in
the opening of this Point, the glory of heaven revealed to us; the Lord grant
that the glory of heaven may be revealed in us. And thus we have finished the
Application of the glorious recompense of the reward of Gods people; the great
argument that encouraged, that strengthened, that confirmed Moses in this his
blessed choice.

FINIS.

