THE CASE OF Edward Bushel, John Hammond, Charles Milson and John Baily,
Citizens and Freemen of London, stated, and humbly presented to the Honorable
HOUSE of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THat they with Eight others, being Empannelled and Sworn of a Jury, for trial
of diverse Persons indicted for several Criminal and Capital Offenses, at the
Sessions of the Peace for the Jail-delivery, held at the Old Bailey for the said
City, in August, 1670. before Sr. Samuel Starling, then Lord Mayor of London,
and Sr. John Howel Sergeant at Law, Recorder, and other Justices there, were
(amongst other Prisoners) charged with William Penn, and William Mead.

And the said Jury having heard and considered the Evidence against the said
Penn and Mead, could not find them Guilty of the Indictment; thereupon they
were threatened and menaced by the said Mayor and Recorder to be Carted, and
Marks to be set upon them, to have their Throats and Noses cut, and be shut up
close Prisoners, and starved to Death, unless they would comply: The Recorder
adding thereunto, that he highly applauded the prudence and policy of Spain in
erecting the Inquisition, and that it would never be well in England, till some
such course were taken here.

Pursuant to which Threats, the Jury by their Order were presently shut up,
with express Command they should neither have Meat, Drink, Fire nor Candles,
which was observed to that Extremity, that they continued in this Imprisonment,
Saturday, Sunday, and Monday, the said Mayor and Recorder adjurning the Court
from day to day, supposing, that the Jury in time, rather then endure such
heavy pressures, would force their Consciences and comply with them.

But all this Illegal and Barbarous Usage proving in effectual; after the said
Jury had with unanimous Consent brought in their Verdict, finding the said
Prisoners not Guilty, which Verdict notwithstanding the said Court did accept
and Record, yet the said Lord Mayor and Recorder fined every of the Jury Men
forty Marks a piece, and committed them Prisoners to Newgate till Payment (of
whom eight paid their fines and were soon discharged.)

And the said four Jurors being Merchants and Tradesmen of London, after they
had been kept close Prisoners about three Months, to their very great Damage,
rather then to betray the Liberties of the Country, were enforced to their
extraordinary Charge to sue out their Habeas Corpus in the Court of
Common Pleas, which Court upon Return of the Causes of Commitment, and after
several Arguments as well there, as before all the Judges of England, consulted
in this Matter, occasioned by the great Opposition of the said Lord Mayor and
Recorder, did resolve and declare according to the unanimous Opinion of all the
said Judges, that they, the said four Jurors, were illegally Imprisoned and
unjustly fined; and thereupon discharged them from their Imprisonments and
Fines.

All which unjustifiable Proceedings by the said Lord Mayor and Recorder were
done after, and in Contempt of that memorable Vote of this honorable House of
Commons, made in the Case of the late Lord chief Justice Keeling, the 13th
December, 1667. declaring, that the Presedents and and Practice of Fining or
Imprisoning Jurors for Verdicts was Illegal.

And for that they, the said four Jurors do humbly apprehend it may be of
dangerous Consequence for any inferior Judicature, who are only to declare the
Law made, to assume to themselves an arbitrary Power of innovating and altering
the same, especially, when it does tend to the Violation and Overthrow of the
ancient and fundamental Laws of the Land, consisting in nothing more then in
the Liberty the Subjects have in the Freedom of Trials by their Peers. And
forasmuch as the said Jurors have not only been great Sufferers in their
Persons and Estates by the said arbitrary and illegal Imprisonment; but they do
also humbly conceive it has been and still is of very evil Consequence to the
Lives, Liberties and Estates of his Majesty's Subjects; for such Persons (who
have acted thus arbitrarily, directly contrary to and in Defiance of, not only
the Laws of the Land; but also of the foresaid Votes of the House of Commons)
to be still continued in Places of so great Trust and Authority, as Recorder,
Justices of Peace and Aldermen of the City of London, to the great Terror and
Discouragement of all Jurors in the Performance of their Duty. And forasmuch,
as they the said Jurors are discouraged by their Counsel to seek Remedy or
Satisfaction in the Courts of Westminster Hall for these so great Oppressions,
the Reason alleged, for that all the said Acts were done by the said Mayor
and Recorder in a Court of Judicature, against which no Action can be brought:
So that they are like to be left remidiless, unless relieved by this Honorable
House, unto whose Protection they do most humbly fly, and beseech their Justice
for their Relief.


