CAVSA DEI, OR AN APOLOGY FOR GOD.
WHEREIN The Perpetuity of Infernal Torments is Evinced, and Divine both
Goodness and Justice (that notwithstanding) Defended.

The Nature of Punishments in General, and of Infernal ones in Particular
Displayed.

The Evangelical Righteousness Explicated and Settled.

The Divinity of the Gentiles both as to things to be Believed, and things to
be Practiced, Adumbrated; and the ways whereby it was Communicated, plainly
Discovered.

By Richard Burthogge, M.D.

London, Imprinted for Lewis Punchard Bookseller in T^tnes in Devon, and are to
be sold by F. Tyton at the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet. 1675.

To the ever Honored JAMES ERISEY OF ERISEY IN THE COUNTY OF CORNWALL, Esquire.
SIR,
THere is no need we pass the Seas to seek a Country of Prodigies, our Own
will furnish Instances enough of Men that would be thought more Merciful than
God Himself; who not finding in their Hearts how to condemn themselves or
others to Eternal Pains, will not apprehend how God should find it in His. The
main Topics insisted on by those so tender dispositions in order to the
extinguishing the Everlasting Fire are, First, The Finity of Sin, that in its
own Nature cannot Merit an Infinite Punishment. Secondly, The Nature of
Punishment, which is for Castigation and Amendment, wherewith the Perpetuity of
it cannot consist. Thirdly, The almost Invincible Ten^ations that even
Christians (Weak and Impotent as they be) are surrounded with, which renders
the state of Absolute Perfection that only has the Promise of Blessedness,
Unattainable by most of them. And is it not Hard that Poor Souls so very easily
diverted from the Way to Heaven, (though they have it shown them,) should for
ever be condemned to such a Hell! Fourthly, The more Tremendous Circumstances
of the Heathen, that never heard of Jesus Christ the Way, Truth and Life, who
would be treated with Severity, with Rigor to Astonishment, if, for not
Proceeding in a Path which they were never Acquainted of, They should be Damned
to Eternal Torments. In a word, How can it comport with the Infinite Goodness,
Love, Kindness, and Fatherly Bowels, of which Almighty God does make Profession
to the world? And who can once think that Tender Mercies, that Compassions that
never fail, should suffer Him so quietly, without Remorse, without Pity, to
behold his Own Offspring Frying in Eternal and Unquenchable Flames!

You see Sir, how hard a Task that Person has, and in how large a Field he is
to Expatiate, that will Establish Perpetuity in Infernal Torments; which was
indeed the only thing designed by me at first, but I found my self in
Prosecution of that Design, instead of framing only one Discourse, if I would
not have that One Defective, Obliged to Digress into several. Wherefore, I
resolved to permit my Thoughts the liberty to range into the common Places of
Hell, of Punishment in general, of Humane Imperfection and the Evangelical
Righteousness, and of the Admirable Instances of Wisdom, Goodness and Justice
in Divine Transactions with the Heathen, as well as Jew and Christian; that
Assuming this Freedom, I might Display the Syntax, Harmony, Connection,
Concinnity of the Notions I Employ, and on which I Bottom, with greater
Perspicuity and Clearness, than otherwise I could have hoped to Effect it. In
all, the thing I Principally Aim at, is to manifest what plain and sober Reason
can do to solve Objections about them.

I call the Whole Apology for God, because the Arguments Alleged, are
Criminations, Insinuating Want of Goodness, Justice, Wisdom in the great
Creator, if really there be a Perpetuity in the Torments settled by Him; And no
Doubt, but when the Arguments are Accusations, to Dissolve and Satisfy Them,
is to make an Apology.

Little thought had I to have Engaged my self on This, or on resembling
Subjects, when I was Invited to it by a Letter from One from whom I as little
expected it; Who Reflecting on an Essay lately published concerning Divine
Goodness, imagines it Imperfect, for that I do not from the Infinite Divine
Benignity, conclude either the Nonexistence of Infernal Torments, or their
Finite Duration. As if God cannot be Just, if he be Good.

Such was the Rise of these Discourses, which I Dressed in the Habit of an
Epistle, Not to interest therein the Person who Occasioned it more than Others,
but for Form-sake, that the Notions I conceived, might enter in more easily
upon the Readers Mind; who, if entangled with the same thoughts, the same
Scruples it Obviates, may look on This Letter as One of Resolution, written to
Himself about Them.

As it is, I humbly make a Present of it to You. Not that I Presume to put the
Honor of Your Name upon it, with design to get Protection for Defects and
Weaknesses therein, that do not Deserve it; But to Proclaim to All the World,
that if Truth could need a Patron, I know None more Eminently Qualified to be
He, than your self; and None more Worthy of the Zeal and Highest Devotions of

SIR, Your most Humble servant, Richard Burthogge,
Bowdon, Aug. 25. 1674.
ERRATA
In the Text, p. 33. l. 22. r. -- (...): p. 35. l. 15. r.(...) --: p. 39. l.
25. r. And Albeit it: p. 44. l. 2. r. (...): l. 13. so r. and: p. 78. l. 23. r.
or laying of them on on those: p. 83. l. 10, 11. dele () p. 110. l. 2. (...):
p. 114. l. 8. r. Good: p. 124. l. 14. quae r. suae: p. 127. l. 13. for (...),
r. (...): p. 133. l. 26. r. owns: p. 138. l. 20. r. leges: p. 160. l. 15. r. as
is in us: p. 182. l. 13. dele and: p. 192. l. 19. r. (...): p. 228. l. 6. r.
tam: p. 276. l. 14. r. Fable: p. 316. l. 7. r. at Rome: p. 319. l. 17. him r.
it: p. 325. l. 15. (...) r. (...): p. 348. l. 16. r. Innovandi: p. 354. l. 1.
r. (...): p. 358. l. 10. r. Paulinum: p. 365. l. 16. r. conringi^s: p. 366. l.
2. dele the: p. 371. for Greece r. Egypt: p. 383. l. 18. r. is derived: p.
390. l. 26. r. was: p. 391. l. 6. r. cited: p. 392. l. ult. dele Ancient: p.
394. l. 9. r. (...): p. 398. l. 8. r. Sapo^rs: p. 410. l. 20. r. their
premises: p. 414. l. 10. r. (...).

In the Margin p. 266. r. Gazaeus: p. 275. r. Pimand. p. 299. after infra add
page 383, 384. p. 307. r. secunda: p. 328. r. 374. p. 347. r. Ovav. p. 384. r.
Diction.

To his much Honored and Worthy Friend Richard Burthogge Doctor of Physic.
Honored Sir,
I Lately met with a Discourse of yours: both the Subject and Title of it, as
well as the Authors name invited me to a perusal. What you designed in that
Essay, I think you have very well performed: But I confess I expected more than
I found, and I believe such a mind as yours, can both enlarge and improve the
subject.

Without doubt it is true what you suggest, that it is a Satanical illusion,
That God Rules by will; that he has no consideration of his creatures comfort,
but only of his own Glory; that he made the greatest part of men to damn them,
and triumph in their ruin; and that he cruelly exacts impossibilities, and
obliges men to come, when yet he knows' they cannot.

But Sir, they are not Atheists, but men of great Devotion, and in the last Age
admired for their parts, and piety, that confidently asserted such things as
the Christian Doctrine. These are not only the Dogma's of the Hobbists, and
Mahometans, but of Gentlemen of the Geneva Twang; and therefore whatsoever an
Atheist may be in his practice, according to these principles, he is
speculatively Orthodox and Godly. I suggest this, because in your making the
Atheist to personate -- you know whom, you make too severe a reflection upon
either their Learning or their Religion.

Since (Sir) you have been pleased so happily to enter upon so good and
gracious a subject, might it not be worthy your consideration to give an
account How it is consistent with the Divine Goodness to inflict infinite and
eternal Punishments for finite Transgressions?

Punishment (according to the Notion we have of it) is either for the Good of
the whole, or of the part, and it is inflicted not to torment the Criminal, but
either to amend him, or the society of which he is a member, that both may
enjoy the comforts, and the sweets of it: But what of good in everlasting
Punishment is there to either of these? or how does it agree with the Notion of
Infinite Goodness according to your own description?

Not to urge, that the most that are Christians, lie, and live under such odd
circumstances, that they are very near in impossibility wholly to subdue and
suppress the influences of sense, and yet must they be plagued or punished with
unspeakable and eternal tortures?

How much more dismal and tremendous does it look that those People in America,
Japan, China, Lapland, etc. that live under an unavoidable ignorance (I mean
morally so) that yet these poor creatures for what they cannot help, shall be
cast into Everlasting Darkness, and sorrows, and that there are no reserves for
their acting for a happiness they have no notice of, or very little, or if they
have, yet are ignorant of the proper methods to attain it? How agrees this with
Infinite and Eternal Goodness? A return to such an Enquiry in order to a
farther explication of Divine Goodness would do a great deal of service to the
Religion which we own. Some such thoughts as these have disturbed mine about
the received and common Faith of future punishments; and if ever your
inclinations lead you to a second Edition of yours, some Considerations about
such an Objection may not I think be impertinent.

I hope I need not beg a Pardon for this trouble from a person that pleads for
so much Goodness: but question not but you will heartily entertain and construe
this bold offer of

Your real Friend and Admirer, W. A.

CAUSA DEI, OR AN APOLOGY FOR GOD.
SIR,
ALthough I am not so vain as to flatter my self into a conceit, that either
the first or the second Apprehensions of All, or of Most are like to be as
partial in my Favor, or Candid, as a Generous and Noble friends: Yet to obey
you, and to acquit my self of some part of what I owe you for your Kindness to
my former Discourse, and for your Civility to me, I am at last resolved to
Expose Another to Mercy; well Assured that whatever Entertainment Ruder hands
may give it, It shall receive in Yours, and in those of worthy Persons, none
but what is Fair and Equitable. And this is all it desires. Which that you may
afford without Repugnance, I must oblige you to consider, that if you do not
find in this Essay, no more than in the Former, the Gratification and Delight
that Novelty in things is wont to bring with it, you ought not to impute it
either as a Fault to the Author, or as a Defect to the Work, but to ascribe it
purely to the Fullness and Riches of your own Mind; it being that alone which
renders you incapable of such agreeable Surprise and Pleasure, as not a Few
Resent in what appears New to them, because indeed there can but little seem
so to one of your Endowments and Knowledge. But what talk I of things New: For
as to my first Essay, whosoever shall but give himself the trouble to Remind
the Method I employed therein, will easily Determine I never had design of
innovating new Notions, seeing if I had, I could not hope to evidence them in
the ways I there proposed (to do it) either from the Scriptures, by which I
was to regulate my self in all I said, or from the Philosophers. You may
believe I only courted Truth, and that I resolved to express my self in common
Notions, and to common sense, in Reasons that were suitable to Mankind; fully
Persuaded, that the things I treated on were of so ample, and so large a
Nature, that no Arguments, no Notions of Scholasticks, or of any other private
Faction, Party, Sect, or Division of men, would ever Adaequate, and Suit, and
fit them. Notions deduced from common sense, are only capable of Adjusting
things of common Concernment. And if I my self have any regard for these
Conceptions, which have had the Fortune to entertain the World with Variety of
Discourse, it is only for their plainness and facility, because I take them
generally to be such as every body that attends, will think he had the same
before, and that he never thought otherwise: Which if they were not, I should
be very much inclined to suspect them False, since I am apt enough to think it
to be as true of Truth, as of the God of Truth, that it is not far from any of
us, if we will but feel and grope after it. Certainly those Conceptions are not
most likely to be truest, which are most elaborate, and farthest fetched; but
which are easiest and most natural. Truth lies not so deep in the Well, as
many (with Democritus) think, and who thinking so, do often overlook it.

And having made you this Apology for the Plainness of my first Essay, I hope I
need not add, that in this second you are not to expect Profound, Uncommon,
Deep, Elaborate Notions, but Easy, Natural, Sensible, Plain and Obvious Ones,
[such as whoever reads, may comprehend] in what I shall rejoyn to your Letter.
which, that my Reply unto it may be the more distinct and orderly, I shall
distribute into three Parts, and so proportion and adjust my Answer; of which

The First contains matter of Reflection on Others.

The Second, matter of charge on Me.

The Third, matter of Exception, or Argument against Divine Goodness.

Of these in Order.

And first concerning the first Head, matter of Reflection on Others, These are
not only Dogma's of the Hobbists, and Mahometans, but of Gentlemen of the
Geneva Twang.

And here I beg pardon for disowning that knowledge you impose upon me,
concerning worthy Persons of the Geneva Persuasion; (for I presume, you mean
Geneva Persuasion by Geneva Twang, a term I profess I do as little understand
in any other sense, as I believe it not to be Canonical or Received in this.)
For I know not any under that Notion so forsaken of their Wits, or their
Religion, as in terms to Assert, God Rules by Will, that he has no
consideration of his Creatures comfort, but only of his own Glory; that he made
the Greatest part of men to Damn them and triumph in their Ruin, and that he
cruelly exacts Impossibilities, and obliges men to come, when yet he knows they
cannot.

But, if there are any under that, or other Notions, who affirm and assert such
things, (though properly I may not call them Atheists) and indeed it were a
Contradiction in the Adject so to do) yet I think, I shall not be Uncharitable
in believing that they that are none, have made many; since I know not any more
effectual way of inclining and disposing men unto Denial of the Being of God,
than to Represent and Paint him out to them, in Idea's not agreeable to common
Reason, nor Sense. You may sooner make them believe themselves to be no men,
than that there is such a God. They that have been constantly told that
Contradictions cannot be, and that God himself can never make them be, will
very hardly be induced to believe, that God himself is, if the very Notion they
are taught of him be a contradiction. And who can reconcile the Roughness of
these. Expressions of the Absolute and Tyrannical Empire of God, to those other
softer ones of his Goodness and Kindness, and Tenderness for men? Certainly,
the Will of God by which he does all things, is not absolute, and mere Will,
but (...), Counsel of Will; and (...) Good Will, Good Pleasure. And thus all
men should speak.

True it is, that all do not, for some, especially (the) Moderns, in
Vindication and assertion of Divine Dominion and Sovereignty, have biassed too
much to one Extreme, using terms sounding not a little harsh in mild and
temperate Ears: as others on the contrary, in contemplation and assertion of
Divine Goodness and Clemency, have also done to the other. The Reason of men's
running to extremes in this matter, and of their aberration from the mark and
scope to which they should direct their thoughts, is, that they look on God
abstractly, under one or other Attribute, whereas they ought to consider him in
all his Attributes together; and all these, in all their several and respective
Aspects, as they have a mutual Influence upon, Concernment with, and Respect,
Order, and Habitude unto each other. For such an Agency on one another, and
such a Complication and Concernment have the Attributes in God, that it is as
true of them in their Connection in the Godhead, as of the Persons of the
Trinity, that One is in Another, or rather, that they are together in God, so
as that one receives some modification (as it were) and some respect from the
other. You may believe of all the other Attributes, in their mutual and
respective Aspects, what I shall instance but in One, I mean Divine Goodness,
which as it is complicated [for Example] with alike Greatness; so it receives,
a Character therefrom, and must be suitably deferred to. Thus David, there is
mercy with thee that thou may be Feared; Mercy, that thou may be feared;
and therefore God is to be feared for his mercy, because he is as Great, as
Merciful; and so Moses, Fearful in Praises; Fearful Objectively and Passively;
God is to be feared while we praise him, and for this reason, because he is
Almighty as well as Beneficient, Dread Majesty as well as Gracious, and
consequently, not only the Object of our Love and Praise, but of our Fear and
Dread. We ought not too abstractly to consider God under One Attribute, without
reflecting on him under others, for we must rejoice with trembling; while we
Rejoice in his Goodness, we must also Tremble at his Greatness. He is Good, and
He is Great also.

Concerning the second head, matter of Charge on me. -- But Sir they are not
Atheists, etc.

And so much for the first part of your Letter, and in return to the second; or
as to those Reflections you suggest me to intend, in making the Atheist
Personate you tell not who; I utterly disclaim them, and profess with all
imaginable clearness and sincerity, that though I know a sort of persons (far
enough from being Atheists) that do argue against others, in terms somewhat
resembling some of those wherein I dress mine, yet I was not guilty of a Design
of so much weakness, as in what I said to Reflect on them for that as such. I
am free to say of all Reflection in the Present matter, as some are wont to say
of far fetch'^ Jests, that he alone does make the Reflection, that can
understand it to be One. For my part, I abhor Reflections and Hard words, as
neither Philosophical, nor Civil, nor Christian. Nor did I introduce the
Atheist to personate another, but to speak for himself. But while we are
mentioning Reflections, give me leave to ask, if you your self reflected not on
Gentlemen of the Geneva Twang, while you were yoaking them with the Hobbists
and with the Mahumetans.

Concerning the third dead; point of Argument, or Exception against Divine
Goodness.

And having (as I hope) in what I have offered, fully vindicated my self from
all that sinister Interpretation you Insinuate me subject to, I am now
according to the Order you observe in your Letter, obliged in the Third place
to vindicate Divine Goodness, from those Exceptions that do seem to lie against
it, in relation to Eternal Punishment.

Which that I may do the more Distinctly, and to your full contentment, I will
Reduce the Arguments you Urge about it, to four heads.

The First. The seeming improportion of Infinite and Eternal Punishments to
Finite Transgressions. The Second. The Incongruity of Perpetuity in Punishment
unto the Ends of Punishment. The Third. The Odd and Unaccountable circumstances
of most Christians. The Fourth. The more Tremendous Ones of ^eathens.
Of these in order, and first to the first Argument, the seeming improportion
of Infinite and Eternal Punishment to Finite Transgressions.

-- Give an account (you say) how it is consistent with Divine Goodness to
inflict Infinite and Eternal Punishments for Finite Transgressions.

And here, you will give me leave to Awaken in your thoughts an Observation,
which no question you have made your self long ago, that Opinions and other
Motions of our Minds, are as often the Result of Constitution and Complexion,
as of Reason and Judgment. For That Consideration in a person of a tender,
sensible and compassionate Temper (such as your own) is sufficient to account
to any that Reflects upon it, for the Difficulty he may find his Thoughts to
make, to conceive it consistent with Divine Goodness, That Infinite and Eternal
Punishments should be inflicted on the sinner, but for Temporal and Finite
Transgressions.

But for your fuller satisfaction in the present Scruple, and an Impregnable
and clear Assertion of Divine Godness, as well as Justice (which also is
concerned) from all the Ignominious Apprehensions under which they seem to lie
in this Matter, I shall here particularly Evidence, First, That it has pleased
God to order and appoint for sin, Infinite, or Everlasting Punishments and
Torments, to be inflicted Hereafter. Secondly, That there is not any Inequality
or Improportion between the Punishment ordained, and the Sin, but a great
Equality and Proportion. Thirdly, That it is a great Instance of Divine
Benignity and Goodness to ordain Eternal Punishments, and to threaten men with
them, as a suitable means in order to their Reformation in the present World,
and to their salvation in the future. Fourthly, That it being Goodness to
Ordain the Punishment, and to threaten men with it, in order to the compassing
those Good and Gracious Ends upon them, It is no Want of Goodness, no more than
it is Injustice, to Inflict it on the Obstinate and Irreclaimable, on whom these
Good Designs are lost and defeated.


Of these in Order.

And First, That it has pleased God to order and appoint for sin not only
Temporal, and Momentany, but Infinite and Eternal Punishments, and that he
threatens men with them, is a great Truth; such an One as is so fully settled in
the Holy Scriptures, that I Admire how any who Pretend to read these, can make
any Q^estion of it. For what expression can be more significant and full, than
that of John? that the Blessed Jesus, when he once has gathered ^all his Wheat
into his Granary, (...) burn up the chafe with Unquenchable Fire; Alluding in
it (likely) unto that of Isaiah, their worm shall not dye, neither shall their
Fire be quenched. Nor is that of Jesus Christ himself, in the Form of the
Sentence (hereafter in the day of Judgment) to be pronounced on the Wicked,
less Pregnant, Depart from me ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. And as full as either, is this of our great Apostle, that
the Lord Jesus shall hereafter be Revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels,
in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them who know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who (says he) shall be punished with
Everlasting Destruction, from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his Power. Everlasting Destruction, (...), the same word to show the
Everlastingness of that Destruction as to show the Everlastingness of God
himself: It is here (...) Everlasting Destruction, and otherwhere, it is (...),
the Everlasting God. I know (...) sometimes used to signify a Duration that is
not Everlasting; but you see it also used to signify One that is: And the
Subject Matter must determine the Sense.

And who can once Question the Perpetuity and Everlastingness of Future
Punishments, that seriously considers the Greatness and Infinity of the Wrath
that shall inflict them? They are to be the Issues of the Utmost Wrath of God,
and therefore are not simply called Wrath, but Wrath in the Day of Wrath; Men
treasuring up unto themselves infernal Torments, being Affirmed in the Sacred
Writings, to treasure up Wrath unto themselves against the Day of Wrath.

And Judge how great a Wrath that is, since all Resentments in the heart of God
proportion and adjust him? Without Question, whatever is in God, is in him
according to the Vastness and Capacity of God; so that seeing God is absolutely
Infinite in Being, and also is Immutable and Unchangeable, Wrath and Hatred, as
well as Love and Good Will, as they exist in him, are also so. The Wrath of the
King is as the Roaring of a Lion; what then is the Wrath of the King of Kings!

It is true, the Anger of Almighty God is in the present Dispensation trusted
in the hands of Jesus Christ, [ All Judgment is committed to the Son] and
therefore for the present, since He, who has the letting out of Wrath, is
partaker of the Flesh and Blood of the Brethren, and so of kin to us, no wonder
if it be let out according to Humane Measures, and with some consideration, and
respect for man; which yet hereafter in the World to come, when things shall be
no longer in a Mediators hands, but God himself who is inexorable, and
inflexible but in his Son, shall immediately be All in All, and do All in All,
is not to be presumed or hoped. So that though Divine Wrath break not out on
sinners altogether in this World, yet in another it will. There is a Day of
Wrath, and of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God.

Here perhaps it may be offered, that Jesus Christ is so invested in the
Government of things, that he has not only the managery of them before the day
of Judgment, but is also to conclude the Scene in it, and consequently that
the Sentence then to be pronounced, since it is to be so by a man, will be past
on men with some allay and abatement. But it must be minded, that though the
Son of man shall Judge the World, yet that he shall come to do so (...), in the
Glory of his Father, or in Divine Majesty; as who would say, that when he
Judges, He will lay aside those Humane considerations and Respects he had
before, and as he appeared more like man in all Precedent Transactions, so that
He will show himself like God in this last. Beside, He will immediately resign
the Government, as soon as he has passed sentence; and (as I noted before) then
God shall be All in All, so no Mutation, no Alteration (after that) of States
or Things.

I confess, Philosophy as clear and quick-fighted as she was in other Articles
of Christian Doctrine, was but obscure and dimm in This. For though she saw a
day of Judgment, and Rewards and Punishments in the Future Life, for whatever
should be done in the Present, as is evident not only in Plato, both in the
Story of Erus in his Rep. and in that fabulous tradition of which in Gorgias he
makes Socrates Relater; but also in Plutarch, in his Consolation to
Apollonius, and in his Golden Treatise of Divine deferring of Punishment. So in
Seneca, in Iamblicus, and in many other of the grave and ancient Philosophers.

Yet for want of Understanding of the Interest that Jesus Christ has in Things
Now, and by consequence, unhappily mistaking in taking measure of the
Distribution of Rewards and Punishments hereafter, by what is at present; She
saw not their Eternity and Infinite duration. For whoever reads Plato in his
Book of Laws, cannot doubt of his Opinion in the matter; Plutar. de iis q. tar.
^ Number. co^rip.
nor is Plutarch less plain, who in the Fable of Thespesius of Soles, expressly
tells us, that Infernal Punishments are Purgatory and Medicinal, Clem. Alexand.
Str^w. l. 5.
as Ephesius also thought the (...) or Infernal Fire to be. And withal, that
there is a certain Term set for their Duration and Continuance, which expires,
when the soul is fully cleansed, purged and Refined by them, from all Infection
of Matter, and all its Filth. Finis autem (faith he) and terminus tormentorum
ac purgationis existit, quum concreta exempts est labes, Pl^t. de iis qui tard.
a Number. cor.
animaque splendida and ab omnibus ma^ulis and labe reddi^ur pura. This was
Plutarch's Opinion of Infernal Torments, and Seneca can own no other, as will
appear hereafter, when we shall show his notion of Punishment.

Yes, Virgil. apud Lactant. Instit. l. 7.6.22.
and if we will believe Virgil in the Eloquent Lactantius, it was in his time a
General Tradition (for he but Relates what he himself had heard, sit mihi fas
audita loqui,) That the Damned Spirits, after they have suffered in the
Infernal Gulf a thousand years, the Punishments inflicted on them (for their
sins) are at the expiration of the said Term, to be sent to Bethe, there to
take a Cup of Oblivion or Forgetfulness. And having drunk there their Fill,
Benumbed with a Mortal Sopor, and consequently Irrecoverably losing and
forgetting All they did, or suffered before, are then Restored to a new
Condition, and Readmitted into Heaven, where they live again in all Felicity
and Happiness, till not contented with it, but Longing to make another Trial of
their Fortunes here below on this Terrestrial Stage, they be accordingly
disposed into Proper Vehicles, and (so) Reappear in Our World to expiate that
Folly and Weakness of leaving the Other. This is the Round. A Revolution and
Hypothesis to which the Origenian is so like, that I believe it a Daughter; and
so believed St. Augustine, Aug. de Ciuit. D^i, l. 11.6.23.
who mentions and confutes it as Origen's. Again, who feeth not in this
(Hypothesis) That Lethe, that Fiction of the Poets, Answers to the State of
Silence, which some Learned men improve, and stand upon so much in Their's! I
lay it down as certain, That Lethe is the State of Silence. But let Maro speak
himself.

Has omnes ubi mill ro^am volvere
per annos,
Lethaeum ad flvuium Deus; evoca^
agmine magno:
Scilicet immemores supera ut convexa
revifant:
Ru^sios and incipiant in corpore velle
rever^i.
Again,
O pater anne aliquas ad coelum hin^
ire putandum est
Sublimes animas, iterumque adtarda
reverti
Corpora: quae lucis miseris tam di^a
cupido?
This was the Old Hypothesis; so Dark were former Ages: Yes so dark were former
Ages in the Point of Death Eternal, or of the Perpetuity of the Punishments in
the other World, that before Christ, they seemed scarce at all to Understand
it. This (I take it) is the meaning of the great Apostle of the Gentiles, when
in the first Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, he says, the Wrath of God
is Revealed from Heaven; namely, that the Light of Nature, by which I
understand the Catholic Tradition of the World, as well as common Reason, did
not manifest the Perpetuity of infernal Torments, but that before the Preaching
of the Gospel, which is a Revelation of the Mind of God from Heaven, men as
little apprehended the Wrath of God for sin, in the Duration and Eternity
thereof, as they did the Righteousness of God, for Salvation from it. It is the
Gospel brings both Eternal Death, and Eternal Life to Light. This Knowledge
is an Effect of the Light of Revelation, and not of the Light of Nature. The
Wrath of God, as well as the Righteousness of God, is revealed from Heaven.
Oppositorum eadem est scientia.

But yet as clear a Revelation as there is Now from Heaven in the Gospel, of
Eternal Wrath on Sinners, as the Philosophers before ignor'd it, so there are
many Christians since, not only Origin and those who follow him, but also
others, who make a scruple to admit it: concerning whom and their Dogmata,
together with the Censure of the Church on Origin for this Conceit, you have
the Excellent St. Augustine in a Chapter of his Treatise of the City of God,
Aug. de Ciu. dei, l. 21. c. 17.
designedly discoursing in these terms. Now I must have a Gentle disputation
with certain tender hearts of our own Religion, who think that God, who has
justly doomed the Damned to Hell fire, will after a certain space, which his
Goodness shall think fit for the merit of each man's guilt, deliver them from
that torment. And of this Opinion was Origin in far more pitiful manner, for
He held that the Devils themselves after a set time expired, should be loosed
from their torments, and become bright Angels in Heaven, as they were before,
but this and other of his Opinions, chiefly that Rotation, and Circum-volution
of misery and bliss, which he held, that all mankind should run in, gave the
Church cause to pronounce him Anathema, seeing he had lost, etc. But to Return.

Thus Infinite Eternal Punishments are (you see) ordained for Sinners. But of
the Nature of them, and where they are Inflicted, as I cannot hold my self
obliged to discourse here at large, so I shall not; Only thus much I will say,
that Hell, it notes not so much a Place, as a State; and yet in regard that
that State must needs be in some Place, I will offer somewhat, first, as to the
Place, and then, as to the State, or (if you please) the Kind and Nature of the
Torments of Hell.

For the Place: The old Theologists among the Heathen (if we may believe
Macrobius) before Philosophy was Extant, esteemed the Body Hell, and that the
Soul descended into Hell, when first it came into the Body: Antequam studium
philosophiae (says he) circa nature inquisitionem ad tantum vigoris
adolesceret, Macrob. in Some. Scip, ^. 10.
qui per diversas gentes autores in constituendis sacris ceremoniarum fu^runt,
aliud esse inferos negau^runt, quam ipsa corpora, quibus inclusae animae,
carcerem foedum tenebris, horridum sordibus and cruore patiuntur.

And Basilides that conceited Heretic, as also the Marcionists before him,
held the same Opinion, that Souls that had committed sin in another Life, did
come to satisfy and suffer for it in this; Than which (as a Father tells us)
nothing could be said with more Extravagance and Folly. Lactant. de falsa sap.
c. 18.
Quae ignorantia effecit, ut quosdam dicere non puderet, idcirco nos esse
natos, ut scelerum poenas lueremus, quo quid delirius dici possit, non invenio.
Ubi enim, vel quae scelera potuimus admittere, qui omnino non fuimus? Nisi
forte credemus inepto illi seni, qui se inpriori vita Euphorbum fuisse mentitus
est.

But some of the Platonists (for, as the lately mentioned Macrobius informs us,
there were of three Opinions concerning it among them) affirmed that the Place
of Hell was all that space between the Moon, or (as they Loved to speak) the
Ethereal Earth and This; the Description whereof, as I received it from the
Author, because it may afford an Entertainment to the Curious and Inquisitive,
I will represent at large out of Him. Macrob. in Some. Scip. c. 11.
Inferos autem Platonici non in corporibus esse, id est, non a corporibus
incipere, dixerunt, sed certam mundi ipsius partem Ditis sedem, id est, Inferos
vocaverunt. De loci vero ipsius finibus inter se dissona publicarunt, and in
tres sectas divisa sententia est. Alii enim mundum in duo diviserunt, quorum
alterum facit, alterum patitur. Et illud facere dixerunt, quod cum sit
immutabile, alteri causam and necessitatem permutationis imponit: Hoc pati,
quod per mutationes variatur. Et immutabilem quidem mundi partem a Sphaera quae
aplanes dicitur, usque ad globi lunaris exordium. Mutabilem vero a luna ad
terras usque dixerunt. Et vivere animas dum in immutabili part consistunt,
mori autem cum ad partem ceciderint permutationis capacem. Atque ideo inter
Lunam terrasque locum mortis and inferorum vocari, ipsamque Lunam vitae esse
mortisque confinium, and animas inde in terram fluentes mori, inde ad supera
meantes in vitam reverti, nec immerito existimatum est. A Luna ^nim deorsum
natura incipit caducorum, ab hac animae sub numerum dierum cadere, and sub
tempus incipiunt. Denique illam Aetheream terram physici vocaverunt, and
habitatores ejus Lunares populos nuncupaverunt, etc.

But whatever this Macrobius tell us of the Platonists: Certainly, according to
Plato himself, to most of the Fathers, and to the subtle Schoolmen, the Place
of Hell (which, as these last affirm, must be as far as possible from that of
Heaven) is subterranean, and near the Center: Of which in Plato's Phaedo, we
have a large Description, not only in respect of all the Punishments and
Torments in it, but of the several Limbi and Prisons. 'Twould be too long to
repeat what he says of it. lamblicus in a place of his Protrepticks hints the
same Opinion. Praestantior quippe (says he) anima cum diis habitat, Iambl.
Protr^p. cap. 13.
and circum circa coetum profectionem suscipit, melioremque finem assequitur.
Quae autem injusta opera contigit, impioque opere atque impietate oppleta fuit,
ubi ad loca judicii subt^rranea venerit, aequam justamque poenam consequitur.
Quorum causa omnia faciend^ sunt, ut interea, dum vivimus, virtutis
prudentiaeque participes simus. And what other thing does that of Plutarch
intimate -- Sed summa duntaxat Terrae Sole illuminantur: Plutarch. de prim.
frig.
Interiora Caligo, Chaos, Orcus nominantur. Ac profecto Erebus ille terrenarum
est tenebrarum Obscuritas.

Now of the three Opinions mentioned, the Holy Scripture seems to some to
favor that most, which Persuades the Air (to be) the Place of Hell; for it is
in Tartarus, or in the Air the Demons are imprisoned in the Chains of
Darkness; and the Devil, who is called the Devil of Hell, is styled in Holy
Writings, the Prince of the Power of the Air, or as some translate it,
consistently enough with this Opinion, the Prince of the Power of Darkness. I
say consistently with this Opinion, since it is the Air that is by Many
Ancients [as well Poets as Philosophers] asserted the darkest and obscurest
thing in Nature, atqui ne Poetas quidem latuit (says Plutarch) Aerem primo
^enebrosum, Plut. ubi supra.
etc. and so Phornutus, Phornut. de Not: Deor.
At postremo Animas accipientem Era (...) vocarunt ob Tenebras, (ut ipsi
quidem censebant) quum pro^sus nobis disparuerint, qui eo sub terram
concesserunt. So conformably to them does Peter speak, when in the second
Chapter of his second Epistle, he says God did Tartarize the Angels in Chains
of Darkness, or put them in Chains of Darkness in Tartarus; or as we translate
it very well, Imprison them in chains of Darkness. For Tartarus is the Prison
of Justice, so Socrates in Plato's Gorgias, whence Plutarch had it in his
Treatise de consolatione ad Apollonium -- qui vixisset injuste and impie is in
vindictae ac justitiae Carcerem, quem Tartarum appellant, abiret. And this
Tartarus is in the Air. So Hesiod in Plutarch, Proinde ex frigore Tartarus
appellatus est, Pl^t. de prim. frig.
Quod Hesiodus it a declarat, Tartaron aereum.

But though the Scripture seem (to some) to favor this Opinion most, that Hell
is in the Air, yet there is a Text which looks fairly for the more received
that it is Subterranean, namely that of Job. 26.5. Not indeed as our Translation
(scarce intelligibly) renders it, Dead things are formed from under the Waters,
and the Inhabitants thereof; but as the Original, (...) The Rephaim or the
Giants do wail, sorrow or Groan under the Waters, and the Inhabitants of them.
The Giants are under the Waters.

Now it is as certain that the Rephaim or Giants (of whom we read in Genesis 6.)
are in (the depths of) Hell, as that they here are said to be under the waters.
For in Sacred Scripture, the Congregation of the Rephaim, or the Place of the
Giants, is a Paraphrase thereof, so Prove. 21.16. The man that wanders ou^ out
of the way of Understanding, shall Remain, we translate it [in the Congregation
of the Dead] but to the letter, in the Congregation of the Giants or in Hell;
and Prove. 2.18. Her house inclines unto Death, and her Paths unto the Rephaim,
or Giants, to Hell.

What other then is Job's meaning, than that the Giants are in Hell [They
wail]? and consequently that Hell is Subterranean and Infernal, [They wail
under the waters]? So that the Tartarus wherein these Monsters are, in his
Opinion, is not that of Hesiod, And Plat. i^ P^aed.
who if Plutarch took him Right, did place it in the Air, but Homer's who makes
it an Abyss or Gulf of Waters. I said if Plutarch took him Right, for it may
be doubted, since the Epithet of Tartarus ^ereus on which he bottoms that
Persuasion, Plut. de prim. frig.
is as well in Homer, who thought not so, as in Hesiod.

I am abundantly confirmed in the sense given, not only by what some Learned
men have largely written on the Text, with whom you may consult at leisure, but
especially from a Passage in the accurate Pausanias, Pausanias in Arcad.
which I could not but Remarque, when I read it. (...) That Homer was the first
that sang that the Titans or Giants were Gods (Inhabitants) in that Place which
is called Tartarus or Hell. So plain a Comment this is on that of Job. The
Giants groan from under the Waters, and the Inhabitants of them. The Giants are
in Hell, and there groan, which that none ought to doubt to be the true
meaning, there immediately follows, (...) Hell is naked before him. But this
Hell is under the Waters; and so is Homer's.

For my part, I am apt to think that Hell is of a Vast Extent, and that the
bounds and limits of it, are not so strict and narrow, as the most imagine. It
may not be confined within the Air, nor within a certain Cavity and Hollow
under the Earth; Happily it is as large and comprehensive as the whole
Elementary World; which that indeed it is, what already has been urged about
it upon the several Opinions, does in some degree Evince. And it may be Hell
hereafter, will not be the same with that which now is Hell. But secret things
belong to God.

This for the Place of Hell, and for the Kind and Nature of the Punishment
which is therein; It does not only consist in Loss and Deprivation, but also in
Pain and Exquisite Torments. For this Reason it is called Fire, and the rather
called so, because (that) Hell it self is styled in the Sacred Scriptures
(...), a word derived from others in the Hebrew which signify the Valley of
Hinnon, a Place wherein the superstitious Israelites, with an Inhumanity that
cannot be expressed, did offer up their Children in the Fire to Moloch.

Not that Infernal Fire is Material and Corporeal, or that it is a Proper, but
(only) Metaphorical Fire. A Fire it is, but such an one as is prepared for the
Devil, and for his Angels, which if it were Corporeal or Material, since
Corporeal and Material Beings act not on Incorporeal, Immaterial Spirits, it
could not be imagined to be. Again, as the Worm that never dies is Metaphorical
and Figurative, so is the Fire that never goes out. Besides, Hell is generally
called Tartarus, and that as Plutarch tells us for the Coldness of it [ ex
frigore Tartarus appellatus est.] Plut. ubi sup.
Nor is this a Fancy only of Poets, or of some few Philosophers, it is
Scripture, That in Hell is Weeping and Wailing and Gnashing of teeth: and (...)
est algentem quassari and contremiscere, to shake and gnash ones Teeth for
cold. In Plato's Hell, which he describes in his Ph^do, there is both Fire and
Water.

But though in Hell there be no Proper Fire, yet since the torments in it are
frequently compared to Fire, and with the addition of Brimstone, it must needs
consist (whatever some imagine) in some thing equally as Dire, as
Insupportable, as Tormenting, and as Vexatious as that. Which that it does, we
have not only Plato's Testimony, Plat. l. 9. de Leg.
but (if we will believe him) the common sentiment of all the World to Evince
and Prove i^. It is (says he) a Common and Received Tradition that Infernal
Torments are most Atrocious and Insupportable; a Tradition so received in his
time, that he most Pathetically inveighs against the Irreclaimable
Obdurateness, and Obstinacy of men, whom that Consideration could not awe and
terrify: You may read it in his own terms in his Book of Laws.

Again, Infernal Torments are not only most Atrocious and severe, but extended
both to body and soul. And it is so great Reason that the Body should as well
suffer as the Soul, That some have thought it not unlikely, that the soul, as
it did not sin but in the Body, so it does not suffer but with it: That it is
Soul and Body in conjunction that do make man, and it is man, not the Soul
without the Body, not the Body without the Soul, but Soul and Body soder'd into
one Compositum that sins, and that which sins must suffer. The Man sins and the
man must suffer.

But I drive it not so far, for the Soul in state of Union to the Body, as it
lives in it, so it acts by it, the Soul as so is Actus corporis, and is
nothing but what relates to the Body, and consequently all its Actions are
Organical; yet since it can be separated, and, though not as Anima, yet as Ens
can subsist alone without the Body; It is in that Estate Responsible [and just
it should] for what it did in the other. I say just it should; Plat. in P^aed.
Philo de Agricult.
For the Soul it guides the Body, it governs it, and to use a comparison that
has had the Honor to have been a Philosophers, is to it as a Rider to his
Horse; who though he goes no where, but where the Horse carries him, and
Acts nothing but by it, yet since he governs the Horse, which goes as
Directed, no wonder if unhors'd and on his own legs, he suffer for the
Trespasses he made his Horse to commit. He suffers on foot for what he did on
Horseback.

All I infer is, That it is highly Reasonable that the man who sinned with his
Body, should suffer in it, as well as in his Soul; and that it is Just that they
who were together in the Crime, should also be conjoined in the Punishment, as
indeed they shall, for we must all Appear before the Judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his Body, 2 Cor. 5.10.

So much for the first Particular, that there are Eternal and Atrocious
Punishments ordained to be inflicted in the other World both on Soul and Body,
for the sins of Men committed in this. I am now in Prosecution of the Order I
proposed to my self, to Evidence the Second; which is, That there is not any
Inequality in the Punishment ordained to the sin; but great Equality and
Proportion.

Which to effect with all imaginable Evidence and clearness, I will first lay
down a Truth acknowledged by all that know any thing (viz.) That every sin is
committed against God, who not only is most Excellent Majesty, but also
Infinitely Good unto the sinner himself, and consequently that it is Infinite in
Aggravation. Then [in the second place] I will make it Evident and Undeniable,
that that Infinite Aggravation which is in every sin, by Reason of its Object,
is the Bottom, Ground, and Foundation, whereon the Perpetuity of its Punishment
is Erected. Thirdly, I will fully prove (to Obviate some exceptions which may
lie before me) that though Insernal Punishments be all of them Perpetual, and
consequently Infinite protensively and in duration, yet that Intrinsecally and
Subjectively they are but Finite. And when I have acquitted me of what I
promise you on these points, then in the fourth place, I shall lay before your
eyes, in a full and more express delineation, the great Equality and Proportion
between the Sin and Punishment; which I will abundantly confirm by many more
considerations I shall add.

And for the first, That every Sin is committed against God, who not only is
most Excellent Majesty, but also Infinitely Good, and to the sinner himself,
cannot be denied by one that Understands the Nature of sin. Against thee, the
Royal Psalmist says, Psalm. 51.4.
thee only have I sinned. The Wrong and Injury may be against man, as that of
David was against Uriah, but the Sinfulness therein is only against God. There
is in every sin a Transgression, Lev. 16.16. Deuteronomy. 17.2.
[Their Transgressions in all their sins] or a Breach and Violation of the Law
of God, and in this the sinfulness of sin consists. This importing in it
Inexcusable (...) and contempt of God. Such is the Nature, and such the Object
of Sin.

Now the Moral Evil is in any Action receives an Aggravation from the Object
(of it,) and that Relation the Offender stands in toward that; for instance,
what is but Assault and Battery upon an Ordinary Man, is Treason on the Prince:
To strike ones Sovereign is a Capital and heinous Crime, Unexpiable but by the
Blood of him that does offend in that kind, when yet to give a Private Person a
Blow, is not so. Arist. de Mor.^ 5. c. 8
. So Aristotle, (...), If any be so Hardy as to strike a Magistrate, he ought
not only to have Blow for Blow, but to be severely Punished. Thus the
Philosopher; and it was one of the Laws of the Twelve Tables, Re, Persona,
Tempore, Loco Atrociores injuriae judicantor, That Injuries were to be esteemed
to receive Aggravations by the Person offended, Labeo apud Olde^dorp. in leg
12. Tab^l tit. 11.
so Labeo interprets it, Persona atrocior injuria sit, cum Magistratui, cum
Parenti, Patronove fiat. The Injury is rendered more Atrocious by the Person,
when it is done to a Magistrate, a Parent, or a Patron.

And granting This, Then How immense and infinite an aggravation must we of
force Acknowledge in all sin, when we consider in it that Contempt, Scorn and
Parvipension of God, which does compose it? That it is against a Majesty so
Excellent, and High, against the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords: against the
Heavenly Father, the Great Creator, the Great Benefactor, him from whom the
sinner has Received his own Being, and all the Goods, Comforts and Advantages
of it.

Most certain it is, that those considerations in inferior Objects, which
scattered and dispersed, do render Actions under greatest Guilt and
aggravation, are all Concentred to aggravate what ever Action man is guilty of
against God. For if it be an Aggravation of the Crime among men, for the
Subject to Affront his King, for the Child his Father, for the Vassal his Lord,
for the Obliged his Benefactor; God is King, is Father, is Lord or Owne^, is
Benefactor, etc. and the Sinner is his Subject, his Child, his Own, his Obliged.

Yes, and all the Aggravations Reflected on the faulty Action by this
Transcendent Object, are as much Superior to those derived from any other, as
those Considerations which in God are aggravating, do transcend the same that
are so in man. As much as God himself in Excellency is above Man, This King
above all other Kings, the Heavenly Father above an Earthly, this Sovereign
Benefactor above Inferior Benefactors, of so much greater Guilt and
aggravation in all respects, is a crime against the former, than it can be
against the latter. The Degree of Aggravation bears Proportion to the
Excellency which Effects it.

This the Ancient Romans had some understanding of, and therefore to Protect
Persons invested with (the Sovereign) Power and Authority, from all Affronts,
they were wont to style them Sacred, to the End that by consideration of the
Name and Character of God upon them, Subjects Apprehending so much more Horror
in the Crime, might be scared from Attempting what otherwise perhaps (without
it) they would have soon presumed to do. So Floccus, Floc. in Prae^at. ad lib.
depotest. Romans
Romany Legibus cautum est (says he) u^ omnes. Potestatem habentes, quo plus
apud eos majestatis esset, Sacrosancti appellarentur, ut si quis quempiam in
magistratu violasset Religio judicaretur.

By this time I make no question but a small Objection which has ministered but
too much matter of Perplexity to some, will offer none to you, namely, that it
will not follow that Sin is therefore Infinite, because against an Infinite
God, no more than that it is Good, and Just, and Holy, and Omnipresent and the
like, because against a Good, a Just, an Holy and Omnipresent God. For you see
I argue not the Infinity of the sin, barely from that Infinity which is in God,
so as if this Attribute in him did Physically (as some would speak) and
Naturally imprint its like upon the faulty Action; no, this Infinity in sin is
not a Natural Infinity, but a Moral, not Infinity of Being, but of Guilt and
Aggravation, and consequently, such an one, as cannot be derived but from such
Considerations [Moral] as are able to Reflect it. It is not derived Physically,
but Morally. I doubt not but you comprehend my meaning, that Sin is not to be
affirmed Infinite, merely because it has an Infinite and Transcendent Being for
its Object, For this the mentioned Objection fully evidences, but because there
are Perfections in the Divine Nature, such as Goodness, Greatness and the like,
that are of a Quality to Greaten the Offense, and Fault against them; which
Perfections being Infinite, do make the Aggravations they Reflect upon the
crime or sin Proportionable. For it is a manifest, a Plain and an Infallible
consequence, that if a crime against obliging Goodness, or the like
Consideration (for what is instanced in One will hold in All) be great; and
against a greater Goodness, it be a greater crime; then a crime against an
Infinite and inconceivable Goodness, must needs be a crime of Infinite and
inconceivable Guilt: Ut se habet simpliciter ad simpliciter, ita magis ad
magis, and maxim ad maxim.

Hence it follows, that no sin is small. For not to stand on this Subtilty,
that there is a kind of Boundlesness and of Infinity in Sin, Sin being in its
very Nature a transgression or Excess of Bounds, the Law it sets bounds and
limits unto men's Affections, but sin transgresses them. I say, not to stand on
that Consideration, the Conclusion Evidently follows from what I have already
offered. For if every Sin be Transgression, and essentially imply a Violation
of the Law of God, a Preferring of Our Unruly, Profane, Unrighteous, Evil Wills
before His, which is Holy, Just and Good, and consequently, be an offering of
Indignity, and (as it were) affront to Him, it is easy to infer, that None is
small, since to violate the Divine Authority and Pleasure, and to despise it
and contemn it for our Own, cannot be imagined so.

I the rather do Enforce this great, Truth, because I know many Atheistically
inclined, who deride the Doctrine of the Fall of man occasioned by the eating
of an Apple, as a senseless and absurd conceit. It cannot penetrate their
Understandings, that a Wise, and Just, and Good God should conceive so great
Anger and Indignation for so small and poor a thing, that He should expose the
First man, and all Descendants from him, to the danger of Eternal Ruin, for no
more than eating an Apple. And what is an Apple to be compared with Mankind,
and with all its comforts! In the day thou eatest, thou shall dye the death,
Demad. apud Plutarch. in Solon.
looks better like one of Draco's Laws, which for their Inhumanity, were
noted to be written in Blood, than like a Sanction of Gods.

And indeed an Apple is no great matter, nor is the eating of it in it self a
Greater; But then it is no small matter neither to offer an Affront to God
Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, to scorn and contemn most Excellent
Majesty, to oppose his Will, to break his Bands asunder, and cast away his
Cords, which Adam did in eating. And what is offered by the Atheist in order to
extenuate and abate the Guilt, does extremely aggravate and heighten it, that
he would break with God for (but) an Apple, as one resolved to deny himself in
nothing, to keep in with God, and Please Him who is his Maker and Sovereign.
Verily He that will break for an Apple, will break for any thing. Without
doubt, It was an Ample Demonstration of the Infinite Benignity and Goodness of
God, that He did not choose a greater matter to exercise the Virtue and
Obedience of the First Man in, who might very well have forborne the Apples of
but One Tree, when he had so many Others bountifully Accorded to him, to Oblige
and gratify him. Indeed had God Required Proof of Man's Obedience in a matter
absolutely necessary to his Comfort or Delight, it might have minister'd some
color of Excuse for his Failure. But now there is None. 'Twas but an Apple, no
more that God denied him, and would he run the hazard of Divine Displeasure,
and Expose his own Eternal Happiness for That? What Pretext can there be for a
Plea, that he would be faithful in greater matters, that broke his Faith for so
small a One? Some find the Breach of all the Commandments in This. Verily, That
Adam disobliged God for an Apple, it argues the greater contempt of God, and
the greater Injustice in Adam. For this I appeal to Aristotle, who speaks home
to All I have said. (...). l. 1. c. 15.
(...) -- Those Injuries are greater which proceed from a greater Injustice; on
which consideration, the least things done, may be the greatest wrongs. So
Callistratus accused Melanopus, that he had defrauded the Maker of Shrines of
Three Halfpence, etc.

But to Return. This Sin Objecctively is Infinite, and it is on this Infinity
of Guilt and aggravation which is in Sin by reason of its Object, that the
Perpetuity of its Punishment, or to use your own expression, the Infinity
thereof is grounded, which is the Second thing to be Proved.

And the first Consideration to Evince it (which I shall insist upon again
hereafter, when I more expressly show the Proportion and Equality between the
Sin and Punishment) is, that there is nothing else in the Punishment of merely
Finite Beings, but the Perpetuity or Infinity of its Duration, that can answer
that Infinity and Vastness of Guilt and Aggravation which is in the Sin, by
Reason of that Infinite Goodness and Transcendent Majesty, that is the Butt and
Object of it. Nothing in the Punishment but its Infinite Duration answers the
Infinity of the Guilt and Aggravation in the Sin.

But beside this main consideration, there is another that Establishes it,
namely, that Eternal Death or Perpetuity of Punishment, is threatened unto sin
as sin [every sin] and therefore must be bottomed on something is in sin as sin
[in every sin] which what it should be is unimaginable other than the
Aggravation it receives from the Object; which if you suppose it but to be,
then will all things be adjusted, and (as I shall evidently show hereafter on
the fourth Head) will all lie Even and Square.

Nor is it a Bar unto the Truth alleged and Pleaded for, but rather a
Confirmation, that the Punishment which Jesus Christ sustained in behalf of all
that will receive him, who suffering in their stead, is understood to bear what
they should, was in its utmost Duration, and Extent but short and momentany:
For as much as it is evident, that the Punishment in Him received the same
Infinity, or Reputation from the Subject, he being GOD-MAN, that the sin of man
Received from the Object, which was GOD. For if in the One, God was sinned
against, in the Other, God suffered; the Blood of Christ was the Blood of God.
The Sin was Infinite, it was committed against an Infinite God; the Punishment
was infinite, it was suffered by an Infinite Person. Not that Christ suffered
as he was God, God as God cannot suffer, but he who was God, suffered.
Passions, as Actions are of Persons or Supposites, and as the Infinity of the
Object made the Sin Infinite in Aggravation; So the Infinity of the Subject
suffering, made the Punishment so in Value and Reputation. Thus Christ
suffering for us, suffered but a moment, though we, had we suffered for our
selves, were to suffer to Eternity.

So congruous it is, and so agreeable that the Perpetuity of infernal
Punishment should be bottomed on the aggravation which the sin receives from
its object: but yet as evident a Truth, and as Perspicuous as it seems, Many
there are who cannot Acquiesce and rest contented with it, Who think themselves
obliged to Account for this Article, in a very different way and manner from
that so lately proposed.

They tell us, tha^ men are therefore Infinitely Punished, or as some express
it, Punished in Gods Eternity, because they sin in their own, they sin as long
as they live, and therefore suffer for it, as long as God Lives. Of which
Assertion there are two senses, of which I must acknowledge that they seem
tolerable, and to bear some Weight, (for in the third it is a Jingle, most
unworthy of the Gravity and Judgment of the men that use it.) The first is,
That the Damned should they live for ever here, they would sin for ever, and so
are Punished not for what they have done, but what they would do. The Second,
that in Hell they never leave sinning, and that therefore God will never leave
Punishing.

Truth is, it were all one to me and my design, which is to evidence the
Perpetuity of Internal Torments, to have it bottomed on either these
considerations (one or both) if I thought them able to support the weight of
it, or on the former I have laid. But not having that Opinion of their great
sufficiency and strength some others have, and knowing that a weak and ruinous
foundation, most times betrays the Fabric; I am unwilling a Doctrine of so
much concernment and importance unto all mankind, and to all Religion, should
be obliged to stand or fall with them. Wherefore, that for the future none may
build upon them, I shall bestow a little of my time, and exercise a little of
your patience to show their Weakness.

For the first then, that the Damned would sin for ever if they lived for ever
here, and that therefore they are Punished for ever. I say it seems not an
Account that can be owned with any safety to the honor of Divine Justice,
seeing to those that weigh things, and that know That only to be Just which is
Equal, it appears not so Consistent with it, that the Punishment should be
Actual, Real, Effectual, when the Sin for which it is inflicted, is only
Possible, Hypothetical, and on Supposition (only.) That which would be, never
was in Act, and it seems very hard, and most unworthy Infinite and Sovereign
Righteousness and Justice, That there should be Punishment inflicted actually,
for sin that never was (in Act.) Non-entities have no Praedicates, and can do
Nothing, if the Sin never was, it can merit no Punishment. It Is ^rue the
Intention of evil is sometimes Punished, where there is no evil Effect, but then
the Intention is the Crime. In all I have said, I suppose the Objection to
proceed of the Event, and not of the Design, that the Damned would for ever
sin, if they lived for ever; not that they Actually and explicitly resolved to
sin for ever. (For) this case is rare, if possible. In this the malice of the
Will would be Infinite, and so he that had an Actual Will or Resolve to sin for
ever, if he could, would deserve for that to be punished for ever. The will
which is the Cardinal and Grand Principle of what is Moral in an Action, might
justly pass for the Deed. But of all the Damned few, if any, can be conceived
to have such Resolves and Intentions.

Nor is the second Opinion, That the Damned are subject to Eternal Punishment
in Hell, because they sin there Eternally,] of more Importance than the former.
For though the Damned sin materially, and perpetrate in Hell the same Actions
(some of them) which they did on Earth, and for which they suffer in Hell, yet
it is a great Question, whether they may rationally be affirmed formally to sin
there, since there is no Law there: Hell is no part of Gods Kingdom, those in
it, are not subjects, but condemned Rebels; and there is no Transgression; and
consequently no Sin, where there is no Law.

Nor is their doing Actions which in themselves were sinful formerly, and which
perhaps are still so in Others, an Argument they sin now in it. For as the
Beasts that are not under Law, though they do the same Actions that men do, yet
do not sin in doing them as men sin, so the Damned that do the same Actions,
yet being now Exiled and Banished by God from under his Protection, and from
his Kingdom, into DUCER Darkness, and consequently, are no longer under the Law
of his Kingdom, they do not sin in what they do, but suffer for what they
sinned. Hell is not a Place of Sinning, but of Punishing. Their Sin there is
their Punishment.

Again, a Person once condemned to dye for Treason, cannot in our Law, be
Judicially called in question for any subsequent Act, because he is Civiliter
mortuus; His former Attainder of Treason is the highest and last work of the
Law, in the eye of which he is Dead, after that, and so unable to commit
offenses. And why, after Sentence pronounced by Divine Justice on the Guilty
Sinner, may not he be looked on as Dead in Gods Law, and as incapable of doing
any thing against it more? Is not the State of Hell in Scripture called the
Second Death?

But to Destroy the both Opinions at Once, with one Argument; Eternal Death is
threatened unto men for sin in this life, and the sentence of it is Pronounced
on the Damned for this; Depart from me you cursed into Everlasting Fire; and
why? for I was an hungered, and you gave me no meat; I was a thirst, and you
gave me no Drink; I was a stranger, and you took me not in; Naked, and you
clothed me not; Sick, and in Prison, and you visited me not; Therefore Depart
from me, you Cursed, into Everlasting Fire. Now, is Eternal Death be threatened
unto men for sin in this Life, and the Sentence of it be pronounced upon them
for what they have committed here; it cannot Rationally be presumed, that the
Everlastingness of the Punishment should not be founded on some thing in the
sin already acted in the present world, but only either on the Hypothetical
Perpetuation of it in this, or on a Fancied Continuation and Persistance in it
Hereafter in the Other.

And having said thus much, you cannot doubt of my sense of what the Learned
Parker further offers out of the Schoolmen, in his Treatise de Descensu, which
because it is a Learned Passage, and one, that by Representing the Variety of
Opinions about the thing whereon I now discourse, will also represent the
Difficulty of deciding in it, I shall give you entirely. -- Atqui nostrum,
Park. de Desc. lib. 4.
quod in medio, tutissimum iter est: Christum nempe, etc. -- But our Opinion
lies in the middle in which it is most safe to go, namely that Christ endured
the very Pains of Hell as to their Substance, which were due to us, and yet
avoided their Eternity. To make this clear, We Deny that Infernal Eternal Pain
is absolutely due to All Sins; and withal, with the Schoolmen, particularly
with Iohanne's Scotus, and with Johannes Picus C. of Mirandula affirm, that
some Distinction must be made in this matter. There are Three things then that
ought to be considered by us in sin: The first is the Aversion that is in it
from God; and to this the Pain of Loss which is Infinite is due, forasmuch as
it is the Amission of an Infinite Good. The second is a Conversion to what is
Perishing and Transient, and to this the pain of sense is Due, which is
Intensively Finite, Agreeably as that delight and pleasure the sinner takes
therein is Finite. But thirdly, there is to be considered also in sin, either
the Continuation and Persistence (of the sinner) in it, or his Cessation from
it. It is only with the first of these that Eternity of Pain does hold
proportion. The second is adjusted by a but Temporal enduring of the Pain. It
is Objected that every sinner sins in his Eternity (as Gregory speaks)
forasmuch as he has cast himself upon a necessity of sinning, from which he
cannot possibly be Restrained by any endeavors of his own: This indeed is
true, and therefore the Eternity of Punishment does naturally follow their sin;
But yet this hinders not but that if sin be supernaturally interrupted, by
Repentance, in that case Extremity only, and not Eternity of Punishment should
be the Due; as which answers the greatness of the sin but finitely committed;
And this is that which Scotus contends for, and which the Count of Mirandula
demonstrates at large, namely, that to sin continued to Eternity both in the
Guilt and Filth, Eternal Punishment is due; but that it is in no wise
necessary, nor exacted by Divine Justice; that Eternal Punishment should be
inflicted for sins, that are not continued to Eternity, but abandoned by
Repentance. Now things being so, it is easy for Every Body to discern how Jesus
Christ endured the Pain of Hell, without the Eternity; especially, That being
remembered which we said before, That He sustained not the Infernal Pains of
those actually Damned, but only of those that were to be so. [ Non Damnatorum
poenam gehennalem sustinuisse, sed Damnandorum tantum.] Verily the Use of this
Distinction here is very great, since those that are Actually Damned sin far
otherwise than the Elect that were to be so: So that Eternal Torment is in
Justice due to Them; but to these Extreme Torment (indeed) is, but not Eternal.
This is clear in a simile. Imprisonment is no part of the Debt, but is Justly
due to him that abides in Debt. And thus it is in the Elect and Reprobate, of
which the former paying the Debt in Jesus Christ, and (renewed by the Holy
Spirit) ceasing from sin are freed from that Eternal Prison of Hell, in which
the Damned are Tormented for ever, because they are for ever in Debt, and abide
for ever Polluted with the Filth, and with the Guilt of Sin. The Case then is
thus, Christ suffered only for the Elect, who were to be Damned, to whose sins
ceasing by Repentance, not Eternity, but Only Extremity of Punishment was due.
So that Justice Required not that Christ should Endure the Eternity, but only
the Extremity of the Torments of Hell.

This is the Notion of the Learned Parker, which yet I must acknowledge I
cannot Entertain a thought of but with Repugnance; for to me it seems very
Harsh, if not directly contrary to Sacred Scripture, That Death Eternal should
not be the Due of every sin; For though indeed Perpetual Torments are not
inflicted on every sinner, and for every sin, yet they are deserved and merited
by every sin, and due to every sinner. The wages of sin is Death; Death
Eternal, for it is opposed to Eternal Life. And if Almighty God be pleased to
forgive and Pardon upon Repentance, it is his Free Grace, and not his Justice
but in respect of that well-ordered and Immutable Covenant, wherein he has
obliged and tied himself to do so; so indeed, he is faithful to forgive.

Nor is Hell a Sheriffs Ward in which the Debtor is Imprisoned till he pay his
Debt: For Imprisonment on Account of Debt is not so intended as a Punishment
upon the Debtor, for not having paid, as to be in lieu of Payment, and
satisfaction of the Debt: But it is ordained to Necessitate him, and to compel
him to Pay it. Whereas all Infernal Torments are truly Poenal, Designed for
satisfaction to the Law and Justice, and Not by way of compulsion, to make the
Prisoner pay a Debt, which, when he is in Hell, it is impossible for him to Do,
since that Design were Irrational. In vain are those means which are Referred
to Ends that they can never compass. Nor can it consist with Wisdom to
Institute such. The Punishments of Hell are Debts; Nor are there are Other
which they are ordained to constrain the Prisoner to pay. If the Scripture
speak of lying in Prison, till men Pay the Utmost Farthing, it must be
Understood of the Eternal Punishment to be Undergone (in Hell.) This is the
Only Debt there to be paid, of which no Abatement can be had. It is expected to
the Utmost Farthing, and this is all that that Phrase imports.

Thus you see I differ both from this and other Excellent and Learned Persons,
and why I do (so) about the Ground on which the Perpetuity of Infernal
Punishment is raised, I say the Perpetuity, for though I have acknowledged
Infernal Punishments to be Perpetual, yet I cannot easily be brought to own
them to be Infinite, but with Distinction, they are not Infinite in Essence or
Being, 'but only in Duration or Continuance, and consequently are not to be
called Infinite in any sense, but because they are Endless.

For questionless the Torments which the Damned suffer in Hell, are
intrinsecally and subjectively Finite, and as Finite as the sins themselves
intrinsecally and subjectively are, for which they be Inflicted. For since all
Reception is according to the Measure and Capacity of what Receives, the
Torment, Pain, or Punishment inflicted on a Finite Creature, and received by
it, neither is intrinsecally, and subjectively Infinite, nor indeed can
possibly be. So that if the sin subjectively and intrinsecally be Finite, the
Punishment ordained is not subjectively and intrinsecally Infinite: which was
the third thing to be proved.

And this Re-minds me of the fourth thing I promised, namely, to Represent
expressly the Proportion between the Sin of man and the Punishment of it. And
this Proportion is manifest. For if the Sin of Man subjectively be Finite, and
Unequal as well as Finite, the Punishment of that sin subjectively is also
Finite, and Unequal as well as Finite; there are Degrees of Torments in Hell,
as there are Degrees of Guilt in sin; and if the Punishment be Infinite
Protensively and in Duration, it is because the sin is so Objectively and in
Aggravation: And Infinite objective Aggravation (for such is that of sin, as we
have formerly evidenced it) cannot be Proportioned in the Punishment of a
merely Finite Being, but by its infinite Duration and Extent. Once the sin is
some way Infinite, but the Punishment of a merely Finite Being, neither is, nor
can be any wise so but in Duration. Wherefore the Punishment would be Unequal
to the sin, if as this is Infinite in Aggravation that were not also so in
Duration. But this I hinted before.

And now Sir, upon the whole you will be pleased to Judge what Inequality there
is, or what Unjustice, or rather what great Equality and Justice in Divine
Proceeding, wherein you cannot but receive abundant satisfaction, as to the
Equity and Righteousness thereof, if to what Considerations have already been
presented you concerning it, you but add the following.

First, That the Proportion which is observed in Distributive (or as Aristotle
calls it, Dianemetic) Justice, is not Arithmetical, but Geometrical; or (as
they love to speak) the medium it observes, is not medium Rei, but Personae,
that is, that Persons are as much considered in the Distribution of Rewards and
Punishments, as things themselves. Yea and more.

Secondly, That in Proportioning of Punishments, to make them Just and Equal,
it is not Requisite that their Duration should exactly be adjusted unto that of
the sin's. A short and momentany sin, if aggravated in the circumstances, may
in great Justice have allotted to it long and tedious Punishment. A Truth so
obvious, that were it not Unnecessary, I might abundantly enlarge in instancing
it; and I would have offered somewhat of mine own in that kind, but that the
grave St. Austine, from whom I make no question but you will take it better,
Aug. de Civit. l. 21. c. 11.
has happily prevented me. He tells us, Some of the Adversaries of Gods City
hold it Injustice for him that has offended, but temporally, to be bound to
suffer pain Eternally, this they say is utterly Unjust. As though they knew any
Law that adapted the time of the Punishment to the time in which the Crime was
committed. Eight kinds of Punishments does Tully affirm the Laws to inflict:
Damages, Imprisonment, Whipping, Like for Like, Public Disgrace, Banishment,
Death and Bondage. Which of these can be performed in so little a time as the
offense is, excepting the fourth, which yields every man the same measure
that he meteth unto Others, according to that of the Law, An Eye for an Eye,
and a Tooth for a Tooth? Indeed one may lose his eye by this Law, in as small a
time as he put out another man's by violence. But if a man kiss another man's
Wife, and be therefore adjudged to be whipped, is not that which he did in a
moment paid for by a good deal longer sufferance? Is not his short pleasure
paid with a longer pain? And what for Imprisonment? Is every one judged to lie
there no longer than he was a doing his Villainy? Nay, that Servant who has but
violently touched his Master, is by a Just Law doomed unto many years
Imprisonment. And as for Damages, Disgraces are not many of them dateless, and
lasting a man's whole life, wherein they bear a Proportion with the pains
Eternal. Thus the Father.

Further, I propose it to the serious consideration of Intelligent and Prudent
men, if that Punishment, how great, how long soever, be too great, or too long,
which for all its greatness and for all its length, is Unsufficient in the
threatening of it to deterr from the sin; it is the End that Measures and
Proportions all the Means that lead to it; and the sole Intention, Design and
End of God in menacing and threatening Punishment, is to Deterr and fright from
sin. If the End be considerable enough, the Punishment threatened can never be
too great. Besides, it argues great malice, when great Threatenings cannot
deterr. However, It becomes God to threaten, and punish too as a God; Sin is
Indignity, and Gods Anger is his Defense; if mortal men kill the Body
Temporally in their Anger, it is like the Immortal God, to Damn the Soul
Eternally in his.

In fine, What if in an Age wherein Hypotheses are taking, I should offer this,
(which yet, what I have proposed already, evinces to be more than so) that
perhaps the Constitution of the other World may require, that what ever state
is in it be Perpetual, as the Make of this requires, that all things in it
should be Otherwise; and consequently, that it is as agreeable and natural, that
all Punishments as well as all Rewards, should be Eternal in the Future Life,
as that all in this should be Temporal. But when I say it may be as agreeable,
and as natural, that all Punishments in the other Life should be Eternal, as
that all Rewards, I would not have you to conceive I think that to be a
Demonstration, which is generally current, and passes with the most for One,
namely, That because the Rewards of Heaven are Eternal, therefore the
Punishments of Hell are also so. I acknowledge that it will not follow. For to
do Good (for so it is to Reward, or to Remunerate) it carries in it more
Agreeabless, and more Congruity to the Divine Essence, and is an Emanation from
it more Connatural, and consequently more Free, than to Punish is, or to
inflict Evil; This being called his strange work, which that is not. It is for
this Reason, that God is so much more Benign and Liberal (as the Holy
Scriptures plainly show us) in Assigning Large Rewards, than He is Severe and
Rigorous in Ordaining Dreadful Punishments; For if (as he is said to do in the
second Command) He visit the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the children, unto
the third and fourth Generation of them that Hate him; He shows Mercy to the
thousandth of them that Love Him. So wide a Difference there is! The Allotment
both of Rewards and Punishments depends on the Divine Will; and (...) or
Lenity, Moderation, Propensity to Favor is the Natural Virtue of the Will.

And thus much by way of Demonstration of this Great Truth, that there is no
Inequality, or Improportion in the Punishments Ordained (though Endless) to
crimes or sins, but great Equality and Proportion; and that the Sovereign
Rector was neither Arbitrari^us and Wilful, nor Unjust, but both Wise and
Righteous in assigning them. What I am next engaged to Perform, is to evince
him Good therein as well as Just, and, that in ordaining and threatening Endless
and Eternal Punishments to sin, he has as much Consideration of the Humane
Interest and Concern, as of his Own.

But before I may Proceed to argue and Evince this Verity, it will be necessary
for a clearer and fuller stating of it, to distinguish between the threatening
of Eternal Punishments, and the inflicting of them. Which I note here, because
I hold my self obliged but to demonstrate now, that there is Goodness in
ordaining and in threatening of Eternal Punishments, as hereafter I shall prove,
that there is great Justice, and no want of Goodness in the inflicting on
laying them on, and those who merit them.

And who can question the Goodness and Benignity of God appointing and
threatening unto men Eternal Punishments, if he seriously consider that his
doing so was absolutely necessary for the whole World to Regulate it, and to
keep it in order, by awing men's minds, and by repressing their exorbitant and
wild Emotions, and consequently, by preparing and qualifying of them for
Instruction in, and for Performance of the common Offices and Duties of the
humane life, as well as of the divine? The Fear of the Lord is the beginning of
Wisdom, says Solomon. Knowing the Terror of the Lord, we Persuade men, says
the Apostle. Plato in his Politics makes the Establishment of Punishments in
another Life fundamental to Government in this. Plat. de rep. l. 2. Plat. in
Prota^.
And even Mr. Hobbs acknowledges, Hobbs de co^p. polit. part. 1. c. 5.
that the Punishment instituted before sin, serves to the Benefit of mankind,
because it keeps men in peaceable and virtuous conversation by the Terror;
and Pythagoras knew as much, for he so pressed this consideration of a
Judgment and Wrath to come, in order to the restraining men from Vice, and to
the inciting of them to Virtue, that he is celebrated for it by Iamblicus,
Iambl. in ^it. Pythag. c. 30.
as Author of the Doctrine. (...) -- And he (speaking of Pythagoras) invented
another way and method of Reclaiming men from Injustice; which was to threaten
them with Future Judgment to be passed on Souls. (...) -- He understanding it
of Infinite Advantage, to strike fear of wrong and Injustice, etc. (...). And
this says Clement of Alexandria, Clem. Alex. in Pedag. l. 1. c. 8.
is a Gracious Method to strike men with fear and terror, that they may not sin.

Now, no scruple can be made of This, that to design the Present and the Future
happiness of man, is a worthy and adorable effect of infinite and transcendent
Goodness, and if the End be so, how can the most agreeable and proper means to
compass and effect it, be the contrary! It is the Goodness of the End that
makes the means Good. Certainly, we ought to hold belief, that God has very
much obliged and engaged us, by dealing with us in a way so congruous, as that
of menacing and threatening is; nor are we able to defend our selves against so
Good, so Pious a Resentment, if we soberly consider (this) That he that
threatens, plainly shows he has no mind to inflict; and that Threatenings are
fore-warnings of Evil, designed and intended to this very End, that those to
whom they are made, may timely shun and avoid it. Matthew. 3.7.
So John, O you Generation of Vipers, who [by menacing you with it] has
fore-warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Questionless he cannot but be
Good in threatening evil, who threatens it for that Reason, that he may not be
enforced to inflict it. This was the sense of Clement of Alexandria, Clement.
Paedag. l. 1. c. 8.
(...) -- It is manifest that who so threatens Evil, has no mind to inflict it,
nor is he willing to do what he threatens.

But why Eternal Punishments? (will you say) I answer, That besides the Justice
of it, the menacing of Infernal Punishments (the lusts of men are so Exorbitant
and high) is not sufficient to subdue and quench them; there must Eternity be
added to Extremity in the Torments, to make the threatening of them an effectual
means to reclaim men; and when that is done too, all is little enough; there
are millions in the world whom not that consideration, as tremendous and as
Direful as indeed it is, is able to deterr and fright from their Vices. If the
threatening of Eternal Torments can effect no more, how much I pray you would
the threatenings of shorter ones effect! Future things are distant and remote,
and what are so, do seldom influence. Great Punishments in another World would
awe but little, if they were not also Perpetual, it is the Eternity that adds
so much to the weight; and the weight of the torments, that makes them over
balance, when they are compared with the sin. Purgatory is not half as scaring
as Hell. The Emphasis of the Punishment is as much upon the Duration, as upon
the kind of it. Go you, says Christ, not (...), but (...), not barely into
Everlasting Fire, but into the Fire, the Everlasting Fire, the Emphasis is on
the Everlastingness of it.

So Advantageous is the threatening of Eternal Torments, and so useful to the
World, that the Sovereign Rector in taking that method, has not only given
Abundant Proof of his Wisdom and Prudence, but also of as much Benignity and
Kindness. A Truth of which the Ancient Heathen had a Glimpse, and therefore
they called the Furies (who are the Executioners of Divine Revenge in the other
World) EUMENIDES; not (as most too frigidly and poorly have conceited) by
reason of their Imbenignity, Inexorableness and Inclemency, but for that (by
the Punishments which they are talked of to inflict upon the Wicked) they
happily occasion very much Good, Benefit and Advantage unto Mankind. For so I
understand Phornutus, Revera, Phornut de Not. D^or.
says he, speaking of the Furies, sunt and Hae Deae venerandae, and Eumenides,
eo quod Naturea Benignitatem ad homines dirigunt, vindicando scelera.

From what I have presented you on this Head, it is not Difficult to Conclude
what sense one ought to have of Mr. Hobb's Notion of Hell, Hobbs Leviat. par.
4. c. 45.
and of the Texts that concern it. He tells us, that the Texts that mention
Eternal Fire, Eternal Judgment, or the Worm that never dies, contradict not
the Doctrine of the Second and Everlasting Death, in the Proper and Natural
sense of the Word Death. The Fire and Torment prepared for the Wicked in
Geenna, Tophet, or what place so ever, may contitinue for ever, and there may
never want men to be tormented in them, though not every One, nor any One
Eternally; For the Wicked being left in the State they are in after Adams sin,
may at the Resurrection live as they did, Marry and give in Marriage, and have
Gross and Corruptible Bodies, as all mankind now have, and consequently may
Engender Perpetually after the Resurrection, etc.

Now, not to mention the Confusion and Perplexity in this Notion, what will Mr.
Hobbs make of that Description the Evangelist gives of Hell, wherein the
Torments of it are painted out so Dreadfully by Fire and Brimstone, by a never
Dying Worm, etc. It is but a solemn piece of Mockery, a Bugbear, a Mormo that
can only fright those weaker Apprehensions that do not thoroughly understand and
see it? Hell to those that know it, for all this Tragical Description of it in
the Gospel, is a Paradise of Pleasure, such a Place as all the Wicked would
elect and choose for their Heaven, a Place of Eating and Drinking, of Marrying
and giving in Marriage, and why not of Quaffing, Carousing and making merry? In
a word, no worse a Place than this Earth; and the state of sinners in it, no
worse nor better (so over-merciful a God we have) than that of Men before the
Deluge. [ The wicked, says he, being left in the state they were in after
Adams sin, may at the Resurrection live as they did.] As if the wicked in the
Old World, had in it suffered and undergone their Hell, and that they had not
been Reprieved for that time, from the Wrath to come. Here is a Hell for
Sinners that would tempt them to be so. Is this Wrath in the day of Wrath? this
the Utmost that God can do? Is Tophet Prepared of Old, and Geenna, and the Lake
of Fire and Brimstone, and the Place prepared for the Devil, and his Angels,
come to this? Is this the Terror of the Lord, with which the Apostles
persuaded men! Who would care for Hell, if this so soft and easy ae Place be
Hell! Ay, but the Fire is Eternal.

And what if Fire and Brimstone prepared for the Wicked in Geenna be eternal,
and there never want men to be tormented in it, but that there be an Eternal
Succession of the Wicked to keep in and feed that Fire? This will not Help the
matter; For though the Fire be Eternal, yet seeing there is no one to lie
Eternally therein, The Punishment is not Eternal; not does the Perpetuity of
the Fire, bring an Aggravation to the Punishment and suffering of the sinner,
since if he feel it not Eternally, it is to him all one as if it were but
Temporal. What does it matter to a Criminal whose Execution is to be but short,
how long the Gibbet stand, or how many others be hanged on it after him? So to
Interpret Eternal Fire, is to Trifle with it.

But this is a too Absurd and Gross Conceit for me to Exercise your Patience
longer on it; wherefore to Apply my self unto the last particular; Not to
mention what Abatement Goodness may be thought to make in Hell Torment, since
this is secret, I shall only endeavor to demonstrate what suffices for my
purpose, that it is not want of Goodness, no more than it is Injustice, to
Inflict Eternal Punishments on those to whom they are threatened, when the Good
Designs and Ends for compassing of which they were so, are altogether defeated.

And in order to the stating and inlightning of the present point, I will offer
all my Notions and Conceptions about it, under three Heads.

First, I will endeavor to Establish this Truth, That Eternal Punishments are
not Inflicted, but on the Obstinate and Irreclaimable.

Secondly, I will Demonstrate, that it is but just to Punish them Eternally
that are Obstinate and Irreclaimable.

Lastly, I shall evidence there is no want of Goodness in inflicting of Eternal
Punishments on such. So far the doing so is from being thwarting and
inconsistent with it.

That Infernal Torments are not inflicted, but on the Obstinate and
Irreclaimable, cannot but be manifest to all that soberly consider, that the
Divine Heart as well as Divine Arms are ever open to the Penitent and
Converting, and that the great God, Resenting as he is of injuries and wrongs,
yet shows not his wrath for any, but on the vessels of dishonor, those whom
he has first endured with much long-suffering, who notwithstanding all his
Obligations on them, and all his endearments, Audaciously persist as long as
life enables, to Provoke him. Can any thing be more Express, or more full, than
is the Declaration which he makes in favor of the Penitent? If the wicked will
turn from All his sins that he has committed, and keep all my Statutes and do
that which is Lawful and Right, Ezekiel 18.21, 22, 23.
He shall surely live, he shall not dye. All his transgressions that he has
committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him, in his Righteousness that he
has done, he shall live. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should
dye? faith the Lord God, and not that he should return from his ways and live?
Again, when [whensoever] V. 27, 28.
the wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has committed, and
does that which is Lawful and Right, he shall save his soul alive, because he
considers and turns away from all his Transgressions that he has
committed, He shall surely live, he shall not dye. So manifest it is that none
Perish but the Irreclaimable and Unrepenting.

For this Reason as well as Others are such forlorn wretches on whom infernal
Torments shall hereafter be inflicted, compared to chaff, to wild Trees, to dry
Trees, they being so Perverse, so Corrupt, so desperately Overgone with
Wickedness and Lusts, that there is as little hope of working on them in the
Methods Appointed by Divine Wisdom to that End, as of converting chaff into
wheat, or of Receiving fair, and good and pleasant fruit from a wild and
crabbed Tree, or from a withered and dry one. The Chaff only shall be burned up
with Fire Unquenchable. And the Tree only that will not bring forth Good fruit,
is to be cut down. And what Husbandman would not cut down a Tree that is but
Cumber and Burden to the Ground?

And this Re-minds me of the second thing, which I propounded to be evinced,
namely, That for God to Punish with Eternal Torment the Obstinate and
Unreclaimable, is so far from being Hard and Unrighteous, that there is nothing
more Agreeable to Justice, and to the common sentiment and notion which we all
have of it, than This.

For First, If God inflict Eternal Torments on men, it is but what he told them
of before that he would do, if they did not Reform, (which was fair) He
strikes not but after He has threatened, so that if they would themselves,
they might avoid the Effects of his Anger; which if they do not, the blame and
Imputation is not to be laid on God, who deplores them, and who gave them
warning, but on themselves that would not take it. On this consideration God
himself insists to Justify his dealings, and when he had Accounted thus for
them, he upbraids the Israelites with great. Injustice and Unreasonableness,
for not acknowledging the Equity and Righteousness of his Procedure. Yet ye
say, the way of the Lord is not equal. Hear now, O house of Israel, is not my
way equal? are not your ways unequal? When a Righteous man turns away, etc.
and when the wicked man turns away, Ezekiel. 18. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.

Again, if God were Good, and Wife, and Just in threatening as we have evinced
him, he cannot be Unrighteous, Evil or Unjust in inflicting; it is but
Vindication of his Word, and what he is obliged to in point of Honor, and in
point of Justice to himself, to make them to feel the Verity and Truth of
Comminations and Threats, who heretofore did mock and scorn them. They who do
not Reform and Convert upon the threatening of Eternal Death, when God makes
it, do by interpretation laugh at That, and dare him; it is as if they should
say, we care not for his threats, nor fear them, let him that makes them do his
worst. And what shall God in Honor then do, when he is challenged to do his
Utmost, but the Justice which he owes himself, to make them feel the Dire
Effects of his extreme displeasure, who so despised it and him? Should he only
threaten and not inflict, what were his Threatenings, but Ridiculous Fooleries!
Once, Threatened He has, and he will execute his Threatenings. He cannot deny
himself.

And supposing it to be a piece of high Justice to God, it cannot be unjustice
to the sinner, to make him an Eternal Instance of Divine Displeasure, for ut
Verum vero, sic justum justo consonat. There is as great a Consonancy and
Agreement in all things which are Just, as there is in all things which are
True: What is but Just to One, that cannot be Unjust and Unrighteous to
Another. Indeed it is the Goodness of the great God to bear with men so long,
and to try so many and so likely methods to reclaim them: But it is but
Justice, when all endeavors to Reduce them, become Unprofitable and vain, to
let Justice to himself, and to the sinner take its course. I say Justice to the
sinner, for He inflicts but what the sinner merits. We have already proved an
Infinity of Guilt in every Sin.

Finally, There is so great Reason that the Obstinate and Irreclaimable should
be Eternal Instances of wrath, that by the Light of Nature, many wise and
knowing men among the Heathen thought so. For Socrates, Plato, Plutarch and
many others, though, as I have shown already, They held infernal Pains to be
Medicinal and Purgatory, and in that respect to be Finite, yet they also held,
that Persons overgone with Wickedness and Vice, who were Obstinate, Perverse
and Irreclaimable, are given up unto ERINNYS to abide in Torments, with that
most Dreadful Fury for ever. Arist. Rh^t. (...) l. 1. c. 15.
The crime is Great says Aristotle (...) which is Immedicable. If says Plato,
Plat. in Phaed.
Any for the Greatness of their Crimes do seem Incurable, Id. in Gorg.
(...) -- (...), Them a Just Fate does Hurry into Tartarus or Hell, Plutar. de
iis quitar. a Number. cor.
from whence they never Return. Thus He in Phaedo. And I find the like in his
Gorgias. Thespesius in Plutarch reports the same.

So Just it is and so Righteous to make the Obstinate and Irreclaimable to
suffer Torments as Everlasting as their Souls. But you will say, perhaps it
may, but how Good is it ^ For though it may be called Goodness to Awe and
Threaten men with Endless Torments in Order to Reform and Imbetter them; and,
if they will not be imbetter'd and reformed by the threatening, it may be
Justice, but how can it be called Goodness to Inflict them?

I might answer, as some others have before me, That Divine Justice is a
Perfection, and consequently a kind of Goodness, That there is no possible
Inconsistency between the former and the latter, that to be Just is to be Good.
But that, since the Objection does proceed of Moral, and not of Metaphysical
and Abstract Goodness, it would look too plainly like an evasion, rather than
an answer, to think to put it off and Baulk it with this.

Wherefore taking Goodness in a Moral sense for Kindness, Benignity, Clemency,
I hold my self obliged to evince there is no want thereof in the execution of
Divine Justice, by Inflicting infinite eternal Punishments. Nor is there, for
certainly there cannot be a want or culpable Privation, Absence or Defect of
Goodness, in Administrations wherein it ought not Properly to be; Privation or
want it is Absentia debiti inesse, The Absence of that which ought [one way or
other] to be in or Present; and therefore seeing Goodness it self Obliges not
the great God to show it in the mentioned circumstances [on the Obstinate and
Irreclaimable] and consequently, it ought not to be further exercised on them,
there is no want thereof, if it be not.

Now there can be nothing clearer, than that Goodness obliges not the Great God
to give Perpetual Demonstrations of it to the Irreclaimable and Obstinate; For
Divine Goodness, as the Humane, is seated in a middle between the two extremes
of Cruelty and Weakness, and is to be directed in the Exercises of it by Reason
and wisdom. Now it is against all Reason, that Goodness which is but cast away
upon the Stubborn and Incorrigible, should be everlastingly continued to them;
for if it were, the Exercise thereof in such a circumstance, would not deserve
the Honor of that name, since, though to bear long be Goodness, to bear
always, and with the Insolent and froward, is not so, but Weakness. Goodness
obliges not God to show it where there is no Reason He should, and where there
is no Reason he should not. God owes Juslice to himself. He is His Own End.
Hear Aristotle in the case. Arist. d. morib. l 4. c. 11.
(...) -- They who manifest no Displeasure for the things for which they ought,
seem fools, as well as those, that are not Angry neither As, nor when, nor with
whom they ought: for they seem to be without Sense and Resentment, etc.

But to exemplify the Reason, to render't more convincing; what if a Father,
after he has long threatened his Disobedient and Rebellious Son with
disinherison and utter displeasure, do at last upon his Sons Persistance in his
Follies, proceed to make him feel in effect what was threatened, Does it argue
any want of Fatherly affection, or kindness in the Parent, whose Bowels yearn,
who would rather than the better part of his estate, it may be of his Blood, he
could reclaim and turn him? No, but a Noble and exemplar piece of Justice which
He owed to himself; which if he had not executed in the present circumstances,
after so much injury and affront done to him, and so much Patience and
endurance exercised by him, the world would accuse him of impotent and fond
Indulgence, and of most pitiful weakness. And is so Irrational and impotent a
Fondness inexcusable in man that has Infirmity of Nature to Apologize and
plead for it, what would it be in God that has none? It Is Reason only obliges
to be Good. Indeed so long there is Reason to be Good, in the Reason of
Goodness, as there is no Reason against it. To be good against Reason, is Folly
and Weakness, not Goodness.

But it may be, you will say, But why so much Haste then? and why does God
Precipitate a Sentence, which he might much longer defer? Perhaps, had he but
deferred it a little longer, those that have not converted, would convert.

I answer, Every man has his Time, and the Order of the Universe, that Frame
and Constitution of things, whereby they ever are in Flux and Revolution,
allows no more; many they be who are to Act their Parts on this Terrestrial
Stage, and those that are before must go off, and take their leaves, to make
room for those that follow: every one must have his turn, there is a settled
Law and Order of Nature, and, according to it, One Generation passes, and
another comes. One must pass, that another may come. Now it is highly Rational
and Congruous, that Divine Wisdom should conform to the Laws it self has made;
and no less so, that this consideration of the shortness and Uncertainty of
Humane Opportunities and Seasons, should excite in man a due and thorough care
to improve them; it being extreme weakness for Him, by any Omission to neglect
and Trisle with the Present, that knows himself not sure of the Future; it is,
to day if we will hear his voice. This is the great Reason why God has rendered
humane life so Uncertain, namely, to Prevent the Oscitancy and Delays, that
man is subject to, I come as a Thief in the Night, watch therefore.

Nor may it be thought that longer time would effect what those advantages the
present time affords does not. Nothing will reclaim the irreclaimable and
Obstinate; that very space to Repent, which does intenerate and mollify the
virtuous and ingenuous, it but confirms and emboldens the stubborn and
wicked; there is enough afforded in the present time to Operate on those that
do not harden their Hearts, and no forbearance, no Patience will have a good
effect and operation upon those that do. To day if you will hear his voice,
harden not your Hearts: his Voice is loud enough to make men hear, if they
harden not their Hearts, and stop not their Ears.

In fine, How long should God try? What bounds and limits would you set his
Goodness? When He has stayed one year, would you not demand another? When he
has waited one and another, perhaps if he would stay the third, the sinner
might Repent; and you might as well demand a thousand years as one, and as well
a Myriad of years as a thousand. How long shall God await and expect? Surely
For ever, if Delinquent man shall vote it. Man will never think that God has
tried long enough, and God only knows when he has.

Thus I have evinced all I undertook to do upon the first Argument, and all was
necessary I should. I have evinced that there are Eternal Punishments; that
there is equality and Proportion between the Punishment (as Endless and Eternal
as it is) and the sin; I have evinced that the threatening of Eternal
Punishment, in order to the compassing the Present and the Future Weal of Man,
is an Instance of Divine Benignity; and also that the Infliction of them on the
irreclaimable and Obstinate is a great Evincement of Divine Justice, and none
of any want of Goodness, Kindness or Clemency.

And now when I recall my thoughts, I find them tempted to suggest to me, That
all the labor I have put my self to in writing, and (put) you to in reading is
superfluous; the matter might have been concluded more effectually in fewer
words. For what if God whose only End is his Glory, and the Demonstration of
Himself in all his Attributes and Perfections, willing to show his Just and
Dreadful Wrath upon his Open enemies, should execute and hang them up in chains
of Darkness, to make them Everlasting Instances and Monuments thereof to Saints
and Angels? What if God will?

And I the rather stand on this Argument, because it looks so like the Great
Apostle's, But O man, who art thou that Replyest against God? Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? What if God
willing to show his Wrath, and to make his Power known, endured with much
longsuffering the vessels of wrath sitted to Destruction? We ought to acquiesce
in all Divine Appointments, and to believe them (to be) Just, when we know them
to be Gods, because his Will is Justice, and it is his Prerogative not only to
Ordain the time when, and the manner how, but also the Duration and extent of
all the Punishments of the wicked, how long they are to endure, as well as of
what weight they ought to be. Pl^tarch. de iis qui tard. a number. corrip.
For so Pindarus in Plutarch, so Religious was he in this point.

Quod, etc. inter multos alios Pindarus quoque testatur, qui optimum appellat
Artificem, Gubernatorem and Dominum rerum omnium Deum, utpote vere Justitiae
factorem and creatorem, cui soli definite convenia^, quando, quomodo, ac
quousque scelestorum unusquisque plecti debeat.

And so much for the First Argument, the seeming inequality of Infinite and
Eternal Punishments to Finite Transgressions, I now proceed to the Second, from
the Nature of Punishment.

Punishment, say you, ( According to the Notion We have of it,) is either for
the Good of the whole, or of the Part, and it is inflicted, Not to torment the
Criminal, but either to Amend him, or the Society of which He is a Member, that
both may Enjoy the Comforts and the Sweets of it: but what of Good in
Everlasting Punishment is there to either of These, etc.

I know not whether the Present Argument will signify the less with you, (for
with me it will not) after I have told you that the Notion it is Bottomed on,
Hobbs de corp. polit. part. 1. c. 3. art. 10.
is Mr. Hobbs's, and that it is in him I find, That the Law of Nature ordains
that no Revenge be taken upon consideration only of the Offense Past, but of
the Benefit to come, that is to say, That all Revenge [by which he means
Punishment] ought to tend to amendment either of the Person offending, or of
others by the example of his Punishment, which (says he) is sufficiently
apparent, etc.

A Notion so Unhappy in its Tendency and Influence, that it will effectually
Perform what you urge it for, in all that can design so ill to improve it. Of
this its Tendency Mr. Hobbs himself is well aware, Hobbs de corp. polit. chapter 5.
art. 11.
and therefore he endeavors to remove the Scandal he foresaw his Dogme would
on this account administer to serious and considerate Persons; but in such ^
way as really does Aggravate it, concerning which I shall say more hereafter.
But to return to you.

It was not (I believe) from Mr. Hobbs for whom you manifest no good
Resentment, that you received this Notion of Punishment, nor do I think you
comprehend the Hobbists (though you see you might) when you say the Notion WE
have of it -- there are other Persons of a fairer Reputation in the World both
for Learning and Religion than you perhaps esteem Mr. Hobbs, or any of his
Sectaries (to be) who are of the same side you take.

What Plutarch's Notion of Punishment is, you may infer from what I have
already offered on the first Argument; and for Seneca and Plato, both of them
seem entirely yours. Seneca says expressly, and for what he says, he quoteth
Plato, that this ought to be considered in every infliction of Punishment, that
it be designed either to amend the wicked, or to remove them, and that in both,
respect ought not to be had to what is Past, but to the Future, for as much as
Plato affirms, No Prudent Rector will inflict Punishment on any man, because
he has offended already, but lest he should offend again; it being impossible
that things Past should be recalled, but not so that things future should be
Prevented. But happily, you will like it better in his own language, and
therefore take it so. Hoc semper in omni animadversione (says he) servabit,
Sen. d: Ira, l. 1.
ut sciat alteram adhiberi, ut emendet malos^^ alteram ut tollat. In utroque
non praeterita, sed futura iutuebitur. Nam ut Plato ait, Nemo Prudens punit,
quia peccatum est, sed ne peccetur. Revocari enim Praeterita non possunt:
futura prohibentur and quos volet nequitiae male cedentis exempla fieri, palam
occidet: non tantum ut pereant ipsi, sed ut alios pereundo deterreant.

Lipsius affirms this Passage to be cited out of Plato de Legibus, Lips.
con.^ Se^. l. 1. d: Ira^ot 177
and for that purpose he produces the following Text, which indeed has
something like it. -- E Platone haec sumpta 9. de Legib. (...) (...)

But I find a more express and pertinent one in his Protagoras. Plat in Protag.


(...).

Nor is this the only Pertinent Citation to be had in Sene^a, there are many
more of like Import, of which yet there is but One that for its Fullness and
Conformity of sense to yours, I shall at present note; it is in his first Book
of Clemency, wherein there is the following Paragraph. Sen. de Clem. l. 1.
Transeamus (says he) -- ad alienas injurias: in quibus vindicandis ^aec tria
lex secuta ^st, quae princeps quoque sequi debet: aut ut cum quem punit,
emendet, aut ut p^^na ^jus caeteros meliores reddat; aut ut sublatis malis
securiores caeteri vivant.

But to come nearer home, I find a Learned man, and he One that though he were
not a Professed Divine, yet in Divinity has merited in many things as much as
most that are, I mean Grotius, who owns the same Notion of Punishment with that
which you Propose as yours, For he says, Ius puniendi in rectore, Grot. de
Satisf. Christ. c. 2.
etc. non est aut jus absoluti Dominii, aut Ius Crediti. Probatur hoc primo ex
fine, qui optime sole^ distinguere facultates. Nam Ius absoluti dominii ut and
jus Crediti comparatum est ejus gratia, qui id jus habet: at jus puniendi, non
punientis causa existit, sed causa communitatis alicujus. Poena enim omnis
Propositum habet Bonum commune, ordinis nimirum conservationem onem and
exemplum: ita quidem ut rationem expetibilis, non habeat, nisi ab hoc fine, cum
jus Dominii and Crediti per se sunt expetibilia. Hoc sensu Deus ipse Dicit se
poena eorum qui puniuntur non delectari.

And I will add to Grotius his Testimony, Dr. Still. Discourse concerning the
Sufferings of Christ, c. 1. sect. 4.
for the Resemblance and Conformity it has therewith, that of a Worthy Person
of our own, who also tells us (as the Author last mentioned) That the
Obligation to Punishment arises from the Injury the Public sustains by the
Impunity of Crimes, of which Magistrates are to take care, for the Reason of
Punishment is not because a Law is broken, but because the breach of the Law
tends to dissolve the Community by Infringing of Laws, and the honor of those
who are to take care of them; For if we consider it, the measure of Punishment
is in a well ordered State taken from the Influence which crimes have upon the
peace and interest of the Community, therefore, Pride, Avarice, Malice, are not
Punished by Humane Laws as severely, as Theft, etc. -- So that the common note
talked of Fiat Justitia and pereat mundus, is a piece of Pedantry, rather than
true wisdom -- And that hence it appears in Humane Laws, the Reason of
Punishment is not that such an Action is done, but because the Impunity in
doing it may have a bad influence on the Public interest, but in debts the
right of Restitution depends upon the Injury received by a Particular Person,
who looks at no more than the Reparation of his loss by it.

I make no question but whatever Persuasion you may possibly have had before,
you have this now, that I will do you all the right imaginable in the Argument,
seeing I acknowledge (that) the Notion that is its Basis and Foundation, has
such Authority to countenance and favor it: which that I may, I shall reduce
the Reason which you urge, to Form, and so display it in its Utmost Evidence
and Force, and then join Issue upon it. And in Forms it runs thus, All
Punishment which is inflicted justly, is inflicted either for the Good of the
whole, or of the part. But Everlasting Punishment as such, is neither inflicted
for the Good of the whole, nor for the God of the Part. Therefore Everlasting
Punishment as such is not inflicted justly, and consequently, not at all. For
Everlasting Punishment is none, if not Just.

Or thus,

All Just and Righteous Punishment is inflicted, not to torment, but to amend
the Party Punished, or the Society whereof he is a member, that both may enjoy
the sweets. But Infernal Everlasting Punishments are not, cannot be inflicted
to amend the Punished, or the Society, but only to Torment the Offender.
Therefore, etc.

This is your Argument in Form, wherein I take it to be so conclusive, so
cogent against Mr. Hobbs and men of his Persuasion, that I see not how on his
Principle the force thereof is avoidable. The Answer he vouchsafech it, is
utterly incapable of being applied, Neither of the Propositions in the
mentioned Syllogism, are in the least considered. A Truth you will as soon
acknowledge as you shall have read what he says. Hobbs de corp. polit. part.
1. chapter 5. sect. 11.
Concerning Revenge, says he, which by the Law of Nature ought nor to aim (as
I have said r. 3. sect. 10.) at present delight, but future Profit, there is
some difficulty made by such as object the continuance of Punishment after the
Day of Judgment, when there shall be no place neither for amendment, not for
example. This Objection had been of some force, if such Punishment had been
ordained after all sins were part, but considering the Punishment was
instituted before the sin, it serves to the benefit of mankind, because it
keeps men in Peaceable and Virtuous Conversation by the terror, and therefore
such Revenge was directed to the Future only.

Who sees not how unapplyable to either Proposition in the mentioned Argument
this Answer is? besides the great Harshness, that Revenge should not regard the
Past, but the Future; and as great a mistake [or Ignoratio Elenchi] as if the
thing is question were the Instituting and Ordaining of Eternal Punishment,
whereas indeed it is the Inflicting, between which there is no little
Difference; since if the Menacing and Threatening of Revenge respects the
Future, yet the Execution and Performance of that Revenge, does in common sense
regard the Past.

Wherefore seeing Mr. Hobbs's Answer will not satisfy a thinking man, I must
Essay to give the argument another, wherein though I might content my self
simply to deny the Major, namely, that All Punishment which is inflicted
justly, is inflicted either for the Good and Reformation of the Party Punished,
or for Example to Others: yet considering of how great advantage it may prove,
not only to detect a false Notion of Punishment, but instead thereof to Settle
and Establish a true One, I shall in order thereunto expartiate in my Answer.
And there are four things that I will do in it.

First, I will consider Punishment in general, as Abstracting from Divine and
Humane, and so from common Notions, endeavor to explain the Nature of it, and
the Ends, Where I will show it to be Vindictive. Secondly, I will show, that
the Notion of Revenge is not incompetent to God, but that He is a Revenger.
Thirdly, I will show, that all Infernal Punishments are Vindictive, or that
they are Revenges. Fourthly, I will answer those Objections that either Mr.
Hobbs's Principles, or other men's suggest against what I say concerning Eternal
Punishment, and ^he Person than God sustains in punishing.
To the First. And what is Punishment in the common sense and Notion which all
the World has of it, but Infliction of some Evil [of Pain] on an offender for
some Past offense? Or as others judge it fitter to express it, Great de I^re
Bell. l. 2. c. 20.
An Infliction of a Natural for a Moral Evil. Malum Pane propter malum Culpe,
Malum Passionis propter malum Actionis, Evil of Suffering for evil Doing.
Indeed the Notion strictly taken, immediately agrees but to Corporal
Punishment, as it is distinguished from Pecuniary, That being called Poena
properly, this Mulcea; But yet it Secondly agrees to Mulcts also; For these,
though in Propriety of Language they be not called Pains, are yet called
Penalties; to signify they are not Punishments, but in that Respect wherein as
Evils, they do Afflict and Pain.

This then Is the true and proper Notion, and the most agreeable to Holy
Scripture, of Punishment as it abstracteth from Divine and Humane, and it
imports in it somewhat as the matter, somewhat as the form. For the matter,
it imports Pain; for the term Pain in English, is derived from Poena, the
word for Punishment in Latin; and indeed what ever is inflicted could not be a
Punishment unto the Party, if it did not some way Pain him. For the Form, it
imports a Relation to committed sin, in recompense of which, and as a thing
deserved, the Pain or Evil is, inflicted; for Pain inflicted without Relation
unto some Offense and Transgression, may indeed be called an Affliction, but to
make that Pain a Punishment, it must regard some Injury, some wrong done, for
expiating which it is inflicted. Thus Punishment it is Retributive, and that it
is so, the very Terms that signify it in the Greek, do also manifestly show;
in which Language it is called (...), all which imply a Retribution and so the
Learned Seldom understood it, Seldom. de jur. not. and gent. l. 1. c. 4.
who says, Ex ratione and essentia Poenae proprie dictae est ut pro peccato
seu culpa aliqua impendatur, etc. Omnigena enim est partim Retributiva, etc.

In this Notion Punishment is really Revenge, and indeed in general is styled
(...) or Revenge by Plato in Gorgias, Vindicta by A. Gellius, and Ulpian that
great Lawyer, defines it Vindicta noxae, Vid. cic. de Inviat. l. 2.
A Vindication of received wrong. For what other is Revenge, than what I have
described Punishment, a Retribution of Evil, a rendering Evil back again for
evil received, or a making him to suffer evil, that has first done it: Only,
it looks in common Usage, as if in some formalities they differed, and that to
make Revenge Punishment, there were required a Sanction of it by Law, as if to
render Evil, where there is no Law to countenance and favor it, were bare
Revenge, but where there is, it were Punishment. This I say, it seems, for
whether any such Distinction be indeed to be allowed or not. I make a great
Question, For as much as all Revenges anciently were called Punishments,
Genuine and Proper. So Pausanids, -- Pausan, in Laceri^.
(...) The Ancients were wont to call Revenges Punishments.

Nor is Castigation or Chastisement (whatever Scaliger and others think) to be
excepted; for as Punishment, it is Retributive, it looks backward, and is
inflicted in the name of merit for some transgression past, and consequently is
Revenge; though as it looks forward to the Future, and is intended to Reform
the Party, and to prevent his doing so again, it is but a Remedy, or Medicine.
I say it again, that Castigation in the Prospect of it, is not Punishment; and
in the Retrospect it is Revenge; Silden de Fare Not. and G^nt. l. 1. c. 4.
and so says Seldom in the place before quoted, Omnigena enim est partim
^altom Retributiva, tametsi simul etiam fuerit medicinalis, ut in Scholis
loquuntur, seu emendationi sive ipsius peccantis sive aliorum adhibita. Neque,
san^ Platonicum illud neminem Prudentem Punire quia Peccatum est, sed ne
peccetur, verum satis esse potest, nisi intelligas, etc.

And from what I have already offered it does evidently follow,

First, That it is not warily expressed by you, that Punishment is not
inflicted to Torment the Criminal, you might as well have said, that Punishment
is not inflicted to be Punishment; it is Essential unto Punishment to be
Afflictive, for otherwise it could not be the issue and effect of Wrath or
Anger, which yet I shall evince it presently to be. To vex and grieve the
offender is the proper end of Anger, and its proper design, and it is in this,
as Aristotle tells us, Ar^st. Rh^t. l. ^ c. 5.
that it differs from Hatred and Malice. -- (...)

And this brings me to the Second Consectary, That all Punishment as inflicted
on transgressors for Offenses P^st^inia^ issue and effect of Anger, for what
else is Anger but as Aristotle has defined it, and as our own Experience
sensibly evinces it, (...) an Appetition in Desire of Revenge, Arist. Rbet. l.
2. c. 2.
and consequently, Punishment is in satisfaction and contentment to Anger.
Hence the Scripture Paraphrases Punishment, by the letting out of wrath or
Anger.

I know the famous Scaliger defines Anger otherwise, Scal. Exerc. 313.
that it is not Appetit^^s Ultionis, but Depulsinis, not a Desire of Revenging,
but ^verting Evil. A Notion not a little opposite to common sense, and to be
admired how possibly it could be his, who was so wrathful and Vindictive a Man,
and when from his own experience, was as capable is ever any was of knowing
better. But I take the Answer to him to be very Pertinent, which Cardan, a
Scholar as Substantial and as Real, and every way as great as himself, has
given long ago on this occasion, Cardan. Actio. 1. contra caelumn.
Verum locum (says he) and (...) open invenit, quibas, suaes ineptias
dissunderet. Utinam vera esse^t quae definit: saepe anim ^^lia quaer^r^ soleo,
que non nvenio ^piud uliquem. Sed absit ut ab illo accipiam, qui nec ab aliquo
veterum significata haec accipit, nec ostendit quod ita fi^^ sed vult, quae
simplics narrationi, (...) dictatori, atqui^e ovacula ^^ipiam, etc. --

Again, the Sentiment of S^nec^ that Noble Stoic, which also Gratius owns as
his, That Justice is not Ira, but Ratio, that Justice is Reason, and not A^ger,
is alleged. A^ if, it were impossible that Justice should be Reason, if it
were Anger. A Notion worthy only o^ Persons who believe the Affection to be
Intrinsecally evil, or who understand them in their Irration^^ excesses only,
as Seneta did when he talked so, Vid. A^ist. de Mer, l., 4. c. 11.
and not of those that can believe that they be natural that they are ascribed
to God that under Regulations and within their Bounds, they are not Evils, but
Perfections, We may be ^ng^^ and not sin. For my part, I am with those
Philosophers of whom I read in Plutarch, Plutar. de Procr Anim. i^ Tim. Vid
Laclan. de Ir^ Dei, c. 37^ and 21, and ^.
who think that there is Reason in Passion. Once Animal in man is Rationale,
Humane Passions, Regulated and Conducted by the Mind, are no Irrational
Extravagancies, or Emotions Opposite to Humane Reason, but Virtues that partake
it, and in themselves Accomplishments that Integrate the Humane Nature, without
which it would be Lame, Imperfect, Defective.

In a word, Vindictive Justice, as Justice, it is Reason; as Vindictive, it is
Anger; and though it be not that Anger which is excessive and extravagant, a
thing so far from being governed by Reason, and participating of it, that it is
inconsistent with it, and is a Perturbation that transports a man beyond all
Bounds. Yet Anger it is, as Anger is that Rational Inclination that a Person
has to vindicate himself, for those Indignities and those Affronts that are
done him. In this sense all Punitive Justice is Anger, and in this sense also
it is Reason, so that it is not true to say, that Justice is Reason and not
Anger, Plat. 11. de rep. Arist. 3. Eth. Nico. c. 8. apud Lipsium. Com. in Sen.
l. 1. de Ira.
For Punitive Justice is both, it is Reason and Anger, or Reasonable Anger. In
fine, I oppose to Seneca's Authority, that of Plato and of Aristotle.

So much in general for the Nature of Punishment. Now touching the Ends of
Punishment, and that Division which is made thereof in reference to them; I
say, that seeing there are several Parties in every Punishment that is
Inflicted, of which the One is Agent, He that Punishment; the Other Patient; he
that is Punished, and then the circumstants and standers by. The Punishment may
bear Relation to them all, and in conformity to those Relations, as it is
expressed by several Titles, so it also has as many several Ends and Designs.

For First, In relation to the Agent; or to him that does Inflict, in which
respect they call it (...) or Revenge, it is designed in Satisfaction of his
Anger, to assert and free him from contempt offered, and so to make Reparation
to, his lost, or injured honor. Noct. A^^. 6. c. 14.
Hence (...) quasi (...), or as A. Gellius -- iccircoque id vocabulum a
conservatione honoris factum putant.

That Reparation of lost and injured Honor is intended in Revenge, or
Punishment, is Unquestionable, in as much as Revenge, which I have defined
Retribution of evil, is not only expressed in common language, by I will be
quits with him, I will meet with him, I will be even with him, in respect of
which it is called (...)( ie) Re^aliation; but it is also expressed, by I will
make him know himself, I will make him know whom he has to do with, before I
have done with him ^ and this is Reparation of Assaulted Honor. Hence it is
that Vindication, which originally and at first did signify Revenge, was
afterward employed to signify Assertion or Defense; because the true Design of
Revenge is to assert and free the taker of it from that contempt, and that
neglect which was shown him. Arist. Rb^t. l. 2. c. 2.


And truly, there is nothing sweeter than Revenge, as it atchieveth this End;
it carries in it so much satisfaction and gratification, something so agreeable
and so delightful, that common sense as well as Aristotle tells us, Arist.
Rbet. l. 1. c. 11. and l. 2. c. 2.
(...) Revenge is sweet. No wonder therefore that it is so Natural to seek
Revenge, since it is so sweet; there is nothing more Delightful than to
Overcome an enemy, and to Regain lost Honor; a Delight so Pure, so Abstract,
that it is 'not Unworthy of Almighty God himself, who is affirmed to Assume it.
He rejoices over his Adversaries.

It Is is relation unto this end, that Anger cannot satisfy it self, as Malice
does, that evil be inflicted upon him that has provoked it; It requires
further that he be sensible of that Evil, and who inflicted it; for if he be
not, it cannot compass this its End thereby; It removes not contempt, it
makes not the enemy to know himself, no nor to know him neither with whom he
has to do.

In fine, This end is so inseparable from Punishment, that whosoever does
inflict this, must needs propose it; and if he do not actually propose it, he
is in Reason to be interpreted to do so virtually, in respect of the Person he
sustains, which is of one so impaired, so injured in his Honor by some
contempt shown him, that he cannot choose but vindicate it. This is the proper
end of Punishment as Punishment, and in respect of this, Punishment is mere
Punishment. Hence God when he threatens to Revenge and Punish, words it, I will
make them know that I am the Lord, etc.

So much for Punishment as it respects the Party that Inflicts it; but as it
respects the Party punished, so it is called (...) or Castigation, and is
intended for his Good, and Amendment. For Instance, a Father so corrects his
Child, a Master his Servant, not merely by way of Vindication, for that he has
been bad, but by way of Reformation, that he may be made better. Folly is bound
up in the Heart of a Child, and the Rod of Correction must fetch it out. Thus
Punishment is Physic.

But if we consider Punishment in Reference to the standers by or Assistants,
so it is called (...) or Example; a word used also in the Scripture, Joseph was
not willing to make Mary a [Publick] Example [(...)] and those things are
written for our examples [(...)] and is Designed to deterr and fright others
from committing like transgressions; and thus also Punishment is Physic.

And so much for the First Particular, to explicate the Nature and the Ends of
Punishment, wherein I have evinced it (as such) to be Vindictive; I now proceed
to the Second, which is to show, that Punishment in this notion of Vindictive,
is not incompetent to God, but that as he punishes, so he is an Avenger; and
that the Punishments which he inflicts, are not only Castigations and Examples,
but Revenges.

And there is nothing more perspicuous than this Truth; for First, Therefore he
Assumeth Anger, wrath and Indignation to himself, nay, Jealousy, to show he
minds his Glory, that he will not bear contempt, that it is no good despising
of him, that if he be despised, as he wants not the Power, so he will not
want the Will to avenge for it. The thought that God will avenge; it strikes
men with fear, and the fear of God is the Beginning of Wisdom; they that fear
him cannot flight him. So Aristotle, (...). Arist. Rhet. l. 2. c. 2.
He that fears cannot flight or contemn.

Again, He has ingrafted a Vindictive Principle into every thing that has
sense; there is not a Worm but has it, and he that has ingrafted Revenge,
shall not he Revenge? for if he that Planted the ear, must needs hear, and he
that made the eye, must needs see; and he that gave a heart to man, must needs
understand; then surely he that has implanted in every living thing a
Principle of Revenge, in order to its own defense and conservation, must needs
be one himself that will take it.

Thirdly, And it being legible and manifest in Nature, Vi^. Frat. Adag. tit.
ultin. Courtar de ^xag. Deor. ^. 307, 308, etc.
no wonder if the very Heathens saw it. For besides the Adrastia and Nemesis of
the Poets, that Sanctuary and Asylum (that) they have made (...) injured
virtue, I find as much in Livy, ad Deos Vindices entolerandae (...) confugiam.
So Seneca, S^nt (...) immortales lenti quidem sed certi Vindices generis
humani, etc. And there is a plain and full assertion of it in the Laws of the
Twelve Tables, of which the first (we have) is, Ad Divos adeunto cast;
Pietatem adhibento, Opes amovento, Life up Pure hands to God; Exercise Piety;
Use no costly and expensive Ceremonies. Qui secus faxit, Deus ipse Vindex erit.
He that does otherwise, God will take Vengeance upon him. It is Deus erit
Vindex, not erit Judex, Cit. d^ leg. l. 2.
Cicero's Observation, V^d. Arist. de man. ad fin.
it is not that God will Judge, but that he will Avenge.

Fourthly, But I insist too long in arguing a Point that is so manifest for
what is plainer than that God is one that executes Vengeance, since he
appropriates it to himself; Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it; for he not
only own himself therein to be a Revenger, but he claims it as his great
Prerogative to be so; Vengeance is mine, it is not man's, I will repay. And no
less than this did Seneca imply in saying, Sen. insap. no^ cad. Inj^ria. c. 18.
Let this therefore be for our comfort, that although our frailty omitteth
Revenge, there will be some one who will revenge us on an Audacious Proud and
Injurious Enemy.

But you will ask me, why does God Appropriate Vengeance? and how does he
Execute it?

I answer First to the first Question, that therefore Vengeance is appropriated
unto God, because in every wrong, iniquity, injury or sin, which in its utmost
comprehension and extent he has severely forbidden, there is contempt of him;
and his command, so that though the Hurt and Injury be done to man, yet there
being also in it (...) and Neglect of God, it were an Insolence that could not
be excused, for the Creature to take the matter out of his Creators hands, who
is infinitely more concerned in it than he. This were for man to frustrate and
defeat (as much as in him lies) the Vindication and Revenge of his Superior
and Lord, and by a Presumptuous execution and Pursuit of his own. God says,
Vengeance is mine. I am more concerned in the Injury than Thou. Thy Enemy
wrongs thee, but he contemns me; and therefore since it is so much my Interest
to see it taken, do thou leave the Revenge to me. And to leave it to God, is
but a piece of Deference and Respect we owe him. So Aristotle, Arist. Rhet: l.
2. c. 16.
(...). It is Pie^y (as one does Paraphrase it) to leave the matter to God, who
if there be any fraud or cozenage, will surely Revenge.

And How is Vengeance executed by him, which was the Second Question I supposed
you to put, but either immediately and in his own Person, or mediately and by
his Ministers of State and Magistrates? Vengeance is God's, but he has
betrusted it with men to execute and let it out; I have said ye are Gods,
Magistrates that bear the name, they have the keeping of the Honor and
Vengeance of God; it is God has put the Sword into their hands, and to appeal
to them for Vengeance is to go to God for it. God does Revenge, when they do,
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay. This is the Charter wherein the
Magistrates vindictive Power, or Right of the Sword is conveyed. Men must not
right themselves, it is God must right them. For this End he has appointed men
on earth in his name to do it, this is the Basis and Foundation of
Magistratical Power, and this is the sole consideration that makes the
Prosecution of Injuries Lawful. Were not Magistrates Gods, there could be no
complaining to them, for redress of Grievances, nor going to Law before them,
in Vindication of our Rights and Properties, for Vengeance is Gods.

I make no question, but by this time you see the little excursion I have made
in this Particular, is not impertinent, but that I was obliged to it, to
obviate the Prejudices some have taken up against the Vindictiveness of
Punishments in general, and consequently of Divine Ones; namely, that Humane
Punishments are so Rectoral, as not to be vindictive or effects of Anger. But
you see now, that Magistrates as Rectors are Gods, that as such, they are
invested with Vindictive Power, and are in the Place and Stead of God, to
execute His Anger for all Dishonor and contempt done him; so that the
Obligation unto Punishment, in a rightly instituted Commonwealth, arises not
only from the Danger that not unlikely may accrue unto it by the Impunity of
crimes, but also from the dishonor and Affront is offered in them unto God,
the Sovereign Rector. So far is Fiat justitia, ruat coelum, from being a piece
of solemn Pedantry. Yes, it is a Principle of solid and substantial Wisdom. God
is the First Author, and therefore He is the Utmost End of Humane Societies,
it is by him, and therefore for him that Kings Rule,. and Princes decree
Justice. Of this Persuasion were such Illustrious Romans as accused of
Parricide (for having murdered his Sister) that Horatius (one of the Tregemini)
to whom all Rome was so obliged, and so freshly; and what they Urged in order
to procure Justice upon him, evinces that they thought the doing of it on All
Wisdom, and that as much as Commonwealths are interessed and concerned in
Punishments, Dio^^ys. Ha-lica^^ass. l. 3.
All-mighty God is more. Hi longa oratione proserebant Lges (says Dionysius)
que nemini quempiam indemnatum occidere permittunt: recensebantque; exampla
Deorum irae in civitates que inulta sivissent scelera. Yes, and in the same
cafe, so scrupulous and tender was the King himself, that though the People
upon Appeal made to Them, had acquitted that Deserving Criminal, yet Tullus
Hostilius out of the great Respect, Fear and Reverence which he paid to his
Deities, would not but in the way of Expiation and Sacrifice. Rex ramen non
contentus hominum calculis, and de Religione solicitus, accitis Pontificibus
jussit placari Deos, atque Genios, and caede Iuvenem expiari legitime.

Nor is what I now assert with so much confidence, more than what the Great
Apostle has asserted long before me, in Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. For nothing can
be plainer, than that in the Text alleged, Paul affirms what I have, (1.) That
the Magistrate is a Revenger, for he not only calls him a Terror to the Evil
(which implies it) but in terms a Revenger. He is the Minister of God, a
Revenger. (2.) That Revenge taken by the Magistrate, as the Sword with which he
takes it, is God's. He bears not the Sword in vain, He is the Minister of God.

(3.) That Punitive Justice is Vindictive, and Punishments Effects of Wrath,
not the Wrath of Man, but the Wrath of God, He is the Minister of God to
Execute, What? Justice to be sure. But that Justice is Wrath, Divine Wrath; He
is the Minister of GOD to Execute WRATH.

And my Assent to these Assertions is unshaken, notwithstanding that I find
objected, that the measure of Punishment is taken from the Influence that
crimes have upon on the Peace and Interest of the Community, Pride, Avarice,
Malice not being punished by Humane Laws as severely as Theft, etc. But this
moves not me.

For First, Humane Laws (as also Lawgivers) are not always what they should
be. And we must distinguish Humane Laws. For these are either Universal, such
as are coincident with Laws Divine, and do Prohibit or Enjoin, what they do: or
else Municipal, and more Particular, founded only on the Profit and Utility of
such as Consent to them. Now Humane Laws of the first sort, which I called
Universal, are properly Laws, and do oblige the Conscience, as being of Divine
Appointment and Sanction, and the Punishments annexed to them must be executed
on offenders, they being Vindicts and concerning God. But Humane Laws indeed of
the second sort, which I would rather call Agreements of the People or Compacts
under a forfeiture, do oblige no farther, than as they are of Advantage; Nor by
the breaking of them incurr you other Danger than of the forfeit was agreed on,
to those to whom you have made it, who may Dispense. For every one may depart
with his own Right, though none with another. Again, if Pride, Avarice, Malice
are not punished by Humane Laws of the first sort as severely as Theft, etc. So
neither are they in the present World by the Divine, which yet Regard God; and
it is because they have not that Malignant Influence upon the Public, which
Theft and others like it have, and consequently, that in that Respect they are
not so Evil. But Thirdly, though the measure of Punishment be taken as you see
I grant in part it is, from the Influence that crimes may have upon the peace,
and interest of the Community, yet it follows not but that such Punishment
inflicted, may be Vindictive. And Vindictive it is, for God ordained it. And he
ordains greater Punishment for such than other crimes, for that they having
Tendency to Ruin and Dissolve Commonwealths, which it is as well his Care, as
great Concernment to maintain and uphold, are more offensive and provoking to
Him, than Others. Cic. in Some. Scip.
Nihil est (says Cicero) illi Principi Deo qui omnem hunc mundum regit, ( quod
quidem in terris fiat) acceptius quam Concilia, Coetusque hominum jure sociati,
quae Civitates appellantur. And so much for the Second Head.

I am now in the Third Place to show the kind and species of Eternal
Punishments, whether they be (...) or (...). Whether they are mere Revenges, in
satisfaction and contentment of Divine Justice and Anger; or Castigations,
intended only to Reform and amend the punished; or in fine, Examples, designed
to Edify the standers by, and make them Careful what they do.

And to be plain, I hold Eternal Punishments now threatened, and One Day to be
inflicted on the Wicked that despise them, all Vindictive, or Effects of Wrath;
And that the great Design and End of God in them is to Rescue his engaged
Honor and Glory, and to satisfy and please himself in Trophies of his
Justice, and in Triumphs over vanquished Enemies.

Now that Eternal Punishments are principally, if not solely designed for the
Honor, Glory, Triumph of the Great God, is evident, in that the day of
Judgment (wherein the sinner shall be damned to them,) is the last day; when
all Administration, Government and Rectory shall cease, and be no more; And
consequently cannot be intended either in favor of the punished themselves, or
for Examples to others.

Perhaps some who love Hypotheses, as many do in this too Curious Age; will
tell you, that the Eternal Punishments and Torments of the Damned are Examples
unto Saints in Glory, and that they are designed as a means to settle and
establish them in that condition; it not being to be thought that any in it can
incline to change, when they shall ever have before their Eyes so Dire Examples
of changing. And Socrates in Plato, who makes the damned in Hell Examples unto
those in Purgatory, is in part of this Opinion, (...), Socr. apud Plat. in
Gorgia.
(says he) (...), -- But others are extremely wicked, and by Reason of their
wickedness become incurable. Of these, Examples are made, who indeed being
incurable, receive themselves no advantage and benefit, yet others do, who see
them suffering for their sins, the most extreme, most sharp, and most
tremendous torments, and that to Eternity.

And for confirmation of it, it may be colourably offered, that the Devil who
affected to leave his first Habitation, and to change it for another, had not
had an instance them of that Exorbitancy and folly in any kind; nor had Adam,
whole Easy Nature was abused by that Serpent into a like Extravagancy and
weakness with his, then had one in his own. For had either of them had an
Example, it is to be presumed, he would have found therein a Perfect Cure for
Curiosity, that Impotent and Fond Emotion, which proved so Fatal to both.

I say Curiosity, which I apply as well to Fallen Angels, as to Fallen Adam,
because it seems not unlikely, an Unhappy Curiosity of knowing this Inferior
World, and perhaps of making an Experiment of Misery and Evil, whereof hitherto
they had but heard, that rather than Pride, or any Impotent and senseless
Ambition of being either Equal or Superior to their Maker (as the most think;)
or, (as Tertullian and Cyprian do) Their Envy at the Honor and Happiness of
man was the Lust inclining them to leave their First Habitation, and to
exchange't for Another. This was that which made them Descend, they were
disposed to try those other Regions. And Really the History of their Fall or
Descent, as it stands on Record in the Sacred Volume, So^rat ^p^d Plat. i^
Phaedon.
which is not much unlike what Socrates in Plato has concerning it,
countenanceth this Opinion, it being said in Jude, that they kept not their,
Original and first state [(...)] but (which is added Exegetically) that [as
Persons not contented with it] they left their proper Habitation. Jude 6.
In doing which, as they committed Sin and Evil, so they found its Punishment:
God for that Extravagance and Weakness (of theirs) both Excluding them for ever
from Heaven, and converting the Place they so affected to be in, into a Hell to
them, 2 Pet. 2.

This is the less improbable, for that they tempted Eve and Adam with the same
consideration, you shall be like to Elohim; presuming (as it may be rationally
thought) that that was likely to become the most Efficacious and Successful
bait unto others, that had proved but too Powerful a One unto themselves. They
by Elohim but meaning themselves, which yet was understood by Adam (probably as
they would have it) to signify God. Thus the Devil put a Fallacy and Cheat
upon our first Parents, and for that is called a Liar from the Beginning. He
Equivocated with them. You shall be as Elohim, [They understood as God; the
Devil meant as his Fellows:] and wherein as Elohim, but by knowing by their own
Experience Good and Evil; and truly so they did, by woeful Experience; they knew
Good in Paradise, and Evil out of it; As the Devils knew Good in Heaven, and
Evil in Hell. But this by the way, to Return.

But though another might presume to bottom the Eternal standing of the Good
Angels, on the Dismalness of that Condition, which they see the Fallen Ones have
plunged themselves into, by leaving their first Habitation; and who would try
again, or wish to have Experience of Hell, Evil, Misery in himself, that has
seen, or still sees so dreadful an Experiment thereof in others? And he might
also think himself as able to account in like manner, for that eternal
confirmation of the glorified Saints in Heaven, by the tremendous observation
of the Dire Examples of the Damned in Hell, eternally depending in their eyes.
I say, though another would account and reckon thus, yet I dare not: There is
in my Judgment an Infinitely higher ground than this, both of the Fixation and
Establishment of Glorified Saints and of standing Angels. For (as I take it) it
is Incorporation and Ingraffment of the former, and also of the latter into
Jesus Christ, and the Inhabitation and Indwelling of the Great Eternal God in
them, as in his own house, that does Establish and Confirm them; it being the
Prime Design of God in all that has been, and all that shall be done in the
World, but to build unto himself a Spiritual House, and Temple wherein he may
Reside for ever; whose House ye are. Christ is Master Builder, Ministers
Inferior Builders, the work both of Christ and Ministers is Edification and
Building. To whom coming as to a living stone disallowed indeed of men, but
chosen of God, Elect and Precious, you also as lively stones, are built up a
Spiritual House.

By this you see Eternal Punishments are not designed for Example, much less
for Castigation and Amendment of the Punished Hell is not a Purgatory, as the
Treefalleth, so it lies: Judgment is the Final and Conclusive Act of
dispensations: No, Eternal Punishments are neither Castigations, nor Examples,
but mere Revenges, intended to Assert Divine Honor, to satisfy Justice, and
in a word, intended to remove away from God, all that Dishonor and Contempt,
that has been put upon him by sinners.

And this also was the Notion that the Ancients had of the last Judgment, for
they held the Justice of the great Judge Rhadamanthus to be Avenging and
Vindictive.

So Aristotle, -- (...),
Arist. Eth. l.. 5. c. 8.
(...)
And they seem to call this the Justice of Rhadamanthus (...) -- If any be
Requited in the same kind, or suffer what he has done, he is served Right.

And so Hesiod, (...)
Hesiod. oper. etc dier. l. 1.
(...)
with such an one God is Angry, who in the End will take severe Vengeance for
all Iniquities.

But this is a thing that seems so harsh to you on many accounts, that to
settle your belief concerning it, I must now perform what I promised in the
fourth place; namely, answer the Arguments you apprehend to militate, and fight
against it: and first for Mr. Hobbs's he says, Hobbs de corp. polit. part. 1.
c 3. s. 10.
Revenge when it considers the offense past, is nothing else but present
Triumph and Glory, it directs to no end, and what directs to no end, is
therefore Unprofitable, and consequently the Triumph of Revenge is Vainglory,
and whatsoever is vain, is against reason. Thus Mr. Hobbs.

But it is as easy a matter to defend my self from Mr. Hobbs in this
Particular, as to Repulse a weak and tired Assailant: for though I do
acknowledge that Revenge as it respects offenses past, is Glory and Triumph;
for therefore I asserted that God did Glory and Triumph in his Revenge [He
Rejoices over his Adversaries:] Yet that his Glory, Triumph and Rejoicing over
them, because it is not directed and referred to a Further end, should
therefore be Vain, is inconsequent. For it is a most improper expression to say
an End is vain; an End as such has no end. Nor can there be an Infinite
Progression in Ends, any more than in Efficients, and though Destinates are
said to be in vain, if either they are insufficiently, or not at all referred
to their Ends, yet that which is no Destinate, but is the Ultimate and furthest
End of all that are, is not vain, though it cannot be referred to another. Now
Divine Glory is the Utmost End of all things, God himself in all he does
refers to it, and obliges us to do so in all we do; so that although it
cannot be denied but that Humane Glorying, or the Boasting of men in
themselves, because it is not (as it ought to be) and indeed cannot be directed
to the Divine Glory, which is the Ultimate End, is therefore vain; yet that
Divine Glory and Triumph it self, which is the matter of the greatest
satisfaction of God, and is the Utmost and furthest End he can propose to
himself, who ultimately minds himself, and cannot possibly do otherwise, that
that is vain, because it has no further End, is not only a Blasphemous, but a
foolish Assertion. The last End can have no further End; indeed no end can as
an end, because as an End it is last. Gods Glory is simply the last End; no
flesh shall Glory in his Presence, let him that glories, glory in the Lord. The
glorying of men is vain Glory, because not referred as it ought to be to God;
but the glory of God is solid and substantial glory, because the End of all.

Again, But you will tell me out of Grotius in the Place before cited, that God
delights not in the Death or Punishment of those on whom it is inflicted,
that is, to use the terms of another Learned Person; of whom I also made some
mention before; that as a Governor or Rector he delights not in it, as
expedient for himself, and that because the Right of Punishment is not existent
for the sake of him that Punishes, but for as much as all Punishment regards
the Commonweal or Society, it is existent for the sake of that.

But I have already proved, that the Obligation unto Punishment resulteth not
solely, nor principally from the Injury the Public may sustain, by Impunity of
Crimes, but from the wrong, and Injury and Contempt of God that is in them;
which whosoever seriously considers that Societies themselves are for God, and
that Punishment it self is in the Nature of it vindictive, cannot easily deny.
Temporal Rewards and Punishments as well as Magistrates and Governments, are
Divine Ordinances, and therefore directed to Divine Glory, as to their last
end. God is the Sovereign Rector, and designs his own Honor, as well as man's
Good. He is Dishonored, as well as the Commonweal endangered, if Punishments
be not duly Executed. For this cause he threatened the Israelites, that if they
found not out the Sacrilegious Person, and Punished him, He would forsake and
leave them.

And for that that it is said in Sacred Scripture, that God delights not in
the Death of a sinner; the meaning is not that, if sinners will be Obstinate,
Perverse and Refractory, he cannot derive his satisfaction from his Justice, in
rejoicing over them to do them evil, for that he can, Vid. Eras^ i Adag. tit.
Ult. Mal.
according to the Proverb, (...). But that he deferreth and delayeth
Punishment, and with much Patience, Long-suffering and forbearance endures all
their miscarriages, and all the Insolences of the wicked; as who should say,
He would rather they would turn from their Wickedness and Folly, and live, than
Persist therein and dye. So he waits to be gracious. The Long-suffering of
God is Salvation.

It is in this sense that God is said not to Punish and correct the children of
men willingly, viz. That he bears with them long; for in common language
those Expressions are Equivalent and much the same, Chartar. de Imag. Deor. f.
110.
(...), it is long before Jupiter inspects his Note-book, and (...), Jupiter
unwillingly takes notice of it: Erasm. in Adag tit. Qui ult. Mal.
and so Erasmus understands them, who tells us, sero dat, aut punit, gravatim
id facere videtur, That whosoever deferreth either to oblige or punish, He seems
unwillingly to do it. It is thus that God delights not in the death of a
sinner, and that He wills it not; comparatively he would rather that he
should Repent and Live; and interpretatively, he delayeth to inflict
Punishment, as it were expecting an occasion, that he might with Honor omit it.

And this in answer to the General Exceptions you put in, namely, The seeming
Improportion between a Finite Transgression and an Infinite Punishment, and the
Inconsistency of Eternal Punishment with the End of Punishment; As for the more
Particular ones, I shall in their order now consider them, and first for that
of the odd Circumstances of the most that are Christians. You say,

Not to urge that the most that are Christians lie and live under such odd
Circumstances, that they are very near an impossibility wholly to subdue, and
suppress the influences of Sense, and yet must they be Plagued or Punished with
Unspeakable and Eternal Tortures?

I answer no, for it is impossible for any while immured in the Body, wholly to
subdue the Influences of sense, and should none arrive at Heaven, but who had
first arrived to a State of Perfection here on Earth, Heaven would be empty,
and Hell full: That Perfection which is to be our aim on earth, cannot be our
attainment, or our achievement but in Heaven. Here sin will be Indwelling in us
as long as there is flesh incompassing us. It is not Perfect, but Sincere
Obedience that is exacted by Grace.

For, that Perfection cannot be attained in the present world by any that
descend from Adam, is evident: in that Concupiscence or Lust is Original,
Native, inlayed with our very Tempers; We are begotten in sin, and in the
Fervency or Heat of Lust and Appetite, and consequently having such Impressions
made upon us in our very Rise and Conception, and augmented, and improved in us
by our after Acts, it is as impossible for us totally to rid our selves of
these, as of any other Instincts, and Propensions of Nature. We may check them
and restrain them, but cannot destroy and eradicate them. This Body must be
new-moulded, new-cast, before it can be wholly freed of the lusts that infect
it. Therefore the Apostle when he would be Discharged from his sin, thus
expresses his Option, who will deliver me from the Body of this Death!

I know that Jesus Christ was a Man, and that he lived in the midst of
Temptations without the Danger and the Power of any, and that he is the Great
Example of Divine Life; but I also know the Devil who coming unto us does find
so much, coming unto him, found nothing in him. For he not being begotten or
conceived in the Ordinary way of Generation, as all others are, with the common
Fervency and Heat of Lust or Appetite, but on a Pure and cold Virgin, and by
the Holy Ghost, had no Original Concupiscence or Lust to be awakened and
excited in him, as in us, by the many Objects presented daily to the sense. Now
external causes work little without there be internal ones to cooperate,
Inefficax est causa Procatarctica sine Proegumena.

But to return; Again, the Christian Life here is compared to imperfect things,
to Fighting, to Running, to Growing, to Walking, in a word (compared) to
Motions; and what is Motion but Imperfect Act, Actus entis in Potentia,
quatenus in potentia. What is in Motion is but in tendency unto Perfection, but
has not yet arrived to it. In Motion there are two terms. The Term from which,
and that in this is here on Earth: And the Term to which, and this is in
Heaven, and between these is the Motion.

Truly Sir, Our Holiness is not our Righteousness to justify our Persons; it is
too Imperfect and Defective to do that, It Is not our Inherent but Adherent
Righteousness, not the Righteousness within us, but the Righteousness imputed
to us, that must bottom all our Hopes; And I the rather say this, because I am
a little jealous (by reason of the supposition on which the Argument you urge
is grounded) that you hold the Opinion which is now the Ascendent, That Imputed
Righteousness is Fancy, and that it was not the Design of Jesus Christ, nor of
the Gosple to advance and set up that, but only that which inheres in us.

Were I sure of what I but suspect that you are indeed of this Opinion, and
that your Argument has Aspect that way, I should more fully set my self to
oppose it, and to establish that Egregious Verity and Truth of Christian
Doctrine concerning Righteousness imputed, as One that ministers as much unto
the Comfort, and Repose and Quiet of Conscience, as any other. But since I am
not sure, I shall say the less of it now.

Only thus much I will say, that certainly the great Design of God in sending
Jesus Christ into the world, was to make His Righteousness, the Righteousness
of God Illustrious, in opposition unto that of man, or the Righteousness of the
Law; there being Nothing within the compass of the Humane Understanding that
can more contribute to illustrate and set off the Infinite and Transcendent
Majesty of the great God, as to his Wisdom, Goodness and Justice, than the
Declaration he has made from Heaven of his Righteousness in Jesus Christ, that
he is Just and a Justifier; Just to Punish Christ that assumed on himself the
sin of man, and a Iustifier of those that are in Christ, whose Punishment he
bore.

The Inherent Righteousness, that Romanists and others so insist upon, is
nothing as a Righteousness to boast of, but that Pharisaical one displayed by
our Blessed Savior in the Instance of it which he gives in Luke, Luke 18.10,
11, 12.
I thank thee O God that I am not this nor that, but do this and that: Wherein
there is an Acknowledgement of God as Author and Inspirer of all the Good he
does, but withal an Exaltation and Advancement of self, I thank thee, there is
the One, I am no Extortioner, no Adulterer, nor Unjust: I fast twice in the
Week, I give Tithes of all that I possess, there is the Other. It was very well
done that he fasted, that he gave Alms, etc. but yet not so well as to
Encourage him to boast therein before God.

Verily the Great Design of Jesus Christ and Christianity is not to exalt, but
to depress self; He that glories must not glory in the Flesh, not in anything
he is, not in any thing he does, though by Divine Assistance. For by that must
all have been done, that either was or could be done by Adam in Innocence, it
must have been done by Gods Assistance; and yet for all that, Room enough there
was for Boasting and Glorying, then in that Transaction, whereas in this of
Grace, or in the Dispensation of the Life and Immortality by Jesus Christ,
there is Absolutely none at all.

No, the Design of Christ and Christianity is instead of Pharisaical and Legal
Righteousness, which consists in our doing and performing of the works of the
Law (as by Divine Assistance and enablement we can) to Institute another, that
of the Son of God, the Lord our Righteousness, who is appointed to invest and
cover with his, all those that sensible of their own Unrighteousness and
Imperfection, do apply themselves unto him for it. Except your Righteousness
exceeds the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees [which consists in their
own doing, etc.] And the Christians does Exceed it, his is the Lord Christ, it
consists not in his own doing for himself, which is but short and imperfect,
but in Christ's doing for him, which is full and Perfect.

That it does so is evident, Luke 18.13, 14.
in that the Publican in whom the Christian Righteousness is represented,
hanging down his head, as one ashamed of himself, and ashamed to come into the
Divine Presence, not boasting of performances and works, but confessing and
acknowledging of sins, humbly imploring Grace and Mercy, was rather Justified
than the Pharisee, that is, according to the Scripture Language, was Justified,
and not the Pharisee. The like of Paul, who had as much according to the Law to
boast of as another, yet in the matter of Justification, when he comes to make
Reflection on his best Performances, he in comparison of Christ, esteems them
all but Dung and Dross; and is to far from standing on them in point of
Righteousness, that he first renounceth all Presensions of his own thereto, and
then entirely devolves himself on Jesus Christ for it. Such is the Christians
Righteousness, it is not his Holiness within, but Christ without that Justifies
him.

This is that method of Justification of sinners that was contrived by Divine
Counsel and Goodness, and that is displayed in the Gospel; God imputes not sin
unto believing sinners, but imputes to them the Righteousness and Sufferings
of the Lord Christ; he reckons as if sinners suffered in their own persons,
and did what Jesus Christ has done and suffered for them, and so acquitteth
them and sets them free, as those that by their Surety have contented Justice,
and satisfied the Law. Thus is Christ made of God unto us Righteousness; Vid.
Michael. in Arist. Moral. l. 5. Camerar. ad e^nd.
His (...) or Satisfaction to Divine Justice by Suffering (for in this sense I
find the word to be often used even in Heathen Writings) as well as his
Performance is Reputed Ours.

Nor is this Licentious Doctrine and an Inlet to Profaneness, for what shall we
say then, shall we continue in sin that Grace may abound, how shall we that are
dead to sin live any longer therein; know you not, etc. Romans 6.1, 2, 3, 4. But
now being made free from sin, and become servants unto God, you have your fruit
unto Holiness, and the End everlasting life, verse 22. Without Holiness no man
shall see God. Faith works by Love. If ye love me, keep my Commandments.

I would have offered more on this Exception, but that you seem not to insist
your self so much upon it. It being Another to which I am proceeding, that it
seems awakens in you far more feeling and more vive Resentments. For so I
judge, when I find you saying, how much more dismal and tremendous does it
look, that those People in America, Japan, China, Lapland, etc. that lie under
an unavoidable ignorance, I mean morally so, that yet these poor creatures for
what they cannot help, shall be cast into Everlasting Darkness, etc.

Truly Sir, I apprehend not the Reason why you instance in the Americans,
Iapaneses, Chinese, as People lying in a state of Unavoidable and Invincible
Ignorance of Jesus Christ, and of the Methods of Salvation, since Jesus Christ
is preached among them, though with some mixture, and the Christian Doctrine,
if you will believe History, has been witnessed to among them, as at first it
was among others, both by the Martyrdom of those that brought it, and by their
Miracles.

You know by whose incitement the famous Francis Xavier (that Papal Apostle)
undertook the Indian Expedition for the saving of souls, and what success
attended both him and those that followed him in that design in India, China,
Japan; whereof you have a large account not only in the Indian and Japanick
Epistles, but also in the Commentaries of Emanuel Acosta, expressly written on
that subject. And how industrious and careful the Great Bishop has been (in
this to be commended) to advance the same Design in America, and what the
settled order for it is, I make no question but you may have read in many, which
I might name. But I will not give you the trouble of Reflecting longer on
Modern and Recent Accounts, since there are others far more Ancient by which it
may be made appear, that Christ was early preached among them. But of this you
may be pleased to consult Paget and Purchase, cum multis aliis.

You see by this how fair an Opportunity I have to evade, but am not Sophister
enough to do so, seeing as you mean the Objection, there is something weighty
and momentous in it, namely, that it seems inconsistent with Divine Goodness
that poor Creatures lying under unavoidable and invincible Ignorance of Jesus
Christ, and of the method of Salvation by him, should be damned to eternal
Darkness and sorrow for what they cannot help, and that to use your own
expression, there are no Reserves for their Ac^ing for an happiness they have
no notice of, etc.

Believe it Sir, it is no easy matter to account for all the Phenomenon of
Providence, and particularly for This, of which, when we have said all we can,
we cannot say as much in Vindication of Divine Goodness, Justice or Wisdom in
it, as God can say in his own. His thoughts, they are as high above ours, as
the Heaven is above the Earth; and what is unaccountable and dazeling to men,
is not so to God.

I say not this as if I thought the present Difficulty less accountable than
many others, but to let you see I have a right sense and apprehension of its
being One; wherein when I have told you what has satisfied me about it, (for I
have had the same Perplexities, and the same scruples) you will happily receive
what also may conduce to satisfy you, both from the Holy Scriptures and from
Reason.

In order hereunto I shall by way of Premise, explicate and settle a Verity
that ought to be received by all Christians as Fundamental to their being so,
namely, That there is no Salvation but by Jesus Christ, which established, I
will in satisfaction of the scruple evince, First, That God is not obliged by
his Goodness to dispense an equal light to all mankind; but that being Free and
Sovereign in all communications of his Grace, he does inqually dispense it, to
manifest himself so. But yet, that Secondly, To whomsoever be affords least
light, he affords enough to leave them inexcusable and without cause of
complaint; because he does afford them more than they improve, or use. And
Thirdly, What in this occasion will abundantly illustrate and set off Divine
Goodness, as well as Justice; he requires not from men according to the light
and means they have not, but according unto what they have, expecting less from
them to whom he has afforded less, and only more from these who have the
opportunities and the means of doing more.


And First, By way of Premise; I lay it down as Fundamental in the Christian
Doctrine and Profession, That there is no salvation but by Jesus Christ, for it
is he the Son of God that has assumed humane Nature; that has satisfied in it
the Divine Justice; that by his Obedience and Death, has rendered God Attonable
to man; and that has procured all the terms (whatever they be) on which Divine
Majesty is pleased to transact again with us, and to receive us into favor. He
is the Prince of peace, that Glorious Intercessor, that has gone between the
wrath of God and us, but for whom Apostate Adam had been lost for ever, and
there had been no more reserves for Happiness, or overtures of Grace for him
and his Descendants, than for the fallen and Apostare Angels. Christ is the
Foundation-Stone, the Chief Cornerstone in this building. God so loved the
world, that he gave his Son: This is my beloved Son, through whom I am well
pleased. Sacrifice and Offerings thou would not, but a body have thou
prepared for me. Lo I come. The Lamb slain from the beginning of the world.

This I take it is the meaning of that known expression, Acts 4 11.
There is no other name given under Heaven by which we can be saved, but the
name of Jesus, viz. That no other Person is to be acknowledged to have the
Honor of being the Procurer of Peace and Reconciliation for us with the Divine
Majesty, and of having marked out the way to glory, but only Jesus Christ, it
being too important and momentous an Affair for any but Emmanuel, or Jesus, one
that is God as well as man, to undertake to manage. For who but God-man could
dare to go between God and man? Mat. 1.21, 22, 23.
Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people: that it might be
fulfilled, They shall call his name Emmanuel; which is by Interpretation, God
with us. The Connection must be noted, it evinces that he only could be Jesus,
that was Emmanuel: thou shall call his name Jesus -- that it might be fulfilled
-- they shall call his name Emmanuel; as if Jesus and Emmanuel were but One
name. There is no other name given, but the name of Jesus, whereby we can be
saved: It is not the name of Moses, nor of Pythagoras, nor Plato, nor of
Mahome^, or of any other mere man; these are not names that merit this honor.
It is Jesus is the only name; it must be God with us that saves us.

The Practical Belief of This is called faith in Christ; and is a thing so
absolutely necessary to salvation, that without it it is impossible to please
God, or be accepted with him. But as absolutely necessary to salvation, as
belief is, it is not so in every Degree, or every Act of it; there are Degrees
of Faith, and there are several Acts; there is a Formal and explicit
apprehension and belief of this Truth in so many terms, that there is One God
the Father Almighty, Propitiated and Attoned toward men; and that there is One
Mediator, Jesus Christ Godman that has attoned and propitiated him. And as
there is a Formal and Explicit, so there is a Virtual and Implicit Apprehension
and Belief of it, which he has that believes that God is; that he is Gracious
and Benign; that he pardons sin; and that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. And one may as well implicitly and virtually Believe as
Will. For as he implicitly and virtually does will the means, although he does
not actually Reflect and think upon them, that effectually does will the End;
so he that does explicitly believe that God is gracious and well-pleased, He
does implicitly believe in Christ, in whom alone he is so; the explicit belief
of the Conclusion, is the implicit and virtual belief of the Premises.

This Virtual and implicit Faith he may be said to have, who fears God and
works Righteousness, whether he be Jew or Gentile; for he that fears God
and works Righteousness, comes unto God [by doing so;] and he that comes
unto God, must needs believe that God is, Heb. 11.6.
and that he is a Rewarder. A Faith that many of the Gentiles were as well the
Owners of as the Jews, for which they were accepted of God: So Peter, Of a
truth, Acts 10.34, 35.
I perceive that God is no Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation, he that
fears him, and works Righteousness, is Accepted with him. And doubtless
there were many Cornelius's and John is plain, He that works Righteousness, 1
John 2^ 29.
is born of God. Such Gentiles are called (...), The Fearers of God, Acts 12.
16. 26. and (...), or Worshippers, v. 43.

I pray Sir consider Rahab the Harlot, Heb. 11.31.
and what kind of Faith it was for which she has the Honor of a Monument unto
this day? and for which her self and all her household were saved, Josh. 2 9,
10, 11.
viz. The Lord your God is a God in the Heaven above, and in the Earth beneath:
This was her Faith; and the Ground and Basis of it, what was it but Report and
Fame? We have heard how the Lord dried up the water of the Red Sea for you,
when you came out of Egypt, and what God did unto the two Kings of the
Amorites; We have heard. All heard, but she only believed savingly; and
therefore hid the Spies, which the rest would kill. This was her Faith, she had
heard of God, the True God; and who had not? and she believed that God was, and
that he was a Rewarder, therefore she hid his Servants, which was her work of
Righteousness. All believed and trembled, we heard and our hearts melted, which
is the Faith of Devils; but she believed and wrought Righteousness, she hid the
Spies. Here Is was a saving, because a living, a working Faith.

It Is true; some of the old believers are Illustrious Instances of Faith, and
of its vigor and power; for though the day of Christ were far off, yet they saw
it clearly, and distinctly; Abraham; says Christ, saw my day [though] far off.
So Jacob, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between
his feet, until Shiloh come, unto him shall the gathering of People be; and so
Job, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall behold him standing on
the earth.

But yet I find them not explicitly a Praying in the name of Christ, or doing
any thing therein. So; hitherto (says he unto his own Disciples) you have
asked nothing in my name; John 16.24.
nor were they yet obliged, since he was not to be so exalted, but after he had
drunk of the brook in the way; it was then the Comforter the blessed Spirit was
to come, and give his Testimony for him in the Hearts of men, after which His
Name was to be honored. John 16.26.
When I am lifted up, I will draw all men unto me. In that day you shall ask in
my Name. Before all was done in the Name of God; but since the Comforter, all
in Christ's Name. There is no other Name under Heaven given, that is, no other
name of any Person on earth is appointed in which we can approach to God, and
so be saved. Indeed the Ancients prayed toward the Debir or Oracle, or Ark
which typified Christ, and so implicitly and figuratively prayed in his Name,
but yet explicitly and formally they did not.

I confess there are not a few, both Pious and Learned that herein differ from
me, who believe the Ancients prayed Formally and Explicitly in the name of
Christ, and who apprehend themselves abundantly confirmed in that belief, by
one expression in Daniel, Dan. 9.17.
Now therefore O God, hear the Prayer of thy servant, and his supplications,
and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary that lies Desolate, for the
Lords sake; for the Lords sake, that is, say they, for Christ's sake. But to
omit that for the Lords sake may be referred to desolate, as it is in some
Translations, wherein the Comma is not put to desolate, but to Sanctuary; as if
the sense were, that for the Lords sake the Sanctuary was desolate: I say
omitting that, and taking it for granted to referr to hear, and lift up the
light of thy countenance; yet whosoever does compare it with the following
Verses, must needs acknowledge, that for the Lords sake is for Gods sake, for
his Name sake, his Honors sake, Dan. 9.19.
it being so explained, v. 19. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider and
do it, defer not for thine own sake, oh my God; for thy Name is called upon
this City, and upon this People.

And thus much by way of Premise, I now apply my self to give a more particular
answer to the Exception, by making evident and clear the several Propositions
which I mentioned for that end, and which evinced and made out, will abundantly
illustrate this matter, and absolutely satisfy your mind, in a scruple which
cannot but be much abated already.

And first, That God is not obliged by his Goodness to afford equal light to
all. For though Divine Goodness be a Perfection essentially inherent in him,
yet in the Exercises of it he is Free and Sovereign; the emanations of that
Glorious Attribute not being as some imagine them, as Unrestrainable and
necessary as those of Light from the Sun, and Heat from Fire. No, it is as well
a great Truth as commonly received, and that the Divine Goodness is seated in
the Divine will, and is (as it were) a certain mode of it; The Goodness of
Almighty God, it is his (...) or Good pleasure, Good Will, and consequently
being but a certain kind or manner of will, must in all the exercises of it be
as free as this is. Divine Goodness is nothing but the Divine Good Will, or a
Propensity in the Divine Will to be doing all the Good that in his Infinite
Wisdom he sees meet.

Now the will of God (if to discourse thereof as of Man's, be not too great
Presumption) is not a Necessary and Determined, but a Free and Undetermined
Principle; and the Nature of it as to Liberty and Freedom, consists in an
Unrestrained Unconfined Amplitude of Acting. Whereof he cannot doubt that
seriously considers what (of another Purpose) I noted in my former Treatise,
viz. That as what is lower on the Scale of Being, and more immersed in matter,
is more confined and determined; so that what is higher, and superior, and more
spiritual, is in proportion according to the measure of its advancement on the
Scale, more undetermined and free. For thus, a little to illustrate and set out
the matter in Examples, Plants and Vegetables are less determined in respect of
Action, than are the Minerals and Fossils. Again, the merely Sensitive or
Irrational Animals are less determined than the Vegetables; Men less than they;
and not improbable, the Angels less than men; But God who is above them all, a
Pure Act, possesses Amplitude of Action, as Infinitely much transcending all
theirs as is his Being. All Determination and confinement is from Matter, all
Indetermination and Unconfinement from Form. God is therefore most Free and
Undetermined, because most Formal and most Pure Act.

But by this Infinite Amplitude and Liberty of Action, I would not have you
understand me to intend wilfulness; as if the Will of God, which is the
Principle and Rise of all External Actions, were mere will, and that in that
Will, there were not also Wisdom, Justice, Goodness and Holiness. For it were
to have a most Unhappy and mistaken Apprehension of me, as if I coined a Notion
of the great God, and of the freedom of his Will, that could not be endured by
any that did either know, or fear him.

No, But by this Amplitude of Action, or Liberty of the Divine Will, I mean no
other but a most illimited Capacity and Power in God, to do what seems best
and most agreeable unto himself to do; and that is best and most agreeable for
him to do, which is most convenient and congruous, and most becoming all his
Glorious Attributes, his Wisdom, his Benignity, his Sovereignty, Majesty, etc.
as who would say, it is a Free, Unconfined, Unnecessitated, Undetermined Power
of doing or not doing what he pleases. Now he does what he pleases, that does
whatever pleases him; and what can we imagine to please God, but what is (most)
agreeable and congruous to him? and what is (most) agreeable and congruous to
him, but what suiteth (best) with all his Attributes? So that it is not mere
will that is the Principle or Reason of the Divine Actions, but, as the Holy
Scriptures happily express it, it is counsel, counsel of Will. His Will is
will, it is Sovereign and Free, but it is also wise; and Good, and Just, and
Holy. God does what he will, and because he will. But yet whatever he does is
Wise, and Good, and Holy, because his Will is so.

But you will say, I grant enough for your Argument as now I have explained my
self; for if the mere and naked Will of God be not the sole Reason or Rule of
his Acting, but that his other Attributes do influence and guide him in it, and
so his Goodness and Benignity does challenge some share; then seeing there is
no Respect of men's Persons with him, but that in his sight all are equal; and
also seeing Goodness obliges not to make a Difference, where there is none
already, It Is Unconceivable how any should be made, and how he should not deal
alike benignly [ be Bountiful and Good alike] to All.

I answer; That indeed Benignity and Goodness has a Great, though not the sole
hand in moving or inclining the Divine Will; that God is no Respecter of men's
Persons; that both Jew and Gentile are as One to him: No humane Qualities of
Wit and Ingenuity, of Learning, of Beauty, of Civility, or the like, which
rather are Effects than Motives of Divine Favor, do at all affect or move him.
Further, nor will I deny, that Divine Goodness and Benignity as such, obliges
not God to Discriminate or make a Difference between Man and Man; but then; as
it obliges not to make a Difference, so it obliges not to make none, but it
leaves him free to follow the motions of his other Glorious Attributes, such as
either Wisdom, Sovereignty, or some other of his admirable Excellencies do
inspire and infuse him with. But chiefly his Sovereignty; for all his Practical
and Active Attributes (for such I call these which (seem to) have an Influence
upon him in his Acting) are all Will. Sovereignty has Place in All. And this
brings me home.

For do you ask me, how it comes to pass there is a Difference made between
man and man, Nation and Nation, in respect of the Light and Knowledge of God? I
answer, God makes it, who deals not alike to all; and do you further ask me,
Why he deals not alike to all? I answer further, it is to show he is not
bound to do what he does to any; and that if he shows mercy, it is because he
will show mercy; not from any obligation on him whatsoever, much less any
engagement from the Object, but ex mero motu, of his own alone Election and
Choice.

It is for this Reason that he so delights in Election and Reprobation, that
he not only shows them in mankind among particular and individual Persons, he
chooses Jacob, and rejects Esau; and among Nations, he choosed the Jews, and
he refused the Gentiles; of all the Nations of the earth, I have chosen you;
and among the Gentiles, he enlightens some sooner, others later, some more,
some less: but also in the kind of Angels, thus he elected those that stood,
and he rejected those that did not: All is to show how Sovereign and how Free
he is, in whatsoever he does. Hence the Scriptures speak so much of Election,
and of Gods Purpose according to the Election, and of the Good pleasure, and of
the will of God.

Thus God in all the Exercises of his Grace is Free, not only from all
Determination and Necessity of Nature, but from all engagement by any foreign
and extrinsecal Respects whatever in the Object; and it is to manifest himself
so, that he so diversely dispenses it; to some he manifests more, to some
less, to those in one way, and to others another; All according to the Counsel
and Advisement of his own Will, and not according to the Humor, or Deserts of
ours.

So much for the first Proposition; but Secondly, Though God dispenses not an
equal light to all, yet to whom he has dispensed least, he has dispensed
enough, if not to save them, (which many of the Ancient and most Learned
Fathers thought) yet he has to leave them Inexcusable, and without Defense, as
our Apostle exprestes it, Romans 1.20.
-- (...)

Certain it is, as I proposed in the first Assertion, That the Dispensations of
Almighty God in point of Light and opportunities of Grace, are not equal every
where; for if they were, there would be as little Beauty, Ornament and Luster,
as Variety in them, since it is in the Moral World, as in the Natural; wherein
Day and Night, and Diverse Graduations of the Light and Darkness in them, are
necessary to compose it, and to set it off with some Advantage and Beauty.

But though there be a Diverse and inequal Dispensation of the Light, some have
more, and some have less, yet so Extensive is Divine Goodness, and so large,
that all have some, and that some (as little as it may be) Enough to silence
Obloquy and Contradiction: A Truth that cannot be Refused in consideration of
the Ancient Gentiles, with more reason than it can be doubted in respect of the
Ancient Jews, who had the Oracles of God.

For the Ancient Gentiles (for so I call those before Christ, in
contradistinction to the Jews) though they had not Moses, and the Law and
Prophets to instruct them in the method of salvation; yet they had Tradition,
and they had Philosophers and Philosophy; The Persians had their Magi; the
Babylonians and Assyrians, Vid. Laert. in Pr^em.
their Chaldeans; the Indians; their Gymnosophists and Brachmans; the Celts and
Gauls, their Druides and Semnothei; the Greeks, their Philosophers; in a word,
All of them they had Divines and Prophets, Vid. infra.
who were Preachers to them of the fear of God, and of Righteousness. And you
know I have already evinced in the Premise, That to fear God, and work
Righteousness, suffices to render one accepted with him, and this Philosophy
taught.

Now by Philosophy I understand not any one kind or Species of it, as either
the Barbarian, or the Grecian, the Stoic, the Epicurean, the Platonic, or the
Peripatetic; Clem. Alex. l. 1. Str^mat.
but (as Clemens Alexandrinus also does) All that Truth or Verity divided and
dispersed among them; and of this I say, It was a Ray or Beam of Jesus Christ,
the Original Light, [ the Light that enlightneth every one that comes into the
World] afforded to the Gentiles to conduct and guide them to God: and so says
the Father, (...) So both the Barbarian and the Greek Philosophy contains in
it a certain Portion of the Eternal Truth; which it Borrowed not, or derived
from the Mythology of Bacchus, but from the Theology of the Eternal Word
himself. Thus Clemens of Alexandria; and indeed it is the main Design of his
Stromata [Books he called so, because in them he collected these Dispersed
Truths] to manifest the Consonancy and Agreement of the Old Philosophers, with
the Verities of the Christian Religion.

I know the Great Apostle affixeth on Philosophy an Epithete that seems not
agreeable to this Assertion, he calls it Vain Philosophy, Col. 2.8.
and cautions those he writes to, with very much concern, more than once
against it; but who ever well considers that he represents the Jewish
Ceremonies, which in their Institution were Divine and useful methods for
happiness, as beggarly and carnal Rudiments, Gal. 4.9.
as Elements of the World, and under other hard names, he will not find himself
surprised at his doing the former; or necessitated to confine the Philosophy of
which he speaks, Clem. Alex. l. 1. Strom.
as Clemens Alexandrinus does, to the Epicurean that denied Providence, and all
Respects and care of God for the World.

For I make no question but whosoever seriously Reminds the Circumstance of
Time wherein the Apostle wrote, that it was after the Effusion of the Blessed
Spirit, and the bringing of the Life and Immortality to light in Jesus Christ,
will easily agree that his Principal, if not his sole Design in so severely
reflecting on the Ceremonies of the Jews, and on the Philosophy of the
Gentiles, was to oblige both the one and the other to abandon and forsake their
A, B, C. And that since there is a fuller and a clearer Demonstration, or
Discovery in the Gospel of the way of Life, It is to wean them from those
Darker Ones, that served their turn before. And indeed, though God connived at
men in the days of their Ignorance, yet now he calls all to Repent.

And verily it is a great Truth, that as he would not have the Jewish Law, so
much less would he have the Gentile Wisdom to supplant the Gospel. All the
Light before Christ, whether that among the Jews, or that among the Gentiles,
was but Moon, or Starlight, designed only for the night preceding; but it is
the Sun must Rule by Day. Now the Gospel dispensation is the Day, and Christ
the Sun that makes it; by whose Alone Light we must walk. For as in Nature, the
Light afforded by the Moon and Stars, which is of great Advantage, and very
much administers to our Direction, and Comfort in a Journey by night, yet in
the day is none; The Moon and Stars that shine by night, and then make other
things Visible, they are Invisible themselves, and Dark by day; So in the Moral
world, not only the Law of Moses to the Jews, but that Philosophy and Wisdom
among the Gentiles, that before the coming of the Lord Christ, while it was yet
extreme Dark, was of extraordinary Use and Benefit, It is no longer new of any
to them, nor to be insisted on, since He is come. For now it is broad Day. One
would be glad of Moonlight, or Starlight, that is to travel by night; but he
delires, and is out of his Wits, that would prefer it before the Sun by Day.

By this time, you see how my Opinion of the Old Philosophy, that it was a kind
of Starlight derived from the Sun of Righteousness, and pointing to him, is so
far from being in Derogation to the Gospel Grace, that it rather highly
Illustrates and Establishes it; the Philosophers themselves, as well as the
Prophets, being (as it were) as so many Stars that shined in a Dark Place, and
with a borrowed luster, 2 Pet. 1.19.
until (in Peter's own expression) the Day Star arose from on high.

But this Assertion, so many prejudices lie against it, is not of a Nature to
be entertained as soon as presented; wherefore I shall crave your leave to offer
somewhat by way of Confirmation, which though I might do by very probable
conjectures, both from the Paerabolical and Figurative way of Institution used
by Jesus Christ, so conformable to that of Plato; and the Interrogatory and
Questionary, so like to that of Socrates and others, and from the Honor put
upon Philosophy and Philosophers, not only by God himself in giving some of
them the Pre-eminence, in an extraordinary manner, by a Starry Messenger sent
on purpose, first of all others to behold the blessed Jesus in the Flesh, and
to Recognize him King; but also by the Ancient Christians, who not only
Permitted, but Assumed their Formalities and Customs. I say, though I might
confirm this Truth by these, and many other very Probable Conjectures, yet I
rather choose to go a Plainer, and more Demonstrative way, by particularly
Instancing the several Doctrines of the Grave Philosophers, and Wise men among
the Gentiles, and showing how agreeable they are to those of Christians; and
that, to vindicate my self from all Temerity and Rashness in affirming what I
have, as well as to afford an entertainment that will neither be unpleasing,
nor unuseful to many. Indeed, it will put the Doctrines of the Christian
Religion beyond the Contradictions of the Atheist, to a Person that shall see
them to be such as have obtained among wise men in the most Ancient Ages, and
Universally over all the World.

And forasmuch as to the Moral part of Christian Religion, there is not so much
doubt but that the Heathen had a great Intelligence and Understanding of it, as
whoever reads Homer, Hesiod, Theognis, Socrates, Plato, Xenophon's Cyrus, and
Oeconomus, Isocrates, Tully's Offices, and Seneca, cannot but acknowledge;
therefore I shall not stay you here with any long Discourse on that point.

Wherein that I may not overwhelm you with a multitude of Instances that do
occurr, for to say all I might, were to translate whole Volumes: I shall only
offer for a taste what is at present in the compass of my memory, upon the
three Heads, Of Piety to God, of Righteousness to man, and of Sobriety to our
selves; Resolving for your greater satisfaction, and that the argument in hand
may have the more Light and Efficacy, to Parallel the Testimonies of the Poets
and Philosophers, which I produce, with others of a like Importance in the Holy
and Inspired Penmen.

And first for Piety to God.

First, That God is to be worshipped. Ianbl. de vit. Pythag. f. 138.
Pythagoras that great Philosopher referred all to this: and before him
Orpheus, whom Pythagoras imitated; but to be particular, He must be worshipped,

First, Spiritually, Purely, Holily.

Cato, and the Heathen Liturgies.

Si Deus est Animus, nobis ut Carmina dicunt,

Is tibi praecipue sit pura mente colendus.

If God be a Spirit, as Poets say, or rather as we are taught in Liturgies or
solemn Prayers, he is chiefly to be worshipped by thee, and with a Pure mind.
Christ in John 4.24. God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit, and in
Truth.

Tibullus. Casta placent superis, pura cum mente venite,
Et manibus puris sumite fontis aquam.
Holy things do please those above; come you with Pure and Holy minds, and with
Pure hands take Fountain water. In Leg. 12. Tabul. Ad Divos adeunto cast. Cic.
2. de Leg.

Approach Holily unto the Gods.
David in Psalm. 93.5. Holiness becomes thy house.
James 4.8. -- Cleanse your Hands, ye sinners, and Purify your Hearts, etc.
Pythagoras. (...) Iambl. Protrep. c. 21. f. 136.

Having put off thy Shoos, do thou Sacrifice, and worship.
Exodus 3.5. Put off thy Shoos, for the Place whereon thou stand is Holy
Ground.


Secondly, In the best manner we can. In Leg. 12. Tabul. Ex patriis ritibus
colunto optima, Cit de Leg. l. ^.
Among all the Country Rites of Religion, those which are best, must be
observed.


So Apollo Pythius.

For when the Athenians had consulted him about Religion, Ci^. ibid.
and Ceremonies, and put the Question to which they should adhere; He answers,
They should adhere to those of their Ancestors; [ quae essent in more majorum;]
and when coming again, they told him that the Religion of their Ancestors had
undergone so many mutations, that they were to seek among so many where to find
it, and therefore pray him to vouchsafe his Direction, which among them ought
to be Observed; To this he answers, The Bent.

Malachi 1.14. Cursed be the Deceiver, which has in his flock a Male, and
Voweth and Sacrifices unto the Lord a Corrupt thing.
Socrates, Zenoph. l 1. de dict. and fact. Socrat.
as Zenophon tells us, was wont to commend this saying of the Ancients,
Secundum quod potes, Diis immortalibus Sacrificia offeras. Offer Sacrifice to
the Gods, according to thy Ability.

Paul in 2 Cor. 8.12. -- So there may be a Performance also out of that which
you have; for if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according unto
that which he has.
Thirdly, According to that Discovery of the Divine Mind which we have.

Zenophon says concerning Socrates, Zenoph. ubi supra. Vid Plat. in Apol. pro
Socr.
Si quando autem quicquam a Diis sibi ostendi putabat; minus persuasus fuisset
praeter Ostensa facere, quam siquis suasisset ei ducem in via caecum pro
vidente recipere, and viae ignarum pro gnaro. Illos autem, qui cavendo mal^m
hominum de se opinionem, praeter illa, quae dii consulerent, facerent,
Stoliditatis accusabot: ipse vero consilium divinum omnibus anteserebat rebus
humanis. If at any time he apprehended a thing to be revealed to him by God; he
could not more easily be induced to act beside that Revelation, than he could
be persuaded to take a blind guide, to conduct him, for one that had eyes; or
to take him that knew not a foot of the way he was to go, before one that knew
it perfectly. Also he accused those of extreme Folly, who to avoid the ill
Opinion of men, would act beside the Discovery and Revelation of God; but for
his own part, he preferred Divine Direction and counsel, before all Humane
Respects.

Deuteronomy. 5. 27. Speak thou unto Us, All that the Lord our God shall speak unto
Thee, and we will Hear it, and do it.
Fourthly, With all Alacrity and Cheerfulness. Ovid. Dii quoque ut a cunctis
hilari pietate colantur,
Tristitiam poni per sua festa jubent.


The Gods that they may be adored with cheerfulness, command men to lay aside
Sadness and Sorrow, which is evident by the Feasts they have instituted.
Apostle, 2 Cor. 9. 7. and Phil. 4. 4. God loves a cheerful giver.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice.


Fifthly, Seriously, and without Distrauion.

Pythagoras forbad Occasional and Ejaculatory Prayers, Pythag. apud. Plutarob.
in Number.
because he could not conceive them to be Serious and Solemn.

The Romans, whilst the Priest was occupied and taken up about the Auguries or
Sacrifices, used to cry, Hoc age, Mind this. Plutar. in Number.
Quae vox eos qui intersunt ( says Plutarch) ad rem quae agitur attentos
reddit.

David in Psalm. 86. 11. Unite my heart to fear thy Name.
Sixthly, With Reverence and Godly Fear, and without Curiosity. Zenophon in
Stobaeus. (...) Zenoph. i^ Epist. ad Aesch. apud Stob. ser. 78.
That Divine things are above us, every one knows. It suffices to adore the
Excellency of his Power. But who the Gods are, is neither casie to find, nor
lawful to seek. So it is not fit for Servants to pry into the Actions of their
Masters; to whom under that character, nothing but service will suit.

Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but revealed things to
us, and our children.



So much for Worship in General.

Now for the two Principal Acts of it Prayer and Giving of Thanks.

First, Prayer.

First, It ought to be performed in Faith. (1.) That God will bear; and (2.)
That he is able to help.

Numa ordained

Peractis precibus sedere, Pl^t. in Number.
To sit down after Prayers; which Plutarch says, was interpreted, Augurii vim
habere, quia bonorum vota cert'a sunt, and firma futura. To be as Good as an
Augury, for as much as the Prayers of Good men are certain and sure to be
answered.

So Menander.

(...). God refuses not his Ear to a Righteous Prayer.

James 5. 16. The Effectual fervent Prayer of the Righteous Man prevails much.
Linus in Iamblic. and Stobaeus.

(...)

We ought to hope all things; there is nothing which we may not hope for. All
things are easy to God, and nothing impossible.

Matthew 19. 26. Luke 18. 27. All things are possible to God. What things are
impossible to man, are possible to God.
Romans 4. 18. Who against Hope, Believed in Hope.
Secondly, It ought to be performed in all humility, with acknowledgements of
our Unworthiness and ill deserving.

Iamblicus. Iambl. de Mist. ex translat. Ficini.


Supplicare vero humillime convenit: agnoscere enim bilitatem nostram si
superis conferamur, efficit, ut maxim supplicemus; convertamurque ad illos
omnino, and assidua consuetudine similes evadamus. It becomes us most humbly
to apply our selves in Prayer; for to acknowledge our bileness, if we be
compared with the Deity, conduces much to the making our Prayer a Prayer; and
to the entire conversion of us to him, and to the rendering us like and
conformable by daily accustomance [or Converse]. Jacob in Genesis 32. 10. I am not
worthy of the least of all thy mercies.
The Publican in Luke 18. 13. Be merciful to me a Sinner.
Seneca. Caeterum idem semper de nobis pronuntiare debebimus maelos esse nos,
Sen. l. 1. de B^nef. c. 10.
malos suisse, invitus adjiciam, and futuros esse. But we ought always to pass
the same sentence on ourselves, that we are evil; that we have been evil; and I
will unwillingly add, that we shall be so.

1 John 1. 8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us.


Thirdly, we must pray for temporals, with Resignation and submission to God,
as who knows what is fitter for us, better than We our selves.

Numa ordained, Adorantem in orbem se circumagere, That he that Prayed should
turn round: Plut. in Number.
which Plutarch thus interprets, (Nisipotius) Quod Aegyptiorum rotae obscure
repraesentant, idem hoc Numae institutum declar at, videl. nihil in rebus
humanis stabile, ideoque conveniens esse, ut quocunque modo vitam nostram Deus
torqueat atque revolvat boni consulamus. Unless you would rather conceive that
what the wheels of the Egyptians did obscurely represent, that same this
Institution of Numa did more manifestly declare, to wit, that in humane
affairs, there is nothing established and firm, and therefore that it is most
fit that after whatsoever manner God does shape and turn our lives, we should
take it well at his hands.

Zenophon says of Socrates.

Orabat Deus simpliciter bona praestare, Zen. l. 1. de dict. and fact. Socrat.
tanquam optime Dii quaenam sint nobis bona scirent. Qui vero aurum, aut
argentum, aut tyrannidem, aut quippiam hujusinodo a Diis orando petebat, illos
simile quid opinabatur orare, ac si ludum talorum, aut praelia, aut aliquid
orarent cujus incertus exitus esset. He was wont simply to ask of God Good
things [not specifying any] as knowing God did understand best what things are
so for us; but as for those that in their Prayers petition for Gold, for
Silver, for Empire, or for any thing else of that nature, them be conceived in
it to Resemble such as should Pray for a Game at Dice, for a Battle, or for any
thing else of a like uncertain and doubtful issue.

Matthew 20.20, 21, 22. Then came to him the Mother of Zebedees Children, with
her Sons, worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of him. And he said
unto her, what will thou? She said unto him, Grant, that these my two Sons may
sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left in thy Kingdom; But
Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask.

Thus much of Prayer.

Secondly, Thanksgiving.

All must be acknowledged and ascribed to God.

Archilocus. Archil. apud S^ob. Sermon. 103.


(...)

Ascribe all unto [the Gods] God; for [ they do ] he does often raise men out
of their calamities, that lay before upon the Black Earth, and as often
overturns and throws upon their backs those that stand most firmly.

And this acknowledgement, or Praise must be 1. In Word. Pythagoras in
Iamblicus. ambl. c. 28. d^ Vit. Pythag.
(...)

For as much as there is a God, and He Lord of all, it is most meet to
acknowledge and confess him, to be the Good.

Psalm 92.1. It is a Good thing to give thanks unto the Lord.
Plato. (...)
It is most just that Hymns and Praises of God [the Gods] mixed with Prayers be
sung to him. Plat. l. 7. de leg. ap^ Stob. ser. 42.
Philippians 4.6. In every thing give praise to God, by Prayer, and
Supplication, with Thanksgiving.


The Ancients had their Paeans or Laudatory Songs, and one eminently called so:

-- Laetumque V^g.
choro Paeana canentes.

2. In Deed. And that, 1. By Tything. The Ancient Heathen generally paid Tithes
to their Gods, as an acknowledgement, High-rent, or Honourary to their
Sovereign; an Usage I should be apt to believe derived from the Egyptians,
Batric. Annal. Alexan. f. 88.
were that true which Batricides says, that by the Ordinance of Joseph they
paid to Pharaoh the Tenth: but since Moses speaks but of a Fifth, I rather
derive the Custom from a much higher Original. Once it obtained generally, to
tithe their Spoils, and their Goods. 1. Their Spoils. Agis gave the tenth to
God. Post haec Agis Delphos profectus est, ac Decimam Deo obtulit. And the
Greeks also under the command of Zenophon, Zenoph. de reb. gest. Graec. l. 3.
when by his admirable conduct they were returned safe into Greece, devoted the
tenth of their Spoil, Zenoph. de Cyr. min. exp. l. 4.
Hic etiam Pecuniam de captivis collectam partiti, eam quae Decimae nomine, aut
Apollini, aut Ephesiae Dianae vota fuerat, consecrandam Praetores acceperunt.
With which money dedicated to Diana of Ephesus that Great Captain builds a
Temple and an Altar, and endows it. Ante templum pila erecta est in qua incisae
literae Sacer Dianae ager. Zen. ibid.
Qui posside at atque ex eo fructum capiat, Annonae decimam illum Deae solvere;
reliquum in sarta tecta conservare oportet. Deam ipsam qui se fraudavit
vindicturam.

The same Zenophon tells us of Agesilaus that he also Tythed. Zenoph. de Laud.
Ages.


Atque Amicorum quidem solum (says he) ab omni praeda tutum praestitit:
Hostium vero ita fruitus Agro est, ut duobus annis centum talenta and amplius
Deo apud Delphos Decimam dedicavit. And

Tarquin the Proud was, in this Respect, no less Religious: He built the
Capitol of the Tenths of Spoils. Dionys. Halic. Antiq. Romans l. 4.
Hoc opus [viz. Capitolium] (says Dionysius) Tarquinius ex Decimis Suessanae
praedae perficere cogitans, etc. And after him, Pesthumius also did consecrate
the Tenths, Live. l. 1.
as says the same Dionysius, Dionys Halic. l. 6.
De spoliorum decimis Ludos and Sacra Diis fecit XL. tatentorum impendio, etc.
According well to what we read of Abraham, Genesis 14.20. Heb. 7.2. And he gave
him Tithes of all; viz. the Spoils.

2. Yes, and the Ancients did not only consecrate the Tenth of the Spoils which
they took; but also of all their other Substances and Goods, Pl^t in. Quaest.
Roman. qu 18.
as is plainly intimated in the Question, which we read in Plutarch. Cur multi
Divitum Herculi Decimam bonorum suorum consecrant? But of Hercules his Tenth,
be pleased to consult Diodorus: Diod. l. 4.
of which also I find some mention made in Cicero. Oresti nuper prandia in
semitis decimae nomine magno honor fuerunt. Cic. l. 2. de Offic.
Yes and long before Hercules, the old Pelasgi that built and dwelt at Spina,
Mittehant Delphos Deo Decimas ex maritimis proventibus: Dionys. Halic. l. 1.
Antiq.
and others of them were obliged by the Oracle at Dodona when they were at
Rest, and settled, Decimas Phoebo mittere, and capita Jovi. So that the very
Heathen by the Light they had, were acquainted that an High and Honorary Rent
must issue out of all our estates, and all our increase, unto God the Owner and
the Lord of All: not unlike to what we have thereof in Solomon; Honor the Lord
with thy substance, and with all the increase of thy substance.


And this for Tything. 2. Vowing is another way of Real Paying of Thanks. It
was One of the Laws of the Twelve Tables, Cic. l. 2. de Leg.
Sancte vota reddunto. And I render it in the words of David, Make Vows, and
pay them unto God. Which in part omitted by the Tyrrheni, or as Dionysius, the
Pelasgi, they were punished for it with a thousand Evils, and were told so by
the Oracle. Dio^. Antiq. l. 1.
Consulentibus autem Oraculum quo Deo, quove Daemone laeso, paterentur talia,
and quomodo quaerendum his malis Remedium; Respondit Deus, eos Voti compotes,
non reddid^sse quae voverant, and multum debere insuper. Laborantes enim
sterilitate Pelasgi omnium Rerum Jovi, Apollini and Cabiris Decimas voverant,
and eorum quae ipsis nascerentur in posterum; potitique voto, frugum omnium,
and pecorum portionem sortiti obtulerant Diis, quasi vovissent haec sola.





Well you will say, but though the World both knew and Glo^ified God, yet
(according to the Testimony of the great Apostle) they Glorified him not as
God; God is a Spirit, but the Gentiles becoming vain in their Imaginations and
conceits of him, Romans c. 1.
changed the Glory of the Incorruptible God into an Image made like to
corruptible man, and to Birds, and four-footed Beasts, and Creeping things.

Indeed it cannot be denied, that generally the Heathen were depraved in their
thoughts of God, but Universally they were not. What apprehensions many of them
had of Idols, and of the superstition representing the Creator in the shapes of
Creatures, you may well imagine by a passage in Strabo. Strab. l. 16. Geogr.
He discoursing somewhere of the Occasion why Moses reputed by him an Egyptian
Priest, abandoned and left his Country, namely, That he held the Institutions
followed in it, not to be endured; That the Egyptians who attributed unto God
the Images of wild Beasts, or Cattle, had no better sentiments and
apprehensions of him than the Greeks, that represented him in Humane Figure;
And that God containing all things, was not to be adored in the Shape or Figure
of any. who (says that Noble Geographer) possessed of this Opinion and Belief,
begat a firm persuasion of the same in not a few good men, whom he conducted to
the Place where now Jerusalem stands.

I might dilate on this head in showing out of Seneca and Tully in many places,
what apprehensions both of these had of Idols, but I should be too prolix. That
the Ancient Persians owned none, is certain. And for the Greeks, it was a
Symbol of the sage Pythagoras, Iambl. Piotrep. c. 21. symb. 24. Vid;. Plin.
Hist. Not. l. 2. c. 7.
(...), Ingrave not any Image or likeness of God in a Ring; whereby it
signified (as Iamblicus interprets him) that God is incorporeal and invisible.
As for the Romans, Numa interdicted unto them the use of all Effigies of the
Gods, and all Pictures; so that in ancient times, and for the space of an
hundred and seventy years, that people had none. Neque priscrs illis temporibus
suit apud illos vel picta ulla Imago Dei (says Plutarch) vel ficta, Plat. i^
Number.
sed primis centum atque septuaginta annis, etsi templa aedificassent, atque
sacras casas struxissent, nullum tamen omnino simulacrum efformavere; nempe eo
quod and nefas esset praestantiora deterioribus assimulare; neque eum aliter
quam mente attingi posse senserunt.

So conformable a sense had many Ancient Heathen unto that of the Second
Command. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under
the Earth, thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them.

And as for others who approved of the use of Images, if we but Reflect upon
the Reason which inclined them to do it, there will be as much to be offered in
extenuation and excuse of that commission, as there can be for the Romanists.
Which truth I shall as easily persuade you of, as I can read a passage to you
in the admirable Max. Tyr. Max. Tyr. Diss. 38.
It a Deorum naturae (says he) nec statuis per se, nec imaginibus opus est;
sed cum infirma sit oppido mortalium conditio, tantumque a divina, quantum a
coelo terra recedat, signa ejusmodi excogitavit sibi, quibus and nomina Deorum,
and nuncupationes tribueret. Si quibus igitur tam firma sit memoria, ut erecto
statim animo coelum usque ipsum pertingere, Deumque recta adire, nihil iis
fortasse opus sit statuis. Verum rarissimi inter homines sunt hujusmodi. And
afterward, Videntur certe and Legislatores mihi non aliter quam puerorum
gregi, has generi mortalium invenisse imagines; honoris divini quasi signa
quaedam, vel notas, queis ad memoriam ejus tanquam manuductione quadam, and via
homines deducerent. And again toward the conclusion of his Dissertation. Deus
enim omnium quae extant pater, conditorque sole antiquior, antiquior coelo,
omni tempore major, omni aevo, and quicquid in natura mutatur; Legislator line
nomine, quem nulia vox exprimit, nulla oculorum intuetur acies; cujus cum
sensus nostros excedat essentia, aurilium a verbis, a nominibus, animalibusque,
ab auri, eboris, argentique figuris, a plantis, fluviisque, a montium jugis,
aquarumque scatebris aliquod petamus; ut ad ejus hac ratione intellectum
pervenire liceat. Cumenim tenuitatis nostrae ita poscat ratio, quicquid apud
nos est pulcherrimum, naturae illius dedicamus: plane ut amantes solent, qui
eorum quos amant, lubenter simulachra intuentur, etc.

As for Reverence to the Name of God enjoined in the third Commandment, Thou
shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, it is evident how great
consideration the Disciples of Pythagoras had of that Duty, Iambl. de vit.
Py^hag. c. 28.
by what Iamblicus affirms of them; (...) That they were very sparing in the
use of the names of the Gods. Indeed (...) Reverence an Oath was a Decree and
Ordinance of that Great Master, and that respect and Deference which he was
sensible was due unto the Divine Name, obliged him to make it; Which same
Reflection urged Periander to proceed farther.(...) (says He) an expression
not to be translated better than in the words of Christ himself, Swear not at
all.

For the Sabbath, Sell. de Ius. Not. and Genesis l. 3. c. 16.
the Learned Seldom as well as others, whom you may consult at your leisure,
has amassed many Testimonies about it. I will only mention that of Tibullus,
Luce sacra requiescat humus, requiescat arator,
Et grave, suspenso vomere, cessat opus.
Solvite vincla jugis, nunc adpraesepia debent
Plena coronato stare boves capite.
Omnia sint operata Deo: non audeat ulla
Lanificam pensis imposuisse manum.


Which may very well be Paraphrased in the terms of the fourth Command.
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it Holy, six days shall thou labor, and do
all that thou have to do; but the seventh is the Sabbath, in it thou shall do
no work, thou nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy Manservant, nor thy
Maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor the Stranger that is within thy Gates.

So much for Piety to God.

As for Righteousness to man, it would be infinite to instance all I might upon
the several Commandments which concern it, both out of Menander, Phocylides,
Pittacus, Theognis, Pindarus, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Cicero, Seneca and
others; a work I find already excellently well performed to my hand by
Stobaeus. ^o^. i^i S^^o^.
I shall therefore urge at present, but that One Duty which is comprehensive of
all the rest; That we ought to do to others, as we would be done unto by
others; which also is the Law and the Prophets.

All men know it to have been a Symbol of the Emperor Severus, Quod tibi fieri
non vis, alteri ne feceris. Do not that to another, which thou would not have
done unto thy self; and what he expressed in so plain words, is as plainly
employed both in that of Isocrates, Isocr. apud. Stob. sermon. 110.
(...). Upbraid no man with his Calamity, for chance is common, and thou
know not what may befall [thy self]: And in that of Seneca, Sen. Ep. 49.
Seis improbum esse, qui ab uxore pudicitiam exigit, ipse alienarum corruptor
uxorum. Thou know how Unjust he is, who expects that his own Wife should
be Loyal and Chaste, while he himself commits Adultery with other men's. And
this for Righteousness to others.

As for Moderation, Temperance and Sobriety, it was a Symbol of
Pythagoras,(...) That One ought not to Indulge himself in immoderate and
profuse Laughter, Iambl. Pretrep. c. 21. symb. 21.
which as Iamblicus, who best could, interprets it, [(...)] employed the
Castigation and subdual of the Affections; A Doctrine most comformable to that
of our Apostle, Mortisie therefore your members which are on the Earth,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate affection, etc. And the same Pythagoras
has another Symbol not impertinent, Pythag. apud Iambl. ubi supra.
viz. (...), Pass not over a Yoke; whereby, as the lately mentioned Interpreter
assures us, he obliged his Disciples to the exercise of Justice, Equity,
Moderation; and indeed he does it in an expression not unlike to that of the
Scriptures, wherein we read, it is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his
youth -- of an heifer unaccustomed to the yoke -- my yoke is easy.

And we have the Famed Socrates a great example of Self-denial, Temperance and
Moderation; for of him it is said by Zenophon, Zen. l. ^. de dict and fact. So^r.
. tali modo corpus ac animum castigabat, etc. tum enim paucis utebatur, ut
nescio quis tam modicum laboraret, qui non posset lucrari quae Socrati satis
essent, etc. That he so chastised both his body and mind, etc. and did use so
few things, that Zenophon knew not the man who got so little by his labors,
but that it was enough to procure what would suffice Socrates. Wherein he
resembled Paul, who says of himself -- I keep down my Body -- I will not be
brought under the Power of any thing -- Having food and raiment, let us be
content. Godliness with contentment is great gain; or in Seneca's Language,
S^^. Ep. 4.
, Magnae divitie sunt lege naturae composita paupertas. Ad manum est quod sat
est. We must deny our selves and take up the Cross to be Christians; and the
terms were no easier for them that would of old be Philosophers, Se^ Ep. 5.
Satis ipsum nomen Philosophiae (says Seneca) etiamsi modeste tractetur,
invidiofum est. Max. Tyr. Dis. 29. Plat. i^ Euthypehr.
Which also Maximus Tyrius affirms, and Plato.

Again, I might also instance, in the greatest and most illustrious duties of
the Gospel, such as that of acknowledging ones self a sinner in order to his
being made better, E^ict. Stob. sermon. 3.
concerning which in Epictetus you may read, (...) If thou will become Good,
first believe that thou art Evil. That of forgetting and forgiving Injuries, of
which the celebrated Cato is a great Example, Se^. l. 2. de Irae. c. 32. Vid.
Socr i^ Crit. Plat.
for to a certain fellow who had hurt him while he was in the Bath, and who
Repenting, asked him forgiveness, He answered (him). I remember not that thou
did strike me. That of giving Alms secretly, let not thy left hand know, what
thy right hand does, of which Artesilaus, who left a bag of money under the
Pillow of his poor distressed friend, unknown to him, [a Story mentioned by
Seneca] is a known and famous Instance: Sen. l. 2. de Benes.
and lastly, That of leaving All for Religion, a Doctrine as hard to be
digested as it is in sensual and debauched times, it would be no surprise to
Anaxagoras, of whom it is averred by Philo, Philo de vit. contempl. Vid. Plat.
Apolog. pr^ Socr.
that Prae amore philosophiae praedia reliquit. He left his Lands for the love
of Philosophy. The like is said of Democritus, and others.

But no longer to insist on special ones, I will only hint some General and
common Rules, by which the Heathen Doctors obliged their Disciples to Regulate
themselves in all their Actions, which as soon as I have mentioned, I make no
Question but you will acknowledge them Christian.

As First, That they ought to live and to think as always in the sight of God,
whoever inspects them; yea, and as if they were within the ken and view of all
men. So Seneca, Sic certe vivendum ^anquam in conspectu vivamus, Sen. Epist. 83.
sic cogitandum, tanquam aliquis in p^ctus intimum inspicere possit, and
potest. Quid enim prodest ab ho^rine aliquid esse secretum, Nihil Deo clausum
est. Interest animis nostris, and cogitationibus mediis intervenit. We ought so
to live, as if we lived in Public, and so to think as if one always looked
into our very Heart; and One can. For what advantage is it that a thing be
concealed from man, when nothing can be hid from God. He is present to our
minds, and conscious of all our thoughts. Thus Seneca; And Thales taught the
same Doctrine: Thal. apud Cic. l. 2. de leg.
viz. Homines existimare oportere, Deos omnia cernere, Deorum esse omnia plena,
fore enim omnes castiores. That men ought to believe that God sees all things,
and that all places are full of him, for by this means they will become more
Holy. Genesis 17. 1.
Walk before me (says God to Abraham) and be upright. Jer. 23.24.
Can any hide himself in secret Places, that I shall not see him says the Lord
[ in the Prophet ] He is the Discerner of the thoughts and intentions of the
Heart, Heb. 4.13.
neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all
things are naked and open in the eyes of him with whom we have to do, says the
Apostle.

Secondly, That whatever enterprise they were engaged in, or did apply
themselves unto, they ought to go about it in the name of God, Acknowledging
Him Author both of all Ability, and all success; for which cause it was
ordained among the Romans, that nothing should be done, or undertaken by them,
but with Invocation of Divine Assistance and Prayer. Plin. in P^^g.
Been ac sapienter P.C. (says the Junior Pliny) majores instituerunt, ut
rerum agendarum ita dicendi initium a precationibus capere, quod nihil rite,
nihilque providenter homines sine Deorum immortalium open, consilio, honor
auspicarentur. It was a Pio^s and most Prudent institution of our Ancestors, O
Grave and Honorable Fathers, that all Orations as well as all Actions, should
be begun with Prayer; for as much as nothing can be wisely taken in hand by men,
and to good purpose, without the Help, Counsel, Honor of the Immortal God. And
so Ovid,

A Jove principium in Iovem terminus esto.

The Apostles Doctrine is, Pray always. And in the Revelations of St. John,
it is I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending. Which minds me of
another Rule.

Thirdly, That they ought in all their Actions to referr unto the Glory of God,
and so to carry and acquit themselves in them, as those that do partake of his
Nature. Ut breviter tibi formulam praescrib^m (it is in Seneca) talis animus
sapientis viri esse debet, Epist. 92.
qualis Deum deceat. That I may prescribe thee a brief Rule of living; such
ought the mind of a wise man to be, as does become God. So the Apostle, Let the
same mind be in you, as was in Christ Jesus. Be you Perfect (says Christ) as
your Heavenly Father is Perfect. Again, it is averred of Pythagoras and his
followers by Iamblicus, Iambl de vit. Pythag. c. 28.
that (...), etc. That whatever distribution they make of Actions, [or what
Rules soever they make concerning them] all refers to this Mark, the Confession
[or Glory] of God. And thus the Apostle, whether you eat or drink, or whatever
you do, do all to the Glory of God.

It was from this Principle that their so absolute a Resignation to the Divine
Disposal and Will, and their so Perfect a Submission proceeded, that as the
Christian prays, Let thy Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven, so a
Philosopher could say, Sen. cur bon. vir. mald siant c. 5. vid. C^b. in Phaed.
Plat.
Nihil cogor, nihil patior invitus, nec servio Deo, sed assentio, eo quidem
magis, quod scio omnia certa and in aeternum dicta lege decurrere -- Olim
constitutum est; quid gaude as, quid fle as. I am not compelled, I suffer
nothing unwillingly, neither am I a slave unto God, but assent unto his Will,
and so much the rather, because I know that all things happen by an Eternal and
Unchangeable Ordinance of God. -- Long since it was Decreed, what thou should
have of Joy or Sorrow. So Seneca. And with how much Justice does the same
Seneca in the same Discourse applaud that manly Speech of Demetrius; In this
One thing, O Immortal Gods, I can complain of you, that you have not made known
unto me what your Will was: for of my self, I had first of all come unto these
things, to which being now called, I present my self.

Fourthly, Vid. Stob. sermon. 22. Epichar. apud Clem. Alexandr. l. 7. Strom.
Not to mention what Apprehensions many of them had of Conscience, and of the
Interest it has in all Our Actions, That a Good one is a continual Feast, an
Evil one a continual Torment; That the Goodness of the Heart ought to concur
to make the Action Good. Actio recta non erit, nisi recta fuerit voluntas, ab
hac enim est Actio. Rursus, Sen. Ep 95.
Voluntas non erit recta, nisi habitus animi rectus fuerit. If the Will be not
Good, the Action which Proceeds from the same shall never be. Furthermore,
the Will shall be Perverse, if the Habitude of the Spirit be not upright. But
not to stand on that, I will add but One more, but that a very useful and
momentous one, namely, That they ought to Act nothing with Doubting and
reluctant Minds, but to be well Resolved of the Equity, Justice and Lawfulness
of things, before they did them; Ci^ Offic. l. 1.
So Cicero. Quocirca circa been praecipiunt, qui vetant quicquam agere quod
dubites, aequum sit, an iniquum; Aequitas enim lucet, ipsa per se Dubitatio
autem cogitationem significat injuriae. Well therefore do they teach, who
forbid the doing of any thing whereof thou have doubt, whether it be Right or
Wrong; for Equity carries its own Light with it; but Doubting declares some
Imagination and conceit of Injury. This is according to our Apostle, He that
Doubts is Damned, if he eat, because he eats not of Faith; for whatsoever
is not of Faith, is Sin.

And now Sir, what remains to perfect my Discourse on this Head, but that I
Demonstrate that the Old Philosophers and other Wise Heathen, in all their
Actions of Religion, designed something which they called communion with God.
Which that they did, is manifest, not only from the Doctrine of the Stoics,
which some deride as too Fantastical and Aerie, but from that of the Platonists
and other Sects. Iambl. de Mist.
Nisi Divina sunt, ubique tollitur sacrificii virtus, quae in quadam Deorum ad
homines Communione consistit. If there be no Deity, then farewell the Virtue of
Sacrifices or Religion, which consists solely in the Communion of God with
Men. Thus Iamblicus. And says the Apostle, we have Fellowship with God.
Plutarch. co^tra Colet.
The like is in Plutarch.

And this Communion with, and conjunction unto God, as they understood it to be
inchoate and begun in the present world, so they were persuaded that it was not
to be Perfect and consummate but in a Future: That here indeed, as on a raging
and tumultuous Sea, men are Incapable of Hearing and discerning God distinctly,
but that hereafter when they have emerged it, they shall go to him, and there
shall Hear him, and See him, and Know him, even as he is. So Max. Tyr. Max.
Tyr. diss. 1.
(...) But how shall we do to get out of this tumultuous Sea, and come to see
God? Thou shall see him entirely, when thou shall be called to Him; nor will it
be long before he calls thee, in the mean time await till he do. Old age is
coming, which will conduct thee thither, and so is Death, which though the weak
fear, and tremble at the Approaches of it, yet every Lover of God does both
expect it with Joy, and receive it with Confidence.

This is much, but what is more surprising, I will now compendiously sum up
the Articles of Christian Faith and Doctrine, and by way of Parallel annex to
them others not unlike them in the Books of Philosophers; which though it may
seem Presumptuous to attempt, is yet no more than what the ancient Fathers,
some of them in part have done, as Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius, and
others of them, as Lactantius for one, acknowledged not impossible to be
performed; for fayes be, Facile est autem docere pene universam veritatem per
Philosophos and Sectas esse divisam. It is easy to evince, that almost the
whole Truth of Christian Religion is divided among the Philosophers in their
several Sects. -- Sed docemus nullam Sectam fuisse tam deviam, Lact Instit. l.
7. c. 7.
nec Philosophorum quenquam tam inanem, qui non viderit aliquid ex vero. We
assert that there was never a Sect so much out of the way, nor one of all the
Philosophers so vain, but that both. It and He had some Glympses of the Truth.
-- Quod si extitisset aliquis qui veritatem sparsam per singulos, per Sectasque
diffusam colligeret in unum, ac redigeret in corpus, is profecto non
dissentiret a nobis. Sed hoc nemo facere, nisi vere peritus ac sciens potest.
Were there one that would collect together, and reduce into a Systeme or Body,
all that Truth scattered in the several Philosophers, and diffused throughout
their several Sects; Verily he would not differ from us. So said the Father,
and so think I.

To begin then, That God is, and is such an One as Holy Scripture has
described him, that is, that he is Father Almighty, Wise, Holy, Good, Just,
Maker of Heaven and Earth, and that his Providence and Care extends to all his
works, are Truths so generally Acknowledged by wise men in all times, that I
dare not abuse your Patience by so Unnecessary a Performance as that would be
to give you many Proofs and Instances on them, out of the Ancients.

You know how many Plain Testimonies concerning them, Vid. Steuch. de perenni
Philo. l. 3. and 4.
are collected by Martinus in his Metaphysics, by Alsted in his Theology, and
by the Noble Morney in his Book of the Verity of Christian Religion, and by
many others; and in the Treatise which occasioned you the present trouble,
there are also some collected, so that I need not add more on this Head, but
only one citation out of Plato. For he having first confessed the little
satisfaction which he had received in the Theogonie, and Zoogenie of the
Ancients, or those Discourses which were transmitted down by them in writing
about the Origin or Generation of the Gods, and Animals, he Premises this as
Fundamental to his own concerning the former. Plat. in Fp^n. Vid. So^r. in
Plat. Phaed. Arist. de Mundo.
(...). That there are Gods, or which I take to be the true meaning that there
is a God, whose Providence and care particularly extends to all things both
small and great, and who is inflexible from what is Just and Right. And
afterward in the same Discourse, reflecting on the Perpetuity, the Constancy,
the Order in the Motion of the Heavens, not conceiving it imaginable how any
lower Being should be able to inspire, and principle it, He concludes that God
did; (...), I affirm, it is God that is the Cause.

But to leave a Point that is not questioned, I proceed to entertain you with
another that almost deserves to be as little, I mean the Doctrine of the
Trinity, which though denied by the Modern Jews, as we may read in Buxtorfe,
Buxtor. Synag. Iud. c. 3. Morney of Trueness of Christian Religion, c. 6.
and called into question by many that profess themselves Christians; yet it
was undoubtedly acknowledged by the Ancient Jews, as you may find demonstrated
in Morney, and was intimated in that Form of Benediction, which Galatinus
mentions; Galat. in Epist. ad Re^^s^n.
nor was it unknown unto the Gentiles, which is now my task to Demonstrate.

And here I must profess how much I owe to the Learned and Industrions
Patricius, Patric Panarch. l. 9.
for saving me a great part of the labor which otherwise I must have put my
self to, by collecting out of Zoroaster, and Hermes, such Authorities as
manifestly prove the point in hand; which partly because they may not be so
generally known, the Author not lying in every bodies way, and partly also to
render this Discourse the more Absolute, I shall compendiously repeat here.

For to begin with Zoroaster, he speaks of a Paternal Monad or Unite, (...),
where the Paternal Monad is; and, as Patricius well observes, a Paternal is a
Generative or Principiant Monad, and so is this, for he begets or
Principleth the number next in Nature, and that is Two [the Son and Spirit]
(...) (faith he) (...). The Monad is Protended, which begets Two; which Two
he calls the Diad, and affirms of them, that they always sit with the
Father, (...). But the Diad sits with him. [ In the beginning was with God.]
Now a Monad and a Diad, or One and Two makes Three; or a Monad protended into a
Diad, is a Trinity; of which he says, (...), The Trinity whereof the Unity is
the Principle, shines out in all the world.

But you will say, here is a kind of Trinity indeed, but of what Relation to
the Christian? Ours is a Father, a Son the Wisdom of the Father, and an Holy
Spirit, through which He works all, and so was Zoroaster's; for the first
Principle, which he mostly calls the Monad, otherwhere he calls the Father,
(...), The Father Ravished himself; (...), The Father perfected all things. The
Second Person, which he somewhere calls the Fathers Power, He calls
otherwhere the Fathers Mind, (...), The self-begotten Mind of the Father,
considering the things which were made. And for the third Person [which, as
Patricius thinks, he calls the Second Mind, for the Self-Begotten is the First,
(...), the Father Perfected all things and gave them to the Second Mind. I say,
the third Principle is by him acknowledged to be the (...), The term of the
Paternal Abyss, and the Spring of Intellectual Beings; To whom ascribing the
Efficiency and Making of all things that are made; he calls him the Maker,
(...), etc. and the Maker, etc.

So much for Zoroaster; and there are as many and as pregnant Testimonies in
Hermes as in Him; Herm. in Pim. l. 2. Vid. Steuch. de perenni Phil. l. 2. c. 17.
all which it were too long to enumerate; wherefore I shall only touch on some,
and those the Principal; as that he speaks of God the Father, and calls him the
Mind, (...), but the Mind, God the Father. Which had Zoroaster also ever done,
I should have thought the Second Mind to be the Son, and that the saying which
I quoted even now, that the Father perfected all things, and gave them to the
Second Mind, were to be understood of the Son, to whom the Scripture tells us,
the Father has given all things, [ All Power in Heaven and Earth is given unto
me:] but Patricius is express, that Zoroaster never calls the Father Mind,
though Hermes do.

Indeed in my Opinion Hermes speaks more expressly of the Son and Spirit, and
more consonantly to the Sacred Scriptures, than Zoroaster, for he says of the
former, (...) -- From the [First] Mind [proceeds] the Lucid Word, the Son of
God. Which Word he often calls the Son. (...), He is the Issue of the most
Perfect, the Perfect, the Begotten, the Natural Son. By this Word, he says the
Father made the World, (...), The Great Creator, or Demiurgus, the Father, He
made the whole World, not with hands, but by [his] Word.

And for the Spirit, what clearer Testimony can be had of him than this. (...).
God [ the Father] Male Female, Life and Light, did by the Word principle
another Demiurgical Mind, which being the God of Fire and Spirit, produced or
effected [the World.] In which Assertion, as in the Holy Scriptures, the Third
Principle is compared to Fire and Spirit, he shall baptize you (...), with the
Holy Spirit and Fire; which Spirit Hermes also represents as the Ligament and
band of Union between the Father and Son, (...), and there is no other Union of
this, than the Spirit that contains all things. And it is this Spirit that he
somewhere calls the Life; for speaking of the Father and the Son, he says,
(...), they are indistant from one another; for the Life is the Union of these
two; and so the Scripture speaks, which also calls the Spirit, the Life.

But in regard the Works of Hermes and Zoroaster are esteemed by many but Pious
frauds, though perhaps it were no hard task to evidence them very Ancient, and
to restore them to their former credit, (a piece of Justice that the Learned
Patricius has in part done them;) I shall therefore add some other Testimonies
not obnoxious to such suspicious, in confirmation both of them, and of the
truths I have designed to evince.

Not that I will much insist on the Trinity of the Ancient Orpheus, In Reu^b.
l. 3. de verb. mir. c. 5. Nox, Coelum and Ether. Morney of Truth of Christian
Religion, c. 6.
or his Three Creators and Makers of the World, (which some say he calls
Phanes, Uranos and Chronos) concerning which you may peruse Reuchlin and
Morney; nor on the Testimonies of the Sibyls, which yet are very plain and
express; nor on the three Kings of Plato neither, under that Notion, Vid. A^g.
de Ciuit. l. 10. c. 29.
of which Patricius whom I have so often mentioned, speaks; or on this, that
Plato in Gorgias (if you will believe the Learned Du port) teaches, (...) (
autorem scil. fuisse) (...), Du-port G^om. Ho-mer p. 86.
That Homer was Author of the Trine subsistence of the Demiurgical Principles.

The first I will insist upon is, that of the Pythagoreans, Arist. de Cae^.l.
1. c. 1.
who as Aristotle notes in his Book de coelo, affirmed, (...) That the
Universe and all things in it are terminated by three: And it was, as Plutarch
tells us, one of the Placits of Pythagoras, Plut. in Number.
-- Diis superis impari numero sacrificare, inferis pari, That the number of
the Sacrifices offered to the Celestial Gods should be Odd, but to the Infernal
Even. Now we know Pythagoras had been initiated in Egypt, into the Mysteries
of Hermes, Vi^. Apul. Florid. l 1.
and in Chaldaea, into those of Zoroaster, and not unlikely in honor of the
Doctrine of the Trinity wherein he was instructed, he might put this Honorary
Mark upon the Ternary number, and Vogue it Sacred and Divine; which also others
did as well before, as after him. So Homer, -- (...). Vid. Du-Port. ubi supra.

All things are divided three manner of ways. So Theocritus. Ter libo, terque
haec pronuncio mystica verba. Theocr. in Pharma-ceutr.

(...).
So Virgil, -- Numero Deus impare gaudet.
So Ovid, Et digitis tria thura tribus sub limine ponit.


And how inefragable a Testimony of the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, that
it was not utterly concealed and hid from the Ancients, is this of Aristotle,

(...). Arist. de Caelo, l. 1. c. 1.
wherefore receiving it from Nature as a Law of her establishment, we are wont
to use this Number [ viz. the Ternary.] in the Solemn Worship of the Gods. And
how could this Usage so obtain [so Universally as to be thought a Sanction, Law
and Ordinance of Nature] but that it was received by Tradition from the first
and common Parents, and so diffused all over? So little reason had Cardinal
Bassarion to deride Trapezontius.

But not to importune you with all that might be said, I will only offer one
consideration more to make it plain, which is, that the Ancient Roman Pontifs,
who it is likely might receive the custom from Pythagoras, were in their
Imprecations, their Vota, or Solemn Invocations of Divine Goodness and
Clemency, wont to hold Three fingers up Erect, the other two depressed on the
Palms of their hands, as who would say, imploring from the blessed Trinity, the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, that good and blessing they Desired.

That this was an Ancient Custom among the Romans (and, Galat. in Ep. ad
Reuclin.
as Galatinus says, the High Priest among the Jews, when he pronounced within
the Sanctuary, the Nomen Tetragrammaton, or name Jehovah, did the like) is
proved by the learned, Reuchlin, who affirms that for this Reason their
Imprecations, Vows, or Blessings were called Indigitaments. So Imprecari, in
Festus Pompeius is indigitari; which word, though by occasion of the Ignorance
of Persons uninitiated in the Mysteries, it were read, and now is written IN
[INDIGITARI] yet anciently, and in the Pontifs Books, it was not so, but
TRI-DIGITARI, Reuclin. in Ep. ad Galatin.
thus III DIGITARI; as they were wont to write One that had been thrice Consul,
III COSS. You may see more of.. this in Reuchlin.

Again, and what among the Learned is more discoursed of than the Trinity of
Plato? who in his Timaeus mentions One, Plat. in Trin.
(...), An Eternal Being Ingenite; whom he afterward calls (...), The Maker
and Father of this Universe; and who is this but God the Father Almighty? Then
he mentions a Begotten God, (...), For all these Reasons did He beget this
Blessed God. By which truly I think he understood not the Intelligible World,
or that Idea and exemplar of the sensible, extant in the mind of God from all
Eternity, which he calls (...), The Eternal Form or Model, but this sensible
one, or Nature; which none can once question that but reads what he further
says of this Begotten God, Plat. in Tim. f. 34: Ed. Steph^ni.
(...). Such indeed was the Eternal Ratiocination of God about the Future God,
which he made smooth and Equable on every side, and from the middle rising up
evenly, a Body Perfect and absolute, composed of absolute and Perfect Ones.
This is Plato his Begotten-God, or the Son of God; not that Intelligible World
existent in the mind of God, but the Sensible produced by it; and of the same
mind is Timaeus Locrus, Tim. Locr. de A^. Mu^.
(...) -- God made this World, etc. which afterward he calls the Son of God,
or the Begotten-God, (...), God willing to beget a most fair and beautiful
Offspring, produced this Begotten-God [the World.]

But to Return to Plato, we have him mentioning another Principle which he
calls (...) or Soul; for he supposes that the sensible World is an Animal or
living Creature, and that this (...) is the Principle that does enliven and
animate it, of which he says, Plin in ^im. f. 34.
(...), [But he Begot] the Soul [of the World] a thing superior to, and before
the Body both in Generation and in Virtue, and set it over it as a Lady to Rule
and Govern it. And of this he speaks in his tenth Book of Laws, Plat. l. 10.
de leg.
wherein he seems to make it to be God, (...). It is manifest that the Best
soul [God] must be affirmed to superintend the whole Universe, and to act and
rule it in that way and method which we have mentioned.

So near this Great Truth was Plato, and had he acquiesced in the General
account thereof, which it seems he had received from the Ancients, with the
Tradition of the (...) or Creation of the World, (which I am the apter to
believe he did, because as Moses hints a Trinity in His Genesis, whence the
Evangelist John derives his, so does Plato in Timaeus, or the Heathen Genesis.)
I say, had not Plato been too curious to pry into a Mystery too hard for him
to comprehend, but had acquisced in the General account received, he might have
passed for a very Good and Orthodox believer (of it.) For what is more
agreeable to Christian Doctrine, than that there is a Father without Beginning,
that there is a Blessed Begotten-God, as who would say the Son, and that there
is a Soul or Spirit [proceeding from the Father and Son] Who does inspire all
the Motions in the whole Universe, and Who does govern them all?

But the Gloss and Comment of Plato (as may be inferred from what I have
Discoursed of it already out of his Timaeus) is not as Orthodox and Christian
as the text it self, and no wonder, when among Christians, and in the advantage
of the Gospel Light and Dispensation, there is so little Understanding of the
Mystery, and that little so imperfect, that even most of us may have as much
Reason to correct the Boldness, Presumption, Temerity of most of our pretending
and splendid Talk upon it, and explications of it, as Plato had to correct his,
which yet he piously did. We may as well say in this matter, when we have said
the most we can, and the best, as he says, (...); Plat. in Tim. f. 34.
but how rashly and inconsiderately do we speak in this matter [which is so
much above us?] By this it seems, that what he wrote by way of explication of
the Trinity, was not so much what he believed of it Himself, but what the
People, of whose capacity he had consideration and respect, could bear.

For however in Timaeus he disguises the matter, it is most certain he believed
better himself. For what belief is more agreeing to the Christian Doctrine, or
more Orthodox than this? That there is a God the Governor and Cause of all the
world, and of all things in it, those that are, and those that shall be. And
that there is a Father of that Universal Governor and Cause of all things: As
who would say, that there is God the Son, invested in all the Power both in
Heaven and Earth; and there is God the Father, who is the Origin and Source of
all that Power, from whom the Son derives and receives it. And this Belief was
Plato's. You shall have his own words -- Plat. Ep. 6. Ed. Steph.
(...) -- Swearing by the God the Governor of all, both of things that are,
and of things that shall be, and by the Lord the Father of this Cause and
Governor. (...), Of whom, if we philosophize truly and aright, we shall all
have as clear a knowledge as Happy men are capable of.

I am the more confirmed in the Pertinency of the present text, by the
Judgment passed on it by One of the most Learned, as well as the most Ancient
of the Christian Fathers: Clem. Alex. Stro^. l. 5.
(...) (says Clemens Alexandrinus) (...), etc. For I mention not Plato. He in
his Epistle to Erastus and Coriscus, speaks plainly of the Father and Son,
etc.

It might be added by way of Confirmation to the sense that I have given of
Plato, that the Platonists have had the like; for proof whereof I will but
offer what I find in St. Austin, Aug. de civ. l. 10. c. 29.
That the Good Simplicianus (afterward Bishop of Milan) told him, that a
certain Platonist said in his hearing, that the beginning of St. John's Gospel,
viz. In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and onward to
the end of v. 5. was worthy to be written in letters of Gold, and to be read in
the Highest places of all Temples. And Amelius, as Vives on St. Austin cites
him, has the very words of the Evangelist, and quotes him. And this for Plato.

I might also instance in other Gentile Writers that do seem to hint somewhat
of this Divine Mystery, Vid. Ste^e. de perenni phil. l. 1. and 2.
and there are who think there is no other meaning of the Pallas born of
Jupiters brain, (of which both Poets and Philosophers have spoken so much) than
that God the Son the Savior of the World, is the Divine Wisdom, begotten of
the Fathers Understanding; and because his Generation is Transcendent, Herodian
l. 5.
and Unspeakable, to signify her being so, Pallas her Image (as Herodian has
assured us) was by the Romans Worshiped and Adored (...), hid and Unseen.
Again, how plain a Testimony to the Son of God the WORD, is that of Zeno in
Laertius, and how agreeable to Christian Doctrine ^ viz. that there are two
Principles, (...), an Active, and a Passive Principle; that the Passive
Principle is matter, but that the Active Principle effecting All, is the WORD
who is God. La^rt. i^ Ze^.
For so I take it we may well translate his (...). Of which Word he farther
says, that it is Eternal, and that it makes all things that are made in the
whole Extent and Latitude of matter, (...).

And for the Holy Spirit, there is not only a general Testimony given to it by
Poets and Philosophers, who conformably to that of Moses in Genesis,
acknowledged a (...) or Common Spirit of the World. So Ovid, Est Deus in nobis,
agitante calescimus Illo,
Spiritus hic celsae semina Mentis habet.
Virgil. Spiritus intus alit., totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet.
So Manilius. Ma^il. l. ^^ c. 2.
Hoc opus immensi constructum corpore mundi,
Membraque naturae diversa condita forma,
Aeris atque ignis, terrae, pelagique jacentis.
Vis animae divina regit, sacroque meatu
Conspirat Deus, and tacita ratione gubernat,
Et multa in cunctas dispensat foedera parts.
But a most particular one both as to its being God, and which is the
Scriptural Notion, its Indwelling, Inspiring, Ruling and Governing in man, Pray
hear Seneca, Prope est a re Deus (faith he to Lucilius) tecum est, intus est.
God is not far from thee, He is with thee, He is in thee. Sen. Ep. 41.
Ita dico Lucili, Lacer intra nos Spiritus sedet, etc. This I say O Lucilius, a
Holy Spirit resideth in us, who is the Observer and Register of all the Good
and Evil we do; This uses us, as he is used by us. There is no Good man
without God. How can any raise himself above the Danger of Fortune, if not
assisted by Him! it is He that inspires Great and Generous Counsels. Once, it
is certain a God dwells in every Good man, though what that God is, is not
Certain. Thus Seneca, so like the Apostle, You are the Temples of the Holy
Ghost.

And so much for the Trinity as far as it was known among the Gentiles, who, if
you will believe Macrobius, as Fabulous and Idle as they were in other matters,
Macrob. Saturn l. 1. c. 2. Vid. Apul. l. de Philos.
were not in the least so in this: for says he, cum de his inquam loquuntur
summo Deo and Mente (of which latter he had said before that it was nata and
profecta ex summo Deo) nihil fabulosum penitus attingunt.

That the World had a Beginning, Vid. Lia^m ap. Laert. Plat. in E^tby. Arist.
de Coel. l. 1. c. 10.
was the General belief of most that ever lived in it, and Aristotle himself as
good as tells us, that all Philosophers before him owned it. Yes, and that it
was Produced by the (...) or Divine Word, was also asserted not only by the
Egyptians and Assyrians, who, if we may believe Hermes and Zoroaster, plainly
did so, but by many Greeks, Z^^. ap. Lart. ^bi, su ra. Plat. in Epi^om.
particularly, by Zeno in Laertius in the text before cited, and by Plato in
his Epinomis, in these Terms: (...) -- together finishing -- the world, which
the Word the most Divine All things had made Visible. St. Austin in his
Confessions says that he had read the beginning of St. John's Gospel [ In the
beginning was the word] in Plato, but not in the same words.

That Angels were Created, and before man, and for his advantage and Utility,
and consequently, that then they were not Devils or enemies to man, was
asserted by the famed Apollo, Ae^. Gazacus in Theop^rast. Vid. Steuch. de
pere^. phil l. 3. c. 12, 14.
in one of his Oracles, (...). Before us, and before the Divine Production of
the World, there were Immortal Spirits created, for our Utility.

That there was an Apostasy or fall of some of those Angels, among whom there
was a Chieftain whom they called Typhon or the Devil, [ Isidis nomine Terram,
Pl^t. de Is.
Osiridis amorem, Typhonis Tartarum accepimus] who degenerating from their
Proper Natures, instead of continuing friends, became the mortal enemies of God
and man, is plainly intimated in the Doctrine of the Ancient Theologues, who,
as Macrobius tells us, and as I minded you before, affirmed the Body to be
Hell; and that Souls were sent into it but by way of Punishment, to expiate
that Guilt they had contracted long before.

And indeed the great Hypothesis of Pre-existence of Souls, though as stated
and interpreted by Hierocles, it seem a Depravation of the History of the Fall
of Man, yet as displayed by Plato himself in Phaedrus, what is it other than a
Disguise of that Tradition of the Fall of the Angels? Plat. in Phaedro.
which we may Presume transmitted to him, and conveyed from most ancient times.

For there he treats of a threefold condition of the Soul or Mind, one before
its Immersion in the Body, while it was above in Heaven; the other after its
immersion in the Body, while it is in Union and Conjunction with it, and how it
came to be so; the third the state of Separation and Disunion from the Body
again, and what becomes of it then.

He says of the Soul, that before its Immersion into this Terrestrial Body,
she was (...), Perfect and Winged, and that while she was so, she did (...),
she kept above, flying as she pleased over all the world; but afterward, by
reason of her turpitude and Pravity, the Feathers falling from her wings, she
sunk lower, and at last, meeting with convenient matter in this Inferior
Region, took up her residence and habitation in it.

This is his Notion of the Pre-existence of souls, and of the cause of their
incorporation in terrestrial Vehicles or Bodies, which in his own terms you may
read in his Phaedrus thus. (...), etc. The Divine Nature is Amiable, Wise,
Good, and whatever else Resemble this, and by these the Wing of the Soul is
chiefly both nourisht and augmented, but by contrary things, as Turpitude and
Pravity, etc. it is clipped and dissolved; The feathers fall off.

And, who sees not in this Hypothesis or Notion, that he supposes there were
Unconcreted Minds or Spirits which fell, and left their first Habitation, which
in their state of Fall or Apostasy not concerned with terrestrial Bodies, are
Demons, and concerned, are Souls? Souls and Demons differing in no other wife
with Plato, than according to the Notion of a Learned Person that understands
him well enough, as Swords in Scabbards do from Swords without them.

And truly to render my Discourse on this matter beyond Exception, I am but to
demonstrate this the sense of many of the Ancients, namely, That Souls and
Angels differ not in substance, but only in condition and state; which that it
was, you will easily be induced to believe when I have proved it Received even
among the Jews, who not unlikely might derive the same as well as many other of
their Vulgar Placits, Vid. Aug. de Civ. l. 9. c. 11.
from the Greek Philosophers.

And that it was a Received (though false) Opinion among the Jews, is evident
from that of those Disciples met together to Pray for Peter, Act. 12.15. Vid.
B^z^iu l^^.
who on Rhoda's insisting that she heard his voice at the Gate, whom they knew
before in Prison, and then Imagined Dead, conclude it was his Angel, that is,
not his Guardian as the most think, nor his Messenger as some, for it would not
follow from the Premises, it was Peter's voice, therefore his Guardian Angel; or
it was Peter's voice, therefore it is his Messenger; but that it was his Spirit,
or as we call it his Ghost, his Spectrum, his Apparition; Men's Ghosts
(therefore called Apparitions) usually appearing in the same shape, and
dissembling the same voice that was owned by the living Persons whom they
Represent.

Nor is this Interpretation groundless, or a mere conceit, for I find in Philo
a passage that will much contribute both to illuminate and strengthen it, for
he says, That the belief that Souls, Philo Iud. l. de Gigant.
Genius's, and Angels do not differ really and in deed, so much as nominally
and in name, will effectively redeem and free the mind from grievous
Superstition: Apul. l. de D^o Socrat.
and so Apuleius, Animus humanus etiam nunc in corpore situs, Demon
nuncupatur, that the Soul of man even while it yet resideth in the Body, is
called a Demon, or Angel.

In a word, That there is a Devil as well as a God, an Evil Principle the cause
of all the Evil in the world, as well as a Good, Zor. a^^d Plutar. Ld^ Osir.
the Author of every Good and Perfect Gift, was a common Tenent in Ancient
times. Zoroaster, Father of the Magi, held there was an Oromazes, and an
Arimaneius, and conform to the Scriptures, adds, de rebus sub sensum cadentibus
illum maxim similem esse Luci, hunc Tenebris and ignorationi: That the One was
best compared to Light, the other to Darkness and Ignorance. Of which Opinion
also were the Greeks [Philosophers and Poets] Qui (faith Plutarch) bonam partem
Jovi Olympio, malam Diti Averrunco assignant, who ascribe all Good to the God
of heaven, and all the Evil in the World to the Devil of hell. Yes says
Plutarch most emphatically, Plutar. de Is. and Osir.
Uerustissima autem sacrarum professoribus rerum, and legum latoribus derivata
est Opinio, Autore incognito, fide firma and indelebili, non in sermonibus ea
tantum, and in rumoribus, sed and in mysteriis ac Sacrificiis, tam Barbaris
quam Graecanicis extans. What? neque casu ferri, and a fortuna pendere
Universum, mente, ratione ac Gubernatore destitutum: neque unicam esse rationem
quae contineat id and dirigat tanquam clavum aut fraena moderans. Sed cum per
multa e bonis juxta malisque sunt confusa -- Ergo a duobus Principiis
contrariis, adversisque duabus facultatibus, quarum Altera ad Dextram and recta
ducat, altera retrorsum avertatur, atque reflectat, cum vitam esse mixtam, tum
ipsum mundum, etc.

And more than this, It was a common Tenent amongst them, that between the Good
and Evil Principle there was War commenced, and carried on i^ the world, which
under the management and conduct of a third or middle One, called by Zoroaster
Mithra, Plutar. de Is. and Osir.
and as Plutarch tells us, by the Persians Mesites, Mediator, by the Greeks
Harmonia, Agreement; It was in conclusion to be finished by the Ruin of
Arimanius; All which the Author last mentioned, in his Treatise of Isis and
Osiris, shows at large, wherein, with many other, you may read the following
Passage. Oromazan natum aiunt e luce purissima, Arimanium e caligine, eos
bellum inter se gerere. Sex Deos fecisse Oromazan, primum Benevolentiae,
secundum Veritatis; tertium AEquitatis, reliquos Sapientiae, Divitiarum and
Voluptatis, quae honesta consequitur opisicem: Arimanium totidem numero his
adversa efficientem. This shows the Nature of the War; and for the Success and
event of it, hear Theopompus. Theopomp. ap Plutarc. de Is. and Osir.
Theopompus ait de sententia Magorum vicibus ter mi^e annorum alterum Deorum
superare, alterum succumbere; and per alia tria annorum millia, bellum eos
inter se gerere, pugnare, and alterum alterius opera demoliri: Tandem Plutonem
desscere and tun^ Homines fore Beatos, neque alimento utentes, neque umbram
edentes. When all the Devils works are Demolisht, and his Government
overthrown, then blessed and happy shall men be. [They shall be as the Good
Angels;] they shall not live on Elementary Aliment, but they shall have
glorious and heavenly Bodies. So I interpret that, neque umbras edentes.

That man was created upright and in the Divine Image, and that He was Invested
in a state of honor as well as of Innocence, and had at first bestowed upon
him, all the Creatures God had made, I have already evinced known among the
Gentiles (in the little Treatise that occasioned your Letter) not only by the
Testimonies of the Poets, Hesiod and Ovid, but of grave Philosophers, of Plato,
of Hierocles, and of others: And therefore I will add here but one more, and
that shall be out of Hermes; Herm. in Pomand. ex edit. Patri^.
(...). The Father of all, the Mind, Being, Life and Light produced man in his
likeness, in whom he was delighted as in his Offspring, for he was very
beautiful, and lovely, bearing the Image of the Father. And in very deed God
was in love with his own similitude, and assigned over unto him all that he had
made.

That Men fell, and by Temptation of the Devil, or Serpent, were cheated out of
Paradise, was a Truth no less acknowledged among the Heathen, than that they
once stood: of which, as I have given several Testimonies in my former
Discourse, so you may find more in Morney and Dr. Stillingfleet, De Ophion^o
tracta vit. Pherecyd s Sir. ut Max. Tyr. dis. 29. osserit.
who both make the Table of Ophioneus (whom Coelius Rhodiginus calls Daemonicum
Serpentem, the Devilish Serpent, and Leader of the Rebels and Apostates from
God) to be a Depravation of the History of Moses concerning man's fall effected
by the crafty Serpent. Once, that man at first was taken up in Contemplation
and Enjoyment of the Great Creator, but that afterward converting to the
Creature, instead of walking in the way of Understanding, which lies above to
the Wise, and of conforming to the Dictates of the superior faculties, he took
the lower way of Sense and Appetite, and so, of a man became a Brute, and of
Free a Vassal, sold to Sin and Lust.] As it is hinted in the Metamorphosis and
Transmutations of the Pythagoreans and Poets, wherein they feigned men
transformed into the shapes of Beasts; so it is expressed plainly by Iamblicus.
Iambl. de Mist. ex Edit. Ficini.
Contemplabilis ipse in se Intellectus homo, erat quondam Deorum contemplationi
conjunctus, deinde vero alteram ingressus est animam, circa humanam formae
speciem coaptatam, sive contemperatam, atque propterea in ipso necessitatis,
fatique vinculo est alligatus.

Nor were they less acquainted with the way of man's Recovery, and with the
method wherein he is to be restored again unto felicity, than with his fall,
and the cause of it. For as they took the Fall and Infelicity of man, to
consist in his Oblivion and Forgetfulness of God, and in a foolish forsaking of
himself (abused as he was by false Appearances,) to Lust and Sensitive
Appetite, instead of firm adhering to Reason; so they understood his Liberation
and Redemption from that Servitude and Bondage, no otherwise to be Effected,
than by his again Recovering that Acquaintance and Knowledge of God, which he
had formerly lost. This is life Eternal to know thee, says our Savior; and
the same says Iamblicus, who speaks as much as here I have, both as to the
Fall of man, Iambl. de Myst^. ex Edit. Ficius.
and to his rise. Considerare itaque decet qua praesipue ratione ab ejusmodi
vinculis solvi potest; est autem solutio nulla praeter ipsam Deorum
cognitionem. Idea namque felicitatis est ipsum cognolcere bonum. Quemadmodum
est and Idea malorum, ipsa quidem Bonorum oblivio; and fallacia circa malum,
etc. -- Haec autem a Principiis cadens, atque repulsa, seipsam projicit ad
corporalem Ideam dimetiendam.

That the Gentiles had heard of the Promise of Christ, or God Incarnate, and
that some among them looked for him, is not obscurely intimated by the Prophet
in the Attribute he gives him, that he was the Desire of all Nations. For
though the Incarnation of God, or as our Apostle, the manifestation of him in
the flesh, be a thing of so much difficulty to be apprehended, that in the
Judgment both of Epicurus and Laertius, it is no less than plain folly and
madness to believe it, Quippe etenim mortalem arterno jungere, and una
Constare, and putare and fungi mutua posse,
Desipere est. --
Yet it is Undeniable that many as well Philosophers as others thought it
possible; And I make no question but moved by some old Tradition, they
earnestly expected such an One to come; of which there are no Dark Evincements.

For not to insist on what the Noble Morney has so closely pressed, that
Julian himself believed Aesculapius the Son of Jupiter to have descended from
Heaven, to be incarnate, to have appeared among men as a man, in order to the
restistution of both souls and bodies to their Pristine Perfection; I say, not
to stay on that, It Is evident as well from Aristotle in his Ethics, Arist.
Eth. Nicom. l. 7. c. 2.
as from others, that they thought the like of Many, [great and eminent Persons
among them;] of All which, that I may not too much exercise your Patience with
instancing in more than need, I will elect but two for Examples.

For what did many of them think of great Pythagoras, Iambl. dt vit. Pythag. l.
2. c. 2.
but what we believe of Jesus Christ, that he was the Son of God, a God
incarnate, sent to men in Humane shape on purpose to Reform and Correct their
lives, and by his own example to inflame and kindle in them ardent affections
and desires after true Philosophy and Happiness. And Aristotle meant no less,
when in a Book he wrote of the Pythagorean Philosophy, he makes mention of --
a certain Distribution of Beings possessed of Reason, Arist. apud Iambl. l. 1.
de vit. Pythag. c. 6.
that was (he says) preserved of Holy men as one of the greatest and most
Sacred Mysteries they had in keeping; viz. That it was either God, or Man, or
as Pythagoras, as who would say as God-man, or One Participating both.(...).

And that you may not fancy I have put a false interpretation on the Text of
Aristotle, or have affirmed more of Pythagoras than ever entered into Humane
Cogitation in respect of him before, you shall have as much as I have said of
him, represented to you by Iamblicus, Iambl. de: vit. P^tha^. l. 1. c. ^.
who wrote his Life; as the common sentiment of very many of Old. (...) -- But
others reported him to be one of the Celestial Gods [who came] for the Benefit
and Reformation of the mortal Life, Affirming that he appeared in humane Form
to men, that he might graciously afford to corrupt nature, a saving Incentive
both to Philosophy and Blessedness.

And little less was said of Plato, another great Luminary or Star that shined
in the Gentile Orb; for of him Speucippus, Clearchus, and Anaxalides in
Laertius affirm it commonly discoursed at Athens, that he was born of a woman
who had never known man, and consequently, that he was begotten of God. For
when Ariston his reputed Father would have taken that Possession of Pericthiona
(for so the Mother of Plato was called) which the Marriage Condition did
entitle him, and give him Right unto, he could not possibly effect it, but was
Restrained by Apollo, whom he saw in a Vision Protecting and defending Her from
his Embraces, to keep her pure until she was delivered of That with which she
went. The Story is known and to be seen both in Laertius in the life of Plato,
Laert. in vit. Platon. Illustr. de Philos. in Platon.
and in Illustrius. So far from being incredible is that Essential Part of the
History of Christ, that he was born of a Virgin, and conceived by the Holy
Ghost.

And what I pray you should incline the Heathen to imagine Extraordinary
Persons to have been begotten of God, or to be Gods incarnate, but what moved
the Jews in the Gospel to think that Jesus Christ was that Prophet they looked
for, and others of them to imagine Simon the Egyptian, and some Barchochebas
to be the Messiah? Namely, that they were informed there was such an one to
come, whom accordingly they did expect, and the extraordinary and surprising
advantages of which the Persons they beheld with admiration were possessed,
inclined them to believe that this or that was he. And indeed the frequent
Apparition of the Angel of the Covenant [the Lord Christ] to the Patriarchs,
might be also some occasion of this Belief.

But this may pass but for a Probable Conjecture. It is certain Job was a
Gentile, that he lived in the Land of Uz, and that he saw his Redeemer; and as
certain that Balaam, another Gentile, Prophesied of Christ, and saw his Day:
and that the Magi or Wise men in the Evangel, had such Discoveries of our
Blessed Savior, and such Conduct to him, as none other Mortal ever had the
like, which ought to be noted. Nor shall I blush to Urge the Testimony of the
Sibylls, on which so many Ancient and Learned Fathers have insisted as on their
Principal Plea: There are many scattered up and down his Institutions by the
Elegant Lactantius, and summed up by St. Austin, which I will not touch: Viv.
ad August. de civ. l. 18. c. 23.
I will only mention the Acrostich which I find in Vives his Notes upon St.
Austin, taken out of Eusebius; and I the rather pitch on this, because I find
in Cicero, some speech of such an Acrostich of one of the Sibylls, written with
much Art, that should speak (as this does) of a KING that was to come, Vid.
Six. Senens. Bibl. l. 2. f. 115, 116.
whereof you may hear more anon.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I n sign of DOOMES DAY, the whole earth shall sweat:
E ver to Reign a King in Heavenly Seat
S hall come to Judge all flesh. The Faithful, and
U nfaithful too, before this God shall stand,
S eeing him high with Saints, in times last end.
C orporeal shall he sit, and thence extend
H is doom on Souls. The Earth shall quite lie waste,
R uin'd, o're-grown with Thorns, and men shall cast
I dols away, and treasure, Searching Fire
S hall burn the ground, and thence it shall enquire
T hrough Seas and Sky, and break Hells blackest Gates.
S o shall free Light salute the blessed States
O f Saints; the Guilty lasting flames shall burn.
N o act so hid, but then to Light shall turn,
N o breast so close, but God shall open wide.
E ach where shall cries be heard and noise beside
O f Gnashing teeth. The Sun shall from the Sky
F lie forth, and Stars no more move orderly;
G reat Heaven shall be dissolved, the Moon deprived
O f all her Light, places at height arrived
D eprest, and Valleys raised to their seat.
T here shall be naught to Mortals high or great.
H ills shall lie level with the Plains; the Sea
E ndure no burden, and the Earth as they
S hall perish, cleft with Lightning: every Spring
A nd River burn: The fatal Trump shall ring
U nto the World, from Heaven a dismal blast
I Ncluding Plagues to come for ill deeds past.
O ld Chaos, through the cleft mass, shall be seen,
U nto this Bar shall all Earths Kings convene,
R iuers of Fire and Brimstone flowing from Heaven.
To this I will but add a Tristich out of Reu^hline, Reuchli^ de ve^b. mirif.
l. 3. c. 15.
which (he says) he found among the Sibylls, though I fear it spurious; (...)

And which he thus translates, Ipsa Dei soboles magni ventura Parentis,
Mortali similis sub carne videbitur aegra,
Quatuor ergo ferat vocales consonat una.
The meaning is, that the Son of God should be incarnate, and that his Name
should be Jesus, (...) IHSUH; as that Author interprets it. But of this, Sit
fides penes Authorem.

But if the Reputation and Credit of the Sibylls be Disputed, concerning which
I shall Presume to offer somewhat hereafter, That of Poets and Philosophers is
more received; I will but mention the Druids, Spotswood. Hist. of Chapter of Scotl.
l. 1. f. 3.
of whom I find in Spotswood, that it is Reported that they prophesied of the
Incarnation of the Son of God; But in regard he cites not his Author, and I my
self have never met with any to strengthen that Assertion, I think it best to
pass it over; as also what Clemens Alexandrinus cites out of Pindarus about a
Savior, Clem. Alex. Stron. l. 5.
that should ^well with Themis: nor will I stand on what the Ancient Hermes,
after he had talked with Pimander, speaks of himself [as a Type,] perhaps in
that sense in which the Prophet David did, saying, Thou will not suffer my soul
in Grave, nor thine Holy One to see corruption; Herm. in P^m^x Ed. Patrit.
So Hermes, (...). But I Raising them up again, was made the Guide of Mankind,
showing them the Way How, and in what manner they may be saved.

Once, who has heard of Jesus Christ, that can without Reflection on him, read
the Greek Stories of Mercury? when he shall find in them, that they make him
Leader of the Graces; that they called him Diactor, a Messenger to go between
the Gods and Men, and Socus or Savior; That they assigned him a Rod with two
Serpents twined about it, to indicate his Office, which was to make Peace, and
to Destroy the Enmity; In fine, That he was the Son of Jupiter, begotten by him
on Maia. Phoniae. de Not. D^^r.
All this and more too is to be read of Mercury in Phornutus, which he indeed
jejunely applies, as many other Ancients also did, to Speech. But we are to
understand it to carry deeper sense than so, which we shall more easily be
induced to believe, if we Re-mind that Admonition (necessary for the
comprehending both of this and like Discourses of the Poets and Ancients) which
Plutarch gives us; Plutar. de Is. and Oscr.
Porro autem fabulis utendum est, non quasi eae remprorsus doceant; sed quod ob
similitudinem cum reipsa aliquam, commodum ad ejus explicationem offertur,
desumendum inde est. We are not so to use (the) Fables (of the Ancients) as if
they graphically did describe the Thing [Discoursed of;] but for some
Resemblance that they have with it, they do Accommodate and help us in its
explication: which is the Use we must make of them.

But that I may not tire you with consequential Evidences, that to some will
seem far fetched, I will offer one or two so manifest and plain, as shall not
only Reflect abundant confirmation on All already offered, but also effectually
Demonstrate (of themselves) the Truth before us, viz. That the Gentiles had a
fair Prospect of Christ, and that Philosophers as wary and as sparing as they
were in making mention of it, yet they saw his Day.

For Plato in his Politics, after he had been discoursing of the Golden
Revolution under Saturn, and had said a many things thereon, seems to correct
himself for talking so Presumptuously of things so long ago, and out of ken,
and therefore for fuller satisfaction, refers to one to come, a fit and
qualified Person, who would give them satisfactory information both in this and
all things else of concern. Plat. in Polit. f. 272. ex Edit. Steph.
(...). But let us Adjourn this Discourse, Until a certain Fit MESSENGER come,
who will tell, etc.

Indeed it would put the Faith of Plato above Question, were that true which
Alsted tells us of it (he says) from Boethius de Disciplina Scholastica;
Alsted. Encyclop. l. 25. c. 3.
That in his Sepulcher was found a Golden Lamin having engraven on it these
words [ Credo infilium Dei nasciturum de Virgine] I believe in the Son of God
that shall be born of a Virgin; Had there such a Lamin so inscribed been indeed
found in Plato's Tomb, and were there no Conveyance of it in by Legerdemain or
Pious Fraud, it would import much. But I am not credulous enough upon so slight
motives, to believe his Faith so clear and so express, especially since I find
not any mention of the Story, or any thing relating to it in Boethius himself,
nor in truth in Since I find Dr. Don. Ser. 2. f. 17. citing Aquinas for the
Story.
any other but one whose very Relation is a Discredit, I mean in Sr. John
Mandevile, who tells the Tale thus, Once upon a time within the Church of St.
Sophy an Emperor would have laid the Body of his Father when Dead, and as they
made the Grave they found a body in the earth, and upon the body lay agreat
Plate of pure Gold, and thereupon was written in Hebrew, Greek and Latin
Letters these words, Jesus Christus nascetur de Virgin Maria, and ego credo in
eum. And it is thought Hermanes the Wise man writ it. A pitiful Story and not
found in the Latin Copy of the Travels as they are in Purchase.

Again, who can put a Tolerable Sense on that in Cicero concerning a King,
without acknowledging the Prospect which the Gentiles had of Christ, and that
indeed the Sibyll spoke of him, though perhaps she were as little understood by
most others, as by her own Interpreter, and by the Orator himself, who derides
her? Sibyllae versus observamus, quos illa furens fudisse dicitur. Ci^. de
divine. l. 2.
Quorum interpres falsa quadam hominum fama dicturus in Senatu putabatur, eum,
quem revera Regem habeamus, appellandum quoque esse Regem, si salvi esse
vellemus. Hoc si est, etc. We observe the Verses of the Sibyll, which she is
said to pour out in her fury: Whose Interpreter very lately (it was thought)
would have spoken in the Senate, That the King which we have indeed, ought also
to be called King if we would be s afe. Forwhich misapplication of the Text,
the Interpreter does as much fall under our Censure as Cicero's; for (as
Suetotonius) Percrebuer at Orient toto Vetus and Constans Opinio: Sueton. in
Vespat. c. 4.
esse in fatis, ut eo tempore Judaea profecti rerum potirentur. Tacit. Hist. l.
5.
Tacitus reports the same.

Again, the Humane Sacrifices which obtained among the Heathen all the World
over, V. Porphyr. de Abstia. l. 2. s 27. Caes. Comment l. 5. Curt. l. 4.
of which beside the Instances alleged in my former Essay, we have many more
in Porphyrie and others, for Evincements; I say, their Pharmaci and Catharmi
were but Depravations and Disguises of that first Tradition of the Seed of the
Woman, or the man Christ, who by Divine appointment was to make his Soul an
Offering for sin, and so to be the common Pharmacus or Catharmus for the whole
Kind.

Nor is this a Notion so improbable and far fetched, but that it is as capable
of Demonstration as any thing of like nature. For had not this Custom not of
sacrificing only, but of sacrificing Men, been bottomed on some mistaken
Tradition, Vid Dionys. Halicar. l. 1. Porphyr. de Abstin l 2. ^ 54, 55, 56.
Vid. Caesar. Com. l 6. Vid. i^f^a
which the rest of the World had received from the first Patriarchs, in whom as
in a common stock, the several Branches concurred; It cannot be imagined how it
should become so early, and so general as Authentic Story witness it, since
Nothing could obtain so generally in the first ages, when there was not such an
Intercourse between the Nations to favor it, as in following times, but what
either was a prime dictate of Reason, which a thing apparently Inhumane and
unreasonable could not be, or else a point of First Tradition.

Yes, The Gentiles had a sense of sin, and of the Clemency and Grace of God; as
also that to expiate for the former, and to procure the latter, there was
somewhat else Necessary beside Repentance and Reformation of the sinner (which
yet the Modern Jews impertinently think enough.) San^ys Survey of Relig^on, f.
223.
For else, what mean all their Rites of Expiation and Lustration? All their
Applications and all their Altars to Jupiter Salutaris, Jupiter the Savior?
and Jupiter Melichius or Placabilis, Jupiter the Appeasable, and Jupiter the
Propitious? Of all which we have abundant Instances and Proofs in Homer, Plato,
Thucidides, Homer and Plat. l. 2. de Rep.
in Xenophon, Pausanias and so many others, that it would be Infinite to cite
them all, Be pleased to accept of three, Homer in Plato de Rep. -- (...)



The Gods are flexible, Prayers and Victims appease them, etc.

Plato himself, Plat. de Rep. l. 2.
(...). Expiations can do much, and the Gods are Exorable, as the Greatest
Cities, the Poets Sons of the Gods, and the Prophets Affirm.

Phornutus. Phorn l. de Not. Deor.
Porro etiam (says he) mitem appellant Jovem, nempe Placabilem esse his, qui e
scelerata vita pedem retrahant, non enim ita erga eos est affectus, ut
reconciliari nequiret, quam ob causam and Placabilis Jovis arae sunt. There are
Altars to Love the Appeasable.

And it is not unlikely but that many of them had some confused Glympse and
Apprehension of Christ, the true Propitiatory; forasmuch as thinking and
Inquisitive Philosophers (for so I call them) who examined the Reasons of the
Rites of their Religion, evidently enough perceived the insufficiency of not a
few for those Ends they pretended, Vid. Porphyr. de Abstinent. l. 2. s. 24.
and in particular of cruentous Sacrifices, which (if they thought of it) they
could not but discern to conduce little to the Real cleansing and Purgation of
their Consciences, the Expiation of sin, and the Propitiation of God. The
Ratiocination of the Prophet Micah is so Natural and Easy, Mic. 6.6, 7.
that it could not possibly escape a Cogitative man, Wherewith shall I come
before the Lord, and bow my self before the High God? Shall I come before him
with Burnt Offerings, with Calves of an year old? Will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my
first born for my transgression, or the fruit of my Body, for the sin of my
soul? It Is not improbable but some Reflections of a Nature like to these,
Iambl. in vit. Pythag. Vid. and Plutarch. in Number. and Porphyr. de vit. Pythag.
engaged Phythagoras (as I find recorded by Iamblicus, in the Book he wrote of
his life) to offer his Devotions on an Incruentous Altar. But whatever moved
him to do so, it is certain that the Poet Philemon convinced of the
Insufficiency of Sacrifices to Propitiate, and Atone God, Obliged men to
Piety, and Righteousness, as Things in themselves of more Avail and Power with
him for that End, than Offerings.

(...)

Now supposing any of them to have had such Reflections, what Inference can be
more easy (if we suppose them also to believe, what the Universal obtaining of
Cruentous Sacrifices over all the Earth compelled them to do, namely, that they
were ordained of God;) I say, what illation or consequence can be more easy,
than that God ordained not cruentous Sacrifices for themselves, as the only
means of expiation of sin, or Propitiation of God; [it not consisting with
Divine Wisdom to appoint so Unproportionable and Imperfect Ones:] but only in
Relation to a Thing of more Perfection and Sufficiency, which these did but
Prefigure and Type? Thus, Christ was not far from any of the Gentiles, would
they have (but) Groped after him. What the Ceremonial. Law given to the Jews
was ordained for to them; Those Apish Observations might have proved to the
Gentiles: such Imperfect Sacrifices might easily have put them on the Quest of
another more Perfect, Expiatory Sacrifice. As the Law among the Jews, so these
Observances and Rites among the Gentiles, did but point to Another: Sacrifices
and Offerings thou would not, that is, ultimately, and for themselves; In
Burnt offerings and Sin Offerings thou had no Pleasure, viz. Terminatively
and in themselves. These were Insufficient for Purgation of Sin, and
Propitiation of God; Then said I, lo I come, [I come] to do what they could
not, viz. by making my Soul an Offering for Sin, to Purge and Take it away.

I am the more confirmed in this Opinion, when I consider with how great care
the Ancient Mystae made it be conceived, that their Religion was Umbragious and
Figurative, and that there was a deeper sense and meaning in the Rites and
Ceremonies of it, than these at first might seem to carry. For to Insinuate
this, as Plutarch tells us, they used to hang up Sphynxes in the Fronts of most
of their Temples: Quo innuunt (says the Author) suam Rerum Sacrarum Doctrinam
constare perplexa, Plutar. de. Is. and Oser.
and sub involucris latente sapientia: And that Inscription on Minerva's Temple
at Sais, celebrated all the Learned World over, implies no less. Plutart. ubi
supra.
Ego sum omne quod extitit, est, and erit, meumque Peplum nemo adhuc mortalium
detexit. I am all That that has been, that is, and that shall be, and no
mortal (Man) has yet discovered my Veil. A Symbol not obscurely indicating
unto Jesus Christ,[or Him that was to come;] of whom it is said, no man has.
known the Father but the Son, and him to whom the Son has revealed Him. He
came out from the Father, and did Peplum Dei detegere, Open or discover his
Veil.]

I know the greatest part of the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews, did Bound
their Apprehensions with the things before their Eyes, and never understood the
true Intendment or meaning of the Ceremonies and Rites of that Religion, of
which they made Profession. And therefore it might well be, that in all their
Humane, and other expiatory and cruentous Sacrifices, they had not one thought
of that Catharmus that occasioned them; But if they had not, it was their own
fault, and I make no Question but there were Many that had. Which I believe you
will not think impossible to be conceived, when I have showed what is next in
order, that notwithstanding the many Lords Gods, as well as Gods, the Gentiles
had; yet many of them knew, there was One THE LORD-GOD or Mediator, as well as
One Supreme GOD.

It Is true, It is a matter of the greatest Difficulty to Evince This, and like
points, because the Magi, Philosophers, Priests, and other Thinking and
Contemplative Persons, did in compliance with the weakness and infirmity of the
Vulgar, and for their own security disguise their meanings, and but show by
half Lights in Umbrages and Riddles, what they knew of God, not agreeing with
the common Notions about him. Plato Epist. secundo.
This is evident in Plato, who in an Epistle which he sent to Dionysius,
excuses the Darkness and obscurity of his Discourse concerning God, with this
Apology, (...). I must speak to thee in Parables, That if the Letter miscarry,
he that reads it, may be never the wiser.] And then proposes his Symbol, circa
omnium REGEM sunt omnia, etc. SECUNDUM ad secunda; TERTIUM ad Tertia, a TERNARY.

But to Return. As many of the Gentiles, notwithstanding the Multitude of Gods
acknowledged among them, did believe there was but One God, Plat. Epist. 13.
as Plato, (...). When I write seriously, I begin my Epistle with God; But when
otherwise, I mention Gods: So likewise, notwithstanding the Multitude of
Demons, or Lords-Gods and Mediators, many did believe there was but one Great
Demon, One Lord-God, the Mediator between God and Man. This Iamblicus assures
us. For when his Scholar Porphyrie had put him the Question, why there was but
One [common] Prayer with which Anciently they Invocated several Demons, Iambl.
de Mist. ex Edit. Ficini.
whereas it seemed more Agreeable, that Diverse Demons should have Diverse
Prayers Address them; He answers, Quoniam per Deum-Dominum, unum Daemonum,
agitur Invocatio, qui and (...) principio suum cuique Daemonem definivit, and
in Sacrificiis secundum propriam voluntatem suum cuique monstrat; semper enim,
etc. That it was, for that All Invocation is Performed through THE LORD GOD,
One of the Demons, Who from the Beginning Assigned every One His Own Demon,
and does in Sacrifices, according to His Own Pleasure, show every Man His Own.

Nor is Iamblicus's Testimony the only One I have in this matter; for Plato in
his Convivium, Plato in Co^viv. f. 201, etc. Ex Ed. Steph. gr. lat.
having spoken somewhat of the Nature, and of the Offices of Love, to the End
he might Discourse more confidently of it, Introduces one Diotima, a Stranger,
but a Prophetess [(...),] and makes her answer Socrates, inquiring what that
Love should be, That it was not God himself, as he had apprehended it, but
(...), the Great Demon, Mediator between God and Man. She says the Great
Demon, for she supposes there are many Demons, but this the Great One, or
LORD-DEMON. (...). There are many and Diverse Demons, and Love is one of them.

I know you do not startle at the Name, nor at the Thing Demon, though I
believe some others will, who are less acquainted with the Ancient Learning,
and who know no other meaning of the word, than what common usage now enstamps
upon it. But there will be little Reason for any man to Boggle at either, if he
can have the Patience but to hear Diotima describing the Demonial Nature, That
it is a middle one between God and what is Mortal, (...) that it is its office
to interpret, and to carry the Prayers and Sacrifices of men to God, and the
Precepts and Commands of God, with all his Gracious Retributions and Returns to
men. (...). That it fills ( being of a middle nature) Both [the Upper and the
Lower Region,] or, is as a haps or common Ligament, to bind the Universe in all
its parts together; (...). That it is the Rise and Spring of Divination or
Prophecy. (...). -- In fine, That God and Man have no immediate communion or
commerce together, but what intelligence and Intercourse soever is between
them, Proceeds from this Daemonial Nature, (...) -- Thus Diotimae.

And how well has her Discourse, it is so deep and so surprising, Rewarded our
Attention to it! For all she spoke in General of the Daemonial Nature, was
intended (as the scope of that Discourse evinces) Principally, if not solely
for the (...), the Great Demon; and if she mentioned others, it was by way of
caution, only to secure her self, and Umbrage what she said that it might down
the better, amid the many Prejudices of the Vulgar that opposed it. Nor durst
Plato, who was well acquainted with the Fate of Socrates, and with the charge
that made it, more apertly explicate the matter; It was the great Crime imputed
to the Master, and for which he was condemned and Executed, that he Introduced
New Demons; and it would have been a greater in the Scholar, and after such
Example less Excusable, wholly to exclude the Old. Wherefore, it is not
Injudicious to Understand the Pro^hetess, in the Argument preceding,
principally to Regard the great Demon; and who is He, but Christ? For it is
He, and (indeed) only He that is a Mediator between God and man, and that
participates them both; It is He Interprets the mind of God, and that
presents all our Prayers, and that Reports all his Answers and Returns; By
him alone we hold Communion, and Intelligence with God; It Is he that fills
All things, which no other Demon can, and in all, the Ethereal Region in the
form of God, the Inferior in the form of man; and it is he that is the common
Ligament that holds Heaven and Earth together, by whom all the Parts and
Members of the Universe, Disbanded in the Fall, are Reunited under one Head.
[(...), Ephesians. 1.10.
to Recapitulate, is the Apostles word.]

And well might Jesus Christ, the Great Demon of Plato, be styled by him (as
he was) (...) or Love, who as one composed all of Love, has given greater
Demonstrations in Effect of His, than it is possible for Men to represent in
words. Nor is it contradicted by the Story which the Author tells us of the
Origin and Rise of Love, Plat. in Conviv. f. 203. Ex ed. Steph.
namely that it was the Offspring of Porus and Penia, of Plenty and Poverty;
for what more easy Applications can be made of it, than to our blessed
Savior, who is the Issue of the Grace and Goodness of Almighty God, and of the
Indigency, Need and Poverty of Man? Had not Man been Indigent and Needy, and
God Infinitely Rich in Grace and Mercy, Christ had never come.

As for the Resurrection of the Dead ( Another Article of Christian Religion)
it was Believed by the Druids; it was Preached by the Sibylls; it was employed
in the Doctrine of the Immortality of Humane Souls, in the Sepulture of Bodies,
Neh. 2. 3.
and in the Rights of Sepulchers, which for that they preserved the Dust and
Ashes of Men against the time of Restitution, were esteemed all the World over
Sacred and Inviolable. Phocyl. in Poem. Admonitor.
So Phocylides. (...)
It is Humane] to afford Earth unto Unburied Carkases. Again, (...)

Thou shall not violate the Sepulcher of the Dead; nor discover to the Sun,
things not to be looked on.

The next Verse is to the same Purpose. (...)
It is Infamous to dissolve the Humane frame, or disturb his Ashes. And why? He
annexes the Reason in the following Verses. (...)
(...) --
And we hope that ere long the grave shall render up again to light the
Relics of the Dead.

And, though in St. Paul's time, Act. 17.18.
^he Multitude at Athens were so ab^olutely unacquainted with the Resurrection
(of the Dead,) that when they had the Happiness to hear him Preach concerning
it, some of them apprehended him to speak of a God, and all of a new and
strange thing; yet we know that at the same time, there were Philosophers Rome
that were most clear and full in their Belief and Faith of it, who not unlikely
with their other knowledges, Received even this at Athens; from some above the
many. Once, Philosophy came from Greece to Rome; and at Rome we have some
Notice of this Article. Sen. Ep. 36.
Seneca shall speak thereof, Mors (says he) intermittit vitam, non cripit.
Veniet iterum qui nos in Lucem reponat, Dies. Death is but [a sleep] an
Interruption, not an Abolition of Life; there wi^ a Day come, when we may
Repossess the Light. Thus He of the Resurrection of the Body: which yet both
Portius Festus and Pliny derided. Pli^. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 55.
Democritus indeed seems to have spoken of it, and that occasioned in part the
Extravagant Sally and Talk of Pliny.

And having treated of the Resurrection of the Body, I will now tell you why I
premised to it nothing of the State and Immortality of the soul; It was because
I did esteem it as a Point supposed in all Religions, and taken for granted.
However in regard you may expect I should say something; not to mention that
Pherecides Syrus Master of Pythagoras, Cic ^^ Tus^. quaest. l. 1.
is said by some, (by others Thales) to be the first that asserted it, Lae^t in
Thal.
which I will then credit when I am convinced that before them, there was
neither Worship nor Theology; I affirm it a Doctrine so Universally believed,
and known to be so, Vid A^st. de Gener. Animal. l. 2. c. 3. Plut, contra Colo^.
Cic. l. de Senec.
that it were superfluous to be much in Citations. You shall therefore have the
trouble but of reading one Testimony, which for Pregnancy and Fullness of its
Sense, and its Conformity with that of Holy Writ, will supersede all others. It
is Moschion's, Mos^h and Stob. S^r. 120.
or as some, Menanders.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
Permit the Dead to be covered with Earth,
And every thing whence it came into the Body,
Thither to Return: the Spirit to Heaven,
And the Body to Earth.
So Solomon. Then shall the dust Return to the Earth, Eccl. 12.7.
as it was; and the Spirit shall Return unto God that gave it. Socrat. apud
Platon. in Phaed.
And Socrates was sure of it that he should go to the (...), to the Gods Lords.

As for Judgment; It Is manifest by a Passage which I cited out of Iamblicus
upon the first Argument, that the great Pythagoras both believed and taught it.
And what Apprehensions the more Ancient Times had, and how conformable to those
that Christians have from Christ in Matthew, Matthew. 25.32, etc.
is deduceable from the Old Story of Erus, Son of Armenius, which we have in
Plato, Plat. de Rep. l. ^ f. 614, etc.
and which I mentioned in the Preface to my former Treatise. The Story is this,
Erus Son of Armenius, was in a great Combat slain with many others, and after
ten days, when the Bodies of the rest, all purified and rotten, were removed,
his was found as sweet and as found as ever, which his friends carrying home in
order to perform to it all the requisite Funeral Ceremonies, on the twelfth day
from his decease, as they were laying him upon the Funeral Pile, Behold Erus
revived, and being revived, related all that he had seen and heard from the
time that he first departed. His Relation follows. (...) -- He said, That after
the Separation of his Soul from the Body, he went with many in his company, and
[at last] arrived at a certain Divine Place, whence he saw two Openings or
Hiatus in the Earth, one near another, and as many also above in Heaven right
opposite to them. That betwixt these Openings there sat Judges. That these
Judges, after they had taken Judicial Cognizance of all Persons and Matters,
and accordingly had passed Sentence, commanded the JUST, (...), to go to the
RIGHT HAND up into Heaven. Which they did, carrying on their Breasts (...), the
Records of all the Good things acknowledged in that Judgment to have been done
by them. But the Wicked and UNJUST (...), were ordered to the LEFT HAND, and to
descend to the Infernals; they also bearing, but upon their backs, (...),
Intimations [as it were Records in writing] of all that they had done. That
Erus himself for his part, when he came before the Judges, was told by them,
that he must return again to Mortals, to Report to them all that he had seen
and heard, and therefore that he should exactly observe, etc.

And how agreeable (I say) is this Relation of Erus, for so much of it as
concerns Judgment, to that we have from Jesus Christ, who tells us, that in
the last day there shall a Separation be made, as of Sheep from Goats? The
Sheep shall stand at the RIGHT, the Goats at the LEFT HAND; and that then the
Good omitted by the Wicked, as that performed by the Just, shall come to Light,
and stand Eternally Recorded with the Sentence passed on them, to show Divine
Justice.

You have another Old Story to Demonstrate the Ancient Faith of Gentiles in the
point of Judgment, Plato in Gorg. s 526. ex. Ed. Steph.
who makes Socrates to tell it to one Callicles. Therein he speaks of Two
ways, one to Heaven, another to Hell: Of three Judges, Rhadamanthus Judge of
the Asians, Aeacus Judge of the Europeans, and Minos presiding over both, with
a many other not impertinent matters. But as he tells the Tale, it is so
prolix, and after what I have already said from Erus, so unnecessary here, that
I will not give my self the trouble to Transcribe, or you to Read it; only,
there is a passage in it that imports how Just, and how impartial a Judgment
that shall be; which for that it is Important and concerning, I think not fit
to omit. For Socrates having in Discourse on some part of his Relation said
(what the Holy Penmen in many places also do) (...), That many of the Dynastes
or Rulers of the World are wicked; thence he takes occasion to resume his
Story, and to tell how Uprightly, how Equally, how Impartially Judge
Rhadamanthus does Acquit himself toward them and others; (...), When the
foresaid Rhadamanthus takes such an one in hand to examine him, (...), He
takes cognizance of nothing in him, neither of what Rank or Quality he is, or
from whom descended; but only that he is Wicked; (...), and finding him so,
dismisseth him to Hell. (...). Putting on him ^ Mark to signify that he is
Curable, or else Incurable.] It seems they held Purgatory.] (...). But if he
see another soul, that of a man that has lived Holily and according to Truth,
and Justly, whether it be that of a plain and Unlearned man, or else of
another, ((...)) But Principally I say, O Callicles, if it be a Philosophers [I
had almost rendered it, if a Christians] One that minds his own matters, and is
no busie-body in other men's) (...), That he huggs, and sends to the Islands of
the Blessed. AEacus does the like. Minos sits by superintending, according to
Ulysses in Homer. (...) Holding a Golden Scepter, and ordaining Right to the
Dead.

This for the Judgment to come; But if any urges that the Testimonies I have
cited do concern the Particular one, which every soul as soon as it abandons and
forsakes the Body undergoes, rather than the General wherein all men all
together, souls and bodies reunited shall appear at the Bar: I say (1.)
Particular Judgment and General differ not essentially; but
accidentally.(2.)And who knows but that they meant both? But (3.) If they
apprehended not the Article in all its Circumstances so distinctly as we now
do, it will not much matter, if for all they did believe the substance, That
All must answer one day for what they do in the Body, and be Rewarded
accordingly: Since this suffices for both the Ends of that Discovery, namely
to Influence the Humane Life, and to Justify Divine Procedure.

As for the two States of heaven and hell, there are so many and so obvious
Testimonies both of Poets and Philosophers, of which occasionally I have
mentioned some already, that to offer any in so plain a matter, and here
especially, may seem superfluous; yet, that I be not altogether wanting unto
this Article in its Order, since I have not yet been so to others in theirs, I
will present you One Evidence concerning it, and because it will indeed be
absolutely unnecessary after that to offer more, I will Present but One. (...)
(says Socrates) (...). Socrat. (...); Platon. in Gorg. f. 523. ex Ed. gr. lat.
Steph.
This was the Law and Sanction of God concerning Men in the Reign of Saturn,
and the same was always, and even now is (in force.) And what is that Law?
(...), etc. That, whosoever among men did live (...) Righteously and Holily,
should (...) whenever he dyed, go (...) unto the Islands of the Blessed,
(...) there to dwell in all felicity, without the Mixture of Evils. This was
the Law for the Good. So Christ, Blessed are they that dye in the Lord,
thenceforth they rest from their labors and their works follow them. There
shall be no night there; There shall be no Curse there. But what is the Law for
the wicked? (...), But he that lived without God, or Impiously in the World,
and Unrighteously, was to go (...), into the Place of Punishment and Justice,
which they call Tartarus. And Dives in Hell, etc.

I confess, the Life Everlasting, by which I understand that Glorious and
Immutable Condition or Estate to be possessed by the Godly in the Resurrection
or the Reunion of the Body with the Soul, is an Article wherein (if in any)
the Gentiles generally were but Dark: And yet (what is not easily believed) it
is true that some of them had Light and Information of it; for that very Poet
whom I lately cited for the Resurrection from the Dead, immediately to what I
have already quoted out of him on that head, adds this. -- (...). Philem: in
Poem. Admonitor.

Afterward [ viz. after the Resurrection] they shall be Gods. And not the Poet
only, but the Old Magi believed Another, and that an Immortal Life. So
Laertius, Theopomp. ap. Laert. in Proem. Plutarch. de Is. and Osir.
(...), etc. -- Who (says he, speaking it of Theopompus) affirms, that
according to the Doctrine of the Magi, Vid. supra 276.
men shall live again, and then be Immortal; A Belief that is not much short of
that the Christians had of old, I know faith Job, that my Redeemer lives, that
in the latter Day He shall stand upon the Earth; and that I shall see him with
these Eyes. When I awake (says David) I shall be satisfied with thy Likeness.
And what is that Likeness. I know how some understand it, viz. That it does
consist in Holiness, or in the correspondency of our Natures to the Divine; But
I rather understand it as Analogy and common sense of Scripture prompts me, to
consist in Glory, I mean, in the conformation of the Vile Bodies of Believers
to the Glorious Body of Jesus Christ. For as they have born the Image of the
Eart hly, they shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly. Beloved, we are now
the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that
when He shall Appear, we shall be lik^ (...) is He that shall (...) Christ? and
the (...) proves it, 1 Ioh. 2. 28.

But to conclude this tedious Entertainment of the Gentile Divinity, I will
only add, that many Heathen held Opinion, that the World should have End by
Fire. Of which persuasion [Generally] were all the Stoics; Seneca is press and
full, Sen. Not. Quaest. l. 3
At illo tempore, solutis Legibus, sine modo fertur. Qua ratione inquiris?
eadem qua Conflagratio futura est. Utrumque sit cum Deo visum ordiri meliora,
Vetera finiri. At that time absolved from all Laws, it does observe no measure.
How can that be do thou say? Why, in the same manner wherein the
Conflagration shall; both the one and the other is when it pleases God either
to give beginning unto new Things, or else to put an end to old, etc. Ovid
says as much. Esse quoque Ovid. Metamor. Dr. Dove against Atheism, chapter 14.
August. Ste^ch. E^g^b. de perenni philosoph. l. 10. c. 29.
in Fatis (...) affore tempus
Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque regia coeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret.
That time shall come when both the Earth and Sea,
With Heavens Arch so Glorious to behold
Shall burn, and shall turn unto Decay.
So also Lucretius. Una dies dabit exitio, multosque per annos
Sustentata ruet moles, and machina mundi,
Accidet exitium coeli terraeque futurum.
The World which stood so many years
Shall in one day destroyed be,
Destruction likewise shall appear
For Heaven and Earth most suddenly.


To this also agrees the Poet Lucan, his words be these, Lucian Bell. Civ. l. 1.
Invida fatorum series, summisque negatum
Stare diu, nimioque graves, sub pondere Iapsus,
Nec se Roma ferens. Sic cum compage soluta
Secula tot mundi suprema coegerit hora,
Antiquum repetens iterum Chaos, omnia mistis
Sidera Sideribus concurrent, ignea pontum
Astra petent, tellus extendere littora nollet,
Excutietque fretum. Fratri contraria Phoebe
Ibit, and obliquum bigas agitare per orbem
Indignata diem poscet sibi, totaque discors
Machina, divulsi turbabit foedera mundi.
The Fates envy the States of mortal men,
The Highest Seats do not continue long:
Great is the fall under the greater burden,
(And Greatest things do to themselves great'st wrong)
Rome was so great (whom all the World did fear)
That Rome her self she could no longer bear.
So when this well couch't frame of World shall burn,
And the last hour so many ages end:
To former Chaos all things shall Return,
(The Envious Fates this Issue do portend)
Then all the Planets shall confusedly meet,
And fires celestial on the floods shall fleet.
The Earth shall grudge to make the Sea a shore,
And cast it off, and push the flood away:
The Moon enraged shall cross her Brother sore,
And seek to alter course, to shine by day:
Thus all at odds, in strife and out of frame,
They shall disturb the World, and spoil the same.


So great a Light was that afforded to the Gentiles, in all Essential points of
true Religion: which perhaps, if we possessed all the Volumes perished by the
Injury of Times, and the Destiny of Letters, would have appeared much greater;
yet so great it seems now by what Discourses I have made already, (the which I
might enlarge on every Article,) That none that does unprejudicedly weight
them, can have cause to wonder either at Clement's, or at Lactantius's sense in
favor of the old Philosophers, A g.^de Civ. l. 18. c. 47.
or that St. Austin should say, That the Jews dare not averr that no man was
saved after the Propagation of Israel, but Israelites. Indeed there was no
other People properly called the People of God. But they cannot deny that some
Particular Men lived in the world, in other Nations, that were belonging to the
Heavenly Hierarchy. And Vives in his Notes is of the same Persuasion.

But do you ask by what means Gentiles who were Aliens from the Commonwealth
of Israel, and without the Line of that Communion; became acquainted with those
great Truths of which the Jews only had the solemn keeping? I answer, that (as
I have often intimated) It was either (I.) By a Catholic or General Tradition
from the first and most Ancient Fathers; Or (2.) By some Extraordinary
Revelation or Discovery made to them; Or (3.) By Communication from the
Hebrews, the Israelites, and Jews, who as a Church, were a Candlestick to hold
the Light committed to them, out to all the Earth.

That most of those Doctrines I have noted, were communicated down from hand to
hand by Immemorial Tradition, from the first and most Ancient Fathers, is not
difficult to be conceived by those that know, that as all men came from Adam in
the first World, so that in the second all did Descend from Noah, who had the
knowledge of the true Religion, and instructed all his children in it, which
children cannot be imagined but also to instruct and teach theirs, and so
onward. But this is not all; for the (...) or mos majorum was a thing insisted
on by all the Heathen, who ever pleaded for the Rites of their Religious, that
they had received them from their forefathers, and that they were of Ancient
Usage; yes, and that Plato (whom Aristobulus the Jew affirms to have been a
follower of the Law of his Nation, and to be very studious of the Doctrines in
the Sacred Oracles, and whom Numenius for the same Reason styles the Attick
Moses,) he says expressly, Numen. ap. Illustr. de Philos.
That he Gleaned all he had, and wrote in that kind, out of Immemorial and
Unwritten, but almost expired and worn out Traditions. For in his Politic in
the Place which I have cited in my Advertisement to the Reader, Plat^ (...)
Politic. f. 271.
he plainly tells us, That the points he speaks of, were transmitted from our
first Predecessors, (...), and c. That those that lived in the former Ages
Preached, Plat. ibid.
(it is his own Expression) (...), They were Preachers of the very things that
now are causelessly rejected of many. (...). The like in his Philebus, Plat. in
Phil^b. f. 16
which I also noted before, wherein he says, that the Ancients, better men
than we, and dwelling nearer to the Gods, delivered to us the Report or Fame of
these things [(...)] Yes, and in his Republique, he makes Adimantus in Address
to Socrates, Plat. de Rep. l. 2. f. 366.
to speak the same, (...), deducing your Discourses from the [An^ient] Heroes
who were from the Beginning, (...), The Remains of whose Discourses are arrived
even down to us. It Is very probable that these whom Plato calls the first
Ancestors, the Ancients, better men than we, nearer to the Gods, Heroes that
were from the Beginning, I mean the first Patriarchs (for so I understand him)
Noah for instance and his children, Apollo apud La^rt. in Zenos.
are the same designed by the famed Apollo, when in answer to a grave and
serious Inquiry made by Zeno Citticus, how he might institute and frame and
order his Life Best? He says, (...), that he would institute and frame and
order it best, if he made it to conform to the Dead. Apollo's Dead, and Plato's
Heroes are the same.

Thus by Oral Tradition, or Report, by which I mean a delivery down of
Doctrines from hand to hand by Words, or else by visible and significant
Actions, many things were transferred from preceding to succeeding ages. But
Report or Oral Tradition and Delivery, is in it self a means of conveyance so
Uncertain and fallible, that when it passes many hands, there can but little be
consided to it in controverted matters; (for) then it proves (most commonly)
so diversified and various, that it is the cause of Controversies, not the
cure; the persons that convey it are so liable either to mistake and Imposture,
or to design and Interest. Nothing is more Obvious, or more frequently
experienced than this: For the Report of an Accident but at One End of the
Town; albeit it may Retain (as for the most part it does) some general likeness
and similitude of the First and Original Truth: yet it is disguised with a
thousand Errors; though perhaps in some places with more, in some with less,
according to the different Capacities, Numbers, Tempers, Affections and Designs
of those that have the conveying of it. Report the further it goes, the more it
loses of Truth, and the more it gains of Error.

In this Instance we have a lively Pourtraict of the False Religion of the
Gentiles, and the plain Reason why it seems in so many things an Apish
Imitation of the True; why it is so diversified in it self, and yet withal
Retains such Resemblance and Conformity with Ours. It is because that all men
came from one, and that all men came from one, and that not only Adam, but Noah
did instruct his children in the Mysteries of the True Religion, and in the
Rites of it, and these again Reported to theirs, and so onward. But we may
easily believe it to have happened in this Tradition, as it does in all others,
that there was almost in every New delivery and Transmission, (for the
mentioned causes) some departure and Recess from the Former; and thence arose
so great Diversity in several parts of the World; yet ( what also is in all
Reports) notwithstanding so much Variation in Particulars as there was among
them; all Retained some Agreement in the General, and that Greater or Lesser,
as those that made them were either nearer to the first Reporters, or more
Remote; or else were more or less Intelligent, Faithful, careful and sincere in
Transferring them. Cunning and Designing men foisted in something of their own,
and made the Catholic Traditions, to father their conceits; But others were
more Honest: Hence the Variety, and hence the Agreement in the Religions of the
World.

Now, those General Articles, Heads, or Points of Religion, wherein all men all
the World over commonly agree, and which are therefore called common
sentiments, though they be not (what by some they be imagined) Innate Idea's,
or Notions ingrafted and imprinted on the Minds of Men by Nature, but (as I
have evinced them) main and substantial Points of the first Tradition, and
consequently, Retained in all the following, with more or less Disguise; yet be
they as Infallibly and Indubitably true, as if they were; since it is as
impossible that they should obtain so Universally (all the World over) if
indeed they were not the Traditions of a first and common Parent, as that they
should be false, if they were. For grant one first Parent common to all the
World, who could not but know the Truth, and that he so delivered things to his
Children, and doubt O Atheist, the Reality of them, if thou can!

Finally, How disguised soever Truth was in those Successive Traditions, as
necessarily it must have been in passing through so many and so diversely
affected hands; yet as in other Reports, so also in these, when one becomes
acquainted with the Original Truth, he will be able by comparing and
conferring, to Discover the Causes, or rather the first Occasions and Rises of
Mistakes and Errors, [ what grounds there were for such; ] since it is as
certain, that all Mistake, Error, Falsity has for its bottom and foundation
one or another Truth, as that Evil has some Good to ground it. This
consideration will administer abundant Light to those that mind it, for their
understanding of the cogency of some of those Discourses I have made before,
about the Christianity disguised in many of the Gentile Rites; and it was for
that Purpose, and with that Design, namely, that it might reflect upon them
somewhat of strength and confirmation, that I made any mention of it here; for
doing which, after I have offered this Apology, I hope I need no Pardon. Thus
Tradition was one way.

But though Tradition was One; yet the only way it was not whereby the Gentiles
became acquainted with the Mysteries of the True Religion, for besides that, we
are to conceive they had some Extraordinary Revelations and Discoveries of
them, by Inspiration or Oracle: There not being any Nation under Heaven, and in
the whole Universe, wherein (if you will credit Cicero) Divination was not.
Cic. de Divin l. 1. Vid. Iambl. de Myster.
And indeed the Ancient Superstition was Magic. Of which truth we are assured
not only by the Definition Plato gives of Magic, (...), that it is the worship
of the Gods; but also by the more Authentic History of Balaam, who when he
would Divine, did nothing but perform Rites of Religion; he caused Altars to be
built, and offered Bullocks and Rams. Strab. Geog. l. 10. and 16.
Yes, and Strabo tells us, that all the Heathen, as well Barbarians as Greeks,
had certain Festive Sacrifices, wherein they were inspired by the Deity,
[(...)] Pausanias also having mentioned the Persians eminent for Divination,
Pausan. in Phocic.
adds, Et haec quidem de foeminis and viris, quibus ad hunc usque diem
Divinandi Scientia Divinitus contigit, memoriae prodita sunt. In sequentibus
dehinc seculis credi facile potest alios ejusmodi homines, qui futura
praedicant, non defuturos.

As for the Rise and Origin of heathen Inspiration of Oracle, I do not hold my
self obliged to discourse thereof here, farther than as generally hinted, it
may serve to regulate our Apprehensions in the present matter; and therefore
omitting what Peripatetiques and Stoics say, who make it the Effect of certain
Preparations or Dispositions of mind, or what Plutarch, who ascribes it unto
Qualities and Temperatures of places; I impute it to Religion, and to the state
and condition of the first times, wherein Inspirations, while there was no
other certain way of knowing the Divine mind, and of being guided by it, were
far more frequent and common, than in the more remote. And no question but
among the many other Traditions given by Noah [Father of the Second World] to
his Children, this was One, In Extraordinary Cases to consult God for
Resolutions and Direction by (a way of) extraordinary Worship and Religion; for
instance, by Extraordinary Prayers, and Extraordinary Sacrifices; it being the
acknowledged Nature of Religion and Worship, by qualifying and accommodating of
the mind to God, to Invite and draw him down, and make him present to the
Religious, and Worshippers. Thus all men all the world over moved by that
Tradition, as by Instinct of Nature, did in all unusual and uncommon
Emergencies, or when they would be counseled and resolved in any matter,
immediately apply themselves to the Deity; which the superstitious Doing in
ways and methods not appointed by the true God, expected him in vain, he (for
the most part) disdaining to approach unto them on such allurements; whence it
came to pass, they were abused by the False, (I mean the Devil) who readily
espying and improving this Occasion, Slily intruded himself; so that appearing
in the place of God, he passed for him. It was thus the Devil became the God of
this World, or of the Gentiles. The superstitious invocated God in false ways,
who therefore refusing to approach, and visit them, the Devil takes the
opportunity; he comes in his stead, and so passes for him.

I am the more confirmed in this Opinion, by considering that among the
Superstitious, there were the same ways of Responses by Visions, by Dreams, by
Voice, etc. as among the truly Religious; as also by the Cessation and defect
of Oracles or Inspiration, which on this Notion, and in this way, is more
accountable than in any other. For when the Superstitious ceasing to be so,
became (as in process of time they did) diffident and faithless of the Power
and Aptness of the means, for effecting of the Ends pretended, and consequently
either innovated New Rites, more agreeable to their own conceits, or else grew
cold and formal in the use of the Old; it followed, that they lost the
advantage of such communication and direction from their Gods, as formerly they
had, with their Faith and Zeal in those Performances, that is, with that
Religion which possessed them of it. False Religion made Oracles, and
Irreligion ruined them. Sublata causa tollitur effectus.

And who can doubt of this Account, or Reason, that seriously considers, First,
That we read not of the Cessation or Defect of any Oracle, but about the time
that Skepticism and Epicurism obtained. That great Oracle at Delphos, so
celebrate in all the Earth, then ceasing to answer, as it had before in Verse,
Vid Minut. Foelic. in Octar.
when the Seeker Pyrrho was followed. And Secondly, That Iamblicus is of the
same Opinion, who informs us, that it was the innovating and unsteady humor of
the Greeks that rendered inspiration so unfrequent and rare, among whom (he
says) it was (for that Reason) of a duration and continuance, much shorter
than among the Grave Barbarians. Iambl. l. de Myster.
Oportet igitur (says he in his Mysteries) Ritus adorationis antiquos tanquam
sacros conservare semper intactos, neque demere quicquam, neque aliunde quid
addere; ferme namque and hac causa nuper extitit, ut omnia and nomina and vota
debilirata jam sint; propterea quod propter ipsam proevaricationem and
invocandi cupiditatem permutata sunt semper, and permutari non desinunt. Graeci
namque natura rerum novarum studiosi sunt, ac proecipites usquequaque feruntur,
instar navis saburra carentis, nullam habentis stabilitatem, ne^abque;
conservant quod ab aliis acceperunt. Sed and hoc cito dimittunt, and omnia
propter instabilitatem, novoeque inventionis elocutionem transformare solent.
Barbari vero sicut moribus graves, firmique sunt, sic and in iisdem sermonibus
firmiter perseverant, ob quam sane stabilitatem, and ipsi Diis sunt amici, and
orationes offerunt illis acceptas, quas nulli ulla unquam ratione fas est
permutare.

But to circumscribe my self: That the True God did on occasion infuse into the
Heathen some Divine Motions is (in my Apprehension) scarce questionable by any
that Reflects on Balaam. Again, and as little questionable is it, that the
Devil, after he had usurped the Place of God, and (as it were) assumed his
Person, did frequently both say and do many things that were like him, to the
end he might more craftily secure the cheat, and pass for what he was not.
Though indeed at other times, he acted things like himself, which when he was
received for God, he might the safer do; and all this as one that Personates
another is wont, who must do something like the person he pretends to be, that
he may pass for him; and will do more like himself. Hence the Heathen Oracles
and Sibylls had a mixture in both of Good and Bad. The former, that they might
seem to come from God; the latter, because they came from the Devil.

Now whether the Sibylls (for of these I principally design to speak, as having
pressed their Authority before) were inspired in what they spoke of Jesus
Christ by the Deity; or (as you see I apprehend) prompted by the Devil, is a
matter not so necessary here to be decided. Both ways are Possible. God
inspired Balaam many hundred years before the Prophets arose, so that he spoke
as plainly and fully of our Savior, as any of them all; and for the Devil, he
gave as large and full a Testimony unto Jesus Christ, when come, as any in that
time beside him. And that he might Predict or prophecy of him in the Sibylls,
and other Oracles, for the same respects and Ends before he came, for which he
did confess him when come, is not difficult to be conceived by a Thinking and
Attentive man. What if the Devil by the clearness of his Oracles in this
particular, thought either to out-vye or to forestall the Prophets in theirs?
It would not seem a Design (if that were his) Unworthy either of the Envy, or
the subtlety, for which he is so infamous. And what if he intended to verify
his Divinity to after Ages, by the Truth of his Prognostics in the former?
Besides, he might conceive it would entangle and perplex succeeding times, as
indeed it mightily has; which to design was proper for him.

Once, it is out of doubt that there were Sibylls, and those Ancient, though how
Ancient it be not easy to determine. Certain it is, their Writings (of old)
were held at Rome in extraordinary Veneration, there being Officers appointed,
during both the Government of Kings, and that of the People, to preserve, and
on occasion to inspect and consult them. Vid. Lactant. Inslit. l. 1. c. 6. --
de Ira Dei, c. 22. Viv. in Not. ad August. de Ciuit. l. 18. c. 23. Dionys.
Halicar. Antiq. Romans l. 4.
That after the Conflagration of the Capitol, and of the Books with it which
happened in the one hundred fifty fourth Olympiad, there were Ambassadors sent
on purpose to Erithrae, to repair that loss, which was done in part from
thence, and in part from other Cities. In fine, Augustus by his Edict commanded
that all the Verses going under the name of Sibylls, in the possession of any
in his Territories, should be brought to the Prefect of the City of Rome, to
be by him submitted to the Censure of the Quindecem viri, who were to judge
which were true, and which false; severely forbidding private persons to retain
or keep them. Thus they were preserved till the time of Stillico, who destroyed
them. Of so much credit they were.

Indeed, That among the Writings commonly reputed Sibylline, there were
anciently a many false, suppositious, and ingenuine, cannot be denied by one
who reads in Dionysius of Halicarnassus an express Assertion of it; Dionys.
Halicarn. ubi supra. Tacit^^ A^nal. l. 6. f. 380. Ed. Lips.
or that considers, that it was (as Taccitus affirms) the Motive of the Edict
(so lately mentioned) of the great Augustus. And for the times since Christ,
what the learned Vossius has suggested may in part be true; Voss. de Port.
Grae. c.1.
that many of the Writings now obtruded on us for the Sibylls, may be Pious
frauds, contrived to beguile the Heathen, by men of honester designs and
meanings than Practices.

Of this sort, forasmuch as the Devil who resided at the celebrated Delphos,
was long before forsaken of his versifying Humor at least, Cic. de Diuizat. l.
2. Strabo Geogr. l. 17. Plutarch. de Orac. defectu.
(as is very Evident from Cicero, Strabo, Plutarch and many others) is that
famous Oracle pretended to be given by him to Augustus Caesar, viz. (...)
(...)
(...)
Me puer Hebraeus jubet hinc Rex ille Deorum
Tartareas remeare Domos haec aede relicta,
Post ergo ora tenens altaria nostra relinquo.


And of the same bran I reckon that Tale of Theodosius the Jew, Howells
Letters, Sect. 6. Let. 37. Vid. Morney of Verity of Christian Religion, c. 30.
which Mr. Howell says he found in Suidas, and concerning which he prays the
Judgment of the Learned Doctor Usher, in a Letter sent (to him) for that
purpose. The Story is this; That when the Temple was founded in Jerusalem,
there were twenty two Priests according to the number of the Hebrew Letters to
Officiate in the Temple, and when any was chosen, his name with his Fathers and
Mothers were used to be Registered in a fair Book. In the time of Christ a
Priest dyed, and he was chosen in his Place; but when his name was to be
entered, his Father Joseph being dead, his Mother was sent for, who being asked,
who was his Father, she answered, that she never knew man, but that she
conceived by an Angel. So his Name was Registered in these words, JESUS CHRIST
THE SON OF GOD, AND OF THE VIRGIN MARY. This Record at the Destruction of the
Temple was preserved, and is to be seen in Tiberias to this day. Thus He.

These, and other instances of Pious Fraud in former times, may be a just
ground whereon to raise suspicion, that some of those Verses commonly reputed
Sibylls, were no better; but that all were so, or that the most, is not at any
hand to be admitted, seeing they were insisted on so much, and appealed to so
often, by very many Ancient, Learned and Prudent Fathers, namely, Justin
Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Lactantius, etc. who instead of defending, would
have indeed betrayed the Christian Doctrine, had they underpropt it with so
weak and false supports. Questionless, it is the only way to stagger and
discredit the greatest Truths, to go about to establish them with lies and
falsities. I confess, it was pretended long ago by the Heathen, that the urged
Sibylls were Impostures, but Lactantius both disavoweth and disproves the
scandal. And Constantine the Emperor, who had opportunity to know it well,
Asserts their Integrity.

Truth is, there would but little Doubt remain in this Particular, concerning
the Authority and use of Sibylls Writings, were that Exhortation Paul's indeed,
which Clemens Alexandrinus puts upon him, Clem. Alexand l. 6. Stronat.
Libros Graecos sumite, and Sibyllas agnoscite, quomodo unum Deum significent,
and ea quae futura sunt, and invenietis in eis Filium Dei clarius and apertius
scriptum. But to omit Apocryphal and Doubtful Testimonies, that which
abundantly Evinceth the Prophecies ascribed to the Sibylls, to be for substance
theirs, and that they spoke most clearly, both of Jesus Christ's Nativity, and
of his Kingdom, is what has been noted and insisted on before by Eusebius and
St. Austin of old, as well as many Moderns of late, namely, That Virgil in his
fourth Eclogue, written about thirty years before the Incarnation of our
Savior, does ineptly apply to Saloninus, Son of Pollio, the Sibylline
Prophecies, conceived in terms that agree exactly to the Great Redeemer, and
can to none else. Ramus in his Learned Praelections on that (fourth) Eclogue,
though he seems himself to haesitate about the interpretation which so many
worthy Persons make, yet he offers much in favor of it. Ramus in Praelect. ad
quartam E^log.
Salonis in Dalmatia victis, Pollio filium quo tun^ erat auctus, Saloninum
cognominavit: Virgilius igitur hac Ecloga (...) ejus describit ex adjunctis,
quod ejus aetatis aetas aurea comes futura sit: eique permulta tribuit, quae
Christo dicuntur a Sibyllis attributae. Quae Christianis ita probata sunt, ut
Graeci hanc Eclogam Graece converterint: and Divus Hieronymus ad Plautinum
affirmet Maronem sine Christo Christianum fuisse; and Divus Augustinus sentiat,
Spiritum sanctum per os inimicorum locutum. Et satis constat Secundianum
Pictorem, and Marcellianum Oratorem, hujus Eclogae versibus consideratis
Christianos factos esse. Thus he.

And to speak plain English, who can longer bark against the Sibylls with any
face, or think to elevate their Testimonies by consideration of the clearness
and fullness of their Prophecies, that reflects on what the Poet professes to
have received from them, and could not from any after Christ, viz. That in the
last Age there should a Child be born of a Virgin; that he should be King of
all the World; that he should take away the sins of men; and that he should
restore unto the Earth Eternal calm and peace; all which and more too that Poet
found in the Sibylls. You well know what he says, Ultima Cumaei venit jam
Carminis aetas, Virgil Eclog. 4.

Magnus ab integno seclorum nascitur ordo,
Iam redit and Virgo; redeunt Saturnia regna.
Now is come the last age predicted by the Sibyll called Cumaean, and that
Great Ordinance appointed from the Beginning of the World is now fulfilled. Now
comes the Virgin, and now the Golden Days of the Kingdom of Saturn return
again. Thus he raises the Attention of the Reader, and after goes on.

I am nova Progenies coelo dimittitur aelto.
Tu modo nascenti Puero, quo ferrea primum
Desinet, and toto surget gens aurea mundo,
Casta fave Lucina, tuus jam regnat Apollo, etc.
Te duce, si qua manent sceleris vestigia nostri,
Irrita perpetua solvent formidine terras.
Ille Deum vitam accipiet, Divisque videbit
Permistos Heroas, and ipse videbitur illis:
Pacatumque regit patriis virtutibus orbem.
At tibi prima puer nullo munuscula cultu,
Errantes hederas passim cum baccare tellus,
Mistaque ridenti colocasia fundet acantho:
Ipsae lacte domum referent distenta capellae
Ubera, nec magnos metuent arment^^ Leones.
Ipsa tibi blandos fundent cunabul^^ flores.
Occidet and Serpens, and fallax herba veneni, etc.
Aggredere o magnos (aderit jam tempus) honores,
Chara Deum soboles, magnum Jovis Incrementum.
Aspice convexo nutantem pondere mundum,
Terrasque tractusque maris, coelumque profundum:
Aspice, venturo laetentur ut omnia seclo, etc.
Which Mr. Sands thus translates,

Now a new Progeny from Heaven to Earth
Descends: Lucina favor this Child's Birth,
In whom the Iron-age ends: forthwith shall follow
A Golden race, now Reigns thy Apollo, etc.
"Now shall our Crimes whose steps do still appear,
Be razed; and Earth delivered from long fear.
The Life of Gods shall lead; shall Heroes see
With Gods commixt, and seen of them shall be;
And with his Fathers Power the appeased World guide.
Free Earth her Native Presents shall provide
For thee, sweet Boy: wild Ivy, Baccaris,
Smelling Acanthus, broad Colocasis:
Goats to their homes shall their full Udders bear;
Nor shall our Herds the raging Lions fear.
The Cradle shall sprout flowers: the Serpents seed
Shall be destroyed, and the false poisonous Weed, etc.
Dear Issue of the Gods, Great Jove's Increase,
Produce those Times of Wonder, Worth and Peace.
"Lo, how the World, surcharged with weight does reel,
Which Sea and Land and Profound Heaven do feel.
Lo, how all Joy in this wished Times approach! etc.
To whom can all this agree, but to Christ?

And now, having vindicated the Sibylls, and evinced many of the Prophecies
ascribed to them to be truly theirs; I am next to do as much for Hermes
Trismegistus, whom all will readily acknowledge to have been inspired, if
Pimander and other cited works be his, which to show to be so, is my present
Business.

And verily, did I not reflect upon the Lust some Critical and Learned men have
of making Trial of their Wits any way, and this especially in elevating the
Authority of Ancient and received Writings; of which we have a great instance
in the Noble Francis Picus (seconded by others) who has taken much pains to
show how little certain we are that any of the many Volumes generally reputed
Aristotle's, D^ Ti^smegis^o Vi^esis Clem. Alex. St^om. l. 6. Lacta^. Instit. l.
4. c. 9.
are indeed his; I say, were it not for this Reflection, I should extremely
admire how any Prudent and Judicious Persons of latter times, should call in
question the Legitimacy of Writings anciently received without question, and
for which they cannot name another Father, there not being an Annius, a Monk,
to Father the Pimander and Asclepius, as there is to Father false Berosus and
Manetho. Again, not to urge that Asclepius is commonly affirmed to have been
translated by Apuleius, and if it were so, it cannot be conceived a Pious
Fraud: I will only add a Testimony out of Iamblicus (who yet is pressed by some
against them) which, Iambl. de My^t.
well considered, will signify with you as much in favor of the Writings
generally called Trismegistus's, as it does with me: It is in his Mysteries,
where I find these words, His ita discretis, facile solvuntur dubia, quae in
Libris Aegyptiis, quos Legisti, concepisse dicis: Qui enim sub Dercurii Titulo
circumferuntur, Opiniones Derturiales continent, etsi saepe Philosophorum
Graecorum Stylo loquuntur; sunt enim ex linguae Aegyptia in Graecam translati a
vir^s Philosophiae non imperitis. Stobaeus has much out of them; and verily
there are as Learned and Judicious men of the Moderns, who do assert the
Authority of those Writings, as any that deny it. Marsilius Ficinus, Patricius,
Steuchus, etc. are great names, nor can I in Coringus himself, find that
against them, which well weighed may over-balance what I have propounded now in
Defense of them.

But to return; there were other ways of Revelation by which the Gentiles may
be thought to have received the knowledge of Religion, I will instance but in
One, and that is Public Vision. For to make a Judgment of what may have been
done in former and long ago elapsed times, by what has been done of the late
[almost] in ours, I will refresh your remembrance of the Famous History of the
Apparition at Medina, with the mention of what I find concerning it in Knolls.
There came news to Constantinople of a strange Apparition which was seen at
Medina Talnabi in Arabia Knolls Turk. Hist. f. 1384. Ed. 5.
whereas Mahomet the Great Prophet was buried, to visit whose Tomb the Turks
use to go in Pilgrimage, but they must first go to Mecha, which is some few
days journey off, and there take a Ticket from the Grand Signiours Beglerbeg,
else they are not allowed to go to Medina. This Vision continued three weeks
together, which terrified the whole Country, for that no man could discover
the Truth thereof. About the twentieth of September there fell so great a
Tempest, and so fearful a Thunder about midnight, as the Heavens were darkened,
and those that were awake almost distracted, but the vapors being dispersed,
and the Element clear, the People might read in Arabian Characters these words
in the Firmament, Oh Why WILL YE BELIEVE IN LIES! Between two and three in the
morning there was seen a Woman in White, compassed about with the Sun, having a
cheerful countenance, and holding in her hand a Book; coming from the North
West, opposite against her were Armies, Turks, Persians, Arabians and other
Mahometans ranged in order of Battle, and ready to charge her; but she kept her
standing, and only opened the Book, at the sight thereof these Armies fled, and
presently all the Lamps about Mahomets Tomb went out; for as soon as ever the
Vision vanished, (which was commonly an hour before Sun-riseing) a murmuring
Wind was heard, whereunto they imputed the extinguishing of the Lamps, The
Ancient Pilgrims of Mahomets Race, who after they have visited this Place,
never use to cut their Hair, were much amazed, for that they could not conceive
the meaning of the Vision; only one of the Dervises declared it, and dyed a
Martyr. Thus the Turkish History. There are many other Stories of Apparitions
not unlike the former, Purchase Pilg. part. 1. l. 1. c. 2.
to be had in Purchase, as that of Virachocha, who appeared to the Peruans, and
taught them: And that of the Maur, or Stranger, bearded and clothed like a
Christian, who to the Pagans of Brasile, did Preach the knowledge of God, but
not believed by them, was succeeded by another, who delivered them a Sword,
since which they have accustomed to kill, and eat one another. The Apparition
of a Cross to Constantine, and of words about it, is generally received, and
reported, not only by Eusebius in the Life of that great Emperor, but also by
Eutychius in his Annals; who adds a Story of another that appeared in
Golgotha, Eutych. Acnal. s. 475, 476.
concerning which he Reports Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem, to have written to
the Emperor Constantius, Son of Constantine the Great, in these words; Sub
Patre tuo beatae memoriae Imperatore apparuit Crux Domini Christi Stellis
[effigiata] medio die in coelo; ac jam te Regnante ( Imperator Foelix) apparuit
super Cranii [loco] Cruxe Luce cujus splendour Solis splendorem ipso meridie
super at. And so much for the second way of Revelation and Vision, wherein
Divine Knowledge may have been communicated to the Gentiles. But to proceed,

Thirdly, That some of the knowledge owned by the Gentiles, was derived at
first or second hand from the Hebrews, and Church of God, is undeniable by him
that shall consider, Diod. Sic. l. 2. Porphyr. de vit. Pythag.
how that in most Ancient times, Egypt and Phoenicia were the ^arts of Wisdom
for the rest of the World, and that both these received much from the Hebrews.

That Egypt and Phoenicia were Marts of wisdom, is most certain. As for Egypt,
it was repaired to by all the World, so celebrate it was for knowledge. There
it was that Thales had his Institution, I^a^t. in vit. Thal.
who was the first Philosopher in Greece, and Author of the Sect Ionic; and it
was thence that the great Pythagoras Author of the Sect Italic, Porphyr. ubi
supra.
did fetch his Wisdom. Homer himself, that Glorious Father of the Grecian
Poets, Clin. Alex. Strom. l. 1.
was so obliged unto Egypt for his great Science, of which he was Master, that
(if we may believe Clement of Alexandria) many thought him an Egyptian. Diod.
l. 2.
Yes, and long before them all the famous Orpheus, numbered by St. Austin among
the Heathen Theologues, as unto whom the Ancient Grecians owed their Theology;
He (as we are told by Diodorus) went a Pilgrimage to Egypt to learn it; and is
for that Reason honored by Virgil both with the name, and with the Habit of
Priest.

Nec non Threiceus longa cum vest Sacerdos
Obloquitur numeris septem discrimina vocum.
This for Greece.

As for Phoenicia, Plin. Hist. Not. l. 5. c. 2.
that of Pliny, ipsa Gens Phoenicum in Gloria magna literarum, etc. That the
Phoenicians were illustrious over all the Earth for their knowledge in letters,
is to be remarked; and it is as certain by the same Author, as by concurrent
Testimony of many others, that the Greeks themselves received Letters from
them, and not unlikely other knowledge with Letters: nor can it reasonably be
so much as doubted, but that this noble people trading into most parts of the
Universe, communicated to them what they had heard, and what they knew of God.

Now that both Egypt and Phoenicia received knowledge of the true God, and
Articles of true Religion from the Hebrews, will be evident to all that mind;
First, That Abraham, afterward that Jacob and Joseph, and for some hundred of
years, all the numerous offspring of the twelve Patriarchs were in Egypt; and
when these last were redeemed and placed in the Land of Canaan, there ever was
such intercourse between them and the Egyptians, as must necessarily occasion
in the latter some Discourses of the true God, and true Religion. I confess
they generally hated the Religion of the Hebrews, because of the Aversion and
Contrariety therein unto their own; But then, by reason of its strangeness,
they talked the more of it.

I am apt enough to believe, that Egypt owed much to Abraham, Joseph. An.
ti^abque; l. 1. c. 9.
as well for that Skill and Knowledge which it had in Divinity, as that in
Astronomy, Geometry and other parts of the Mathematics, for which in after
times the Egyptians were in such repute; yes, and perhaps from him they might
receive their very Letters themselves, to which belief I am inclined by what I
read in Pliny, who yields the Assyrians to have had advantage of all Nations
in point of Letters, Plin. Hist. Not. l. 1. c. 9.
when he faith, Literas semper arbitror Assyrias fuisse; sed alii apud
Aegyptios a Mercurio, ut Gellius; alii apud Syros repertos volunt.

And Phoenicia was so near Palestine, where the Fathers Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob sojourned, and where afterward according to the Promise, their Posterity
inhabited; and in the Days of David and Solomon, and not unlikely both before
and after, by reason of Trade (facilitated by community of Language, the Punic
and Hebrew differing only in a Dialect) there was such commerce and intercourse
between the Hebrews and Phoenicians, that the Manners and Religions of both
people, cannot be conceived to be unknown to either, Epicharmus in Clement
affirms the Phoenicians to have received their Letters from the Jews, and so
does Eupolemus.

And having mentioned Solomon, with the Intercourse between the Hebrews and
Phoenicians in his time, I cannot pretermit a not impertinent note, which it
occasions me to make; De Brachman: Gymn^ophist. Vid. Strab. Grozr. l. 15. Apul.
Florit. l. 1. Clem. Alex. Strom. l 1.
It is that the Brachmans and Gymnosophists, men of so fair a Reputation
thoroughout the whole Universe for Knowledge and Philosophy, were the
Offspring of the Voyage to Ophir, and that the Jews that fetched Gold from
India (for Ophir is in India, beyond Ganges, where Chryse was of old, and now
the Kingdom of Pegu) left behind them in that Golden Country, Doctrines much
more precious than the Metals they went for. Those were the Institutions for
which so many ages after, these Philosophers of India were so Venerable; whose
very way and method of Philosophizing, which as Laertius notes, Laert. de vit.
in Proem.
was Aenigmatical and Sententious [(...), Worship God: Do no Evil: Exercise
Fortitude:] was as conformable to that of Moses, as was the Matter of their
Philosophy. Such was the Rise and Origin of the Brachmans and Gymnosophists.

And for the Persian Magi, though some derive the Brachmans and Gymnosophists
of India from them, and others on the contrary the Magi from the Brachmans or
Gymnosophists, affirming that Histaspis Father of Darius, traveled into India
with design to learn Philosophy and Magic, the which the Magi afterward
professed in Persia: Yet I have cause to think, that omitting the Magic
whereof Zoroaster is reputed Author and Founder, the Magi celebrated by the
Greeks for Doctrines so conformable unto the Christians, owe their Original and
Rise to Daniel.

And what inclines me to this Belief, is that Daniel was considered first by
Nebuchadnezzar, afterward by Belteshazar as a Great Magus or Wise man, and had
in such Repute and Honor, that he was preferred by the former to be chief of
the Governors of all the Wise men in Babylon, or as it is interpreted Daster
of the Magicians, Astrologers, Chaldaeans, Southsayers; and by the latter made
the third Ruler in the Kingdom. Yes, and at the Entry of Darius, in whom the
Kingdom was translated from the Assyrians to the Medes and Persians, he had the
honor of being, first, the President over all the Princes of the Provinces,
and then, after the Conspiracy of all the Magi and Princes against him; in the
progress of the Government of the same Prince, he had the Happiness to see
their Ruin, and to hear his God proclaimed God and King thoroughout the whole
extent of the Empire. Thus perished the old Magic, the famed Superstition of
Zoroaster, it was extinguished with those that made Profession of it, and
another kind of Magic (to use the Heathen Term) introduced by Daniel (then of
great Authority and Influence) even that of Moses, which was continued down
along from him (among the Jews) in the Schools of the Prophets, accordingly as
he had promised, and predicted that it should be; the Lord your God shall raise
up unto you another Prophet like unto me. It was for this Magic that the Jews
were noted; Talis erat Moses (says Strabo, Strab. Geogr. l. 16.
speaking of Magi or Diviners) and successores ejus: qui cum initia non mala
habuissent, postea in deterius delapst sunt. A Censure much truer of the
Gentile Superstition.

In this I am confirmed, First, By that of Pliny, Plin. Not. Hist. l. 3. c. 1.
who having spoken of the Magic of Zoroaster, adds, est and alia Magices
factio a Mose, a Ianne and Iotape Judoeis pendens, sed multis millibus annorum
post Zoroastrem. And there is another exercise of Magic, derived from the
Jews, Moses, Jamnes, and Jotape [ perhaps he means Iannes and Joshua, so
confused is Tradition but by many thousand years later than that of Zoroaster.
And also that in Diogenes Laertius, some who by the great conformity of Tenants
observable between the Jews and Magi, were convinced of some Relation and
intercourse between them, Lae^t. de Vit. in Pro^m.
yet unwilling to acknowledge the Truth, that the Magi proceeded from the Jews,
affirmed that the Jews derived from the Magi, (...), And some say, the Jews
came from those Magi. To this add, that the Greeks must be conceived to mean
this New Order of Magi, and not the old, who would derive them from Histaspis.

And for the Druids both of Britain and Gaul, there is so great Resemblance in
their Institutions, Discipline and Doctrine, with the Jewish Priesthood, that
it is not difficult to guess their Original: It was the Office of the Druids,
as of the Jewish Priests, to procure Sacrifices private and public, Caesar.
Com. l. 6.
to interpret Laws, to instruct Youth, to decide and umpire Controversies, and
si quis aut privatus aut populus eorum decreto non stetit, Sacrificiis
interdicunt, etc. And if either Person or People will not bide by their award,
they Excommunicate (and outlaw) him. In order to discharge the Office last
mentioned, all the Druids (over whom presided one that had Supreme Authority,
as who would say, the High Priest) did once a year upon a certain and
determinate Time, use to assemble in a Consecrated Place in midst of Gaul,
where they sat in Judgment, and where all the People that had any Differences
depending, convened before them, to have them ended. Not much unlike what is
ordained in Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10. In fine, what makes it more probable, Caesar.
Co^. l. 6.
is a common Usage mentioned by Caesar to have been among the Gauls, which
likely they received from the Druids, namely, of computing times, not as other
European People, by the number of the Days, but Nights, they so observing
Nativities, the beginning of Months, and of Years, that the night therein
precedes the Day. A Custom bottomed upon the Great Originist, and that account
he gives us of the Genesis and Rise of things, wherein the Darkness was before
the Light, Night before Day. Evening and Morning made the first Day, etc.

And now I make no Question, but you will tell me, that you should not doubt
the Druids were of Hebrew Institution, and Original, could you be resolved how
it came so pass, that Nations so remote as the Gauls and Hebrews, should
communicate knowledges. Wherein to give you satisfaction, I shall plainly
evidence, First, That the Gauls received the Druids Institution from the
Britains, and then that the Britains immediately received it from the Orient;
not unlikely from the Phoenicians [who sailed hither.]

That the Gauls received the Institution of the Druids from Britain, Caesar.
Con. l. 6.
was in the Days of Caesar a received Opinion. Disciplina in Britannia
reperta, atque inde in Galliam translata esse existimatur. This Discipline of
the Druids is also found in Britain, and it is believed from thence
transplanted into Gaul. Which Opinion he confirms, and nunc qui diligentius eam
rem cognoscere volunt, plerumque illo discendi causa proficiscuntur. And even
to this day, those who will more thoroughly understand that matter, do for the
most part sail over into Britain to learn it. And indeed it cannot be imagined
to be communicated from the Jews any other way than by Sea, since the
Intermediate Countries, through which it must have passed by Land, have no
Vestigia of it.

As for the second Point, That the Britains received those Knowledges, which
were the foundation of the Druids Institution from the Orient, is very
probable, because it is apparent by very ancient Story, that they had no little
Correspondence with it; Caesar. Com. l. 5. Diod. Sic. l. 6.
for not only Caesar, but Diodorus Siculus mentions the Chariots that (as in
the Eastern Countries) they used in War, which the rest of Europe did not, and
the latter faith expressly. -- Britanniam tradunt incolere Aborigines, qui
Priscorum more vitam degunt, utuntur enim in pugna curribus, velut antiquos
Graecorum Heroes usos in bello Trojano ferunt. The Inhabitants of Britain are
said to be Aborigines, living after the manner of the Ancients, for in fight
they use Chariots, as in the Trojan War (they say) the Old Heroes of the Greeks
did.

That the Phoenicians sailing hither, and Jews perhaps with them, brought those
knowledges, is most likely, Vid. Ezekiel. c. 12.
because they were the Merchants of the World, and anciently most famous both
for Navigatition and for Trade, so that as Gold obliged them to sail to India,
Cinn might to visit Britain. Britanni qui Juxta Velerium Promontorium incolunt
Diod. Sic. l. 5.
[which dwell at the Lizard] mercatorum usu qui eo stanni gratia navigant,
Humaniores reliquis erga Hospites habentur. Thus Diodorus. So long ago was this
Island famed for Tinn, for which in Caesar's time it drove a great Trade with
the Gauls.]

In fine, not to mention that the name of Druid derived from (...) an Oak, a
Tree of old in much Repute with the Hebrews, that which renders it the less
Unlikely that the Phoenicians, enlightened by the Jews, were founders of the
Order of Druids, is that conformity of Customs that the Gauls had with them in
sacrificing men for expiation of God, and for Redemption of their own souls,
they being framed to this Usage by the Druids upon a a Ground received from the
Phoenicians, Caesar. Com. l. 6.
Quod pro vita hominis (as Caesar gives it) nisi vita hominis reddatur, non
posse Deorum iminortalium numen placari: That nothing can appease the Immortal
Deity, or content and satisfy for the life of man, but the life of a man. This
Principle [the rise of Humane Sacrifices] whereon (if the Story be not a
corruption of that in Holy Writ of Iephta) Agamemnon offered Iphigenia, looks
high, and does effectually evince what I so often have inculcated, Steph.
Dichion. Histor. in Iphigen.
that the Heathen usage of sacrificing men had its foundation in that great
Tradition of the Seed of the Woman, that he was to make his soul an Offering to
God for sin, and that no consideration could content Divine Justice for the
Lives of men that had been forfeited to it in the fall, but the Life of Christ
a Man. The Redemption of a soul is precious.

It is true, I find in Diodorus, that the Ethiopians were so great Pretenders
unto Religion and Antiquity, that they affirmed Worship (itself) to have had
its Origin and Rise among them. Diod. Sic. l. 4.
Asserunt Deorum (says he) apud eos cultum primitus adinventum, Sacra insuper,
Pompas, celebritates aliaque quibus Diis honores impenduntur, ab eis fuisse
reperta. Qua ex re ipsorum in Deos pietate, religioneque inter omnes vulgata
videntur Aethiopum sacra Diis admodum grata esse. Hujus rei Testimonium
asserunt Antiquissimum fere ac celeberrimum apud Graecos Poetarum, qui in sua
Iliade Iovem reliquosque una Deos introducit in Aethiopiam tum ad sacra quae
cis de more fiebant, tum ad odorum suavitatem commigrantes.

But it is easy to imagine, how they might receive their knowledge from the
Egyptians, their Neighbors, and consequently (though we should not believe
Josephus, that Meroe anciently was Saba) how much they were indebted to the
Queen of Sheba, and the Jews, that great Person so dispersing and spreading
among the Heathen far and near, the knowledge learned by her in the Royal Court
of Solomon, that she is in story celebrated for it for a Sibyll, and so styled
by some the Babylonian, and by others the Egyptian. I impose not my conceits
upon you; what I now say, is a matter vouched by as good Authority as any we
can have for things of this Nature. Pausan. in Phocic.
Hear Pausanias, (...). After Demo, there comes another, who by the Hebrews
that inhabit above Palaestine, is reputed a Wife or Inspired Woman, her name is
SABBA, whom some call the Babylonian, some the Egyptian Sibyll. Thus He.

Further, I might here add what others have discoursed more at large before me,
that the Greek Philosophers immediately derived from the Jews some of the
knowledge which they had of true Religion. Clemens Alexandrinus undertook the
Province long ago (which since him others also have discharged) it is his main
business in his second Book of Stromata, to demonstrate how Prodigious
Plagiaries the Greeks were in all the Rites of their Religion, and to instance
what they stole from the Jews. And though Laetantius gainsay what I am now
about to tell you, yet I find it in Porphyrie, Porphyr. de Vit. Pythag. Vid.
Clem. Alex. Stiom. l. 1.
(viz.) That Pythagoras himself did travel to the Hebrews, and was instituted
by them: and Aristotle, though I think him not a Jew, as some assert him, yet
(if we may believe Clearchus, his Disciple, who in Josephus tells you it) he
was instructed by a Jew, a Coelo-Syrian. In fine, what to me is more than all I
yet have said, it is evident from the History of Sacred Scripture, that it was
the great Design and End of God, who is most Wise and Good, to give the rest of
the World, at convenient Periods, some Intimations and Discoveries of himself
by means of the Hebrews, to the end that he might never leave himself without
witness, but might Refresh the knowledge which they had received of him by
Tradition, or otherwise, when it was almost outworn and vanished. For this
purpose, while mankind was yet but of a narrow spread, he ordained the travells
of the Patriarchs; and when afterward it was of greater, he set up the Nation
of the Hebrews, as it were a Beacon on a Hill, in the midst of all the Earth to
lighten it. And more than that, he orders several scatterings and dispersions
of them; first of the ten Tribes by Salmanazer; then of the two by
Nebuchadnezar, into Countries into which there was Resort from all the world.
After this, he in his Providence obliged Alexander, great Founder of the
Grecian Monarchy, to visit Iewry; to venerate Iaddus the Priest, to Invest the
Nation of the Jews with great Immunities and Privileges. From which time not
only the People, but their Usages and Laws became of so much Reputation, that
Ptolomy (the Son of Lagus) that great Patron of Learning, and Lover of Books,
procured the Mosaic Writings to be solemnly translated into Greek [then the
Universal Language] by which means the knowledge of Good, as well as Copies of
the Bible, were dispersed and scattered throughout the whole Earth. In a word,
who knows not that in our Saviors time, there were Jews or Israelites of all
Nations under Heaven? of so large a spread then was the knowledge of God, Acts
2.

So beholding were the Gentiles; and yet it cannot be denied, but that they so
avers'd and hated the Jews, to whom they were obliged, that in their Writings
they make no frequent mention of them, and when they do any, it is with hard
words; Reflecting on them as a People most conceited, superstitious, absolutely
unworthy all remembrance; for which Reason their Doctrines were by most
despised, or if received by some more knowing and discerning than the Rest, and
so proposed to others, it ever was with much disguise and alteration, left they
should betray their Original. Thus, the Light shined in Darkness, and the
Darkness comprehended it not.

And so much by way of Demonstration of the knowledges the Gentiles had before
Christ; and of the Methods wherein (it may be probably presumed) they received
them. As for what they have been Owners of since, and how they came to be so, I
shall only offer what is generally acknowledged, that in the very first Age and
Century, the Gospel way communicated unto all the Earth, either by the Apostles
themselves, or their Disciples and followers [ their sound went over all the
Earth, and their words to the End of the World:] and that there was not that
Place and Region then inhabited, wherein it may not be evinced by either plain
and undoubted History, or by apparent Probability, that the name of Christ was
heard of. Go disciple all Nations (says our Savior to his Apostles) and the
Fall of the Jews (says Paul) shall be the Riches of the Gentiles. Among the
Fathers, Tertullian, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Hilary are of the same Opinion:
Purchase Part 1. l. 1. c. 2.
And in the Industrious Purchase you may read the several Peregrinations of the
Apostles, with the Proofs he gives of them.

It were easy for me to instance in the most Remote Regions, how the Gospel
came into them, but that I judge it superfluous; only, because you mentioned
China as an Example of the grossest Ignorance of God and Christ, I shall mind
you of the Ancient Stone, not many years ago discovered in it, which affords an
admirable Testimony, that the Gospel penetrated thither, by means of St.
Thomas; as also of the Chaldee Breviary, Alvarez Semedo Hist. of China, par. 1.
c. 3^.
rited by Alvarez Semedo, which assures us of the early preaching of the Gospel
of the same Apostle among the Chinesians, Indians, Aethiopians and Persians.
And for America, it is evident from Vega who was born in Cusco, and of the
'race of the Inca's, Vid. P^rchas par. ^. l. 1. c. 2. s. 7.
That it was uninhabited long after the Incarnation of our Savior; and some
have thought it worth their labor to evince, Thorow-good, Jews in America.
That at least some of the Inhabitants in it are Jews. And it would be worth
ours, had I leisure to display the admirable Methods wherein Providence has
from time to time revived the knowledge of Jesus Christ in Regions where it was
effaced and worn out.

But you will say (that) perhaps the Ancient Heathen might be so enlightened
before Christ, and so since, and that those among them which were Humane and
Civil, might retain much of what they had received from their Ancestors, or
otherwise, in points of Religion, but that it is as evident there are a many
Savage and Barbarous ones, for instance, not to mention any remote and distant
times, these in ours about the Bay of Soldania, and Cape of Good Hope, the
Lapps and many others. And shall these be damned to Eternal Torments, for what
they cannot help? Shall these be cast into everlasting Darkness, and Sorrows,
without Reserues, etc.

I answer, that besides that their Ancestors may long ago have had the
opportunity of hearing the Gospel, which they either entertained not, or having
entertained, afterward Revolted from it to Barbarity and Heathenism, so that
God in Righteous Judgment might punish them in their Posterity, with the want
of what they rejected; I say besides that, there is no Nation under Heaven so
Inhumane, Barbarous and Savage, but that though it may not have as much as many
others, yet it has sufficent light concerning God, and concerning common
Offices and Duties of men, such as does leave them inexcusable, and without
Defense [(...) in Paul's expression.] Of this no Question can be made, in as
much as those that have the least light have more than they improve or live to,
which having, there is no Reason for them to complain they have too little; it
is their Omission (and no man may pretend the Advantage of his own Guilt) as
well as their Unhappiness they have no more, who employ not, and improve not
what they have. Light is a Growing and Improvable thing, they would have
received more, in using what they had: The Blessed Spirit who is free and
unconfined, and who blows where he lists, would not have failed to Assist
sincere and hearty endeavors.

This is certainly the cafe of all how Barbarous, Rude and Savage soever, they
have sufficient Light and Means afforded to them to be better, a Light within
them, and a Light without them, Subjective and Objective Light.

First, A Light within them. This is the true Light that enlightens every man
that comes into the world. By the Light within, I understand nothing but (...)
Practique Reason, that Ray of Jesus Christ [ the Sun of Righteousness ] who is
Original, First and Primitive Reason; by which a man enabled to discern Good
and Evil, Virtue and Vice, Rectitude and Turpitude, is agreeably inclined to
Pursue one, and to Refuse the other. So Seneca, Sen. Epist. 120.
I now therefore return unto that which thou desire me to Resolve thee in,
how the knowledge of that which is Good and Honest came first unto us. This
Nature could not teach us, for she gave us but the Seeds of Sciences, and not
Science it self, Some say that we casually come to the knowledge thereof, which
is Incredible; that the Image of Virtue shall casually appear unto any man. But
we suppose that by Diligence, Observation; and frequent conference of things,
estimated by that which is Good and Honest, we have attained to this Knowledge,
etc.

I know that Archelaus, Aristippus, Carneades and others hold Opinion that
neither Rectitude, nor Turpitude, Virtue nor Vice, Good nor Evil are by Nature
so, but by Law; and that there is nothing either Honest or Dishonest, Virtuous
or Vicious, Good or Evil, Essentially, Intrinsecally, and in it self, but only
by Denomination from extrinsecal and foreign Respects; Respects not ingenite
in the things themselves, but, by Positive and humane constitutions,
superinduced upon them.

the like Opinion are many now among us, who apprehend that Just and Legal are
the same, as if all in any Government and Society done according unto Humane
Law and constitution, were justly done; whereas, what Lactantius long ago
observed is most true, that it is not Justice, which is Uniform, simple, and
the same in all the World, but Interest or Utility that is the Cause of Humane
Laws, which are therefore so difform, various and manifold, because as well the
Interest, as Humors of the People to which they be adapted, are so. And how
can men be Just, by conforming but to Laws that are made by men who may be
Unjust? Aliud est igitur (says the Father) civil jus, quod pro moribus ubique
variatur; aliud est vera Justitia, quam uniformen and simplicem proposuit
omnibus Deus. Civil Law therefore which is everywhere diversified according to
the several manners of men is one thing, and true Justice another, which
uniform and simple, is proposed by God to All.

But to return to Archelaus, Aristippus, and Carneades, They might as well have
said, That there is no Asperity or Laevity in Tangible Objects, no Harmony or
Dis-harmony in sounds, that among odors, vapors and colors, some are not in
Nature Pleasing and Agreeable unto these respective Senses they affect, and
others contrary; but that this Agreeableness and Disagreeableness of Objects to
the Sense, from which they are denominated Good or Evil to it, is but a fiction
of the Humane Mind. I say as well; For the Practique Understanding is but a^
High and racy Sense, and as other Senses, so this (within its capacity and
Sphere of comprehension) has Objects that are contrary, some are Agreeable; and
some are otherwise, and she Judges of them. There is Ingrafted in the Mind of
Man an Intellectual Sense, a Discernment of what is Good and Evil; as in the
Eye, a sensible one of White and Black; In the Palate, a Taste of Bitter and
Sweet: In the Ear, a Power to Discriminate Harmonies and Discords; in all a
sense of Pleasure and Pain. What is Harmonious, Equal, Congruous, and
consequently Pleasing and Agreeable unto Practique Reason, and accordingly
approved by it, which it honors with a Dictate that it ought to be pursued, or
effected, that is called morally Good; and what is Dis-harmonius, Inequal or
Inconcongruous, and consequently Painful and Disagreeable, and accordingly
disallowed, of which the Understanding Dictates that it ought to be Avoided,
that is Morally Evil. To be morally Good or Evil, is to be Good or Evil in
point of Manners; Good and Evil in manners, are the Objects of the Practique
Understanding; there are things Agreeable and Disagreeable to the Mind and
Practique Understanding, as well as to other Senses. There are things Good, and
things Evil to this High and Racy Sense, as well as to Inferior Ones.

The System of Prime, Common Plain Self-evident Dictates of the Practique
Understanding or Reason (whose Number can no better be Determined than that of
Fundamentals in Religion) is generally called the Law of Nature; not only
because it is described as it were in Nature, and in the very habitudes and
Respects of things themselves, but also because (as our Apostle happily
expresses it) it is a Law whereby a man is so unto himself, that is, his very
faculties themselves, which are his Nature, do as it were prescribe him Laws,
which in Opposition unto Positive and written Laws, are called Unwritten, Plato
d^ Leg. l. 7. Arist. Rhet. l. 1. c. 10. Cic. Part. Orator. Orat. pre Milon.
and under that Notion were acknowledged by the Wisest Heathen, by Plato, by
Aristotle, by Cicero to be the Catholic or common Law of all mankind.

I say, it is called Law, the Law of Nature; but in Strictness and Propriety,
it is not Law barely, for that it is a frame of things that Natural Reason
shows fit, and necessary to be done or forborne; for seeing Law is nothing but
the signification of what a Superior Power and authority requires from us, in
point of doing or not doing, as we would have him pleased, or incurr his
Displeasure, Reason does not by a naked Dictate of the Reasonabless, and
fitness of things, make the Doing of them Duty and Obedience. For though Reason
do enjoin for Matter and Substance, but what God does; yet properly its Dictate
is not Law upon the bare account of being an Injunction and command of Reason,
but as it is an Injunction and command of God; which is signified to us, and
made known by Reason. Else Man in the State of Nature were his own Lord, and
Governor.

Yes, that men do hold themselves obliged unto things proposed to them by the
Practique Understanding, as unto Duties which they owe, and consequently that
the Dictates of the Mind or Understanding are Regarded by them as Laws, arises
from a Belief implanted in them, That what Reason manifests to be convenient or
unconvenient, Equal or Unequal, Congruous or Incongruous, is the Will of One
above them, that they should Perform, or Omit; It being Law only that is
capable of making Duty, and the will of the Superior only that is capable of
making Law. Reason though it may inform us what is fit and congruous to be
done, yet Inforces not what is so to be duty; if there go not a Persuasion with
it, that what it shows, is the will of a Superior. The Law of Nature is the
Law of God written in Nature, which Reason shows, and this makes Duty.

That Principle by which a Man is Conscions that there is a Superior (Power)
requiring him as he would either Please or Displease, to do what Reason
dictates fit and convenient, and to forbear the contrary, is Conscience, which
I take (as it Exists in us) to be an Instinct of Nature, or (if you will pardon
the expression) A Natural Habit and Impression transmitted with the Geniture
from Parents unto Children. Reason shows what is to be done, but this
conscience binds it on the man as Duty, and makes him to believe what Reason
shows, to be the Will of a Superior. So the Apostle; these not having a Law,
are a Law unto themselves: Romans 2.14, 15.
which show the work of the Law written in their Hearts, their Conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while Accusing or Excusing one
another.

I call Conscience an Instinct. To comprehend which, it will behove us as well
to look abroad, and about, as into our selves. There is in Animals that want
Reason, a Principle of Action which we call Instinct, by which a Hound does
follow the Hare; the Hare avoids the Hound; a Chicken dreads the Kite; a Lamb
at first fight of the Wolf will tremble and seek Sanctuary; By which Birds
instructed both to build their Nests, to sit on their Eggs, and to feed their
young, are moved to seek Places of most Advantage and Retreat to conceal them.
And such a Principle in man is Conscience; It is an Instinct, or (if you
please) a Natural Impression of a Future Judgment in the Mind of Man; You may
call it a Natural Habit. An Habit, because it was at first an Adventitious
Impression; Natural, because now it is Original, and transmitted in the same
way as other Natural Qualities.

This Impression of a future Judgment, or the Fear of God as Judge, might
first be taken by Adam, when after he had eaten the Forbidden fruit, Hearing
God coming, he avoided him and fled; [which I the rather think, because Natural
Conscience (before Illumination of it by Divine Grace) is apter to accuse and
terrify for Evil done, than to receive comfort for Good.] Which Impression so
Received and Transmitted to Posterity, is confirmed and strengthened, or else
weakened and abated in them, and perhaps extinguished by Education and Usage. A
constant Exercise of Religion, by Preserving Fear of God, preserves the
Impression; without that, it first Abates, and then Expires; Men of no Religion
will in time be men of no Conscience. Conscience in Adam was Knowledge; he
feared God because he knew him; In his children Instinct, they naturally fear a
Reckoning; and cannot help it.

Taking this to be the true Nature of Conscience, that it is the Practique or
Reflexive Power of the mind (as) formed with an Instinct of a Future Judgment;
All its Operations are most easily conceived. For then if a man Reflect and
seriously considers, either that he has omitted, what he ought to have done,
or else has practiced what he ought not: he is conscious in it that he has
Incurred the Displeasure of a Superior Power, and consequently is full of
Terrors, and Horrors, from an apprehension of his coming to Judge for it; or if
he be conscious that he has Performed what he ought, and consequently that the
Power above him is well pleased, this possesses him with secret Joy, as being
one in Favor with his Master, who will not fail one day to make him see the
Effects of it. Their Consciences Accusing, or Excusing. This Conscience
naturally is in every man, who by it is a Law to himself, till he fear it. Of
this Conscience the Heathen have spoken much. Hear one or two for all. Pyth^g.
apud Stob. S^rm. 22.
(...). He that is conscious to himself of any crime, be he never so stout, his
conscience makes him most fearful and Timid. Antiphon. apud Stob. ibid.
(...). For a man to be conscious to himself of having done no wrong in his
(whole) life, it affords him unspeakable Pleasure.

So much for the Light within. But Divine Bounty infinitely transcending humane
Apprehension, has afforded Man not only Light within, but Light without. For
that which may be known of God is manifest unto him. Romans 1.19, 20. Psalm. 19.
and 89.3.
For the Invisible things of God from the Creation of the World, are clearly
seen in the things that are made, even his Eternal Power, and Godhead, and he
left not himself without witness, Acts 14.16, 17.
in that he did Good, and gave us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons,
filling our hearts with Food' and Gladness.

This Light without is styled Natural Theology, and is a manifestation and
Discovery in the things that are made, and in the Providential Dispensation,
Government and Conduct of them, That God is, and that he is Almighty, Infinite,
Eternal, Immense, Allwise, All-knowing, Bountiful and Benign, which is
principally showed in the former: And that he is Su^ream Rector and Governor
of all, that he loves Righteousness and does Right, that he is Gracious and
Merciful, and that his Mercy is to All, and over All his works, and this is
principally shown in his Providence. Hear Hierocles concerning Natural
Theology, and perhaps Christologie. (...). Nature having fashioned the Visible
world, according to Divine Measures, did by Proportion every where in different
manners, conform it unto himself, and express the Image of Divine Pulchritude
in all the Species and kinds of Beings through the Universe, in this one way,
in that another; so that Heaven was to have Perpetual Motion, Earth Stability,
but both of them to bear some Footsteps of Divine Similitude. And so the
Apostle, who is the Image of the Invisible God, the first born of every
creature, for by him [as by an exemplar] all things were made, etc.

This Theology indeed is ^ieroglyphical and Figurative; Nature, an Allegory,
God is represented in her and in Providence, as a Cause in its Effects, and as
a thing is signified in the sign, that shows it, not to the sense, but by it
to the mind. But as it is significant, it is also suitable, congruous,
convenient unto Humane Nature, and consequently plain enough. For as Man is an
embodied, and incorporated mind, a Rational Discoursing Animal, one that
infers thing from thing, so it is agreeable and sit that God should
represent himself unto him in Types, Figures, Signs, ways wherein he is to
exercise his Reason and Discourse. Such is the Demonstration of Almighty God in
the World, It is not that of Colors to the eye, but of Conclusions in the
Premises unto the Mind; the Theology of Nature is significant, and the World,
a System of Divinity, AEnigmatical and Symbolical, God is ^een and represented
in it, but so that while the Senses show, it is the Understanding that does
see, and read him. The Invisible things of God are clearly seen, (...) being
minded, Sensibles are Signs; and a Sign is what does offer somewhat to the
Sense; but more to the mind. God must be minded in things made, or else no
seeing of him in them, so Homer, Homer. apud Stoboem. Fglog. Ethic. l. 2. f.
163.
-- (...)
Pursue the Footsteps [or Vestigia] of God.

And so Pythagoras, Pythag. apud endem. ibid.
(...). Follow God or Imitate him, who goes not before us Visibly to the Eye,
but who is to be seen by the Understanding Harmonically, in the Eutaxie and
Goodly order of the World.

So much Light without, and such a Light within have all, and those who live
not up unto it, and don't improve it, are inexcusable, and without the least
Defense or Apology; Romans 1.20. Romans 2.1.
[ so that they are without Excuse -- Now thou art inexcusable O man:] And I
take it, Jesus Christ himself in that so well known Parable of the Talents,
designed the Vindication of Divine Procedure in this Particular now before Us:
And (if you will give me leave to say it) even the satisfaction of your
scruples. For in the Distribution of the Talents, to one five, to another two,
to a third one, conceive him by the first to intimate enlightened Jews and
Christians; by the second, Civil, and by the third, Savage and Barbarian
Heathens; and then you have your case; wherein be pleased to observe, How he
with one Talent, when called to Account, but Pleads for himself as you have
pleaded for him, by Reflection on his Master, accusing him of want of Goodness,
and of as much Injustice for expecting from him what he could not do, and for
condemning him for what he could not help. Then he which had received the One
Talent, Mat. 25.24.
came, and said, Lord, I knew that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou
have not sown, and gathering where thou have not strawed, etc.

Where permit me to observe what here I may insert without Impertinence, That
Idle Ratiocinations, [ such' as these; If I am Elected, I shall be Saved, let
me do what I will; if Reprobate, I shall be Damned, do what I can; I have no
Sufficiency and Power of my self to Act toward my Salvation; and therefore,
How, or Why should I endeavor it? If God expects from me more than he has
put into me, and grow angry because he has not what he looks for, who can help
it?] These and other such discourses are the great impediments to let and
hinder men, in minding their Eternal concerns, and to deterr them from them:
This is the Lion in the way. I call them Idle Ratiocinations in conformity to
Jesus Christ, who styles them so. For it is not the common ordinary vain
Discourses, Mt. 12.36.
(as many apprehend them; and for countenancing which, they quote a Rabby, Lad.
Cap^el. Sp^ci eg. ad Mat. 12.36.
(...) Etiam propter sermonem levem viri cum uxore adducetur ille in judicium)
that are the (...) the Iale words intended by our blessed Savior, when he
tells us that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account
thereof in the day of judgment: But they are the Ratiocinations and Discourses
instanced before, and the like, which for that they do enervate all endeavors,
and consequently render men Idle in their most important and concerning work,
are therefore called Idle. That this is so, I am abundantly convinced, for that
I find the very term in this sense in frequent use among Philosophers, Cic. l.
de Fato.
witness Cicero, nec nos impediat illa ignava ratio quae dicitur, (says he,
whose Testimony is as plain as full) appellatur enim quidem a Philosophis
(...): cui si pareamus, nihil est omnino quod agamus in vita: sic enim
interrogant; si fatum tibi est ex hoc morbo convalescere, sive medicum
adhibueris, sive non, convalesces; item, si fatum tibi est ex hoc morbo non
convalescere, sive tu medicum adhibueris, sive non, non convalesces: and
alterutrum fatum est: medicum ergo adhibere nihil attinet. Recte genus hoc
interrogationis Ignavum atque iners nominatum est, quod eadem ratione omnis e
vita tolletur actio.

But to return; you see how God is Charged; and how does he acquit himself from
the charge and imputation laid upon him by this Unprofitable man, but by
telling him what I have you? that he had received a Talent, and that he ought
to have improved it, and the rather for that he apprehended [him] his Master so
Severe and Rigid; That had he put his Talent, though but one, unto the
Exchangers, and so Returned it again unto his Lord with Just improvement, he
himself in Justice had been held excused, and his Lord contented; which since
he has not done, he is concluded not only Insolent and wicked for his vile
calumniation of his Master, but slothful and idle, for not improving his
Talent. The Lord answered and said unto him, Thou wicked and slothful servant,
etc. which stops his mouth. He had a Talent, and should have improved it.
Indeed, the Master would have seemed hard, to look for something, when he had
given nothing, but he is not so to look for improvement, where he gives a
Talent.

And this Reminds me of the Last Particular, which I promised to evince (for
which you see I have prepared the way) in order to the clearing of the present
difficulty, and that is, that God is so good that he accepts not according to
what a a man has not, but according to what he has, where he gives, he
expects more; where less, he looks for less; still he looks for Returns but
in proportion unto what he first gives; which since he does, I see no Room for
Complaints. No man shall be condemned for what he could not help, nor for what
he could not do.

I know almost Nothing wherein the Scripture seems fuller than in this
Particular: for in the Parable of the Talents, as he received Five
improvements, from him that had five given him, so he accepts the two by way of
improvement, from him that has but two to trade with: and the Man with one
Talent, is not condemned for not producing five, or two, but for his not at all
improving that one. Lev. 5.7.
And if he be not able to bring a Lamb, then he shall bring for his trespass,
which he has committed, two Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons. Ast. 17.30.
And the times of this Ignorance God winked at, but now commands All to
Repent. As many as have sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law; Romans
2.12.
and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. Gods
Judgment is Righteous and Just; not according to what men have not, but
according to what men have, does God accept.

For my part, I conceive Sincerity, and the true Direction of the Intention to
do the Will of God, (which ever is accompanied with suitable endeavors) to
import much; yea, most with him. For so a man's endeavors be unfeignedly
designed, and in integrity of Conscience (according to the measures of received
Light) to the promotion and advancement of Divine Honor, though the Acts
themselves conferr not much to that end; yet I make no question but the good
God does what a good man, V^d. Epicha^m. apud Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7.
a good Father, a Gracious Prince would; I mean, he regards the will, and good
intention of the Agent, rather than the simple Acts themselves that flow from
it. Yes he looks to the Heart; If there be first a willing mind, 2 Cor. 8.12.
[that must be first] it is accepted, etc. Perhaps, while some of us are for
Martyn, and others for Luther, and one against another, God likes well of us
All. He understands us to mean the same thing, though we understand not one
another, and I fear, never shall.

Finally, I make no question, but sincere Endeavors after knowledge of the
true God, and sincere Intentions to advance his Glory, are Recompensed with
further Revelations and discoveries of him, which I take it is the meaning of
our B^essed Savior, Mat. 6.22.
saying, (1.) If thine Eye be single, that is, if in what thou do, thou have
a love to God, and what proceeds from it, a simple and unbyassed aim at his
Glory, then thy whole body shall be full of Light, thou shall receive a more
abundant light, and manifestation to direct and guide thee in it: John 7.17.
And, (2.) If any man will do his will, He shall know of the Doctrine, whether
it be of God, etc.

So much for your fourth and last Argument, The Tremendous Circumstances of the
Heathen. In answer whereunto I have evinced their cases not to be so sad and
Dismal, nor God in his Transactions with them so severe and hard, as some
conceit him. I have also proved that the Great Creator, as he does Inequally
Dispense his Light and Favor, so that by his Goodness he is not obliged to do
otherwise. That to whom he does dispense least, he yet affords sufficient to
leave them inexcusable, and without cause of complaint. In Fine, I have Evinced
that God expects not from man, but in proportion unto that he first gives
him, more from them that have received more, and less from him that has less.
And wherein now in point of Goodness, or of Justice, is he wanting or Defective?

Thus Sir, It is that I have labored your satisfaction in the several Points
wherein you Desired it: And if Integrity, Candor, Sincerity in a Performance,
may Justly Bottom any Hopes of its Success, I cannot be without some, That what
has Proved Really convincing and Establishing to me, will also Prove the like
to others; which that it may, and Particularly to your self, is matter both of
Ardent, and of Daily Prayer, to,

SIR, Your Friend and Servant, Richard Burthogge.

FINIS.

