Y^TTELISTS ^ YLTTELI^OENO^ OR, THE EVANGELIST YET Evangelizing.

Submitted to the Judgment and Censure of the Churches of England and Ireland.

By DANIEL BURSTON B. D. And Preacher of Gods Word in the City of Waterford.

Ephesians. 4. 11. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers.

12 For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ.

13 Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son
of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ.

Duo sunt vocabula quae non recte accepta fallunt sc. temporarium, and
extraordinarium. Sarav. de diverse. gradibus, etc. cap. 16. Quanquam non nego
quin Apostolos postea qu^que vel saltem eorum loco Evangelistas excitavit Deus,
ut nostro quidem saeculo factum est, Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 3. sect. 4. As the
primitive Churches were undoubtedly governed by the Apostles, and their
immediate Successors, the first and best Bishops; so it cannot in reason or
charity be supposed, that all Churches in the world, should either be ignorant
of the rule by them prescribed, or so soon deviate from their Divine and holy
pattern, King Charles the first, (...). c. 17. DUBLIN: Printed by John Crook,
Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and are to be sold by Samuel
Dancer, Bookseller in Castlestreet, 1662.

TO His EXCELLENCY JAMES Duke, Marquess and Earl of Ormond, Earl of Ossory and
Brecknock, Viscount Thurles, Lord Baron of Arclo and Lanthony, Lord of the
Regalities and Liberties of the County of Tipperary, Chancellor of the
University of Dublin, Lord Lieutenant General and General Governor of His
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Sommerset, one
of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Councils of His Majesty's
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, Lord Steward of His Majesty's
Household, Gentleman of His Majesty's Bedchamber, and Knight of the most noble
Order of the Garter.
May it please your Grace,
THat little Presents have been acceptable to mighty Princes, is their usual
Apology, who draw those precedents into examples; but it cannot be mine, in
consecrating this small Tract to Your Excellencies hands: They presented their
Governors with what was their own, I offer to your Grace, not what is mine, but
Yours: You, as his Majesty's Vicegerent, are appointed to defend the faith, and
under him and our Savior, are the chief Officer, both over the Civil and
Ecclesiastical affairs of this Kingdom. This Discourse concerns the faith in
its visible profession, and the order settled by Christ, for the Government of
his Church; and therefore it is yours by those Titles. The weakness of the
style, and manifold imperfections of the Composer, would deter me from
returning you what is Yours, in such a ragged dress, and by such an unknown
hand; were not I verily persuaded, that as his Sacred Majesty is Divinely
chosen, like another Zerubbabel, to raise a ruined Temple, so Your Excellency
is one of the most eminent of the Subordinate Rulers, to carry on that glorious
work; wherein as well poor Laborers must be employed to remove the rubbish,
and clear the foundation, as Master-workmen, to rear and complete the Fabric.
Illustrious Sir, I humbly beg my admission into the Roll of those Gibeonites:
Industry and due observance of my Superiors directions, are my only
commendatory Letters; if their certificate may procure me the office. I will
oblige my self to what conformity they enjoin me in my work. But wherefore
this? Behold I see the Head-stone already brought forth with shouting, and hear
the Inhabitants of these several Kingdoms from every quarter, crying, Grace,
grace unto it. Now God Almighty bless our Zerubbabel, strengthen his hands,
level all Mountains before him, make him the blessed finisher of what he has
happily begun, give him and his Kingdoms peace out of this Temple, and cause
its glory to exceed the glory of the former; and may your Grace live long, and
long to see it; and abundantly share in the comforts of it: May you no minute
of your life be unassured of your indearment to God, the King, the Church and
Kingdom. Let the Everlasting eyes be always over you, to direct; and let the
Everlasting arms be always under you, to uphold and protect you in all your
ways: And when full of days, full of honors, full of all joy and peace in
believing, you shall be gathered to your Fathers, may you be translated, and
for ever fixed as a Star of the greatest magnitude, transcendently differing
from others in glory. This the God of all blessings effectually grant, as is
most affectionately implored by, My Lord,

Your most obedient Servant, and daily Orator, Dan. Burston.

To the Rigidest Dissenters of the Presbyterial Judgment.
Brethren,
FOr your sakes is this Treatise principally intended, to whom therefore but
unto you, can I direct the Preface. Others, who own the truth thereby
maintained, are already therein confirmed, by Arguments, which to indifferent
Umpires are unanswerable. My design is, neither to broach a Novelty, nor to
get a Party to own an old (though by you endeavored to be antiquated) truth:
But to free it from causless opposition. How far I have done, or come short of
it, I am unfit to Judge. God and my conscience witnesses, my sincere labor to
do it. Arguments on both sides, I have diligently, and indifferently weighed,
and never wittingly cast the scale, where the weight of faith or reason did not
carry it. Own what is of God; dispute, and show me the error of what is mine.
I will more readily retract it, then I published i^. It Is truth I seek, not
name, nor victory, let her triumph, I can as cheerfully follow chained to her
chariot, as rid in it.

If you do prepare for opposition, be pleased to remember, we dispute about a
Divine Intstiution, if we must fight, let us try it out, within sacred lists;
And not disorderly skirmish, about the vices, or virtues of men, least we
elevate Gods, and Christ's authority, to establish man's. Outward P^ety, zeal,
and earnestness, in, or for a way, or profession, are no i^fallible marks of
the truth of it: Fairer flowers grow oftener in the by way, then in the road. A
Divine right consists in the Divinity of the instituter of an ordinance, nor is
it more Divine, in the zeal, or less divine in the negligence of its
Administrators. For then God were beholding to man for the credit of his
institutions. Besides zeal may be found in Idolaters, and persecutors; Romans
10.2.3. For I bear them record they have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge, for they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and endeavoring to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God. Remisness may creep upon the Ephesine Angel. Rev. 2.4.
Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
love. Whither, Timothy, or some other Bishop, was this Angel, I cannot
determine; but although many of the Ancients say that Timothy and no other is
meant under that denomination; this is most true, who ever the Angel was, he
was a true, and had been an active Minister of Christ. One who had tried those,
who said they were Apostles, and were not, and had found them liars. Rev. 2.
The Pharasees in Christ's time, and Monks, and Friars in ours, pretended, and do
pretend, enough external holiness; and acted, and do act, too much zeal, and
earnestness, in maintenance of their Traditions, and Inventions. But our Lord
Jesus did not approve them, neither do you (I hope) applaud these. Do not
commend in your selves, and cause, what you condemn in them, and theirs. Who
estimate truth's not by their own natures, but by the moroseness, or rigidness
of their asserters, and account that most true whose defenders are most
precise, shall never be free of a scepticalness, and irresolution, of what is
truth, either so long as there is hypocrisy, or selflove in the world, Nunquam
rectum erit judicium, nisi quod ex veritate rei feratur; nam simul ac personae
prodeunt in medium oculos, and sensus, in se convertunt, ut veritas protinus
evanescat. Calv. in loc.
or as Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light. Our Saviors
council is most safe, viz. not to judge by the appearance, but to judge
righteous Judgment. Joh. 7.26. The Pharisees had the appearance on their sides,
Christ had righteousness on his, who looked at the former, censured him for a
Sabbath breaker, who eyed the latter, condemned them for Judges of evil
thoughts. Calvin's note upon the place, is excellent. He says, Judgment which
is not given according to the truth of things, can never be just, for so soon
as persons come before us, our eyes, and senses turn toward them, but truth
vanishes. Thus he. While Apostles lived, how did deceivers vye with them, in
appearing Sanctity, whose hypocritical glimmerings, so dazzled the weak eyes of
the giddy multitude, as almost to withdraw them from truth. Take a few of the
many complaints, of one Apostle about this matter. Romans 16.18. For they that be
such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words,
and fair speeches, deceives the hearts of the simple. Col. 2.18. Let no man
beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels,
intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind. Indeed outward strictness may magnify our inventions for a long
time, (it enlivened, and prolonged the days of Monkery, beyond the age of
Methusalem) the want of it may vilify divine institutions, to prejudiced, or
unexamining persons; But when once the contrariety of those forgeries, unto a
sacred rule is evidenced then those who see and own it, shall come off with
shame, and loss, and those who see, and will not own it, will run into worse
extremes, they for the most part turning Atheists, and refuse to serve any god
at all, since they may not worship their Diana's. Men naturally love their own,
for it they will wrestle, fight, and lay down their lives; thus Israel of old
did for Moloch. Ezech. 16.20, 21. Moreover thou have taken thy Sons, and thy
Daughters, which thou have born unto me, and these have thou sacrificed to them
to be devoured; Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter? that thou have slain
my children, and caused them to pass through the fire for them? Thus Baals
Priests presented him with drink offerings of their bloods. 1 Kings. 18.28. And
they cried loud, and cut themselves after their manner, with knives and
lancers, till the blood gushed out. This it seems was customary with them, they
did no new thing, but what was usual, or after their manner for them to do.
These delusions, no doubt their faction called devotions, and I know not what
moral reason can be assigned, why that Nation was so inclinable to Idolatry at
every turn, unless this extraordinary Idolatrous zeal, turned their stomach
against Gods true Worship, which might, and ought more temperately to be
celebrated; Look we therefore all of us, who would not be deceived to the
straitness of the rule, not to the bendings of men's affections, for certainly,
either to be fiery hot in a false worship, or stone cold in the true; issue
forth (though at diverse heads) from one, and the same Fountain of self-love,
and meet at last, in one broad channel of opposition unto truth.

Mistake me not (My Brethren) as if I intended to justify you, either in your
arrogated zeal and sanctity, or in your bold charges of tepidity, and
luke-warmness against our former Bishops. I have only argued hitherto upon your
own Hypothesis, and modestly intimated, that (notwithstanding your pretended
zeal) you ought to have forborne your outrageous violence, in extruding of an
order of Divine Institution, though your charge charge of personal failings in
some Officers had been true. Much more should you have held your hands, when
some of your Consciences could not but bear you witness, that you accused many,
if not most of them falsely; for had all the Bishops been remiss, or lukewarm,
you could have had neither occasion, nor pretense to cry out so pitiously of
persecution under them. A cry, which formerly procured them envy, and malice;
you pity and compassion, but how deservedly, impartial Posterity may determine,
when the faithful Records of those, and the immediately following times shall
exhibit, many of your loudest complainers, equally as violent, and seditious
against all other Church Governments, although of their own erection.

But granting, without disadvantage to truth; that some of the Bishops were
faulty; others were not so, even by the confession of the most Rigid of your
Party; And what if more had been blame worthy, what is that to their Order?
Judas betrayed, St. Peter denied, all the rest of the Apostles forsook Christ
at his apprehension, and St. Thomas doubted the truth of his Resurrection, but
who ever charged their crimes upon the Apostolate? 1 Samuel 2.17.
Hophni and Phineas (the high Priests) were outragiously wicked, but who
excuses the peoples improvement of their distaste against them, to an
abhorrency of the offerings of the Lord? Who blames the fountain, which after
long running passes through miry, or boggy places? If the abuse, or accidental
corruption of things, take away their essence, and use, abolish we Preaching,
the Sacraments, and the Scripture, as well as Episcopacy. Nihil boni aut liciti
est omittendum propter scandalum acceptum hominum pharisaico ingenio
praeditorum. Amos. cas. consc. lib. 5. ca. 11. these. 12.
It Is a notable case of Conscience, and well resolved by Amesius, That no good,
or lawful thing is to be omitted, because men of a Pharisaical Spirit take
scandal against it.

But you will say, the estate of the inferior Clergy, and People, was corrupt
under the Episcopal discipline.

I answer, your endeavors to vilify the former are sufficiently known, and I
doubt not, but your partiality, and unbrotherliness, (to say no worse of it)
will in due time be manifested to the world by an abler Pen; I am resolved to
deal liberally with you, and to argue by concession. Granting therefore,
corrupt humors were formerly latent, in the body of the Ministry' Yet,

First, 'twas not, because there was no rule to restrain them. View The
Ecclesiastical Canons in England, A. C. 1603. Can. 75. And the other English
Ecclesiastical Constitutions in A. C. 1640. And then judge, whether they
tolerate, or prohibit vices in the Ministry. Who reads them shall find our
Church therein making whips of great Cords, to drive unclean persons out of the
Temple. But because the books are not in all men's hands, I will ttanscribe a
passage out of the latter, worthy of golden characters, and everlasting memory;
It runs thus. This present Synod straightly charge all Clergy men in this
Church, Constitutions, and Canons ecclesiastical agreed upon by the Archbishops
and Bishops in the year 1640 Canon. 10.
that setting before their eyes the glory of God, the holiness of their
calling, and the edification of the people committed to their charge, they
carefully avoid all excess, and disorder, and that by their Christian and
religious conversation, they shine forth as lights unto all others in all
godliness, and honesty; And we also require all those, unto whom the government
of the Clergy of this Church is committed, that they set themselves to
encourage godliness, and gravity, sobriety, and all unblameable conversation in
the Ministers of this Church. And that according to the power with which they
are entrusted, they diligently labor, by the execution of the above named
Canons, and all other Ecclesiastical provisions made for this end, to reform
all offensive, and scandalous persons (if any be) in the Ministry. as they
tender the welfare and prospering of piety, and religion, and as they will
answer to God, for those scandals which through their remisness, or neglect
shall arise, or grow, in this Church of Christ. Thus for the Canon,

2. Such corrupt humors were not broken forth into a Gangraena. Consult your
own Mr. Edwards, his four years observation of the state of the Ministry,
after your discipline claimed Praelacy in the Church of England, and compare it
with the worst, which has, or can be said of the Clergy, in fourscore years
before, and Judge righteous Judgment. Constitutions in 1603. Can. 26.


That the people were profane, is to be bewailed, not upbraided as the fault
of a Discipline. They were so, both in Christ's, and the Apostles times, and
under their Government, neither was due provision wanting in our time, to
restrain it, as in theirs, though succeselesly in both. Do not therefore impose
upon weak, and crazed Judgments, that for a cause, which is none, and suppose
the worst, even that too much indulgency was used toward those offenders, yet
consider frail humanity, wherein thy self bears a share, call to mind the
distraction, which fear of widening a Schism, might raise, even in the most
sober spirits, thou will find the very reason, why the power to revenge
disobediennce, and profaneness, was not more vigorously put forth, and executed;
Did thou, or the men of thy party occasion the fault, by your seditious, and
heady courses? do not acts the Devils part, and accuse the faulty. our
Governors faces could not be toward you, but their backs must be upon others.

There are two more grand exceptions (not for any weight in themselves, but for
their prevalency upon some men's capacities) against Episcopacy, the former is
drawn from the Covenant, the latter from the Lordly titles of the Bishops.
Reader lend me a little patience, while I answer both in order.

Obj. First, we are bound by a Covenant, as well to extirpate Praelatical
Episcopacy, as Popery.

Rep. I know this Covenant pretends both, unto the Word of God, and the Laws of
the land, for its president and warrant, but it cites no parallel case, Philip
Nyes covenant with narrative Page 12.
either in the one, or the other; This has not only been observed by your
Covenanters, but one of the compilers of this Covenant, durst tell the world,
not many years after its rigorous imposition upon the Nations, (as vouched by
both those Authorities) that, We read not either in divine, or humane history,
of the like extant in any age, as to the matter, persons, and other
circumstances thereof. History, and Law cases, I leave to the learned in those
Sciences, if any yet seek farther satisfaction in those particulars then the
printed Declarations of the several Parliaments of these Kingdoms, against that
confederacy; neither shall I trouble my self to seek after Mr. Ny's concealed
other circumstances; but will endeavor to prove that both for the matter of
the Covenant, and the persons of the Covenanters, there was something
unpresidented, both in the Composition ard imposition of it, and consequently
that it ought not to be tried against the Praelacy, or Episcopacy of the Church
of England.

I begin with the matter of the Covenant; Expect not (Reader) that I should
load my Pen, or thy patience, with the whole bulk of its Best reformed
Churches, liberties of the Kingdom, highest Judicatories, nighest conjunction
and uniformity.
aequivocal, Malignants, Incendiaries, evil Instruments, Schism.
Censorious, and Extirpation of Praelacy, or Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops and encouragment to other Churches to enter into the same, or a like
association or Covenant.
Injurious expressions; the two latter misbecoming reformed Christians of an
Evangelical Spirit, and the former most necessary to be avoided, in all Oaths,
which exact, or expect performance. All of them vastly different from the
Scripture qualifications of a Covenant. Jer. 4.2. Thou shall swear the Lord
lives, in truth, in righteousness, and in Judgment. My intent is to keep
close, and solely, to the matter of Episcopacy, covenanted against. The word
Episcopacy, is of a doubtful signification, our Covenanters found it to be so,
when to preserve their Government, and ministerial order, from extrusion by the
Covenant, they were necessitated to distinguish betwixt Scripture Episcopacy,
and Bishops, and English Episcopacy, and Bishops. But this Cobweb distinction
does not mend the matter of their Covenant, every one sees Passion, Self, and
Faction in it, and will believe it, till the Covenanters shall soberly, and
convincingly prove English Episcopacy, or our Churches retention of an order,
distinct from, and superior unto Presbyters, to be Antiscriptural; the
contrary is endeavored to be evidenced by the following Treatise. And if I
have successefully accomplished it, disingaged men will soon resolve, that the
matter of any Covenant approved by God in Scripture cannot be Parallel to this
national Covenant, which forswears an order of Divine Institution. And if this
Covenant do oblige Christ's office of Legislator, or high Priest, is vainly
confirmed to him by his fathers oath. Heb. 7.21. when men's subsequent oaths,
may disanul the Government, and reject his instituted orders of Ministers in
his Church. This single confidence of opposing, and the thrusting forth of the
Church, an order divinely appointed, is sufficient, not only to demonstrate the
corrupt materials of a Covenant, and the incapacity of any persons whatsoever,
to compose or impose it, but also to denominate it (with what ever titles
biased men apparel it) a league with hell, and death, not a Covenant with the
Lord. An engagement not fitted to procure Christ an unity, but to nourish and
foment Diabolical divisions. Neither let any imagine that these terms drop only
from the pens of enemies, to the Calvinistical model; for learned Zanchy, (as
Dr. Fern, Ferns certain considerations of present concernment, touching the
reformed Church of England Page, 107. London 1653.
from Dr. Du Moulin quotes him) affirms as much, he says, Testor me coram Deo,
etc. Or, I protest before God, and in my conscience, that I hold them no better
then Schismatics, that account, or make it a part of the reformation of the
Church, to have no Bishop's. Thus Zanchy. But leaving the matter of the
Covenant, come we now.

Secondly to to the persons Covenanting. They are considerable either.

1. As such, as are requisite to concur in the composition, and imposition of a
lawful, and obliging Covenant, and if such, or any of them were wanting in the
framing of this covenant. Then,

2. As such as did compose, and impose it. We find a failer in the former, and
therefore may call the persons subject, to our primary disquisition.

First, Persons deficient; the chief Magistrate is a person absolutely
necessary to concur in, and perhaps to contrive a national Covenant. 2. Chron.
23.3. And all the congregation made a Covenant with the King, in the house of
God, and he said unto them, behold the Kings Son shall reign, as the Lord has
said of the Sons of David. ver. 16. And Jehojada made a Covenant between him
and all the people, and between the King, that they should be the Lords people.
2 Chronicles. 34.31, 32. And the King stood in his place, and made a Covenant before
the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his Commandments, and his
Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all his heart, and with all his soul to
perform the words of the Covenant, which are written in this book, and he
caused all that were present in Jerusalem, and Benjamin, to stand to it; Read
also Nehem. 13.25. These were all Covenants made with, and by the consent, and
contrivance of the King, or chief Governor of Judea, neither do I find any
more then one called a Covenant in Scripture, which was made without, or
against the King. It is recorded Hos. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. Israel is an empty vine,
he brings forth fruit unto himself, according to the multitude of hi^ fruit,
he has increased the Altars, according to the goodness of his land, they have
made goodly Jmages; their heart is divided; now shall they be found faulty; he
shall break down their Jmages, he shall spoil their Altars, for now they shall
say, we have no King, because we feared not the Lord, what then should a King
do unto us, the have spoken words swearing falsely, in making a Covenant, thus
Judgment springs up as Hemlock in the furrows of the field. All the former
Covenants are directly contrary to our Covenant, for o^^ King not only was no
party in its composition, and disowned it after its imposition upon the people,
but commanded all his Subjects upon their Allegiance not to take it, nor was
this only hi^ Judgment in the heat of the War (when that Proclamation i^sued)
but afterward when God by unparrelled sufferings and i^ dignities had prepared
his royal soul for celestial enjoyment with the Spirits of just men made
perfect, he does in his king Portraicture, which are the last and most
spiritual breathings o^ the soul of that incomparable Martyr, thus express
himself The Presbyterian Scots are not to be hired at the ordinary rate^
Auxiliaries, (...). Cap. 14.
nothing will induce them to engage, till those that ca^ them in have pawned
their souls to them by a solemn league and C^venant. And again, Nor can such
after contract, devised, and imposed by a few men, in a declared party, without
my consent, and without any like power, or precedent from Gods, or man's laws,
be eve^ thought by judicious men sufficient, either to absolve, or slacken the
moral, and eternal bonds of duty, which lie upon all my Subjects consciences
both to God and me. The Covenant in Hosea, exactly agrees with ours, if which
were our Covenanters President, may they know it is a Covenant signally
witnessed against by the holy Ghost, and let them bewail all the Judgments,
which it has brought upon the Nations, and repent speedily of their perjury,
lest it bring more. But we will proceed unto the second sort of persons
Covenanting, who are

2. Persons efficient. The first Movers of our Covenant were

First, The subordinate Magistrates and Ministers, both of them unqualified to
make the Covenant, not only because they were separate from the chief
Magistrate, but because they were in Covenant before, and bound as fast as
Religion and Law could tie them. All of them by the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and some of them with the superadded Oath of Canonical obedience.
All which Oath's, as they were taken in the name, and presence of the most high
God, so they were prior and precedent to the Covenant. Now to evince the
competency of such persons, to make a Covenant contrary to their former
Covenant, must with all prove it lawful, and in the power of a Christian to
free himself of the obligation of one Oath by swearing another, that he will
not keep it. And then it is mere ignorance, and want of using his privilege,
which draws the guilt of perjury upon any called a Christian. Then Servants may
desert their Masters, Subjects rebel against their Prince, notwithstanding all
former contracts and Oath's, to serve and obey them, if they take a new
Covenant to the contrary. Then the Principles of reformed Protestant Divines
are more perjurious, then the resolutions of Jesuitical Casuists, Azo^
Institu^mo^al. To. 1. lib. 11. cap. 6. Sect. primo qua ri^ur Lugduni 1602.
who say, that If a man makes a promise to his neighbor, and afterward swear
to do the same thing for a third person, his Conscience is bound
notwithstanding his subsequent Oath to the latter, to stand to his word given
to the former. And then all distinction betwixt temerarious Oaths, and Oaths
made in righteousness, truth, and Judgment, may easily be removed and taken
away, to the utter abolition of all faith in societies. Calvin, tells us that a
temerarious Vow, or Oath is; viz. Qui vovet quod cum vocatione sua pugnat,
temerarius est Calv. Instit. Lib. 4. ca. 13 Sect. 3. Dico omnia non legitima,
nec rite concepta vota, ut apud deum nihil sunt, sic nobis irrita esse debere.
Calv. Instit. lib. 4 ca. 13, 20.
Who ever vows any thing contrary to his calling, is temerarious. Now whither
our Covenanters did Vow after that manner, let their own Consciences, and
unprejudiced men determine. If they did, may they consider what Calvin's
Judgment is of such a Vow, Vota in considerate suscepta necessario sunt
rescindenda. Id. ibid.
or Oath: He says. I say all unlawful or misconceived vows, as they are
nothing in Gods account, so ought we to esteem them unobliging. And again. Vows
inconsiderately taken, not only do not oblige, but are necessary to be
cancelled. And furthermore. I say there can be no obligation, where God
abrogates what man confirms. Suffice this to be spoken of the first sort of
persons efficient. Ego nullum fuisse vinculum dico, ubi quod homo confirmat,
deus abrogat. Id. ibid.


2. Persons absolutely resolved, ere they composed that Covenant, took it
themselves, or imposed it upon others to make a Schism, not only from
Episcopacy, which the Covenant abhorred, but from Presbytery, on whose favor
it seemed to be framed; and therefore they procured the Covenant to be written
in such an ambiguous style, as it might equally patronize their new fangled
notions, as Presbytery. Thus the Dissenting Brethren maintain against the
Assembly, Reply of dissenting Brethren to the Assembly before the Committee for
accomadation. Page 89.
before the Committee of Lords and Commons for accommodation. And were never
(that I hear of) checked by that Committee, or by the Parliament; contrariwise
their papers are licensed by the Parliament to be Imprinted. They say, Whereas
the conformity sworn in the Covenant, is now urged upon this occasion, and
continually upon the like, turned as that great Argument against us in Pulpits,
Presses, and ordinary Treaties, as if what we desired were contrary thereunto:
This Argument cannot hold against us, without an affixing of an interpretation
upon that part of the Covenant, and that according to our Brethrens Principles
only, who when we took this National Covenant were known to be of the same
Principles we are now of. And yet this Covenant was professedly so attempered
in the first framing of it, as that we of different judgments might take it,
both parties being present, at the first framing of it in Scotland. I shall not
aggravate this confession, let the sober Reader resolve how far a Covenant
thus attempered and framed, either obliges the Conscience, or complies with
the sin so heartily bewailed. Isa. 59.12.13. For our transgressions are
multiplied before thee, and our sins testify against us, for our
transgressions are with us, and as for our sins we know them. In transgressing
and lying against the Lord, and departing away from our God, speaking
oppression and revolt, conceiving, and uttering from the heart words of
falsehood. This shall suffice in answer to the first popular Objection against
Episcopacy. Proceed we to the

2 Obj. Some will say they are not simply enemies to Episcopacy, though
attended with some superiority over, and distinction from Presbyters. But this
offends them, the former Bishops were Lord Bishops; and the present succeed
them in those titles, which is most intolerable! It being so directly contrary
to our Saviors express command; Mat. 20.25.26. But Jesus called them ((...))
unto him, and said, you know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion
over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them but it shall
not be so among you.

Res. I answer; the Relative pronounce ((...)) or them, is diligently to be
observed, which refers to (...), or the ten, mentioned in the foregoing verse,
whose affectation, or assumtion of any honorary title, is not recorded, but
that they had indignation against their two fellow Apostles, or St. James and
St. John; i. e. they were passionately distasted against the presumptuous
request of those two Apostles, to have the chief places in Christ's Kingdom
bestowed upon them; wherein though the two Apostles were faulty, yet our
Savior compassionating their frailty, blames their brethrens indignation
against them, by an illustration of the tens too nigh compliance with Gentile
tyrants, in that their rage and passion. Whence we may observe, that though the
illustration speak of tyranical civil rule, yet the proposition illustrated
relates unto Christ's condemnation of Spiritual tyranny or rancour, and
sensoriousness of Spirit of some Apostles toward others. Neither can we but by
enforcing more from the Illustration, then is in the Proposition (which is
irreconcilable to solid argumentation) infer any thing from this Text, against
the present Titles of our Bishops.

But some will reply, and say, St. Luke repeating the same History, speaks of
the Apostles coveting a Title, or who should be greatest. Luke 22.25.

I answer, First, probably St. Luke does not cite one and the same History, or
refer to one and the same time, which St. Matthew for St. Mark: Mar. 10.41.42.
as well as St. Matthew assigns the indignation of the ten, for the occasion of
Christ's injunction; whereas St. Luke says it was the contenti^n of the twelve;
how ever more particularly to explain St. Lukes testimony, we say.

Secondly, Christ's condemning the affectation of greatness in in the Apostles,
either condemns all assumption of honorifick Titles, and exercise of authority
and dominion simply and absolutely* or limitedly, and under some qualification.
If it be affirmed that he does intend the former, I demand whither this be a
particular precept, concerning only those times, and Apostles, or a general
rule equally concerning them, and all succeeding Ministers and Christians. It
being well known that many of Christ's exhortations unto, and reproofs of his
Apostles, concern all Christians, as represented in them: Allow the former, it
is misalledged to disprove the present Titles of Church Officers; it being a
particular case, and not to be drawn into president to the prejudice of any
persons, whom it does not nominate. Grant the latter. First, so far as concerns
Apostles, or Ministers; it at once abrogates their power to exercise any
Authority, or rule in the Church, or accept any name, or title, not given them
by Christ, during the time of his Legislation, or continuance upon earth;
whereas nothing is more plain, then both their exercise of Authority and Rule,
read the Acts of the Apostles, the Epistles to the Corinthians, and unto
Timothy; and their acceptance of new titles, the words (...), and (...), all
containing honorable titles, common to Church Officers, and civil Magistrates
do as plainly evidence; they being never used of them in the Gospels, or before
Christ's ascension, but frequently in the Epistles, or afterward. Do any say
the holy Ghost imposed those names, which is all one as if Christ had given
them ere the Ascension? I answer, this will not remove the inconvenience and
contradiction, for if the former Scripture had absolutely excluded Honorifick
Titles; the holy Ghost could not have admitted them afterward without
inconsistency of his manifestations. Secondly, so far as it concerns the
generality of Christians, it rescinds the ties of al civil Authority, and
prohibits the Christian Magistrate to receive any honorary Titles, not expressly
allowed him by the mouth of Christ, while upon the earth, then both which
nothing is more contrary to Scripture for Government, see Romans 13.1. Let every
soul be subject to the higher power, for there is n^ power but of God, the
powers that be (the power which then was, w^ cruel, and persecuting Nero) are
ordained of God. 1 Pet. 2.13. Subm^t your selves to every Ordinance of man for
the Lords sake. whither it be to the King, as supreme. For Titles see Luke 1.3
there St Luke calls Theophilus (...). i. e. the best, the most potent
Theophilus.
most excellent Theophilus. Act 25.21. Nero is called Augustus, (...). i. e.
the divine, venerable, or to be worshipped.
or sacred. Act. 26.25. there St. Paul calls Festus, The same word which is
used by St. Luke of Theophilus.
most noble: We conclude therefore tha^ Christ's words, whither recorded by St.
Matthew, or by St Luke, are not to be taken s^mply and indefinitly.

Are they then to be taken limitedly, and under some qualification? they are
so, but to find out and assign their bound, would cost much, and difficult
inquiry. Did not other Scriptures tell us the Apostles aimed at Christ's
temporal Kingdom in this world, and the destruction of the present Jewish
Policy. Luke 24.21. But we trusted that it had been he who should have redeemed
Israel, etc. Act. 1.6. When they therefore were come together, they asked of
him, saying, Lord, will thou at this time restore the Kingdom unto Israel? This
no doubt was in their eye in the objected Text, neither am I the first, or
single person, De terreno Christi regr^ somniabant. Whitak. controv. to. 2.
cent. 4 quas. 1. S. 1.
who so conjectureth. Learned Whitaker says. In this their demand they dreamed
of Christ's Kingdom upon earth. This was it which Christ condemned in his
Apostles, but this is not condemnable in the Titles of our Bishops; the
Apostles sought an arbitrary power, and ambitious Titles, in the destruction of
the then Civil Government: Our Bishops receive a limited and legal Title, and
authority, for the support and maintenance of the now Civil Government. Such
props whereunto they are, Vid Zanch. Conf^ss fi^ei ca. 25. Aphoris. 25.
as our late and never to be forgotten experience sufficiently learns us, that
they cannot be removed, but the other immediately tumbles with them.

Their Titles then of Lords, are not reverseable by this Text, no more then an
extreme prejudiceth a virtuous mean, neither to deal plainly are such their
Titles proveable, or disproveable by Scripture, because they are of another
nature, and triable at another bar, which whether it give sentence for, By
strictly ecclesiastical, I understand what belongs to a Minister, by reason of
his order, not what belongs to him by reason of his degree dignity, or
jurisdiction, or what belongs to him in the Church, not wha^ bell ngs to him in
the Comm^nwealth.
or against them, let the objector consider.

That Church Officers, and Church Members, where the state is Christian, are
considerable in a double capacity.

First, in a Sacred, or strictly Ecclesiastical, wherein no trusts not
conceded, no Titles not imposed by Scripture, are assumeable by them.

Secondly, In a Civil and Political, In which respect, unless we will introduce
Papal exemption, or quaking Anarchy; Church Officers must do those duties, and
discharge those trusts which the Laws, or customs of the Nations wherein they
live, expect, and require from persons of their Estates, Interests, or
Qualities. That Christian Bishops may where the estate is Christian lawfully
concern themselves in Civil matters; and have done it many hundred years ago,
by, and under the authority of the Supreme Magistrate, without any
enter-fearing with their Spiritual offices, is at truth so fully a tested by
all sorts of testimony, as the Scriptures, the Fathers, and Calvin himself: all
quoted by Bishop Davenant in his eleventh question of his Theological
determinations, as more need not to be added. That this does not thwart St.
Paul's injunctions against being entangled with the affairs of this life. 2.
Tim. 2.3. may be easily evidenced. This text is sometime urged upon all men,
exciting them to forsake the world, and turn Monks and Hermits, so by many
blind Zealots in the Papacy; Other times it is urged against some men, or
Bishops, commanding them ot relinquish their Revenues and Jurisdiction, thus by
many impetuous Presbyters. The former notion is more ingenious, and carries
less partiality with it then the latter, that inviting all men to a voluntary
beggary, and levelling community, this extorting honors and estates from some
men, therewith to adorn and enrich their ambitions, or malevolous enemies.

But neither of them are true; for had a total abdication of the affairs of
this life, been negatively, and at all times, and in all cases enjoined unto
all men, we should not so often meet with the distinctions betwixt poor and
rich, bond and free, servants and masters, suhjects and Kings inserted in the
New Testament, nor was it a particular command to Church Officers, since St.
Paul spends not a small part of the Epistle to Timothy, to show him how
oeconomically a Bishop ought to govern his own house; and how Politically he
ought to proceed in the exercise, and infliction of Church Censures. See 1.
Tim. cap. 3. and cap. 5. Beza eying the design of Monkery, who principally urge
the text in vindication of their single life, tells them, and experience
confirms, that a Soldier (the metaphor of whose calling the Apostle follows in
this text) is not absolutely debarred from marriage, many of them marching with
their wives in company. But marriage draws along with it, if not all, yet the
greatest and sorest affairs of this life. 1 Cor. 7.33. But he that is married
cares for the things of this world how he may please his wife. The truth
therefore is, Civil Affairs are no more interdicted to a Bishop then to a
Soldier, to neither of them indefinitely, and absolutely, to both of them
casually, and upon special occasions, so far forth as they are inconsistent
with their callings, and avert them from their duties, and no otherwise, or
longer. This will be greedily devoured by some, who will forthwith say, we
grant all required by Antagonists. May they therefore digest our meaning, which
is, that by things inconent with a calling, and avertent from duty, we
understand all, and only such things as are singly and absolutely of that
nature, such things as at no time, in no capacity can be, a duty incumbent upon
the person concerned. A Soldier has several duties (to omit all others) as a
Soldier, as Victualling, Training, Scouting, Resting, Charging, Retreating,
Fighting, to enjoin him fighting where any of the rest is, his duty, and to say
he were no Soldier, what ever else his necessary occasions were, because he is
not always actually ingageed in fighting with his enemies is such an absurdity
as cannot impose upon any men, who have not made total shipwreck of their
understandings. Church Officers are Men, Subjects, Christians, as well as
Church Officers. In all these respects they have several and distinct duties,
and they (as other men) have their circumscribed and strict limits, they can be
in no more places, or engaged upon any more actions then one at one time;
therefore to urge the performance of all those duties upon them at once, and to
affirm they totally renounce one duty when they discharge another, is to charge
St. Paul with deserting Gospel-preaching, when he shut the opened door upon
himself at Troas, and went thence to compose the schism at Corinth. 2 Cor.
2.12, 13. Furthermore when I came to Tr^as to preach Christ's Gospel, In loc.
and a door was opened unto me of the Lord; I had no rest in my Spirit, because
I found not Titus my brother, but taking my leave of them, I went from thence
into Macedonia. Beside, to keep to the Point in hand, our Adversaries will not
say that an estate in this world does necessarily and unavoidably work those
effects of inconsistency with the Ministerial calling, avertency from its
duties. Since then they would not so undefatigably labor to work themselves
into the affections, and respects of rich men, and neglect no opportunity to
enrich themselves. Neither can they with any forehead affix the same ill
consequents to Civil authority, and grandeur, since both of them rightly
managed have (as Spiritual) an influence to encourage virtue, and discourage
vice. In a word intangling with the affairs of this life, principally consists
in a heady, arbitrary, and illegal intermedling with secular matters out of our
callings and places; whereof if the late Scottish Presbyters (who arrogantly,
and without any, unless it were an extraordinary call, interposed in almost all
Civil, Martial, and Criminal matters, generally without the authority, many
times without the consent, and sometimes against the peremptory command of the
Civil Magistrate) are not of all men in the world (hardly the Pope excepted)
the most highly and notoriously guilty, I shall be content to incur any just
censure from the worst of Readers. That our blessed Savior did refuse to
divide the inheritance betwixt the dissenting brethren, flowed from a
Political, not Moral incapacity; as appears by his own quaery. Luke 12.14.
(...), or man who made me a Judge? whereas had such civil actions been morally
inconsistent with his office, he should rather have used a positive negation,
that he could by no means meddle with such concernments, then a quaery, which
puts his refusal upon a civil defect, or his not being appointed to be a Judge;
which fully imports, that if he had been legally constituted, and placed in
that office, no bar in his sacred function could have hindered him from deciding
their difference St. Paul and Sylas are called Lords at Thyetyra Act. 16.30.
Sir: what shall I do to be saved; the word rendered Sirs is (...), Lords, and is
the most significant name in the New Testament to express the power, and the
authority of the most high God. It originally denoting a Lord from self
proceeding authority and essentiality. In both which respects, none but
Jehovah, eminently, and transcendently a Lord. And therefore he is called, 1 Timothy 6.15. (...). or the only Potentate; and King of Kings, and Lord o^ Lords.
But derivatively, it is a title elsewhere in Scripture given to Magistrates.
Act. 25.26. (...), or having nothing to write to my Lord ('it is there used of
the Rom^ Emperor) and to Ministers, Concerning titles of honor given to
Christ^an Bishops before Papal usurpation, read Bp. Downhams defense, lib. 3.
ca. 6. London. 1611.
as to St. Paul and Sylas in this Text And in the Old Testament of the
Translation of the Seventy it is given to Eli by Hannah. 1 Samuel 1.15. (...), or
not so m^ Lord. And to Elijah by Obadiah. 1 King. 18.7. (...); or art thou my
Lord Elijah? who incontinently owns ^hab, by that title V. 8. (...), or go tell
thy Lord, and But waving these and all other, both Old and New Testame^
instances, we shall confine our observation strictly to this ti^^ given by the
Jailer to St. Paul and Sylas; which though^ had proceeded from the custom of
the place, or the urbanity o^ the Speaker; the Apostles ought to have rejected,
or at le^^ St Luke should have entered their dissent, or his censure (...)
their consent to receive it; if such Honorifick titles had be^ simply, and
absolutely inconsistent with their Ministerial vo^^tion. But none of these are
done, the title stands fair upon the holy Record, as due unto, and deserved by
the Apostle And might they receive such titles from an inferior person, what
valid reason can be given, why their Successors may not receive the like, by
the Authority of the Civil Magistrate, especially since they receive them for a
Civil and most importantly necessary end, which is unremovable, while Pastors
enjoy any titles to temporal possessions, or while their flocks have any desire
to swallow, or devour them. The not distinguishing betwixt these two several
capacities in Church Officers, has nursed the cavil against our Bishops titles;
not that they were never separated until now, for they are distinct in their
natures, nor that the Bishops were not careful to maintain them distinct in
their administrations; for when did any Bishop derive, or challenge his power
to preach, ordain, confirm or censure ecclesiastically as a Lord of Parliament,
or when did he derive his Civil honors from the Episcopal Institution. His
relation to the Church and consecration by former Bishops, made him a Bishop,
but his Princes favor, and his interest in the Kingdom made him (as every
other) Lord. Neither ought he to be sent to his Bible, to prove his Title,
which he (as all of like dignity) holds by his Princes munificence, and the
Law of the Land. Besides as Lord Bishop, de has not more power in the Church,
nor would he have less then if he were not a Lord, because he holds his
Bishopric, and his Lordship by a different tenure, the one under King Christ,
the other under his lawful Sovereign. He may be as others are a Lord, and not a
Bishop, and he may be a Bishop and not a Lord, only a Bishop he must be, if he
lawfully do Episcopal works: A Lord he may be, if his Prince allow him that
Title. Furthermore, let it be well observed, this distinction is not only
fitted to secure the honor of Bishops, but it is necessary to be continued for
the indemnifying of the Civil Interest of the meanest Minister; for otherwise
if any Honors, Manours, or Lands descend to a Minister after he has received
holy orders (as who can with any modesty deny that many Ministers sprout from
honorable, or worshipful stocks) he ought not to own them, but suffer them to
fall into the Kings hands, or Escheat into the Lord Paramount, or come to the
next heir, lest by reason of those Honors, Manors, or Lands, he rransgress
the rule of Christ in the objection, by becoming a Baron, Lord, or Landlord,
and so exercise Jurisdiction and authority over his fellow Subjects, Suitors,
or Tenants. And finally; the London Presbyters when they found their ordination
by Lord Bishops to be objected by the Independent, or Brownistical faction, as
rendering their Ministry invalid, or at least their present standing
Antichristian. They are necessitated to keep at the same guard to maintain
their own order, as the Bishops do to preserve their honor. And give it the
world under their hands, that The Lordly titles of the Bishops were mere civil
additaments annexed to their Bishoprics by Kingly favor, not essential
ingredients to their office. Thus they. But I remember I am not to write a
history of former times, or to give a reason of other men's actions, but of mine
own. A controversy there is as the world knows betwixt us (for I must
acknowledge, Jus divin. 2 par. page 24. London 1654.
and do hereby profess my self to be Episcopal) my desire is, and I hope it is
also yours, that it may be ended; you pretend a divine right for your
discipline, the Bishops do the same for theirs. What way is there to compose
the difference? but either with the Socinian to cut the knot and deny all
divine right, or fairly to unty it; by declaring whose the Divine right is;
both of you cannot have it, necessary therefore it is to settle it with one;
least while we fight, and destroy one another for the shadow, we loose the
substance. Our late hazard whereof, I hope you have both seen and lamented.
This discourse has no other errand, then to present Christ's Institution to you
both, and show you the first formed Church, whereunto all succeeding Churches
ought to conform. I have sailed directly up to to the Fountain head, not lay at
Anchor, and rid in the Channel of after practice; If there the water flow sweet
and calm, do not trouble or seek to draw them into a new course, who ever
dug it; what is first is truest, if what you have opposed come up nighest to
the prime verity, do not kick against the pricks, or fight any longer against
God, or it.

How Mahumetanisme, and Papal tyranny at first invaded the Church, needs no
declaration, but least they, or a worse mischief at last overspread those
Kingdoms, let me beseech you in the bowels of our dear Lord, to beware of
dividing novelties, and to walk close by the footsteps of the ancient
Shepherds, and observe their tracks; Schism of all storms is the sorest, and
beats fiercest against the Ark of the Church, oh get a safe harbor so soon as
you can, for if it bluster and rage till their strength is over, your
weather-beaten souls will run a shore any where. Remember the shipwracks in
Julian the Apostates days, or if you please look but upon our own coasts for
these last twenty years. I would not reproach you, suffer me i^ faithfulness to
your souls, and to the Churches peace, to mind you what brambles have grown
under your shadows, out of which have come fire to destroy the Cedars of your
Libanon; does not Independentisme Anabaptisme, etc. call you father? though as
if they were by-blows, you are ashamed to own them for your children. Do they
not plead your Principles, use your engines against Episcopacy, to batter your
discipline? And say nothing but your tithes, and secular advantages, withhold
you from walking up a breast with them, unto your first and most righteous
pretensions: you account it a dart through the liver of Episcopacy, that
whereas St. Jerome says it was ecclesiastically instituted in remedy of Schism
and division, contrariwise it has not repressed, but increased them. And
consequently it is not of Divine Institution; But were his opinion, and your
inference true (as they are both most false) how strongly does this battering
Ram recoyl against your discipline? View it but since it was, or aimed to be
Paramount in the Church of England. What innumerable Sects have issued from it?
Where was Jndependentisme, Anabaptisme, Socinianisme, Familisme, Ranting,
Seeking, Quaking, till you opened the bottomless pit of Schism, and let forth
those Locusts? you would have your party to esteem your earnestness against
Episcopacy, to be an effect of Gods raising your spirits, and persuade
tractable and preingaged persons, that such strict men as you are, cannot be
acted by a sinful impulse; whereas many, if not most of the heads of the
forenamed Sectaries, All his latter scriblings.
are equally as blameless in their lives, and as bitter in their words against
your Discipline, as you are severe in your lives, or sharp in your tongues
against Episcopacy: Did the wrath of man work, or infallibly express the
righteousness of God, how sinful will your cause be found? For what scoff,
taunt, reproach, did you at any time cast upon Episcopacy, which these
Phanaticks have not retorted upon your Discipline, with advantage of greater
rage and bitterness, if it be possible? Who sees not the spirits of Penry, and
Barrow revived in Cretensis, and defense of the Apology against A. S.
John Goodwin! Retortion of the Smectymnuan arguments.
Saltmarch, Uniformity examined etc.
Dell, and your demy-martyrs Uniformities deformity
Burton and John Lilburn? Is not every Independent, and Anabaptist confession
of their faith so many several admonitions to you? Did not your dissenting
brethren censure your godly discipline in the Assembly Reasons against the
Presbyterian government, page 4. S. if not upon this ground. page 7. S. 2. It
brings etc, page 23. S. now it is granted.
oft-times for worse then Episcopal, and sometimes for worse then Reason
against subordination of standing Synods S. it is proved from what the
Prebyterian.
Papal; so certain and undeniable a truth it is, that those who spurn against
the right will submit to no other, but their own wrong way.

Do you say this was not the fault of your Discipline, but of factions,
ungodly, and unruly men, and although poor you, have sat beside the saddle in
England, yet your brethren ride in state in other places.

Res. This triple cord has no strength, a small twitch will break it asunder,
the blamelesness of the rule is equally pleaded by Episcopacy, confirmed by a
Divine right, and uninterrupted Ecclesiastical practice for above 1600 years,
whereas you have no Divine right for your new coined government, and the right
you have hardly exceeds the age of one man. All which time it has incessantly
been opposed by the contrary practice of all other Churches: All which I doubt
not to prove by the present Treatise, and that which shall shortly follow it
(if God will) concerning the Apostles. But your opposites were factious, good
words brethren; clear your selves ere you charge others, Episcopal men will
hear you, and tell you other men's turbulency against you, is a just punishment
of your factiousness against them. Your plea hangs totteringly now by one
slender thread, viz. your prevalency in other places; Be it so, consider when,
how, and in what you prevailed: A good cause may be unfortunate, when the worst
is crowned with success, Pompey is vanquished when Caesar is victorious, and
Josiah is slain when Pharaoh Necho triumph't. Where the cause is naught, the
means to effect it perjurious and indirect, its success is at best but
prosperous villainy. I have read, and who has not, how G, and S. obtained what
they have, were you treading in their steps, in the five years after 1640. what
argument could you have had, suppose you had prevailed to prove the goodness of
the cause, which Mahomet may not enforce in verification of his Alchoran;
certainly wresting of Scripture, and a conquering arm of flesh, are the main
stays of that abomination. Moreover let it be noted, his disciplinarians
contend with those, whom they account Infidels, you, with those whom you dare
not deny to be Christians; 12. Considerable cautions very necessary to be
observed in and about a reformation, according to the Word of God Cant. 12.
you may remember how John Goodwin concludes his cautions about a reformation
according to the Word of God; Is it not even thus? When either the Alchoran of
the Turks, or the Missal of the Papists shall appear to be according to the
Word of God, then may your reformation hope to partake of the same honor also.
Thus he.

'Twas not the least stumble, which I received ere I fell finally from a good
opinion of your discipline, to be told to my head by one of your most eminent
partisans, that the Church of England should never come under any other
Discipline but yours, unless she first waded up to the knees in blood; Sirs, is
this Christian meekness? Is this Christ's way to call sinners to repentance?
know you what you say, or of what spirit you are, when you rage after this
manner? Will Christ allow a bloody revengeful Spirit in Presbyters, when he
checked it in his Apostles? We read in Scripture, that our Savior came to save
men's souls, where read ye that he came to destroy them? we read that he founded
his Church in his own blood, where read you that he intends to propagate it
with the blood of other men? We read that he gave his back to the smiters, and
was meek and gentle, where read you that he commends rage and violence to his
Disciples? If you, or any else think his patience toward, and prayers for his
enemies, is no pattern for your imitation, yet consider his tremendous
application to his Apostles, of the masters severity against the unmerciful
servant; Mat. 18.35. So likewise shall your heavenly father do unto you, if ye
from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses. Si enim
hosts extraneos, non tantum vindices occultos agere vellemus, deesset nobis
vis numerorum and copiaram? plures nimirum mauri and marco-n ami ipsique
Parthi, vel quantaecun que unius tamen loci, and suorum finium gentes, quam
totius orbis? Externi sumu and vestra omnia implevimus? urbes, insulas,
castella, municipia, conciliabula, castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, palatium,
senatum forum? sola vobis relinquimus templa. Cui bello non idonei, non ptompti
fuissemus? etiam impares coptis, qui tam libenter trucidamur? si non apud istam
disciplinam magis occidi liceret, quum occidere. Potuimus ac inermes, nec
rebels, sed tantum-modo discordes, solius divortii invidia, adversus vos
dimicasse; Tertull. Apol. advers. gent. cap. 37.
Are there any other Scriptures which allow, and commend bitterness among
Christians, certainly the Primitive Church never took them to be part of the
Canon; otherwise Tertullian most vainly, trecherously, and unworthily did
betray the truth, by glorying of the readiness of the professors of his time,
to suffer martyrdom under persecuting heathens, when yet they were of
sufficient force to fight with them, and put it to the hazard of a victory,
whereof the Christians might have been assured, if it had been Gods pleasure to
engage them in a war. What will the same Scripture justify of your
slaughtering of your brethren for doing the will of God, which would not admit
Primitive Christians to slay heathens for opposing it? Cusanus was then in the
right, when he said, the Scriptures are always to be interpreted according to
the Churches current practice Wherein though he meant the Roman Court, she may
as justly claim that privilege as any other party whatsoever, she being both
the oldest, and greatest faction in the Christian world. Besides (brethren)
where is the liberty, and tenderness you plead for in the day of your own
distress? Can you destroy your brethrens bodies, and not persecute their
consciences: Are your imprisonments, and banishments, if not as evil doers, yet
as busy bodies, more precious in the eyes of the Lord then the death of your
brethren, who do their duties, and are ready to give an account of the faith,
and hope which is in them, with meekness and wisdom? Lay to heart what
mischiefs your fury, and great hatred has already done in those kingdoms,
before you think of doing more? how many habitations has it made desolate, and
without an Inhabitant? how many ancient and famous Cities and Towns has it
defaced? what orders in the Church and Commonwealth has it confounded? and how
many burning and shining lights in both, has it barbarously and brutishly
extinguished? What is all the blood already shed in England, and Scotland
nothing? will nothing satisfy your horse-leech appetite, but a second opening
of all the veins of the kingdom that you may drink the blood of Kings,
Captains, and mighty men? believe it sober Christians think, that a sea of
penitential tears will not wash away the scandal, which you, and the men of
your confederacy, or Covenant have brought upon the reformation, by
unparallelled villainy in 1648. they fear least that very action caused the
Protestants in Piedmont and Poland to stink in the nostrils of their Princes,
and that those poor souls are now crying under the Altar unto the Lord, to
require their blood at your hands. The perclose of your Covenant, alaruming all
Papal Princes to keep strict watch over their subjects of the reformed
profession, since therein by way of prayer you say, Read the Covenant.
That the Lord would bless your desires, and proceedings with such success, as
may be deliverance and safety to his people, and encouragement to other
Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of the y^ke of Antichristian
tyranny, to join in the same, or like association or Covenant. And since the
murder of our late gracious, now glorious Sovereigne, is alleged by the
principal Parricides to be pursuant to the Covenant, Because the preservation
of the Kings Majesty's person and authority (were alleged by them to be
inconsistent) together with the liberties of the kingdom, Read the Covenant.
and the preservation, and defense of the true religion. But it is time to close
this Paragraph, let me only tell you, if I had no other motive but the
opposition of your Spirits unto Scripture rule, it would have spurred me on to
study and publish this discourse; but I had another incitation previous, and
more prevalent, take it, as I shall not fear to give it, at Gods tribunal
another day.

Above four year since, having not long before received Presbyterial Imposition
of hands; Providence cast me into the company of one of the chief of that
Presbytery, we being private, he and I only in company, he delivered me an open
book into my hand, with a leaf turned down, against the argument for the
imparity of Ministers, drawn from the diverse institutions of the twelve
Apostles, and seventy Disciples, which he willed me to read, consider, and give
him my thoughts upon it, I did all but the latter, which struck me into horror
and amazement; I could as easily have given him an Empire, as my present
thoughts upon it, for neither of them were in my power; but God made a way for
me to escape the tentation, other brethren coming in to visit him in the mean
time, diverted us into other discourses; neither did he again require it at any
time afterward. Who was the author of this book I know not, it was a small
imperfect piece in 16. without either beginning or ending; which I only saw at
that time, for one quarter of an hour, and never afterward. But though I was
free of him, I could not so rid my thoughts of it; many were the reasonings,
and searchings of my Spirit why it was proposed unto me, and what use I was to
make of it, now it was proposed. Sometimes I feared it was offered to try my
resolution, or irresolution in my late engagement, but I soon overstrid this
block, not finding any cause for its laying before me, either in my intentions
or actions, because what I had done hitherto was in the simplicity of my heart,
and I always went with the forwardest in obedience to the commands of that
Society. Sometimes I doubted, least it were a Sathanical illusion to unfix my
thoughts, since it perpetually haunted me for many months, and I did a
thousand times adjure it, to surcease its solicitations ere I set Pen to paper.
But it would not leave me, and at last I could not leave it. This wondrously
perplexed me, how to dismiss it I could not tell, and how to follow it, I saw
not, but over innumerable precipices; Episcopacy being then ^hrown out, and the
extruding force, being as to humane ap^earance more united than ever; for this
cause I fasted, pray^d, and wept before the Lord, beseeching him to clear up
his mind unto me, and resolve me whether he would have me to desist, or go
forward, my will being pressed to yield obedience either way, according to the
intimation of his pleasure. I pretend no revelation, only took the ordinary
way, to quiet and settle my Spirit, but the more I fasted, and the more I was
resolved, that a necessity was laid upon me to study this controversy, and woe
was me if I did not do it. Whether this resolution were a return of prayer, or
an answer to the prepossession of my Spirit, the righteous God will one day
make manifest, for though I know nothing by my self, yet am not I hereby
justified, but he that judges me is the Lord. However resolved I was, and am I
hope (in his strength) to set upon it. But where to make my approach, cost me
some time and study; I diligently read over what ever I could buy, or borrow,
concerning the argument, and after much observation, saw the main hinge of the
controversy, hung upon the explication of the Evangelists proper office and
work, the Wight Divines in answer to the arguments of the late King Charles of
blessed memory, particularly unto that which concerned Timothy, and Titus, say.
And first t^ that of Timothy, and Titus, we grant that Timothy and Titus had
authority and power of ordaining Presbyters, and Deacons, and of exercising
censures over Presbyters and others, though we cannot say they had this power
as the Apostles substitutes or successors in the Episcopal government, but as
extraordinary Officers, or Evangelists, which Evangelists were an office in the
Church, distinct from Pastors and Teachers, Thus they; whereby it appears, that
the Evangelizate of Timothy and Titus, is the only reserve, encouragin^
Presbyters not to quit the field, and yield an entire victory to Episcopacy.
This their main strength is assaulted by this discourse with what success, time
and impartial Judgments must determine I arrogate nothing to my self, being but
a commanded man who fights under the banner, and conduct of the captain of the
Lords host, even our Lord Jesus Christ our Legislator, high Pries^ Apostle, and
Bishop of our profession; his is, and his alone be the glory of what is
effected, the shame mine, of every failer a^ miscarriage, whereat how numerous
soever they be, let not t^^ adversary triumph; for I am certain the work shall
be accomplished, though not by me, yet by others more able and wo^thy, that
Gospel ordinances may regain their ancient credit, an^ be effectual to their
former, and most glorious ends of perfec^ing of the Saints, working in the
Ministry, and edifying of the bo^^ of Christ, not any longer be subjected to
the designs, or pass^ons of corrupt men; and be continued or rejected, so far
a^ they carry on, or hinder Schismatical, Papal, or Machivili^ projects. That
Episcopacy is of a thriving genius, appears h^ an acknowledgment of Mr.
Baxters, when Presbytery had i^ greatest hopes of being settled, Episcopacy had
visibly the least hopes of being restored in the Church of England, ('it was at
Richard Cromwels entrance upon the pretended Protectorian Government, and the
book is dedicated unto him) he says. It is easy to see, that Episcopacy is
neither such an upstart thing, Five disputations. disput. 3. or an Episcopacy
desirable for the reformation, preservation, and peace of the Churches S. 14.
London. 1659.
nor defended with such contemptible reasons, as that the controversy is like
to dye with this age, undoubtedly there will be a learned and godly party for
it, while the world endures, unless God make by Illumination or Revelation,
some wonderful change upon the sons of men. That I think few men do expect. And
certainly we should do the best we can to prevent a perpetual dissension in the
Church. Were there not one praelatical man now alive, it were easy to foresee
there would soon be more. Thus he.

Some may object, my former contrary engagement to dis^nable me from this
service.

But therein they shall only repeat my own objections to, and against my self;
I thought, and do think my self unfit for this employment, for that and many
other reasons. I know my understanding is little, my acquired parts are
nothing, and my means to require them but one remove from nothing. I see
prejacent difficulties, great, and wel-high insuperable, this controversy
being the Acheldama, and Golgotha of Polemick Divines, what, whereof the false
reports of the wicked spies concerning the land of Canaan, is exactly verified.
Namely it eats up its Inhabitants; God knows I did not go upon this errand,
without many cold sweats and shrinkings, I often wished some body else had been
sent, and was ready to say to God, with Moses, Lord, send by the hand of him
whom thou will send. But go I must, I found no remedy, my comfort was, and is,
I did not seek it; But if a necessity be laid upon me, and against my will, a
dispensation is committed to me. Who am I to resist God? were past opposition a
ba^re against all future submission to truth. Christ would never have prayed
for Peter after he had denied, and forsworn him, nor would the other Apostles
have received him into their society, much less would the holy Ghost have made
him his mouth in his life time, and he being dead, yet speak to the Church in
his writings. Indeed Christ after his Resurrection bids the women go and tell
Peter what they saw, but although that relation primarily belonged unto him,
yet if it do not secondarily import our Saviors readiness to receive others
guilty of Saint Peter's fault, I know not how to make sense of what St. Paul
says Romans 15.4. For whatsoever things were written before time, were written
for our learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might
have hope. We read that Saul the persecutor, became St. Paul the preacher, and
God raises up Barnabas to work the brethrens affection to him, who before
refused to join themselves unto him Act. 9.26.27. Would men of greatest graces
consider how many Talents are forgiven them, they would never rigourously exact
pence from their delinquent brother, who professes penitence. St. Paul's
expressions to the high flown Corinthian Church, is worthily remarkable. 1 Cor.
5.9, 10, 11. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God?
And such were some of you; and were God as man is, inexorable for one or many
faults, all men might be damned, and deprived of the glory of God, because all
men have sinned, and come short of it. Let not therefore those sins which drove
me to the Lord to seek his pardon, be accounted unpardonable by men: Must we
not all stand at Gods judgment seat? who art thou that judges another man's
servant? to his own master he stands or falls; yea he shall be holden up,
for God is able to make him to stand. Would I cover my sin with Ad^m I could
retort this objection, and say, the worst which can be charged upon me will
come far short of their crime, who solemnly took their corporal oaths to defend
Episcopacy, and yet were the most active enemies to extrude it; that I now say
truth, I dare refer me to the judgment of any moderate Reader. And I could say
more, but these Fig Leaves are too dry and rotten to cover a sinful nakedness,
they have sinned, and I have sinned, our sins do not extenuate one another,
the Lord grant us all repentance unto life. Let the righteous smite me, it
shall be a kindness, and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil,
which shall not break my head, for yet my prayer shall be in their calamities.
Let Gods ordinances be precious, I cannot be too vile, for I seek not my own
honor, but theirs.

Thus I have given a faithful, and free account of my motives and ends in this
great undertaking. All which I commend (Dissenter) to thy serious perusal, and
consideration; look off the man and view the arguments; consider not who
speaks, but what is said. If that satisfy thee, know it is no dishonor to
stoop to truth, who ever deliver, or defend it. If thou art unsatisfied, answer
plainly, heartily, and fully to the whole argument, my reply shall either be a
friendly submission to thy judgment, or a fair reason why I cannot. Passion,
strife of words, personal invectives, and domineering over mangled sentences,
will do no business, and has undone too much already; my resolution is, has
been, and shall be to avoid them, if thou will do the like, what ever thou do
shall be welcome, since it can bring nothing but my conviction of an error, or
confirmation in the truth. Upon these terms I bid thee heartily, otherwise
eternally farewell.

Dan. Burston.
Junii 20. 1661.
THis page being otherwise vacant, I have since the press was delivered of the
rest, judged it convenient to transcribe the following acknowledgement of Mr.
Calamy Mr. Jenkyn, Mr. Love, and forty nine more Presbyters (thirteen whereof
were members of the Assembly) of the province of London (as they were then
pleased to phrase it) confirming my charge, page 18, 19. of the fruitless, but
passionate attempts of Presbytery to extrude Episcopacy, A testimony to the
truth of Jesus Christ, subscribed December. 14. 1647 and printed at London by
A.M. for Tho. Underhil, 1648
with the Midwifery of Schisms, Heresies, and Divisions into the Church of
England, viz. Instead of an establishment of faith and truth, we swarm with
noisome errors, heresies and blasphemies, instead of unity and uniformity, in
matters of Religion, We are torn in pieces, with destructive schisms,
separations, divisions, and sub-divisions; instead of true piety, and power of
godliness, We have opened the very floodgates to all impiety and profaneness;
instead of submitting to the Government of Christ, We walk in a Christless
looseness and licentiousness; instead of Reformation, We may say with sighs,
what our Enemies heretofore said of us with scorn, We have a deformation in
Religion; and in a word, instead of extirpation of heresy, schism,
profaneness, etc. We have such an impudent and general inundation of all those
evils, that multitudes are not ashamed to press and plead for a public,
formal, and universal toleration: This book came lately to my hands, and
against the forequoted passage, was smartly written in the margin, Fructus
hujus Parliamenti Amoenissimus, or, The most pleasant fruit of this Parliament.

To the judicious, and unprejudiced Reader.
Dear Sir,
THou have read a large Epistle, dedicated to another sort of men, and may
perhaps question why I stumble at the threshold, and neglect to salute thee.
Will thou know the reason? It Is neither out of carelessness, nor incivility, but
designedly, and of set purpose, because this whole Book is a kind of Preface,
unto a following discourse, unto which thou shall find herein a frequent
reference, namely the tract concerning Apostles.

What is writ, read freely. I will not forestal thy judgment, by telling thee
several, learned, godly, and judicious persons have encouraged me in this
design, though I could do it truly, and name time, place, persons and
expressions. Thou art at thy liberty; carry thy censure along with thy
judgment, I am not so in love with error, as to make my self a party, when thou
impleadest it.

Let me be thy remembrancer in one thing: This Tract to such as I presume thou
art not (men biased, or unexercised in this controversy) carries a face of
novelty; the Method, and perhaps some forms of speech, are different from what
generally in these latter times are used upon this subject, Respite therefore
thy censure, till thou have read over the whole; where I am singular, bid me
freely to stand forth and produce my reasons. Where others stand with me,
observe who they are, of what persuasion they are, and whether I had not reason
to allege them, in confutation, or confirmation, if not of somewhat mentioned
in this Tract, yet of some other thing, which thy reason may induce thee to
believe, may be hereafter more fully handled.

I have in this Tract primarily endeavored to evidence, and evince Scripture
matters, by Scripture testimony. But least I should be thought to wrest them to
my own, or any novel interpretation, I have very frequently cited the consent
of Authors, both Ancient and Modern, the most unquestionable, and approved to
my observation, when I first entered upon this task, I soly kept my self to
Gods Word, and Presbyterian Authors, that by the former I might be the better
enabled equitably to reprove, or approve of the latter. But afterward when the
substance of this Tract was finished, which was nigh three years since, I did
upon advice of learned friends, enter upon the filling up the vacant Margent,
and swelling the bulk of this book, as they now more appear; the most of my
quoted Authors I have diligently perused, and faithfully examined. And for the
rest, I d^ every where (to the best of my remembrance) acknowledge my debt t^
my Creditors, from whom I have borrowed them, and with whose stock I have
traded.

All that I have written (Judicious Reader) does earnestly effl^gitate, and
patiently await thy serious censure; I am free in wha^ I write, and dare tell
thee (even when the pen is in my hand ready t^ subscribe my name) that granting
the reasons to be equal, I can better bear thy reproach, then the applause of
other men. I am

Thine to love, and admire thee at a distance. Dan. Burston

THE EVANGELIST YET EVANGELIZING, etc.
AN Evangelist is a Scripture Native, who travailing through manifold
Translations, The question stated.
retains his name invariably in them all, and from first to last, from Original
Greek to our Mother Tongue, he parts with neither sense, nor sound, only stoops
to Transcription in a more familiar Character. Castalio, who Translates the
Bible by Ovids Metamorphosis, and justles out almost all Ecclesiastical words,
to place Classical in their rooms, as Legates for Apostles, Commonwealth for
Church, Genii for Angels, vouchsafes the Evangelist to retain his name, in Ephesians.
4.11. But although universal consent meet in the Evangelists name (whether
names are not now affixed as an Index unto things, or men mufling their eyes
with passion, or partiality, will not, or cannot see to what ^age they point,
or a rending from the love of God, immediately divorceth from his wisdom, or
some other, and more secret cause, the indubitate effect of an enraged deity,
actuates our distempers, it is most certain that) his office is the common
anvile whereupon our flaming controversies are incessantly, and alternately
hammered. I dare not, neither need I walk in the sparks of those fires, for a
written word is the only directive beam in this way, which as the Sun is all
men's light, but who walks by it is my part to enquire, the readers to judge.

Begin we from his Definition, which is the only sure foundation to a well
built discourse. Presbyterian definitions of the Evangelist force into the
discourse.


An Evangelist is --

But hearken! what Stentorean voice pierces mine ear? with what noise and
clamor am I told this foundation is already laid? Can the man do any thing but
what is already done, who comes after Calvin, Beza, Faius, Zanchius, Aretius,
Polanus, Bucanus, Vrsinus, Paraeus, Wollebius, Spanhemius Maretius, and the
Presbyterian Divines of the Province of London? All which have unannimously,
and according to Scripture defined this officer.

Sir who ever you are, I hear! I hear! and beseech you to forbear your
vociferation; your face and name, indeed I know not, but think I apprehend your
tribe, by the precise recital of your Genealogy. The numerousness of the names
I allow, but must dispute the quality of the Definers; whether they be all of
sufficient age, to depose in this matter; or whether they be not all of a
party, and packed to give testimony in prejudice of truth. Certainly the smooth
chin of your Patriarch Calvin, brings him under a shrewd suspicion of nonage,
especially since he (the Evangelist) pretends to very great Antiquity: And if
Calvinists may be credited in their writings against Episcopacy, has left his
Church station for as much above fifteen hundred years, as Calvin is aged,
above one hundred. And for the rest, Beza, Faius, Zanchius, etc. Are they not
all confederates with Calvin? May not Theophrastus and Bombast, as well be
accounted distinct persons in Paracelsus his name, or the most tedious Welsh
Genealogist be metamorphosed into (...) many several shapes, as he reckons Aps
in his pedigree, a^ the major, if any part of them be dogmatically diverse from
Calvin. For he contrived a new A very strange thing sure it were, that such a
discipline as you speak of, should be taught by Christ, and his Apostles in the
Word of God, and no Church have found it out, or received it, until this
present age. Hookers preface to his Eccles. Policy Sect. 4.
module of Divine Worship, (to whose establishment his opinion of the
Eva^gelist, gave the greatest assistance) and they as his officious Heralds
proclaimed it to be a second Dianas image, let down from Jupiter: No wonder
then if they all agree, but it were indeed admirable (i^ prudent men had not
long since observed, how God has mingled a spirit of perverseness, and
contradiction among the heads, and leaders of that party) that there should be
one dissenting brother. Our business is not to dispute their unity (ere we
close the examination of their Definitions, we shall show how well they hang
together) but to examine their several Definitions, which phrase witnesses
sufficiently against their boasted unanimity, for to what purpose is there any
more then one, if they be all agreed in a Definition. Calvin's Definition.


It Is time to hear themselves speak, Calvin begins thus.

By an Evangelist, I understand those who being less then the Apostles in
dignity, are next unto them in office, and therefore supplied their places,
such were Luke, Timothy, Titus, and such like, Per Evangelistas eos intelligo,
qui quum dignitate essent Apostolis minores, officio tamen proximi erant,
adeoque vices eorum gerebant, quales fuerunt Lucas, Timotheus, Titus ac reliqui
similes. Fortasse etiam, 70. discipuli quos praeter duodecim Christus
designavit.
perhaps also the seventy Disciples, whom Christ chose in the second place
after the Apostles. He proves his whole Definition, and the comprisal of Luke,
Timothy and Titus therein, by Ephesians. 4.11. in Margin.
Ephesians. 4.11. the Evangelizate of the seventy, by Luke 10.1. in margin. Calv.
Instit. lib. 4. ca. 3. Sect. 4 Genevae. 1592.
Luke 10.1.

Beza and Faius, thus. They bear the name of Evangelists, Beza and Faius their
definition.
whom the Apostles used as companions, and fellow-helpers, hecause they
(Apostles) alone, could not supply all Churches upon all occasions, such were
Timothy, Titus, Sylvanus, and others: Evangelistarum nomine intelliguntur ii
quibus comitibus and (...) utebantur Apostoli, quod ipsi omnibus rebus, and
ecclesiis, non possent soli sufficere. Cujusmodi erant Timotheus, Titus,
Silvanus, and alii; Erat autem officium eorum peragere inchoatum, vel aliter ab
Apostolis demandatum opus, in constituendis ecclesiis, ut praesertim ex
epistolis ad Timotheum, and Titum liquet, quorum etiam munus temporarium fuit.
Evangelistas autem alia angustiori significatione vocamus quatuor illos quorum
opera usus est dominus, ad evangelicam historiam scriptis tradendam, and
ecclesiae christianae primordia describenda. These. Theol. in schol, Geneven,
sub Beza and Faio proposit. and disputat. disputat. 72. Genev. 1586.
Their office was, to perfect what was begun, or do other work committed to
them by the Apostles, in constituting Churches, as eminently appears by Paul's
Epistles to Timothy and Titus: Their charge was temporary. In a more restrained
sense those four are Evangelists, whom the Lord employed to write the Gospel,
and register the birth of the Christian Church.

This Definition or description, brancheth forth into many more particulars
then Calvin's, but has less root of Scripture Proof; Indeed it makes a braving
flourish of three whole Epistles, but cites no one, either chapter or verse,
neither is the word Evangelist any more then once used in all those Epistles;
where we doubt not to prove, that it signifies no such officer as they here
describe. Time was, when Rome her self could not have passed into the Church
with so much new doctrine, unquestioned by her faithful Sentinels; how
leasurely did she ascend, and climb most steep rocks of rugged opposition, by
the space of a thousand, and some hundred years ere she reached the estimation
of an infallible chair; whose arbitrary Traditions (such they are, although she
call them, till she prove them Apostolical) and the sacred Oracles ought to be
embraced by all Christians, with a like veneration and pious affection: But
Geneva, well fare her heart, quietly sets down in it, in less then half a
Century. A main argument against the worlds universal decay, and clear
justification of the scandalized Paradox that the present is every way superior
to the precedent age. Zanchius his definition.


Evangelistae, qui ab evangelio vel praedicando, vel conscribendo, ita nominati
fuerunt; proinde etiam novum est nomen, novi testamenti temporibus reservatum.
Qui autem evangelistae vocarentur, breviter dicam quod sentio, edoctus e sacris
litteris. Illi mihi fuisse videntur, qui ab Apostolis aut secum assumpti, ex
revelatione Christi, aut aliquo missi, cum ipsorum authoritate, vel
praedicabant evangelium, modo hic, modo illic, nempe ubi jam ecclesiae non
erant abapostolis fundatae. vel evangelicas historias, summamque doctrinae
evangelicae literis commendabant, juxta priorem sensum Apostolus scribens 2.
Tim. 4. ait opus fac evangelistae i. e. praedica evangelium, fuerat enim
Timotheus, a Paulo creatus episcopus. Et sic etiam Act. 21. Philippus diaconus
vocatur evangelista, juxta alteram significationem intelligo Marcum, and Lucam,
proprie fuisse evangelistas, Mattheum, and Johannem, and Apostolos, and
Evangelistas; neque haec species ministerii, si proprie loqui velimus, locum
jam habet in ecclesia, etsi enim multi sunt, qui singulari gratia donati
praedicant evangelium, aut etiam evangelicam doctrinam in libris propagant, hoc
tamen non faciunt autoritate accepta immeditate ab Apostolis ut Marcus, and
Lucas, Timotheus, Titus, and alii, aut ab ipso Christo, ut Mattheus, and
Johannes, sed accepta a magistratibus; aut ecclesiis. Zanch. in quart.
praecept. Neostadiis Palatinat. 1577.
Zanchius thus. Evangelists are so denominated from writing, or preaching the
Gospel; their name is new, and reserved to new Testament times. What they were
I shall briefly teach others, as I have learned out of holy Writ. They were in
my opinion, either such as the Apostles took with them, by the Revelation of
Christ, or sent forth with Apostolical Authority to preach the Gospel, now
here, now there, where the Apostles had not founded Churches. Or they were
Gospel-writers. According to the former sense, the Apostle writing to Timothy,
2. Tim. 4. says, do the work of an Evangelist, that is, preach the Gospel, for
Timothy was before ordained bishop by St. Paul; In this sense also, is Philip
the Deacon an Evangelist, Act. 21. In the latter sense, Mark and Luke were
properly Evangelists; Matthew, and John, both Apostles and Evangelists. To
speak properly, this officer does not now continue in the Church, for although
many endued with special grace, do preach the Gospel, or defend its doctrine by
their writings, yet they do it not by authority immediately derived from the
Apostles, as Mark, Luke, Timothy, Titus and others, or from Christ himself, as
Matthew, and John, but by authority derived from the Magistrates, or Churches.

Aretius thus. Aretius his definition.
Evangelists obtain their name from preaching the Gospel, they were next to the
Apostles in office. inferior in dignity, not necessitated to preach every
where, Evangelistae ab evangelii praedicatione, nomen habuerunt; Apostolis
proximi officio, dignitate inferiores: non incumbebat iis necessitas ubique
docendi, nec instituebant novos caetus, sed Apostolorum doctrinam conservabant,
and in certis ecclesiis docebant. Vt Philippus in Caesarea. Act. 8. ult.
Timotheus, 2 Timothy 4. juebtur docere evangelium. Alias significat scriptores
Evangelii, quo sensu, quatuor tantum habemus Evangelistas. Aret. problem. loc.
62. Ex^us. per Johen. le Breux. 1617.
neither did they institute new churches. but were conservators of the Apostles
doctrine, and taught in certain Churches. Thus Philip at Caesarea, Act. 8. the
last verse. and Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.5. is bid to preach the Gospel; otherwise it
signifies Gospel writers, in which sense we have only four Evangelists.

Polanus thus. Evangelists were next unto the Apostles in office, Polanus his
definition.
and as their companions, and fell w laborers, did supply their places, their
work was in the Apostes company, Evangelistae fuerunt, qui ab Apostolis officio
proximi erant adeo que vices eorum gerebant veluti Apostolorum comites, and
(...), qui una cum Apostolis, ac jussu illorum evangelium praedi^abant apud
questis. Quales fuerunt Lucas, Marcus, Timotheus, Titus, and Philippus Act. 21,
8 Polan. Partit. Theol. lib. 1. page 226. Genevae 1626.
or by their command to preach the Gospel any where, such were Mark, Luke,
Timothy, Titus, and Philip. Act. 21.8.

Bucanus thus. Evangelists were the Apostles companions, Bucanus his-
definition.
fel^ow-labourers, and Colleagues, not ordained by Christ himself without an
intervenient humane Ministry, but chosen by the Apostles, Evangelistae comites
(...), and (...) Apostolorum, non ab ipso Christo. i. e. nullo hominum
interveniente ministerio, sed ab Apostolis ipsis electi, aut assumpti; ut vices
eorum in rigando, and superstruendo, and ei quod susceperant operi perficiendo,
and evangelio praedicando, modo in uno, modo in alio loco, quasi subsidiarii,
and veluti s^cundarii quidam Apostoli, non in una tantum ecclesia, sed in
pluribus ecclesiis g^rerent, and pastorum oppidatim constituendorum and ordinis
sacrorum in ecclesiis ad quas missi fuerunt instituendi, jus, and protest^tem
haberent idque tanti sper dum ab Apostolis revocarentur, quales fuerant
Timotheus, Lucas, Marcus, Tychicus, Titus, Philippus, and alii Sive ex illis
70. discipulis quos dominus designaverat, sive ex alis asciti. Angustiore
significatione, quatuor illi spirisancti amanuenses quorum opera usus est
dominus, ad evangelicam historiam Christi scriptis tradendam, and ecclesiae
Christianae primordia describenda, quorum duo Marcus, and Lucas, Apostolorum
comites, and evangelistae, duo vero alii, Mattheus, and Johannes, Apostoli, and
Evangelistae fuerunt. Bucan. loc. com. loc. 42. qu. 17. Genevae. 1630.
or taken with them, as a kind of auxiliary, or secondary apostles, to sup^ly
their places in preaching the Gospel, sometime in one place, other while in
another; and in watering what was planted, and building upon the foundation
laid by the Apostles, not in one, but in many Churches; for the accomplishment
of which task they had a right and ^ower (till they were recalled by the
Apostles) to appoint, and put pa^ors into holy orders in every city. Such were
Timothy, Luke, Mark, Iychicus, Titus, Philip and others, whether of the number
of the seventy desciples, whom our Lord ordained besides the twelve, or chosen
out of others. In a stricter signification, the four Gospel-writers were
Evangelists, but so as Mark, and Luke were Apostles companions and Evangelists,
Matthew and John both Apostles and Evangelists. In proof of all this he cites
in his margin. Tit. 1.5. Act. 16.3. 2 Timothy 4.5. v. 11.12. 2 Cor. 8.23. Act.
21.8. Luke 10.1.

Ursinus and Pareus their definition.
Vrsinus and Pareus, thus. Ministers mediatly called, were first Evangelists,
who were the Apostles helpers, and by them sent to teach diverse Churches. They
quote no Scripture for this definition, as neither did Polanus before, Mediate
vocati sunt primo evangelistae, qui erant adjutores Apostolorum and mittebantur
ab Apostolis ad docendum varias ecclesias. Catechis. Vrsinc-Parean. part. 3
quaes. 103 Francofurti. 1621.
nor does Wollebius, nor Maresius, after them.

Wollebius his definition.
Wollebius thus. Evangelists were the Apostles companions, and supplies.
Evangelistae Apostolorum comites, and succenturiati. Wolleb. compend. Theol.
lib. 1. ca. 26. Londini 1647.


Spanhemius his definition.
Spanhemius thus. Evangelists were Apostolical men, who either besides the
Apostles labored by Divine inspiration, and conduct in Gospel-writing,
Evangelistae fuerunt viri Apostolici qui vel praeter Apostolos; evangeliis
scripendis manum divina inspiratione and ductu admoverunt; Vel Apostolis
vicariam operam in constituendis, sive gubernandis etiam ecclesiis
praestiterunt, quales fuerunt, Sylas, Timotheus, Titus, and alii. Spanhem.
disputat. Theol. disput. de ministerii ecclesiast. v^cat. Genevae 1652,
or they were vicar-Apostles, in constituting and governing Churches, such were
Sylas, Timotheus, Titus and others. His proofs are Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.9, 10.

Maresius his definition.
Maresius thus. The four Gospel-writers, are by way of eminency called
Evangelists, and not only they, but those also whom the Apstles elected,
Evangelistae dicuntur non autem (...), quatuor illi spiritus sancti amanuenses,
in historia Christi describenda, sed etiam comites, and (...), Apostolorum, ab
illis electi, and assumpti; and subinde huc, illuc, emissi, ad opus quod ipsi
caeperant rigando, and superstruendo, peragendum; quales Timotheus, Titu^,
Marcus, Lucas, and alii, sive ex 72. discipulis, quos Christus designavit ad
tempus, sive aliunde asciti. Mares. System. Theol. loc. 15. Sect. 47. Groningae
1656.
and took into fellowship, as their companions, and fellow laborers to travel
hither and thither, to finish the work begun by the Apostles, in watering what
the Apostles had planted, and raising the superstructure where they had laid
the foundation, such were Timothy, Titus, Mark, Luke and others; whether of the
number of the seventy two Disciples, commissionated by Christ for a time, or
chose^ elsewhere.

The Presbyterian Divines of the province of London thus. Evangelists properly
so called, were men extraordinarily employed in preaching the Gospel, without
any settled residence upon any one Charge, Jus divin. 2. part page 68. London.
1654.
they were comites and vicarii Apostolorum (or the Apo^tles companions and
vicars) and they had curiam vicariam omnium Ecclesiarum (or the vicariate
charge of all the Churches) as the Apostles had curam principalem, (or the
principal charge.) And they did as Ambrose says, Evangelizare sine cathedra,
(or preach without a chair, or episcopal residence.)

These names counted, beginning at Calvin, The exceptions are twofold against
this Jury of definers.
and ending with the London Presbyters, number more then a Jury, upon whose
verdict the Evangelists cause is by many taken for adjudged, by more it is
thought to be misjudged; I am of the latter opinion, and shall take leave to
speak somewhat in arrest of Judgment; Reader thy Reason and conscience are the
upper bench of my appeal, my exceptions are

1. They have not proceeded according to their evidence. First they have not
proceeded according to their evidence.


2. They are not agreed in their verdict. Secondly they are not agreed in their
verdict.
We shall prosecute these in order.

First, They have not proceeded according to their Evidence; The crime is
heinous, proved, it will lie heavy upon their memory, unproved, it will as much
oppress our reputation. The first exception charged, and proved in nine
particulars.
It Is in vain to word it, either in a complement to our Reader, or an Apology
for the attempt, the dye is cast, the charge is given in, we are bound to see
the issue, and abide the Judgment. We impeach first the foreman Calvin, who
ranks the Evangelist next in office, First Except. the Evangelists were not
next in order to the Apostles
though inferior in dignity to the Apostles. Aretius and Polanus dutifully
observe, and write after his copy; but what Scripture guided their Pens? what
text did they lay before them to write by? Indeed Calvin cites Ephesians. 4.11.
where, if there it be proved, either the textual order and method, obviates it
to all capacities, Calvin's cited text does not prove it either.
at first view and reading, or the Apostles scope showing more closely,
reserves it to the search of more piercing Judgments. Any of these
(confessedly) is sufficient, but the former (as being less liable to dispute)
is rather to be expected in such positive determinations; for where the
intricasie, or darkness of allegations, inforceth a Judge to fetch a compass,
and arise gradually to the pitch of resolution, the principles of ordinary
prudence require more suspensness, and wariness, though his decisions be
probable deductions, not peremptory conclusions. But Calvin defines resolutely,
let us see whether the order of the words, or the writers sense, or either of
them will warrant it.

First in order of the words translated.
First, the Grammatical order of the words, exemplified in our translation,
leads in the Prophet before the Evangelist, and immediately following upon the
heels of the Apostles. We there read. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, etc. Calvin says the Evangelist, and St. Paul
says the Prophet is next to the Apostles. We trust the reader will not be long
resolving which to credit, for unless the Prophet be the Evangelists copula,
and knot of conjunction with the Apostles; Prophets, not Evangelists, are next
Apostles. And Calvin defining the contrary, inverts St. Paul's order, which is
not only his, but the holy Ghosts also: Definitions, or descriptions (such
Calvin's most properly is) ought to explicate things, or persons by certain
properties, or distinctively operative powers, known, or acknowledged to be
theirs, by artists skilled in their appendant sciences. But this Definition, or
description, contrary to all rules of art or reason, waves what is
acknowledged, elects new Principles, and proceeds contrary unto them. That the
Evangelist is the news-bringer of Christ and his righteousness, unto
unbeleevers the notation of the word, many plain Scriptures, and the unanimous
exposition of the godly and learned Ancients, do abundantly testify and
irrefragably prove. But this is too short for Calvin's purpose, a new house must
have a new foundation; what has been said is not worth observing; the
Evangelist is an officer next Apostles, and a text where the holy Ghost places
Prophets next Apostles proves it.

Protestants complain bitterly against Papal tyranny, in locking up the sacred
oracles, under an unknown tongue from the people. Contrariwise, they expose
that treasury unto vulgar inspection, and assign many fair reasons for their so
doing. Bu^ if they take such a wide liberty to sense, and interpret it contrary
to the holy Ghosts express method, and to the ordinary interpretation of words
of the most plain and univocal signification (such the words separating the
stations of Church Officers in this text are) where is the reformation? Does
not their tyranny exceed Pontifical, indifferency being umpire? For Papists,
beside a long prescription of many years corrupt custom, outing the people of
this privilege, add a seeming reason to wit least ignorants should wrest those
same hard things in Scripture, unto their own destruction: A reason though
plausible, yet no more conclusive, or rational, then an obstinate debarring of
all men from tasting of those meats, or drinks, wherewith some overgorging
their stomachs, do or may surfeit. But Protestants though they importunately
plead Gods design to familiarize his revealed will unto the meanest capacities,
that all men may ^now the things which are freely given them of God; And though
^hey professedly maintain the evidence, perspicuity, plainness, and facility of
holy Writ to be understood; and its necessity ^o be observed and practiced (by
all who can read, and under^^and it, or have it read, and commended to their
understand^^gs by others) and that those main wheels give motion to these
^^sser ones, of their endeavors to translate, and transcribe them unto
maternal languages: Yet by their expositions, they do e^^nally obscure, and
hide them from common observation, in a ^ulgar, as in a foreign Dialect, for not
to go beyond our Tedder, ^ay not a private English Christian as easily
translate the origi^al, as suppose this translated text, approximates the
Evange^^sts to the Apostles, because he there reads in plain English, and he
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets and some Evan^elists.

Secondly, Secondly or original.
Will not the translation bear the Evangelists nextness to the Apostles, the
original sinks deeper from under it. We there read. (...). Here each officer
has his prefixed article, which elsewhere is allowed, either to distinguish
one person, or thing from another, or to demonstrate the writers singular
intentives upon what he handles. Give we it which of those two significations
we please in this text, any of them will strongly maintain the exactness of its
order. Besides St. Paul (as foreseeing and intending to silence all after
disputes) does not trust it ^^ngle upon the article, but double rayles the
station of each officer, as well with the particle (...), as with the before
mentioned Article. I know this particle is very often used, and according to
the several exigencies of the places, it becomes Polysemous, or of diverse
significations. But this text will only admit it to have a discretive
signification; for instance, it is sometimes in other places rendered
adversatively. But, First best expositors, shut the door of this text against
it, unanimously ^ranslating it, by autem vero, so the vulgar, Beza, Piscator.
Secondly, an adversative reddition, In loc.
would be inconsonant to the Apostles scope, which is, the enumeration of the
Christian Church Officers; who though they are distinct, are not opposite,
because all are instituted by one Christ, all are related to one Church, and
all even by the assignation of this text, have common works appointed to them,
even the perfecting of the Saints, the work of the ministry, and the edifying
of the body of Christ. Thirdly, Grammar rules, and the authority of all
Idoneous Authors, with one mouth reclaim against the treble adversativeness of
any particle unto it self, without an intervenient redditive, but such were the
adversativeness of this Particle, if that were its signification in this Text.
Sometimes again this Particle (...), is rendered causally, (these two are its
most, and most usual significations, besides the signification which we insist
upon, and only can pretend any tolerable title, to a place in this Text) but
neither will the Text admit thereof, because the subject of the discourse i. e.
Church Officers have a preassigned causality, namely, Christ's ascending,
descending, and giving gifts unto men; the declaration of the effects of which
cause, is this 11. and the following verses. It is therefore most manifest,
that nothing can be more notoriously convicted of error and falsehood, by the
literal exposition of Scripture (which if it be not the only, ought to be the
most general, and is the most safe way of expounding Scripture) then this
Presbyterial notion of the nextness of the Evangelists to the Apostles Examine
we it either by the Translation, or original Text, and that no criticisme can
avoid the exactness of its order. I am not ignorant that there are some, who
undervalue what they do not understand, and to spiritualize their own
barbarism explode all literal senses, especially when squared by Grammatical
rules, whom though I can pass by in their own persons, and leave them vainly to
bark against an unreachable Moon, ye^ least their error creep into the
affections of some ingenious, bu^ less wary Christians, let them know
Grammatical criteria's, never more duly take place, then in the decision of
questions about the order, proper, and most usual significations of word in a
sentence. And that of all other, Presbyterians have leaf cause to disallow
them, unless being Posthumous babes of ignorance, or born since the death of
their learned fathers, Calvin, Beza, Piscator, etc. they are unacquainted with
their critical eminencies: But enough of this digression, and since it is
needless to return where we began it, proceed we to what remains.

Secondly it is not proveable by the scope of the text.
Secondly, the Evangelists nextness to the Apostles, is equally disprovable by
the scope of the Text; as by the Grammatical order of the words. It concerns
the Churches unity, when gathered, and governed, by all officers of Christ's
appointment. The London Ministers call the Text (deservedly) the great Charter
of the Ministry. Calvin says, Jus divin. 1. part. p. 39. penitus sacrum, and
spirituale regimen, quod posteri Hierarchiam dixerunt. Calv. instit. lib. 4.
ca. 6. sect. 10. Hierarchiam revera non delineavit, sed Hieroduliam Ames Bell.
enerv. To. 1. page 136. Amstelod. 1628.
it entirely describes the Churches sacred and spiritual government, which men
of after times called Hierarchy: Calvin grumbles, but Amesius scolds out right
at the word Hierarchy, he says, in truth it does not describe an Hierarchy,
but an Hieroduly. Which with Reverence to his Revera, is a fond, unnecessary,
and dangerous distinction. It Is a dangerous distinction. For Christ has
appointed a government in his Church: A government indeed subserving his
Authority, and securing the peace and welfare of the governed; but if therefore
it loose its denomination, and must be termed servitude, then tyranny is the
only government. It Is fond, and unnecessary, for since the Church has, and
ought to have a Government, it must not only be inoffensive, but most proper,
to call it an Hierarchy, or holy Government; For Hierarchy, as dangerous as the
unlearned account it, in its Greek attire is in an English habit, no other then
a holy Government. Besides, Calvin admitting of sacrum regimen, over nicely
distanceth himself from those who call it Hierarchy, for he says the same in
Latin, which they do in Greek; yea scrupulous Amesius can stretch his gullet to
swallow sacrum regimen (sure there is some charm in that word against
Hierarchy) for a little above in the same Page, he says. Totum sacrum
ecclesiae ministerium, and regimen a Christo institutum. Ames. ubi supra.
The Text represents the whole holy Government, and Ministry instituted by
Christ. Surely did these men conscientiously consider, what a laughing stock
they make themselves and their cause, unto cunning men: how far they encourage
the most pernicious, and unreasonable Heretics, to be perpetually babbling
against truth; what an unwelcome sight it is, to an eye compassionately affected
toward the healing of the gaping wounds among Christians; and how dreadfully
distracting, and obstructive it is to those hearty prayers, and sincere
endeavors, which pious men would otherwise use, and improve with God, and
Christian Princes, to bring about that most blessed and desirable work of their
closing, and binding up: They would never, while pretending reformation only of
what is amiss, so furiously, and fruitlesly, attempt to make breaches in what
is already so well said, or done, as when they have struggled till they are
weary, they must say, or do the same things, or nothing. But I list not to
enlarge a comment upon this scurvy text. Amesius (as appears by what of his
has been already quoted) senseth the holy Text of the Gospel, ministry. And in
this scope of the Text we have the concurrent suffrage of in 4 praec.
Zanchius, in loc.
Aretius, in loc.
Marlorate, in loc.
Fulk, in loc.
Piscator, loc. com. loc. de ministerio q. 2 Tom. controv. page 530. sect.
secundo respondeo Genevae. 1610.
Bucanus, and (g) Whitaker. And does i^ treat of Church-work? and mention what
hands are to be employed in that service? must not each officer abide in his
appointed station? how else can the work go forward? or if it do go forward,
how can it agree with the holy Pattern? o^ shall we charge the Apostle with a
slippery memory, forgetting when he comes among men, though he had been in the
Mount with God, the form, and fashion of that Tabernacle which the Divine
Majesty intends to pitch among them? what is, if this be not an injurious
reflection upon the blessed Spirit who moduled the platform? as charging him
with neglect, and carelessness, in the choice of his employed instrument to
prepare and sort the materials, he laying third for second, and second for
third. Briefly, will it not be so far from carrying on the Apostles designed
ends of peace and unity, as a^ once to distract the then present Church, whose
officers were otherwise marshalled, and to perpetuate future disquiet an^
vexation unto all succeeding enquirers, after the work, and office of the
Prophets and Evangelists: Besides, if those Prophets and Evangelists, were not
thoroughly mortified from their corrupt affections, and had a self-denying
Spirit, which the^ could, from time to time, entayle upon their Successors,
what a present and dangerous occasion of emulation, and jelousie, did this
mislocation insinuate into their Spirits. Which whatever their gifts or graces
were, could not be easily overcome and mastered, since some of the Apostles
strived for superiority, or who should be greatest; Mar. 9.34. When the^ were
all of one order, and when they had no such plea for it* as God has set some
Apostles by such a name, others by another in the Church.

First Obj. Scripture terms are not always exactly marshalled.
What has been said is liable to many objections; we must answer them, ere we
can proceed to the remaining exceptions. The Objections are four in number.

Obj. 1. Scripture terms are not always exactly marshalled, what goes first in
the nature of things, comes behind in the order of story, and contrariwise.

Ans. by a distinction.
I answer, Scripture although it be undivided in its Author, is yet capable of
distinction, according to the several matters, or things whereof it treats,
in reference unto some of which, the objections are of force; unto others, it
is of no validity, for instance:

First, It historically registers, civil or mixed actions, First where the
objection lies.
and transiently observes, or occasionally exhorts unto remote acts of Faith in
particular converts. In which cases the holy Ghost directed his Penmen to use
a running style, either because those matters are not treated of professedly,
but relatively to some other subject; or their exact knowledge is not of
absolute necessity to salvation: or they do not concern the Church in any
essential part; or other Scriptures deducing them from their first causes,
observe the proper order.

Secondly, Secondly where not.
It directs in things absolutely necessary to salvation, and for the regular,
and peaceable Government of the Church in her, proper, and abstracted nature.
Of this latter kind, is the instanced Text, Or it is not the great Charter of
the Ministry, and does not entirely describe Church Government, and the
Ministry, Particularly not in Ephesians. 4.11.
according to the forecited opinions of the London Ministers, Calvin and
Amesius. But being so, (we argue from their concessions in this Paragraph) the
objection cannot be allowed to take place against the exactness of its order.
Because, First, First because it would disturb the Churches peace.
If the disposition of the ranks of Church Officers, were left to uncertain,
and fallible conjecture (and they must be so unless Scripture ascertain them)
it were impossible for the several orders of Ministers, to satisfy their
consciences in the orderly discharge of their offices; or for private
Christians to reap any certain, or durable comfort by their Ministry, since
variety ^f doubts, or distresses might arise in their consciences, when they
might not know to whom to apply themselves for redress. Besides Satan, and
seducers, could never want a gap, through which they would bring dreadful, and
endless confusions into Christian societies; for could loose professors once
compass this point, that Scripture hurls together matters of Faith, and order
so confusedly, as what is first, what second, could not be distinctly, and
determinately resolved; they would weather all opposition against their turning
Scepticks, or Seekers (a favorable term bestowed by this complemental age upon
wandrers from the true Religion) and never set down under any Ministry, or
close with any Religion, till they have found one exactly complying with their
wild and irregular fancies. So that the widest divisions among pretended
Christians (though all profess and are called by Christ unto unity) could be
no matter of admiration, and amazement unto sober men, rather it were a wonder
they are no more, nor more gaping, since each crazed brain, is left to the
conduct of his own conjecture, in what order to believe and obey.

The rule therefore which constitutes this objection, and is so common in men's
mouths upon sundry occasions, is not general nor frequently, and without
evident necessity (such as contradictions to other Scriptures, reason, sense,
historical verity, etc.) to be at all used. But on the contrary, this must
obtain the repute of an undoubted axiom in Theology, that should the recital
of the aforesaid Ecclesiastical matters, be preposterous in one Scripture, some
other text must be extant, whence the Church assisted by the holy Ghost, may
certainly and unerringly determine their due location, and reiglement. But
there is no necessity of recurrence to this rule in this case, since no text
puts the Evangelist in other order, then third from the Apostle, and next to
the Prophet. Secondly it contradicts another Text.
And since, Secondly, St. Paul elsewhere professedly treating of the Essence,
Unity, and Government of the Church, adjoyns Prophets, not Evangelists to the
Apostles. His words are. 1 Cor. 12.28. And God has set in the Church first
Apostles, secundarily Prophets, etc. In this Text the holy Ghost (as it were
foreseeing the froward opposition of unruly men, against Christ's instituted
orders of Ministers) interposeth his Authority, and infallibility, so expressly,
as they would believe any discreet man spoke orderly, who upon the least
deliberation used the like form of expressions, and that it were the rashest
act of most insolent immodesty to question it, for to what purpose serve these
numeral distinctions, first, secondarily, thirdly, if not to give each officer
his due rank and difference? what! would the Holy Ghost have us to remember
where, and in what he forgets himself? Be it as far from any sober mind to
think it, as it is from the holy Ghost to do it. Besides were the Presbyterian
location of the Evangelist justifiable by some hitherto unalledged Text; yet to
a diligent considerer of the Apostles earnestness, and particularity of
expression in these two Texts (Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28.) the one mark he levels
at in both; to wit, Church unity and edification, (the ablest marshals to array
her Officers) and whether any other Scriptural order, or recital of things in
the same or a like manner, as in these Texts, is adjudged by godly and learned
expositors, or can be proved by any other judicious persons to be preposterous
and alterable, the difficulty will be insuperable, let his will be never so
forward, convincedly to persuade his own Judgment, (much less other men's) that
the Apostles order in such concealed Text is to be preferred to it in the two
other. Furthermore, Thirdly, Thirdly it makes the Apostle loose his end in the
ranking of those officers.
St. Paul in this Epistle to the Corinthians, takes just occasion to reprove
the pride and haughtiness of the Prophet, and gives rules for the avoidance of
those crimes and prevention of like checks for the future, 1 Cor. 14. per tot.
And in the aforementioned Text, 1 Cor. 12.28. As it were of set purpose to
humble, and moderate the Prophets Spirit, he places his charisma, or the gift
of Tongues in the lowest class of extraordinary donations, saying after that
miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. In
the arrogant abuse of this gift, subserving it to private ostentation, not
public edification, the Prophet was most grievously peccant, he speaking with
tongues, that his parts might be magnified, not that the consciences of the
people might be instructed; wherefore as I said the Apostle to humble him,
places his admired gift, upon the lowest seat in the Church, as upon a Stool
of repentance. Wherein did St. Paul act (not to say spiritually, and specially
directed by the holy Ghost, which notwithstanding was most true) but
rationally, and out of a prudent intention, to bring the Prophet to the
knowledge of himself and duty, how weakly does he defeat his design of the
expected success, if while humbling the gift, he exalt the receiver to an undue
place, and preheminency. For was it a sin in the Prophet to be proud of a real
gift; And was this a fit way to correct him, by perching him upon a place
assigned to another, and his superior officer? would he abuse Gods gift, to
pride and vain glory, and would not he make the same misimprovement of the
Apostles mistake? But why do I say mistake, who could know the Evangelists
proper place if St. Paul did not? Is it not he? who sent forth, or took with
him more who are accounted Evangelists by modern Divines, (and they have drawn
the Catalogue far larger then any of the Ancients) then all the rest of the
Apostles? And who only of all the Apostles, uses the word Evangelist in his
writings: Neither does any other Scripture writer use it except St. Luke, who
once gives Philip that title. Act. 21.8. but even then (and he never uses it
in any other place) he brings St. Paul unto, and leaves him at Philips house;
consequently he could not choose but be very well acquainted with his office,
and order in the Church. Moreover in this Epistle to the Corinthians St. Paul
calls himself, a wise master builder, 1 Cor. 3.10. but wherein did his skill,
or care answer that title, if in laying the foundation stones where ought to
be, and he seemingly uses most diligence, he heedlesly misplaces two of the
first three. We hope the ingenuous Reader is satisfied (if not by what we have
said, yet because the Apostle has asserted it twice) in the exactness of the
Apostles order, and location of Prophets, not Evangelists next to the Apostles;
neither need any more be added, but (if it be possible) to stop the mouth of
gainsayers, we add; Fourthly the generality of learned men, Fourthly Presbyters
acknowledge the Apostles order to be exact.
Presbyters and others acknowledge it. The major part of the Definers,
Immediately preceding their definition of the Evangelist.
as Calvin, Beza,, Faius, Zanchius, Bucanus, Wollebius, Spanhemius, and
Maretius, define Church Officers in the Scripture order, first Apostles,
secondly Prophets, thirdly Evangelists. Indeed to make way for the Evangelists
vice-Apostolate, either they assign the Prophet no ordinary office-work, or
what is by far inferior, to what they allow to the Evangelists, but with how
little reason they do it, we doubt not to render evident, ere we conclude all
our exceptions against their Definitions. Others o^ the Definers (out of an
undoubted consciousness of the weak reasons for, and the strong testimony
exhibited by the forementioned Texts, against the Evangelists nextness to the
Apostles) take no notice of the Textual order, but upon their own Authority,
some thrust the Prophet before the Apostles, so same page with their
Definitions of the Evangelist.
Vrsinus, and same page with their Definitions of the Evangelist.
Pareus,; others place him in the rear of the Evangelists, so same page with
their Definitions of the Evangelist.
Polanus, and Advice to Parliament about Church Government title of the
officers of the Church.
our Assembly: Another makes him lag behind Teachers, so same page with their
Definitions of the Evangelist.
Aretius, Henderson, though none of the Definers, yet a famous Presbyter, and
the more illustrious by the reflection of the bright beams of his royal
Antagonist, allows all the rest of the officers mentioned, Ephesians. 4.11. to be
duly ranked, but strikes the Prophet quite out of the Catalogue: First Paper
passing betwixt the king and Mr. Henderson at Newcastle to the argument brought
by your Majesty.
he says. In the Ministry of the new Testament, there is a comely, beautiful,
and divine order, and subordination, one kind of Minister being placed in
degree and dignity before another, as the Apostles first, the Evangelists,
Pastors, and Doctors in their own ranks. Thus he. But proceed we to some closer
proof, Beza says. The Prophetic order is joined to the Apostolic in Church
Government. Our Sacatia, ours by profession though not by birth, in his tract
of the diverss degrees of Ministers, Ordinem adjunctum Apostolico in ecclesiis
administrandis Bez. ad Ephesians. 4.11.
places the Prophet third from the Ap^stles. Beza never Thanks him for
countenancing the Presbyterian notion about the Evangelists so far, but checks
him roughly, and tells him, I do not assign the Prophet the third degree, as
thou do, but the second degree as the Apostle does.

Piscator says. The five terms of Apostles, Prophets, etc, Non tertium ut tu,
sed secundum gradum cum Apostolo assignem. Bez. cont. savat. cap. 1. S.
denique, quod sacrarum quinque genera, and quasi ordines. Piscat. Anal. ad Ephesians.
4.11.
are five kinds, and as it were orders of officers. Our learned Whitaker and
(a) Zanchius are more positive, Zanchius says plainly, they are five orders,
and (b) Whitaker says, certainly the Apostle does describe those kinds of
Ministries in order, which Christ instituted to teach his Church. Our Rigid
English Presbyters, who stood by the location of the Evangelist; according to
the former Definitions, till they had effected the temporary extrusion of
Episcopacy: when that work was over, they forced him to take another, and lower
seat: God permitting Independency by a just law of retaliation, to vex them
welnigh to the extermination of the Presbyterian Government, which a wrong
extent of the Prophetic office clamourously, and impudently asserted, Zanch.
in 4. praec. page 662.
as Presbyters had before served the Bishops, with the like concerning the
Evangelist. The case was in short thus: Certa genera ministeriorum, quae
Christus ad ecclesiam suam docendam instituit, descripsit ordine. Whitak. cont.
To. 2. page 530. secundo respondeo.
the Independents shrouded their gifted and unordained brethren, under the lap
of the Prophets mantle, Liberty of Prophecy being the Independent Shibboleth,
as parity of Ministers, had been before the Presbyterian. Whereat the London
Ministers enraged, say, The Prophets were Church Officers, not only preferred
before Pastors, and Teachers, but also before the Evangelists; suffice this in
answer to the first. We proceed to the second objection.

Obj. 2. Prophets mentioned, Ephesians. 4.11. and 1 Cor. 12.28. were either
foretellers of future events by Divine Revelation, o^ men extraordinarily
raised to reform the Church: Jus divin. 1 par. p. 97.
Which being true; the Evangelist may retain all allowed him by the former
Definitions, Obj. 2. The Prophets were predicters or extraordinarily raised
reformers.
without any of the surmized inconveniences, since to foretell future events, or
reform a corrupt Church State, required a more extraordinary assistance, then
any of the works assigned to the Evangelist.

1 Ans. I grant the New Testament speaks of Prophets, of either sort, of the
former Agabus, etc. of the latter, 1 Ans. by concession, that the word may
elsewhere b so interpreted
John the Baptist, though his work was not only, yea not principally the
regulation of things amiss in the Jewish Paedagogy, and their reduction to the
ancient standard of discipline, but the introduction of a new order, and form
of worship under the Kingdom, and Government of the Messiah, whose forerunner
he was.

2 Ans. I deny, 2 Ans. by negation that it does not so signify in these texts.
that Prophets in either of those latitudes are spoken of in these Texts,
particularly.

First they were not perdicters because. First their assigned works are of
another nature.
1. First not foretellers of future things, for these reasons.

First, Because both Texts treat of a gathered, and governed Church, and of her
officers, unto whom works of another, and diverse nature are assigned, even
perpetual, ordinary, and yet continuing works, but prediction is discontinued,
or rarely found in the Church at this day: The work of our Prophet registered,
Ephesians. 4.11. Is the perfecting of the Saints, the work of the Ministry, and the
edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity, etc. Indeed in 1
Cor. 12.28. mention is made of some extraordinary gifts. But, First there is no
mention made of prediction. Secondly what are mentioned are seated apart, and
distinct from the Prophet, and might as well be the gift of Teachers, as of
Prophets: For some of the lower order o^ Church Officers received those
miraculous effusions of the hol^ Ghost, and wrought by them. So Philip, Act.
8.6. who thoug^ called an Evangelist, Act. 21.8. was no more then a Presbyte^
he being expressly excluded from imposition of hands, which was a distinct act
of the Apostolic office. Act. 8.14, 15. An thus the seventy Disciples, Luke
10.19. Thirdly, who ever received those gifts, the holy Ghost in enumerating
them sep^rate, and distinct from officers, wills us to consider in what n^tion
they received them, least confounding gifts and office^ First we make both
temporary, when only one was. That n^ office instituted by Christ in the
Primitive Church was temp^rary, shall be proved in the seventh exception, but
that gift^ were temporary, appears both in their present disuse: And in that
those officers who exercised them once, could not alwaie^ do it, although the
occasions were the same. St. Paul, wh^ one while cured multitudes of diseased
persons, by handkerchief and aprons taken off from his body and put upon
theirs. A^^ 19.12. Another time advises Timothy to a physical care o^ his
bodily health, least he should prejudice it by over much intentiveness upon the
best things. 1 Timothy 5.24. And is forced to leave his dear companion Trophimus
sick at Miletum, while he travails elsewhere. 2 Timothy 4.20. Secondly, we maim
the ye^ continuing officer, of a part of his office; when he is to do the same
works of perfecting the Saints, etc.

We are therefore yet to expect a proof, that this Prophet mentioned, 1 Cor.
12.28. was a foreteller of things to come, and long enough we may expect it:
since St. Paul a little after in the same Epistle, assigns him another work; 1
Cor. 14.3. He that prophesies speaks unto men, unto exhortation,
edification, and comfort. These are not only distinct from prediction, but are
ordinary, and continuing office-works; In doing whereof (let it be noted) the
Prophet was to wait for a May, or permittance from the Church. 1 Cor. 14.31. ye
may all prophecy one by one, that all may be edified, and all may be
comforted. But how may all Prophecy? even in subjection of Spirit unto their
fellow Prophets. ver. 32. And the Spirits of the Prophets are subject unto the
Prophets. Which being understood, either of the Prophets power over his own
Spirit, that he might, or of his Brethrens power over him, that he must be
subject in speech, ^n silence, denies he had the same impulse with old
Testament Prophets: All which were Predicters, and never less able to command
themselves, or liable to be commanded by others, ^hen in that action. See Jer.
6.11. Amos. 7.12, 13, 14. Se^ondly Inspiration, or the gift of foretelling
things to come, 2. Prediction was a gift promiscuously bestowed upon both
sexes, both men and women, but women are prohibited to prophecy in the sense
of those texts.
^as promiscuously bestowed, both upon men and women, without distinction of
Sex; when Philips daughters are called ^rophetesses, Act. 21.8. I hope we do
not take them for Church Officers, or of the order mentioned 1 Cor. 12.28.
(since ^hen the rule could not have been given. 1 Cor. 14.34. Let ^our women
keep silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted them ^o speak, but they
are commanded to be under obedience, as also says ^he law) but that they were
inspired by hymn, spiritual song, or ^therwise, to foretell future events, and
probably St. Paul's ha^ards and sufferings at Jerusalem. Certainly blessed Anna
was ^uch a Prophetess, her Prediction concerning our Lord Jesus then newly
born, is recorded. Luke 2.36, 37, 38. And there was ^ne Anna a prophetess, she
coming in at that instant, gave thanks ^ikewise unto the Lord, and spoke of him
to all them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem. Besides St. Paul. 1 Thessalonians.
5.20. gives (...) general Caveat, not to quench the Spirit: But if Prophets,
and Prophesies in the objected Texts, must be interpreted by Predicters, and
prediction; he transgrest his own order, when he ^mposed silence upon women in
the Church, 3. Presbyters deny these prophets to have been Predicters.
since they received, and might exercise that gift as well as men.

Thirdly, Presbyterian commentators, will neitheir allow the Prophets mentioned
in these Texts to be Predicters, nor their work to be prediction. The London
Divines say* the Prophets both in this place (they mean 1 Cor. 14.3.) and where
ever else in Scripture mentioned, were an order of Ministry, Jus divin. in part
page 96.
not only gifted brethren, but constituted officers in the Church, thus 1 Cor.
12.28. God has set in his Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets,
thirdly Teachers. Transit a primo gradu ad prophetas quo nominenon intelligit
eos, qui dono vaticinandi pollerent sed qui singulari, non modo interpretandae,
sed inpraesentem usum prudenter accommodandae scripturae, gratia pollerent, nam
prophetiam prefert omnibus aliis donis; quia plus aedificationis afferat, quod
elogium in rerum futurarum praedictionem minime competeret, deinde cum definit
prophetiae munus, (vel saltem tractat quod precipue agere debeat) docet eum
incumbere in consolationem, exhortationem, and doctrinam. Haec autem a
vaticiniis sunt distincta, sunt ergo nobis propheta hoc loco, primum eximiis
scripturae interpretes, deinde non vulgari prudentia, and dexteritate praediti
ad circum spiciendam praesentem ecclesiae necessitatem, ut apposite loquantur.
and sint hac ratione quasi divinae voluntatis internuncii. Calv. in 1 Cor 12.28.
Thus they. Calvin says, The Apostle passes from the first degree to
Prophets, by which name he does not understand foretellers of future events,
but men enabled by special grace to interpret, and wisely accommodate
Scripture unto present occasions, for he prefers prophecy to all other gifts,
as more edifying then they; which commendation prediction does not deserve.
Furthermore when he defines the prophets work, (or at least handles what he
ought principally to do) he says he must use his whole endeavor to comfort,
exhort, and instruct; but these are distinct from prediction. We understand
therefore by prophets in this place, chiefly excellent interpreters of
Scripture, secondly men endued with a more then ordinary prudence and
dexterity, to speak appositely to the Churches present necessities, and be as
it were the messengers of the divine will. Thus he. This is generally the
Protestant opinion, hence Whitaker replying to Bellarmine, who censeth Prophets
in these Texts, as the first member of the objection does, says in scorn.
Mitto hic quam cite, Bellarminus per prophetas eos intelligit, qui futura
praedicant. Whitak. controv. To. 2. page 530.
I let pass how Clerk-like Bellarmine understands foretellers of future events
by prophets. and this shall suffice in answer to the first member of the
objection.

Secondly, these Prophets were not extraordinarily raised reformers. 2 they
were not extraordinarily raised reformers. Because


Because somewhat was amiss, both in the Prophets, and in the Church whereof
they were officers, but the Apostle orders the reformation of both.

First, That somewhat was amiss in the Prophet 1. Somewhat was amiss in the
Prophet.
appears (beside what has been already instanced) in the many Apostolical
cautions, and rules given for the regular administration of his gifts, 1 Cor.
14. per tot. for instance a prophetical gift, a choice, though not the only
one, was the gift of tongues, compare Act. 2.4. with ver. 17.18. you will find
the gift of tongues conferred upon the Apostles, to enable them to Prophecy.
And Act. 19.6. speaking with tongues, and prophesying, or gift and office are
coupled; now in the misimployment of this gift, he Corinthian Prophet was
delinquent, and is therefore reproved by the Apostle. 1 Cor. 14.5.6. ver. 14.
ver. 23. ver. 26.

Obj. Is it said the Apostle perpetually, or very frequently, distinguishes in
that Chapter betwixt tongues and prophecy.

Sol. I answer to grant it no more is gained, then that, First they were
diverse actions, which is no bar to their performance by one and the same
person at several times. Secondly, though the actions were, and might sometimes
be diverse, yet they were not always so, nor did the distinction consist in
the separate nature of the things, but in the several capacities of the
hearers: For the Linguist might at once speak with tongues, and prophecy unto
intelligent persons, while at the same time he scattered his words in the air,
and was a Barbarian to the ignorant. Thirdly, a nigh observer will easily
discern the Apostle evidencing in this seeming opposition, the subserviency of
tongues unto edification, which is the Prophets principal work, thus who speaks
with tongues ought to accommodate his discourse to the capacity of his hearers.
1 Cor. 14.15. is to pray that ^e may interpret. 1 Cor. 1^.13. and a rule is
given that others should do it, if the Linguist do not, or cannot. 1 Cor. 14.27.

Secondly, the Church of Corinth as well as the Prophet, ^ood in need of
reformation, but the Apostle leaves it not un^o the Prophet, but takes course
about it himself; 2. The Corinthian Church wanted reformation, and St. Paul not
the Prophets gives orders about it.
whether in grosser misdemeaners, that they might be speedily punished, 1 Cor.
5.3. or in slighter offenses; that they might be tolerated until his coming, 1
Cor. 11.34. now had either of these things belonged to the Corinthian Prophets
cognizance, either the Apostle would not have intermedled at all, or given the
special reason why he thus of necessity invaded the Prophets privileges, that
they might be preserved to him and his Successors for the future; and these
acts not hang upon the file, as presidents to his prejudice. Thus we dismiss
the second objection. The third enters.

Obj. 3. The dissenting brethren, reduce Prophets, and Evangelists to a
parallel order, 3. Obj. the prophetical and evangelical order were parallel.
wherein they follow Reason of dissenters page 116.
Bullinger, whose words upon the Text are. Apostles, Prophets, Vnicae
functionis vocabula, and quamvis varia in eundem recidunt. Bullinger ad Ephesians.
4.11.
and Evangelists, are names of one function, and though various, meet at last
in one order, office, or officer.

First the works assigned to the Evangelist will not admit the Prophet to a
parity.
First, Ans. This plaster is not broad enough to cover the sore, for were
Prophets and Evangelists of the same order, both of them did, or might perform
the same Office-works: But the former Definitions assign the Evangelist such
works as the Prophet, could not do any parallel, or equal to them. For were the
Evangelists the Apostles vicars over all Churches, the Prophets whatsoever
office they bare in the Church must of necessity be inferior to them.

Secondly, our Assembly disallow the parity.
Secondly, Our Assembly urged by the dissenting Brethren, therein dissenting
from themselves) to prove by Scripture, the subordination of their several
Courts, to wit, Consistories, classes, Provincial Synods and general
Assembly's; because as they say, the inferiority, and superiority of officers
were so distinguished in the Apostles time, as they prove by this text, Ephesians.
4.11. The Assembly calling to mind the dissenters former assertion, about the
parallelness of the orders, Ans. to diss. p: 14. London 1648.
betwixt the Prophets and the Evangelists, shape them this answer: That for
ought there appears, the Evangelist might as well be of a parallel order with
Pastors and Teachers, as with Prophets. The consequence whereof must be both a
plain denial of the objection, which the assembly also does in the forecited
place; and (whereof perhaps they were not aware) a direct confutation of
Calvines (and consequently of their own) opinion of the Evangelists nextness to
the Apostles; This text being singly alleged by him in proof of that notion,
for were the Evangelists next to the Apostles, so as to apply their places, in
constituting, or governing all, or many Churches; no question can be made
whither they and Pastors be of a parallel order, unless Pastors as well as
Evangelists, be extraordinary: and this text treat only of extraordinary
Officers, for the yet continuing Pastor (or Presbyter, for of him only
Calvinists understand that term) is not as they say, the Evangelist was, next
i^ office to the Apostles, and does not supply their place in constituting, or
governing all, or many Churches. But if he be, then the middle wall betwixt
ordinary and extraordinary officeers is taken down, and all offices are laid in
common.

This notion therefore about the parallelness of the orders, betwixt the
Prophets and Evangelists, will not unty, but more entangle, the knot of this
difficulty, concerning the Presbyterian location of the Evangelist, however it
advises to a true exposition of the five terms Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, etc. The five terms, Apostles, Prophets, etc. expounded.
we shall do it, or endeavor to do it, with all possible brevity, and
plainness.

First. Negatively, showing what they were not. First negatively they were not
several orders.


Secondly, Positively declaring what they were.

First, Negatively, they were not several orders of teaching Church Officers.
The affirmative is maintained by Beza, Zanchius, Piscator, Because
and Henderson (as we have before heard) but other reason, either there, or
elsewhere in their writings, besides their bare say-so, they do not give. This
might be turned off, with as bare and peremptory a denial; but we study the
Readers satisfaction, First, ascended Christ ratified only two orders of
officers.
and will assign reasons why we cannot even orders, with the terms Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists etc.

First, Ascended Christ ^atified those, and only those orders of teaching
Church Officers, whom he constituted while de^cended, because he who ascended
is also the same who descended, See my reasons for Christ's sole Legislatorship
page 83. etc.
and in both capacities, He gave some Apostles, etc. Ephesians. 4, 8, 9, 10.11. But
descended Christ appointed only two orders of teaching Church Officers, The
twelve Apostles, Mat. 10.1. and the ^^venty Disciples, Luke 16.1. Now if the
number be augmented after the Ascension, how can he who descended, Dandi
vocabulum innuit, non esse hoc inventum mandatum sed sacrosanctam Christi
institutionem, quod regitur ecclesia verbi praedicatione neque enim Apostoli,
se ipsi crearunt sed electi fuerunt a Christo. Calv. ad Ephesians. 4.11.
and he who ascended be the same. This no doubt Calvin eyed when he says, The
word give intimates this is not an invented command, but Christ's holy
institution, that the Church be governed by preaching of the Word, for neither
the Apostles created themselves, but were elected by Christ. Thus he. But
certainly to vary the orders of teaching Church Officers, by making them more
or less, according to the several states of Christ's ascending, and descending,
must imply the addition of power in one state, which he wanted in another, and
consequently that he who descended, and he who ascended is not the same in
power, and virtue; neither will this text be of any force against the
Nestorians, (though Jerome use it) to prove that the Son of God, and the ^on of
man are not distinct persons, but both one, because St. ^aul says, he who
descended, and he who ascended is the same. But ^ather those heretics are in
the right, Vid. Estthium in loc.
since the highest reformists (or those who would be accounted such) vary, and
alter the orders of Church Officers according to those several estates of
Christ. Besides this confining the teaching Ministry unto two orders is not my
private inference from those Texts, Damasus Bishop of Rome (St. Jeroms
contemporary) gives this very reason for the unchairing of the Chorepiscopi, or
Rural Bishops. He says, Those Chorepiscopi are prohibited as well by this
sacred See (Rome) as by the Bishops of tbe whole world, Chorepiscopi tam ab hac
sacra sede quam ab episcopis totius orbis prohibiti sunt, nimis enim eorum
institutio improba est and prava quia etsi de summo sacerdotii ministerio
aliquid presumant; omni tamen authoritate carent nam non amplius quam duos
ordines inter dicipulos domini esse cognovimus i. e. duodecim Apostolorum, and
septuaginta duorum discipulorum. Vnde iste tertius processerit ignoramus and
quod ratione caret extirpare necesse est damasus apud ferutian. 1. libro decret
distinct. 68.
for their institution is overmuch improbous, and wicked, because although they
presume to do somewhat appertaining to the chief Sacerdotal Ministry, yet they
want all authority. For we have not known any more then two orders among the
disciples of the Lord. i. e. the twelve Apostles, and seventy two disciples,
whence the third proceeded we are ignorant. And what is void of reason of
necessity must be extirpated.

Secondly, Every here mentioned work of perfecting of the Saints, working in
the Ministry, and edifying of the body of Christ which contain a complete
discharge of the whole office of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Teachers, or St. Paul would never have said, that Christ gave the officers for
that end, were done by one or other of those two orders, even Apostolical, or
Presbyterial. The Apostles personally discharged them all, the word (...)
rendered perfecting, is a Metaphor translated from the natural to the mystical
body; properly it signifies the concinnation, compactness, apt, and orderly
disposition of all the members, in a complete and perfect body, and their
setting in joint, when any of them are dislocated by casual violence,
tralatiously as in this Text it imports the gathering, governing, forming, and
reforming of the Church. Thus to perfect the Saints was the Apostles work. Act.
1.26. Act. 2.42. Act. 6.1, 2, 3. Act. 8.14, 15, 16.. Act. 14.23. Act. 16.4. 1
Cor. 5, 3. 1 Cor. 11.34.3. Epist. Joh. v. 10. Neither was this alone an
Apostolical work, for so was the work of the Ministry, Act. 20.24. And so was
the edifying of the body of Christ. 1 Cor. 3.10. The four remaining terms;
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, are so far from constituting
several orders, or relating to special, and distinct works, as the work
denominating them are not proper, or distinct, either to the Apostolical, or
Presbyterial order, but common to both. The Apostles Prophecy, Act. 2.18.
which to the end 36. so did Presbyters. Act. 15.32. This Text concerns Judas
and Sylas, whose Presbyterate shall be evinced in the fourth exception. The
Apostles Evangelized, Romans 1.15. Romans 15.20. 1 Cor. 1.17. 1 Cor. 9.16. So did
Presbyters. Act. 8.1. v. 5. v. 35.. This concerns Evangelist Philip, whose
Presbyterate shall be manifested, in the explication of my own definition of
the Evangelist. The Apostles fed. 1 Cor. 9.7. 1 Pet. 5.1. so did Presbyters.
Act. 20 28. This concerns the Ephesine Elders, whose Presbyterate will be
readily granted by Presbyters. The Apostles taught, 1 Timothy 2.9. This Text
concerns one and the same persons, with Act. 20.28. In omnibus his diversis
nominibus, simile, and prope unum doctrinae officium, videtur fuisse tractatum
Paul. ad Augustine. inter opera Augustine. To. 2, Epist. 58. Basileae. 1556.
This no doubt occasioned Paulinus St. Augustines contemporary, and writing to
him to say, That alike, and almost one office of teaching, seems to be handled
in all these diverse names.

Thirdly, the Church at Jerusalem, convened in a Synod, is comprised in
Apostles, Elders and Brethren. Act. ^5.2. v. 4. v. 6. v. 22. Act. 16.4. This
was the first Church formed by our Savior, and at this time not only fully
constituted, but assembled for the exercise of the highest act of
Ecclesiastical power. And she may rather be presumed to be a pattern unto all
other Churches, then to derive an example from them, and al^er hers, according
to the diversity of their constitution; which she must do, or continue
incomplete, if Apostles, Prophets, Thirdly the Church of Jerusalem Synodally
convened, is comprised in Apostles, Elders, and Brethren.
Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, were so many several orders. ^esides, let
it be noted, this Synod, at Jerusalem, was conve^ed long after the Apostles had
received the gift of Prophecy. ^ct. 2.18. And after St. Peter had Evangelized
to Cornelius, and his gentile relations. Act. 10. which notwithstanding, and
although in all probability others of the Apostles, especially (...). Paul and
Barnabas had done the like works, yet no mention (...) made of Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, or Teachers, distinct from Apostles and Elders.

Fourthly, who ever Apostolized, Prophesied, Evangelized, ^r did any other
work, relative to the perfecting of an old, Fourthly the same works done by the
same, or diverse persons in diverse places. did not diversify the orders of the
workmen.
or ^^thering of a new Church, he did not receive a new order to ^o, or by
doing of those works, because order preceeds of^^ce, and who ever did these
works, he was an officer before he did them: Neither did he ascend any step, or
degree above his brethren and fellow-officers, ordinarily officiating in
constituted Churches; Because, either those officers had done the ^^me works in
the Churches where they were settled, or others those descendants they were,
had done them at the first settlement of those Churches; And because such new
Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists would become settled officers, have
their limits, do the common works of Governing, Feeding, and Teaching, when
their converts were gathered into a Church. Indeed the table must be spread for
Christ, by Apostolizing, Prophesying, or Evangelizing, ere we entertain him, or
he us, by feeding and teaching, but it is equally certain that the former must
end in the latter, when, and so soon as the Church is constituted; Besides for
this purpose it is very observable, that they who in Scripture are called
Evangelists, were in orders, or made Ministers ere they were called
Evangelists. Thus Timothy was ordained by St. Paul, and did Apostolical works
a^ Ephesus, long, and long before he is enjoined to do the work o^ an
Evangelist. Thus Philip was ordained an officer in the Church of Jerusalem (but
he was a Presbyter, not an Apostle, a^ shall appear largely in the following
part of this discourse) ere he did Evangelize at Samaria and Caesaria. Act. 8.
And for doing whereof he is called an Evangelist, Act. 21.8. Those two
Evangelists being of different orders, or of the Apostolical and Presbyterial,
makes it manifest that the Evangelizate was no distinct order, for although the
Apostles might have done its distinct acts had it been an order, because the
Apostolate was the highes^ Ecclesiastical order, and every superior order,
eminently (a^ least) contains the inferior in it. Yet Presbyters could no^
have done them, because if the Evangelizate was any order, i^ cannot be denied
to have been superior to the Presbyterate Neither could any presbyter be
admitted to do its distinct acts without a downright overthrow of all formal
difference, betwixt the orders. If any unsatisfied Reader shall yet persist i^
his opinion, that the Evangelizate was a distinct order, we desire him to show
us its formal difference both from the Apostolate, and from the Presbyterate.
And what other works the Evangelist could do distinct from those enumerated in
this text viz. the perfecting of the Saints, work of the Ministry, and edifying
of the body of Christ. All which we have already proved to have been done by
Apostles and presbyters: we may be, and have sometimes been told, that Timothy
and Philip, after their former ordinations received new commissions authorizing
them to be Evangelists. But we dare not believe it, since Timothy's order (ere
he wa^ bid do the work of an Evangelist) was so high and eminent, the
Evangelizing must be an undervaluing to him, if it placed hi^ in a new and
distinct order or office, because he was before appointed by St. Paul to do
Apostolical works, or the distinct works of the Apostolical office at Ephesus;
which was the place whereunto the command was sent him to do the works of a^
Evangelist. And since Philip, after the mention made of him, Act. 6. is not
noted in Scripture to have received any new order, or commission to do the
works received Act. 8. And for doing which (as has been said) he is called an
Evangelist, 2 Paper for your Majesty's definition of the Episcopal go^ernment.
Act. 21.8. the Wight Divines do voluntarily allow us, that, Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, etc. are distinguished by their callings, and
commissions, but not by their works; which they endeavor to prove by this
text, or Ephesians. 4.11. But without success; neither are they, nor any of their
partisans like to be successeful ^n it till it shall be Scripturally evidenced,
that Christ did Commissionate distinct orders of Church Officers; and did not
^ppoint every of them their proper and distinct works, which ^f proved, will
destroy the very nature and essence of order, which consists in the distinct
and separate works, or trusts committed to the ordained. And as for the Wight
Divines allega^ion of the aforesaid Ephesians. 4.11. in proof of their notion, we
^ope enough has been, and will be said in this, and the ^ollowing reasons, why
the Evangelizate was neither a distinct order, or degree of, and in
Ecclesiastical offices, to convince any impartial Reader, of its unaptness to
maintain their cause, ^r disserve our opinion.

Fifthly, When any settled Church sent forth any of her offi^ers to constitute a
new Church, 5. When some officers went abroad to constitute a new church,
others of the same orders, staid at home to preserve the old one.
she kept others of the same ^rder at home to preserve her self. Thus the other
Apostles ^ent forth St. Peter, and St. John to settle a Church at Sama^ia,
among Philips converts, themselves remaining and con^^nuing in the mean time at
Jerusalem. Act. 8.14, 15. Thus ^^ucius, Simeon, and Manaen, emitting St. Paul
and Barnabas, to ^vangelize to the Gentiles, themselves staid at home with the
Church at Antioch. Act. 13.1, 2, 3. The ground of this practice is ^vident in
reason, for otherwise the Church would be always ^lanting, never planted, the
enchurching of one would be the ^nchurching of another people. Christian
religion (as it is said of the Sea) would loose as much at one place, as she
gained ^t another. A planted Church must have her officers con^tantly residing,
to dress, feed, and govern her; that vineyard ^ould be soon overrun with
weeds, if at any time she wanted those spiritual Husbandmen. A propagated
Church must also ^ave her affixed officers; but they are not of a different,
kind from officers in constituted Churches: because the ministry is but one,
and new Ministers are made by old ones, in virtue of Christ's promise
successively to continue the same Ministry unto his church. Whence it follows,
that the ministers whether in a constituted, or propagated Church are both of
one order, and nature, because both are derived from one original, but being of
different growth's, they fall under answerable denominations. These are hopeful
grafts, while they are fruit-bearing trees; these Apostolize, or Prophesy, they
feed; these Exangelize, they teach; their root is one, their fruit one, but
their plantations are several.

6. Bullinger reduces the three first terms to one order, and St. Paul
reduces the other two unto one other order.
Sixthly, Bullinger, as has been instanced, says the three first titles are
names of one function, which must be the Apostolate, since the Apostles are
first named, the Presbyterate of the other two, may not be questioned, since
the Apostle comprehends both under the one name of Teachers. 1 Cor. 12.28.
Suffice this in demonstration of the reasons, why the five terms do not
comprehend an equal number of Church Officers of several orders.

Secondly, Negatively, The five terms do not constitute, a like number of
degrees, or dignities, of officers of fewer orders.

2. Neg. they were not several dedegrees. The. Absurdity
The affirmative is Calvin's, and the general Presbyterian opion. But therein
their wariness, or (shall I call it) their wiliness is remarkable; to call them
several orders, would too grossly exceed the number of Christ's instituted
orders, and too suddenly engage them upon the dispute of the nature, and
differences of those orders (the assured break-neck of their cause) but to call
them several degrees, or dignities, would furnish impudent wranglers with a
sophistical distinction to oppose truth, and persuade easy and tractable
Readers, that there is some notorious official difference betwixt the past, and
present Church Officers, because their leaders say, one is of one degree or
dignity, the other of another, and because themselves know not what degree, or
dignity means, or wherein their diversity from order consists. But Calvin, and
the rest, instead of avoiding, rush at another door into the same inconvenience
of exceeding the number of Christ's instituted orders: For when order and
degree, are used of men in societies (as here) concerning their functions,
employments, or honors, differencing them one from another, they import one,
and the self same thing; who is so of a different degree, is also of a
different order, and contrariwise, hence the promiscuous use of these two
words, for one and the same thing, is very frequent in most polite and accurate
authors. I am well acquainted with the usually assigned difference, Vid.
Ciceronis opera passim.
betwixt order and degree, Order being restored to a distinct power in special
acts, degree to superiority without power. But those Figleaves will not cover
the Definers nakedness, because though they call the Evangelizate a degree, yet
they allow the Evangelist distinct acts of office, as the incarnate change of
all Churches, ordination of Ministers, exercised of Censures in, Dangerousness
of the affirmative.
and o^^^ all, or many Churches. Whereby as they make the office a distinct
order, so it is a question not easily resolved, whether they might not more
safely, and agreably to their own principles, have called Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, etc. several orders, rather then several degrees, extend they
degrees, either to somewhat different from order, or to an higher step in the
same order.

If they accept it in the former latitude;

Then Christ's Legislative power is impaired, and the new Testament Church State
is not introduced by one Legislator, but by many Legislating Commissioners;
Because the Evangelist, who according to Beza, Faius, and Spanhemius, founded,
or instituted Churches, were not of the same order with the Apostles, and
consequently acted under another order and commission, then that which Christ
gave to his Apostles.

If they take degree in the latter signification. Then,

First, the Apostolate (to which the first word in the catalogue or Apostles
appertains) was both the highest order and degree in the Church; but if
Prophesying, Evangelizing, Teaching, and Feeding, altered the degree or order
of those who discharged them, then the Apostles so often as they wrought any of
these works, descended into a lower state or condition, then that wherein
Christ had constituted them.

Secondly, all the former Definitions are faulty, and vicious in the
non-assignation of the Evangelists order, whether it were the Apostolate, or
the Presbyterate; or wherein his degree differed from other officers of the
same order.

Thirdly, the distinct and separate Definition of the Evangelist, as neither an
Apostle nor a Presbyter, but inferior to the one, and superior to the other in
Office-works, is introductive of a third order, for such inferiority, and
superiority are the plainest, and most visible characters of order and
subordination. Hence the Wight Divines tell us roundly, that Evangelizate was a
distinct office.

Fourthly, the Diana of Presbyterianisme, 1. Paper. Sect. to that of Timothy
and Titus.
or the parity of all officers of the same order is in danger to be despised,
and her magnificence destroyed, for every degree has respect to superiority,
and inferiority. This is not only ours, but the joint opinion of Calvin, and
Aretius, who say, The Evangelists were inferior unto, and less then the
Apostles.

The Reader is now expectant to hear what we think of these five terms, and
wills us not to take shelter at the safe, and usual retreat of hazardous
undertakers, viz. a denial of the verity of the opinions of other men. We are
content to endeavor his satisfaction, upon condition he do not condemn our
labors till himself have done better, and allow a probability unto our opinion
till he give us one more probable. Upon those terms we say.

Thirdly. Positively they were several denominations conferred upon, or taken
by Church officers, relatively to their labors in several parts, 3.
Positively, they were denominations conferred upon, or taken by
Church Officers, relatively to their labors in several parts, or places of the
Catholic Church.
and places of the Catholic Church. They must concern Church Officers, because
none else could be Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, etc. They must denominate,
not constitute officers, because all so denominated (except Apostles, which
term is primitive) were in orders before. The first Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers in the Catholic Church, were Apostles, and
Elders in the Church at Jerusalem. They were conferred upon them, or taken by
them, relatively to several performances of the same work in diverse places:
Because it is one Christ preached, the same Sacraments administered, the like
orders of officers ordained, in a constituted, or to be constituted Church.

The Apostle in this Text assigns three works to the Ministry or perfecting of
the Saints, work of the Ministry, and edifying of the body of Christ. These
refer to a treble Ministerial act of office.

First, Church propagation, and Government.

Secondly, due consideration, and respect to the subject so to be propagated
and Governed.

Thirdly, the conservation of both in order and unity.

All these are linked one within another, and orderly draw the interpretation
of the five titles mentioned in that Text after them.

Apostles who.
That the Church be propagated, and Governed, presupposes according to Christ's
promised perpetual presence with his Ministry, Mat. 28.19, 20. and St. Paul's
assignation of the end of the gift, and continuance of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.13.
Till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. That there be a Power in old officers to derive their order unto
successors in planted Churches, to preserve them, and to transfer them unto
others of the same order, to concinnate, perfect, put new converts into, and
govern them according to Gospel order. This is the first link of the chain
Apostles. See 1 Timothy 14, 15, 16. Act. 8.14, 15.

The Church is a building of God, her materials are Jews and Gentiles, first
Jews, then Gentiles, the conversion and enchurching of the Jews in a
Gospel-state, tacks the Prophet to the Apostles. The Jews were acquainted with
many Prophesies, forerunning, and pointing at the present dispensation. A
Messiah even when he came they did earnestly expect. Joh. 1.21. And they asked
him, what then? Art thou Elias? And he says I am not. Art thou that Prophet?
And he answered no: But the Messiah being come, they were prejudiced against
him, because the humility of the Carpenters Son did not answer to their carnal,
and pompous expectation of the Son of David; Those high thoughts his
Ambassadors must bring down; the readiest way to do which, lay in a right
exposition of old Testament Prophesies, and solid proof of their accomplishment
in Christ. upon this account John the Baptist is called a Prophet. Luke 1.76.
Mat. 11.9. Luke 6.26. Besides, the Apostles receiving the gift of Tongues, Act.
2.4. maintain it to be an accomplishment of an old Testament-prophesie,
relating to the days of the Messiah, and enabling them to Prophecy. Act.
2.18. And ^n my servants and handmaids, I will pour out in those days of my
Spirit, and they shall Prophecy. That is, as their following discourse
interprets it, not foretell some new thing, but evidence Christ already come, to
be the promised Savior. Act. 2.22. ad fin. 36. Thus Judas and Sylas, sent by
the Apostles and Elders of the Church at Jerusalem, with decrees for
determination of the question about the abolition, or retention of Mosaical
rites and ceremonies, are called Prophets, Doctores in ecclesia Hierosolymitana
a qua mittebantur cum mandatis ipsorum muneri convenientibus. Bez. ad Act.
15.32.
while exhorting the people (who before scrupled it) to consent to the
abrogation of some of them, and observation of others, according to the tenor
of those decrees. Act. 15.32. And Judas and Sylas being Prophets also
themselves, exhorted the Brethren with many words, and confirmed them. Beza
upon the Text observably says, They were teachers of the Church at Jerusalem,
by whom they were sent with instructions suitable to their work. Aretius says,
They were able interpreters of Scripture, because a Prophet is not only a
foreteller of future things, Idonei scripturae interpretes nam propheta non
solum is est, qui vaticinatur, sed prophetarum interpres, apposite docens, and
enarrans scripturas; fecerunt autem hoc, non semel aut iterum, sed diu
multumque, nam de illis dicit, quod illic commorati sunt, non alia de causa,
quam quod seditionem, and desidia orta ex illa quaestione componerent, quod and
feliciter effecerunt. Aret. in loc.
but an interpreter of Prophets appositely teaching, and expounding Scriptures.
This they did not once or twice, Doctores ecclesiae praediti singulari dono
interpretendi scripturas propheticas. Piscator in loc.
but long and often, for it is written that they tarried there long, for no
other cause then the quieting of the sedition, and dissension occasioned by
that question (to wit, about Circumcision and Ceremonies) which they happily
effected. Picator more succinctly says, They were Teachers of the Church
endued with an excellent gift of interpreting prophetic writings. We have
added the exposition of these Authors at large, concerning the Prophet with
respect to some Readers, who perhaps will receive it from them, though they
would have scrupled, scorned, rejected it, coming from us; This age being so
quarrelsome, that truth dares not travail abroad, without some noted man's
pasport.

We have done with Apostles and Prophets, the Evangelist comes next to hand, of
whom we say, the conversion, and enchurching of the Gentiles, clasps him to the
Prophet. (Poor souls) they had never heard of Christ, that there was, or was to
be a Savior, was altogether news to them. This news mu^^ be brought them by
some messenger, and what name is so ^greable to his errand, Evangelists who.
as an Evangelist. It Is true, explaining (...) old Testament Prophesies, might
in some cases be useful to the Gentiles; It would convince them of the
antiquity of Christian Religion, and enable them to answer to their unconverted
neighbors, objecting the contrary. And it is as true, that preaching unto Jews
may sometimes be called Evangelizing* some of them might be ignorant, others
might be negligent to consider of old Testament Prophesies, ushering in the
good tidings of a Mediator. But it is most certain, that primarily* properly,
and of strict necessity, the explication and application of such Prophesies,
belonged unto the Jews, they would n^ otherwise (though the Gentiles might)
believe the Gospe^ And that Evangelizing comes up nighest to its original
signif^cation, when intimating news of good things, to those who ha^ not a hint
of it in a before believed promise. And that it i^ more frequently used in the
new Testament, of preaching to the Gentiles, then of preaching unto the Jews.
Besides this exposition both justifies the Apostles order in Ephesians. 4.11. and
exactly agrees to the manner of the manifestation of the mystery of our
Redemption, to the Jew first, and after to the Gentile. Romans 1.16. For I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation,
unto every one that believes, to the the Jew first, and also to the Greek. Our
Savior was primarily sent to the Jews. Mat. 15.24. But he answered, and said,
I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. To them first ^^nd
exclusively for that time) he sent his Apostles, Mat, 10.5. ^hese twelve Jesus
sent forth and commanded them, saying, go not ^^to the way of the Gentiles, and
into any City of the Samaritanes ^^ter ye not. So Luke 24.27. And that
repentance, and remission o^ sins in his name should be preached unto all
Nations, beginning at ^erusalem. Besides when the Apostles had received the
larger ^^fusion of the holy Ghost, after our Saviors Ascension, they make the
first publication of both at Jerusalem. Act. 2.14. But Peter standing up with
the eleven, lift up his voice, and said, ye men of Judea, and all that dwell at
Jerusalem, be this known unto y^u, and hearken unto my words. Act. 3.26. unto
you first, God ^^ving raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in
turning a^ay every one of you from his iniquities. In this course also the
di^^ressed teachers proceeded. Act. 11.19. Now they that were ^^ttered abroad
upon the persecution that arose about Stephen, tra^^iled as far as Phaenice,
and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the Word unto none but the Jews only. Thus
also did St. Paul, and ^^rnabas. Act. 13.46. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold,
and ^^d; It was necessary that the Word of God should first have been ^^ken
unto you, but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves ^^worthy of of
everlasting life, lo we turn to the Gentiles. Pastors who.
Suffice ^^is in explication of the word Evangelists.

The work of Pastors was in a constituted Church; The church gathered, whether
out of Jews or Gentiles, must af^erward be kept together, the evil spirit
dispossessed, and fallen ^^om heaven (or the hearts of men) like lightning,
will endea^our recovery, and repossession of his old habitation; and that ^ith
success unless the Church have constant Pastors to feed and ^ourish her up in
the Word of life, to lead her sheep into ^^een pastures, to provide them a safe
fold against Wolvs, to have ^^medies in readiness for cure of all contingent
diseases; and (...) all things, and at all times, to lead and look to them as a
^ook of Gods, purchased with the blood of Christ, and commit^ed to their charge.

The office of Teachers concerned the Propagation, Teachers who.
and succession of members in constituted Churches, that Pastors might have
a^waies a flock to oversee, and look after. Gods Covenant is ^ade with the
faithful and their seed, the latter of which must ^ant, ye many of the former
being babes, and children in understanding may want instruction, therefore
there must be a ^nccession of Teachers, (...) or Catechists. Thus I think St.
Paul expounds this word, Illos dicit doctores qui in ecclesia literis, and
lectionibus retinendis pueros imbuebant, more synagogae, quia traditio illorum,
ad nos transitum fecit. Ambros. ad. 1 Cor. 12.28.
both Romans 2.21. Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy
self. (...), thou that preachest, a man should not steal, do thou steal, etc.
and Heb. 4.12. For when for the time ye ought to have been teachers (...) ye
have need that one teach (...) you again, which be the first principles of God,
and are become such as have need of milk, not of strong meat. To be sure the
Commentary going under the name of St. Ambrose, does so, it says, The Apostle
calls those teachers, who after the manner of the Synagogue, did instruct youth
in reading, and learning,, because their Tradition is passed over unto us. This
also is Beza's opinion, as may be read by the learned Reader in the Margin.
This affirmative exposition of the terms, though we believe it contain nothing
contrary to the Analogy of Faith, Doctorum munus est verbum dei simpliciter
enarrare, ut verus sensus eruatur and catechumenos praesertim instituere B^z.
confess. fidei Excus. per. Eustathium Vigon. An. 1583.
repugnant to the Apostles method, or defective of a full dicharge of all the
mentioned works of perfecting of the Saints, etc. yet we deliver it only, as
our probable opinion, and are contented it hold our Readers belief no longer,
then till he can relieve it with a better. I the negative we are positive, that
the five terms do not const^tute so many several orders, or degrees of
Church Officers: Because the whole Ministry in the first formed Church, were
either Apostles or Presbyters; neither can the orders be any more, and must be
as many in every Church formed since according to her pattern. Nor let the
distinct enumeration of those several terms of Apostles, etc. puzle any sober
Reader, since those terms were used, either because the works giving
Church Officers those denominations, were done in that order, first, second,
third, etc. or because every officer of the same order, though he might have
right, yet in fact did not d^ all those works, some went from place to place,
to conve^ men, and settle new Churches, others officiated in settle^ Churches,
to confirm, and continue Christians in the Faith; some Apostolized, others
Prophesied, some Evangelized, others fed and taught: But because some did, or
might do all those works, the terms Apostles, Prophets, etc. do not include so
many several orders or degrees of officers, and because others did only some of
them, therefore distinct and discretive denominitions were necessary; those
denominations rather relating to the Church in several capacities, then to
several sorts of officers. Thus have we finished our answer to the third
objection, the fourth begins.

Fourthly, 4. Obj. the text to be sensed by gifts not by officers.
The Papists (to dint the edge of a Protestant argument against Papal tyranny,
who (Protestants reflecting upon the aforesaid scope of the Text, as concerning
Church Officers, do conclude the Pope is no new Testament officer, because he
is not named therein) do object and say; the Text does not treat of
Church Officers, but of several Charismata, Bell. de Romans Ponti. lib 1. ca. 9.
Sect. potest etiam responderi.

Esthius ad Ephesians. 4.11.


or extraordinary gifts, personal to the first Church Officers.

Sol. I cannot see wherein this objection will avail the Presbyterian cause,
their Patriarchs so directly affirming the contrary, but because it is a
principal way of arguing with some men, to heap together what ever may be said
to the contrary of a malignant truth, whether it make for or against them, I am
willing to enter into a consideration of, and make answer unto that objection.

First, I answer by concession; the word gift is twice used, 1 Ans. the word
gift is granted to be used several times in that Chapter.
and is the translation of two several Greek words, in the precedent part of
the Chapter. We read ver. 7. of the gift of Christ. (...) that word is
variously interpreted. First of whole Christ, and all his benefits. Joh. 4.10.
Romans 5.15. 2 Cor. 9.^5. Secondly, of extraordinary spiritual gifts. Act. 8.20.
Act. ^0.45. Act. 11.17. Thirdly, of office-work. Ephesians. 3.7.8. Two of these
significations conclude peremptorily against Bel^armin, and Esthius, the
middlemost only favors them, and nothing but a strong bias in the scope of
the Text can carry it to their opinion. Besides (...) is rendered gifts. ver. 8.
And he gave gifts. etc. This word is frequently used elsewhere, but never to my
remembrance in the same sense, as in this Text, here it signifies Gods gifts
unto man, elsewhere it signifies man's gifts one unto another: So Mat. 7.11.
Luke 11.13. Phil. 4.17. Consequently it can speak nothing, but what the scope
of the Text before us puts in its mouth. Furthermore to grant all which may be
granted; (...) is rendered grace ^.7. which elsewhere is promiscuously sometimes
translated gifts, 2 Cor. 8.4. Sometimes grace; but when it is used of the
Ministry (as here) it commonly denotes their office, so Romans 5.15. 2 Cor. 3.10.
Gal. 2.9. Aretius makes (...) of equal force with (...) in this Text, but were
that granted, (which must be freely given, since it can never be gained by
force) yet the Text is not necessarily, and unavoidably to be sensed by gifts,
for (...) as well signifies office, as gifts. See vid. a Lap. in locum.
Romans 12.6, 7. Chrysostom. Lombard. Thomam. a Lap in loc. and Smectymn. page
19. London. 1654.
1 Timothy 4.14. Wherefore,

2 answer, his verse, or he five terms therein are not to be expounded by gifts.
Secondly, we deny that (...) though it had been used, or (...) and (...) which
are used, can sense the five terms, Apostles, Prophets, etc. by gifts, not by
Church Officers.

First because the terms are elsewhere distinguished from extraordinary gifts,
1 Cor. 12.28. there as here, Officers are named in official terms, as Apostles,
Prophets, Teachers, and besides which we have not here, miracles, gifts of
healing, and diversity of tongues are added; which latter were extraordinary
gifts received, and acted by Church Officers. And unless the former were
official terms, their distinct enumeration were superfluous.

Secondly, the works mentioned in this Text are not of an extraordinary, or
temporary nature concerning non-converts, or unbeleevers (the grand, if not the
sole end of Gods collation of such extraordinary gifts. 1 Cor. 14.22.) but of
public, and perpetual advantage to Christian societies, to wit, the perfecting
of the Saints, etc.

Thirdly, are Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, etc. extraordinary gifts? So
also are Pastors and Teachers, since the Text allows us to give that term no
more to one then to another, and since they all have one assigned Legislator,
as also yet durable and continuing works.

Fourthly, the ministry is a gift, but of another nature then the gifts in
question, that is the public gift to the whole Church, these were personal
gifts, to particular men.

Third Particular ans. to Esthius. In loc.
Third Ans. Esthius is so violently born down the stream of ancient Expositors,
running in the other channel, as he cannot take hold of any one of his opinion;
Indeed he snatcheth at St. Ambrose, but incontinently takes off his hand,
confessing he interprets it (as we do) of Officers, and leaves us to take hi^
word against that Father: A Lapide concurs with his fellow Jesuit, and
Esthius, but in like manner urges it upon his own authority, acknowledging
that St. Ambrose, and St. Anselm (no other Father or Ancient writer being
quoted by him) were of the other Judgment.

Fourth particular answer to Bellarmine.
Fourth Ans. Bellarmine foreseeing the inability of this comment to encounter
the force of the opposite argument brings it into the field as a rear guard,
which he never draws up, or enforces, but outfaceth the truth with this
bravado in the front: Although the Pope be not literally mentioned, Bellar du
by supra.
he is specially intended in the first clause; And he gave some Apostles:
Whence I collect that, First, the sensing of this Text by gifts is a Jesuitical
shift, to salve the honor of the Popes lost Apostolate. Secondly, Bellarmine
in the double answer, enterseers, and contradicts himself, for if the
Pontificate be expressly placed in the term Apostles, then the Text does not
treat of extraordinary gifts, but if the text do treat of such extraordinary
gifts, then his holiness must go seek another Scripture to confirm his
Apostolate, and support it from falling out of the Church together, and ceasing
with those gifts. We are now got out of the fourth, and last Objection, and
enter upon the second Exception against the Presbyterian Definitions.

Second Except. Evangelists did not officially supply the Apostles places,
Second exception, the Evangelists were not the Apostles supplies.
nor does the so often mentioned Text in the Epistle to the Ephesians (for all
Calvin says it) prove it. It barely mentioning the name Evangelists, without
any word, or title of their Office. Because the text quoted to prove it does
not prove it.
Their foundation being thus demolished, we might surcease all farther
troubling our selves with their superstructure, and leave it to fall of its
self; but because all look not so low as the bottom, and ground of things, and
because this building has a gay, but deceitful aspect, we will come a little
closer, and view, and examine it more narrowly: 3. Their reasons for it
examined.
The whole pile of the Evangelists supply of the Apostles places, stands upon
those two slender pillars.

First, a supposition of their distinct works, the Apostles being presumed to
plant, the Evangelist to water Churches; First Rea. the Apostles planted, the
Evangelist watered Churches.
see most of the fore cited Definitions.

Secondly, a mere conceit of their distinct titles, they allowing the Apostles
their name and title, without alteration, but do esteem the Evangelist to be
the Apostles companions, or vicars; Second Reas the Evangelists were the
Apostles companions and vicars.
see also the Definitions.

We will try whether those pillars be built upon the rock, or upon the sand,
our search shall begin with the first of them, which is,

First, Apostles and Evangelists did distinct works, Their first reason
confuted.
or the Apostles planted, and the Evangelist watered Churches. There is some
ambiguity in the term planted, it is borrowed from husbandry, First in one sense
the Apostles did not plant the Church.
and originally notes the sowing of the first seed of a vegetable, be it herb,
flower, grain, etc. or the immediate entrance upon a country improvement. In
this sense we deny that either the Apostles, or the Evangelists planted the
Church, for Christ the chief husbandman, first took in that vineyard, and
appointed the Apostles, and all other Ministers to be but laborers, and
servants under him to dress, and look after it.

But beside this, to plant has a derivative signification, so it is used of the
taking up, Secondly in another sense the Apostles planted the Church, but they
did not do it singly.
and spreading into many places, what before grew in one place. In this sense
we confess the Apostles planted Churches. But, First, this in strictness of
speech is rather propagation, then plantation. Secondly, this was no distinct
work peculiar to the Apostles, for even in the Apostles times, the Evangelists
thus planted, or constituted Churches; as we have already heard, from Beza,
Faius, and Spanhemius, in their Definitions. And also much of that work, call
it by what name you will, has been done since the death both of the Apostles,
and of the supposed Evangelists, as will soon appear by a search after the
originals of most Churches now in being. Let me add, much, if not most of that
work remains undone until this day, the greatest part of the world being
unconverted, and must for ever continue so, if propagating Churches, were the
distinct and incommunicable work of the first Church Officers: So that no
present Church Officers have a power to preach unto the Turks, Jews, Tartars,
Persians, and other numberless unconverted Nations in the four quarters of the
world, and to settle them in a Church estate upon their conversion. I am not
now to be told, that the first Officers were builders, present Officers are
conservers, and maintainers of Churches, or what vast difference these terms
are conceived to put betwixt them. But let it be told me never so often, I
shall never take it for a truth; till it shall be proved that Christ was not
our Legislator; that he did not promise a perpetual presence to an Apostolical
succession of Ministers: That no Church has been formed out of a before
unconverted people, since the death of the twelve first Apostles. That never
any more like Churches shall be formed hereafter: And that the building
Apostles preached another word, administered other Sacraments, exercised
constantly, and officially other censure, then conserving Ministers, can now
preach, administer, or exercise. This first reason therefore, for the
Evangelists supply of the Apostles places, as their inferiors, because the
Apostles planted, and the Evangelist watered Churches, is no reason. Proceed we
to their

Their second reason invalidated.
Second, or the distinct titles betwixt the Apostles, and the Evangelists, these
so far as concerns the Evangelist, are twofold. 1. Vicars. 2. Companions.


Evangelists were not the Apostles vicars.
First Vicars. It seems the Apostles were Parsons, and the Evangelists Vicars in
the Catholic Church. This is affirmed by the London Presbyters, as we have
beforeheard in their Definitions. But they bring no Scripture for it, neither
is it agreeable to any of those sound words, unless it be one of those profane
novelties, prophesied of, and prohibited by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.10. Do
Presbyters mislike our diligence in meddling with their work, and say they can
do it better; we will not answer it with another question, why it is left
undone? But are content to await their leisures till they can, or will do it.
And as a spur to their future diligence we make this serious proffer. Let them
give one clear and full Scripture instance (one is not much in a business of
this weight, and easily produced, if all Scripture be so plain, as they boast
it is, for their notions) proving the vicariate unto the Apostles, of those who
did the works mentioned in their Definitions: And by what authority the
Apostles made them their vicars, theirs be both truth and- victory. Till which
is done, we say the notion is novel, and censure it as such; suffice this for
the Evangelists first supposed title. Proceed we to the

Secondly. Companions. The Apostles companions distinguished.
The Evangelist they say accompanied with the Apostles: And it may be granted,
for the Apostles had companions of several sorts; what they were perhaps may
not be unworthy of our inquiry and observation, as also whether the Evangelists
accompanied with the Apostles, as inferior to them in dignity, but next unto
them in office. I observe the Apostles had beside companions on the road, two
sorts of companions in the work.

First, Ministers. Such was John-Mark to St. Paul, First into Ministers, who
did no parallel works, which those mentioned of the Evangelist.
and St. Barnabas, Act. 12.25. And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem,
when they had fulfilled their Ministry, and took with them John whose surname
was Mark. Act. 13.5. And when they were at Salamis, they preached the Word of
God in the Synagogues of the Jews: And they had also John to their Minister. In
the former of these two Texts, we have the assumption of John-Mark by the
Apostles; In the latter, we have the quality wherein they received him, namely
to be their Minister. Now whether Mark and his like, ministered to the corporal
necessities of of the Apostles (as some think they did) Scripture is silent,
Vid. a La p. in loc.
and it contributes little to the clearing up of their Church-office, whether
they did, or did not. But this we may probably collect out of the story of the
aforesaid John-Mark. The Apostles in their travails took some choice, and
hopeful persons to accompany them, to Minister unto them, and observe their
ways, who were a kind of seminary, or nursery of Apostles, planted, with
designed successors. The Apostles imitating Moses therein, who in like Manner
assumed Joshua, who accordingly is called his Minister. Exodus 14.13. Deuteronomy.
1.38. Josh. 1.1. These Ministers afterward as occasion offered, the Apostle
assumed into a partnership, or refused them. Thus John-Mark the Minister having
justly distasted St. Paul by leaving, and not going with him, and Barnabas,
unto the work at Pamphilia, (Act. 13.13. Now when Paul, and his company loosed
from Paphos, they came to Perga in Pamphilia, and John departing from them,
returned to Jerusalem.) after his coming back to them at Antioch, for this very
reason is adjudged by St. Paul (though Barnabas resolved the contrary) not fit
to be received into a further fellowship with them. Act. 15.37.38. And Barnabas
determined to take with him John whose surname was Mark: Bu^ Paul thought it
not good to take him with them, who departed from them from Pamphilia, and went
not with them to the work. This occasioned a paroxisme, and violent feaver-fit
of contention betwixt the Apostles, which proceeded to the breach of the
present association. And Barnabas holds his former resolution and assumes Mark:
But St. Paul choseth Sylas. Act. 15.39.40. And when the contention was so sharp
betwixt them, that they departed asunder one from another: And Barnabas took
Mark, and sailed into Cyprus: And Paul chose Sylas, and departed, being
recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God. Now that St. Paul withstood
Marks readmission; evidenceth that those Ministers (while such) stood in the
nature of Candidates for office; and might upon their good or evil behavior be
elected, or rejected. Otherwise St. Paul could not so resolvtely have opposed
Mark, and rather chosen to break with Barnabas, then t^ close with him. Besides
some new honor was derived unto Mark, by his readmission and reassumption;
because if at his return, he had been of an equal order with St. Paul, and
Barnabas, his proffering himself to the work had been sufficient satisfaction,
especially when Barnabas was satisfied. This gradual assent of Ministers, is
farther confirmed by Timothy, who is called St. Paul's Minister. Act. 19.22. So
he sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him, Timotheus and
Erastus, but himself abode in Asia for a season: Which Timothy, he the same
Apostle afterward exhorts to abide at Ephesus, and take an Apostolical charge
of that Church, 1 Timothy per tot. But we read not either of Timothy, or Mark,
doing, or being desired to do any works of that kind, while they were but
Mini^ters to the Apostles: Exam. Council. Trid. 2 par. Exam Can. 2 de sacro
ordene non quod aequales esset honoris gradus, sed communis omnium opera, quo
minus excusabilis fuit postea, cum. sanctam vocationem desereret. Call. ad Act.
13.5.
That Mark while a Minister to St. Paul and Barnabas was initiated, and entered
into an inferior degree of office in the Church, Chemnitius assents. Calvin
concerning the same says, he was made a Minister, not that the degree of
honor was equal, but because the work of all of them was ^ommon, whereby Mark
was afterward less excusable when he deserted his holy vocation, Beza says
the word Minister, strictly ^ignifies an under-Rower, the Apostles as it were
sitting at the stern. Besides it does not savor of a Christian, much less
Apostolical spirit for any one to call his fellow labourer in the ^ame work his
Minister. St. Paul uses another kind of lan^uage concerning them, 2 Cor 8.23.
Whether any do enquire of Ti^us, he is my partner and fellow-helper concerning
you, or our brethren ^e enquired of, they are the Messengers (or Apostles) of
the Churches, and the glory of Christ. This leads us to the consideration of
the, Subservientem ad verbum subr emigem, Apostolis viz. quasi gubernacula
obtinentibus. Beza ad loc.
(...) Second sort of Apostles companions, or partners, who were men assured,
and ordained by the Apostles into their whole work, and office. Thus Sylas by
St. Paul, Act. 15.39, ^0. After which assumption both are jointly engaged in
confirming of the Churches. Act. 16.4. And as they went through ^he Cities they
(i. e. Paul and Sylas, read the context) delivered ^^em the decrees for to
keep, that were ordained by the Apostes and ^lders at Jerusalem. Secondly, into
partners who did like work with those mentioned in the Definitions, but were
not Evangelists in the sense of those Definitions.
This Sylas did not do in virtue of his first ^mission from Jerusalem, but in
the authority of his new assumption, recorded but five verses before; the
mention whereof ^ere an insignificant copiousness, and wast redundancy of
words, if it did not raise Sylas to an higher order, or farther empower him for
the work, because long before he had travailed in company with St. Paul, and
needed not now so solemnly be said to be taken with him; Most certain it is,
while St. Paul and Sy^^ continued together, Sylas is not scripturally excluded
from doing of any work, or bid stand by while St. Paul acted single, neither is
he called by any distinct, or inferior title to St. Paul. Suppose Evangelist,
or other: But on the contrary both he and St. Paul are directed in their
journeying, and work by one spirit. Act. 16.6, 7. conjoined in the subscription
of several Epistles. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1, 2. 2 Thessalonians. 1.1. the end and occasion
whereof we dispute not till provoked by some adversary: and the one is
acknowledged by the other to be his fellow laborer in planting the Corinthian
Church. 2 Cor. 1.19. such a partner was Titus, he is so called 2 Cor. 8.23 and
his discharge of Apostolical works at Creet is evident by Titus 1.5.

Reasons why they were no Evangeltsts.
This second sort of Apostles companions, or Partners, are they whom our
Definers account to be Evangelists, but they give no reason for it, neither
peradventure can any be given, but the following reasons oppose it.

First the Evangelist was a distinct order, and superior to Prophets.
First, if companions, partners, and suppliers of the Apostles places, in
constituting of Churches, ordination of Ministers, etc. were Evangelists as
Evangelists are Presbyterially defined to be distinct from, and inferior to
the Apostles; then of necessity the Evangelists were a distinct order, and
superiou^ to Prophets, the dangers and inconveniences whereof, have been
sufficiently showed already.

Secondly, if such Companions, Partners, and Suppliers of the Apostles places
did the aforementioned works, Secondly, the Evangelist is assigned such works
as necessarily raise him to the Apostolical order.
they were not only next Apostles, but of the Apostolical order, because what
ever was officially Apostolical is thereby allowed unto them, consequently they
were not Evangelists in the sense of the Definers. This is manifestly provable,

First, by Scripture, which perpetually mentions the Ap^stolate, as distinct
from, and superior unto all other Ministers, Luke 19.1. Luke 10.1. 1 Cor.
12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. B^^ distinction of order consists in distinct works,
whereas the Apostles wrought no higher, yea no other works in respect of their
offices, then those allowed by the Definitions unto the Evangelists, viz. of
planting, and governing Churches. Beside^ we have exactly searched the new
Testament, for the origina^ of Church Officers, to the joint mission of St.
Paul and Barnabas, and observe where any pairs are solely mentioned, wherea^
one is called, or reputed to be an Apostle, the other is likewise so styled, or
by his name, and concurrent operations is adjudge to be an Apostle: For
instance, Christ sent forth the Apostle two, and two by themselves, Mar. 6.7.
And he called unt^ him the twelve, and began to send them forth two by two, and
gave them power over unclean spirits. The seventy Disciples he likewise sent
forth in couples by themselves, Luke 10.1. After those things the Lord
appointed other seventy also, and sent them two, and two before his face, into
every City, and place whether he himself would come: neither do we any where
read of his blending of any two, or more of those diverse orders. After the
Ascension this order also continues. Thus St. Peter, and St. John (both
Apostles) are emitted by the other Apostles at Jerusalem, to constitute a
Church at Samaria; Act. 8. 14, 15. I list not to engage upon a curious
speculation, why Christ yoked his Disciples at their work, what is most
obvious, takes best with me; to wit, he did it that the burden might lay the
steadier, and be born the easier upon conjoined shoulders, that couples drawing
together might mutually assist one another, and rid and dispatch more work then
one could do alone; our enquiry is after the order of such associates, which
Scripture hitherto makes parallel, and

Secondly, reason votes with it; to what purpose serves order, or wherein does
diversity of order consist, but in the separate and diverse actions of men of
several orders; Vbi primo occurrit a liquid additum alteri, ibi incipit esse
orde Durand. ad lib. 4 sentent. quaest. 24. quantum ad primum Lugduni 1560.
who is chief where all command? Joseph had been Pharaoh, or more then he,
unless the King had reserved the Throne out of his large grant of power unto
that Favorite. Genesis 41.41. To question whether two legal discharges of the
same distinct acts, be of one, and the same order, is, if not to deny order, to
exclude them both from being members of it, for there is the same reason to
admit, or exclude both. I know either order Apostolical, and Presbyterial, did
common works, as Preach, Baptize, etc. In doing whereof, neither encroached
upon the others orders or ^ounds, because both did them of official right.
Barnabas objected to be an Evangelist.
But this is no ^eason to continue the surmized difference, and diversity
be^wixt the Apostles and the Evangelists, because the Evangelists are not
limited to such common works, By Calvin and Maresius.
but empowered to ordain Ministers, and exercise the censures, which works are
purely, and properly Apostolical. Non autem Barnabas, ut multi perperam volunt
colligere, ex Act. 13.2. Act. 14.14. cum tamen comes fuit additus Paulo, ceu
Evangelista, Paulus enim praeibat in loquendo, unde synecdochi (...) ambo
Apostolorum nomine exprimuntur. Mares. system. Theol. loc. 15. Sect. 44.
And let it be noted also that several of the Definers say, they did those
works in or over, all, or many Churches.

This might suffice to be spoken in this point, but Presbyters knowing how much
the whole weight of their cause rests upon this, how weak soever pillar;
labor might and main to uphold it, with what props, or shows of reason, or
conjecture, we will now examine. All consent to the parity of jointly emitted
Officers, till the Apostolate of St. Paul and Barnabas. In whom if we will
credit those who have made themselves our adversaries, the ancient order is
inverted, St. Paul being an Apostle, Barnabas being an Evangelist. This they
affirm with some heat, and fume forth into reviling terms against those, who
with Scripture affirm the contrary. Thus Maresius, he says. Barnabas was no
Apostle, as many would foolishly, or perversely ^ollect from Act. 13.2. Act.
14.14. whereas he was added to St. Paul, as his companion, or an Evangelist;
for Paul was most forward in speaking, and both were called Apostles,
synecdochically, because one was an Apostle. Quum Lucas Barnabam cum Paulo
Apostolum vocat nominis significationem longius extendit, quam ad primarium
ordinem quem insti tuit Christus, in sua ecclesia proprie enim loquendo,
evangelista fuit non Apostolus. Calv. ad Act. 14.14.
Calvin says, whereas Luke calls Barnabas an Apostle, he stretches the
signification of the word beyond the order instituted by Christ, for to speak
properly Barnabas was an Evangelist not an Apostle. It Is hard to judge which
does more apparent injury, to truth or St. Luke; Calvin who says he speaks
improperly in calling two Church Officers by the same names, when both were
coupled in performance of the same works: Or Maresius, who sliceth the
Evangelists single words in pieces, and makes him, when no reason can be
alleged moving him thereunto, to wrap up (what one would think he intended
for) the plainest historical narratives, in such perplexed folds of figures, as
it is very difficult (if not impossible) to understand his meaning. If he writ
the Acts at this rate, they are not, as he designed his Gospel to be, an
instruction for Catechumeni, young raw Christians, to use, for the confirmation
of their Faith. Exceptions against their manner of speaking.
Luke 1.4. That thou may know the certainty of those things, wherein thou
have been instructed (...) wherein thou have been Catechized.) but an
exercitation for critical Grammarians to abuse, to a perpetual wrangling, and
arbitrary abounding in their own sense. And it may equally be said of
Scriptures, as of Aristotle's Book of natural Principles, they were published,
as if not published. It Is a maxim with Civilians, not to distinguish where
their law does not distinguish, and ought it not to be so among Divines? Admit
the contrary, when you charge sacrilege upon the Papists, for stealing the Cup
from the Laity (Scripture admitting them to a participation of both elements 1
Cor. 11.26, 27, 28.) how readily may they answer, both elements are mentioned
in Scripture Synecdochically. And the Laity ought so to interpret i^ because
their Church (which knows the figures in Scripture as well as any private men)
has determined that they have (...) right, and does admit them to participate
only in one; o^ when you say, St. Peter's now claimed Jurisdiction over the rest
of the Apostles, is of a latter date then the Apostles time; because the ten as
the greater number, and evidentially of the power in the major part sent him,
with St. John, to perfect the Church-plantation begun by Philip at Samaria;
Act. 8.14, 15. they may retort the argument, and say the ten in St. Peter's
absence (a known Jesuitical contrivance, to rebate the edge of Protestant
instances against St. Peter's being at all, or so long as they say he was at
Rome) sent St. John, but St. Peter returning in the mean time (least so eminent
a service should be done without his concurrence) accompanied St. John upon his
own authority. And they are both said to be sent Synecdochically, because one
was; or finally when those stains of Christian religion, who pretend love to
God, but are envious, malicious, and uncharitable; toward their brethren, are
reproved for their hypocrisy, and unnaturalness, they may plead Christ's
reduction of all the commandments unto two, one of love to God, the other of
love to our neighbor, but the latter is to be understood Synecdochically, the
former of loving God, which according to his own nature, is spiritual, and
invisible, being the only law performable by the new creature. But it is lost
time to trample any longer in this mire; examine we upon what mistakes those
Authors lead, and leave their party in it. Calvin says. Calvin's reason
expended and exploded.
Otherwise the word Apostle is stretched beyond Christ's primary institution,
and order. Whereby if he understand (I know not what else he can understand, or
be understood to mean) that Christ strictly confined the Apostolic office in
its institution, unto the number of twelve, so that never one more was to be
added to it: it equally oppugneth St. Paul's Apostolate, and both he and
Barnabas are called Apostles improperly, the word being stretched beyond
Christ's primary intendment, for the number of the Apostles was complete,
Mathias being surrogated into Judas his stead, long before St. Paul's
conversion. Nisi forte quia Paulo additus fuerat ut collegae utrumque in pari
officii gradu statuimus. Ita Apostoli titulus vere in Barnabam competet. Calv.
ad Act. 14.14.
Besides what ever Calvin meant by this proof of Barnabas his Evangelizate, he
did not long continue to have a value for it, and gives sufficient reason why
any one of an ordinary capacity should slight, scorn, and reject it, for in the
following words, he adds, Unless because he was added to St. Paul as his
colleague, we set hoth in the same degree of office, and so the title Apostle
will truly agree to Barnabas. These are Calvin's reasons for Barnabas his
Evangelizate. Maresius says, Paul was most forward in speaking. But this is a
mere crack of words, weak, and frivolous, because, First, forwardness or
backwardness of speaking, is no argument of the imparity of Church Officers; If
it were, not Christ's commission, Maresius his reason is no reason.
and ordination pursuant to it, but a natural fervor, and readiness of
utterance would constitute the highest order of Church Officers. Secondly,
Maresius his argument for St. Paul's Apostolate, rather then Barnabas's; or his
forwardness of speaking is retorted upon St. Paul, by the Sect-masters at
Corinth to prove him no Apostle. 2 Cor. 10.10. they snarle at his defective
utterance, as he himself complains, For his letters say they are weighty, and
powerful, but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech is contemptible. And
2 Cor. 11.5.6. He is necessitated to maintain his equality with the other
Apostles, notwithstanding his rudeness, or being an Idiot in speech. He says,
For I suppose, I was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles, for though I
be rude in speech ((...)) yet not in knowledge, but we have been thoroughly made
manifest among you in all things. Thirdly, Barnabas has a very high
commendation in St. Lukes history, for his grace and ability to minister the
oracles of God, Act. 11.23, 24. Who when he (Barnabas read v. 22.) came, and
had seen the grace of God, he was glad, and exhorted them all, that with
purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord, for he was a good man, and
full of the h^ly Ghost, and of faith, and much people were added unto the Lord.
Besides probably the Apostles surnamed him Barnabas, or the Son of consolation,
with relation to his gifts in exhortation, Act. 4.36. For let Bar be compounded
with the Hebrew nabba, or with the Syriack nabba, either way it as well
denotes, a Son of exhortation, as of consolation, or rather a Son of
consolation, by exhortation. And the word (...), whereby St. Luke expounds ths
name Barnabas, signifies both official exhortation. Act. 13.5. Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 4.13. and beneficial consolation. 2 Cor. 1.3. And Barnabas was renowned
for both, he was Barnabas, a Son of exhortation by his doctrine, and he was
Barnabas a Son of consolation by his charity. Fourthly, let Maresius his
praeibat in loquendo be referred, not to natural forwardness, but precedence,
and power of order, so that St. Paul's speaking before, or when Barnabas held
his peace, must be accounted an argument to prove the superiority of the ones,
and the inferiority of the others offices; By the same reason St. Peter was not
only supreme over, but of a distinct order from the other Apostles, he very
often making use of this precedence of discourse, Act. 1.15. Act. 2.14. ver.
37, 38. Act. 3.4. ver. 12. Act. 4.8. Act. 5.3. ver. 9. Act. 8.20. etc. Barnabas
proved an Apostle by a sixfold Scripture testimony.


All proof therefore of Barnabas his Evangelizate is wanting, and want we may
long enough, when such eminent persons as Calvin and Maresius, can bring no
better. But we have proof sufficient for his Apostolate, Videtur aliquatenus
adjungendus Barnabas. Bez. ad Ephesians. 4.11.
St. Luke richly furnishing us with a fourfold testimony, and St. Paul with a
double. St. Luke witnesses;

First, that Barnabas, and St. Paul, were at the same time separated to the
same work by one Revelation, and imposition of hands. Act. 13.2. As they
ministered unto the Lord, and f^sted, the holy Ghost said, separate me Barnabas,
and Paul, unto the work whereunto I have called them. This single testimony
extorted a confession from Beza, that Barnabas in some sort ought to be
reckoned among the Apostles.

Secondly, that they were both Apostles. Act. 14.14. Which when the Apostles
Barnabas and Paul heard of, they rent their clothes and ran in among the
people, crying out. They were now at Lystra, where such a Majesty of the divine
power attended their joint Ministry, and Barnabas's in particular; as the
amazed people reckoned him for Jupiter, and St. Paul for Mercury ver. 12. Who
knows not but that these amazed Heathens did mistake the true quality of the
Apostles, however from their act is colligible, that they were so far from
observing any inferiority in Barnabas to St. Paul, as contrariwise they
accounted him the father of St. Paul (had he been Mercury) and of other their
misconceived deities.

Thirdly, they acted jointly in Apostolic works. Act. 14.23. And when they
(St. Paul and Barnabas; see ver. 22.) had orda^ned them elders in every Church,
and had prayed, with fasting they commended them to the Lord, in whom they
believed. Ans. to Dissenters P. 20. London. 1648.
The dissenting brethren infer from this act of St. Paul and Barnabas that
there remains a power of ordination in any two elders at this day. Whereunto
the Assembly answer; For ought our brethren have showed to the contrary, some
of those elders might be ordained by Paul, some by Barnabas, and not all by
both jointly. Whereby they grant, that the faculty to do this work was
distinct, and in^eparable in either of them, whether associate, or asunder;
consequently Barnabas did not derive his power from St. Paul, neither was he
inferior to him. Cap. 14. Sect. istis autem adjunctis.


Fourthly, at their parting Barnabas assumes Mark into the same partnership of
his work, as St. Paul took Sylas; Act. 15.39* 40. which is a further
demonstration that St. Paul had no coercive power over him, Videmus hic
qualiter secundum oraculum officia inter se distribuerunt, nempe ut Paulus, and
Barnabas gentium essent Apostoli, alii autem Judeo rum. Calv. in-loc.
and that he was no such Evangelist as Bucanus in his Definition, and before
Beza in in his Treatise against Saravia, dreams of; to wit, One who continued
no longer in employment then till recalled by the Apostles. Suffice this for
St. Lukes testimony in this matter, St. Paul witnesses that,

Fifthly St. James, Cephas, and St. John acknowledge the joint Apostolate of
him, and Barnabas, and gave them the right hand of fellowship, as to the
Apostles of the Gentiles. Gal. 2.9. And when James, Cephas, and John who seemed
to be pillars perceived the grace which was given unto me, they gave to me and
Barnabas the righthand of fellowship, that we should go unto the he^then, they
unto the Circumcision. Calvin upon the place deserves attention, he says, We
see here how according to the Oracle, they parted offices among them; to wit,
that Paul, and Barnabas, should be the Apostles of the Gentiles, the others of
the Jews. B^ if the Oracle designed Paul, and Barnabas to be the Apostles of
the Gentiles, Calvin never consulted it, when he said Barnabas was no Apostle,
but an Evangelist.

Sixthly, Barnabas had (as St. Paul) a power to abstain from working, and to
expect a maintenance from the Churches, (...) the other Apostles did, 1 Cor.
9.4, 5, 6. Have we not power to eat, and to drink; have we not power to lead
about a sister, a wif^ as well as other Apostles, and as the brethren of the
Lord, and Cephas? or I only, and Barnabas, have we not power to forbear w^ king?

Barnabas is therefore an Apostle, no Evangelist, and he, a^ St. Paul are to be
reckoned among those Apostolic paires, w^ travailed, and wrought together as
fellow laborers. A that we may at last put a period unto this exception, I
repe^ and again say; No one while associate in the works of ordin^tion,
censures, etc, with Apostles, is in reference to such ass^ciation called in
Scripture, or can thence be proved to be a^ Evangelist. Be it granted, that
none after Barnabas is called a^ Apostle, (which perhaps 2 Cor. 8.23. Rev. 2.2.
and sever^^ other places will deny) yet since we have so often before receiv^^ an
account of Christ's Institution, and the Churches practis^ in this case; reason
wills us to esteem such associates of the sam^ order, and office, and give them
the same apellation, or title with those who associated with them; wherein we
shall n^ weaken the authority of holy Writ, or add any thing to t^ mind of its
author, but evince the self consistency of Scripture and the Apostles
uniformity in their Church-proceedings. Besides, after so many express
instances of Apostles, associating wit^ Apostles, Presbyters with Presbyters,
to question the order of the one, when both wrought the same work, is all one
as to doub^ whether St. Paul, St. Peter, or St. John, or any other Apostle^
more frequently mentioned in Scripture, do continue Apostles, if in any place
we meet their name without that title, when to another making so fond an
inference, our selves would reply, Scripture does it to avoid tautologies:
Suffice this for the second Exception.

Third Exception. We deny Calvin's warrant, from Ephesians. 4.^1. Luke 10.1. or either
of them, Third Except. Luke, Timothy, Titus no Evangelists.
to fasten an Evangelizate upon Luke, Timothy, and Titus, for but in one of
those Texts, ^he word Evangelist is barely used, in the other neither word, ^or
matter agreeable to Calvin's Definition of the Evangelist; and (...) neither of
them is the least mention of this Triumvirate, or of any one of them; Besides,
Ephesians. 4.11. which mentions Evange^^sts, also mentions Apostles, Prophets,
Pastors, and Teachers.

And any one of equal confidence with Calvin, may say Luke, ^imothy, and Titus,
were as truly Apostles, or Prophets, or Pastors, (...) Teachers, as
Evangelists. Besides if those three persons who neither there, nor elsewhere
are called Evangelists, be notwith^^anding Evangelists; because the name
Evangelists is used in that Text, then may we affirm what we list, of
whomsoever, or ^hatsoever, whose bare name we find in Scripture, and be it ^rue
or false, outface gainsayers with a pretended Scripture-^uthority, but in the
mean time prove nothing but our selves ^o be ridiculous, or if common fame
mount us up to a higher ^hear, make our believers to be so; we in the mean time
base^ employing the excellency of our parts, and splendor of our ^^putation
to make a Pack-horse of our brethrens modesty, and ^redulity, wherewith
afterward we will break their backs, if ^alled they wince, and will not stand
still under every arbitra^y, and most importable load; I confess Timothy is
once bid to ^o the work of an Evangelist, in what sense we forbear to enquire
^n this place, and turn over its consideration to the eight Ex^eption, and our
separation of the Equivocal senses of the word ^vangelist, but admit it any
sense, at the liking of the imposer; that does that concern Luke or Titus? of
whom the word is no ^here used, or if it were, it could not concern all of
them, in ^ne sense, St. Luke was a Penman of holy Writ, so were neither
Timothy nor Titus; Timothy, and Titus constituted new, or ^onserved old
Churches, and exercised Apostolical authority, ^n the administration of the
several powers of ordination, and ^ensures, but what Scripture proves the like
of St. Luke? Suf^ice this for the third Exception.

Fourth Exception. Sylas, Timotheus, Titus, Fourth Except. Sylas, Timotheus,
Titus no Evangelists.
were no Evangelists, though Spanhemius say it, neither dare we take his word
for it, least we incur a note of partiality, for excusing in him what we accuse
in Calvin; because he proves it as Calvin does, by bare, and impertinent
quotations, Ans. to dissenters page 62.
viz. Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.9, 10. But in good time our Assembly steps forth to
Spanhemius his aid, and with much confidence say, It Is plain Sylas was an
Evangelist: And not content with that, they add, it is a plain of Judas; Sylas
his Evangelizate they prove by Act. 15.40. Act. 16.19. Act. 17.4. ver. 14.15.
Act. 18.5. Judas his, by Act. 15.22. ver. 32. Seriously did I not know at what
rate these Captains levy and muster Scriptures, we should be daunted at their
numbers, Judas his Evangelizate examined.
here arrayed against truth; bu^ whether they be brought into the field for
pomp, or fight, will appear by the ensuing examination. Least is said of Judas,
w^ will rid our hands of him first. We read Act. 1.21. of o^ who as this Judas,
was surnamed Barsabas, he was candidate for the Apostolate when the lot fell
upon Mathias. In their prae nomina they differ, that was Joseph Barsabas, this
Juda^ Barsabas, but whether they were distinct persons, and this the brother of
the other (as A Lapide will have it) or whethe^ they were the binomina of one
person (Scripture affording many instances of like kind) we cannot determine.
In loc.
This is ce^tain, they were either distinct persons, or one person. If the^
were one person, his order is plainly separated from the Ap^stolical; Act.
1.23. And they appointed two, Joseph called Ba^sabas, who was surnamed Justus,
and Mathias. They appointed* but to what purpose did they appoint two, even
that out o^ one of them a Successor might be chosen into Judas his office and
place; but neither of these two could now be appointed t^ it, had they been of
the same order before: Therefore Antiquity constantly accounts both the Eligees
(while standing i^ election) to be Presbyters. And so far as concerns that
Bars^bas, no work of his recorded in that Chapter, or elsewhere does exalt him
above that order. Indeed Beza makes him t^ be the same with Barnabas, mentioned
Act. 4.3^ But he assigns no other reason for it, Bez. ad Act. 1.23.
then videri possit, it m^ seem so. But what ever it seem to Beza: First it did
not s^ seem to Citat. per a lap. ad Act. 4.36.
St. Chrys^stome, nor to ad Act. 4.36.
Camerarius, nor to ad Act. 1.23.
A Lapide. Secondly, it rather seems by St. Lukes exact description of
Barnabas, by his Name, Profession, and Country (in all which is somewhat
singular) that he rather designs a person formerly unmentioned in his History;
note his word^ Act. 4.36. And Joses, who by the Apostles was surnamed Barnabas,
which is being interpreted the son of consolation, a Levite, and of the Country
of Cyprus. If the Barsabas's were distinct, the latte^ enters the History, Act.
15.22. where he is styled (...) which our Translators render chief, but the
word signifies so much and somewhat more: to wit, a particular kind of
eminency, or official prelation. Primarios i. e. in existimatione habitos. Vt
pote ecclesiastico munere fungentes. Bez. ad Act. 15 22.
So Heb. 13.7. Luke 22.26. Beza upon ^he place interprets it by principal men
of high repute, being Church Officers. Now if they were Church officers (as
indeed they were, because they did the work of Church Officers ver. 32.) then
either they were Apostles, or Presbyters, not Deacons distinct from Apostles,
and Pre^byters, because they Prophesied, which was none of the Deacons work, as
he was distinct from the other two orders: But if they were Apostles, or
Presbyters, then were they not Evangelists in the sense of the Definers. Our
enquiry therefore is after their order; The Reader who watches for my halting,
supposes he has now gotten his advantage, and may demand with what face, or
co^^ur of modesty, I who so lately said Apostles, associated with A^ostles,
Presbyters with Presbyters, can question Judas his or^er, when he travailed in
company with the Apostles, St. Paul and Barnabas; But I feel my legs steady
under me, and the slip (...) in the questioners memory; for I have
distinguished betwixt ^postles companions of several sorts, and affixed a
parity, only (...) joint laborers, and performers of the same distinct works;
^ow if Judas, and Sylas did such special works, and were thus ^ssociate with
St. Paul, and Barnabas, upon their emission from ^erusalem, the dispute is at
an end, I yield my self caught in a ^ontradiction, but many reasons evince the
negative, none ^rove the affirmative; for, First the express errand upon which
Judas, and Sylas are sent forth, is not to constitute ^hurches, ordain
Officers, or administer the Censures (what ^urisdiction had the Apostles at
Jerusalem, much less could they ^erive to others, within St. Paul's, or
Barnabas's line) but to ^ive an account of the decrees of the Church at
Jerusalem, a^out the question then agitated about Circumcision etc. by false
^rethren among the believing Gentiles. So that Judas, and ^ylas may more
properly be termed the Messengers, or Mini^^ers of the Apostles, and Church at
Jerusalem, then the associ^tes of St. Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15.25. It seemed
good unto ^s being assembled with one accord, to send chosen men unto you, with
(...) beloved Barnabas and Paul. Secondly, those decrees being ^romulgated in
many places, one of the Messengers Judas, re^^rned back again to Jerusalem.
Act. 15.33. And after they had ^^rried there a space, they were let go in peace
from the brethren to the ^postles. This verse dismisseth both Judas and Sylas,
but it is (...) be interpreted only of leave given unto them by the Gentile
Churches to return home which Judas accepted, Sylas did not; for we read ver.
34. notwithstanding it pleased Sylas to abide there still. Afterward this
Sylas is assumed by St. Paul into a partnership, Act. 15.39.40. ere he joined
with him in Apostolical works: Wherefore Judas and Sylas at their first
emission from Jerusalem, were Elders of that Church, or Ministers of the second
and inferior order, whose emission, and the after exercise of a part of their
function by Prophecy, persuading the Gentile Believers to submit to the Jewish
Churches decrees, is all that is proved by the Assemblies Texts in proof of
Judas his Evangelizate. But how far they are from proving him such an
Evangelist, as is defined by Calvin, or Spanhemius, any one who is not partial,
or irrational may easily determine, for in or out of that Chapter (except in
the forementioned places) he is not spoken of, much less said to be associated
with any Apostle, or sent forth by him with Apostolical authority, to plant
new, or prune old Churches; all which should have been proved, ere the Assembly
had so ventrously called him an Evangelist. But let us see whether they have
any better hap with Sylas, concerning whom has been observed. First his
emission by the same Apostles, Sylas his Evangelizate examined.
at the same time, and for the same work with Judas. Act. 15.22. consequently
that they were then both of one order. Secondly, his assumption afterward by
St. Paul into a partnership; Act. 15.39, 40. This assumption, and the
succeeding associate actions done, both by St. Paul and Sylas, is only held
forth by the numerous Texts cited by the assembly, in proof of Sylas his
Evangelizate. In all which the word Evangelist, or any word of kin to it, is
not used, nor in any of them, neither do they hint his inferiority, or
subordination to St. Paul; so plainly do they prove him no Evangelist in a
Presbyterian sense; although our assembly say the contrary. Besides if either
Judas, or Sylas was an Evangelist, from, and after the time that Sylas was
associated by St. Paul, then forthwith the other is deofficed, for both of them
could not be Evangelists in one sense, because their works before, and after
Sylas his assumption were diverse, Fifth Exception. The seventy Disciples were
no Evangelists

1. Calvin's cited text does not prove it.


and each subordinate unto other. Thus we take our farewell of the fourth
Exception.

Fifth Exception. The seventy Disciples were no Evangelists. The affirmative is
Calvin's and Bucanus's, and they both pretend to prove it by Luke 10.1. where
Christ's designation, and emission of the seventy into every place and City,
whither he himself would come, is recorded. Which work were it allowed to be an
Evangelizate, or the workmen to be Evangelists in a proper and distinct sense,
it would stand the Definers in no stead, the mission and works of the seventy
Disciples being no way parallel to the mission, and works assigned by their
Definition unto the Presbyterian Evangelist: We dare trust any Reader to
compare the Text and the Definitions, and will transcribe neither of them. 2
Calvin will not allow that text to speak of Evangelists.
But perhaps we may save him (as well as our selves) a labor; for Calvin
serves this Text as the former, brings the record and speaks without it, yea
which may seem incredible, he did not think the persons there mentioned, to be
such Evangelists as he defines, for his Commentary upon the text, puts the
fortasse in his Definition out of doubt, Nulla his 70. discipulis proprie fuit
commissa legatio. Calv. ad Luke 10.1.
there he says, The seventy Disciples had properly no legation committed to
them; which is most repugnant,

First, to the nature of an Evangelist.

Secondly, to Calvin's own Definition of an Evangelist.

Thirdly, to what St. Luke writes of the seventy Disciples.

First, to the nature of an Evangelist, who is a Church Officer instituted by
Christ, but to be an officer without legation, or appointment to the office, is
as impossible, as to be a natural Father without a Child. Secondly, to Calvin's
own Definition of the Evangelist; wherein he gives him an employment, and
consequently an appointment to it, for how can any supply the Apostles places
without legation to that charge? to what purpose is all the noise of the
Apostolical ordination, association, or emission, if the Evangelists had no
legation, but acted upon their own heads. Thirdly, to what St. Luke writes of
the seventy, he is in nothing more exact throughout his History, then in the
distinct enumeration of their commission, ordination, and emission; That one
Chapter Luke 10. presents us with four observables concerning them. First their
designation, Luke 10.1. After these things the Lord appointed other seventy
also: In which few words are considerable, first who appointing? the Lord
Christ; Secondly who appointed? other seventy also, some were appointed before,
these were other seventy also; Thirdly when appointed? after these things, i.
e. after what precedes in this History, and particularly after the emission of
the twelve in the foregoing Chapter. Fourthly, after what manner they were
appointed? (...) he renunciated, demonstrated, or published, as electors to
Civil offices, give notice of their Eligees. Suffice this for explication of
the first observable in St. Lukes History concerning the seventy. Secondly,
their Commission, and work in the last part of ver. 1. ver. 5. and ver. 16.
together with the ground of both, ver. 2. and their privileges ver. 4. Thirdly
their Emission, ver. 3. Fourthly, their Confirmation, or continuance in the
harvest after their first fruits were brought in, and accounted for ver. 19.
Behold I give you power, etc. This notes continuance of Christ's presence with
them, for he does not speak in the past tense of what he had given, but in the
present tense of what he now gives, and confirms. This nineteenth verse is a
good way from the beginning of the Chapter; and Calvin has now forgot what he
wrote on the first verse. For there he says, they had no legati^n, In posterum
confirmat Discipulos. Calv. ad Luc. 10.19.
here he says, Christ confirms his D sciples for the future.

This latter is true; and confirmed by Euthymius, as Maldonate upon the place
quotes him. The result of all this is, either Calvin did not define the
Evangelist, or the seventy Disciples (himself being Judge) were no Evangelists.
What then! does Calvin contradict himself? he does so, and I would to God that
were all, it were no more then a particular confirmation of this general axiom,
that all men are liars. But there is more in it, for when pretenders to
explain, do obscure things, it is designedly to pucker, entangle, and ruffle
them into insolvable knots: Thirdly, so does Polanus and Spanhemius.
However Polanus, and Spanhemius lend us a sharp sword to cut them in pieces,
for perceiving Calvin's self-willedness, and single standing against all
Antiquity, to be too obvious to be publicly owned, they endeavor to turn the
knot of the Text another way, Polan. partit. Theol. lib. 1. p. 127. Spanhem.
disput. de ministrorum vocatione, etc^
and say, The seventy were a sort of Apostolical men, distinct from Apostles,
and Evangelists; but they do not tell us what sort of Apostolical men they
were, or wherein their distinction from Apostles, and Evangelists did consist,
and I believe they were well-enough content to leave it so: Whereby they make
all before cited of the Seventy, to be a mere dumb show, and transient
ceremony, and leave Presbyters at a loss about the original of their own order.
Whether because upstart-like they are ashamed to own their poor Parents, let
others determine. To these shifts are modern wits reduced, and in these
bypath do they wander, when they are weary of the old way, beaten with the
track of former Saints; and disdain to acknowledge any able labourer in Gods
vineyard, beside, or before themselves. Antiquity with one mouth proclaims the
Presbyterate of the Seventy, Fourthly so does Antiquity.
and says, Presbyters succeed them, as Bishops succeed the Apostles; but modern
Presbyters say, They were Evangelists, Apostolical men, any thing, nothing (for
they say their office was temporary, and discontinued) rather then they will
consent to Antiquity, or yield to truth. But both opinions act upon some
reasons, let the ^eader judge which are most convincing, and forcible. The
^ntients living nigh to the Apostles times, and reflecting upon the distinct,
and successive ordination of Bishops; and Pres^^ters from time to time, were
careful to find out, and keep ^art their originals, and first locations in the
Church. This (...) far as concerns Presbyters, was the ordination of the
se^^nty Disciples; and was the reason why the Ancients always ^^lled them
Presbyters. But our Definers living at a great ^^stance from the Primitive
times, when the Church state was ^uch corrupted: Papal tyranny by a way
peculiar to all tyrants, ^^ving confounded all orders, except those of its own
erecti^^. They designing reformation (whether because they were of ^e lower
order, or because the Our Presbyterian Assembly tartly urging the dissenting
brethren to a full conformity, to their government (which both of them in the
Bishops days called the discipline of God) receive from them a smarter denial,
they alleging that, there may be a greater variation, from ^overnment which is
established in a divine right (whereby they imply there is such a ^^^ernment
but distinct from the Presbyterian) much more from a government which is not
^^^blished on a Jus divinum. They add in the same, But when the government it
self, has (...) toleration from the state, etc. Dissenters answer to the
Assemblies papers before the Committee for accommodation, page 25. Our
perservation is, says the learned Hooker (^eaking of the Presbyterian
government) that no age had ever knowledge of it but only (...), that they
which defend it, devised it, that neither Christ, nor his Apostles at any (...)
taught it, but the contrary. Heokers Ecclesiastical Policy, Lib. 3. Sect. 10.
Magistrates, and Common-^^alths, under which they lived, would admit only of
those o^^icers who complied most friendly with their Civil Govern^^nts, or for
other reasons which themselves can give) did ut^^^ly renounce the superior
Ecclesiastical order. This at^^mpt being so contrary to Christ's diverse
Institutions of the ^elve Apostles, and seventy Disciples, the plain
constitutions (...) the Church at Jerusalem, in Apostles, and Elders, and the
^^me of all other Churches, from our Lords ascension until t^eir time, they
were necessitated to countenance one evil, by the perpetration of another, and
having thrown out the office to wrest those texts from truth, and the
exposition of all form^r Saints, which might, (as this of St. Luke) be a
Landmark o^ Mere-stone, to discover the former diversity, and distinction
betwixt the officers. But enough is said of this fifth Ex^^^tion, and we matter
not what Readers think it too much, so ^^at has been spoken be truth, as we
verily believe it is.

Sixth Exception. This passage, Gospel-writers were Evangelis^^ (which
vein-like conveys corrupt blood through the body of the former Definitions)
supplies matter to our sixth Exception. We would free our selves and Readers
from mistakes: Wherefore be it known we level our Exception, not against the
calling Gospel-writers Evangelists, for such they were in a gener^^ and large
sense, but against the Definers unwariness, who being to define, a yet
continuing Church Officer, and citing a ter^ which treats of him in that
notion, should yet notwithstanding cast up Scripture-writers in their number,
between whose o^der and our observation, the holy Ghost draws a veil, for
instance St. Luke. And whose work was not official, but of temporary, and
extraordinary Revelation; the major part of the twelve Apostles, being no
Scripture-writers, when others no^ of their number, as St. Luke, and St. Mark
were. Besides the word Evangelist is not used of the Penmen of holy Writ, in
a^ the new Testament, which we ascribe to Gods wisdom, a^ especial care of his
Churches peace, least otherwise brain-^ giddy, and vainglorious persons
perceiving that text spe^ of a formed Church, and of successive Church officers
(as inde^ it does) should assume confidence to profess what others ha^ the
impudence to conceive, namely that there is a standi^ Church Officer who may
write a fifth Gospel, and third Test^ment of the holy Ghost, because Christ
has set some Evang^lists, or Gospel-writers in the Church, till we all come in
the ^nity, etc. which terms are generally accknowledged to comprehend every
period of time, from the first age of the Chris^^an Churches militancy, until
the victory which advances h^ to the state and blessedness of triumphant
glory. Moreove^ modern Enthusiasts may hence be encouraged to censure (...)
proceedings of the ancient Church in rejecting Basilides a^ Gospel, Vid Baron.
ad eosdem annos.
writ A. C. 120. Valentinus his Gospel, promul^^ted, A. C. 140. Marcions
Gospel, and Apostolic instrume^^ published, A. C. 146. And Manes his Gospel,
and twelv^ Apostles sent forth to preach it, A. C. 277. These inconve^iences
are foreseen by more ocular Authors, some Scapula ad verbum ex (...) Thesauro
Stephani.
whereof say^ Gospel-writers are called Evangelists tralatitiously; minusrecte
Esth. ad Ephesians. 4.11.
others say, they were so called improperly: Our learned Whitaker, Mitto hic
quam site, etc. Whitak. To. 2. controv., page 530.
adjudgeth Bellarmine interpreting Evangelists in this text by Gospel-writers,
to be worthy of scorn not answer. Finally, n^ one book of Scripture, bears the
name of Philip or Timothy, or comes commended to the Church singly under their
name* But the holy Ghost only calls them Evangelists, therefore either
^ospel-writers were no Evangelists in a strict sense, or Timo^^y, or Philip, or
either of them were none. This concludes ^ur sixth Exception.

Seventh Exception. Beza, Faius, Seventh Except. the Evangelist was not
temporary.
and Zanchius unwarrant^^bly say, the office of the Evangelist was temporary,
and does ^ot now continue in the Church. This they barely say, but ^^^ce they
allege no confirming Scripture, we might without ^y more ado, turn them over
to St. Paul's council, 1 Cor. 4.^ not to think of men above what is written. But
peradventure ^ough they name it not, they took the oft-cited text, The text
Ephesians. 4.11. does not prove it.

First paper. Sect. And first of that of Timothy and Titus.

Their reasons thence drawn for the affirmative discussed.


Ephesians. ^11. for their warrant, it being Calvin's proof, and singly ^oted by the
Divines at Wight to give a King satisfaction, who ^rupled, and doubted of this
temporariness: We have read ^e text ten times over, and over again, but cannot
discern ^w it proves any is, or differenceth one officer from another,
^^temporary, for in the whole verse is not one member of that ^^stinction, but
contrariwise the titles Apostles, Prophets, Evan^^^ists, Pastors, and Teachers,
are weaved into one uninterrupted (...) read and series of discourse, and as if
the holy Ghost would ^ark their continuance to our memory, he prefixeth the
me^^odical helps of first, and second, to only two of three, whom ^r modern
divinity teaches us to forget. 1 Cor. 12.28. ^he London Divines saw this, but
rather then they will acknow^^dge it, Jus divin. 1. par. p. 40.
they have recourse to a distinction of their own for^^^ng, and say, The words
are to be understood, not Conjunctim, but ^ivisim, not conjoynedly that all of
them should continue, but seve^^lly that some of them, at least should
continue. Thus they. But ^e dare not allow of their distinction, for admitting
such a li^^ntious liberty to distinguish, men of corrupt minds may take, ^d
leave in Scripture, at the direction of their unsettled fan^^es; and thereby
prove the most Orthodox to be more erro^^ous then themselves: Besides let the
most desperate here^^^ks raze never so many of those sacred records, they are
not ^^provable, if they leave any undefaced; because they may ^s well as our
London Presbyters) resolve, and convince gain^ers, that the Scriptures are not
to be understood conjoynedly, ^at all of them should continue, but severally
that some of them at le^st should continue. And the least part they have left.
And a^ how happy had Marcion been, had he known, and could he h^ve made use of
this distinction, when Tertullian in contempt, and to render him odious to the
Church, called him the Pontick Mouse, for gnawing out what Scriptures made most
against his heresies, Secundum hanc interpretationem (quae mihi and verbis, and
sententiae Pauli consentanea videtur) tres illae functiones, non ideo
institutae in ecclesia furunt ut perpetuae fo re ^sed ad id modo tempus nullubi
ecclesiae ante fuerunt constitutae. vel certe a mose, ad Christum traducendae.
Calv. instituto lib. 4. cap. 3. Sect. 4.

Quanquam non nego, quin Apostolos postea, quoque, vel saltem eorum loco
evangelistas excitavit deus, ut ^ostro quidem saeculo factum est. Jd. ibid.


out of the Canon. But leaving the London Divines, come we to Calvin, who also
apropriates the three first terms to temporary officers, pursuant whereunto he
interprets those terms after a new, and till his time unheard of manner, and
says. It seems to him that those functions were not instituted to continue
perpetually in the Church, but either to remain till Churches were erected
where none before were, or till they were translated from the mosaical, to the
Christian discipline. Thus he* And thus it seems; Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, were absolutely temporary, and confined within one, or other of
these two limits, either to plant new Churches, or purge old from Judaisme: And
this seems to Calvin to be most consentaneous t^ the words and opinion of St.
Paul. Which notwithstanding, let the words and opinion of that great Apostle go
whither they will; Judicious Calvin has another notion, whereby these
functions seem to him to continue, not only after the death of the first
Apostles, and Evangelists, but even till his own time* for in the very next
words he adds, Although I deny not the God has since raised up some Apostles,
or at least some Evangelists in their stead, as has happened in our timo. This
latter may be true, though I very much suspect it in the sense which Calvin
meant it; but being true any way (as it is one way mos^ true) Calvin shows us
what a value he has for the sense, and meaning of St. Paul, according to which
he says his former n^tion is framed; Truth therefore it i^, that the first
notio^ is not suited to the sense and meaning of St. Paul; it is Calvin^ fancy
not St. Paul's sense, and is most improbable and false, since both Conversion
work upon the Gentiles, and Convicti^^ work among the Jews, is yet a continuing
work, and incumbe^ upon present Church Officers, the most part both of Jews, a^
and Gentiles being yet unreduced to a Christian Church Estate* More
distinctions, or other interpretations of the text, in savor of the
Evangelists temporariness, Reasons for the negative.
we have not seen alleged; but this fourth of the Ephesians, furnishes us
with several reasons in the negative.

First all were instituted, and confirmed by one lawgiver.
First, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, etc. were all of one institution, and
confirmation in office, because descended Christ who gave them, did continue
them when ascended, St. Paul directly affirming (...), etc. or he who
descended, and h^ who ascended is the same, and in both states, He gave some
Apostles* s me Prophets, and some Evangelists, and s^m^ Past^r, and some
Teacher*

Secondly, the Apostle wrote to the Ephesine Church, who had all now counted
standing officers affixed; Secondly, the Church whereunto St. Paul wrote was
constituted, and if he spoke of other officers then were settled or ought to be
continued with her, he should have mentioned them.
whom it was unsafe to distract with the enumeration of so many extraordinary
officers, without ascertaining of their names, numbers, and peculiar works.
Their names would have satisfied her whom, their numbers how many he meant, and
the distinction of their peculiar works, would both have given convincing
reasons, why he singled them out from the rest, unto a discontinuance and
hedged out all after pretenders to their office; But the Apostle omits all
those, and on the contrary, reckons each officer in official term^, takes all
possible care least their order, or ranks should be inverted, and appoin^s all
of them to perfect the Saints, work in the Ministry, and edify the body of
Christ. All which are the ordinary, and conti^uing works of the present
Ministry, or they have nothing to do.

Ob. Several works, Obj. other texts assign extraordinary works to the
temporary officers.
or actions are elsewhere ascribed to some, or all of the temporary officers,
not now performable by continuing officers. I answer, whosoever instanceth in
those works, must withal prove they were the office-works of those imagined
temporary officers, othe^wise he mispends his time, abuses his Reader, and
begs the question; for the Text in Ephesians treats only of office-works,
perfecting of the Saints, Answered negatively, and by an distinction betwixt
works and gifts.
etc. not of personal priviledge^, as working of miracles, etc. When God
instituted the legal ministry, he bestowed extraordinary gifts upon Aaron the
first high Priest, He casts his rod into a serpent, and he, or Moses for him,
laid it in the Ark, and it blossomed, and bare Almonds; Both these were done by
a special command, but did not amount unto a divine, and standing institution,
because his Successors could do neither of them; which defect did not alter the
Priesthood, and make Aaron of one order, his Successors of another, for the
Author to the Hebrews, says of that Hierarchy even in his time, that it was
(...), or after the order of Aaron, Heb. 7.11. The nature or continuance of an
office, is not known in the personal gifts or abilities, whether infused or
acquired of any of its administrators, but in the relation it bears to the
society, for whose weal, and advantage it was instituted. This is evident in
the Text before us; where St. Paul says, Christ gave some Apostles, etc.: but
why gave he them? to work miracles, or glory of their utterance, or knowledge,
no he gave them for the perfecting of the Saints, etc. I know many things are
heaped together as the extraordinaries of the first officers, which to a taker
of them in the lump, makes them seem hugely extraordinary, but who ever shall
view them one by one, shall find the most of them, as well extraordinary, and
extraofficial unto them, as unto us, some such as they could not always do, as
miracles, etc. others not common to all the Apostles, as Scripture-writing. The
bundle of supposed extraordinaries is confessedly bigger then what is here
exposed, but this is not a fit place, nor am I minded to spend time to consider
them here in parcels, we may have occasion perhaps to hint at some For the
Apostles general charge see page 29.

For their giving of the spirit see page 191. etc.

For their ordination by Christ see page 83. etc.

For their sight of Christ in the flesh, see page 90.

Thirdly the text is of that nature whereof one member being questioned, all
the rest are brought into doubt.

Survey of spiritual Antichrist, part 1. page 212.


of them in the following part of this discourse, but their full examination
and prosecution belongs to the tract of Apostles, whither we remit it, and the
Reader whose appetite is already stirred for further satisfaction. Proceed we
now upon the reasons why the Text in Ephesians does not treat of extraordinary
officers.

Thirdly, the Text is a Gospel-promise concerning, and assuring the perfection
of the whole Church, from the time of Christ's descent, and all time after
following from his ascension, till all believers shall come in the unity of the
faith, unto a perfect man, etc. Now may such a promise be understood by halves,
and the effective mediums of that perfection, or any of them be disused, to
what sort of words may we safely give an entire credit? or to speak more
plainly, how dare any single Saint adventure his faith and salvation upon a
particular promise. This no doubt occasioned Rutherford to say; If Christ
promised to be with the Church for an age, so as the Apostles did cease in the
next age, then there must be no Saints on earth now, but only in the first age
after the Resurrection, for this promise of Christ's presence is not extended to
Ap^stles only, but to all the faithful. Thus he.

Fourthly, this text is the principal prop of the standing ministry, and so
acknowledged. Lutherans.
Fourthly, This Text is the strongest and most bearing Pillar o^ the present
Ministry, the Sanctuary and Asylum of all persecuted Ministers, when
anti-ministerial Enemies would do violence unto their Office: then no words of
a temporary Ministry, for fear least the Adversary rank themselves in the same
list, and turn them all out of the Church together. Those three different
professions, Lutheranism, Calvinism and Papism, which share this Christian
western World among them, though in other things they are most contrary, Ipse
filius dei ministerium perpetua vocatione vult in ecclesia conservare, sicut
ait Paulus* Ephesians. 4. and dedit etc. Chemnit. exam. secunda partis Council.
Trident. tit. de sacramento ordinis, Francofurti. 1578.
yet agree as one man in this truth. For the Lutherans shall speak one of their
best Spokes-men, renowned Chemnitius; he says, The Son of God will conserve a
Ministry in the Church by a perpetual vocation, because S. Paul says, Ephesians.
4. And he gave some, etc. I could name others, as Brentius, Gerhard, yea and
Luther himself, but this shall suffice. The Calvinists Calvinists.
have very many Advocates, I shall (since the present Controversy is with
them) single out a few of them: Jus Divin. 1. part. page 39.
The London-Presbyters (as we have heard before) call the Text the Great
Charter of the Ministry: And is it so? How chance the three first named
Ministers, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, to hold their Offices for term of
life, when the other two, Pastors and Teachers, hold theirs in tail, to
themselves and their Successors? How can the present Ministry be assured of the
continuing use of their Function, when three equally, yea primarily, in the
Patent, are now degraded, and exauctorated? Methinks a busy Fancy reflecting
upon our late Tumults and Disorders, may make this Text prophetical concerning
the Great Charter for our Civil Rights; all which has been contended for (or
pretended so to be) with the hottest zeal, except the first clause, whereby the
King, and the then Authority of the Kingdom, grant unto God and Holy Church,
all their Rights and Privileges; all and every of which have been violated;
and to say the first clause, or what concerned the preservation of the
Immunities of the Church, was temporary, will be a more temperate answer then
any yet has been given to the Churches Complaints of received in^uries and
spoils, (His Majesty's most pious and gracious Restitution of the Clergy to
their Rights, only excepted.) But farther, as these London-Ministers call this
Text a Charter, Jus Divin. 1. part. page 40. Answer to dissent. page 2. Bound
up with their directory title Church.
so they give the Reader an account of its contents, (may he carry it in his
memory throughout this Discourse!) they say, When Christ promises a Ministry,
till we all come to the unity, etc. he is not only obliged thereby to keep it
from a final abolition, but from a total interruption. The Assembly in proof of
the Presbyterian Government, and to free it from the objections of the
dissenting Brethren, premise this (as an indisputable principle) before their
main Arguments, viz. All the Ministers, and Officers of the Church are given to
the whole Church, for the gathering and building of it, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians.
4.11. And they are all to teach and rule, and perform all other ministrations
with reference to it, and the least advantage of it. Thus they. Besides in
their advice to the Parliament about Church Government, they prove from the
said Texts, That the Ministry and Ordinances were given to and are to continue
with the Church till Christ's second coming. Docet hac sententia Paulus, usum
ministerii non esse temporalem, sicut paedagogiae cususpiam, sed perpetuum
quamdiu in hoc mundo ver, samur. Call. ad Ephesians. 4.13.
Calvin (whom our Assembly ad Ephesians. 4.13.
Assembly transcribe) thus comments upon the Text: Paul teaches by this
sentence, that the use of the Ministry is not (as the training of youth)
temporary; but perpetual, so long as we continue in this world. Who would read
more upon this subject, let him consult Calvin, Institut. lib. 4. cap. 3. Sect.
4. Whitack. Controv. To. 4. Controv. 4. quaest. 1. page 529. Sect. secundum
nostrum argumentum. Jus Divin. 1. part. page 39, 40, 114, 115. etc.

Papists. Hi gradus, and hic Hierarchicus ecclesiae ordo, ut alii sint
Apostoli, alii Prophetae, alii Evangelistae, alii Pastores, and Doctores,
manebit, durabitque donec infideles omnes ad unam Christi fidem and ecclesiam
^centur. A Lap. ad Ephesians. 4.13.
The Pontifician Suffrage is yet behind, which none delivers more fully or
plainly then A Lapide the Jesuit: He says, These Degrees, and this
Hierarchick Church Order, that some shall be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers shall remain and continue till all
Unbelievers are called to Christ Faith and Church. See also Jo. Bellar. de
Eccles. militante, lib. 3 cap. 13. Sect. praeterea Ephesians. 4. and lib. 4. cap.
8. sed ut vis hujus argumenti.

Fifthly, This text being opposed to the reception of all new Ministers unless
they are therein named, cannot without express nomination, contain any which
are temporary. Baleus de Scr. Anglic Cent. 7. Reasons against Presbyterial.
Government. p. 38 Constituit quidem alios Apolos, alios Pastores, alios
Evangelistas, alios* Doctores, cur non dicit unum omnibus praefecisse, qui
vices suas gereret, id enim locus-postulabat, nec debuit omitti, si verum
esset. Calv. institut. lib. 4. cap. 6. Sect. 10,
Fifthly, When any new erected Office, or order of Ministers would force into
the Church, this Text is made the port to keep him out, unless it can show its
hand, or bring its ticke^ for admission. Thus Treviza lets fly at the swarms of
Mo^ and Friars in the seventh Century, with, He had read where G^ had sent
Apostles and Priests into the world, but never any Monks (...) begging Friars.
Thus he. The Independents tread upon the toes of Presbyterianism, encroaching
upon the English Church with, Do you any where read that God has set in his
Church, fir^ Presbyteries, secundarily Classes, then Consistories? Calvin keep
at this guard against the Pope: He says, Indeed Christ appoint^^ some
Apostles, some Pastors, some Evangelists, some Teachers, wh^ does he not say,
He constituted one as his Vicar over all the rest, (...) that this place
especially required it, neither ought it to have been ^mitted, if it had been
true. Thus he. Now are these good arg^ments against Monks, Friars, Presbyters,
Classes, Popes, that the^ are not to be received into the Church, because they
are n^ nominated in this Text? No argument can be drawn from thence to prove
them temporary whom it does not nominate (unless it plainly express their
temporariness) because the same arguments would take place against and exclude
M^nks, Friars, Presbyteries, Classes, Consistories, Popes, although they had
bee^ named, if their Excluders please to say they are temporary, and though
admitted in the primitive, not to be continued in ou^ time.

These are our Exceptions against their Scripture Proof of temporary Ministers,
Exceptions against the word temporary, two ways interpreted.
but we have not spoken all that we have to say in that argument, for the term
Temporary may not pass without a long and serious animadversion: For I am
resolved that I may with good reason affirm, that the misunderstanding or
neglect of clearing up the true import of that word, has above all other
things rendered the Controversy about the Orders of Church Officers, intricate
and perplexed. Duo sunt vocabula quae non recte accepta fallunt, scilicet
temporarium and extraordinarium. Saravia de diverse. grad. Minist. lib. 1. cap.
16. London, 1611.
Learned Saravia could long since say, Two words not arightly interpreted are a
cause of error, to wit, Temporary and Extraordinary. A way to expound them he
assigns in that place, which although I will not utterly impugn, yet because
I judge it insufficient to loose all knots in this Debate, I shall pass it over
in silence, and spend a little more time and pains upon it, then (as I have yet
observed) he or any others have done before me.

The word temporary may be sensed two ways:

1. Of a certain time limited and past, or of the Apostles time, 1. Of time
limited, or past.
exclusive of all others.

2. Of any time, Planetary or Erratical, this, that, 2. Of erratical time.
or any other time, (all time admitting interruption, and opposed to
perpetuity) when a temporary officer (suppose the Evangelist) has been, is, or
shall be extant in the Church.

One or other of these two interpretations the term must bear ^n the former
definitions, let the Definers, or any for them, That Evangelists were temporary
in the first sense, affirmed by Zanchy. His reasons for it.

1. They were made Officers by revelation.

2. They were ordained by the Apostles. His first reason confuted. Revelation
distinguished into 1. Primary. 2. Secundary.


1. Primary, that made no Officer temporary.


elect which they please, we doubt not, by their several examinations, no
evidence the contrariety of both unto truth. And

First do they accept it of a time limited, or past, or the Apostles time,
exclusive of all time since effluxed?

We desire to see their Reasons. Are we answered by Zanchy?

They were either 1. Made Officers by Revelation. Or, 2. They were ordained by
the Apostles. We will reply to both these in Order.


To the first we answer by a distinction, and say, Revelation may be
distinguished into Primary or Secundary.

First Primary Revelations, they so far as they concern Church Officers, were
the first intimation of Gods will, for the constitution of those Officers: now
if Zanchy mean that the Evange^ist was thus chosen by Revelation, we expect to
know where we shall search for that Revelation, since the Revelations we have,
or can find concerning the constitution of Officers, declare no such thing,
but their settlement to the worlds end, Mat. 28.19, 20. And till we all come in
unity. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Terms as opposite to temporariness, as time is to
eternity. Does Zanchy therefore accept Revelation of,

Secondly, Secondary they if any such be designed officers, either

First to a new office. The danger of that notion.


Secondly, Secondary Revelations, or Revelations consequent unto, and succeeding
the first Revelations.

We answer, these Revelations designed their Eligees, either to a new, or to an
old Office; If to a new Office. Then, First, descended Christ did not
constitute his Church, and institute all her Officers for the dispensation of
her holy things; and some besides Apostles, etc. are given for the perfecting
of the Saints, etc. But descended Christ did constitute his Church, and
institute all her Officers for the dispensation of her holy things: Neither had
any other any power to do it, because he is our sole, and only Lawgiver, and
because he who descended, and he who ascended is the same. Secondly, Several
manifestations of the Divine will,, and executions of the Legislative power
will be contradictory, and justle one against another: The Church will fall
under distinct forms, and constitutions. The Platform of arguments raised
against the first, will equally batter the second Revelation. Divine Revelation
will cease to be the foundation of the Churches standing Ordinances, or
Ministry; what we have, or are like to have of Church Order, or Office will be
maintained to be the results of her own prudence, and o^ the successive
exigencies of her affairs, and government. And whenever she is wiser, or
factious pretenders to reformation presume they are wiser, then their
Predecessors, they may, pleading new Revelations alter her present form and
constitution, and frame her a new, as they think fitting. These will be some of
the sad effects of new Revelations, superceding the obligation and force of old
Revelations, and constituti^^ of distinct Officers in the Church, for the
dispensation of he^ holy things; neither will we add any more till we see ho^
these can handsomely be avoided; does Zanchy therefore accept his secondary
Revelation.

Secondly to an old office.

This is true, and verified in two instances.


Secondly, of a particular Revelation, designing new men to an old Office; we
say such secondary Revelations concern not the nature or limitation of the
Office, because they were defined, and bounded by the first Revelati^n; but
they do concern the unusual, and divine exhibition of a person, or persons to
the Church to admit him, or them unto Office. This is most true, though it make
little for Zanchies purpose, but much to the vindication and clearing up, of a
most precious and undoubted truth, and is confirmed by many, and plain
^cripture instances. We shall confine our search unto two, ^oth which are
famous in the new Testament for having Reve^^tions previous to their
Church-imployments, but let modern ^nthusiasts note it, these Revelations came
to others not them^^lves, the office was constituted and settled in the Church,
^^ng before those Revelations; both persons had hands solemn^^ laid upon them,
and their work seriously commended unto them by the imposers, ere they engaged
upon it.

The first of them is St. Paul: First of St. Paul.
The holy Ghost reveals to A^anias, the notable change wrought upon Saul's
heart, how he ^as persuaded to preach, where he was resolved before to
pers^cute the Gospel. This Ananias must communicate unto him, by his hands upon
him, and commend his work unto him, ^re he set upon it. Act. 9.17. ad fin. 20.
This being done, s^metimes afterward a Revelation comes to the Prophets and
^eachers at Antioch, willing them to dismiss St. Paul, and Bar^^bas from their
particular relation unto that Church, and t^ consecrate them, and send them
forth upon an Apostolate a^ong the Gentiles; This they do by fasting, prayer,
impositi^n of hands; Act. 13.1, 2, 3. I am not ignorant how divided
^^terpreters are in their opinions, concerning these two sever^l impositions of
hands upon St. Paul: Some esteem them to be s^veral ordinations, others think
otherwise: The new England Divines embrace the first opinion, but for a purpose
utterly undream't of by any other of its other favorers, Jus divin. 1 par. p.
145.
namely the reo^dination, or reiteration of the imposition of hands upon the
heads of those Ministers, who quitting one, become a new related unto another
people. Their brethren at London justly decry their novel and het^rodox notion,
but (though no fools) while they pass the rock of one absurdity they shipwreck
upon another, peremptorily saying: Ananias did not impose hands upon St. Paul
in ordination; wherein they have both the opposition of Scripture, Dico Ananiam
imposuisse manum Paulo ad hoc ut visum reciperet. Bell. de sacram. confir. lib.
2. ca. 12.

Vid. etiam eum eodem libro ca. 2 haec quoque solutio.


and of their own most noted Expositors, although as they ventu:+rously affirm,
the text seems only to hold forth the recovery of St. Paul's ^^e-sight, not his
ordination. But this is borrowed from Bellarmine, and is one of the things
which seem, and are not, and they were hood-winkt, or looked off the Text when
they wrote (...) for Ananias is expressly sent unto St. Paul, as well that he
might be filled with the holy Ghost, as receive his sight. Act. ^* 17. And
Ananias went his way, and entering into the house, and putting his hands upon
him, said, brother Saul the Lord Jesus which appeared to thee in the way as
thou came, has sent me to thee, that thou might receive thy sight, and be
filled with the holy Ghost. In other Texts the receipt of the holy Ghost is
constantly interpreted of the collation of official gifts, and wha^ other sense
can it bear in this Text, since forthwith upon Ananias his departure, St. Paul
having refreshed himself after his long pains and fasting, he went forth and
preached Christ in the Synagogue. Act. 9.20. And straight way he preached
Christ in the Synagogue, that he is the Son of God; besides, ere the second
Imposition of hands, by Lucius, Simeon, and Manaen, S^ Paul is registered among
the Prophets, or Teachers of the Church at Antioch. Act. 13.1. Now there was in
the Church which was at Antioch, certain Prophets and Teachers, as Barnabas,
and Simeon that was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, and M^naen, which had been
brought up with Herod the Tetrarch, an^ Saul. In hunc finem Ananias in Paulum
manus imposuit, partim ut illum deo consecraret partim ut illi impetret
spiritus dona. Calv. in loc.

Ananias mittitur, ut eum instruat donis spiritus sancti, ad Apostolatum
necessariis. Piscat. Anal. in loc.


These Scriptures prove that St. Paul was a Church-off^cer, ere Act. 13. And
Calvin, and Piscator say he was ordained by Ananias, whose opinion we hope the
London Divine will not be angry, if we prefer them before theirs. Cal^^^ says,
for this end Ananias imposed hands upon St. Paul, par^^ to consecrate him unto
God, and partly to convey spiritual gifts un^ him. Piscator says, Ananias is
sent to furnish him with spiritu^^ gifts necessary for the Apostolate.

But it may be questioned by what right, or authority An^nias could ordain St.
Paul.

I answer, Ordination of Ministers by Imposition of han^ was an official act,
performable by some, but not common t^ every Church Officer; See page 191.
'Twas not common to every Church Officer, since Philip who preached unto, and
baptized the Sa^^ritanes, could not impo^e hands upon them, but that w^ was
reserved to the ministration of the Apostles St. Peter, a^ St. John, when they
came down from Jerusalem. Now if Ph^lip could have done this work without them,
neither ought (...) to have omitted it, nor was it convenient for them to
exec^^^ it; if they were as St. Paul was careful (and who may doub^ it, since
they were guided by one, and the same spirit) not to trespass within another
man's line. This is one, but not the only Scripture instance, proving the
distinction of order in the Primitive Church; for Timothy is settled at
Ephesus, to orda^^ Elders by Imposition of hands, and to exercise the
Ecclesiastic^^ censures, when yet there were Elders officiating in the Church
before his coming. I grant we have no Text proving the admission of Ananias
into the Apostolical order, but doing their work, his capacity must follow of
course, for had he not been lawfully empowered to do it, God would not have
commanded him upon it. And if he had not received this power in the ordinary
way, as St. Paul, Barnabas, Timothy, and Titus received it, viz. by ministerial
Ordination, but by especial, or particular Revelation, God would, or might have
made St. Paul an Officer the same way, not ordered Ananias to do it, much less
by the rite of Imposition of hands, which was the ordinary way of admitting
Officers unto Office. Besides had Ananias an extraordinary capacity to do this
ordinary work of Imposition of hands, it renders him an Apostle of an higher
form, and of a more divine designation then St. Paul, who receives the holy
Ghost by Imposition of hands.

But moreover, and besides what has been alleged, to prove that Ananias
imposed hands upon St. Paul in virtue of a ministerial order; Ex a Lap. ad Act.
9.10.
I shall expose to the Readers view the opinion of several Expositors:
Oecumenius says, He was only a Deacon; and yet adds, that he was of the number
of the seventy two Disciples. Wherein (with reverence to his ashes) is
contained a notorious contradiction; for the seventy two Disciples were
Presbyters, otherwise the Church before, at, and welnigh ever since Oecumenius
his time, have erred in the derivation of the original of the Presbyterial
order, from our Saviors constitution of those Disciples. St. Augustine says,
He was a Presbyter, with whom in some measure agrees Calvin, Lib. 2. quaest.
Evang. quaest. 47. ex tod. Alap.
who fancying that Ananias his present Imposition of hands upon St. Paul, had a
special relation to St. Paul's confirmation in the Faith, he urges it against
the appropriation of confirmation, to Episcopal administration. But St.
Augustins opinion cannot be true; For Ananias as a Presbyter could not ordain
St. Paul to the office of preaching, since there is no ground for such, Lib. 4.
institutio ca. 19. Sect, 10.
a practice in Scripture, but many instances to the contrary (which was also
the current, and constant practice of St. Augustins time and age wherein he
lived. And since Calvin says, That Ananias consecrated St. Paul unto God, and
obtained for him spiritual gifts: Which Piscator affirms to be such as were
necessary for the Apostolate; whereby in a further contradiction to Scripture,
a Presbyter is empowered to ordain an Apostle. And Calvin's notion is equally as
improbable, and false as St. Augustines, since the text expressly says, that
Ananias was sent to impose hands upon St. Pault hat he might receive the holy
Ghost. i. e. receive ministerial abilities. And that forthwith after Ananias
his departure, St. Paul preached Christ in the Synagogue. i. e. publicly, and
officially exercised those gifts; which is something more then is conferred by
confirmation, unless all confirmed persons may forthwith discharge distinct
ministerial works. However both these opinions th^^ far concur with ours, even
to allow that what Ananias did, was in virtue of a ministerial order; And I
trust the candid and judicious Reader will as well allow us a liberty to assign
him a probable and proper order, as them to limit him to an order, which is
neither proper, nor probable.

Suffice this, for the first Revelation, and ordination of St. Paul.

Proceed we to the second; or Lucius, Simeon, and Manaen, their imposing hands
upon the same person by the direction of the holy Ghost. Lucius, Simeon, etc.
ordained St. Paul.


But while we are stepping forward, a question thwarts us, and demands a reason
of this reiteration of the imposition of hands upon St. Paul.

I answer, the two Chapters Act. 9. and Act. 13. treat of several, and distinct
ordinations of St. Paul unto diverse offices.

Does my Reader demand of what orders those offices were.

An Apostle.
I answer, Christ instituted only two teaching orders, or the Presbyterate and
Apostolate, which orders must interpret the several acts of Ananias, and of
Lucius, and his Colleagues; for immediately after either of them St. Paul did
the work of a Preacher. Ananias therefore ordained St. Paul a Presbyter* Lucius
etc. ordained him an Apostle. Ananias his act is confessed to be an ordination,
as we have before heard, but if admitted St. Paul to the Apostolate, the
reiteration of the a^ by Lucius, etc. either justifies the New-Englanders
notion, o^ was a nullity. For St. Paul could not be ordained into another
Church, or empowered to do other works, then what were committed to him by his
first ordination, if that admitted him to the Apostolate.

Ex a Lap. in loc.
Arias Montanus, Cajetane, and Suarez say, the latter imposition of hands, or
that by Lucius, Simeon, etc. was precatory, not ordinative, but contrariwise it
was ordination to the Apostolate.

First, all the new Testament records not a more formal ordination, First,
its recital comprehends all the parts of a most formal ordination.
the Text both describing the ordainers Commission, and the manner of its
Execution. The Commission; Act. 13.2. As they ministered unto the Lord, and
fasted, the holy Ghost said, separate me Paul, and Barnabas, unto the work
whereunto I have called them. The manner of its Execution; ver. 3. And when
they had fasted, and prayed, and laid hands upon them, they sent them away.

Secondly, St. Luke never styles St. Paul, or Barnabas Apostles, or notes their
performance of Apostolical acts, Secondly St. Luke never till after this act
calls St. Paul an Apostle, etc.
till after this second ordination. But immediately after it, he does both,
Act. 14.14. Which when the Apostles Barnabas and Paul beard of, they rent their
cloths, and ran in among the people, crying out. ver. 23. And when they had
ordained them in every Church, and had prayed with fasting they commended them
unto the Lord on whom they had believed.

Thirdly, The Apostolate, or higher Church Order (believe we either precedent,
Thirdly the Churches constant custom has been to ordain none Bishops who were
not before Presbyters.
or subsequent Church-custom) used not to be derived to any after its first
insitution, who had not before given proof of their ability, and fidelity in
the lower order, or in the Presbyterate. Thus Antiquity with one mouth, judges
Mathias to have been a Presbyter, or one of the seventy Disciples, ere he was
elected an Apostle. Thus St. Mark and Timothy, ministered to Barnabas and St.
Paul, ere they were elected to a partner-ship. This custom has been generally
observed in the Church ever since: Only some of latter days, have been created
Bishops in Germany, etc. ere they were Presbyters, and without ever intending
to be so, the greatness of the Revenue, and Jurisdiction, betraying the office
into the hands of secular ambition: But however such is the convicted
consciousness of these removers of the ancient bounds, that they exclude those
Bishops from the performance of proper Episcopal actions; and in propriety of
speech they may be said to have a secular Bishopric, not to be Christian
Bishops.

Fourthly, The most godly, learned, and ancient fathers, allow St. Paul, and
Barnabas to be ordained Apostles, by Lucius, Fourthly, the Ancient fathers
allow St. Paul, Apostolical ordination by Lucius, etc.
Simeon, and Manaen. Thus St. Chrysostom, the interlinear gloss and St. Leo in
his Epistles, reflecting no doubt, upon whose opinions learned A Lapide, who
also quotes Turrianus as of his opinion says. It is plainly probable, that St.
Paul, and Barnabas, had been already before this time ordained Presbyters, and
now were ordained Bishops.

Fifthly, Modern Divines both Presbyterial and Episcopal yield to this Truth.
Fifthly, Modern Protestant Divines of greatest note and authority are not
behind in suffraging to this Truth. Ad Act. 13.3. the Assembly here transcribe
Diodate upon the place where may be seen for the most part the fame words, or
altogether words to the same purpose. Jus Divin. 1. part. p. 159. Act. 13.1, 2,
3, 4. Exprofesso Paulum, and Barnabam Apostolos, gentium designat. Et paulo.
post: nequit eam ecclesiam veris Christi ministris destitutam esse, ubi Paulus,
and Barnabas, ad gentes concedere jubentur, prophetae nominantur. -- Extra
controversia^ est, expressas fuisse istas circumstantias, quo plus fidei apud
nos habeat Pauli vocatio. -- J^bet Deus ecclesiae suffragiis emitti Paulum, and
Barnabam quo ipse designavit. -- Promulga^ publico edicto, solenni ecclesiae
subscriptione obsignari jubet. -- Non tantum dimittunt, sed s^lenni ritu
instituunt eos, gentium Apostolos. Calv. ad Act. 13.1, 2, 3.
Our Assembly in the person of the Holy Ghost, say, Separate me Paul and
Barnabas that they may have like authority with the other Apostles; which if
they had received before, there was no need of this solemn injunction for a
separation. The London-Divines say, That even the very Apostle Paul, though
chosen immediately by Christ unto the great office of preaching unto the
Gentiles, in a miraculous way, yet notwithstanding it was the pleasure of the
holy Ghost, that he must be separated, and set apart by men for this great work
Calvin, notwithstanding his former opinion of S. Paul's ordination by Ananias,
is equally as peremptory for his ordination, by Lucius, and he says, In this
text God professedly designs Pau^ and Barnabas to an Apostolate among the
Gentiles. He adds, The holy Ghost mentions prophets, least any should suppose
Paul and Barnabas were s^nt forth by a Church which wanted true Ministers (...)
Christ. And again: Without all controversy, the holy Ghost observe^ the
circumstances of their fasting and prayer, that we may give the greater credit
to Paul's calling. And furthermore, God commands that Church to send forth Paul
and Barnabas, by their suffrages, unto the place whereunto he had called them.
This suffrage he calls the Churches promulgation by public Edict, and solemn
subscribing and sealing to Gods command. This is much, but he adds more, and
with it we shall conclude his Testimony: He says, Lucius, Simeon and Manaen
did not only dismiss Paul and Barnabas, but ordained them by a solemn
ceremony, to be the Apostles of the gentiles.

Omnino opus id fuit Apostolatus ad gentes, Aret. ad Act. 13.1, 2, 3. gentium
vocatio fidelibus tunc videbatur res nova, and insolens. Ita Paulus de sua
missione ad gentes debuit certa in ecclesia habere testimonia. Id. Ibid.
Aretius says, The work here committed to Paul and Barnabas was altogether an
Apostolate unto the gentiles: He adds, The calling of the gentiles then seemed
a thing new, and insolent to believers, therefore Paul's mission to the
gentiles ought to have certain testimony in the Church. Neither is this a
Presbyterian notion; for Doctor Hammond allows it, and in his paraphrase upon
the text says, And as they were upon a day of fasting, performing their office
of prayer unto God, the holy Spirit of God by some afflation or revelation,
commanded them to ordain or consecrate Barnabas and Paul to the Apostleship to
which God had already designed them: Heylins Hist. of Episcop. par. 1. ca. 4.
sect. 1.
and ^^cordingly they observed a solemn day of fasting and prayer, and so by
^^position of hands ordained them, and sent them away about the ^ork designed
them by God. Thus he. Thus Doctor Heylin, Paulum nescis a Deo simul atque
ecclesia missum esse? Whitak. To. 2. de authoritat. S. Scripturae contra
Stapleton, lib. 3. Sect. 3. Si vero quaeris quamobrem impositae illis m^nus
sunt eam te Graecus Scholiastes docebit, (...) hoc est and possent c^m
authoritate praedicare, Whitak. To. 1. con. Duraeum. Sect. 66.
he ^^ith, S. Paul's calling unto the Apostleship was not until the holy Ghost
had said unto the prophets Lucius, Simeon and Manaen, minis^^ing then in
Antioch, Separate me Barnabas and Paul unto the work whereunto I have called
them. And thus Doctor Whitacker interrogating Stapleton, says, Know thou
not that Paul was sent both b^ God and the Church? (he has reference in this
demand to ^ct. 13.) And answering Duraeus upon the same matter, he says, But
if you inquirest why hands where laid upon him, the Greek Schol^^st will
resolve thee that it was to enable them to preach with authority.

Sixthly, Since variety delights some Readers, Jubente spiritu sancto post
jejunium and orationem, per manus impositionem potestatem accipisse praedicandi
ubique evangelii, testatur idem Lucas. Eo namque sacro ritu initiatos
Apostolatu nemo est qui dubitat. Spondan. epit. Ann. Barron. ad Ann. Christi
44. Sect. 32. Quarto quia Christus ordinavit Apostolo-episcopos, h^ alios, ergo
and Paulus ab ii^ ordinatus est, hoc enim postulat, ordo Hierarchicus a Christo
institutus, ut cum ip^e Petrum and Apostolos, ordinavit, caeteri omnes ab eis
vel eorum successoribus ordinentur, A Lap. ad Act. 13.3.
and since what I have written may be censured for novelty by some captious
Readers, if it be not confirmed by all sorts of testimonies. I ^^^ll adventure
to confirm this truth by the deposition of some ^^pal Divines, who are of no
small note and authority. They a^e the College of Rhemes, who in their
Annotations upon the words, Separate me, mentioned Act. 13.2. say, Though Paul
^^re taught by God himself, and specially designed by Christ to be an A^ostle,
and here chosen by the holy Ghost, together with Barnabas, ye^ they were to be
ordered, consecrated and admitted by men; which wholly condemns these new,
rebellious, and disordered spirits, that challenge and usurp the office of
preaching, and other sacred actions f^^m heaven, without the Churches
admission. With these Divines a^ree Baronius and A Lapide. Baronius says, Paul
and Barna^^^ (witness S. Luke) did by imposition of hands after prayer and
fasting receive power to preach the Gospel every where: for of their initiation
to the Apostolate by that sacred rite there is none who doubts. A Lapide who
as before was noted, recites and refuteth the opinions of Suarez and Cajetan
against S. Paul's ordination in this place, does give four pregnant Reasons to
prove the contrary. His fourth Reason is, Because Christ ordained his Apostles
Bishops, they, other persons; therefore S. Paul was ordained by them. For this
Hierarchick Order instituted by Christ does require, That whereas he ordained
Peter and the Apostles, all others should be ord^ined by them or their
successors. Do any object and say, He says the Apostles, not Lucius, etc.
ordained S. Paul and Barnabas: May they be remembered how in the words
immediately prec^ding, he affirms this Text contains the only mention in the
scripture of the time and place of their ordination, and names and qualities of
their ordainers; but here is nothing said of the Apostles, but of Lucius, etc.
Besides in the following words he quotes Oecumenius, and Lyranus, asserting S.
Paul's ordinatio^ by Lucius, Manaen, etc. empowered thereunto by being
themselves previously ordained by the Apostles, which their opinion he neither
censures, or rejects, as false or improbable.

I know not what entertainment this truth shall meet in t^ world, this I know,
that I shall neither stand nor fall alone wi^^ it; and that there is but one
material objection against it, u^ which I shall endeavor to frame an answer.

Obj. S. Paul was an Apostle not of man, nor by the will of man.
Object. S. Paul says, Gal. 1.1. He was an Apostle not of m^^ nor by the will
of man.

Answ. 1. This phrase may refer to the institution of the Apostolical office,
or to the designation of S. Paul's person, or to the manner of his receiving of
his Doctrine, not to his ordination
Answ. 1. This phrase may refer to the Divine Institution^ the Apostolical
Office, Luc. 6.12. And it came to pass that (...) went out into a mountain to
pray, and continued all night in pray^ with God; and when it was day he called
unto him his Disciples, (...) out of them he chose twelve, whom he named
Ap^stles: or it may re^ to the designation of S. Paul's person, Act. 9.15. Go
thy ways, f^ he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles
a^ kings, and the children of Israel. Or it may relate to his recei^ing of
Evangelical Doctrine, Gal. 1.11, 12. For I certify you ^^^thren that the
Gospel which was preached of me is not after man, n^^ther was I taught it but
by the revelation of Jesus Christ. In (...) these senses S. Paul was an Apostle
not of man, nor by the w^ of man. And why may not the objected text be
explicated b^ all or some of them, since they are so obviously proveable^
Scripture, rather then have an interpretation affixed to it, m^^^festly
repugnant to other portions of holy Writ, and some^ them directly concerning S.
Paul; for was he formally admit^ to the exercise of his Apostolical Office, not
of, or by man, because humane ordination was incompatible with that sacre^
Function; then why does S. Luke record Mathias his electi^^ and ordination by
men, Act. 1.23. ad fin. capitis? And why a^ not the several forementioned
impositions of hands upon S. Pa^^ expunged out of the holy Canon? and why does
S. Paul in the same Epistle to the Galatians, so unwarily and vainly set dow^
his receiving of the right hand of fellowship from S. James, C^phas and John,
and their acknowledging him to be the Apostle of the Gentiles, Gal. 2.9.

Secondly, Act. 13.4. expounds the objected Text, and gives ^his sense; S. Paul
was made an Apostle not by man singly, Secondly, his emission by Lucius, etc.
is said to be an emission by the holy Ghost.
or (...) man's invention, but by man pursuant to a previous direction (...) the
holy Ghost, according to the Rules of Gospel Order, ^^nce in the forementioned
Act. 13.4. it is written, And they being sent forth by the holy Ghost, departed
unto Selucia, and sailed thence ^o Cyprus. But how did the holy Ghost send them
forth? (...) the preceding verse, or ver. 3. And when they had fasted, ^d
prayed, and laid their hands upon them, they sent them away. ^he they spoken of
in this verse, I suppose none will deny to be ^^cius and his Colleagues.
Besides, whoever shall observe St. ^^uls writings, they will find him usually
in those things, or a^^ions, wherein God directed (though they were done by
^en) to fix the whole upon God: Whereby he does not utt^^ly exclude men from
having any hand in those things, or ^^^ions that were injurious to truth, but
only he gives the pre^^inence unto God, that best befitting his majesty, and
prime ^^tion in all actions. Thus he says he went up to Jerusalem by
Reve^^^ion; Gal. 2.2. This journey all Expositors whom I have seen ^^cept Beza)
interpret of his second, In loc.
or third going up to Je^^^alem after his Conversion; Take we it of either, as
well ^^mane appointment, as divine Revelation designed him unto ^t service.
Calvin expounds it of the former journey, men^^^ned Act. 11.29.30 Then his
Disciples every man according to (...) ability determined ((...) limited,
designed) to send relief unto (...) brethren, which dwelt in Judea, which they
also did, and sent (...) by the hands of Barnabas, and Saul; The common opinion
in^^^prets it of the latter recorded. Act. 15.2. When therefore ^^ul, and
Barnabas had no small dissension with them, they deter^^ned ((...) ordered,
constituted) that Paul, and Barnabas, and ^^tain other of them should go up to
the Apostles, and Elders about ^t question. Thus also he (St. Paul) exhorts the
Ephesine elders t^ take heed to themselves, and to the whole flock over which
the holy ^host had made them overseers. Act. 20.28. when without all ^^ubt, he
the Apostle had ordained those Elders. Act. 19.6. Thus Archippus is enjoined to
fulfill his Ministry in the Church of ^^losse, which he had received in the
Lord; Col. 4.17, Thirdly, the phrase may be equally verified, and in the same
sense of Pastors and Teachers, as of Apostles.
And ^t I never read any ancient, or modern writer, who sus^^cted him to be an
extraordinary Officer, or to be made a Mi^^^ter any other way then by
ministerial ordination. And this l^^ds on a third answer to the objection.

Thirdly, Pastors, and Teachers, yea every single and ordinary Presbyter may
use the phrase, not of men, nor by the will of man, etc. concerning their
office, they being as well as Apostles, made by the holy Ghost, since the same
Christ who gave, and confirmed the Apostolate gave also, and confirmed the
Pastorate. Ephesians. 4.9, 10, 11. Two things are considerable in every
Church Officer. First the institution of his Office. Secondly his admission to
it. In the first notion, every Churchofficer, is an Officer not of man, nor by
the will o^ man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father who raised hi^ up from
the dead. In the latter men have a hand, but the^ do not act singly, for
Officers are ordained by Officers, in vi^tue of a divine appointment, and
promise of the contiuance o^ a successive Ministry. This I hope will be a
sufficient answe^ to the objection, and also for our proof of one Officer
desi^ned by Revelation for an Office, but not Ecclesiastically investe^
therein, neither exercising the trusts thereof, till ordained, a^ admitted
thereunto by former Officers. Consequently the Revelation was so far from
constituting a new Office, as that^ did not place a new Officer in an old
Office, but pointed hi^ out into the Church to receive it from her. Observable
f^ this purpose is what Chemnitius says concerning Lucius, Sunt quidem omnes
Christiani sacerdotes, 1 Pet. 2. Apoc. 1. non tamen quivis Christianus publicum
verbi, and sacramentorum ministerium sibi sumere and arrogare debet, non enim
omnes sunt Apostoli, non omnes doctores. 1 Cor. 12. sed qui peculiari, and
legitima vocatione a deo ad hoc ministerium segregati sunt. Chem. exam. con.
Trid. 2 p^ de sacr. ord. Can. 1. Nam and Paulum immediate vocatum. P publica
ecclesiae testificati^^ renunciari, and designari voluit quod esset gentium
Apostolus, etc. 1. Vt persona illa eccl^siae publicae designaretur, and
renunciaretur legitime esse electa, and vocata. 2. Vt hoc ^ tu ille qui vocatus
erat, de legitima, divina sua vocatione, confirmaretur, and simul ad^^neretur,
se destinari, addici, and devoveri ad ministerium, and cultum dei. Jd. ibid.
Sime^^ and Manaen, their imposition of hands upon St. Paul, (...) All
Christians are Priests, 1 Pet. 2. Apoc. 1. But yet every Christi^^ ought not to
take, and arrogate to himself the public Ministry of (...) Word and
Sacraments: for all are not Apostles. All are (...) Teachers 1 Cor. 12. But
those who are divinely separated by a pe^^liar and lawful vocation unto this
Ministry. Act. 13. He adds, F^ the holy Ghost would have Paul although
immediately called, to (...) pronounced, and declared by a public and
ecclesiastical testim^^^ to be the Apostle of the Gentiles. By this public
testimony he u^derstands imposition of hands, for the usage whereof he ass^ two
reasons, First, that such persons should thereby be p^^lickly designed and
proposed to the Church, as lawfully elected (...) called. Secondly that being
so called they might be assured of the lawful and divine calling, and withal
admonished that they w^ thereby destinated, addicted, and devoted to the
Ministry, and service of God. Finally learned Calovius says, Pastors, and
Teachers are given by Christ from heaven, A Christo dicuntur donari coelitus,
pastores and doctores Ephesians. 4.11. Qua propter etiam illi qui ab eccesia
vocantur, a Christo coelitus donantur, and mediate per ecclesiam mittuntur,
quum Christus ecclesiae suae praesto sit eamque gubernet. Mat. 28.20. Calov.
Socin. profligat. loc. de Eccles. controv. 4.
for the work of the Ministry Ephesians. 4.11. wherefore also they who receive
their call from the Church, are divinely given by Christ, and mediately sent by
her because Christ is always present with, and governs his Church. Mat. 28.20.
But leaving the first proceed we to the

Second instance, of a person divinely designed, Second instance is Timothy,
whose abilities were prophesied of, ere he was made an officer. But he did not
receive the gift or office till S. Paul laid hands upon him.
but ecclesiastically admitted to Office in the Church, which is Timothy, whose
eminency in the work of the Lord is revealed by prophecy, ere he was made a
Minister; 1 Timothy 1.16. This charge I commit unto thee s^n Timothy, according to
the prophecy which went before on thee, that thou by them might war a good
warfare; ^ut notwithstanding those foregoing Prophesies, he is afterward
ordained, which ordination, not those Prophesies, gave him his Office-power; 2 Timothy 1.6. Therefore I put thee in remembrance, that y^u stir up the gift of God
that is in thee, by the ^aying on of my hands. Do any object, 1 Timothy 4.14.
Neglect not ^he gift which is in thee, that was given thee by the Prophecy,
with ^he laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. I answer: Although
Prophecy, and laying on of hands be both of them named, yet the Text must
admit of the former Interpretation, Prophe^ie relating to the designation of
his person, laying on of hands to his actual admission unto Office; for if
Prophecy had conferred the Office, laying on of hands had been superfluous.
Expositors sense Prophecy in this Text two ways. First some refer it to the
future time, succeeding Timothies ordination. (...) by prophecy, being put by
an Heterosis (frequent in Scripture) for (...) unto prophecy: The holy Ghost
thereby designing not what gave him his Office, but what he did after he
received it. Thus Beza. Secondly, In loc. In loc.
others refer it to the time past, or preceding his ordination, expounding it
by, 1 Timothy 1.16. So St. Chrisostom, Calvin, Aretius, Piscator, Doctor Hammond,
and A Lapide: Take we it in the first sense, Prophecy is no kin to Revelation,
nor does it concern the point in hand; Accept we it in the latter (which I do
with both hands) it gives most clear evidence to Primitive Church Power and
practice, namely to give the Office, though God himself design the person, and
extraordinarily signify it unto the Church. Aretius therefore concerning
Lucius, Conferunt quod jam deus ordinaverat munus, ut sint doctores ecclcsiae
inter gentes. Aret. ad Act. 13.3. Corollary.

Revelation makes all officers perpetual, none temporary.


Simeon, etc. their Imposition (...) hands upon St. Paul, says well, They
confer the Office; which God had before ordained, to wit, that they should be
ecclesiastical teachers among the Gentiles: This he says, the same say we both
of that, and this of Timothy, neither hereby is Gods will subjected to the
Churches pleasure diverse, but intimations of his will are reconciled, and
joined hand in hand; Finally to conclude our Animadversion upon Zanchyes first
Argument for the temporaryness of some primitive Church Officers. We are bold
no^ only to conclude in a direct opposition thereunto, that Revelation made no
Officer temporary, but to assume that all Officer^ are therefore standing, and
continuing in the Church, because their Office is founded upon a divine
Revelation; for if their order did not commence in a divine Revelation, it
could not be the ordinance of God, since there is no way to manifest Gods
ordinances unto men, but by his own revelation. And since when once an
ordinance is revealed, in virtue of that Revelation (if ever it be one) it
becomes a divine, positive, and standing institution, not requiring a
successive Revelation, but ordination to perpetuate it unto the end of the
dispensation whereo^ it is an Ordinance; because (to keep to the point before
us) the primary Revelation shines into all following ordinations, and declares
each Minister, from first to last, to be a Ministe^ according to the revealed
will of God. And let it be noted, that our clearer apprehensions, applications
of, and submiss^ons unto foregoing Revelations, are equally called Revelatio^
in Scripture, as Gods first discovery of new things. Ephesians. 1.17 That the God
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory may gi^^ unto you the spirit of
wisdom, and Revelation in the knowledge of him. Do we doubt what is meant by
Revelation in this verse, the next verse will resolve us that thereby the
Apostle means only the grace of illumination, and confirmation in the truth,
ver. 18. The eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that y^ may know what
is the hope of your calling, and what riches of the glory of his inheritance in
the Saints. Whence cannot be imagined that God in every infusion of grace into
the heart of a Christian, makes some new, and before unheard of discovery of
his will, but only by the same spirit, applies the same word to their hearts,
as unto others before; and at the same time in the same condition. But it is
time to call our pen off, from a pursuit of this Theme, and having recollected
our selves, let us pause a while, and conclude our answer to Zanchyes first
Argument for the temporaryness of Officers in the first latitude of that term.
But we cannot long take breath, Zanchys 2. argument.

Evangelists were temporary because they were ordained by the Apostles.

Answered First passively. Secondly, actively.

First passively. Their ordination by Christ considered, and the settlement of
their office proved by three assertions.


for his second challenges an encounter or our yiedling, he advances toward
us: And he will maintain Evangelists to be temporary, Because they were
ordained by the Apostles. Our defense is, that Apostolical ordination may be
considered two-wayes. 1. Passively, or their own ordination by Christ. 2.
Actively, or their ordination of others.
We are bold to say that neither of those made Apostles, or any other officers
ordained by them to be temporary. But we will consider either of them
severally; we begin with,

1. Apostolical passive ordination, or their own ordination by Christ; I know
this point strictly belongs to the tract concerning Apostles, but because I
know not whether ever that work shall see the light, yea or not, our time being
in the hand of God, and what ever we purpose, he alone disposes of our
actions. And because the temporaryness, and vice-Apostolate of the Evangelists
cannot be so conveniently, and ^hroughly refuted, as by searching into the
nature, and insti^ution of the Apostolic Office; we will for the evidencing of
that truth lay down these three assertions.

First, That Christ is solely, and incommunicably his Churches Legislator, and
appoints all officers, and Ordinances appertaining to her, in her proper
nature. This will lead us to the Fountain head of all purely ecclesiastical
authority and power.

Secondly, That Christ ordained the Apostolic Office. This will manifest that
the Apostolical Office and authority, was derived and limited.

Thirdly, That Christ confirmed the Apostolic Office, at, and after his
ascension, as a standing Office to be continued with his Church. This will
prove that the Apostolate it self, was not temporary. I begin with the first of
these. First, Christ was solely, and incommunicably his Churches Legislator.

Proved by testimony.

First prophetical.




First, Christ is solely, and incommunicably his Churches Legislator, and
appoints all Officers, and Ordinances appertaining unto her, in her proper
nature, or as she is his Body, he is her head. This is a truth evidenced by the
light of all authority.

First Prophetical. Isa. 9.6. Unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given,
and the Government shall be upon his shoulder, etc. Ezech. 34.23, And I will
set up one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David,
he shall feed them: And he shall be their Shepherd.

Secondly, Evangelical. Joh. 13.13. Ye call me Master, Secondly Evangelical.
and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am; Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. And Jesus came,
and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given to me in heaven, and in earth,
go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost. Teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you, and Lo I am with you to the end of the
world, Amen.

Thirdly Apostolical.
Thirdly, Apostolical. Jam. 4.12. there is one Lawgiver who is able to save, and
to destroy, who art thou that Judge another. St. Paul almost every where in
his Epistles concurs in this opinion, calling Christ the head. Ephesians. 1.22. Ephesians.
4.15. Col. 1.18. the foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. the high Priest, Heb. 6.20. and
the Apostle, Heb. 3.1. i. e. by way of eminency, he being primarily, and
immediately sent by the father. But no where he (the Apostle) testifies more
fully, for Christ's sole Legislatorship, then in the oft-cited Text, of Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13, 14.

Fourthly, Paternal.
Fourthly, Paternal. The ancient Fathers those lesser Stars in the Churches
Firmament, meet in one constellation with the stars of the first magnitude, or
holy writers, and jointly give their influence, to Christ's sole Legislatorship.
It were easy for me to be copious in this Argument, but to reserve the cloud
of witnesses to the tract of Apostles, where I shall evince this truth by a
chain of testimonies, reaching from the primitive times to St. Jeromes, and the
next following Century: For the present I dare say, I need not multiply
quotations in a matter so plain and obvious, because none moderately versed in
their writing can with any forehead deny it, All of them acknowledging Christ
to be the sole Legislator, and assigning to Apostles (who if any might claim a
share therein) successively into their own orders and office. However we will
here insert three or four testimonies, of a like number of very ancient, and
undoubted authors. Tertullian, prescribing against Heretics, Huc igitur
dirigimus prescriptionem si dominus Jesus Christus misit Apostolos ad
praedicandum, alios non esse recipiendos praedicatores, quam quos instituit
Christus. Tertull. de praescript. p. 76. Habemus annumerare eos, qui ab
Apostolis i^stituti sunt episcopi; nam sirecondita mysteria scissent Apostoli
quae seorsim, ^^tenter reliquis perfectos docebant, iis vel maxim traderent,
quib^s etiam ecclesi^s co^mitte^ant. Iren adv. Haer. lib 3 ca. 3.
and particularly lashing Marcion says, This is our prescription, that if our
Lord Jesus Christ sent the Apostles to preach, other preachers whom he has not
sent are not to be received. Irenaeus (who lived A. C. 180.) writing against
some heretical tradition-mongers, who boasted of their knowledge in a more
secret, and spiritual Theology, derived unto them from the Apostles hands;
says We can reckon them who were instituted Bishops by the Apostles, and were
their successors: Now had the Apostles known ^^y secret mysteries, which
privily, and apart from the rest, they ^^ught unto perfect men; they would with
the first have delivered ^^em to those Bishops, unto wh^m they committed the
Churches. S. Cyp^ian (who lived A. C. 250.) encouraging his Colleague Corn^l^us,
the then Bishop of Rome, not to be moved at the clamor, or rage of heretics,
says, Brother we ought principally, Hoc enim and maxim frater laboramus, and
laborare debemus ut unita tem ae domino, and per Apostolos nobis successoribus
traditam, ^^antum possumus obtinere curemus. Cypr. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 10.
Vide in hac re quid ec^^^siae catholicae valeat Authoritas, quae ab ipsis
fundatissimis sedibus Apostolorum usque ad ^^diernum diem succedentium sibimet
episcoporum serie, and consensione firmatur. Aug. lib. 11. (...) Faustum, cap.
2.
and earnestly to labor what in us lies, to retain the Lords unity, deliver^d
by the Apostles unto us their successors. Finally, St. Augustine writing against
Faustus the Manichee, says, Thou see how avai^^ble the authority of the
Catholic Church is in this matter, which, ^^on the sure built seats of the
Apostles, is upheld until ^^is day, by a series, and consent of Bishops
suc^eeding unto t^em.

Fifthly, the School learneth us the same lesson, she teaches, Fifthly
Scholastical.
^^at the Apostles could not constitute another Church, nor deliver a^^ther
Faith, nor institute other Sacraments; Apostoli non potuere constituere aliam
ecclesi^^^, nec tradere aliam fidem, nec instituere alia Sacramenta. Tho.
Aquin. 3 par. sum quaest. (...). art. 2. ad 3. Lugduni. 1562. Quia pertinent ad
potestatem excellentiae, quae competit (...) Christo. Tho. Aquin. 3. par.
summul. quaest. 72. Art. 1. ad. 1.
for which elsewhere (...) assigns this solid reason; namely, Because it
belongs to the power of excellency, which is incommunicably Christ's.

Sixthly. Pontifician: Modern Papal Divines, Sixthly Pontifician.
although they p^rceive a huddle of officers, sacred, and not sacred (wherewith
the Primitive Church was not acquainted, at least as so many di^^^nct orders)
to be crept into their Church, yet they endeav^ur might and main, to drive them
from Christ's precept, or ^^ample: Thus they bring the Doorkeeper into the
Church, Fab. Incarnat. scrutin. sacerdotal. tract. de ordine Rothomai 1634.

De clericis.


upon Christ's thrusting the Buyers, and Sellers forth of the Temple, Mat.
21.12. The Reader, upon his taking the book, and reading in the Synagogue. Luke
4.17, 18. And so of the re^t. Let none take offense at the obscurity of our
cited Author, for the same is delivered by Bellarmine: And compreh^nded in a
Definition, and Canon of the Tridentine Council, which says None but Christ
can institute a Sacrament, Si quis dixerit sacramenta novae (...), non fuisse
omnia a Jesu Christo domino nostro instituta, etc. Anathema sit. Council.
Trident. Sess. 7. Can. 1.
and ana^^^matizeth gainsayers.

Seventhly, Presbyterian.
Seventhly. Presbyterian. The Pope, since his exorbitant Usurpation of all
power, the spiritual directly, the temporal indirectly (as Bellarmine truly
phraseth it) is as Herod upon the Throne tickled by the Jesuits among other
blasphemous titles, with this of a secondary Legislatorship, so Christ first,
and he secondly, may impose Ordinances by virtue of their Legislative office.
Legislatoris proprium sit, primarium habere potestatem secundarius non datur
legislator in rebus ecclesiasticis, quia primaria illa authoritas, nemini a
Christo commu^^catur. Ames. Bellar. enerv. Tom. 1. p. 237.
But Amesius strongly checks Cardinal Bellarmine for his sawciness, and
unanswerably says. A Legislator properly ha^ the primary authority, neither
will ecclesiastical affairs admit of a secondary Lawgiver, because the primary
authority of King of t^ Church, is communicated by Christ unto no man.

Ephesians. 2.20. objected, And are built upon the foundation etc.
No Scripture is really, and there is but one seemingly repu^nant to Christ's
sole Legislatorship: It is Ephesians. 2.20. And (...) built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Chr^^^ being the chief cornerstone.

A Reader newly entered into the controversies betwixt (...) and the papists,
will soon and easily reconcile this seeming diff^rence: But for the sake of
others.

Answer 1. Apostles were not a personal foundation.
I answer, First, Reason says Apostles were not, neither co^ they be (as Christ
is) a personal foundation; for whatever h^ been in that respect built upon
them, would have long since su^ and vanished with the consumption and
corruption of their Bodies.

2. They were not an cfficial foundation.
Secondly, Scripture and Reason jointly say, They were (...) an Official
Foundation; i. e. the Apostolic office was not t^ foundation of Church
Government, because then there wo^ not only have been several foundations,
Christ and they wh^ they lived, but a succession of several foundations, from
the times unto ours, and thenceforward so long as the Church co^tinues
militant. But the foundation of the Church, and of (...) Ministry is but one,
and the Apostles built upon it, 1 Cor. 3.1* According to the grace of God given
unto me, as a wise master buil^ I have laid the foundation, and another
builds thereon, but let ^^^ry one take heed how he builds thereupon: for
other foundation (...) no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ.

3. They were a Doctrinal foundation.
Thirdly, They were a Doctrinal foundation: I explain (...) meaning thus: The
apostles and prophets were doctrinally the Churches foundation, because they
penned and published the Scripture, which is the word and will of Christ, who
is the foundation: This is true of prophets, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. Of which
^^lvation the prophets have enquired and searched diligently, who pro^hecied of
the grace that should come unto you, searching out what (...) what manner of
time the Spirit of Christ in them did signify, Nos non negare, imo defendere
contra negantes, verbum Dei ministratum per Apostolos and prophetas, esse
proximum fundamentum nostrae fidei. Bell. de verbo Dei. lib 3. cap. 10.
respondeo ad hoc argumentum quod saepe, etc. Lugduni 1610*
when ^e testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and what should
af^^rwards follow. It is also as true of apostles, John 14.26. But ^he
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father shall send (...) my name,
he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to ^ur remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you. All protestant ^ivines thus expound the
apostles to be a foundation; and Bel^^rmine does not much dissent from them: He
says, We deny ^ot, but are ready to defend against gainsayers, That the word
of God ^^spensed by the Apostles and Prophets, is the next foundation of our
^aith. I add it is so, not as their word, but as the word of christ, unto or
by them: Besides, others not of the number (...) the twelve Apostles were a
foundation unto the Church in this ^se; as S. Paul, S. Luke, S. Mark, and the
Author of the E^^^tle to the Hebrews, (if it were not S. Paul.) Suffice this in
^^nfirmation of the first Assertion.

2. Assertion. 2. Assertion. Christ ordained the Apostles.
Christ ordained the Apostolic office while he ^s upon Earth. This is a Truth
which we suppose needs no ^^oof to any who have but read of Christ, or of his
Apostles: ^or shall we so far question our Readers unacquaintedness with ^^ly
Writ, as to burden him with many Quotations in this mat^^r. Consider that one
Text, Luc. 6.12, 13. And it came to (...) in those days, that he went out into
a mountain to pray, and ^^^tinued all night in prayer to God, and when it was
day he called unt^ ^im his disciples, and of them he chose twelve, whom he
named ^^^stles. In this Text are observable,

The Acts preparative to the Ordination of the Apostles: ^^ich are twofold,

1. More remote, He went out into a mountain to pray, and ^^^^inued all night
in prayer to God.

2. More nigh, He called his disciples unto him. This is the first o^^erveable.

^econdly, Their Ordination: which also has two parts,

1. Their Election, He chose out of them twelve, i. e. out of the (...) of his
disciples. These twelve were disciples before, and ^hile they were disciples,
they did the works mentioned, John ^2. When therefore the Lord knew how that
the pharisees had ^d that Jesus made and baptized more disciples then John,
though Je^^s himself baptized not, but his disciples; then the twelve apostles,
as well as Mathias, St. Paul, Sylas, Timothy, etc. ascended from one
ecclesiastical order to another; but let the Reader judge of this, and consider,

In loc.
2. Their designation in these words he named them Apostles. This text is
parallel, and contemporary with Mark 3.14 Sebastian Barradius, and Lightfoot as
Jansenius and Calvin jointly agree. Upon which Text of St. Marks, Calvin says
^^nulli, or some (he might have said quamplurimi, or very many) understand the
recording of our Saviovrs ordination of his Apostles. All whose opinions, and
expositions he turns (...) peremptorily with an Hallucinati sunt, or, they made
a w^ conjecture, and were deceived; which notwithstanding, in the words
immediately following he allows, that Christ in his pra^er, Hoc autem exemplum
nobis perpetuae regulae instar esse debet, ut a precatione ordiamur quoties
eligendi sunt ecclesiae pastores. Alioqui in auspicatum erit quicquid
tentabimus. Nec sane dominus tam sua causa precatus est quam ut legem nobis
prescriberet. Calv. ad mar. 3.14.
antecedent to their vocation, gives a standing rule obse^vable by the Church,
in her subsequent ordination of Ministe^ his words are: But this example ought
with us to have the force^ a perpetual rule, that we begin with prayer so often
as the Pastors (...) the Church are to be elected, otherwise what we attempt,
will be i^ prosperous, f^r in truth the Lord did not pray so much upon his own
a^count, as to prescribe a law unto us. Whence is as evident as light a^ high
noon, that he makes this passage a pattern to the Church i^ her ordinations,
which can never handsomely be drawn, unle^ the original treat of the same
matter. I readily acknowledge^ that our Savior in several other (and perhaps
posterious) passages of his Gospel, gives several commands to his Apostle^ and
from thence, and the undoubted conformity of the Apostle^ unto them, several
official acts are colligible. But if the Ap^stles were not Church Officers,
till he gave those subseque^^ commands, those observations of St Luke, and St.
Mark w^ contain nothing but wha^ was needless to be mentioned; a^ in the other
Scriptures, our Savior m^st be understood command his Apostles upon office
work, ere they were in order whereas that the Apostles were appointed to that
high ca^ling by the ordination, mentioned by St Luke, and St. Mark, S^
Chrysostom and Theophylact rest assured. And St. Luke, and S^ Mark say enough
to resolve any one, Ex Mald. in loc.
who is not resolve^ to give no credit to their testimony, that he not only
designed them to that Office, but actually admitted the^ unto it; that he
designed them to it; over and beside wh^ has been instanced of St. Lukes, St.
Mark says, Mar. 3.13. H^ called unto him whom he would; which phrase cannot
import any thing else, then the selection of some in the rejection o^ others;
that he admitted them to Office. St. Luke says he ^^med them Apostles i. e.
gave them a title, and office distinct, and distinctive from others. St. Mark
says he conferred upon them both a faculty to do acts of office, and to
receive ex^^aordinary gifts, Mar. 3.14.15. And he ordained twelve, that ^^ey
should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach, ^d to have
power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils: The for^ality of this
ordination no doubt occasioned St. Peter to say ^f himself, and the rest of the
twelve Apostles, that they were (...) or witnesses chosen before of God, Act.
10.41. ^^decompounded word formed as it were of purpose to silence ^e popular
notion of laical suffrages, as essential to the ordi^^tion of Church Officers,
whose chief basis is its compound (...) when used in the writings of heathen
Authors, who li^^ed in popular, or democratical states, for our Savior acted
^^ngle in the ordination of his Apostles, without the peoples ^^ffraging by
holding up of hands, or bulleting with pebbles, ^he had not the foundation of
Church Government bears ^ot upon the unction of a divine Legislator; but upon
the plea^^re of Jewish, or Heathenish people; who as they might have ^^fused
the first ecclesiastical Government, so also might they ^^ve altered it after
their acceptance, by their own new choice ^d sanction, or their successors may
now do it; and intro^uce another, and different form of Church Government, when
^d so often as they please. This shall terminate our second ^ssertion.

Third Assert. Christ confirmed the Apostolic office, at, Third Assert. Christ
confirmed th Apostolate a a standing office, after his ascension.

Proved by two instances.


and ^ter his ascension, as a standing office to be continued with his church.
This if we examine modern writers, is a bold and un^sual Assertion, but most
approved and ordinary, if we sub^it either to the testimonies of Scripture, or
of Antiquity: ^he latter has been briefly evidenced already, and its larger
^ertificate is referred to be produced in another tract, to which (...) wishing
our Reader to consider what has been said, and pa^^ently to expect what may be
added) we refer it. The for^er, or the testimony of Scripture unto this truth,
we shall de^onstrate by two instances.

First, Our Saviors promise made, First Chrsts promise and St. Paul's
exposition of it*
and given after his Re^^rrection, is to be with the Apostles unto the worlds
end, in ^e discharge of those works, without which the Church can neither be (
as Baptism, which is the initial seal of the Gospel ^ovenant) or continue ( as
teaching, which equally regards the conservation, as the constitution of a
Church.) This is evident by the famous, and often instanced Text, Mat. 28.19.20.
I know the phrase of going to all Nations, to teach them as there used, but
that will not evince the temporariness of the Apostolic Office, because this
work is performable unto this day, and will continue so henceforward every day
unto the end of the world: Take we the nations spoken of in the Text, either
for Christian, or Infidel: All the former need it for their confirmation in the
Faith. All the latter want it for their conversion to it. This Scripture is
plain, and full enough to prove this first instance, but least any should
expect that a Gospel truth, as well as a law matter, ought to be confirmed in
the mouth of two witnesses. St. Paul to put the business out of dispute, says,
Christ both descended, and ascended gave the Apostles to the Church, For the
perfecting of the Saints, work of the Ministry, and edifying of the body of
Christ; Till we all come, etc. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. And moreover. God has set
(in the Church) first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, etc. where the word (...)
rendered set notes both ordination, 1 Timothy 2.7. whereunto I am ordained a
preacher (...) and fixation. Act. 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves,
and to the whole flock over which the holy Ghost (...) has made you overseers.
And here (with the Readers patience) I cannot but enter a dissent against that
opinion which makes the Apostles sight of Christ in the flesh, to be an
undeniable character differencing them from all other Ministers, whereas the
Apostles commission, at the giving whereof they not only saw, but received
their authority, and office from Christ includes Successors. And whereas such
vision of the incarnate Messiah was no office-work it being no where inserted
in, or required by the commissio of the Apostles, or of any other Ministers.
Much less was it ^ proper office-work peculiar to the twelve Apostles, since
multitudes of other persons, both men and women, sick and sound, friends and
foes, Jews, Samaritanes, and Heathens, Magistrate and Subjects, Ministers and
private Christians, were made partakers of that benefit. Neither have those
Interrogatorie; 1 Cor. 9.1. Am not I an Apostle? Am not I free? have not I seen
Jesus Christ our Lord? Are not you my work in the Lord? Any reference (what
ever others may think) to the marks distinguishing the Apostles from other
Ministers. The second Quaery (which the vulgar, and Syriack Interpreter read
first) or am not I free? If, as it is thought by some Interpreters Hammond.
Estthius, A Lapide in locum.
it relates to St. Paul's liberty to receive a maintenance from the Churches of
his own plantation, as the other Apostles did from theirs, although he did not
take it from the Corinthian Church. It cannot be a characteristical mark of an
Apostle in a proper sense; for then St Paul by that phrase acknowledges a
diversity in office betwixt him, and the other Apostles. If as Arerius, Beza
Piscator, in loc.
others think, it relates to a freedom from Jewish ceremonies; the which the
Corinthians abused to the grievance of weaker brethren, not becoming according
to his example all things to all men; that they might win some. Neither in that
sense can it be a proper mark of an Apostle, since it was occasionally
practicable by all private Christians, and is accordingly recommended to the
Churches both at Rome, and Corinth. Concerning the third phrase, or have I not
seen Christ, etc. we shall add no more then what has been said already: The
fourth or last phrase, or Are not ye my work in the Lord? is of all the rest
the most unlikely to give a special mark of an Apostle. Since the conversion of
the Samaritanes (a like work with that spoken of in this text) was The work of
the Lord wrought by Philip the Evangelist? but he was no Apostle; and since
there has much (not to say more then in the Apostles lives) of that work been
done since their deaths. The truth therefore is, that St. Paul does not intend
in this place to give the proper marks of the Apostolate, but occurs to some
vulgar insinuations, urged against his Apostleship. And endeavors to prove,
that even in those things which they magnified in the other Apostles, he was no
whit their inferior. But to proceed, secondly, the Apostles derived their
office unto others. Secondly the Apostles derived their office unto others.
This is provable by many Scriptures, but we shall limit our search at this
time, unto the single instance of Mathias, recorded, Act. 1. there we read, how
shortly after Christ's ascension, and before the miraculous effusion of
extraordinary gifts, the Apostles met with the hundred and twenty, and St.
Peter standing up in the amidst, opens the reasons and grounds of that
assembly; namely to put one into the Office of Apostate Judas. This he urges
upon them with some vehemence, and among other expressions says, Act. 1.21.
(...) it must be done, or it was by no means to be neglected: The most probable
reason of which earnestness, seems to be the the nature of Judas his Office,
which was not personal in him, but (...) a lot, or part of the Churches
patrimony, or heritage; Lot or inheritance being the proper signification of
that word, and accordingly it is constantly used by the seventy (so far as my
observation serves me) of the setting forth, and assignation of the Land of
Canaan, unto the Isralites to be lotted forth, or parted by inheritance among
them, according to their tribes. Thus it is used, Numb. 16.55, 56. Numb. 33.54.
Numb. 34.13. Numb. 31.1, 2. Josh. 13.6. Josh. 14.2. But return we to St. Peter,
and the hundred and twenty; he having told them that the vacancy made by Judas
in the Apostolic Office must be supplied, they fall upon it, two are chosen,
whose merits being equal the Apostles submit their title unto a lot, which
falls upon Mathias. Out of which History I collect two observables. First, that
the Apostolical Office was derivable, and not personally limited and fixed to
the first twelve, for then Judas, which completed the number could have no
successor: but Mathias succeeded him into his whole Office; compare Act. 1.17.
where we read what Judas left behind him; for he was numbered with us, and
obtained part of this ministry. (...). with v. 25.26. where we read what
Matthias entered upon, viz. That he may take part of this Ministry and
Apostleship, from which Judas by his transgression fell; and he was numbered
among the eleven Apostles. (...). I need put no favorable gloss upon this
Text, an ordinary belief of the Divine Authority of Scripture, and a small
spark of Reason will soon convince any man of reasonable piety, or parts, how
far this first Observation is confirmed or infirmed by it. However, to leave no
scruple in any breast, which I am able to foresee or remove, Sit ordinatio justa
and legitima, quae omnium suffragio and judicio fuerit examinata quod postea
secundum divina magisteria observatur in Actibus Apostolorum quando de
ordinando in locum Judae Episcopo Betius loquitur. Cypr. lib. 1. Epist. 4.
Epist.
let me add the ensuing exposition of S. Cyprian upon these Scriptures: He
says, That ordination is just and lawful which shall be examined by the
judgment and suffrage of all, (in this he has reference to the Jewis^
Ecclesiastical Policy, ere the Incarnation) and after it he adds, Which
afterward according to the Divine Precept, is observed in the Acts of the
Apostles, when Peter speaks of ordaining a Bishop instead of Judas. Whence
note,

First, That Bishop and Apostle, were terms convertible in S. Cyprian's time,
and did signify one and the some Officer of the Apostolical Order: for of that
Order Matthias was, when he was ordained Bishop in the stead of Judas.

Secondly, That in S. Cyprian's Judgment the Apostolate was a derivable
Office, and fixed in the Church, otherwise he would never have said Matthias
was ordained Bishop in the stead of Judas, much less would he have drawn that
ordination into a predent (as he does in that Epistle) to be observed in
following ornations.

Thirdly, That the substantial Rules about ordination are in^riable, or always
one and the same, before, in, and after the ^postles time. And this leads in
our second observeable from ^he Text.

Secondly, Revelation and Ordination had primitively diverse ^perations, and the
Church could do her ordinary work without such extraordinary assistances. The
Apostles without con^^lting any other then their own privileges, Matthias his
ordination by Lot expoundded.
and the Churches ^resent necessity, elect, or cause to be elected two
Candidates ^r the Apostolate, and afterward appoint Lots to determine which of
the two should carry it.

I well know that this giving forth of Lots, and the event ^^ereof, the prize
falling to Matthias, is made an Vid. Piscat. ad Act. 1. ult. and Cameron. Pr l
ect. in Matthew. 10.16, 18, 19. Francofurti. 1642.
argument to ^rove the extraordinariness of the whole action. But let the
^evisers and Defenders of that opinion consider, that three ^ings are to be
eyed in every ordination, 1. The subject matter. 2. The form. 3. The
circumstances in its administration.


1. The subject matter: which is a person meetly qualified, and so adjudged by
those who have authority to be the Admiministrators of Holy things.

2. The form: which is either internal or external; internal, or Christ's
promise to continue the Ministry; external, to continue it by the ordination of
Ministers. For it is with you (Apostles, Ministers) he promises to be present
unto the end of the ^orld, i. e. in a ministerial succession, for he cannot be
present with what is not, and no man or individual number of men, continue
perpetually upon earth. Both these concurred in Matthias ^is person and
preferment, the subject matter, Act. 1.21, 22. Wherefore of those men which
have accompanied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went out and in among
us, beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up
from us, ^ust one be ordained with us, to be a witness of his resurrection. The
^^ternal form, Act. 1.20. For it is written in the book of the Psalms, ^et his
habitation be desolate, and his Bishopric let another take. The ^xternal form,
Verse. 23, 24, 25. And they appointed two, Joseph ^^lled Barsabus, who was
surnamed Justus, and Matthias, and they ^^ayed and said, Thou Lord, which
know the hearts of all men, show ^hether of these two thou have chosen, that
he may take part with us in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas by
his transgression fell, that he might go to his own place. In all this (the
special circumstances of time, place, and of those individual persons, only
excepted) there ought to be a concurrence in the ordination of every lawfully
ordained Church Officer of the same order, until this day, because they are
unalterably essential to their office* Hitherto then there is nothing
extraordinary. Is it therefore,

3. In the circumstance of Matthias his ordination? this wa^ casting of Lots,
Act. 1.26. but did not make him an extraord^nary officer,

1. Because the Apostleship, or the Office whereunto he w^ admitted, was
settled in the Church long before these Lots were given forth: for the Apostles
and hundred and twenty nere questioned the continuance of the office, ere they
put it to ^^ whether Matthias should be the officer; which unless they h^ been
fully persuaded of Christ's mind for the fixation of the O^fice, they ought not
to have done, but rather to have put it to l^ and sought a clear direction from
the Lord, whether Judas shou^ have a Successor, yea or not.

2. This casting of Lots was not constitutive of the Office, but visible Rite
whereby Matthias his designation to it was intimated to the Church. Neither was
it a Rite appropriate to ord^nations into the Apostleship, or manifested by
Divine Revelatio^ at this time, and to be used on this and like occasions, but
it w^ used at the discretion of the eleven Apostles; because S. Pa^ and
Barnabas were ordained into the Apostolate by another (...) different ceremony,
viz. By imposition of hands, Act. 13.1 2, 3.

The truth is, both Lots and Imposition of hands were ar^trary, and prudential
ceremonies, not constitutive, but de^rative of Church Officers, and their
several usages in the sa^ case, (viz. ordination of diverse Officers of the same
Order) ^ evictive not of the extraordinariness of the ordained, but of the
ordainers authority and power in the contrivance, continuanc^ or discontinuance
of those Rites, or of any of them: for as the^ could not both of them be
appointed by revelation, or Christ positive institution, because one of them
would nullify the other two revelations would be brought into competition
which ^ them should continue the manner of ordination; and the Church would be
left at incertainty whose part to take: so neither di^ the Christian Church
stand in need of such divine and supern^^ral directions, either ceremony being
used by her elder Sister ^e Jewish Church, upon like occasions. Scutet.
exercitat. Evan. lib. 1. ca. 7.
Thus the Priests famies were placed, and their several places assigned by lot,
1 Chronicles. 4.31. 1 Chronicles. 25.8. Nehem. 10.34. compared with v. 1. and ^.8, 9.
where also we may observe who gave forth, and num^red these Lots; This custom
continued till our Saviors time, ^r Zacharias the father of John the Baptist,
was of the course or ^t of Abiah. Luke 1.5. But notwithstanding that lots has
this ^cclesiastical use under the old dispensation, yet imposition of ^ands by
a triumvirate, or three Elders, was the most usual ^ay of ordaining of Jewish
Officers. Lightfoots harmony ad Act. 13.1. Thorndikes service of God at
religious assemblies, page 66.
And that the Apostles ^^d respect unto Jewish customs in the usage of both
these ce^^monies of lots and imposition of hands, is the opinion of ma^^
fathers, schoolmen, and learned Interpreters; thus Com. in Jonam.
St. ^erome, Sermon. de Mathia.
St. Augustine, in loc.
St. Chrysostom, in loc.
Beda, 2. 2. quae. 95. art.
Tho^as Aquinas, ad an. Christi 45. Sect. 34. and ad an. 34. Sect. 67.
Baronius, in loc.
Dionysius Carthusianus, and in loc.
^rhanus. To these so far as concerns imposition of hands may be ^^ded
Institut. lib. 4. ca. 3. Sect. 16.

In com. ad Act. 6.6.


Calvin, and (m) Beza. Suffice this in evidence of ^^e second instance, and
therewith we will not only conclude ^^r third Assertion, but all that we intend
to write of Aposto^^al ordination passively considered, or their own ordination
by christ. Proceed we to the second member of the distinction out Apostolical
ordination, which is,

Secondly. Apostolical active ordination, or their ordination (...) others; 2.
Member of the distinction, or Apostolical active ordination, or their
ordination of others. This did not make those whom they ordained temporary.

The danger of the affirmative.


of which also we say, it did not make those whom ^e Apostles ordained
temporary. The affirmative is princilly intended by Zanchy, when he makes the
Apostolical ordination of those whom he calls Evangelists to be a main reason
of ^^e discontinuance of their office. But this is a more infirm, ^^d
insufficient medium to prove an officers temporariness, ^^^en any of the
former: That a following Revelation should ^^ke a former by the heel, and
supplant it, is but an equal ^atch, it setting God against God, and one
Revelation the other by the ears with another. That Officers immediately ^^dained
by the Lawgiver were temporary, might be true, (...) he had any where told us
that he made them upon such ^^rms; but that Officers ordained by the Apostles
(who them^^^ves were ordained by Christ) were temporary, is most false ^^d
dangerous, it setting man against God, the Administra^^r against the
Legislator, and annihilating divine Revelation, ^^d institution, by humane
ordination. Besides this absurdity, ^^ll thence unavoidably follow, that all
offices into which the Apostles immediately, or personally admitted Officers,
were temporary; whereby the Church would now be utterly deprived of the
Presbyterate, and of the Diaconate, yea of all order, and power of ordination;
Since the Apostles in their own persons, The proof of the affirmative.
ordained both Elders Act. 14.23. and Deacons, Act. 1, 2, 3. etc. This mischief
is avoided, and the mistake which causes it, by a right understanding of the
nature of ordination which be it administered by the Apostles, or by any other
lawfully empowered from the Lawgiver downward to the end o^ the world; is not,
nor never was any temporary, or arbitrar^ thing, but a permanent Church act
grounded upon Christ's institution, and promise to perpetuate the ministry. This
must ministerially commence in Apostolic ordination, but was (...) therefore
temporary? to whom did Christ promise a perpet^al ministry, but to the first
Church whereof the Apostles we^ Ministers? What! did they see the date and
expiration o that promise? Is the worlds end, and the Apostles live^-e^
Synonima's, and terms equivalent? or did that world the cease, and another
begin since? certainly if it be still the sa^ world, if there be any of the All
spoken of by St., who are ^ to come in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the S^ of God unto a perfect man, etc. they are under the same
promis^ and have the same means of its acknowledgment. This the London Divines
acknowledge, they say, For ordination of Minsters, Jus divin. 1. par. page 161.
we have not one Apostolical example, but Apostolical precep^ 1 Timothy 5.22. If
it be further objected, that ordination menti^^ in the text forenamed was only
for those times, and not to contin^ to the end of the world.

Ans. This is not true; for if the ministry be to continue to the e of the
world, then the way to enter into the ministry enjoined by Apostles, is also to
continue: And there can be no reason brought ^ the one should be abolished, and
not the other. Thus they. A^ herehence is easily colligible, that they think
what ever t^ Apostles commanded concerning ordination is practicable unt^ the
end of the world; whereunto I add that ordination practice^ by the Apostles,
was only the first link of the chain of the succession of Church Officers,
because unless duly ordained off^cers, till, and at this day are ordained, and
do ordain as truly, and into the same commission, as if the Apostles were still
alive, and assisted in those actions; the commission, ordination and promise
are all lost, and the Church has ever since the death of the Apostles been
governed by new erected officer* This truth is perpetually attested by all the
Ancients, they un^nimously deriving the order Episcopal from the Apostolical,
^ot as a new order, but as the same order transmitted ^y the death of the
Apostles, unto the Bishops their succes^ors.

Thus have we examined Zanchy's reasons for the temporari^ess of the first
Church Officers, A brief recapitulation, and enforcement of our instances
against Zanchyes reasons for the temporariness of Church Officers.
namely, either because they were chosen by Revelation, or because they were
Apostolically ^rdained, and we hope if what we have written meet with
un^rejudiced Readers, it will convince their consciences of the ^nvalidity of
those reasons, let them be considered either ^oyntly, or separately.

If they be considered jointly, and Revelation associate with ^postolical
ordination determine the temporariness of Officers, ^hen Revelation in
conjunction, is the confusion of ordination; nd Scepticks in religion may
deservedly question how follow^g ordinations can perpetuate any ecclesiastical
Officer, since ew Revelations may be pretended to discontinue them, which ^ill
as little contradict Christ's promise, or the Churches pra^ise, as the former
did, they being both of them as express for ^e continuance of those Ministers,
which former Revelations ^ade temporary; As for the perpetuation of those
Mi^isters, which till these new ones come, we judge continuing.

If they be considered separately, then to recapitulate him up, and briefly
enforce what has already been more l^rgely handled. We may tell those who
maintain the contrary.

That divine Revelation did not make any Officer temporary, because all
Church Officers are founded upon Revelation; which in its first discoveries
gives them to, and leaves them ^ith the Church; to abide with her until the end
of the world, and till we all com in the unity of the faith, etc. And if any
suc^eeding Revelation shoul annul the former, the divine right ^f the Ministry
is utterly lost, since both the Primitive, and pre^^nt Church are under one,
and the same Mediatorian ^overnment. And as we may tell them this, so als^,

That the ordination of the Apostles by Christ, did not make themselves, or
those whom they ordained tempora^^.

First not themselves, for that the Apostles themselves were ordained, instead
of convincing us of their temporariness, leads us into the consideration of a
Lawgiver, who constituted them. This Lawgiver was Jesus Christ our Lord, whose
appointment of the Apostles, or of any other Officers in his Church, was no
extraordinary thing (nothing more properly, or ordinarily belonging to a
Legislator, then to make Laws, and appoint Officers to put them in execution)
neither was the Office temporary, because the Lawgiver appointed the first
Officers, for all orders, whether civil, or ecclesiastical, must have their
commencement, some must be the original Officer^ but so long as the society is
the same, the office, though not the; officers is the same. To conclude, we
have not the same Ministry, because we have not the same Individual Ministers,
most desperate, it killing all Laws, in the death of the prese^^ administrators.

Secondly, not others; Because the Apostles power to orda^^ others, was derived
from Christ's promise of a perpetual pr^sence, which settled Apostles themselves
to the worlds en officially, though not personally; according to their
practice, ^ conjectured at by after ages, but plainly recorded in Scripture was
in their lives time to derive their Office unto others: ^ unto Mathias,
Timothy, Titus, and others.

But here the Shoe wrings, and Presbyterian Divines cry o^ importunately that
these persons were all temporary, and ta^ of them, or Timothy and Titus were
Evangelists, not consid^ring that if the temporaryness of the Apostles were
grante^ this imposes a fresh necessity upon them to show, how the ^postles
could derive what was temporary in themselves, (...) others temporarily, or for
term of life; derivation of off^al trusts being the most undoubted evidence,
both of the perpetua^ of offices, and succession of officers. A new argument
assigned by later Presbyters to prove the temporariness of the first
Church Officers, and to avoid the force of the arguments for their continuance;
It is.
This one thing were suff^ent to warrant our dismission of Zanchy's reasons as
invalid ^ this controversy about the temporaryness of officers, and t^ prepare
our way to the arguments confirming our denial of the limitation of any
officers to the Apostles days.

But we must respite the latter for a little space, because w^ find others of
Zanchy's opinion have somewhat more to add wh^ Judgment should not be given
against him, or them: We mu^^ therefore beg our Readers patience a while till
we have examined it, and then we shall God willing proceed.

Our latter Presbyters perceiving the Cogency of some of the form instances,
are enforced to grant that Apostolical acts o^ office, or what was done by the
Apostles, or committed by them to others, relative to the Churches propagation,
and government, whether by ordination of Ministers, or exercise of ^he
Censures, etc. was derived downward into some hands, and conitnued dispensable
by those Trustees unto this day; and must perpetually continue so till the end
of the Churches militancy. But to secure their Principles, they start a
question about the orders of those Trustees, whether it were the same with the
Apostolate (higher it cannot be) or distinct and inferior. The former part of
the quaery they insist not much upon, for affirmed and proved, it maintains
our opinion, and resolutely opposes the temporaryness of any of the first
Ministers; and that with reason, since it gives Christ's institution the
authority to direct Apostolic practice, whereas the contrary nullifies Christ's
institution by Apostolic practice. The Apostles derived their office-work unto
a distinct, and inferior order of officers, viz. unto Presbyters.

Their reasons for it.


Therefore they build upon the latter, wherein they are so forward, and
^lamorous that (though Judge, and party) they have outfaced some ^art of the
reformed Christian world, that themselves are the ^postles descendants, and
successors in those trusts. Whereby we have not an abolition of the office, but
a mutation of the order of the officers. This is a high, and till our time
unheard of notion, requiring little less then a second descent of our Savior
for its authorization. But this they do not, nor dare pretend unto; let us
consider impartially, and in the fea^ of God what they allege.

First, Our Assembly feign a sophistical distinction, whereby when the whole
practice of the Apostles will serve their turns, they arrogate it, because qui
Apostoli, or those who were Apostles acted as Presbyters, First, the Apostles
acted sometimes as Apostles sometimes as Presbyters.

Ans. to dissenters p. 52. and p. 55.

This distinction is, first fallacious,

Secondly Popish.


but when it will not they renounce it, and say the Apostles therein wrought
qua Apostoli, or as they were Apostles; but I dare say (without any partial
reflection upon these times) that this is a mere jugle, and shift to palliate
their boistrous extrusion of Episcopacy, and fallacious intrusion of their
Antiscriptural Government upon the Church of England, for as it confounds two
distinct offices (of which more by and by) so all our Divines thus censure it
in Bellarmin, Bellar. de Romans Pontif. lib 4. ca. 5. Sect. respondeo magnum esse
discrimen.
who endeavors to prove, That none of all the Apostles, but St Peter had
successors, because as he says, The powers given to him, and them jointly as
Apostles, were particular settled upon him and his successors, as the ordinary
Pastor. And the truth is this distinction grows out of such pliable timber as
Artists may make scammum, aut Priapum, Consistory, or Pope, or what they please
out of it.

Secondly, officers may succeed each other into their work, not into their
commission.

Ministers at Wight.

2. Paper.

This reason is fallaciously propounded by them.

And is by us,

1. Explicated.


Secondly, The Ministers at Wight prove Presbyters to be standing Apostles,
because at they say; There may be succession into the same work, though not
into the same commission, or office. Thus they, but if it be a reason why
Presbyters succeed Apostles, it transcends my capacity, and I shall by and by,
give my reasons why I cannot understand it.

But least some fallacious evasion lurk in these general terms, same works, and
same office: We desire our Reader (ere we make a direct answer) to carry in his
memory our former distinction concerning ecclesiastical works, viz. into common
works, or works done by both orders, and distinct works, or works done by any
one of them; for we cannot deny present Presbyters a faculty to do what ever
was officially done by former Presbyters, though those works were commonly, and
promiscuously done both by Apostles, and Presbyters. This we do deny, that
Presbyters succeed Apostles, or that their performance of common works, will
entitle them to do what was distinctly done by the Apostles in the Primitive
time; for then all distinction betwixt Apostolical, and Presbyterial order, is
utterly removed; then the first Presbyters lived, and dyed ignorant of their
chiefest privileges, and it is either a Tautology in St Luke, or an usurpation
in the Apostles, or both, that he distributes the officers of the Church at
Jerusalem, into Apostles and Elders; It lies therefore upon the contrivers of
this reason, or Paradox, To prove, that what official act the Apostles did by
distinct commission, and never communicated to former Presbyters, is derived as
a work unto present Presbyters, who make no pretense or challenge to the
commissions, either of the first Apostles, or Presbyters. That they pretend not
to an Apostolical commission, this assertion of the Wight Divnes informs us.
And that they do not make claim to the commissions of the first Presbyters,
has been partly showed in the fifth Exception, and shall be hereafter more
fully evidenced, in answer to the third Presbyterian reason of the Apostles
derivation of their office-works unto Presbyters. Thus have we showed what the
Divines at Wight have said, and what they are to prove; They have affirmed
without reason that Presbyters succeed Apostles in their work, though not in
their office:

Secondly denied because
We deny it for the following reasons.

First, it is false, and of dangerous consequence.

Its falsehood.


First it is false, and of dangerous consequence, that any one should succeed
another into his officework, but not into his commission or office: It Is false,
because the commission and office gives the relation betwixt officers and
people, and office works are the actual performance of the duties belonging to
that relation. Now as there can be no effect without its immediate cause, so
neither can the same work be done without the same relation; relation and work,
not being contradistinct, but subordinate, so that it can no more be the same
work where the office is diverse, then it can be the same duty without the same
relation. I prove this by an instance too too familiar in these Schismatical
times: A Lay, or unordained person, may actually baptize, or celebrate the
Communion in the prescribed form, but is his the work of a Minister? or is he
made a Minister by doing it? Indeed it is a like act, but it is not the same,
because the Administrator, and a Minister have not the same Church relation.
There is the fallacy, and here is the danger of the notion; Its dangeronsess.
for if the same work may be done without the same office, then all the Church
acts of an unordained intruder (so they be done in common, and ordinary form)
are justifiable and valid, or none are, because what he, and an ordained
officer does, are the same works. And when he is rebuked for meddling with the
Ministerial office, he may answer, and allege in his own defense, that he
pretends not to the Ministerial office, but to the work, for doing whereof he
is unjustly blamed, since Ministers themselves grant there may be a succession
into the same work, though not into the Commission, Secondly, it is contrary to
the nature of Christ's commission.
or office. Reason being thus irreconcilable to this irrational notion, we take
it for granted, that so is Scripture the rather, because these Wight Divines
allege none in favor of it, wherefore not finding it bottomed either upon
reason, or Scripture, we suppose it to be borrowed from the often interrupted
transactions of temporal Princes, who themselves, commissions, offices and
officers, are all temporary, alterable, and perishing; which as not
prescriptive in this case, and violently drawing Christ to an imitation of
humane formalities (it implying his keeping a Patent office, where when one
officer dies, another comes and receives a new Commission for his office) we
censure for a profane, and Phanatick novelty. And do in a direct opposition
maintain, that King Jesus who never dies, never is put by, or deposed from the
Regiment of his Church, but is yesterday to day, the same day for ever, he who
is, was, and is to come the Almighty; perpetually grants the same offices, and
impowers to perform the same works by the same Commission, without renual or
alteration. Nor can it want proof to a diligent observer, of Mat. 28.18, 19,
20. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. that his Commission is issued forth, directed, and
confirmed, not to a personal and stinted number of officers, since they decay,
alter, and dye daily, but to a perpetual and unchangeable office, capacitating
successive officers to preach, baptize, and perfect the saints, work in the
ministry, and edify the body of Christ, till the end of the world, and till we
all come in the unity, etc. Suffice this to be spoken against the second
Reason, or Paradox.

But there is more behind, for the Wight Divines present is with monstrous
assertions (as the unclean beasts entered the Ark) in couples, but with this
difference, they were both of a kind, these diverse, and being conceived of
mingled seed, are by far the more monstrous; behold the Beast.

3. Reas. Presbyters were constituted by a dateless Apostolical practice, not
by Christ's commission.

Wight Divines second paper.

This distinction is fond and perilous.


Thirdly, The same Wight Divines explicatively of the forme^ Assertion (sure
there was need) add in the same place, the^^ words, The ordinary officers,
which are to manage the works (...) teaching, and government are constituted,
settled, and limited i^ warrant of Scripture, as by another commission, then
that which the Apostles had. I trembled in my self at reading of this fond and
perilous distinction, fond, because it is a distinction without a difference;
Christ's Commission to my sense being warrant of Scripture, and warrant of
Scripture being Christ Commission: Perilous because if it be a lawful
distinction, an^ warrant of Scripture, and Christ's Commission do constitute
diverse officers to do the same works of feeding, and governing then an officer
by Christ's Commission is none by warrant o^ Scripture: And an officer by
warrant of Scripture, is none by Christ's Commission. Besides many, and
perplexed were (...) thoughts, and enquiries what this warrant of Scripture
shou^^ be, whether somewhat preceding, or somewhat succeeding Chri^^^
Commission; If preceding, I resolved Christ would not impo^^ null Commissions
upon his Church. If succeeding, I perceive not how her officers could hold
their places by a better Patent, then their Kings, and Lawgivers. After I had
sufficiently wearied my self, I found these Divines elsewhere thus delivering
themselves in this matter. They say, The ordinary powe^^ of teaching and
governing, In the same second Paper not far before the end.
are settled in the hands of ordinary officers by a new warrant and commission,
according to the rules of ordination, and calling in the Word. This resolved
me, that this pretended Scripture warrant, was posteriour to Christ's
Commission, and if these Divines say true, Christ committed one thin^ to the
Apostles, and they practiced another; but I was not (...) far resolved as to
have no remaining scruple and this among others was a sore enquiry to me; where
to enter upon my search of this new warrant, and where to find the silken Clue
which directed the way into this Labyrinth of Apostolic practice, much time I
spent, and much labor I lost, in turning over such papers as came to my lands,
and could not find wherewithal to unloose this knot; till at last I met from
the Assembly, what? what gave me satisfaction? no, what completed the Paradox;
they say, The truth is we read not at all in Scripture of the time, Ans. to
dissent, page 3^. etc.
or occasion of ordaining elders in that Church (they mean the first Church, or
the Church at Jerusalem) elsewhere they add. We find elders in that Church
first named, Act. 11. and afterward, Act. 15. but when they were constituted,
we find not particularly expressed; only we may rationally conceive, that the
Apostles in their care for the Churches good, did ordain elders in that Church
very early. Ans. to diss. page 47.
We ^eserve this notion of the Assemblies to be anatomized, and ^cattered
peecemeal in the following part of this discourse; In ^his place we shall only
parley with it, and say, what if See page 275.
Christ not the Apostles, ordained the first Elders? what if See Page 276.
St. Lukes not recording their original in the Acts of the Apostles be an
additional confirmation of this truth, and of his cautelousness not to use vain
repititions? he having largely, and plainly inserted it in his Gospel,
whereunto the acts of the Apostles is a kind of supplement, or appendix: And
what if See page 279.
the same Assembly in the same tract, in the same 38. page and in the very next
line after their denial, to have read in Scripture of the time, or occasion of
ordaining Elders, do in effect confess all this? All which we do undertake to
evidence in the places, unto which a reference is made in the margent, then
what is proved by this Paradox, but what we all know already, even that none
are so blind, as they that will not see, and that when men of the largest
parts, and strongest abilities are once intoxicated, and made drunk with error,
they never cease reeling, till they fall at the utmost distance from truth: But
in the mean time this bold Assertion, that Presbyters succeed Apostles thus
marvailously flankered is this citadel, out of which they batter Timothies
temporary office, and defy all who dare make a title (though they make it good)
unto a present capacity to discharge it. However in the ^trength of the Lord,
we will make our Approaches unto it, well hoping that the Magical spell is now
spent, and the time ^ome when this enchaunted Castle* raised by the witchcraft
of rebellion must vanish. Our Reasons against the temporariness of the first
Church Officers, and against their derivation of their Office-works unto
another and inferior Order of Officers.
Our assault is a down right denial that the Apostles did derive their
Office-works unto an inferior Order, or namely unto Presbyters, and
consequently that no Office in the primitive Church was temporary.

First, It Is contrary to Apostolic practice.
First, The constant practice of the Apostles contradicts it. Presbyters are not
of yesterday, they were as well in being in the Apostles days, as in ours; but
no Scripture proves their receiving power from the Apostles to ordain
Ministers, or exercise the censures, etc. singly, and independently, from an
higher Order of Officers. Contrariwise we have many instances of the Apostles
reserving those powers in their own hands, or derivi^ them to others of their
own Order, and superior unto Presbyters: for instance, S. Paul censured the
incestuous Corinthia^ 1 Cor. 5. when yet that Church had affixed Elders,
otherwi^ he could not have complained of her members, for unworthy r^ceiving of
the Eucharist, for had that Sacrament been celebrted by unordained men, the
reproof lay equally against the unworthy breaking and pouring out, as against
the unworthy taki^ and drinking of the bread and cup: and the Apostle should
no^ have ordered the self-examination of the Communicants ere the^ came to the
holy Table, but the suspension of all celebration o^ that sacred Mystery, till
the Elders were ordained among them The same Apostle commits ordination and
censures to Timothy a^ Ephesus, long after that Church was gathered, and her
Elders ordained, as shall appear by and by, in our discussion of the dat^ of
the first Epistle to Timothy. But why need we post it off s^ long? How could
Timothy receive and proceed upon the accusation against delinquent Elders, 1 Timothy 5.9. if there were no Elders the Church before his coming, or if they were
ordained ^ him? (for he had such power, 1 Timothy 5.22.) yet the power o^
administering the censures was no longer in his hands, but in a Consistory,
Classis, or Assembly of themselves. I know these instances, especially that
concerning the Church of Corinth, supply matter to long disputes, not by their
own inevidence, but by the wranglings of their Expositors. However lest we
should swell this discourse to too great a Bulk, and rend away a principal part
from that concerning the Apostles, we cannot discuss them here, but must refer
them thither: which notwithstanding, if our reasons against the Evangelists
temporariness, and See page 198, etc.
Timothys Evangelizate upon Presbyterian principles, be conclusive and evident,
a foundation will be laid, whereupon the continuing distinction betwixt the
Apostles and Presbyters, must be built, and the whole Presbyterian structure in
defense of their succession unto the Apostles, will be levelled. And finally,
what has been instanced of Timothy in this paragraph, will persuade candid
Readers of the reasonableness of our denial, that the Apostles committed their
office-works unto Presbyters, or that such an assertion can be founded upon
their practice.

Secondly, It falsely and anti-scripturally supposes that descended Christ did
not form his Church which he confirmed at his ascension, Secondly, It Is a false
supposition.
but left his Apostles (as they gathered it) to cast it into what mold they
pleased, the erroniousness of which conceit is evidenced by all the Gospels,
and especially by Act. 1. throughout. Besides, were it true, that the Apostles,
not Christ appointed the standing Ministry, then the Divine Right thereof is
forthwith abrogated and anulled, since it must be warranted by the Legislators
institution and commission, not by the Apostles practice how early soever it
were: otherwise the Apostles, not Christ, are the Churches Lawgiver; their
practice, not his institutions are her Laws. Thus Presbyters demurring upon the
Bishops plea for a distinct order, nullify Christ's Legislation, and settle
their own office, upon a foundation inconsistent with it. But we remember that
we have already referred this point, and send it to its place.

Thirdly, It infolds a notorious contradiction, Thirdly, It implies a
contradiction.
for first, it grants that the Apostles received commissions and delegations,
but by and by it makes them supreme, and impowers them to delegate at pleasure,
some into their own commissions for a time, others into another for perpetuity,
then which, nothing can be more contradictory to reason, for was it ever heard,
or to use the Assembly's words, can it be rationally conceived, that any
supreme Governor should issue out commissions to his Officers to do what they
will upon their own heads, and sometimes to act by their commission, as the
Apostles are said to do in the delegation of the Evangelists, otherwise to act
without it, yea to the disannulling and overthrow of it, as they are also said
to do in the ordination of Presbyters? And yet their commission includes
Successors, and though they should alter the orders instituted by Christ, yet
could they not give Church Officers any other works then what he had appointed,
namely, preaching, baptizing, perfecting of the Saints, etc. The Wight Divines,
and the Assembly understood well enough the import of the Apostles commission,
how it must if it continue include Successors; because the first Apostles are
not now, and yet the world is not ended, nor are we all come in the unity, etc.
But this is the pestilence of their discipline, an Antidote must be prepared
against it, but they can or will compound no better then a bold charge of
breach of trust upon the Apostles, making warrant of Christ and Apostolical
commission to command one thing, but warrant of Scripture and Apostolical
practice to do another.

Fourthly, It dissolves Ecclesiastical Unity.
Fourthly, It dissolves the straightest Bond of Ecclesiastical Unity, and man's
against the Church her strongest Fortress against haeretical Invasion and
Depraedation. The Apostle, Ephesians. 4. show the several Ligaments of the Churches
Unity: as, it is one Faith, one Baptism, one Spirit, one hope of calling, so
it is one Ministry Indeed the Apostle does not use the phrase one Ministry in
expres^ syllables, but when he said, That ascended and descended Christ is the
same which gave some Apostles, etc. he means as much as if he had plainly said
one ministry. Our entire conjunction with our head is kn^ by all these joints,
break the hold of any one of them, we are s^ far separated from him. The Church
is a mystical Body, wherein a in the natural body, when all is joined together,
and compacted by the which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual
working of the measure in every part, the whole makes increase to the
edification of it self in love. Now if the Ministry have the nature and place
(...) a joint in the mystical Body, it must always be the same; much more when
it is the principal joint, and Atlantic knot wherein all the other joints
meet, and are moved: For is it one faith i^ how is that generated? by the
Ministry; Romans 10.14. How sha^^ they call on him in whom they have not
believed? and how shall the^ believe in him of whom they have not heard? and
how shall they he^ without a preacher? Is it one baptism? how is that
dispensed? the Ministry; Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations,
bap^^zing them, etc. Is it one Spirit? how is that received? by the Ministry; 2
Cor. 3.6. Who also has made us able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the
letter, but of the Spirit; for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
Gal. 3.2. This only would I learn of you, received ye the Spirit by the works
of the law, or by the hearing of faith? V. 5. He therefore that ministers unto
you the Spirit, and works miracles among you, does he it by the works of the
law, or by the hearing of faith? Is it one Body? how is that concinnated? by
the Ministry; Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And he gave some Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ; till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ. In the same Epistle the Apostle tells that
Church, that they were made (...), or a Body incorporated, and (...), or
co-parteners of the promise, by his Ministry, Ephesians. 3.6, 7. That the gentiles
should be fellow heirs and partakers of his promise in Christ, by the Gospel,
whereof I am made a minister, according to the gift of the grace of God given
unto me, by the effectual working of his power, Is it one hope of our calling?
how are our expectations raised toward it? by the ministry, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14.
For we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren, beloved of the
Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth; whereunto he called you
by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. This
says Scripture: and what says Reason? Will it ever admit Faith, Baptism,
Spirit, Body, Hope of calling, to be ordinary and unalterable Unities, when yet
the Ministry which knits them together is sometimes temporary, sometimes
perpetual, sometimes ordinary, sometimes extraordinary, notwithstanding it was
instituted by Christ to continue in doing of that work till we all come in the
unity, etc. Let one instance be given of any number of men, who made a real
change in their Ministry, and did not alter somewhat in their Faith, Baptism,
etc. Think we when Rebels cut Christ's cords in sunder, they intend to tie
themselves faster, or rather to hold their Faith and obedience by a bow knot,
which they will slip, or streighten at pleasure. Search the Church Antiquities,
you will find the original betwixt ordinary and extraordinary Officers
commencing in the most profligate practices of most pernicious Heretics; had
Marcion, Valentinus, or Basilides a safer retreat for their new Apostolate,
then an obstinate denial of successors unto old Apostles? Sure I am, Tertullian
(who lived but two hundred years after Christ, and was himself a Presbyter)
thus catechizeth Marcions disciples, Evolvant ordinem Episcoporum suorum, ita
per successionem ab initio decurrentem, ut primus ille episcopus, aliquem ex
Apostolis, vel Apostolicis viris, (qui tamen cum Apostolis perseveraverit)
autorem, and antecessorem habuit. Tertul. de praescript. p 80.

A quibus traducem in fidei, and semina doctrinae caeterae ecclesiae mutuatae
sunt, and quotidie mutuantur and ecclesiae fiunt. Ac per hoc, and ipsae
Apostolicae deputantur, ut soboles ecclesiarum Apostolicarum, Omne genus ad
originem suamcensentur necesse est: Itaque tot, ac tantae ecclesiae, unam esse
ab Apostolis primam, ex qua omnes; sic omnes primae, and omnes Apostolicae, dum
unam omnes probant unitatem. page 76. vide etiam. page 81.


Let them turn over the order of their Bishops so flowing in a succession from
the Apostles, that their first Bishop had one of the Apostles, or Apostolical
men, (who persevered with the Apostles) for his Author and Ancestor. Thence he
proceeds to show (page 82.) what Churches could produce their genealogy;
namely, Corinth, Philippi, Ephesus, and Rome. And he adds, That not only
Churches planted by the Apostles, but all other Churches which have borrowed,
and do borrow daily the root of faith, and seed of doctrine from them, are to
be accounted Apostolical, as being the race of Apostolical Churches; for when
all of the same kind are mustered under their originals: All will be one
Apostolical Church, because all proceed from one; so all are first, and all
Apostolical, while all approve one unity. I know some passages in this, are
highly esteemed by traducers, and denyers of the Apostles successors, but I
dare say it is for want of due consideration of the authors scope, and of
distinguishing betwixt the first Apostles, and their successors. The tract he
intitles A prescription against Heretics, by whom he specially designs the
Marcionites, whose ringleader Marcion (Tertullians contemporary, or very little
his senior) levells all former Church-states to build a new one upon himself;
And accordingly, as a second Christ, he publishes his new Instrument, and as
the Devil tempting Christ, he retains, and rejects what he thought fit in
Scripture. Tertullian in this case must act both defensively, and offensively,
or defend the present Church State, and deny Marcions notion, doing the former,
he assigns successors unto the old Apostles, and maintains that the Church did
not expire with them, but continues one and the same, under the government and
administration of the Bishops, their successors; doing the latter, he decryes,
and exclaims against all new power, to ordain another kind of Apostles, and
puts Marcion upon the proof of Christ's again descending, and constituting, and
giving gifts unto the heretical, Idem page 79.
and new created Apostles; whereby over, and beside the confirmation of the
truth, and of his own most true opinion, he gives us this certain Axiom. That
to keep out new, there must be successors unto old Apostles. This was
Tertullians buckler against Heretics above fourteen hundred and fifty years
ago, then he, and his fellow Presbyters, saw no other way to secure their own
order, or the Churches peace, but in the maintenance of the succession of their
Bishops unto the Apostles. But were he now alive, and inhabiting either Rome,
or Geneva, or in any other place under their Jurisdiction, his assertion would
not pass uncensured, nor himself unpersecuted without a recantation. Rome says
she alone is Apostolical, Geneva says she is, and all other Churches ought to
be Presbyterial; and governed by Officers not founded upon Apostolical
commission, but upon they know not what Apostolic practice. These things shall
be further explicated in the tract concerning Apostles, neither should we have
named them here, but to show our Presbyters from what desperate precipices they
tumble and cast down the stately temple of Church order, to build themselves a
moveable tabernacle in her ruins. But we hasten to the next reason, which is a
consequent of this.

Fifthly, It introduces multiformity, or diversity of constitution betwixt the
past, and present Church? Fifthly, it introduces multiformity betwixt the past
and present Churches.

The reasons are.

First because the Ministry is the external form of the Church which form
cannot be altered without the alteration of the subject.


the form of the Church is twofold, either internal, or external, the former is
faith in Christ, because it consists in the union, relation, and life which
the Church has, and holds with him as her head; the latter is Christ's
instituted ministry; ministers being co-w^rkers with him. 1 Cor. 39. and
builders upon his foundation, ver. 10. According to these diverse forms, the
Church falls under distinct denominations of visible and invisible; and as
without one Christ to be believed in, she cannot be one invisible church, so
without one ministry to preach the Word, admi^ister the Sacraments, and
exercise discipline, she cannot be one ^isible Church: Hence Christ coupleth
his perpetual presence and a ministry, Mat. 28.19, 20. and St. Paul says the
ministry given by Christ, is necessary to be continued at their work, till we
all come in the unity. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. These Scriptures are most plain to
prove the external formation of the Church by the ministry, the former looks
upon the world as gentiles till the Apostles disciple them; the latter looks
upon the Church as undiscernable from other societies till perfected by the
ministry: Neither need we to seek for man's, when we have found Gods authority;
however for the farther evidencing of this truth, not in its self, but unto
some men's capacities, we shall subjoyn the testimony of several authors,
ancient, and modern. St. Cyprian says: The Church of Christians is a flock, or
people united to their Priest, or Pastor, whence we ought to know that the
Church is in the Bishop, and the Bishop in the Church, and whosoever are not in
the Bishop, they are not in the Church. i. e. if we may interpret his meaning,
no visible Church, Ecclesia Christianorum est plebs sacerdoti adunata, and
pastori suo grex adhaerens, unde scire debes episcopum in ecclesia esse, and
ecclesiam in episcopo, and si qui cum episcopo non sunt, in ecclesia non sunt.
Cypr. lib. 4. epist. Epist. 9. ubi non est episcopus, ibi non est ecclesia.
Hieron. ad Luciferian.
no Church externally formed according to the pattern of the precedent Church,
the reason is because ministerial acts as preaching of the Word, Forma externa
ecclesiae consistit in coetuum sacrorum collectione, conventione,
administratione and regimine ecclesiae unius cujusque penes illius pastores,
Presbyteros and seniores Mares. system. Theo. loc. 16.

Jus divin. 2 par. p. 96.

Vnde enim natae sunt haereses, nisi dum episcopus qui unus est, and ecclesiae
prae est superba quorundum presumtione contemnitur. Cypr. lib. 4. epist. epist.
9.

Ne que enim aliunde haereses obortae sunt etc. Epist. haec sunt enim initia
haereticorum, etc. lib 3 epist. 9. lib. 1. epist. 3.


administration of the Sacraments, and exercise of the Censures, specificate
the Church, and difference her from other societies. And uniformity of external
constitution (in what is essential to the constitution) is a most requisite
principle of union betwixt one Church and another, in so much, that what ever
Church is not so formed as the Primitive was, is not one Church with her; Not
that the former Church prescribes her example (as her own act) to be imitated
by al^ following Churches, but because both the one and the other is
constituted one body by the constitution of the Lawgiver* and promised to be
continued in unity until the end of the world. Maresius says, The outward form
of the Church consist in her gathering, assembly, public service, and
government: A^ which are performable in each Church, by her own Pastors,
Presbyters and Elders. The London ministers say; a true ministry is esential to
an organical Church, or Church administering ordinances But if this, and their
other opinion about diversity of th Office, Order, Commission, and Warrant,
betwixt the past, an present Church Officers be both true, what follows but
mult^formity, and diversity of constitution betwixt the past, an^ present
Church-states, so that they are not one visible bod^ neither have they one
head, because as has been said, this external form or ministry, specificates
the Church, and differe^ceth her from other societies, and because by rule
undeniable the composition cannot be one, where such form is manifold; becau^^
it inseparably inheres to the matter, and will not admit of the sup^^induction
of another form; Excellently St. Cyprian says, when come heresy's and
schisms, but when the Bishop which is one, i^ set over the Church (he means
each particular Church, and us^ this argument against those Africane
Schismatics, who made rent from the Church of Carthage, and carried themselves
insolently toward him their Bishop) is c^ntemned by proud and presumptuous
men. This he spoke neither in a heat, nor suddenly, but in several places
elsewhere using almost the same words, it appears to have been his constant,
and professed Judgment.

Obj. Amesius, says profession of faith is the external form of the Church.

Medull. Theol. lib. 1 ca. 31. Sect. 27. and ca. 33. Sect. 18.


Amesius to express his singularity (a fault too too common with him) and to
elevate the divine right, and necessity of the ministry, makes profession of
faith to be the external form of the Church; the ministry to be her organical
state.

But this is easily refuted, by a right stating what an organic^ state is, and
considering whether the ministry stand in the same elation to profession of
faith, Ans. the invalidity of his assertion fully manifested.
as an organical state does stand unto its form. An organical state
presupposes a form, nei^^er is it, or continues it longer such a state, then
while sub^ervient to the form, therein, or thereby exercising his function; ^he
eyes, or ears of dead men are no organs, because being sepa^^ted from the form,
they do neither see nor hear. If we com^are this with the ministry, and
profession of faith, we shall soon ^erceive these wide differences.

First, the ministry precedes profession of faith. Romans 10.14 ^^d 17. Romans
16.26. Gal. 3.2. Cap. 32. Sect. 30.
I know Amesius in confirma^^on of his opinion, adds, That there may be a
profession of faith in. ^^me assemblies, before solemn preaching of the Word,
and admini^^^ation of the Sacraments. But this needs no refutation, since
^hrists institution, and promise is otherwise, Mat. 28.19.20. St. ^aul resolves
the case otherwise. Romans 10.14, 17. and no Scrip^^re instance can be given of
any company professing the faith, before they had been under a Gospel ministry.
And Amesius ^ould have done well to have told us, what profession of faith ^^en
can make before they hear of faith, or the Gospel.

Secondly, ministerial acts (as has been instanced) difference ^^ofession of
faith from other professions; the Church from ^^her societies. This they do not
commonly, but most properly, they specificating the Church a distinct society
from all others, and entirely, and exclusively belonging to her, and her alone.
Otherwise the most, and most learned of our reformed divines are mistaken, who
make pure preaching of the Word; and l^wful administration of the Sacraments to
be the marks of the Church. To these some add ecclesiastical discipline, but
with ^o disadvantage to our Assertion, for all of them are ministerial ^orks.
Mat. 28.19.20. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. 1 Timothy 4. 1 Timothy 5. ^r tot. Return we
therefore to the other more ancient, and more true opinion, which resolves the
ministry to be the external form of the Church; wherein we acquiesce; And are
resolved that this form must continue one and the same, from the first instant,
to the last moment of the Churches continuance, i^ she be always one body, and
have constantly the same constitution.

Our resolution arises, and is confirmed, Secondly, the Church is often called
a body which must be one,
not only from what has been already said, but from hence, that the Church is
often called Christ's body. 1 Cor. 12.27. Ephesians. 3.6. Ephesians. ^.16. And unless we
foist the mock-figure Antiphrasis into that expression, and say the Church is
called a body, because she holds no proportion with other bodies, we may
conceive the holy Ghost in comparing the musical with the natural body, points
at some Analogy betwixt them; But nothing is more obviously proveable of the
natural body, then her institution, for conservation by the same Elements. And
the following Scriptures seem to justify the same of the mystical body. Ephesians.
4.10. ad fin. 16. Ephesians. 2.21. Col. 2.19.

Thirdly, the constitution of the Jewish Church was always one.
If any one think this instance from the natural to the mystica^ body, is too
remote let them know this truth is attested by the Church State ere the
incarnation, she was at first seated in Moses his chair, or formed by officers
of his appointment. A^ therein, after the expiration of nigh two thousand
years, (...) sat in Christ's time, neither are her then officers blamed for
setting in it, but for stepping out of it by their traditions. T^^ new
Testament, and the faith of Christians willingly pr^^ Christ to Moses, as the
surety of a better testament, an high Pri^ consecrated for evermore. The
Apostle, and Bishop of our professi^ who was faithful in all his house i. e. as
Calvin expounds it, Calv. in Heb. 3.5, 6.
in a government of his whole Church. All which he was not as a se^vant (which
Moses was) but as a son, Heb. 3.5.6. But if reason be refractory, how hardly
will it be reclaimed, since the M^s^cal discipline continued enforce so long,
it commencing, as concluding in high Priests, Priests, and Levites; yea most of
the nation of the Jews continue under that pedagogy unto thi^ day. But
Christian ministers allow Christ's institutions to be a^brogated, almost as soon
as instituted, because very early afte^ his ascension the Apostles (with whom
he promised to be pr^sent successively unto the worlds end) did ordain others
to their work, not in virtue of their Commission, or Order, ^ther do their
successors found their Jusdivinum-ship thereupo^ but upon a new warrant,
Baxters 5. disput. disp. 1. Sect. 3. page 22.
and the rules of ordination in the Word: More might be added in this
particular, but we chu^ to give it the Reader in Mr. Baxters words, he says;
It is no^ a tolerable thing to charge God with such a sudden mutation of ^^
law, or order of Church government, without very certain proof* If we find
Christ settling one way of Church Government in his own time, and presently
after for the first age, it is a most improbable thing that he should take that
down again, and to set up another kind of government, to continue ever
afterward. Thus he.

Obj. the Jewish Church frequently admitted extraordinary officers or prophets.
Obj. Do any say the Jewish Church frequently admitted extraordinary Officers,
or Prophets?

I answer. This were it true, proves nothing why the Chri^ian Church should
also do it; the Mosaical was a temporal ^ispensation, the Christian is
perpetual. Besides many, great, and weighty are the differences betwixt those
Prophets, and our ^retended extraordinary Officers. Ans. by a declaration not
only of the diverse Church states then, and now, but of the most different
quallifications of those Prophets, and our pretended extraordinary officers.


First, Our pretended extraordinary Officers are of the constitution of our
Church, so were not those Prophets of the constitution of the Jewish Church;
neither were any Officers of her constitution temporary, and extraordinary:
They were Moses, Aaron, the Priests and Levites; Moses is considerable in a
^ouble respect. First as Legislator (who is no Officer in the ^^nse wherein we
are now treating of Officers, for therein Mos^s typed Christ, and holds no
resemblance with Apostles or Evangelists) therein he neither had, nor could
have successors.

Secondly as chief Magistrate, therein he had successors, as ^oshua, Josh. 1.1.
Othriel, Judge. 2.9, 10. etc. Aaron the high ^riest had successors, he saw
himself stripped, and his son Elea^r clothed with his Robe, and settled in his
Office of high ^riest-hood, ere his death, Numb. 20.26, 27.28. the Priests, ^^d
Levites also had successors. Numb. 18.6.7. Deuteronomy. 7.9.

Secondly, Our pretended extraordinary Officers are affir^ed to alter the frame
and constitution of our Church, Christ ^^ft it to them Apostolical, they left
it to their successors ^resbyterial; Christ gave both Apostles, and Elders (to
orders of preaching ministers) to the Church, they took away one, ^^d left only
the other remaining. Whereas all the Prophets ^ised up in the old Testament, or
any of them, did not alter ^^e first frame of the Jewish Church, vacate the
old, and ^ring in a new Ecclesiastical Government, because the ^riest-hood
continued to be after the order of Aaron till ^ospel times.

Thirdly, We have no word in the new Testament foretelling ^s of the ceasing of
some, and raising of other extraordinary Officers, or willing us to receive
them when they do come, but many to the contrary, Mat. 28.19, 20. 1 Cor. 12.28.
Ephesians. ^.11, 12, 13. Mat. 7.15. Mat. 24.11. ver. 24. 2 Pet. 2.1. ^ Joh. 4.1.
But the frequent raising up of Prophets under the ^ld Testament dispensation,
is promised in the very body of the Mosaical Ordinances. And therefore they are
unduly called (at least in the same sense as we call ours now) extraordinary.
Deuteronomy. 8.15. The Lord thy God will raise up a Prophet unto thee, from the
midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me unto him shall ye hearken. I
willingly grant this promise principally belongs to Christ, and is accordingly
cited by St. Stephen; Act. 7.37. but less principally, it refers to other
Prophets, forerunning his Incarnation. And it has both a fore, and after
reference in the Chapter, which rather inclines it to them then him.

First, If we look backward but to the verse immediately going before it, we see
Moses delivering this promise as a mean to keep Israel at all times to their
law, and from heathen superstitions, and enchantments; read the words, they are
For these nations which thou shall possess hearkened unto observers times, and
unto diviners, but as for thee, the Lord thy God has not suffered thee so to
do; the Lord thy God will raise up unto thee Prophet, etc. That Israel when
planted in Canaan, was very forward at several times to learn those ways of
the heathen, a^ that God for the most part raised up Prophets at such time^ is
evident from Isa. 8.19. Jer. 10.2. Jer. 27.9. Micah 3. Micah 5.12. Zech. 10.2.

Secondly, If we look forward we behold a rule given for the trial of false
Prophets, ver. 20, 21, 22. But the prophet which shall presume to speak a word
in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the
name of other god, that Prophet shall surely dye, and if thou say in thy heart;
how sha^ we know the word which the Lord has not spoken? When a Prophet
speaks in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come (...) pass,
that is the thing which the Lord has not spoken, but the Prophe^^ has spoken
it presumptuously, thou shall not be afraid of him. From whence is colligible,
that Moses under the promise ^ Gods raising up a Prophet, intended not only
Christ the g^ Prophet, but even other Prophets also who should speak ^ word of
the Lord; for if the Prophet like unto me, had referr^ only to Christ, this
caution needed not to have been given concerning true, and false Prophets: But
the whole Jewish nati^ (with Samaritanes) ought to keep themselves to the five
books of Moses, and deny credence to all, and every the prophetica^ writings
before the Incarnation. Whereas if the Prophet like ^^me refer unto other
Prophets as well as Christ, we have a warrant to believe their writings, and
may conclude upon the reason, why ^ caution against false Prophets is added, to
wit, least the people should be abused with false alarums of the coming of the
great Prophet. Thus to expound the Text is not my singular opinion In loc.
Abulensis, In loc.
Cajetane In loc.
A Lo^ide, and Itaque post quam auguriis, divinationibus, artibus magicis,
necromantiae, aliisque superstitionibus vetuit eos dare operam, subjicit se
daturum quod pro omnibus sufficere debet, nempe prophetis nunquam destitutum
iri. Calv. inst. lib. 4. ca. 1. Sect. 5.
Calvin thus expound it. Calvin's words I will ^ranscribe, he says, Therefore
after he had bid them to take heed ^o soothsaying, divination, magic arts,
necromancy, and other superstitions, he subjoynes his promise to take
sufficient care never to leave them destitute of Prophets. Thus he. Unto whom,
and all the forementioned I have judged it requisite to subjoyn the ^arge, and
ample testimony of Mr. John Diodati, concerning the old Testament Prophets; he
says. The ministry of the Prophets was no way concerning the ceremonial, and
ordinary service, but was directed to these three several ends. First to
maintain by preaching, and by the word, the religion, and customs in their
ancient purity, and ^ntegrity; to correct and purge vices, crept in among them
from time ^o time, to oppose all humane power, which should be contrary to Gods
power, and finally to keep, or set again all things into their ^ormer state, by
the same spirit, as they were first established in the be^inning. The second,
was always to keep alive the promises of the Messiah, and to keep the faith
and expectation of the faithful always ^ent toward him; and to comfort and
strengthen the Church in her ^ufferings, Argument before his annotations on the
prophecy of Isaiah. London 1643.
by setting before her the promises of her restoration by Christ's spiritual
kingdom. The third, to be the ministers of Gods ^racles, in many particular
occurrences, for the revealing of his secret will, ^or to give resolution in
perplexities, or direction and council in diffi^ult cases; or for to denounce
threatenings, to beat down the pride of the rebellious, and for to bring
unbeleevers to repentance; finally, ^hey were instruments of Gods continual
communication with his Church, and sovereign power, and government over her;
the strength^ing of the ordinary ministry, and a remedy against disorders and
^rowing evils. Thus he. And thus are we returned to the ^lace where the
beginning of the objection found us, and hope ^e may (notwithstanding any thing
which may be alleged of ^he old Testament Prophets) confidently, and
rationally as^ert, that the one, and always the same constitution of the
^ewish Church shames the Christian, if she be multiformous. ^he Reader may
perceive how easily, if I listed to pursue all ^dvantages, I could convince
this opinion of the imaginary accession of Presbyters unto the Apostles, of the
highest, and ^ost blasphemous derogation unto Christ. It charging him ^ith
temerity, and inadvertency in his institutions before his ^scension, yea after
his ascension, for he then confirmed what ^e had before instituted. But the
argument before us con^erns the Church, I shall therefore only add in
conclusion of this ^fth reason, that as it is impossible to injure the Church
and Christ not feel it, so she cannot be more insufferably abused, then to be
charged that she is not now Organized as in her Primitive state; It giving the
lie to Christ's promised presence with her ministers, and raising such a thick
wall of partition betwixt the two Church states, as both cannot be that one
body of Christ.

Sixthly it destroys the ministry.
Sixthly, It not only makes the Church monstrous, or manifold, but renders her
ministry a chimaera, a metaphysick notion, a lie, nothing at all, because the
principle of the temporariness of any minister will, or may be improved to
deordinate the whole ministry: Satan, and corrupt men are only excelle^^ at
assuming, and concluding from particular propositions grant them one Office, or
Officer to be temporary, how facile and strong is their inference (a pari) they
are all so. Let me add, such inference of every one, arises out of the
premises of our opinion of the temporariness of any one Officer; for the
temporary Officer once had an express warrant, and commission for his Office,
or the Church would never have received hi^

But the perpetual Officer never had, could, or can have a^ more: now may one
of these warrants and commissions be annulled, and made void, why may not
another: Church orde^ is like foundation stones, no part of it can be removed,
but somewhat of the substructure tumbles with it. That Presbytery fell with
Episcopacy, and had been grub'd up root and branch, Jus divin. 2 par. page 69.

2. Paper delivered to the ministers at Wight


with that tree of her own hewing down, unless she had left a stump standing,
whereupon to graft her own ordination by the Bishop Presbyter, is a recent
experiment. Wherefore when fallen on the wrong side of the Lighter, she
pitifully tells the insulting Independents, that she did not Covenant the
abolition Scripture Episcopacy, but Praelacy. Prophetical whereof was th
passage in his blessed Majesty's papers (wherein is enough also ^^ prove him
King and Priest) viz. His Majesty doubteh whether it be i^ your power to give
him any perfect assurance, that in the desired abolition of the present
hierarchy the utter abolition of Episcopacy, and consequently of Presbytery, is
neither included, nor intended. Thus His Majesty, and this shall end our sixth
reason.

Seventhly, it irreconciliably contradicts other assertions of Calvius and
Zanchys.
Seventhly, It irreconciliably contradicts those portentous assertions of
Calvin, and Zanchy, which boad ruin, and destruction to whatsoever Church state
they hang over. Non'nego quin Apostolos quoque vel saltem evangelistas quosdam
excitavit deus, ut nostro quidem tempore factum est. Calv. instit. lib. 4. ca.
3. Sect. 4.
Calvin (as was before observed) says I deny not but some time afterward (i.
e. after the Apostles time) God has raised up some Apostles, or in their stead
some Evangelists, Aliquando evangelistas quosdam excitat deus quum vult. Zanch.
in 4. praecept. page 662.
as has happened in our ^ime. Zanchy says, when God pleases he raises up some
Evangelists. Both those notions (whatsoever they are to truth) are directly
contrary to the Evangelists, or any other Officers limitation to the Apostles
days, and have a force upon the strongest backed Presbytery, to make it stoop
as low to the pretended Evangelists in these days, as to Timothy and Titus in
the Apostles. This Presbytery half in the chair in England, providently
foresaw, and to secure themselves hastily hewed down the stairs (or was
endeavoring to do it, if the Independents had not discovered and disturbed
them) whereby she ascended the Supremacy. The Apostles commission, when pleaded
by Bishops, was tem^orary, there was no other way to eject Episcopacy, but
afterward the Apostles commission, and most of their works were ordinary, and
imitable by Presbyters, there was no other way ^o settle Presbytery. The
particular instances we reserve to ^he tract of Apostles but they are so
numerous and notorious, that the dissenting brethren, not passionately, but
with very good reason tell the Assembly, that they brought the Apostles to the
state, condition, and work of ordinary parish ministers. Reasons against the
Presbyterian-government page 36.

Aus. to dissert. page 56.


This the Assembly (the odium of the term only excepted) acknowledge, and say,
Our brethren confess the Ap^stles were virtually elders, we say really, and
indeed: Whence is easily colligible. First, how the same Officers are
temporary, or continuing as they deserve, or serve Presbyterian designs.
Secondly, how unjustly Presbyters quarrel with the Bishops for deriving their
Office from the Apostolical, as one and the same order: When yet themselves do,
and must confound two distinct orders, Apostolical, and Presbyterial, ere they
can patch together their new discipline. Particularly, the incongruities
wherewith the Wight ^resbyters passionately, and absurdly load Episcopacy, do
fly back into their own faces, Wight divines second paper.
and strongly retort against themselves. They say; Whereupon it follows, that
the highest officers in the Church are put into a lower orb, an extraordinary
office is turned into an ordinary distinct office, confounded with that which
in Scripture is not found, a temporary and distinct office revived. This shall
conclude our seventh, and last reason for our resolut^on against the
temporariness, Second interpretation of temporary as relative to erratical time
propounded.
or sole limitation of any Officer into the Apostles days.

The other Interpretation of temporary is yet behind, or as it is spoken of
uncertain, or erratical time. Any time when Calvin will not deny, or when
Zanchy says, God will have such Apostles, Reasons against it.

First the contrary is proved by Scripture. Secondly, Calvin, Zanchy, etc. and
others allege no Scripture in proof of their opinion.


or Evangelists in the Church. But we must equally enter our dissent against
this, as against the other. For,

First, the words of several texts; God has set, 1 Cor. 12.28. Christ has
given; Ephesians. 4.11. Lo I am with you to the end of the world, Mat. 28.19, 20.
imply nothing less then such uncertainty, and wandering.

Secondly, These divines allege no Scriptures to prove their Assertions.
Calvin says, he will not deny it. Zanchy says, God does send them. Our
Assembly say Assembly before Committee of accommodation page 98.

Extraordinariis ministris quibus neque ab homine, neque per hominem proprie
confertur, sed a solo deo, per Jesum Christum, and spiritum sanctum. Ames.
medull Theol. lib. 1. ca. 23. Sect. 26.


they have their authority not from, or by man properly, but from God alone by
Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost; Of this kind of Officers he reckons some
living in his own, or his fathers days, but we must note that he says it upon
his own, not Scripture authority, and we shall show how little reason he had to
say it ere we conclude our reasons against the allowance of this latt^ sort of
extraordinary Officers. Aretius Interdum cum mundus exorbitat a vera doctrina
deus alios extra ordinem ^ittit reformatores qui loco Apostorum, and
Prophetarum sint, tales hodie Lutherus, Zuinglius, and alii. Aver. problem. loc
says, Someti^ when the world wanders from true doctrine, God does
extraordinari^ send other reformers, who are instead of Apostles, and Prophets,
^^ Luther, Zuinglius, and others in these times: But what have we to do with
the sayso's of our Assembly, or Amesius, or Calvin not denial; our question
concerns a matter, not of humane opinion, but divine institution, and we expect
the authority of the holy Ghost, not their words for its confirmation: Indeed
Zanchy and Aretius speak a little louder, but to as little purpose; they say,
God will have them to be in the Church, ^^^ does extraordinarily send them to
her; But what matters it ^ what men forge Gods volition, or mission, since he
gives ^ Church no notice of it in the Scripture. It Is not the first ti^ that
false prophets have come with a God wills, or thus says the Lord, when they
have only seen the visions of their own heads, and spoke the deceipts of their
own hearts. What a grave pers^^ long since observed of loose Historians, is
daily verified of more loose divines, i. e. when they have entangled themselves
with monstrous positions, deo indigent and machina, they want the engine of a
deity, to releeve and free them. The ordinary character of the false Prophets
of old, was to run, ere they were sent, they came all extraordinarily, for
neither God, nor his Church called, or sent for them. And we have seen
thousands in our time, who as if they had been Heralds to Christ's second
coming, Polybius.
have soberly affirmed, lo here is Christ, lo there is Christ, ^hey wearing a
disguise of Sanctity so neatly upon their Hypocris^e, as our selves might have
been cheated into a good opinion ^f them, unless the holy Ghost had forewarned
us not to believe them, because they shall deceive many, and if it were
possible even the elect. Then we saw that such confidence in contradictions was
an evidence of their being Seducers, or seduced, for whosoever ^^ith sometimes,
Lo here is Christ, otherwhile, Lo he is there, confesses he knows not where he
is, for Christ's word is not yea and nay, nor his body here and there, nor was
it ever fancied so to be, till the real presence became consubstantiate with
ubiquity. It Is our own persuasion (let it stand or fall at the pleasure of the
discreet Reader) how no one thing gave a rise and increase unto the several
Sects of the Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes, and Herodians of old, like this,
there were many Prophecies and Promises in the then only Books of God,
concerning the future manifestation of the Messiah, and of Elijah who was to
come, to ^repare his way before him, Mal. 4.5. and those Sectaries took
^dvantage to vend their Traditions and Inventions under the ^ined but plausible
Titles of the Laws of that Messiah, or of ^^mething previous thereunto: But we
Christians are under ^^other Dispensation, neither do we expect an Elijah to
come ^^d loose our knots, or resolve our doubts; for we steadfastly believe,
that he who should come, is come, and that we need not look for another, Mat.
11.3, 4. with 14. Hebr. 3.2, 3.

Object. But may some say, Objection from GOD's Omnipotency.
Consider a little better with your self what you write, ere you write any
more, does not Zanchy say, God when he will raises up Evangelists, or
extraordinary Offi^^rs: And cannot God do what he will?

I answer, Answered.
He can; but will and can are of equal force with God, and he will do nothing
against his Truth; Power and ^erity are his inseparable natural Attributes, and
what is one (...) his Nature, cannot be two in his Providential
Administrations; God is just as Powerful as he is True, and just as True as he
is Powerful: These Attributes always move and act together. Luxuriant Fancies
would perpetually sprout forth into unworthy Conjectures of an incomprehensible
Being, and though in t^eir presumed Exaltations they most heavily depress it,
they ^ould obtrude their Notions, as Divine Truths, upon those who a^e as
Credulous as they are Confident, did not God check and keep them under, by a
peremptory enjoining all men to respect him, and expect from him, according to
a written word: who do so, may assure themselves of a certain and timely
performance, but whoever wait the assistance of a Divine Power contrary unto a
Sacred Promise, though they speciously pretend Gods Omnipotency, and doing all
things, yet they do in effect bend God to their wills; bind one of his hands
within another, make him will contradictions, and consequently impotent to do
any thing. Whatever God does, has done, or promised to do, he squareth it by a
certain Rule or Law; this so far as concerns Church Officers, is Christ's
Institution, Commission, and Promises in the Word. And if the Word be proper,
the Divine Power has in nothing so strictly tied up his all-acting power, as
in the continuance of those Institutions, and accomplishment o^ those Promises.
Our Lord Jesus instituting his Ministry, promises a perpetual presence with
them to the end of the world and S. Paul argues for the performance of
Promises, upon ^ most true supposition, Thirdly Amesius audaciously says,
There is no scripture for it, neither are we to expect any other authority then
that of the people.

In historia novi Testamenti exempla habemus constitutionis ministerii, and
ejusdem etiam conservationis, sed non restaurationis ejus, aut reformationis
post generalem Apostasiam omnia igitur quae pertinent ad plebem fidelem in tali
casu, non repraesentantur ibi certis exemplis. Ames. Bell. enerv. To. 2. page
77. This notion favors 1. Popery.


lest otherwise God should deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. Give us therefore
Scripture for this Knight Errantry ^ Officers, we shall be silent in that will
of God, whatever else brought, is as easily rejected, as objected; and we dare
bold answer, that the Apochryphal wills and sendings of God, quoted ^ Zanchy
and Aretius, if God would have them in his Church, ^ send them to her, why did
he not keep them there, while the^ were there, given and set by him, with
promise of their continuance unto the worlds end, and till we all come in the
unity, etc But

3. Amesius bids us despair of Scriptures having any hand i^ the draught of
this temporary Officers Commission; for he says Although the new Testament
contain certain examples of the constitution and conservation of the Ministry,
yet there is none of its restoration and reformation after a general
Apostacy. We may ^ therefore expect certain Scriptural examples of the duty of
the fai^ful multitude in such a case. What! Have we certain exampl^ of the
conservation of the Ministry, and have we none of it restoration? Can that
which is conserved, be so wholly lost, ^^ we may not know where it is, or who
have power to find it out^ Away then with the sufficiency of Scripture: Then
Presbytery is beholding to Bellarmine for his defense of the unwritten word of
God, since it is equally her Sanctuary as the Papists. Yet it is a question not
easily resolved, whether all or any Papal traditions derogate more for the
Authority of a written word, ^^ the power of ordinary Church Officers, then
this one Presbyterian unwritten word; how easily is Plebem changed into Papam?
or whereby can the Pope more readily justify his wo^^ exorbitancies, when
indicted of contradiction and opposition unto Scripture, then to say, There is
no Scriptural Example suitable unto the present case or time? If at any time
corruption leave the Church a Chaos, and confused lump, why may she not as well
be formed by Papal as Popular discretion? 2. Machiavilanism.
Besides what a wide breach does this sulphurous notion tear in the wall of the
Vineyard? What! Is not the Church sufficiently in danger by Politicians
framing of Trojan Horses for her Ruin, but her pretended Reformers must trap
them with the gay title of Reformation, and Restoration of Religion, and
suffer them to surprise her greatest strengths, as Palladiums, and excellent
Inventions of a propitious Deity. If the multitude may make a Ministry,
Machiavils sons in the multitude will make ^^d unmake Ministers, till they have
made all Religion subser^ient to Reason of State. Furthermore, what mischievous
Se^ucer can want a warrant for his actions, 3. The worst Exorbitancies of the
most mischievous Seducers.
how extraordinarily ^icked soever they are? If his perverts once sign his
Commissi^n, how vain are all after-disputes and arguments? his inward ^all is
from God, his outward from the people, to whom all be^ongs in case of
Apostacy: Be his party powerful who dare ^ain-say him? be it weak, how ready
is this reply, The Faithful ^ho always are the least number, acknowledge his
heavenly mission in their submission to it; and the opposition which he and
^hey meet with from the ungodly multitude, ought to be interpreted an
additional confirmation to his call, since all past Law-^ivers and Reformers
met with the like: dares any silly soul ^ome against him with the sling and
stone of Scripture? observe ^ow this Goliath defies them. It Is for ordinary
Officers to con^orm to Scripture president, what others account his sin, he
e^^eems to be his glory, namely his administration of holy things without an
ordinary call; for otherwise he could have no testi^ony to his extraordinary
mission, Scripture containing no ex^mple of the Restoration or Reformation of
the Ministry, after (...) general Apostacy. These are bad fruits of a cursed
principle, but there are worse in the bud, for since scripture tells us not who
^^r what shall be Judge of the time of the coming these of Extra^rdinaries, nor
whether the Church stand in need of them, yea or ^ot; What Star can direct us
to their Cradles? What person was, or should be present at the issuing forth
the Fiats for their ^o long dormant Commissions, and sealing of their patents?
Into what number of Extraordinaries those new Commissions shall be limited? Who
will, as in Jeroboam's time, may fill his his hand, or consecrate himself an
extraordinary Officer. And as fast as justice, or death cut off one of those
Hydra's heads, another will arise in its stead; for why may not what has once
been be again? Can that Church? which admitted one, shut the door against
another extraordinary Officer? Apostasy, and corruption was brought into the
Church by many hands, how can they be carried out by a few? When seditious
malcontents, as Betwixt the second and third Century,
the African Schismatics in St. Cyprians time, betwixt the third and fourth
Century.
Arius, Aerius, and others afterward hedge up the ordinary way, because it is
not broad enough to bear their ambitions. Amesius draws their special plea, and
admits them, since Antichrist has, or they say he has abused it, to stop it
up, and lay out, and walk in another. Dare any saucily demand a sight o^ their
Commissions? they say show the old cancelled, they will produce their new
Letters Patents; Otherwise what was valid for Zuinglius, etc. is the same for
them. The Gospel is a mystery (and why may not they extraordinary members o^
its mysteriousness) have, as every common science, the allowance of
praecognitio, or conceded principles, against which (...) dispute may be
tolerated. Prove a Trinity, discover where Lazarus his soul was, when his body
lay four days in the grave, or how the eternal God could be born in time, take
flesh, and dwell among us, they will sensibly, and rationally, make o^^ their
call. But if you say faith evidenceth the former, the reply, it is because you
want it that you do not see the latter. Wounded men must trust their
Chyrurgions eye and art, and a corrupt Church State (as God knows they live in,
and are the bluness of the Pestilential humor) must trust her reformers, though
extraordinary in their call, and in their course Honest Socinus would never
have attempted the reformation (...) the reformation, had not much been
wanting, so truly is ^^ affirmed by his followers.

Tota ruet-Babylon dirupit^tecta Lutherus,
Calvinus muros, sed fundamenta Socinus.
Luther pulls down the roof, Calvin the wall,
Socin the groundwork, thus whole Rome does fall.
The glorious title of Reformation, and odiousness of Apostasy, leads tender
spirited men any whither; Even as harmless birds when their notes are
counterfeited into snares and lime-twigs; good men! who can blame their ardent
desires to be more like and nigh to Christ? But because hypocrisy, and
unworthy designs may pretend reformation, and Apostates cry out of Apostasy,
the most guilty, being usually the most clamorous; and it were to no purpose
for the Wolf to put on sheeps clothing, unless he hoped he should be taken for
a very sheep; therefore may all sober minds be pleased to accept our Saviors
advice, to beware of disguised Wolves, and to couple prudence with their
sincerity. These guides will soon discover, that as a preposterous disposition
of the same parts will not conform an artificial frame to its primitive
composure, so neither can one, and the same Church be formed by the Ministry,
and reformed by the mul^itude: For Reformation is the reduction or bringing
back of a swer^ed thing, or state, unto its first and original constitution.
This is ^eformation in general, and such ought Church reformation to be; for
all endeavors wide of that scope (be the Church state never so vicious, or our
pretensions never so specious) are not ^ reformation, and setting in joint what
was dislocated, but a deformation, and straining of what is strong and well
set, and ^nevitably tends to the dissolution of the whole frame. The ^ork of
grace in the heart is sometimes phrased By renewal, Col. 3.10. s^metime by
being born again, Joh. 3.3. sometime by being formed again, Gal. 4.9. All which
is done by restoring the ^ame Image of God in righteousness, etc. Ephesians. 4.23.
wherein Adam was at first created. This truth is equally verifiable of all ^he
members jointly, and in society, as of any of them severaly, due regard being
had to their several formations and con^titutions; so that as particular
reformation must answer to particular formation, so must general reformation
answer to general formation; so that Amesius is to prove, that the primitive
Chrch was formed without a ministry, ere he can truly ^ssert, that the present
Church may be reformed by the mul^itude.

We read in the old Testament of the formation of the Jewish Church, Fifthly
contrary to the manner of reforming of the JeWish Church.
and of her reformation after several Apostacy's. But the chief Magistrate, and
the chief Priest, who were instrumental to make, were always employed to mend
that frame. Thus she was at first formed by Moses and Aaron; afterward
reformed by David and Zadok, after Saul's Apostasy and death, ^ Chron. 24.31. by
Jehosaphat and Amariah, after Rehoboams, defection, and Asa's partial
reformation, 2 Chronicles. 19.11. by J^ash and Jehojada, after Athaliahs usurpation.
2 King. 12.8, 9. by Hezekiah and Azariah, after Ahaz his abomination 2 Chronicles.
31.10. by Josiah and Hilkiah, after the dreadful revolt under Manasseh and
Amon, when the bare finding of the Book of the Law, occasioned matter of
admiration and amazement. 2 King. 22.4. ver. 8. by Zerrubabel and Joshua, at
the Jews first return from Babylon; Ezra. 3.2. and by Nehemiah, and Eliashib
after wards, Nehem. 3.1. I freely acknowledge that the chief Magistrates from
Moses downward did hold their own, and keep their Aarons under, the chief
Priests being in this as in many other things, types of Christ, who was subject
unto Caesar. Thus did Moses. Numb. 10.1. ad fin. 10. Thus Solomon. 1 King.
2.26. Thus Nehemiah. Nehem. 13.8. and ver. 29.30. Thus the Magistrate did in
his political capacity, and he did somewhat else, either in an ecclesiastical
capacity, or as supreme governor of the Ecclesiastical Polity; namely, dire^^
in the prudential administration of Church matters. Perhaps he did not do it
separate from the Priest, but we know n^^ what part the Priest acted, for the
Prince is solely name^^ Thus David, 1 Chronicles. 24.3. Thus Hezekiah. 2 Chronicles. 3 2.
And no solid reason can be given, why this flower shou^^ not be wreathed within
their Scepters, it being so influentia^ upon civil peace, and of such a nature
whereof may be said b^ the change of one word, as David did of Show bread, it
is ^^ a manner Civil, The high Priest had as his common, so his peculiar works;
the former has been spoken to, and may be farther evidenced by Deuteronomy. 7.9, 10,
11. 2 Chronicles. 19.8, 9, 10. The latter appears by, 2 Chronicles. 26.16, 17. My design
i^ all these instances is not to exclude any, who are warranted to ^^ and
assist under the Prince, and chief Priest in those Assemblies But to prove the
Lords care of maintaining the dignity, a^ distinctness of his own Ordinances,
even after most fearful Apostacies; for such most of the forementioned
insta^ces do concern; and let me add, who ever acted with, or under the Prince
and chief Priest, nothing was done without them. But contrariwise their
exclusion from any Convention, pretending to the highest, or most glorious
reformation, was interpretatively Gods negative voice, not passing, or
approving the acts of those assemblies. For instance: The lower rulers, and
inferior clergy, associate with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16.1.2. (the
only pattern of an attempted, but unaffected Presbyterian government in the
whole Bible) rise up against Moses and Aaron, pretending both to reform, and
that they were so reformed, and holy, as Moses and Aarons power was too great
to be endured: Number. 16.3. ye take ^oo much, etc. (not too much in its own
nature, for these Rebels ^id desire the same thing) but too much upon you. It
went to ^he heart of Corah and his complic^s, that Moses and Aaron, not
hemselves were settled in it. But did the Lord pass this act with he Royal
assent? no, he takes but till he next morning to deiberate upon it, ver. 5.
when he makes them such prodigious ^xamples of successess rebellion, as a
sanctified heart cannot read heir story without trembling; or a gracious ear
hear it without tingling; the Lord doing a new thing, or (as the margent more
expressly from the original) creating a creature. ver. 30. ^. e. making a
Judgment, as it were of set purpose to revenge heir wickedness, the earth
opening her mouth, and swallowing hem up quick, whereby at once he signified,
not only his preent indignation against them, but what others are to expect who
in according to their example. It continuing a truth unto the ^eriod of divine
Revelation in a written word, that the adunct of Corahs gainsaying or
perishing. Jude ver 11. Besides an ^surping prince (Jeroboam) and the body of
the people (or the en tribes) set upon what no doubt, they called a through
reormation; 'twas so in the language of some latter times, for he true
Magistracy and Ministry was voted down, reason of state iscovering no other way
to strengthen a cracked title, or set^ng a tottering Crown upon an Usurpers
head, but a change ^f the old worship: That (away with it) learned obedience to
God and his lawful Vicegerent, and Priests. And above all lly conscientious
souls would hanker after David's house, 1 ^ing. 12.26, 27. if it were continued.
Besides, what might ^ould Jeroboam have upon the people? how could it be
exected that they should stick to him in the plunge of his forunes, unless they
were engaged in rebellion, and Apostasy sa eep as he? could he once make them
break the bonds of their ^s, no doubt they would fight resolutely for the
liberty of their ew conscience? Wherefore Jeroboam, and his Ahitophels must
^ome together, take council, and what is the advice? why, to ndeavour by some
popular insinuation to make the tribes out of love with what from Moses
downward, until this day had been their Religion. This is suggested by public
Proclamation, 1 King. 12.28. (...)
It is too much (Rabh it notes a greatness in quantity, or quality too long,
and too tiresome, the way too much, and too expensive the worship, both
prevalent arguments with an idle or covetous heart) for you.) Jeroboam could do
it himself, but good man! he studied the ease of the King and Priest-ridden
people.) to go up to Jerusalem (the habitation of tyrants, malignants, and
will-worshippers.) This plot takes with all, or most part of the people, except
the Priests and Levites. 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14, 15. few being of David's mind, not
to serve God with what cost them nothing, 2 Samuel 24.24. But it is no matter,
'twas the Clergy (perrogative creatures) who were discontented; and the
opposing of this blessed reformation so much, would make the Laity favor it
the more; they were afraid of their parsonage barns, but who cares, now the
proprietor shall have his tith gratis, or buy it cheaper of the new ministry. 1
King. 12.31. Had we lived in those days, how might we have heard each village
ecchoing to other, with these or the like acclamations? Let my Lord King
Jeroboam live for eve^ Let it be inscribed upon everlasting monuments,
impenetrable by the sharp teeth of all devouring time, tha^ Jeroboam an^
freedom are twins of a year! date all public evidences from his entrance upon
the government, as the first year of Isreal's berty by Gods blessing restored! O
happy Prince! O tender F^ther! O blessed People! had any one stood at the elbow
o^ God, while he was measuring out the several successions o^ times, he would
had it been in his power, elected to have served his generation under so sacred
a regiment! long, and long live Jeroboam, Jeroboam, Jeroboam! But let
Jeroboamites rejoice in Jeroboam, and walk for a while in the sparks of this
f^^^ which their sins have kindled: God does neither approve of the ref
rmation, n^r of the reformer, and it will not be long ere be show he dislike of
both; partly in the extirpation of Jeroboams family, root a^ branch, whilst he
was scarce cold in his grave. 1 King. 15.25. fin. 29. partly in printing the
character of walking in the way ^^ Jeroboam, upon men destinated to unavoidable
ruin. 1 King. ^.34 per tot. partly in the welnigh perpetual oppression of this
peop^ under foreign enemies, or intestine feuds, till carried into an hitherto
unredeemed Captivity. 1 King. 16.16. and ver. 22. 1 King. 20 4. 2 King. 17. per
tot. And finally by the frequent interruptio^ of their civil government, for
whose ^establishment this state religion was at first invented. 1 King. 12.27.
This was the only popular reformation in the old Testament, these its
undesirable effects, and yet it carried a fairer face then most succeeding
Popular reformations, Jeroboam (whom no body in his days durst style beneath a
King) being a party in it: And he might touch the Prophecy of Aliiah the
Shilomite, that it was the Lords pleasure to raise him to that dignity 1 King.
11.29. ad fin. 32. so wretchedly false (as to this example) is Henders ns bold
asseron, he says; though reformation by the body of the people is m^re
^perfect (viz. then regal or sacerdotal) in respect of the instruents, or
manner of proceeding, yet for the m st part it is m^re pure ^ its effect, and
product. H^nders^ns second paper 1. concerning the reformation of religion.
An asse^tion, wherein as the author ever consulted with St. Paul, Romans 3.8.
And not rather as we ^e slander^usly reported, and as some affirm that we say
let us do evil, ^at good may come, whose damnation is just; so I do believe it
is ot verifiable, or to be verified by any (called) reformation in ^e Jewish,
or any other Church from Jeroboams time unto urs. But Vzza's story is a truth,
2 Samuel 6.6.7, 8. And when ^ey came to Nach^ns threshing floor, Vzza put forth
his hand to ^e ark of God, and took hold of it, for the Oxen shook it; But the
anr of the Lord was kindled against Vzza, and God smote him there ^r his error,
and he died there before the Ark of God. And David ^as despleastd, because the
Lord had made a breach upon Vzza, and he called the name of the place Perez
Vzza unto this day. Whence note.

1. Vzza did not presumptuously, or in contempt to the Levites whose Office it
was to carry the Ark) thrust them by from their employment, only he put his
hand to the Ark to hold, or ^pport it in a case of seeming necessiy the Oxen
stumbling ^rough weakness, or kicking through wantonness, and shang it.

2. The civility, and sincerity of Vzza's intentions were so ^sible, or at
least so apprehended by David, that unto him the ivine proceedings against Vzza
sounded harshly, and were ispleasant.

3. Neither the seeming necessity, nor Vzza's intentions, nor David's good
opinion of them, could put a bar to Gods disleasure, but he struck him there
for his error or temerity, and ^ere he died before the Ark of God, his crime
and punishment, ^ming the place of execution Perez Vzza, or the breach upon
^zza in terror to all after attempters to sin by his example; eglecters and
wavers of known duty may pretend necessity, ^ood meaning, and the favor of
good men, but with what ^azard this one instance is sufficient to inform them.

4. That the procuring of a pure and through reformation (such ^his bringing
back of the Ark in David's time was 1 Chr. 13.3.) ^he holy, and ever blessed
God, is careful not to use any intruments promiscuously huddled together by
popular tumults, but those who have the clearest warrant, and authority in his
Word, to do his work. A like truth with this concerning Uzza is 1 Samuel 2.34,
35. (and I wonder neither of them made impression upon the consciences of
Amesius, Henderson, and other the like brazen trumpets to popular seditions)
where we read, that when the prodigious sins of Elie's sons (the Priests)
provoked God to use extreme severity against their whole family, he does not
threate^ to raise up the people, to reform the Priesthood, but promises that
he will raise him up another Priest.

Sixthly, contrary to the manner of reforming of the Christian Church.
It Is granted the Christian ministry is not now confined as the Jewish was, unto
one family, or tribe neither is our Church (as theirs) limited to one nation,
but if when the vineyard was thus either way enclosed, God left the reformation
of ecclesiastical corruptions, if not solely, yet inexclusively to the chief
Magistrate, and sons of Levi (his first Committees for the custody of that
discipline) how much more forcibly does it conclude in this state of the
Church, that duly ordained Officers be convened under the authority, and
protection of Christian Princes, about the determination of matters of like
nature.

First, Because Christian Kings as nursing fathers, may challenge the same
authority in our Churches, as the Jewish Kings exercised in their Church,
because the Polity, or external administration of discipline is (even
Presbyters being Judges) so much alike in both: Witness the London Presbyters,
they say; What Grotius says, Jus divin. 1 par page 172.
that the government of the Churches of Christ was conformed to the pattern of
the Jewish Synagogue, is true in many things.

Read Bp. Jewels defense of his Apology against Harding. page 691. and seq.
London. 1571
Secondly, Because the first Christian Emperors, and King had this power
peaceably allowed them, neither can they no^ be excluded but a Pope steps
immediately into their place, or which is worse, many.

Thirdly, Because each Church now grieved, or corrupted, has not only a
liberty as the Jewish had, to convene all her own Officers (some whereof at
least may be rationally adjudged to be as much spirited with a zeal for
reformation, and have, or ought to have more reforming abilities, then the rest
of the people.) But also (which the Jews had not) has privilege to assemble
with her sister Churches in general, or other Synods to ease and reform her
self. And why should not we rather expect Christ's presence, and submit to its
dictates in such assemblies, since he has promised it. Mat. 18.17. Mat. 28.19,
20. And the Apostolical Church practiced it, Act. 15.6. And the Apostles, and
Elders came together for to consider of this matter, then to await an
extraordinary call, and assistance to a promiscuous multitude, who however they
come together (even their advocates, and patrons being Judges) they cannot
assign a warrant, or example of Scripture for their direction. This shall
conclude our third reason against the temporariness of Church Officers in this
second limitation, and exposition of the word temporary.

Fourthly, Who ever have in these days stood to an extraordinary call, they
neither have the gifts, nor do the works of them who are accounted
extraordinary Officers in the primitive Church. Fourthly, now pretended
extraordinary officers neither have the gifts, nor do the works of those who
were formerly accounted extraordinary.


First, They have not their gifts. First, they have not their gifts.

Habent dona and assistentiam extraordinariam, itae ut sine errore ministrent.
Ames. medull. lib. 1. ca. 33. Sect. 25.

Compend. Theol. lib. 1. ca. 26.

Jus divin 1 par. p. 116.


Amesius says the former extraordinary Officers had extraordinary gifts, and
assistance to minister without error; what gifts, and assistance the first
Church Officers had we dispute not, this we do deny that Amesius, or any for
him can maintain those to be thus qualified, whom in that very Chapter he calls
extraordinary Officers raised up of latter times, or since the reformation
begun by Martin Luther in Germany. Wollebius gives a more particular ^ccount of
their gifts, he says they were prophecy, tongues, and miracles. But where, or
in whom shall we find them, or any of them in these days. The London Divines
abate one of these three, they say; He might be an extraordinary Officer who
did not work miracles, they instance in John the Baptist; were it not for ^he
sake of others, I could turn this over with a short answer, and say what am I
concerned in their contradictions? But least ^he Enthusiast take sanctuary at
it, I dispute its privilege. That John the Baptist wrought no miracles, is
confessed, but there may be several reasons given for it; and why it is not to
be drawn into justifying president of the want of those gifts, in any now
pretended extraordinary Officer: For John was the immediate forerunner of
Christ; that the Messiah should come, was the constant and ordinary belief, and
at this time the raised expectation of the Jews, unto whom he preached, and
affirmed de facto that he was come. This was a more direct way to prove his
doctrine, then working of mirales; for miracles may be feined, in his preaching
could be no deceit; If his Auditors turned to their Bibles, and found what the
ancient Prophets predicted concerning the Messiah verified in Christ, they had
reason to believe their Preacher, otherwise they might reject both as
deceivers: This if I mistake not, is a reason assigned by the holy Ghost, why
John wrought no miracles; Joh. 10.41. And many resorted unto him, and said,
John indeed wrought no miracles, but all that he said of this man were true;
how soon John spoke of Christ, and how he protects himself under the wings of
his authority, when questioned for doing somewhat reputed extraordinary;
appears by Joh. 1.25, 26, 27. And they asked him, and said; why baptizest thou
then? if thou be not the Christ, nor Elias, nor that Prophet, John answered
them saying, I baptize you with water, but there stands one among you, whom
you know not, he it is, etc. The sum of all this is, John was a crier, or
Herald. Joh. 1.22. who gave notice of the coming, and approach of the longed
for Savior; whose message could be no otherwise confirmed then by Christ's
presence: Miracles would do no good without it, and were needless with it.
Perhaps also our Lord reserved those largesses of the divine bounty to (...)
distributed among the people by his own hands, or the han^ of his Apostles,
after he was more publicly known. We expect therefore from our now pretended
extraordinary Officers, to minister without error, prophecy, and work
miracles (all which in the judgment of their favorers are requisite
qualifications in an extraordinary Officer) or we cannot, we will not own them.

Secondly, They do not do their works. This is by far a more certain way to
judge of the order of Officers, Secondly, they do not do their works.
then gifts, for gifts may be diverse, works must be the same; and all that we
have said concerning them in the foregoing Paragraph, is t^ be reduced to the
force of an argument, arising from the co^^cessions of our opposites: But we
shall by and by digress, return we therefore into our way; now pretended
extraordinary Officers, do not do the works of formerly presumed extraordinary
Officers. The Apostles and Evangelists preached, baptized, and mainly
endeavored to build Churches, where no foundation was already said to their
hands, and to preserve settled Churches in order and unity. But our
extraordinaries, if they break down the carved works of Gospel order in
constituted Churches, with axes and hammers (instruments of violence of the
readiest execution) are instantly baptized by their Party into the name, and
confirmed in the Office of an Evangelist, or an Apostle. The good works of real
Apostles and Evangelists are, and must be accounted temporary; pretended
Zealots have other work to do then to travail in the conversion of the
Gentiles, but the bad works of nominal Apostles, and Evangelists are, and we
fear will be long continuing. It exceeds our Arithmetic to cast up what
damage, either the Christian Church in general, or my mother Church, the Church
of England in particular has sustained by their violence, and usurpation. What
institutions of Christ, and Apostolical practices have we had disputed,
censured, and exploded by factions, and clamorous novelty, out-voicing them to
breath their last, and close their eyes with those of the Evangelists and
Apostles. And what novel inventions have been obtruded upon the Church, in the
commanding form of a Divine Right, by self sent pretenders to their Office. To
say the hot Sun in Africa, does not more frequently generate deformed
terrestrial monsters, then this loose opinion about the extra ordinariness, and
temporaliness of Church Officers, does enliven ecclesiastical misshapen
births, might be thought a Rhetorical flourish, were not multitudes of
confirming instances at hand; for what error, or false doctrine has prospered
from Mahumetanisme to this day; whose Authors have not pretended extraordinary
communion with a deity, and voiced the visions of their own heads to be the
revelation of the blessed spirit: But we will draw the points of our compass
nearer, Cut off by the sword of Justice C. C. 1525.
and within the circumference of the immediate preceding, and present
centuries. Thomas Munzer; the Patriarch Anabaptist, a smoking firebrand, whose
tail threatened in to so great a part of Germany, boasted of Gods extraordinary
raising him up with the sword of Gideon to extirpate the wicked; or if you will
read his meaning in his practices, the magistracy, and ministry; John the
Botcher of Leyden, A. C. 1536.
who stitch't Munzers scattered shreds into a kingdom, and sewed on himself as
their cape, or King, at Munster in Germany, blasphemously enough (had it not
been done by an extaaordinary call) styled himself; The King of Saints, as a
mock Christ, chose his twelve Apostles; and like himself, a lustful salatious
wretch, took his fifteen wives at one time, one whereof dis^elishing his
practices, he sacrificed (for he was both king and Priest) immediately before he
celebrated the Eucharist. This wretch burning many thousands of choice books in
that Town, justified it by Scripture, saying, the time was now come when they
should be all taught of God. A. C. 1527.
Thomas Schuk of Gaul in Helvetia an Anabaptist also, Leydens Savior (though
in respect to their King, I place him beneath him in this discourse) in a full
assembly of his confederates, caused his own brother to kneel down before him,
and in that posture killed him; their common father, and mother afterward
expostulating with him, to show his motives and inducements to commit that
horrid villainy, he impudently told them, what was done, was by the will of his
heavenly father, wherein he barbarously, and searedly persisted at the place of
execution. A. C. 1550.
Henry Nicholas, the unhappy root of all the accursed ranting practices, from
his time downward unto ours, saluted our fathers in this mock Apostolic style.
Henry Nicholas by the grace and mercy of God, through the holy spirit of the
love of Christ, raised up by the highest God from the death, according to the
Providence of God and his promises, anointed with the holy Ghost, in the old
age of the understanding of Jesus; Godded with God in the spirit of his love,
illuminated in the spirit of the heavenly truth, the true light of the perfect
being, made heir with Christ in the Heavenly good of the riches of G^^
according to his promises in the most holy services of God, to the o^^dience of
his love. Hacket that manlike monster, and shame of (...) Country, A. C. 1591.
whose positions were so dreadfully blasphemous, a^ a sober tongue cannot name
them without blistring, gave out by himself, and his two false prophets,
Coppinger and Arthington, how God had extraordinarily raised him up to reform
the Church. That bloody parricide Enoch ap Evan, natures by-blow, and the stain
of generation, whose inhumane murder of his own natural mother and brother, at
Bishops-Castle in the County of Salop, Studely's looking-glass of schism.
in the year 1633. as an ill boding Meteor, and Malignant Comet, ushered in the
immediately following Civil wars, and unnatural troubles, searedly affirmed,
that he butchered those harmless souls in a zeal for God; the fuel to which
accursed flame was their filial submission to the determination of their mother
Church, in receiving the blessed Eucharist kneeling, and refusing to submit to
his Phanatick dictates in that matter. What need more words? or why wast we
time in personal instances? does not Soeinianisme (that sink whereinto all
heresies, ancient, and modern are evacuated) brazen-facedly tell the world,
that their tenet, which ungods Christ, and renders his death and satisfaction
insolvent for our sins, Ecclesiae nostrae credunt ea sibi a deo revelata esse;
quae ad excolendam veritatem evangelicam, utpote in quibus de vera dei, and
Christi gloria etc. and denique quae devia verae pietutis expeditiori reddenda
agunt. Smalc. praef. novinst. ex Calov. Socin. prostigat. Wirebergae. 1652.
is revealed to them as a more nigh, and expeditious way to what concerns the
true glory of Christ and God; to advance true piety, and refine evangelical
truth. Faustus Socinus magnifies his uncle Laelius, Divinum quid sapiens a deo
ipsa patefactum precibus multis a christo impetra tum. vix quicquam divinius
videri queat sperabam te fassurum Soc. De unic. fill. dei existent. adv. Erasm.
Joha. Omnes una secum deo gratias agant, pro Laelio. Socino cui deus primo
revelavit. Smalc. par. Sophis. page 5. ex Gelassii grammat. sacr. tract. 3.
numb. 47. Francofurti. 1653.
his wresting of those ^in words for our Saviors divinity, or before Abraham
was ^^m, to maintain thereby his sole existency (as other men's) ^m, and not
before the time of his incarnation; And of it ^th. It savours of some divinity,
was obtained (which instead of ^leeving, we admire how he durst write it) from
Christ him^f by many prayers, and divinely sparkleth with such bright and
^zling beams, as hoped his Antagonist would have discerned, and ^ored them.
This very ignis fatuus so amazeth Smalcius, as he ^uld bend the whole Church
upon her knees together with him, to ^ss God for revealing it to Laelius
Socinus.

Finally, whence is this pestilent Sect encouraged to lay the (...) to the root
of the whole ministry, but either because the ^imitive Ministers were
temporary, and extraordinary, Ex Calovio.
or the ^esent Ministry has lost the file of its succession in Antichristi^
Apostasy. And professedly, and in the face of the world to ^intain, That no
ministerial work, as the work of a distinct Offi^ is now continuing, what is so
called, being only a work of charity (...) from every man unto his neighbor.
Suffice this for the fourth ^ason. Fifthly, Scripture Apostles, and Evangelists
had an ordinary Mission


Fifthly, Scripture Apostles and Evangelists had an ordinary ^ssion concerning
the former Apostles enough has been ^d in the foregoing part of this
Exception; The Evangelists ^ntioned in Scripture are but two, Philip and
Timothy; and ^th of them had an ordinay mission. Timothies mission; Tim. 4.14.
etc. 2 Timothy 1.6. undeniably proves. Philips ^ssion, so far as concerns his
Diaconate, is as plain by Act. 6. 2, 3. We will not here dispute his call to do
the works re^ded, Act. 8. reserving it to our own definition of the E^ngelist;
and shall only add in this place: That the works he ^d, namely Preaching and
Baptizing, necessarily required a ^l, and ordination to do them, because unsent
persons are ^ohibited to meddle with them, Mat. 28.19, 20. Romans 10. ^. and 17.
Socinus, the arch enemy of Ministerial Mission, Illi enim qui in Samari a
crediderunt fide vera crediderant, and erant intus in clesia, quae una est,
name Philippo diacono, quem ijdem Apostoli miserant baptizati erant. ^prian.
epist. ad Jubaianum.
^der the name of Gratianus, Prosper says, Philip was sent by the ^postles,
with him agree Zanchius, Aretius, Polanus, and Buca^s in their aforecited
definitions of the Evangelist. And this ^s also St. Cyprians judgment long ago,
he says, Those who believed in Samaria, believed with true faith, and were
within the Church which is one, because they were baptized by Philip the
deacon, whom the Apostles sent among them; We will add no more to this fifth
Reason. Sixthly, who might best pretend an extraordinary call in these days do
themselves disown it. Non dissimulanter testamur nos haberi. Lutherum pro
insigni Christi Apostolo. Calv. adv. Albert. Pighium lib. 1. Gerard loc. de
ministerio Sect. 144. 145. 146. Genevae. 1639. Jus divin. 1 part. page 120.
121, 122. 123 Seventhly, Presbyters deny an extraordinary all. Jus divin. par.
1. p. 71.


Sixthly. Those who might best pretend an extraordinary call in these days,
and have it voluntarily given unto them by others, do themselves disown it.
Aretius as we have heard before, calls Luther an Apostle, so does Calvin, He
says without dissimulation, we esteem Luther to be a famous Apostle of Christ
We hope we need not tell the Reader that Calvin, and Areti^^ in both those
places understand an Apostle to be an extraordinary Officer, let him that
doubts consult the places. Bu^ Luther himself always stood to an ordinary
call; never appea^^ed from it, and expressly disclaims all other. This is
exactl^ demonstrated by his learned defender Gerhard, in his Theological common
places, where he records the several dates of Euthers Academical, and
Ecclesiastical preferments. The L^^don Divines say as much of Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, Bucer, (...) Peter Martyr. They conclude with Zanchyes testimony
in the matter, who inrols himself in the same Catologue with Zuinglius and the
rest; And there we conclude this sixth Reason.

Seventhly, The same London Presbyters sadly reflecting upon the aforementioned
Socinian, and enthusiastic tenets, together wit^ many other inconveniences,
arising from this distinction betwixt temporary and continuing, ordinary and
extraordinar^ Officers; not only modestly enter their dissent from the
mai^^tainers of the extraordinary call of our first reformers, but ^^solutely
lay down this axiom; they say, there is a necessity in Church of Christ, of a
constant, perpetual, and ordinary Missi^ This is a precious truth, and that the
Reader may improve as he ought, we beg him to consider that perpetual being
predicated of any subject, comprehends all time from its commencement to its
conclusion; so that if there be a necessity (...) a perpetual ordinary Mission
in the Church of Christ, it is u^^doubtedly exclusive of extraordinary Officers
in the Primitiv^ if in the present Church State; for of necessity she must
perpetually have an ordinary Mission, there is no time past, present or to
come, when she has been, is, or can be without it: An^ let the Assemblies
vague and uncertain early ordination of Presbyters come up never so nigh to the
first constitution of the Church, they will be excluded from a perpetual
relation t^ her, because there was some precedent time when she was without
them. Nor are the London Divines alone in this opinion, or they borrow it from
their brethren in the Assembly, Humble advice concerning the doctrinal part of
ordination bound up with their directory.
who ^^y, Ordination is always to be continued in the Church; and ^^ove it by
Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 5.21, 22. I receive their propositi^n, but must tell them
their proof is strong against Presbyteri^^ ordination, and destroys their
proposition unless Timothy ^^d Titus have successors to continue their
practiced way of or^ination; for neither of them (if we may believe the same
As^^mbly) were Presbyters, nor did ordain as Presbyters, but as ^xtraordinary
Officers, or Evangelists; so that their proof and ^roposition compared exhibit
this Paradox, that ordination, because ceasing in some, and beginning a new in
others, is al^aies to be continued unto the Church. A notion so cracked, ^^d
maimed, as nothing can splice it, or hold it together, but ^^e, or other of
these two things, to be demonstrated by ^lain and convincing Scriptures, either,

First, That Christ betrusted ordination to several hands, or ^rders of
Officers. Or,

Secondly, That Presbyters are ordained singly, and separate ^^om the higher
order. But return we to the point before us, ^^e perpetuity of the ministry in
the ordinary way of ordinati^n ^^is provable out of all Presbyterial divines,
who write ei^^er of the Church, or of the ministry. But we will confine our
^earch to a few instances, out of Calvin and Zanchy, that it may ^ppear we do
not oppose our own, or other men's wills against their fore-examined, and
refuted opinion about the temporari^ess of Officers: We have heard Calvin upon
Ephesians. 4.13. say, Neque enim vel solis lumen, and calor, vel ^ibus, ac potus,
tam sunt praesenti vitae fovendae, and sustinendae necessaria, quam est
conservandae in terris ecclesiae Apostolicum, and Pastorale munus. Calv.
institut. lib. 4. ca. 3. Sect. 2.
The Ministry is not temporary, as the training of youth, but perpetu^l so long
as we continue in this world. Elsewhere he adds, the ^^ht, or heat of the sun
is not more necessary to the nourishment, and ^stenance of this present life,
then the Apostolical, and Pastoral Office (...) necessary for the conservation
of the Church upon earth. Now what has been said by me, or can be urged by any
other, for the overthrow of this distinction betwixt ordinary, and
extraordinary Officers, which will not receive encouragement from this sentence
of Calvin's, for if light and heat, meat and drink, be not more necessary for
the present life, then the continuance of the Apostolical, and Pastoral Office
is for the Churches conservation upon earth: It must inevitably follow, that
the maintenance of any temporary Office (for none can lay so fair a claim to
it, as the Apostolate is even in Calvin's Judgment, most unnecessary, Sicut
ecclesia dei perpetua sit oportet in hoc mundo, propter promissionem dei, and
Christi, docentis, portae inferi non praevalebunt adversus eam: sic etiam in t^
semper sit, and maneat ministerium. Zanch. in 4. praec. page 655.
dangerous, and destructive. Zanchy says. As i^ is necessary that there be a
perpetual Church in this world, because Christ has promised that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it so likewise is a perpetual ministry necessary.

Ratio est quia sicut per ministerium ecclesia colligitur, sic etiam per idem
servatur, pro inde notas ecclesiae, etc. Christus enim non permittit, nec
permittet, ut sua ecclesia legitimo careat ministerio, quod igitur aliquando,
and alicubi, and aliquo modo vitiatas vidimus, and videmus, praecipuas
ministerii parts, non tamen semper, nec ubique, nec penitus totum ministerium
corru^pi permittit Christus, unum enim ab altero, separari non potest, nec
ecclesia a ministerio, nec ministerium ab ecclesi^ Zanch. Ibid.
This he not only says, but confirms by many reasons, viz. The ministry must
preserve the Church, because it gathers her; Vhe notes of the Church, viz. pure
preaching of the Word, and lawful administration of the sacraments cannot be,
or be discerned bu^ in the ministry, neither does Christ permit, nor will he
suffer the Church to want a lawful ministry. And although we hvae seen, o^
shall see the principal parts of the ministry, sometimes in some places, and
after some sort to be corrupted, yet does not Christ permit the whole ministry
to be always, or every where, or totally corrupt^^ because then the same may
be affirmed of the Church, for one ca^^ be separated from the other, neither
the Church from the minist^^ nor the ministry from the Church. This shall
conclude our ^^venth, and last Exception against temporary, erratical, a^
unfixed Officers.

Three grand objections against the precedent part of this discourse.
I have walked, especially in this seventh Exception upon a^ Icy path, and as
God, and my conscience bears me witness, have endeavored to tread warily, and
to the best of my observatio^ not to wander out of the road of truth. But I
dare not gi^ entertainment to flattering hopes, that I shall meet with no^ who
watch for my haltings, and to take advantage of my trippings to cast me down. I
write to the mixed multitude of all sorts of Readers, and must as well obviate
the calumny of the froward, as the equity of the moderate minded. There are who
will charge this discourse with three heinous crimes, any of which proved,
condemns it for dangerous and unseasonable; therefore they must all of them be
confessed, or avoided, ere we can proceed to the remaining Exceptions, 1. Obj.
that I seek credit by discrediting of eminent persons.
and following part of this dispute. They are that,

1. Obj. I seek a name by vilifying of eminent men, and to raise my own upon
their ruined credits, namely, Calvin, Beza, etc.

2. Obj. I scandalize all reformed Churches. 2. Obj. that I scandalize all
reformed Churches.


3. Obj. I give the Roman Synagogue occasion to blaspheme the living God, and
his people.

To the first Objection I answer.

First, 3. Obj. that I give the Roman Synagogue occasion to blaspheme.
The equity of my opposing of some of the opinions of those noted men, has
been so clearly proved, by facing them with other sentences of their own, or
most devoted partisans, as we doubt not that the unprejudiced Reader will
resolve that the repugnancy, and contradiction is primarily in Calvin, The
first objection answered.
against Calvin, Beza against Beza, the London divines, or our Assembly,
against both, rather then in me, against any of them. First, I do not discredit
them, but they discredit one another by their contradictions.


Secondly. The thing in controversy is not matter of notion, or opinion,
wherein much may be attributed deservedly to humane parts and abilities. But
matter of fact, of a divine, and positive institution clearly witnessed by
Scriptures, and obvious to ordinary, yea welnigh all capacities; such as
neither their, mine, or any other man's credit, or discredit, can make more or
less, or other then it is. I say de facto, 2 The matter in contest is not
matter of opinion but of divine institution.
that Christ ordained both Apostles, and Presbyters for succession, and
appointed them to continue perpetually with his Church. Calvin, etc. say he did
not, or that tract of time, or other contingency, has annulled or worn out
them, or one of them; Let their, and my reasons be put upon a Scripture
balance each against other, and the weightiest carry it.

I know they have something more to say for themselves, then has been yet
insisted upon; namely that the terms, Bishops and Presbyters, are aequivocal,
and signify the same thing in several texts; that St. Jerome 390. years after
Christ, seems in one, or two places to favor their opinion, and that a
numerous stray of Monks, Friars, and Schoolmen, have pressed through the gap
whereat he entered. All which shall have a large disquisition, and we hope a
satisfactory refutation in the tract concerning Apostles, to which they most
properly belong. Their argument from the equivocalness Bishop and Presbyter, in
several texts briefly considered, answered, and referred to the tract of
Apostles.
But least any Reader think we wave them, as fearing their force, let him take
this brief answer to them in this place. We entreat him not to insist too
peremptorily upon the equivocalness of Bishop, and Presbyter in some
Scriptures, as reducing the Gospel-feeding, and governing Ministry to one
Order, till he can reconcile that notion to Christ's distinct Ordination, and
institution of the twelve Apostles, and seventy Disciples, to the plain
constitution of the Ministry of the Primitive Church by Apostles and Elders,
and to the powers, which the Apostles acted themselves, and derived unto
others, over Presbyters. Neither is it of any force to say our higher Order of
Officers are now called Bishops, not Apostles, for

1. They have been called Apostles long, and long after the death of the twelve.

2. They own, and maintain themselves to be the Apostles successors.

3. They do the Apostles works, and in virtue of their commission.

4. They may as well be called Bishops These are most evident truths, that the
Apostles were Bishops over those Presbyters they ordained, as well as over the
Churches they planted, and that government being necessary for the Churches
welbeing when multiplied, and sociated, must also necessarily descend from the
Apostles to others, after the example of that superiority and power they had
ab^^ others, which could not end with their persons, since the use and end of
that governme^ still continue (...). ca. 17. or of the differences betwixt the
King and two Houses. Episcopatum: Nos vocabulum illum libenter retinuimus quia
dei ecclesiastico, and eo q^ them Apostolico munere hic agit. Bez. ad Art. 1. 20.
as St. Peter could call the Apostolate a Bishopric. Act. 1.20. For it is
written in the b^^ of the psalms, let his habitation be desolate, and his
Bishopric (...) another take; the word Bishopric or, (...), Beza renders
Episcopatum, and says, he does willingly retain the term, because the Apostle
treats of an ecclesiastical Office, and that indeed the Apostolical. Besides me
thinks the holy Ghost in calling the Apost^^late a Bishopric, consequently the
Apostles Bishops, in that pla^ (which is not only mine but St. Cyprians
consequence, as ha^ been before observed) and Presbyters, compresbyters, Deaco^
etc, in other places seems to hint, that so long as the offices (...) distinct,
and each Officer limited to his proper work; A rigid, and perpetual distinction
of the names of those Officers, is not absolutely necessary. And furthermore to
improve this promiscuous usage of names to confound the orders of ministers,
must unavoidably sink the Apostolate, into the Presbyterate or Diaconate, when
an Apostle is called Presbter or a Deacon.

Their Arg. from St. Jerome and some of his followers briefly considered, and
referred to the tract of Apostles. Augustine. de Haeres. ca. 53. Genevae. 1559.
But it is time to come to their second Argument drawn from the authority of St.
Jerome and his followers; which we de^^^ may be reconciled to the Churches
uninterrupted practice, before, and in St. Jeromes time. St. Augustine St
Jeromes equal in time, and in many other things much his superior, calls St.
Jeromes opinion, as broached by Aerius, proprium dogma, or a singular, and
novel notion: And when it shall be proved in the tract concerning Apostles, to
which the full prosecution of this work belongs.

1. That all Expositors, Protestant, and Pontifician, reject more singularities
in St. Jerome, then in any other ecclesiastical writer of unsuspected credit,
and of like antiquity.

2. That all his ancients, Clemens, Ignatius, and Ireneus, Tertullian, Cyprian,
etc. All his equals and contemporaries, Athanasius, Eusebi^s, Ruffinus, Gregory
Nazianzen, Gregory Nyssen, Basilius Caesariensis, Hilarious Pictavensis,
Ambrosius, Epiphanius, Augustinus, Optatus, Chrysostomus, Cyrillus
Hierosolymtanus, Salvianus, yea and St. Jerome himself did elsewhere profess,
and maintain the contrary opinion.

3. That he was a Presbyter, and in actual Schism against his own Patriark John
of Jerusalem, whom he most passionately, and virulently reviles and reproacheth.

4. That while they continued at variance, his brother Paulianus being to be
ordained Presbyter, he did not open the pack of Aerianisme, and set up for
himself, but against the Canons, all due order, and Scripture warrant, he
fetches another Bishop (Epiphanius) to Allotrioepiscopize, and Bishop it in
his Pa^riarks Diocese.

5. That afterward (the Sea of this contention yet flowing betwixt them) he
sayls to Rome, and is the first Champion of ^ll the Ancients in defense of the
Bishop of Romes usurped power to tolerate, and indemnifie Rebels against their
own Bi^hops. And

6. That while he was at Rome, Pope Syricius and his Clergy, were equally
distasted at his passion, and intemperance as his own Patriark Ruffinus, and
others had before been, they after a sort expulsing him the City.

We shall leave it to all sober men to pass Judgment, Mihi videtur, ut pace
tanti viri dicam, nec Scripturae sacrae, ec antiquitatis historiae
consentaneum. Esth. ad Tit. 1. 5.
of what force St. Jeromes angry lines are in this matter; whether his notion
may not as well be termed a singularity in him, as in Aerius. And whether it be
not deservedly censured by the learned Esthius, As neither agreeable to
Scripture, nor ancient History.

Obj. Do any say the distinction betwixt ordinary, and extraordinary Officers,
was entertained in the Church long before Calvin's, Beza, or Zanchyes days.

I answer; This will no whit advantage, much less excuse them, for since it is
neither satisfiably by Scripture, nor by the writings of the most Ancient
fathers, who unanimously assign successors unto the Apostles, distinct from,
and superior unto Presbyters, and thereby make all Orders instituted by Christ
ordinary, and continuing; True Reformers should have rejected the distinctions,
not maka a farther, and worse use of it than the Pope did before them, for the
special service of whose Supremacy, together with an officious attendance upon
the Sacrifice of Mass, I believe it was, if not at first coined, yet at least
passed for current in the Church.

This might suffice in answer to the first Objection, but least a Spider should
such poison out of this free discussion of the errors of Calvin, A
consideration how far the most eminent men may be opposed.
Beza, etc. And say I design to lay their honor in the dust, to prove contempt
upon all their labors, and to cast a longer shadow by travailing in the
afternoon of their declining eminencies, because they were godly, and learned
men of a different Judgment, I add for my own vindication, and the satisfaction
of moderate men, that I do honor (so far as fallible humanity can expect)
their parts, abilities, and pains in many of their undertakings; They were all
learned, and Judicious persons, men as able to serve truth, and in many things
doing her as eminent and useful service, as almost any other whom she
entertains; Her challenge to them (whereof am only the bearer) concerns not the
reprobation of their parts and persons, but the rectification of their errors.
Neither are they the first famous men who have been mistaken in Church matters.
This they freely marked in their Predecessors, this if they give occasion,
their Successors must observe in them, otherwise truth once buried under a
noted man's authority, can never expect a resurrection.

There is a twofold Rock, against which most ill ballasted, and worse steered
Judgments, bulge, and shipwreck; either they will believe nothing from any man,
let the divine Majesty print never so fair characters of its wisdom, and of
irrefragable reason upon his expressions; they will believe every thing from
some men. The former lifts up a ruin-threatning head more visibly, the latter
though covered under water, is equally, if not more dangerous, because it is
not so easily discerned, or avoided. That imbrutisheth all men; this all but
our own Faction. Truth sayls in a middle channel, and anchors the steady
Judgment in a safe harbor, even to believe what is rational, though spoken by a
fool, or an enemy; to reject the contrary, though pronounced by the wisest, and
most friendly. Were this ingenuity entertained among Christians (in matters of
opinion and private determination) we should not with such fruitless, and
unanswered words, and wishes call back the Primitive love and candor into our
societies, and in the mean time bite, and devour one another. But where truth
is party there is no nutrality; In this case our Savior says, he that is ^t
with me is against me: It Is not urbanity to our friend, but ^eachery to truth,
to applaud him to her prejudice, and it is ^rdly utterable what mischiefs, and
inconveniences she receives, ^hen her presumed defenders excur into a
justification in gross, ^ those, who in some things complying with their
opinions, ^e in others contrary to her; she is most glorious in her own
^ikedness, our passions and our praises, equally disguise, and ^shonour her:
When I have observed some eminent men ^inly prefacing what they believed to be,
and really was truth; ^ith their unwillingness to dissent from others of their
own ^nk and reputation, it has suspended my Judgment in an ^quilibrious
doubtfulness, whether they thought to bear out ^uth, or be born out by her;
Truth (as Christ) may be be^ayed with a kiss and complement; and this is a
degree of ^eason, whereunto the grossest rudeness cannot ascend. Re^erend, and
eloquent Dr. de Moulin did not advance the French church, or her Presbyterian
Government, in his Apologetical ^ters to Bishop Andrews; nor did the Church of
England, re^ive a little prejudice by the Encomiasticks, which some of her
^rned men, and obedient sons, made upon the Genevian Displine. Divine
institutions if widened, or straightned by our con^sions, or denial, will loose
their authority, and be accounted the re^lts of prudence and convenience, by
judicious and cunning men. If ^e will be giving, let us part with our own, not
Gods right; ^ us not confound our inventions with his institutions, to ^ingle
both together is the ready way to make neither oblige ^e conscience. Witness
Erastianisme, and Socinianisme. It Is a ^s divinum we must stick to, if we will
prove our Ministry to ^e Gods Ordinance unto our people, or have them own it as
^ch; wherein if we waver in our Epistles, or Treatises unto ^rangers (in what
language so ever they are written) how easi^ comes it, and how many are there
to bring it to their notice, ^^d when they know it, and object it against us,
with what ^ords can we excuse our selves, or desend our Order? The church is
not now as of old, confined within two Nations or Professions, viz. Jewish and
Samaritane, for besides several Churches under reformed Episcopal, or
Presbyterial Government; there are many of a third sort, whose Ministers
pretend ^onfidently, and constantly their Divine Right. But if we (be our ^nds
what they can be) are indifferent in our Assertions, and ^ang it in suspense,
whether we, or others, or both of us (when the world is sensible of our
contrary constitutions) be Governments by Divine right: uninterressed persons
will settle there, where there is most confidence, and least dispute tolerated.
I know the world is too bankrupt in civility, too slow in making just payment
of those observances, due from all men unto the worthy advancers of truth; my
intent is not to show forth their Charter of Protection, but to caution their
friends of truth, not to fetter her freedom by their complements. We may honor
men, so has God ordained; Render honor to whom honor is due, Romans 13.7.
That's the Kings. Hold such in reputation. Philem. 2.29. that's the Ministers. In
honor preferring one another, Romans 13.7. That Is one Christians duty to
another. But we must distinguish what honor we give to me^ and when we give or
take it; what honor, least what we give to men be stolen from Christ, and our
respects (as Gideo^ armies bounty to him) prove a snare to them. Judge. 8.25, 2^
27, 28. It Is Christ's peculiar honor to be, and be esteem^ infallible, to be
indisputably credited upon his own wor^ wise, or good men, will neither take,
nor give this honour^ themselves, or others, for humanity must be laid aside,
or take into an indissolable union with the deity, ere man can be infallible
The best of men have, and will acknowledge they have errors St. James the
Apostle, and a Penman of Holy Writ, who might have pleaded infallibility, if
any mere man may do it, on the contrary says; Jam. 3.1, 2. My brethren, be not
man masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation, (...) in
many things we offend all; If any man offend not in word (...) a perfect man,
and able to bridle the whole body; the last words ((...) if any man offend not)
run Hypothetically, but do not cont^ a grant that some men are impeccant, for
that the forego^ clause, or in many things we offend all, contradicts. Rather
they (...) force the proportion of all men's fallibility, and imply, if so much
perfection is required in bridling the tongue, of which notwithstanding he
says, ver. 8. the tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil full of deadly
poison; then how much more perfection i^ requisite, for the unerring regulation
of the thoughts and actions. And will the best of men, even Apostles acknowledge
they have errors? what is it for others to deny it, but to charge them with
want of charity unto, or Judgment of themselves, and to presume we know them
better then they know themselves. We admire the stupidity of Heathens, in
worshipping of stocks, stones, and dumb creatures, which they knew were no
Gods, but to adore in men what themselves disown is a ^rosser and more senseless
Idolatry, it stooping to an Idol which ^ath a mouth and tongue, wherewith he
tells us he is no God: ^xcellently S. Paul, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. My speech and my
preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration
(...) the spirit and power, (there is his practice,) that your faith ^ight not
stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God: there is his reason for
it.) Men may lead us, as the Samaritan ^oman did her Citizens, unto Christ, but
unless our faith ulti^ately resolve, as theirs did, John 4.42. Now we believe
not be^use of thy words, for we have heard him our selves, and know this indeed
the Savior of the world. It will stand totteringly upon sandy foundation.

Besides, as we must distinguish what honor we give to men, we must heedfully
observe the time when we give it unto ^em. When Christ is dishonored, the
Church reproached, ^ her unity broken, then is no time for Christians to seek
their ^wn honor; in this case it is enough that the disciple be as his ma^r,
and the servant as his lord: for if they have called the master of the ^use
Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of the household, ^atth. 10.25.
'Twas the high commendation of Valiant and ^eligious Vriah, that he would not
take his ease in his own ^use, when the Ark of God, and his General Joab, lay
in the field. Sam. 11.11. To be dishonored with Truth, will bring more ^^e
Comfort and Peace, and prove a greater Honor at latter ^d, then to be honored
without it: Those (as Moses) God ^ll honor: These (as the Pharisees) he will
bring to shame. ^or our indirect honoring, or being honored by men, occa^neth
a farther dishonor unto Truth; who unite to us, will and from her, and
transform Verity into a Conspiracy, and ^^ith into Faction. Nothing being more
certain and explored, ^en when each has the honored head of his own party,
seldom ^ never any hold the head of truth. S. Paul's carriage toward ^e
factious Corinthians is of excellent use, though rarely imi^ted. They had
eclipsed the Majesty, and broke the Unity of truth, by setting too high a value
upon, and having his per^^n, and the persons of their other Teachers in an
undue admi^^tion, One was of Paul, another of Apolles, a third of Cephas, none
^r Christian Concord or Communion. What does the Apo^le in this case? Why he
tears the Garland from off all their ^eads, and sets it upon the Head of
Christ, mightily endea^ouring that neither Paul, Apollos, or Cephas might be
named among them, but only Christ, 1 Cor. 1.13, 14. Like we the way and
company, we shall not travail far, till we meet another Apostle encouraging us
to keep in it, and threatening us if w^ stir out of it, that we shall be branded
for the worst Haereticks for they, as we, have the persons of men in
admiration, Jude v. 16 A bare cautelousness, not to be liable to this crime or
punishment, may (I suppose) be my justification, for using such plai^^ness and
freedom of speech with dissenting, and (as I believe mistaken Brethren. It
being each Church Officers duty, (i^ which Catalogue I am, though unworthy,
enrolled) by an intuition of Charity, (perhaps Presbyterian parity may carry it
further) to observe, bewail, and endeavor to redress what he perceives amiss in
his Brethren: Other design I had not, in ex^mining, and dissenting from the
aforesaid opinions. And I ho^ I have pursued it with demonstration, and kept my
self with due limits. Sure I am, I have spared the Image of God in e^^
Dissenter, and not dropped such black words to blot this pa^ as Grotius in his
vote for peace execrates in others, he na^ them: and what he there writes, is
not matter of opinion, (...) of fact. This shall suffice, and I hope will be
sufficient to a^^swer the first Objection. 2. Object. Or Scandal given to all
reformed Churches. 1. Answer. Our controversy is not with Churches, but with
particular men.


But our Boat being cleared of one Rock, another threaten^ yea we are charged
to dash against Reformed Churches.

Answ. 1. The diligent Reader need not to be remembered how seldom I have
mentioned Churches in this dispute; my business was and is with particular men,
with whom supposing the worst, that I have dealt too coursly, yet am I to learn
that the Calvin, Beza, etc. are so many particular Churches, or that (...) of
them together (with whom I have to deal by name) be o^ Church, since they are
all Ministers. But if Maresius his fig^ Synecdoche must be brought into this
place also, and we must (...) a part for the whole, account them Churches,
because the^ were Ministers, then I say, This will come little short of seatin^
them in several Chairs of Papal Authority and Infallibility: an^ we must be
wary not to meddle with any of their Errors, lea^ (as the Pope) they threaten
us with a Catholic Church falling about our Ears. Reason tells us, That a City
is not tainte^ with the Treason of a few Inhabitants; and the Scripture assure^
us, that the eleven were not degraded by Judas his apostacy. (...) the
subsistence of any body, did depend upon the absolute soundness of every part,
a could not long continue: The Head or the Heart may ache, and the body do well
in time notwithstanding S. Paul reckoned up the several Factions in the Church
of Corinth, made or abetted by her prophets and leading men, for which he very
frequently and severely checks them by name, which assuredly he would never
have done, if it had injured the Catholic or that Church in particular. This
might stop the mouth of the objection, would not clamorous Spirits hale it to
Churches, and cry out, That (notwithstanding this evasion) I scandalize all
reformed Churches. Of necessity therefore I must add some thing more, though
if I did not believe Truth dictated it, I would conceal it.

2. Reformation is a thing easier pleaded then proved: 2 Answer. By
distinguishing Reformation into
All that says it is reformed, is not. Reformation (as Titles upon
Apothecaries Boxes) may be written on the forehead where corruption and
deformitie's in the brain. Primitive Heretics promised others liberty, while
themselves were the servants of corruption. What says it is, no more then what
seems to be, is not the same. But we are yet too general, that we may therefore
resolve our Reader whether we have scandalized all or any Reformed Churches, we
shall consider Reformation, as it falls under considera^ion in a twofold
notion. 1. Proper.


1. Proper. Reformation, properly so called, has the same relation unto
Formation, as Resurrection unto Life: that is of the same Body, this must be of
the same Church: The Church is ^hen reformed, when she is restored to her
primitive constitution: what that was, may be collected from what has been
^lready handled in this discourse: but I know with whom I have ^o do, Concilia
coguntur, ut reformentur ecclesiae, ecclesiae sunt reformandae, ad formam
omnium optimam. Melior ecclesiae forma inveniri, aut excogitari non potest;
illa, illata quam Christus per se and per suos Apostolos, ecclesiam initio
constituit; and confirmavit. Qualis fuit illa veteris and Apostolicae ecclesiae
forma tempore Christi and Apostolorum liquido and certo apparet, ex libris
Apostolorum, and Evangelistarum probabiliter autem, ex reliquis post Apostolos
antiquissimis ecclesiae scriptoribus. Et paulo post. Sunt igitur ad formam
veteris, and Apostolicae ecclesiae, ^mnes ecclesiae reformandae. Zanch. de
regula Concilii.
and am beforehand aware of how little credit whatever I shall say, will be
with them. May they therefore hear what Reve^end Zanchy says in this matter:
He says, Councils are to be con^ened for the Reformation of the Church:
Churches are to be reformed according to the best Form of all: a better Form of
a Church cannot be found out, or imagined, then that according to which Christ
by himself and by his Apostles in the beginning instituted and framed his
Church: What was the form of that old and Apostolic Church in the time of
Christ and of his Apostles, plainly and certainly appears in the Books of the
Apostles and Evangelists, and probably out of the other most ancient
Ecclesiastical Writers, after the Apostles: Therefore all Churches are to be
reformed according to the Form of the ancient and Apostolical Church. Thus he.

And let the Objectors show me any one Church formed as the Primitive and
Apostolic Church, which admits but of one teaching Order, I will bear the
heavy burden of a Scandalizer of Reformed Churches, otherwise he who charge
me with it, and cannot prove it, will be censured for a false Accuser.
Presbyterians usually appeal from Fathers and Councils, to the first Church,
truly affirming, she is the prime Antiquity. All contrary unto her (be it never
so gray headed) is Novelty, and to be censured as such. Content we are to
attend the prosecution of their appeal at that Tribunal, let them prove the
Church of Jerusalem, and any under Calvin's Discipline, to be alike
constituted, we will venerate both as the oldest and truest Church in the
World. What the Church at Jerusalem was, soon appears; she was founded by
descended Christ, in the twelve Apostles and seventy Disciples, confirmed after
his Ascension in Apostles and Elders, both of them, Officers distinct in their
Titles, and n^ less in their Office-works, as has been here and there hinted
i^ this Discourse, and shall be evidenced at large in that concerni^ the
Apostles. Now if Calvin's Church be thus constituted, (...) are all agreed,
first, middlemost, and last Church State is sti^ the same, and the distinction
betwixt ordinary and extraordinary officers is returned to the Brains of its
first Forgers, to consume and rot with them. But if this new Church be not thus
constituted, she is neither formed as the Church of Jerusalem was, nor reformed
according to her Pattern or Example. The Church, like Theseus Ship, does not
retain an old name, under new materials, she is rib'd, and plank'd with the
Tree of Life, Timber which can never rot, nor be worm-eaten, descended Christ
is the Keel of her Ministry, ascended he builds her tigh^ and Stanch, and will
maintain her so, till the perfecting of the saint and he as it were again
descend, by surrendering up all ((...) Mediatorian) power unto the Father, that
God may be all i^ all. But

2. Common or deptiangr from a Communion with a corrupt Church, in which sense
also no reformed Church is scandalized by this Discourse.
Secondly, Reformation has confessedly another notion; which for
distinction-sake we may call its common signification. A Church is said to be
reformed, so far as sshe frees her self from the corruption of a deformed
Church, with whom she formerly held communion and fellowship. This is an act of
the highest nature and most important consideration, to the whole State of
Christianity, not to be thought of, much less attempted, till all other means
have been tried and found fruitless: that we are all one body, minds us not
lightly to consent to the abscision of any member, though corrupted, for till
peril of gangreening be imminent and unavoidable, the grounds of hope are
equal, that by good Medicines, and the strength and vigor in the sound parts,
the corrupt may be assisted to expel the noxious humor, and amend, with those
of fear, least the sound be concorrupted by them. Several Churches of
Apostolical plantation, as Corinth, Galatia, etc. were full of gross humors,
and corrupt members, but S. Paul does not immediately threaten them with an
excommunication, and cutting off from all other Churches; but contrariwise, he
insists upon councels, entreaties, and prescribed Remedies, how they might
reform themselves. But granting (as there may be) a just and reasonable cause
for such departure and reformation from a corrupt Church; what is done should
be apprehended and carried with the feeling of a Patient loosing a Limb, and
with the Care and Conscience of a skilful Chyrurgion, who cut off no more then
is ulcered, and not to be continued without danger to the body. To conclude
corruption in all, from unsoundness in some members, is assuredly destructive
to every body, either Natural, Civil, or Ecclesiastical. A foul Church has
some part clean, or she is no Church at all. Neither does Reformation terminate
in the uttermost imaginable distance from her, but in keeping as far from her,
as she is from her self when she was primitive. The name Reformation assures
us, that once she had a right form, and retains some part of it, otherwise she
cannot be reformed, but must be formed a Church ere she be one. A Mahumetan
does not reform, but turn Christian. Recession from what a corrupt Church holds
in common with the primitive, is no Reformation, but an equal departure from
both. Wherefore let the Objector prove, that all Churches thus reformed from
Romish superstition, allow of the distinction betwixt Ordinary and
Extraordinary Officers, and practically admit but of one teaching Order of
Ministers, we will take no disadvantage to his prejudice of his former failure,
but we are certain he equally fails in this, as in the other, for besides the
Saxonish, Swedish, Danish, (not to mention the Greek and Abyssyne) the Church
of England (not only the fairest Flower in, but the Wall and Defense about the
whole Garden of Reformation) excludes her self from their number: She being
divinely directed in her Reformation unto this blessed temper, she left the
corruptions of present Rome, and was content to hold Communion with her (if she
pleased) in what was Rome primitive, whereby at once she avoided the scandal of
Novelty and Faction, and left an open door to Rome her self to reform, if she
listed. Her Judgment about extraordinary Ministers, Articles of the Church of
England, Art. 23.
she delivers thus: It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the Office of
public preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the congregation, before he
be lawfully called, and sent to execute the same; and those we ought to judge
to be lawfully called and sent, which be chosen and called to this work by men,
who have public authority given them in the congregation, to call and send
Ministers into the Lords vineyard. Thus the Article. And for the Orders of her
Ministers, she judged it unsafe to invent a new frame, because of corruption in
the Romish Hierarchy, but veiwing the primitive constitution of Apostles and
Elders, how comely does she frame her self by Bishops and Priests, (not
Sacrificers, but the contraction of Presbyters) both distinctly named in her
Book of Articles, whereunto all her Ministers were sworn, and those who were
conscientious of their Oaths, strenuously defended both against Rome and
Geneva. The distinguishing Rails betwixt which two Orders, she visibly placed
in a solemn and peremptory confinement of either Officer within and exercise of
different official Actions.

It cannot be denied, but in the Crisis of her late, and in some measure
yet-continuing Agony, she was hardly able to put forth her power according to
her principles, which rash judging illwillers imputed to the crazedness of her
first frame, not to the multitude of ill humors, then drawing to a
consistencie, and heading in the Distemper under which she yet labors; yea
even at that time so out-ragiously violent upon her, that if any of her more
obedient Sons durst assert the Divine Right of her higher Order of Officers, he
was instantly clamoured against for a Novelist, because Faction had
over-perswaded her open-ear'd party, that it was grounded upon an Act of
Parliament, not Christ's Institution. A cavil begotten by want of will, or
skill, to distinguish betwixt what was merely, what mixtly Ecclesiastical in
their Jurisdiction, or what they held under King CHRIST, what under King
CHARLES. But let us observe while she was yet in vigor, (when the only true
Judgment can be made of her) how she muzzles the Mouth of that Cavil, and
strikes through the Loins of that Objection. In that famous conference at
Hampton Court, upon King James his entrance upon the Government of the Realm of
England, Bishop Bancroft protested before the King, the most honorable
Personages, and the greatest Opposers of Ecclesiastical Government by Bishops,
in the Kingdom, Conference at Hampton Court.
That unless he could prove his ordination lawful out of Scripture, he would
not be a Bishop four hours longer. This spoken upon this occasion, in such a
place, and before such a presence, cannot be turned off as one Doctors opinion.
Preface to the Book of the Form of Ordination.
But this is not all we have to say in this matter: The whole Church of England
professes, That it is evident to all men diligently reading the Scripture, and
ancient Authors, that from the Apostles time there have been these Orders of
Ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests and Deacons. And in the
ordination of Bishops, she has ^hese words, in the exhortation of the people
to pray for the Elect, viz. Brethren it is written in the Gospel of S. Luke,
that our Savior Christ continued the whole night in prayer, or ever he did
^huse and send forth his twelve Apostles. That the Disciples which were at
Antioch did fast and pray, or ever they laid hands upon, or ^ent forth Paul and
Barnabas. Let us therefore following the exam^le of our Savior Christ, and his
Apostles, first fall to pray, or that we admit and send forth this person
presented unto us, unto the work thereunto we trust the holy Ghost has called
him. In the prayer she ^^ith, That it may please thee to bless this our Brother
elected, and to and thy grace upon him, that he may duly execute the office
whereun^ he is called, to the edifying of thy Church, and to the honor, ^raise
and glory of thy name. And furthermore, she adds, Almigh^y God, Giver of all
good things, which by thy holy Spirit have ap^ointed diverse Orders of
Ministers in thy Church, mercifully behold his thy servant, now called to the
work and ministry of a Bi^op. Nor did she content her self with saying so, for
when ^ome Sheep marked by foreign Shepherds, (or Presbyters or^ained by
Presbyters) desired the Communion of her Fold, at ^he beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, she shore off their ^ut-landish Mark, and caused them to
receive hers, ere she ad^itted them. This Smectymnuus acknowledges: they say,
Smectym. p. 5.
When some of our Brethren who flying in Queen Mary's days, had ^^ceived
imposition of hands beyond the Seas, returned again in Queen Elizabeth's days,
they were urged again to receive imposition of hands from our Bishops, and some
of them did receive it. This they urge as horrid and unpardonable crime in
Episcopacie, at a time when very charge was adjudged a convicted crime, and no
Writ of Error or Defense might be admitted or argued. But may they ^ow be
pleased to hear,

1. That Ordination was never committed to Presbyters in ^he Apostles days; and
that for them to take more now, then was then allowed them, is to reform
primitive Institutions, by present practices.

2. That their great Patron S. Jerome appropriates Ordination to Episcopacy, as
an Act differencing it from Presbytery: And whereas they tell us, Bishops and
Presbyters are all one Order, Episcopacie being only a Degree of the same
Order, above Presbytery; we must answer them, That this mud is raked out of the
standing pits of the Schoolmen, Ordinatur omnis ordo ad sacramentum
Eucharistiae Tho. Aquin. 3. per sum. Q. 40. Art. 5.
and has no color but their wrong Definition of Ecclesiastical Order, namely,
Tha^ the supremity thereof is the administration of the Eucharist; wherea^ this
was a work commonly done both by Apostles and Presbyters, in the primitive
time, consequently the affixing of a parity of Order to all of its
Administrators, must necessarily remove all former difference betwixt the first
Apostles and Presbyters, when yet Scripture is in nothing more exact then the
maintenance (...) such diversity; it frequently assigning distinct official
works unto the Apostles, as Ordination of Ministers, exercise of Ce^sure, etc.
Besides the same Schoolmen, when they give Order i^ proper Definition, are
neeessitated to ackowledge that Episco^^cie is an Order distinct from
Presbytery: Episcopatus non est ordo, nisi secundum quod, ordo officium quoddam
est ad sacras actiones. Tho. Aquin. 3. per summae quaest. 40. Art. 5. conclus.
Alio modo potest considerari ordo secundum quem est officium quoddam respectu
quarundam actionum sacrarum, and sic cum Episcopus habeat potestatem in
actionibus Hierarchicis respectu corporis mystici supra Sacerdotem Episcopatus
erit (...) Id. ibid. ad primum. Ordo est signaculum quoddam Ecclesiae per quod
spiritualis potestas traditur ordinat^ Lomb. lib. 4. sentent. did. 24. Atqui
discrimen hoc Episcopi, and Presbyteri, Divino Jure, per Christi institutionem
se^ per fuit in Ecclesia designatum. Id ibid.
they say, Episcopaci^ not an Order, unless in this respect, that order is a
certain Office (^^culty or power) to do some sacred actions. And moreover, O^^
may be considered in another sense, in which respect it is a certai^ Office
Relative to some sacred actions; and so since the Bishop hat^ power in some
Hierarchick ctions above a Presbyter, respecting the Body mystical so far forth
Episcopacie will be an Order. With the agrees the grand Definition Order,
framed by the Father of the Schoolmen, or the Master of the Sentences, which
is, Order (...) a certain Ecclesiastical Signature, by which spiritual power is
give to the ordained, But the Episcopal Consecration capacitates f^ several
Church-works, as Ordination, Confirmation, etc. wh^ none without it can do;
therefore those acts do as really d^^rence the Bishop from a Presbyter, as
administration of the ^^craments, or giving of Absolution differenceth a
Presbyter from a Deacon. In the same place the same person says, This
diff^^rence betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter was always marked out by i^
institution to be of Divine Right in the Church; for Christ ordain his Apostles
Bishops, as S. Augustine in his Questions upon the old and new Testament, takes
for most assured, whereas Presbyters only ^upply the places of the seventy two
Diseiples, as Pope Anacletus teach^th. I cite the words of my Author, but let
no man boggle at them, for Popery was not what is now, when Anacletus was
Bi^hop of Rome, and instances shall not be wanting in the tract of Apostles,
that this was not Anacletus his single opinion: Learned Doctor Davenant late
Bishop of Salisbury, after a brief view of the Schoolmens opinions, says, It
suffices us, Nobis sufficit (hac verborum velitatione seposita) si ostendamus,
cos, qui appropriate vocantur, Episcopos habere dignitatem altorem potestatem
majorem and eminentiora officia sibi annexa, quam habent alii Presbyteri idque
verbo Dei minime repugnante. Sed parum est quod dicimus non repugnante, nam in
verbo divino adumbratam delineatam, and ab Apostolis ipsis constabilitam fuisse
hanc Episcoporum, supra Presbyteros eminentiam, facile est demonstrare. Dav.
deter. quaest. Theol. q. 42. Tria autem sunt insignia Episcoporum propria,
quibus facile a caeteris Presbyteris distinguantur ceterisque superiores
agnoscantur.
(this skirmish^ng of words being dismissed) to show that those who
appropriately are called Bishops, have a higher Dignity, a greater Power, and
more ^minent offices annexed to them, then have other Presbyters; and that not
opposed by the word of God; but we have said too little in affirming that it is
not opposed by the word of God; for it is easy to demon^trate that this
eminency of Bishops above Presbyters is adumbrated, delineated, and
established by the Apostles in the word of God. In the same determination a
consulter of the place may observe how he proves this Assertion by Analogy
from the Jewish Church, and positively by the institution and practice of
Christ and his Apostles. And furthermore he adds; That there are three proper
Ornaments of Bishops, whereby they are easily distinguished from other
Presbyters, and may be acknowledged to be superior unto them, Viz.

First, 1. Quod in civitatibus quantumvis amplis and populosis in quibus plures
Presbyteri creabantur, unicum tantum Episcopum ordinarunt Apostoli cui
decedenti, alius singulariter in eadem sede succedebat.
When many Presbyters were created in large and populous cities, the Apostles
ordained only one Bishop, upon whose decease another singly succeeded.

Secondly, Right and power of Ordination, 2. Jus and potestas ordinandi quae ab
Apostolis ad Episcopos transmissa, Presbyteris autem inferioribus denegata est.
transmitted by the Apostles unto Bishops, and denied unto inferior
Presbyters.

Thirdly, Power of Jurisdiction, 3. Jurisdictionis potestas. Non modo supra
Laicos, sed supra Clericos, etiam Apostolica institutione Episcopis subjectos.
Id ibid.
whereby both Clergy and Laity were subjected by Apostolical Institution unto
Bishops.

I readily acknowledge this learned man does not call Episcopacy an Order (for
what reasons he himself knew best.) Bu^ whether to say; Bishops appropriately
so called, have a^ higher dignity, a greater power, and more eminent Officers
annex^^ to them by Christ's institution, and Apostolic practice: All which he
afterward particularly enumerates (as has been already hinted) do not import
and imply as much, as if he had called them a distinct Order I leave to
judicious men to determine, since the essentials of Order, (...) ex secunda
Apologia Athan. page 570. ex officina Conmelin.
or superiority over inferiors, and right power of doing distinct
Office-works, is thereby allowed unto Bishops. But to proceed.

Thirdly, That the Church of England in this annulling of Presbyterian
Ordination, as she kept close to her own constitution, so followed the fairest
Copy of least questioned Antiquity; when Aerianisme (or modern Presbyterianisme
call i^ which you will, for it is one Tragedy acted by several persons upon
diverse Stages) first sprouted in the arrogant practice^ Collythus, who being a
Presbyter and no more, and presum^ to ordain Presbyters, the Patriarchal Synod
gathered out Egypt, Thebais, Lybia, and Pentapolis, and and assembled (...)
Alexandria, declare all his Ordinations null, all ordained by him to be reduced
among the Laity for this only reason, or because Collythus died a Presbyter;
nay more, the second Council of Spain upon relation of a certain Bishop (then
dead) who by reason of a pain in his eyes (in his life time) did only lay on
hands in the ordination of one Presbyter and two Deacons, Relatum est nobis de
quihusdam clericis quorum dum unus ad Presbyterium duo ad vitarum ministerium
sacrarentur. Episcopus oculorum dolor detentus, manum suam super eos tantum
imposuisse, Presbyter quidam qui contra ecclesiasticum ordinem benedictionem
dedisse, qui licet propter tantum audaciam poterat accusatus damnari, tamen
quia jam ille examini divino relictus humano judicit accusari non potest, hi
qui supersunt gradum sacerdotii, vel Levitici ordinis, quem perverse adepti
sunt, amittant. Council. secund. Hispalen. can. 5. ex sum Council. edit. per
Caranzam Rothomag. 1633.
suffering a ba^^ Presbyter to give the blessing unto them against
ecclesiastical order. They decreed, if the Bishop had been alive, he ought to
be accused and condemned for this boldness, and that the Presbyter and D^^cons
so ordained, should loose the degree of the Priesthood, and Deac^ ship, which
they had perversely obtained.

Thus warranted our Church of England acted at home to maintain her
constitution, and to give her testimony against the contrary; and was she
afraid, or ashamed to do it abroad? no, but sending several of her renowned
Sons to assist in the Synod of Dort, where the Orders of Church Officers were
Presbyterially defined: She entered this solemn protestation against it, unto
which no answer was then given, Interea tamen de disciplina paucis monet,
nunquam in ecclesia obtinuisse ministrorum paritatem; non tempore Christi
ipsius tunc enim duodecim Apostoli erant septuaginta discipulis superiores. Non
Apostolorum aetate; non subsecutis saeculis: nec valere rationem in hac
confessione usurpatam, nempe quia omnes sunt aeque ministri Christi; nam
septuaginta discipuli erant ministri Christi, non tamen Apostolis aequales, and
omnes omnino homines sunt aeque homines, non tamen inde homo homini subesse non
debet, haec non ad harum ecclesiarum offensionem, sed ad nostrae anglicanae
defensionem, monuisse professus est. Synod. Dordracen. sess. 145. See the joint
attestation of the English Divines, Anno. 1626.
nor is any like to be given unto the worlds end. Viz. In the mean time he
declares (viz. the Bishop of Landaffe, in the name of himself, and of his
Reverend Colleagues, Bishop Hall, Bishop Davenant, Doctor Goad, Doctor Ward, and
Doctor Belcanqual) in a few words, that a Parity never took place in Christ's
time, for then the twelve Apostles were superior to the seventy Disciples; not
in the Apostles time, nor in the following ages; neither is the reason used in
this confession of any force; to wit, that all are equally the Ministers of
Christ, for the seventy Disciples were the Ministers of Christ; but therefore
they were not equal to the Apostles, and all men are equally men, but thence
does not follow, that one man ought not to be subject to another. This he
professes to have declared not in offense of these Churches, but in defense of
the Churches of England.

This Doctrine thus professed, practiced, and protested both at home and
abroad, was so deeply rooted in English men's minds, that our Assembly of
Divines durst not in their confession of Faith, revive the distinction betwixt
ordinary, and extraordinary officers, or so much as name it. I take notice of
there advice, afterward presented to the Parliament about Church Government. In
the fifth Exception.
It being attempered unto Policy, and the then State of affairs, but not
Justifiable by Scripture Rule, or the ancient Ecclesiastical Practice. This the
Dissenting brethren abundantly prove, who (as we have heard) call the
Presbyterian Government, a Government not established upon a Jus divinum, but
settled by the State. And prove it to be Their reasons against the Presbyterian
government
irrational, and Their reasons against the subordination of standing Synods. 1.
it is proved from what the Presbyterian; and alibi passim.
worse then Episcopal, or Papal. Do any say, the Assembly omitted all treaty of
Church Officers in their confession of Faith. I answer, that contradicts not
what I said, but such their omission may beget a question, which themselves
only can resolve, namely why their confession, repugnantly to the confessions
of all other Churches, makes no mention of the Ministry; Sure I am, their
Scottish brethern, give a solemn caution about it; they say, Least our
intentions, and meaning be in some particulars misunderstood, it is hereby
expressly provided, and declared, that the not mentioning in this confession of
the several sorts of Ecclesiastical Officers and Assemblies, shall be no
prejudice to the truth of Christ, Act of general Assembly prefixed to our
Assemblies confession of faith.
to be expressed fully in the Directory of government. The result of all this
is, that the Church of Enland was, and is one of those reformed Churches, who
does not own this distinction betwixt ordinary, and extraordinary Officers, and
gives her reasons why she does not; till which are answered, the favorers of
the distinction complain unjustly of their dissatisfaction, or of our
scandalizing of all reformed Churches. But did I say the Church of England does
not own the distinction? I must say more; she needed not to own it, because her
Reformation was effected by ordinary Officers, as the Ark used to be carried
upon Levites shoulders; neither was any noise, or tumult heard within all her
borders, except the joyful, hearty, and universal acclamations of the people,
every where crying grace, grace, unto it. We proceed to the la^ Objection. Obj.
3. that we give the Roman Synagogue occasion to blaspheme.


Obj. 3. Not only Calvin, etc. but the whole Reformation hereby set
bare-brested against the fiery darts of Roman bla^phemies.

I answer, First, I grant this crafty Adversary singles out our Reformists
opposition unto truth (if any be) or contradiction one unto another, 1. Ans.
concession how far Papists may take it.
as the fittest place to raise his battery against the whole Reformation. But,

Secondly, The whole Reformation is not concerned in this charge, 2 Ans.
Negation; that we give it.
for the reasons expressed in the last Paragraph of our answer unto the second
Objection: and if any part of the Reformation be chargeable, must we conceal
their weakness, that the Adversary may securely make his breach, and enter at
pleasure (...) To what purpose shut we our eyes against what they see? (...)
less their eyes be covered under our lids: Does not the Li^ see the silly beast
when he hides his head, and does not see the Lion? Who writ Ministromachia, and
how long since is perfectly known to any, Stanislaus Rescius.
who is but moderately acquainted with our controversies: Does the Roman
Synagogue blaspheme? Are they to be blamed who gave the occasion, or those who
endeavor to take it away? When will we be, if we be not yet, sensible what
advantage the Pope has gotten, by the seldom agreeing together of some men,
but when they fight him? And might not the miserable ends of the seditious
Captains at Jerusalem, when besieged by Titus Vespasian (if we wanted an
experiment) tell us what would be the issue? This we shall not question, but
can resolve, that the different constitution betwixt the Reformed Church of
England, and others also dignified with the same Title, had long since been
observed, and (I doubt not) highly improved to the advantage of the Papacy.
Gualterus the Jesuit could ask the French Reformists before I was born; By
what law of truth or reason, Praeterea quanam veritatis aut conscientiae lege,
fratres apellare audent ministros Angliae, qui habent inter se episcopos, and
Archiepiscopos, eosque simplicibus ministris, ita authoritate, and potestate
superiores, ut nulla propemodum inter utrosque comparatio existat. Gualter.
Tubul. Chronograph. page 298.
they dare call the Ministers of England their brethren, who have Bishops, and
Archbishops among them, so far superior to common Ministers, that no
comparison may be made betwixt them; Now must we suffer those Rabshakey's to
proceed in their reproaches, and close our lips, least speaking we wake a
sleeping Faction? What do all men of different judgments, tenderly suffer their
dessenting brethren to go on unmolested in their own ways? Did we never hear
of Calvin's Discipline in England? or has our Church received no prejudice by
any of his Emissaries? If he be right lets close with him, and hold together
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace? If he be wrong, it is a shame to
us not to be as free, diligent, and open in the maintenance of truth, as he, or
his are for the propagation of error; how lustily he, or his party endeavor
it, and that with explicit abhorrency, and overt expressions to render all
contrary constitutions odious, appears so frequently in their writings, as it
would savor of no industry to transcribe particular quotations: Let me only
add to this Section, that all the labors of the society of Jesuits, since the
first foundation of their Order, have not so much settled the triple Crown upon
the Popes head, or dissettled the reformed interest, as the tepidness of some
lukewarm defenders of the Discipline of the Church of England, whilst it
stood, and the violence and rage of ignorant Zealots against it, since its
shaking. We know who said it; Because they received not the truth in the love
of it, that they might be saved, God shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe a lie. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. But,

Thirdly, 3. Ans. retortion upon the Papists.
What do the Factors of the man of Sin take heart, and resolve that Rome shall
once again be the only mart for trading, since the Reformists, or some of them
are guilty of such indirect and unhandsome dealings; may they know, she will
get little by the bargain, because much of this Ware lies upon her Merchants
hands already; for instance, did not Hildebrand the root, and foundation of the
present Papacy, a man of far greater repute with them, then any of the
forementioned are with us, profess his election to be extraordinary, Naucler.
generat. 36.
and of St. Peter's choice, when he intruded upon the Papacy without the will of
the elector Cardinals: This past for a current History, and Tradition before
Luthers days, for the Relator Nauclerus lived, and ends his History with the
precedent Century; And is to this day so well approved by the Roman Church,
that Gualterus the Jesuit affords him a place in his Catalogue of holy
writers. I will not turn mine, or my Readers stomach, by raking in the writings
of Surius Metaphrastes, pratum spirituale, or the golden legend; which are the
common Lay-stals of such Church filth raked into heaps, and dunghils. Baronius,
the most advantageous, and admired writer of the Annals of the Roman Church;
well knowing how light many of her Monastical, and Pontifical practices would
weigh, without the allowance of some grains of extraordinary callings and
Revelations; Hangs his History very thick with those forgeries: For instance,
has any light Huswife a dislike against her Husband, and his family, and lust
to travail with some errant Friar; how opportunely does she meet St. Thecla in
the very entrance of his History (bare fourteen years after Christ's Ascension)
divinely moved to forsake he Spouse, and gad about with St. Paul from place to
place in his travails. And when by the Law, that then was, she was exposed to
the Lions, they became tame, and fawned upon her. All which we esteem more
slightly, then the most undervaluing words can express, because they are so
contrary to St. Paul's Doctrine, 1 Cor. 7.13. ad fin. 16. and doubtless to his
practice; for he would not say one thing and do another; which Text, and others
such like, were so busy with the Cardinals conscience (though he name them
not) that after he had related this passage, Ad propria reverti, ne poneret
offendiculum evangelio. Baron. ad Ann. Christi 47. Vtor Epitome Henrici
Spondani, Impressa Francofurti. 1614. Baron. ad unde. Ann.
and others concerning her, he introduces St. Paul rating at her, and
commanding her to return to her own (Spouse, House, Country, least she caused
the Gospel to be evi^ spoken of.

Besides, Is any puffed up with the Tympany of a private Spirit, and not having
yet made shipwreck of his Faith and Conscience, is expectant ere he launcheth
further into that Whirlepit, whether such a notion have any president in the
Church Antiquities; his eminency will assure him, that Gregory Thaumatourgus,
or the wonder-working Gregory in the year of Christ 234. did receive from the
hands of the Virgin Mary, and of St. John the Evangelist, a rule of Faith
verbatim, concerning the perfect knowledge of the Trinity.

The same Cardinal says, that St. Jerome was converted upon sight of an Angel,
Ad ann. 386.
speaking in the ear of St. Ambrose, preaching unto the Millanois. And that the
same St. Ambrose; the same day wherein he dyed at Millain in the West, was seen
in the East, (i. e. some part of the Greek Empire) praying, and laying his
hands upon several persons. Indeed the Cardinal does not tell us, whether it
were in confirmation, or ordination, but the matter is not much, since both of
them belonging to Episcopal administration; and St. Ambrose could then as well
do one as another, and both of them as easily as one. And if he did ordain,
what a multitude of extraordinary Officers might he make?

Thus (he also tells us) how St. Proclus, then St. Chrysostomes disciple, and
afterward his successor in the Patriarchate of Constantinople, saw St. Paul
leaning over his masters chair, Fidem fecit se saepius vidisse. Baron. ad Ann.
Christi. 407. Os admoventem auri dextrae Id. ibid. Cum quid de sacris literis
scribere vellet. Baron. ad Ann. Christi 604.
while he was writing. But least any one should be so hard of belief, as to
question one Satins testimony of another, the Cardinal adds That St. Proclus
was deposed, that he saw it often: And had so clear a view of St. Paul at his
apparition, that it was one part of his oath, that he saw the Apostle putting
his mouth to St. Chrysostoms right ear.

Moreover he adds, that John the Deacon constantly saw the holy Ghost in the
form of a Dove, sitting at St. Gregory's right ear, when he commented any thing
upon Scripture. A relation so venerably received by, and put so far out of
dispute with our forefathers, that St. Gregory was always pictured with a Dove
at his ear.

But what if this extraordinary, and private spirit speak mistakingly, by the
tongue of the Enthusiast? will it tell him as the true did St. Paul (even then
when he spoke truth) that bonds and afflictions abide him? no; Baronius has
provided him of a Reprieve, no other, nor worse man then sweet St. Bernard
shall bail him from imprisonment, and answer the Action for him. The story is
in short thus, St. Bernard was a busy instigator of Jews the seventh and his
Frenchmen, to undertake the Pilgrimage War in Palestine, then propounded by
Pope Eugenius (Bernards quondam fellow Monk.) The good Saint promised the over
credulous King mountains of success, and profit here, and a Paradise of
unspeakable glory hereafter: He, and his people fly into the expedition, but
suddenly their wings are clipped; all things happen contrary to their
expectation, and St. Bernards Prophecy; hereat sober men storm and rage, and
St. Bernard being yet alive and uncanonized, his Holiness and truth are called
in question, and he good man, and his friends for him are forced to Apologize,
wherein among other things in his behalf, we read, That he indeed by divine
inspiration did persuade unto this service, Ipsum quidem spiritu Dei afilatum,
expeditionem illam suasisse, sed vel eos, qui eam susceperant, ob superbiam,
lasciviamque suam, salutaria mandata non observantes merito rerum, and
personarum dispendium tulisse: vel sic variis tribulationibus a peccatis
purgatos, opportune a Deo ereptos esse, ex hac vita, ne diutius in ea
permanentes, pejora forte prioribus scelera, in suam perniciem animarum
perpetrarent. Baron. ad Ann. Christi. 1156.
but the undertakers, either out of pride, or lasciviousnes not observing
wholesome Councils, deservedly suffered the loss of their lives and fortunes, or
being thus purged from their sins by manifold tribulations, God took them out
of this life, least continuing any longer therein they might trespass a new,
and more grievously to the utter destruction of their souls.

Multitudinem Angelorum qui cecide rant exiis qui in expeditione mortui erant,
restauratam esse. Baron. ubi supra, and Bernardi. Epist. Epist. 333.
This John Abbot of Casemary not only promoted, but withal protestated to St.
Bernard himself: that St. Paul, and St. John, did Saepius visitare, or very
often visit their Covent, of whom it being demanded what became of the souls of
those slaughtered bodies, they answered (he calls it certissima revelatio, or a
most undoubted Revelation) that they were translated into heaven, to supply
(...) vacancy left there by the Apostasy of the fallen Angels. Hereupo^ St-
Bernard is absolved from all blame, and Baronius observes in the same place and
year, that Henry, King Jews his brother (St. Bernard having before hand
prophesied of his conversion) was shorn a Monk of the Cistercian order. And
undoubtedly this laid a foundation for the willingness of the next succeeding
Generation to adventure again upon the same expedition, with worse success
under St. Jews.

If all this be not sufficient to convince a Papist, how justly what we have
reproved in some Reformists, is chargeable upon his Faction, let him cast his
eye upon the stolen feather wherewith Bellarmin tricks, and imps forth the
train of the pr^^ent Church of Rome, particularly these two; namely Bell. de
Eccles. militant. not. 11.
to glory of her Miracles, and Id. ibid not. 12.
Prophetic light yet continuing. These he calls Church-marks, but to my
observation they point out nothing, except the diffidence of the Church of Rome
to adventure a trial of her verity by the doctrine of the Scriptures: However,
were they not a back of Steel to the weak bow of her cause, she had long since
brake with the violent draughts of Will Worship and Superstition. Neither could
the innumerable swarms of religious Sects (all whose thighs are laden, either
with somewhat contrary unto truth, or one unto another) have ever been hived,
or cloistered without the tinkling of such pretended Prophesies, and
extraordinary Miracles. I call them extraordinary, because they are so diverse
in their ^auses, and effects from the true Miracles. They proceeded from, and
were wrought by the power of God to confirm true Doctrine: These are base brats
of men's deluded imaginations, or Sathanical sleights purposely excogitated to
infirm true Doctrine, and establish the contrary. But let us not wander from
our path. The fore-observed use of these pretended Revela^ions, and pious
deceipts was providently foreseen by Bellarmine; when in proof of Prophetic
light yet continuing, Et quidem monachi and Romano Pontifici addicti Bell. not.
Eccles. not. 12.
he ^nstanceth in the Prophesies of St. Benedict, and St. Bernard. And when
answering to Luther, objecting that the Church of Rome has received a bill of
divorce from God; he says, There have ^een true Prophets in every age, who
were Monks, and sworn men ^o the Pope. This might suffice in proof of the
guiltiness of the Papists, in supporting the worst part of their Abominations,
with extraordinary Revelations, and Ordinations of men to Office. But we have
somewhat more to add, which we desire ^ur Reader seriously to consider: It is,
The whole foundation of ^he Papacy stresseth upon this distinction betwixt
ordinary, and extra^rdinary Officers. This will appear in several instances.

First, Calvin objecting, Ephesians. 4.11. to exclude the Pope from his arrogated
power in the Church, because the Text ^oth not mention him, or his Office,
Responde^ Pontificatum summum esse diserte positum in illis verbis, and posuit
alios quidem Apostolos, siquidem summa ecclesiastica potestas ^^n solum data
est Petro sed etiam aliis Apostolis, omnes enim poterant dicere illud Pauli. 2
Cor. 11. instantia mea quotidiana cura omnium ecclesiarum, sed Petro data est
ut ordinario pastori, cui perpetuo succederetur; aliis vero tanquam delegatis,
quibus non succederetur. ^ell. de Romans Pontif. lib. 1. ca. 9. Vid. etiam
Franciscum Suarez. in sua defensione fidei Catholicae. lib. 3. ca. 11. Sect. 12.
is answered by Bellar^ine; The Pontificate is expressly placed in the word
Apostles; In^eed the highest Ecclesiastical power is not only given to Peter,
but al^o to the other Apostles; for all of them could say, that of Paul, 2 Cor.
11. that which comes upon me daily, the care of all ^he Churches, but it was
given unto Peter, as unto the or^inary Pastor, who should perpetually have
successors, to the other A^ostles it was given as to Delegates, who could have
no succes^rs.

Again, Non eodem modo quo Petrus, illi enim habebant ^ummam, atque amplissimam
potestatem, ut Apostoli, seu delegati. Petrus autem ut pastor ^rdinarius, Id.
de Romans Pontif. lib. 1. ca. 11. Sect. tribus modis dicuntur.
when our Divines argue for a Parity among all the Apostles, because they are
all called Foundations. Bellarmin an^wers. They are not Foundations in the same
manner that Peter is, for they had the chiefest and most ample power as
Apostles, or Delegates; but Peter had it as the ordinary Pastor.

Elsewhere he tells us, that we may understand that this chief power was
committed to all the Apostles as to Delegates, Vt autem intelligeremus hanc
summam potestatem collatam Apostolis omnibus, ut legatis, non ut pastoribus
ordinariis, and cum quadam subjectione. ad Petrum, soli Petro dicitur, Joh. 21,
Pasce oves meas, quemadmodum solum illi dictum erat, Tibi dabo claves. Claves
enim regni ut principalis, and ordinarius praefectus, tunc solum accepit, cum
audivit pasce oves meas. Bell. de Pontif. Roman. lib. 1. ca. 12.
not ordinary Pastors; and that with some subjection unto Peter, because it is
only said to Peter, feed my sheep, as it was only said to him, to thee will I
give the keys, etc. for he then only received the keys of the kingdom, as
the principal and ordinary Governor, when he heard those words, Feed my sheep.

Besides, when we object against the Popes Primacy; the constant opinion of all
the Ancients, about the s^ccession of all duly ordained Bishops unto the
Apostles, and that the Pop^ own Councils, congregated even since he is gotten
upon a Pinnacle of the Temple; namely the Councils of Florence, an^ Trent have
defined for the Bishops; the words of the Council (...) Trent, because it was
the last assembly of that nature, and by the Papists is accounted to be a
general Council, I shall transcribe, viz. The holy Synod declares that Bishops
(who do succeed in the place of Apostles) do principally appertain to this
Hierarchick Order, Sacrosancta Synodus declarat episcopos (qui in Apostolorum
locum successerunt) ad hunc, Hierarchicum ordinem precipue pertinere and
positos (sicut Apostolos ait) a spiritu sancto, regere ecclesiam Dei, eosque
Presbyteris superiores esse, ac sacramentu^ confirmationis confer, ministros
ecclesiae ordinare, atque alia pleraque peragere ipsos posse, quarum functionum
potestatem, reliqui inferioris ordinis nullam habent. Decret. 7. sess Cap. 4.
Si quis dixerit in ecclesia catholica, non esse Hierarchiam divina ordinatione
instituta^ quae constat ex episcopis, Presbyteris, etc. Anathema sit. Can. 6.
and are placed (as the Apostle says) by the holy Ghost to rule the Church of
God, and that they are superior unto Presbyters. And that they can confer the
Sacrament of confirmation, ordain Ecclesiastical Ministers, and perform many
other things; the power to do which, the rest of the inferior order of
Ministers have not. And in their Canons in corroboration of this Decree, they
say, If any shall s^ that there is not an Hierarchy of Divine Ordination in the
Catholic^ Church, which consists of Bishops, Presbyters, etc. let him be
Anathema.

Si quis dixerit episcopos non esse Presbyteris superiores, vel non habere
potestatem confirmandi, and ordinandi (...) eamquam habent illis esse cum
Presbyteris communem, etc. Anathema sit Can. 7.
And again; If any shall affirm that Bishops are not superior (...) Presbyters,
or that they have not a power of confirmation and ordination, or that what
power they have is common to them with Presbyters, etc. let him be Anathema.

But Bellarmine is Antahema proof, and turns them off, Respondes magnum esse
discrimen, inter successionem Petri, and aliorum Apostolorum nam Romanus
Pontifex proprie succedit Petro non ut Apostolo, sed ut Pastori ordinario
totius ecclesiae, and ideo ab illo habet Romanus Pontifex Jurisdictionem, a quo
habuit Petrus. At episcopi proprie non succedunt Apostolis, quoniam Apostoli
non fuerunt ordinarii, sed extraordinarii, and quasi delegati Pastores, quibus
non succeditur. Bell. de Romans Pontif. lib. 4. ca. 25.
together with the authority of the Council with this peremptory answer, viz. I
answer, there is a vast difference betwixt the succession of Peter, and of the
other Apostles, for the Roman high Priest does not properly succeed Peter as an
Apostle, but as the ordinary Pastor of the whole Church. And therefore the
Roman high Priest has his jurisdiction from him, from whom Peter received it.
But Bishops do not properly succeed Apostles, because the Apostles were not
ordinary, but extraordinary, and as it were delegated Pastors, who could have
no successors.

This is Bellarmines opinion, and generally received, and maintained by all the
modern Champions of the Papacy, now let who will be Judge, whether in the
overthrow of the distinction betwixt ordinary, and extraordinary Officers, I do
gratify the Papists, or rather at once decry both Papal, and Presbyterial
usurpations upon Episcopacy, neither let any wonder why I couple these two
seeming opposite Factions, for as to the maintenance of this distinction, I
find them no farther disagreeing then thus, that the Papists make St. Peter
only an ordinary Pastor thereby to secure the Papacy. Presbyters make all the
Apostles a Presbytery of ordinary Pastors, thereby to set Presbytery, or their
consistorial Government. However, least I should be thought singular, let me
nominate a few of many, who stand with me in the denial of this distinction:
Unto Bellarmines first instance, Whitaker gives this answer. It Is a new
distinction, Nova distinctio, Bellarminus homo mirus, qui cum summam potestatem
omnibus Apostolis concesserit, Petri tamen primatum, and monarchiam defendit.
Whitak. To. 2. controv. 4. quaes. 1. ca. 3. Sect. secundum nostrum argumentum.
and Bellarmine is a wonderful man, who granting the supreme power unto all the
Apostles, yet contends for the Monarchy, and Primacy of Peter.

Amesius answers. Si Petrus ut Apostolus fuir ordinarius Pastor, tum
extraordinarius, and ordinarius Pastor, idem sonant, tum etiam omnes Apostoli,
fuere ordinarii Pastores. Ames. Bell. enerv.. To. 1. p. 136.
If Peter as an Apostle was the ordinary Pastor, then the extraordinary, and
ordinary Pastor is the same, yea then all the Apostles were ordinary Pastors.
Reader I beg thee carry this back, and compare it with the Assemblies
Assertion, Page 120. viz. that the Apostles were really, and indeed Elders.

Opinionem cum recentissimam, tum inertissimam, and infirmissimam. Whitak To 2.
controv. 4. quaes. 2. ca. 3. Sect. quartum nostrum argumentum.
Unto Bellarmines second instance, Whitaker thus answers: What he teaches of
the ordinary Pastorate, Quod Petrum vocat pastorem ordinarium, id nullus unquam
veterum docuit novum hoc, and Jesuiticum commentum est, quo minime miror
tantopere delectari Bellarminum, utpote suo foetu. Whitak. To. 2. contro. 4.
quae. 2. ca. 3. Sect. hoc fuit primum nostrum argumentum.
that none of the ancients taught at any time, but is a new, and Jesuitical
fiction, which makes me the less admire that Bellarmine should please himself
so much with his own brat.

Laud against Fisher. page 168. London. 1639.
Archbishop Laud against Fisher, answers, That the highest ecclesiastical
power confessed to be given to other Apostles, as well as unto Peter, was given
unto Peter only as an ordinary Pastor; whose successors should have that power
which the others should not have can never be proved out of any Scripture, nay
I will give them the^ own latitude; It can never be proved by any Tradition of
the wh^ Catholic Church. Thus he.

Unto Bellarmines third Instance the same Whitaker answers. It is an opinion
as most novel, so most inartificial and weak.

Unto Bellarmines fourth, and last Instance, the same person also answers.
This distinction betwixt Peter and the other Apostles, is fained, neither the
Scripture nor any father, nor hardly any Papist except Bellarmine himself makes
mention of it. Respondeo hanc distinctionem inter Petrum and alios Apostolos
esse commentitiam scriptura, nec ullus pater, nec fere quisquam papista,
praeter Bellarminum huius distinctionis meminit. Whitak. To. 2. contro. 4.
quaest. 8. ca. 3. Sect. nunc nos contra probabimus.

Vt Apostoli claves a Christo acceperunt, and potestatem docendi, and
remittendi peccata, sic and episcopi. In iis vero quae Apostoli extraordinary
habuerunt non successernut illis episcopi, hoc est in illa potestate, quae
vere, and proprie Apostolica est. Id. loc. posterius citato.


In thi^ Chapter Whitaker proves against Bellarmine, that Bishops d^ succeed
the Apostles. This truth he asserts peremptorily in all that precedes, and in
what follows a little after our Quotation. But in the manner of their
succession he judges it safe not to be over curious; but with some passion
calls those Theologasters, who assert such a succession as is maintained by
this discourse. I reverence the learning and memory of the man, and should, if
not have omitted altogether, yet at least have respited what I shall now add,
until the publication of the Tract of Apostles. But perhaps some who never
before read any thing of this Authors, turning to this place of my citing, may
in the latter part of the Chapter find his dissent from us, and tax us of
reading Authors (as himself does) by an Index; or of a crafty concealment of
the adverse testimony of this famous man. We must therefore take notice of what
he says, Si vere, and proprie Apostolo succederet, tum faceret vere quod
Apostoli facere potuerunt hoc est, scriberet libros canonicos, donum linguarum
and miraculorum haberet, super serpents ambularet, daemones ejiceret, and alia
ejusmodi faceret, etc. Jd. loc. posterius citato ibid.
and be concluded by it, or give reasons why we cannot; he grants, that Bishops
do succeed the Apostles in their common works, as power of the keys, teaching,
and remitting of sins; but he tells us of other things as preaching in the
whole world, writing of Canonical Scriptures, working of Miracles, gifts of
Tongues, casting out of Devils, and walking upon serpents, which were truly,
and properly Apostolical works, and ought to be done at this day by those who
truly, and properly succeed the Apostles, if there be any such.

Here are several things practiced by the Apostles granted to be perpetual,
others extraordinary; We yield willingly the former, but (notwithstanding this
great Divines censure of gainsayers) we must animadvert something upon the
latter. What is truly, and properly Apostolical, he accounts underivable,
consequently.

First, This denies the power of the keys, preaching, and remission of sins to
be truly, or properly Apostolical works, and yet they are required of them by
Christ's express commission. Joh 20.23. Mat. 28.19.20.

Secondly, It overthrows all proper, and true succession to the Apostles. And
consequently, the Bishops whom he allows to succeed the Apostles, do succeed
them neither truly, nor properly; which to my sense is irreconciliable to the
nature of Succession; since the Successor truly, and properly enters upon what
the Predecessor enjoyed. I know in temporal possessions, one Predecessor may
have several Successors, A Father may divide his Lands among many Sons, all of
them are his Successors, but none of them enjoy his whole estate. But this will
no whit advantage Whitakers opinion till it shall be proved, that present
Church Officers succeed the Apostles in nothing properly Apostolical, and that
what he accounts truly, and properly Apostolical, and consequently underivable
were the verities, and proprieties of the Apostolic Office: I bear in memory
well enough what he has said, but must profess before the world, that I cannot
allow his Criteria's, or preaching to the whole world, writing of Scriptures,
working of Miracles, gift of Tongues, casting out Devils, and treading upon
Serpents; to give a certain character of the proper, and true Apostolic
Office, distinct from what is derived to their Successors, for the greatest
part of these matters were no part of the Apostolic Office, but extraordinary
gifts, and what is Official is at this day practicable by their Successors; for
instance; their preaching to the whole world, is the only Office work mentioned
by Whitaker among his supposed extraordinary Apostolical works. And this to
this day is incumbent upon their Successors. We have spoken somewhat of this
already, page 89. And shall add more, page 290. out of this discourse. If all,
or any of which, shall satisfy our Reader, it will convince him; that though
this work was truly Apostolical, yet it was not so proper to the first
Apostles, as to distinguish them, as men of another Order from their present
Successors; because others besides the twelve Apostles did it in the Apostles
days; and because much, if not most of that work remains undone until this day.

All the rest mentioned by Whitaker were special gifts, at neither truly, nor
properly appertaining to the Apostolic Offic. For example, he instanceth in
Gospel-writing. I grant the Apostles were employed in this work, but not
properly, and exclusively of all other men, for then we should have no Penmen
of holy Writ but Apostles, whereas St. Luke, and St. Mark were Scripture
writers, but none of the twelve Apostles: Nor was it truly an Apostolical
work, so as to distinguish an Apostle from an Officer of an other Order, for
then Andrew, Philip, Bartholmew, Thaddeus, one, if not both the James's,
Th^mas, Simon the Canaanite, Obj.
and Mathias were truly no Apostles. Do any say these Apostles did, or might
write Scripture, though they did not write it, or if they writ, their writings
are not come to our hands. Sol.


We can oppose a reason against either member of the Objection.

First, If these Apostles did write books of Canonical Scripture and they are
perished, then have we not the Canon of the Scripture entire. And so great a
flaw being found in Gods providence toward the preservation of his Oracles, as
to suffer the writings of the major part of the Apostles to perish; those who
please, may either thence take advantage to deny the certainty, and validity of
the rest, or to vend new Enthusiasmes, under the specious pretexts of the
recovery of the writings of these Apostles.

Secondly, Whereas it is supposed that some Apostles might (thought they did
not) write Scripture. This is directly repug^ant to the nature of Divine
Inspirations, which to whom so^ver they came, they immediately captivated the
man to their ^leasure, and made him but as a Pen in the hand of the holy Ghost,
to write what characters he framed, what words he dicta^ed, and no other. This
is St. Peter's decision. 1 Pet. 1.21. ^or the Prophecy came not in old time by
the will of man, but holy ^en spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. In
which Text ^eing moved by the holy Ghost, is directly opposed to the will of
man, If the will of man acted, it was a humane, not a divine ^otion; but if the
spirit of God moved, there was no impulse ^f the will of man; but what was done
was by a supernatural, and divine force, carrying and bearing men out of
themselves, ^o that all of them might say with St. Paul. 2 Cor. 12.2. Whether
they were in the body they could not tell, or whether they were out ^f the body
they could not tell. By, and from all which we may ^fely, and warrantably
conclude that no Apostle who did not ^rite Scripture, had any faculty to do it,
since if it were other^ise, Inspiration would be proved to be a resistable
motion, and ^ose Apostles who did not write Scripture convinced to have
^esisted the holy Ghost.

But return we orderly to the rest of Whitakers proper, and ^rue Apostolical
works, they are working of miracles, gift of ^ngues, casting out of devils, and
treading upon serpents. These ^re all of one nature or kind, and proceed from
one cause; viz. ^he effusion of extraordinary gifts upon the first
Church-offi^ers; and by an examination how truly, and properly any one of them
was an Apostolical work, we may make a Judgment of ^he rest, we will make an
essay upon the gift of working of Miracles. This (in a direct opposition to our
learned Author) ^e say was not an Apostolical work, either truly, or properly,
^or then when the Apostles ceased to work Miracles, they were ^o true Apostles.
And St. Paul who once could heal multi^udes with clothes taken from his body,
ceased to be a true Apostle when he lost Trophimus sick at Miletum: Not
properly, because Philip, who is expressly excluded from the Apostolical, Order,
Act. 8.1. wrought Miracles at Samaria. Act. 8.6. And the people with one accord
gave heed to those things which Philip spoke, hearing and seeing the Miracles
which he did. And what has been said of Miracles, may be said of the gift of
tongues, casting out of Devils, and treading upon serpents, and sufficiently
proved by, Act. 8.7. Act. 19.6. 1 Cor. 14. per tot. Luke 10.17. and ver. 19. In
all which places, persons distinguished from their Apostolical Order, are noted
to exercise those gifts.

These things shall have a larger handling in the Tra^t concerning Apostles,
where we shall not only distinguish betwixt Apostolical works and gifts, but
give rules and directions, whereby one may be known, Papal objection; that they
do not hold the distinction so grossly, as the Protestants do.
and differenced from another. And thither we refer all farther dealing in this
matter, and the fuller answer unto Whitaker, if any not satisfied with what is
said i^ this discourse, shall continue to insist upon his authority. Thus might
we dismiss the third Objection, and proceed to the remaining Exceptions, but as
quaerulous Protestants have give objections, so clamourus Papists may add
another; and say.

Sol. The Protestants do not hold this distinction, but the Papists hold it as
grossly as the Phanatick part of pretended Protestants.
Obj. Were all this granted. The Papists do not hold the distinction betwixt
ordinary and extraordinary Officers, (...) grossly as the Protestants do;
Protestants leave all to the i^^spired Laity in case of corruption, but Papists
own the Pope (...) Christ's Vicar, to have authority to examine the verity, and
vali^ of pretended revelations, and to compose all other differenc^

I answer; I might charge this Objection as a calumny, s^^ I have already
produced a Catalogue of so many Protesta^ Churches who disown the distinction.
But I shall endeavor t^ give the Objection a fuller answer: And do say.
Papists a^ no more excusable in this, then the most hair-brained Enthus^^asts,
who make the worst use of this distinction. I prove i^ from Bellarmine, his
task being the settlement of the Popes Infallibility uncontrollable by general
Councils, and according having laid this foundation, Summum Pontificem esse
caput totius ecclesiae, Bellar. de Council. lib. 2. ca. 15.
That the Pope is the head of t^^ whole Church. Non esse in concilio summam
potestatem. cap. 16.
that Councils have not the supreme power, Pontificem esse absolute supra
concilium. cap. 18.
t^ the Pope is absolutely above Councils, etc. Pontificem non posse subjicere
seipsum, sententiae coactivae conciliorum. ca. 18. Non tamen hinc sequitut non
licere, resistere Pontifici, ecclesiam destruenti, licet enim eum servata,
reuerentia admonere, and modeste corripere, repugnare etiam vi, and armis si
ecclesiam destruere velit; a^ resistendum enim, and vim vi repellendum, non
requiritur ulla authoritas; vide de hac i^ Johan. de Turrecre mata lib. 2. ca.
106. Bell. de Council. lib. 2. ca. 19. Sect. respondeo non mirum.
that the Pope ca^ subject himself to the compulsory decree of Councils. At
last he p^^ceives the earth quakes under the weight of his Structure; A^ the
Church cries unto him, that this unlimited papal power leaves her remediless,
let the Pope be never so arbitrary or tyrannical. Wherefore he digs deeper, and
discovers (not a Ro^ but) a great part of the Jesuitical mystery (which is so
to manag^ other men's boundless subjection to the Pope, as to make him a vassal
to the Jesuits) and plainly tells his Holiness. That i^ does not follow from
hence (i. e. all disputed in the foregoing Chapters) that it is unlawful to
resist the Pope destroying the Church, for it is lawful with fit reverence to
admonish him, and modestly to re^uke him; yea to oppose him by force and arms,
if he will destroy the church; for to resist and put back force with force, no
authority is re^uired. This he declares not as his single opinion, but as
jointly ^ofessed, and owned by his fellow Cardinal John de Turrecremata;
Whereby the truth of the Popes Fallibility is confirmed in the ^outh of two
Cardinal witnesses. Particularly Bellarmines ^estimony, not only contradicts,
but draws a Deleatur upon that he had before written of the Popes
Infallibility; for were it ^ue, when he says De verbo Dei. lib 3. ca. 5. Sect.
quintum testimonium. de Roman Pontif. lib. 4. ca. 3. per totum, and ca. 6. per
totum de Council. lib. 2. ca. 2. Sect. tertia classis.
the Pope cannot err, because Christ pray^ for Peter, that his faith should
not fail. It had been a fairer, ^^d fuller answer to say, the Objection
supposes a thing impos^ble, and utterly inconsistent with our Saviors prayer
for Pe^, and his Successors. But if the Objection be true and va^d, as
Bellarmine by his answer unto it acknowledges it to be, ^en the infallibility
is a fable. However Bellarmine will main^in both, and calls John de
Turrecremata to his assistance: ^he Objection is conceded, the sore
acknowledged, the salve ^escribed; In this case the Pope must not step into the
Chair, ^ut the people must pull him out, no matter who, of what con^tion, or in
what manner they assemble, for to repel force ^th force no authority is
required: Do but they say he will ^estroy the Church, and have power enough to
stand by their ^ords, it is sufficient, yea it is the only remedy, and final
Judg^ent. For the Pope cannot (though he would) submit himself to ^e compulsory
decrees of Councils. Thus if Papists complain, that ^e Reformation has entered
into any place with more force ^en order, those they complain upon may answer
they did no^ing but upon Bellarmines advice and council; for ere they re^rred
to force, they said, and were ready to prove that the ^ope would destroy the
Church, and they had no other way (...) resist his force but by taking up arms
against him. And thus ^apists and Presbyterians, who for ends not much unlike;
the depression ^hat's the Papal) the suppression (that is the Presbyterial) of
an Offi^r of divine Institution, superior to Presbyters, and equal to the
^ishop of Rome, that themselves may arrogate, and usurp his authority; ^aintain
this accursed, and to be abominated distinction, betwixt or^inary and
extraordinary Officers. Although in other things they ^em to be, and are the
greatest opposites; yet herein they agree to ma^age their arch usurpation so
arbitrarily, that as their settlement is by ^orce and disorder, so to leave the
people to like means to relieve them^lves against their tyranny, men without
authority with the one, and men without Scripture warrant with the other, being
the fittest and ablest Reformers. This shall conclude our seventh Exception;
and answer to the Objections which might be made against it. We proceed to the

Eight Except. none of Bucanus his Scriptures prove this definition.
Eighth Exception. Bucanus bemists his Readers Judgment with a Fog of bold
pretentions, he calls them Scripture proof concerning the Evangelizate of
several persons nominated in the new Testament; When upon examination, they
will prove him self an Evangelist in the sense of his Definition, as soon as
any whom he calls by that name. How thick do Evangelists drop from his Pen?
Luke, Mark, Timothy, Titus, Tychicus, Philip; And what a large scope of holy
ground do they overspread? Tit. 1.5. Act. 16.3. 2 Timothy 4.5. ver. 11, 12. 2 Cor.
8.23. Act. 21.8. Luke 10.1. Romans 16.7. These Scriptures are eight in number,
six whereof neither name, nor take notice of any Evangelist. The other two name
Evangelists in the particular persons of Philip, Act. 21.8. and Timothy, 2 Timothy
4.5. But our Definer does not resolve us, whether Tim^^ and Philip did
precisely, and separately all the works mentio^^ed in his Definition, or
whether they both of them wrought one and the same works, neglecting therein,
as also do all the rest of his brethren, the principal part of his duty, which
is when words are equivocal, or of diverse senses, as the word Evangelist, is to
segregate, and disperse the common significations, and to limit by express
enumeration of special Acts, the distinct sense wherein he accepts them. This
had Bucanus had leisure, or a will to have done, he would soon have perceived,
that the term Evangelist could not agree to Philip and Timothy, in one sense:
But since he omits it wholly, we shall not urge (...) any farther in this place,
herefater we will do it with our (...) strength, when preparatory to our
Definition of the Office^, we shall separate the Equivocal senses of the name;
Whether with the two Texts, Act. 21.8. 2 Timothy 4.5. we refer it. Besides, could
Timothy and Philep, be both of them proved to be formal and proper Evangelists,
and their works altogether the same; what is this to the proof of the
Evangelizate of Luke, Mark, Tychicus and Titus, whom, or any of whom no
Scripture calls Evangelists, nor can it thence be proved that all of them did
only the same works one with another, or with Philip and Timothy. The sole
proving whereof would have contributed more to the Definition of this Officer,
then either Bucanus, Calvin, or all the rest of the Definers have effected. But
let us consider what Bucanus has done; Tit. 1.5. is his leading proof, there
we read. For this cause left I thee in Creet, that thou should set in order
the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had
appointed thee. Here is the words of the Text, but where is the Evangelist? or
how shall we know it treats of an Evangelist? Are we answered, that although
the word Evangelist be not Syllabically written in it, yet what was so loudly
called for before answers here, namely Titus did the same works at Creet, as
Timothy did at Ephesus; but Timothy is called an Evangelist, therefore he and
Titus are both of them Evangelists. I reply; the works required to be done by
Titus in this Text, were ordination of Ministers, and setting things in order,
which must be understood of giving Rules about Discipline, or exercise of
Ecclesiastical Censures, or both of them; If which were Timothies works at
Ephesus, and with relation to them, he is called such an Evangelist by St.
Paul, as Bucanus, Beza, Calvin, and Zanchy define, then Timothy, and Titus were
both of them Evangelists. But in finding two Evangelists, we have lost two
other things, viz. Ordination of Ministers, and exercise of Ecclesiastical
Discipline and Censures, for those Definers say, the Evangelists were
temporary, now operation follows being, and longer then the Office the work
cannot continue.

It is said what was temporary in them, Obj.
is perpetual in the ordinary Officers, or Presbyters.

I answer. Besides the unsoundness of the distinction, Sol.
it being both Antiscriptural, and weakly built in the brains of its first
Forgers; the Objection is levelled by a bare review of that Church State, where
Timothy was exhorted to abide, and do those works of Ordination and Government.
That Church was Ephesus, she had Presbyters affixed to her ere he came thither,
as has been already proved in the foregoing part of this discourse, and shall
be more fully evidenced in the remaining and following part. Proposition
concerning Presbyterial ordination in the Assemblies advice to the Parliament.
Chapt. of the power of ordination. Cited by Jus divin. 1. par. page 181.
Neither is there any one Scripture extant of Presbyters ordaining singly,
separate, and distinct from the higher Order. I know from what misinterpreted
Texts they derive their challenge, and shall in fit place (even the Tract of
Apostles) glean out the Tares which they have mingled among the Wheat: Suffice
it here to hint, that the single pillar of Presbyterian Ordination, in the
Judgment of our Assembly is, 1 Timothy 4.14. But Calvin the founder of their
Discipline could discern it to look that way. This Gillespy puts off slightly,
and says it was one of Calvin's few mistakes. Calvin's mistakes I am not
concerned in, but I wonder Gillespy so far mistook the interest of his party
in this acknowledgment; the consequence utterly overthrowing the Presbyterian
Platform, it implying Calvin built it upon a wrong foundation; whereat shall we
hold our peace, and suffer Presbyters to give Presbytery what sense they please
in 1 Timothy 4.14. yet comparing it, with 2 Timothy 1.6. It proves nothing less, then
their ordaining singly, and distinct from the higher order: Hence the London
Ministers write in the Li^e against these two Texts in the Margent; that S.
Paul was ordained by Christ, Timothy by Paul and the Presbytery. This is also
the judgment of the Assembly. But of this largely in the Tract concerning
Apostles. Jus divin. 1. par page 4.
And to return to the point before us. I say, and affirm that if Timothy, and
Titus were temporary Evangelists, because either of them performed the same
Ecclesiastical Acts of Ordination and Censures; Annot. ad 1 Timothy 4.14. and ad 2 Timothy 1.6.
then were those Acts as well as th^^ Office, temporary. These Rocks are
avoided by steering (...) to the scope of St. Paul, in 2 Timothy 4.1. ad fin. 6.
And ^ hope the Reader will be satisfied upon bare reading of the words, that
Timothy is called an Evangelist upon another score, then for Ordination of
Ministers, exercise of Discipline, etc. However he may expect a full
explication of that Text hereafter in this discourse, when we examine the
validity of the Presbyterian Arguments in proof of Timothies Evangelizate.

We proceed at present to examine the rest of Bucanus his Scriptures; whereof 2
Cor. 8.23. is another, which though it be not next in his order, and ranking of
his Texts, yet because it concerns Evangelist Titus, we take liberty to examine
it in this place. The holy Ghost there dictates. If any do enquire of Titus, he
is my partner, and fellow helper concerning you, or our brethren be enquired
of, they are the Messengers ((...) the Apostles) of the Churches, and the glory
of Christ. Can any Text speak less of the Evangelist then this does? what
advantageth it a cause to sub poena many witnesses, who appearing in Court will
not lay their hand upon the book, or if they do either stand mute, or speak not
to the point in controversy. It Is true St. Paul calls Titus, (...) and (...)
or partner, and fellow-helper: But what are these words toward the proof of an
Evangelist, or an Officer who is inferior in dignity, and next in Office unto
the Apostles. The word (...) properly signifies one of two, or more, who hold,
and exercise the same thing, Estate, Trade, or Office in common among them;
wherein all have a like propriety, such partnership, not consisting in ones
value, or estimation of another, but in every of their joint interest; for
instance, it is used of men of the same vocation, thus Luke 5.10. And so was
also James, and John the sons of Zebedee, which were partners, (...) with
Simon. i. e. they were all Fishermen, and traded upon a common Stock. St. Paul
calls Philemon his partner, ver. 17. and urges it as an Argument, why he
should receive his Runnagate servant Onesimus into favor, and employment;
which partnership let it consist either in work, or wealth, implies joint
interest and concernment, otherwise St. Paul's argument had been weak and
invalid. Thus sufferers of like affliction, Heb. 10 33. and sharers of like
grace, 1 Pet. 5.1. 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 Cor. 10.13. and ver. 20. 2 Cor. 1.7. are all
of them expressed by this word (...). The substantive (...) which with (...)
are stems sprouting from one and the same root, is used of the Act of the other
Apostles, receiving S. Paul and Barnabas into a fellowship of their Office.
Gal. 2.9. And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived
the grace which was given to me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of
fellowship, (...) And why did they give it, even as it follows in the verse,
that we should go unto the Heathen, they unto the Circumcision. This being the
usual sense of the word (...) in other places, therefore Titus being called St.
Paul's partner, does more probably evince his Apostolate then his Evangelizate,
especially if we reflect upon him; either ordaining elders, and setting things
in order at Creet, Tit. 1.5. or accompanying his fellow travailers in this Text
of the Epistle to the Corinthians; Who are called (...) or our brethren the
Apostles of the Churches.

The other word (...) or fellow helper, is promiscuously used of any kind of
helpers, either temporal or spiritual; Thus A^uila, and Priscilla are called
St. Paul's helpers. Romans 16.3. Greet Aquila, and Pr^scilla my helpers. What
Aquila was we dispute not, but Priscilla could not be St. Paul's helper in the
Ministerial Office, she being of the Sex prohibited to take Orders.
Contrariwise, Titus was St. Paul's helper in Office, he being engaged at Creet
upon distinct Apostolical works; which whether they make both St. Paul, and
Titus to be of one Order, or one an Apostle, the other an Evangelist, let the
prudent Reader determine; our business is to proceed to the examination of the
residue of Bucanus his Text; whereof, Act. 16.3. is the third. It concerns
Evangelist Timothy, and relates how St. Paul took, and circumcised him; which I
believe Bucanus mistook for his taking him, and sending him forth to
Evangelize, the words are him (i. e. Timothy, of whom the discourse is
continued from the first verse) would S. Paul have to go forth with him, and
took him and circumcised him, because of the Jews which dwelt in those
quarters, for they all knew that his father was a Greek. This Timothy long
after ministered to St. Paul, Act. 19.22. consequently could not be at the time
of St. Paul's circumcising him his Companion and Fellow labourer, for the
reasons expressed in the second Exception of this discourse, page 44. 45.
Suffice this in examination of his third, proceed we to his fourth Text, which
is 2. Tim. 4.11, 12. This is his proof of three Evangelists, let us read it,
and heed it well; the words are. Only Luke is with me, take Mark and bring him
along with thee, for he is profitable unto me for the Ministry; And Tychicus
have I sent to Ephesus. Here are three men named, Luk, M^rk, and Tychicus, but
were a thousand Alembicks set to the Text, and wonder-working Paracelsus alive
to tend them, he could not thence extract three, yea not one Evangelist; for
instance. Only Luke is with me; what pity is it that as an Evangelist is not
added? or is such addition needless? was every companion to the Apostles an
Evangelist? Alas it cannot be, for Barnabas was with St. Paul, Act. 14.14. and
yet he; Priscilla was with St. Paul, Act. 18.18. and yet she was no Evangelist.
Bring Mark along with thee; where shall we find the Evangelist in this phrase?
If we grope by conjecture, it is because our Author leads us into, and leaves us
in the dark; was Mark an Evangelist, because he travailed in company, or was
desired to accompany with Timothy the Evangelist? The primitive custom yet
continuing, that Officers of the same Order should travail in couples. This
proves one incertainty by another more uncertain, till Timothies Evangelizate
be clearly, and convincingly proved. But what if Timothy was no Evangelist in
the sense of Bucanus his Definition: And what if Mark were the same person whom
Barnabas assumed into a partnership, as is probably affirmed by Esthius, and A
Lapide. ^n loc.
Then Mark was as far from being an Evangelist, as the Text is from mentioning
it. Tichicus have I sent to Ephesus; but wherefore? could he be sent upon no
other errand, except to Evangelize? What! was Timothy, and the Church at
Ephesus Ethnic, and yet to hear the first news of Christ; or is an Apostles
Messenger; and an Evangelist terms Equivalent? If we will believe the
Postscript to the Epistle to the Romans, it will assure us that Phebe carried
it to Rome, but I hope none will take advantage of her being sent by the
Apostle, to conclude her to be an Evangelist. We must believe that some were
sent by the Apostles to settled Churches, (such Ephesus was, ere Tychicus was
sent thither) upon other errands then to evangelize, namely to collect their
charity toward their poor and necessita^ed brethren, 2 Cor. 8.18. and why
might not Tychicus be sent upon one or other of these accounts, as well as to
evangelize? ^ure I am, that men of greater eminency then Bucanus (as Baro^ius
and Pelecanus) say Tychicus was sent upon the former ac^ompt, or to br^ng this
Epistle to Timothy; and I am as sure, that considering S. Paul's present
necessities, it is more proba^le that he was sent upon the latter account, or
to hasten a ^ollection for the Apostles relief, rather then to evangelize. We
^roceed to Bucanus his fifth text, which is Luke 10.1. But now ^is proofs draw
nigh the dregs, and are very flat, for he bor^ows it from Calvin; and we have
said enough in the fifth Exce^tion to prove that those who believes it treats
of the Evangelists, ^as they are defined by Calvin or Bucanus) credit men's
Fancies, ^ot the word of God. The last text is Romans 16.7. which of all ^he rest
is shot widest from the white of truth, for as it neither ^entions the name,
nor any presumed work of the Evangelist, so ^ose whom it mentions, it
expressly styles (...), ^ famous among the Apostles, of which phrase the Reader
shall ^od willing have a further account in the tract concerning Apo^les. This
shall conclude the Eighth Exception. The Ninth ^llows.

Ninth Exception. Ninth Except. 1 Cor. 12.9, 10. does not prove Spanhemius's
definition. In loc.
We challenge Spanhemius for bringing in ^y head and shoulders 1 Cor. 12.9, 10.
as a witness in this con^oversie, where is so little appearance either of the
Evangelist ^ of his Office, that no Commentator, Presbyterian, or other, ^ my
knowledge) besides Spanhemius, suspects his being there. ^arlorate in his
Ecclesiastical Exposition, culls out the choicest ^ Modern, Presbyterian, and
other Commentators, and be^des his own opinion, he cites Calvin, Meyer, Martyr,
In loc.
and Bullin^r, but writes not one word of the Evangelist. To the^e may ^e added
Aretius and Piscator. Indeed Beza upon the place oc^asionally mentions Philip
the Evangelist, not with reference to ^is Office, or what he had, and
performed, but in reference to ^is gifts, or what he had not, and could not
perform The text ^reating of discerning of spirits, which Philip wanted, he
baptizing Simon Magus, whom Peter afterward discerned t^ be in the gall of
^itterness, and bond of perdition. If any think Spanhemius has dived deeper
and nearer to the bottom of this text, then any other Expositor, Let them
compare it with his Definition, I have done it, and perceive them to be so
disparate and unagreeing, that I could not find in my heart to waste paper in
transcribing and facing them one with another. The Reader who is unsatisfied
may read the one in his Bible, the other in the sixth page of this Discourse.

Thus have we finished our first Head of Exceptions against the Definers, and
submit it to the Readers Judgment, whether they have proceeded according to
their Evidence, yea or not.

Corollary from the nine precedent Exceptions.
If they have not, as I verily believe, and hope I have proved they have not. We
beg our Reader seriously and in the fear of God, to consider whether the finger
of God does not here write in Capital Letters, That Presbyters are themselves
most guilty of what they charge as the highest crime upon others; it being a^
Axiom with the more downright and rigid of that party, (t^ call them
conscientious, having learned from Beza, to disting^ betwixt Science and
Conscience, who concedes the latter to the Ancients, and arrogates the former
to his own time and way) That no Church matter, although it be relative to the
externa^ administration of her Discipline, In Epistola ad Duditium.
ought to be entertained i^ that quality, without producing of
Scripture-credentials* When behold and stand amazed! we must take the
definition o^ Church Officers, who are so essential to the Churches external
Form, as she cannot be visible without them, upon the Definers bare words, for
other warrant they give us not for their Definitions, the impertinent quotation
of chapter and verse only excepted. But we have submitted all to the Judgment
of the impartial Reader; A^ let me add, I dare make the conscience of the most
rigid person a Tribunal whereat I am content that whatever has bee^ said of
Calvin and the rest shall receive a re-examination. Provided he have room
enough in his Judgment left spare of prejudice to entertain and discuss this
question, Whether the Defifiners proceed upon such clear, full and convincing
Scriptures a^ they require from others in lesser things, and is, and ought to
be used in a business of this nature and weight?

Second Head of Exceptions, or the Definers are not agreed in their Verdict,
proved in five instances.
But part of this charge is yet behind, and Method require^ us to prosecute and
finish it, ere we crave theirs, or any other Readers final Judgment.

We deliver it in short thus, The Jury of Definers are not agreed in their
verdict. This has been in part evidenced in the fifth exception, where the
contradictions of Calvin, Bucanus and Spanhemius, and Polanus about the seventy
Disciples have been evidenced: But over and beside it, there remains several
exceptions arising out of their Definitions. First Except. Beza Flaius, and
Spanhemius, against Aretius, Zanchius, and Maresius.


First Exception. Beza, Faius and Spanhemius say, Evangelists constituted
Churches. Contrariwise Aretius says, They did not constitute Churches, but
conserved the Apostles Doctrine, and taught in fixed Assemblies. Zanchius
says, They preached the Gospel now here, now there, where the Apostles had not
founded Churches. And Maresius says. They were sent hither, and thither to
finish the work begun by the Apostles.

Second Exception. Second Except. the London divines against Aretius, Vrsinus,
and Pareus.
The London divines say. Exangelists had a vicariate charge of all Churches.
Contrariwise Aretius says, no necessity lay uyon them to preach every where,
but they taught in certain Churches. Vrsinus and Pareus say, They taught diverse
Churches.

Third Exception. Third Except. Aretius overthrows his definition by his own
proofs.
Aretius destroys his Definition by his own presumed confirming instances; he
defines Evangelists by Gospel preachers, where the Apostles had founded
Churches. And affirms that Timothy, and Philip were both of them Evangelists in
that sense. Whereas Philip prepared, and drew together the materials, wherewith
St. Peter, and St. John afterward builded a Church.

Fourth Exception. Fourth Except. Zanchy in a contradiction.
Zanchy says, Timothy was an Evangelist, and his Office temporary. Instancing
only in his being ordained Bishop by St. Paul, and preaching the Gospel to
prove his discontinuance. But certainly the function Bishop, or the work
Preaching cannot be removed out of the Church; neither did any before, or since
Zanchy suspect it of preaching, or affirm it of the Scripture Bishop. And such
Timothy was, otherwise we could not have his ordination by St. Paul recorded in
holy Writ. Besides, Bishop may be taken in a Presbyterian, or a Praelatical
sense: If in the former, then the parity of Ministers of the same Order, now
zealously maintained, was not observed in the Apostles days; because Presbyter
Timothy had power of Ordination, and Censures over other Presbyters: If in the
latter; what is so earnestly withstood by others, is quietly yielded by Zanchy,
namely that praelatical Bishops, or Bishops superior to Presbyters were
ordained by St. Paul, one whereof was Timothy: In a word take we Bishop in what
sense we please, if Timothy were therefore a temporary Evangelist, because he
preached the Gospel, and was ordained Bishop by St. Paul; then as well Bishop
Presbyter, as Bishop Praelate, and Gospel preaching are all thrust forth of the
Church together with Evangelist Timothy.

Fifth Except. Bucanus in a contradiction.
Fifth Exception. One Member of Bucanus his Definition recoyles against another,
and breaks it all to pieces. In one place he says, The Evangelists were not
immediately chosen by Christ without an intervenient humane Ministry, but chosen
by the Apostles, or taken with them, etc. but by and by, he adds. The seventy
quos dominus designaverat, or whom the Lord ordained were Evangelists.

Corollary from all the exceptions to bewail the drousiness of the husbandmen
while all these tares were sowing.
This shall suffice in charge of both sorts of Exceptions; If all, or any of
which convince the sober Reader of the falseness, or imperfection of the former
Definitions. Let him never busy his enquiry to search after the reasons, why
presbyters should tolerate so many, and diverse opinions in a matter so sacred,
and necessarily requiring uniformity, as is the body of our Christian
profession. If he adventure upon it, I shall leave him to himself, or others to
get his satisfaction: Few of what may (...) presumably, or probably be their
reasons occurring to my sense and observation, but what may bring a man in
danger of following a truth to nigh too the heels. My desire rather is that all
our hearts, and affections may be taken up with a bitter lamentation, that the
Husbandmen should sleep so soundly, while all these Tares were sowing, and not
only suffer them year after year, to be cast into the Furrows of the
Church-field, when little else was sowed in any of the generally learned
Languages, unless in some by, and less conspicuous corners of controversal
Tractates. But perpetually permit them to grow (without weeding out) to the
over topping, and choking of the wheat. For what were both Universities, but
seminaries of these Doctrine? When the young Theologue betook himself to the
study of Divinity; what other Institutions, common places, bodies of Divinity,
Medulla's, Syntagma's, Systems, problems, compendiums, Cathechismes, Synopses;
Theological theses, and disputations could he meet with: And how soon did these
sour Grapes set his teeth on edge, distasted his palate, and made him disrelish
the established Discipline of his mother Church? A vice which increasing upon
him with his years, so habituated his affections unto Calvinisme, that nothing
could effect a cure upon him but Divine grace, Church preferment (insufficient
to take off all malcontents) or the toylsome, unpleasant, and perhaps
dangerous way (according as the spirits of his neighbor-hood stood affected) of
turning the course of his studies in his Country retirement: All of which
together, were not efficacious enough to eradicate this long, and deep rooted
Malady; so that some few Bishops were remiss in the exercise of their
Jurisdiction, and maintenance of the dignity and distinctness of their Order;
too too many of their actions scandalously witnessing against them, that the
means and honor, or the serving of a party, not a convinced Conscience of the
Divine right of Episcopacy, or a true love to the established Hierarchy and
Discipline, seated them in the Episcopal chair. And for the residue of that
most venerable Order* how often did God chide those spiritual Fathers in the
rebellion, and stubborness of their younger Children, for breeding them no
better. It Is true the way to sound Theology was open, though trodden by a few
feet. It lay by the Footsteps of their former Flocks, and ancient Shepherds
Tents; especially in those ages, and Theological exercises, when Christ, not
Aristotle moderated in the Schools of the prophets. This (let others take what
path they please) seems to me to be the safest way; because unless our Religion
be new, and of this days birth, we ought to conform to yesterdaies, and elder
observation. Christianity (if ever it will be) is of sufficient age to exact
our imitation of former patterns, and needs not leave us to excogitate new
forms of Divine worship. But because less knowing, and more presuming spirits
had found out a shorter cut, hastening, and hollaing on their party with
incessant clamours to follow them, no matter what, or whose Fences, or
Enclosures they brake down, and laid wast, therefore these high ways were
unoccuppied, and the Travailer chose by-ways: And there has been War in the
gate. Besides, not only the Church, but the Commonwealth of learning is Invaded
by presbyterianisme; in so much, as if the Heathen poets, Orators, and
Historians had prophesied of the Evangelist, as defined by presbyters. (...):
Sic vocanturii, in novo testamento qui secundi ab Apostolis, quosque illi
tanquam asseclas, and collegas habebunt in fungendo suo munere peromulgandi
evangelit ideoque nulli ecclesiae erant addicti, Ephesians. 4. postea ver^
aedificatis jam ecclesiis* cum Apostolorum, and evangelistarum munus desiisset,
translatum est^^^en ad quatuor illos Historiae Christi scriptores, and
peculiariter, tributum Johanni, pro cogn^mine, ut ab altero Johanne
distingueretur, Scap. Lex. Amstelod. 1652.
We find undertheword (...) in Scapula's lexicon, this Interpretation. They are
called Evangelists in the new Testament, who were the Apostles seconds, and
employed by them as their fellows and companions in Office to promulgate the
Gospel. Therefore they were not settled upon any one particular Church, Ephesians.
4. But afterward when Churches were settled, and the names both of Apostles
and Evangelists ceased; the name was translated to the four Gospel-writers, and
particularly given to John for a surname to distinguish him from another John.
This I do not transcribe intending it a farther refutation, because I doubt not
but it is done already in the foregoing exceptions. Only to excite those who
have ability, and authority to row^ out of their drousiness, and to endeavor
the recovery, and cleansing both of these upper, and neither springs thus
forcibly, or fraudulently cut off, and taken from the Church.

Philip and Timothy compared.
WE are now through Gods assistance gotten forth of the Presbyterian
Definitions. But (this notwithstanding) we cannot come at our own Definition
till we have separated the Homonymy's, or doubtful significations of the word
Evangelist. And given our Reader an account, how, from whom, and in what sense
we take it.

Logicians distribute homonymy's into pure, and Analogous; the former concerns
things purely diverse; the latter relates unto things partly the same, and
partly diverse, And is the Homonymy which troubles us in this dispute.

The verb (...), the theme from whence the word (...) is formed, is used of
several persons.

First, Of the Angel news-bringer of Christ's birth, Luke 2.10.

Secondly, Of our Savior himself, Luke 20.1. Ephesians. 2.17.

Thirdly, Of the Apostles Act. 2.42. Act. 14.15. Ver. 21. Ver. 35.

Fourthly, Of Philip. Act. 8.12.

All these (to name no more) although they agree in one general work of
publishing good tidings, yet can they not be rationally conceived to be of one
Order, or to do all and only the same Official actions with the Officer
mentioned, Ephesians. 4.11.

The Substantive Evangelist (the Compass whereby all steer in the Sea of this
Controversy) is to my remembrance never used in the old Testament of the
Translation of the Septuagint: And it is used but three times in the new
Testament; all the places have been already named, the first is Ephesians. 4.11.
This proves the being of such an Officer, but what he is, or what his works
are, it declares not; the only stead it stands us in, is to tell us there is
such a Church Officer, but it leaves us to search where we can find him. The
other,

Second and third Texts, Act. 21.8. 2 Timothy 4.5. concern two famous persons,
Philip and Timothy, often mentioned elsewhere, as officially engaged in yet
continuing ecclesiastical actions: If which be parallel, or the same works be
done by both of them, we need not travail far for the Definition of this
Officer, since both Philip and Timothy are Evangelists; Otherwise if their
works be diverse we must endeavor to find out, of which of them it is spoken
strictly and formally; the Reader will soon see how the case stands in a brief
survey, and comparison of both their labors.

We begin with Philip; Philip mentioned Act. 8. and Act. 21. the same Philip.
he is called an Evangelist, Act. 21.8. where he is mentioned, not as
officially Evangelizing, but as occasionally visited by St. Paul. However,
another Text supplies what here is wanting, and proves this, and the Philip
there mentioned, to be one and the same Philip, it bringing him unto, and
leaving him Evangelizing at Caesarea, where St. Paul now finds him. The Text
is, Act. 8.40. But Philip was found at Azotus, and passing through, he preached
in all the Cities ((...)) till he came to Caesarea. This Evangelizing was also
his work at Samaria, Act. 8.12. When they believed Philip preaching ((...)) the
things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were
baptized both men and women. It was also his work with the Eunuch, Act. 8.35.
Then Philip opened his m^uth* and preached ((...)) unto him Jesus. Objection
against it.


I know some fancy a diversity betwixt the two Philips, or one Philip twice
named, he Act. 8. they say was the Apostle Philip; he Act. 21. was Philip the
Deacon, or one of the seventy; but contrariwise. Answered.


First, This opinion is most improbable, both because the Apostles are expressly
excluded out of the number of the brethren dispersed by the persecution arising
after St. Stephens death, Act. 8.2. And Saul was consenting unto his death; and
at that time there was a great persecution against the Church which was at
Jerusalem; and they were all scattered abroad throughout the Regions of Judea
and Samaria, except the Apostles. But Philip the Evangelist was one of the
dispersed brethren. Act. 8.4.5. Therefore they that, were scattered abroad,
went every where preaching the Word: Then Philip went down to the City of
Samaria, and preached Christ unto them. And because if the Philip, Act. 8. had
been the Apostle; St. Peter and St. John neither needed, nor ought to have been
sent to impose hands upon his Converts, In loc.
for Philip the Apostle could have done it himself; and it is inconsistent with
Gospel order, and the Apostles practice, Romans 15.20. that any Officer should be
sent into another line to take his work out of his hands. And do what he
could, and ought to have done without them. Quarto mentitur in eos quod dicit
Philippum qui baptizavit Simonem Magum fuisse Philippum Apostolum, nam certa
res est Philippum illum, non nisi diaconum fuisse. Coc. in sens. quorundam
scriptor. veterum. Londini, 1623. Philips works 1. Work.


Secondly, It is (not to mention the Ancients) generally rejected by
Presbyterian Commentators; as by Calvin, Aretius, Pomeranus, Piscator, and our
Assembly. Cocus in his censure of some Ancient writers, reckons it for one of
St. Clements lies (as he terms it) because he, or the Impostor under his hood,
says, Philip who baptized Simon Magus was Philip the Apostle, and not Philip
the Deacon.

Philip therefore being the same Individual person in both places, our next
enquiry is after his works, concerning which we say.

1. He was a Church Officer sent forth from Jerusalem in perilous, and
persecuting times, to preach the Go^pel, and baptize Converts where Christ had
not before been named; his Office is evidenced by his works of preaching, and
baptizing, Act. 8.12. so also is his Mission, because unsent persons are
strongly barred from doing them, by Romans 10.14.17. Mat. 28.19, 20. When he was
sent forth, Act. 8.1. resolves. To whom he went, appears both in the character
at his coming, Act. 8.9. and by what he did among them after his coming, Act.
8.12. the former informs us, that notwithstanding our Savior had passed in his
Journeyes, sometimes through these parts, yet in all probability these persons
had never seen, or heard of him, for then they could not so soon have been
bewitched with the Sorceries of Simon; the latter assures us, that granting
they had seen, or heard of Christ, they were yet to be made Christians,
otherwise they needed not to be baptized.

2. Although he did preach and baptize at Samaria, yet the Church at Jerusalem
sent down St. Peter, 2. work.
and St. John thither to add some other thing, be it in Ordination or
Confirmation, or both of them, which Philip did not, neither could he do, not
because Imposition of hands succeeded with the gift of the holy Ghost, was
peculiarly annexed to the ministration of the twelve Apostles; for Ananias
gave, or rather God gave the holy Ghost to St. Paul by his imposition of hands,
Act. 9.17. but because Philip was of the inferior Order, and had not like
power derived unto him as Ananias had. Collating with passages, we have both a
clear instance of the derivation of the Apostolate in Ananias his Imposition of
hands to give the holy Ghost, and a plain witness to the truth of the
Institution of the Church Officers of diverse Orders, in Philips suspension from
^t; had the Act been peculiar to the twelve Apostles, and temporarily limited
to their personal administration, Ananias not being of their number could not
have done it; and that Ananias did it by reason of his Order, or in virtue of a
power received in the ordinary way of verification of Christ's promise of a
perpetual Ministry (or in the way of Ordination) not in virtue of extraordinary
spiritual gifts appears in this, that Philip who had, and exercised those gifts
in as large and wonderful manner, as almost any other one man mentioned in
Scripture, is yet notwithstanding withheld by the holy Ghost from meddling with
it. But furthermore, had the Act of Imposition of hands been common to every
Preacher, and Bapti^er (as is now pretended) Philip ought not to have forborne
it, yea the Apostles at Jerusalem usurped upon his privileges, when they sent
St. Peter, and St. John to do that work, which he could, and ought to have done
without them. How the Apostles gave the holy Ghost and wherein briefly
explained.


I well know, that to give the holy Ghost, is now reckoned one of the peculiar
extraordinaries of the twelve Apostles, and how near to a blasphemy against the
two first persons of the Trinity, from whom the third, or the holy Ghost
proceeds some men's expressions, and apprehensions are in that matter. But
what has been before observed of Ananias, and wha^ shall be hereafter observed
of the holy Ghosts descent upon Cornelius, we hope will be of force to suspend
the Readers thoughts concerning it, till we shall discourse it more at large in
the Tract concerning Apostles: In this place we judge it only requisite to
expose to his view the Commentaries of several learned men, upon that phrase in
Act. 8.15. Beza says, Receive the holy Ghost, i. e. those excellent gifts
wherewith Church Officers ought in a special manner to be adorned. And a little
after he adds, Without all doubt Peter and John were sent by the other
Apostles, (...) i. e. Dona illa eximia quibus esse ornatos oportebat eos qui
praeficiendi erant ecclesiae. Et paulo post. Petrus and Johannes proculdubio
missi erant ut partim Philippi diaconi doctrinam ipsi confirmarent, partim ut
Apostolica authoritate ecclesiam in ea urbe constituerent. Bez. in loc.

Minime dubium est, quia primas docendi parts susceperant. Calv. in loc. (...)
pro (...), nempe pro aliquibus eorum, nam donum illud spiritus sancti
conferrebatur ad praedicadum evangelium, vel saltem ad prophetandum quorum
neutrum singulis ecclesiae m^m^ commune erat. Piscat. in loc. Hammond Paraph.
in loc.


partly to confirm Philip the Deacons doctrine, and partly to settle a Church
in that City by Apostolical authority. Calvin says, undoubtedly they were
newly made teachers. Piscator says, laid hands upon them, i. e. upon some of
them by a Synecdoche of a part for the whole; for the gift of the holy Ghost
was conferred to preach the Gospel, or at least to Prophecy, neither of which
were common to all Church members. Learned, and judicious Doctor Hammond thus
Paraphrasing the Text, says, The two forementioned Apostles were sent to
confirm them, and to ordain them elders or Bishops, in every City one by
Imposition of hands.

These are the opinions of learned Divines of the two contrary Judgments: Let
the Reader believe which of them he likes best; neither of them will prove any
more then this, viz. the holy Ghost in the primitive time attended some yet
continuing Ordinances, with the effusion of external visible gifts; whereunto
the intention, or ability of the administrator no way concurred, God bestowing
them upon the Apostles without a^ humane Ministry, and upon other men, both by
the administration of the Apostles and of other Ministers. It Is confessed these
gifts are at this time ceased; not because temporary Ministe^ are ceased, but
because the gifts were temporary; some such a^ these who acted them once could
not act them another time, as has been elsewhere instanced in the gift of
healing: And is equally true of the gift of tongues. St. Paul imposing hands
upon the twelve at Ephesus, instantly they received the gift of Tongues and
Prophecy, without study or meditation, Act. 19.6. But the same Apostle
adviceth Timothy (on whom notwithstanding he had formerly laid hands, 2 Timothy
1.6.) to give attendance to reading, 1 Timothy 4.14. to meditate, ver. 15. and to
study to show himself approved. 2 Timothy 2.15. Besides, as some of these gifts
could not always be conferred by the same Apostles, so all of them were such,
as the holy Ghost expressly pronounces to be temporary, 1 Cor. 13.8. Charity
never fails but whither there be prophesies they shall fail, whither there be
tongues they shall cease.

But the same Ordinances, spiritual graces, and necessary gifts still continue,
and whosoever receive them, whether in Confirmation or Ordination, receive the
same Spirit in the same O^dinance in as effectual, though after a diverse
manner: And are as truly Ministers and Christians, as if they were ordai^ed, or
confirmed by the twelve Apostles, or by any one of them; otherwise we shall not
only have extraordinary Ministers, but extraordinary Ordinances and Christians.
And the present Church will be altogether diverse from the primitive.

Observable it is; How the Apostles received the holy Ghost Joh. 20.22. i. e.
were Saints and ministers, ere they received the extraordinary gift of fiery
tongues, Act. 2.3, 4. Whence no doubt the Church in all ages took her warrant
to use the form of words there used by our Savior, or Receive ye the holy
Ghost, in the Ordination of her Ministers, thereby at once intimating her right
unto that institution, and steady belief of the same spirits accompanying it in
her administration. Deinde cum unicus ecclesiae pastor maneat, necesse est ut
in ministris quorum opera utitur; spiritus sui virtutem proferat. Calv. ad Joh.
20.22.
Calvin's note upon the Text is observable, he says, Furthermore since the one,
and only Pastor of the Church yet continues, he must expect the virtue, and
efficacy of the spirits of his employed Ministers. Piscator says, We may not
doubt but he performs the same thing toward present Ministers and their
hearers. Chemnitius says, God adds the words, receive ye the holy Ghost, as
his promise to give grace and gifts to all lawfully called Ministers, whereby
they may rightly, faithfully, and profitably perform their Ministry: He adds.
These things are necessarily to be considered in ecclesiastical vocations, that
the Church, and Ministry may certainly determine, that God is present and
efficacious in their Ministry, according as he says, Cum Christus Apostolos ad
praedicandum evangelium mittens, afflatu testatus est, etc. ne dubitemus eum
istud adhuc hodie praestare. Piscal. ad Joh. 20.22.

Addita est promissio Deum daturum gratiam, and dona quibus eaquae ad
ministerium pertinent, recte fideliter, and utiliter, exequi p^ssint, qui
legitime vocati sunt. Joh. 20. accipite spiritum sanctum. Chemnit. exam.
Council. Trident par. 2. exam. 3.4, and 5. Canon de sacramento ordinis.

Haec necessario consideranda sunt in vocatione ecclesiastica, ut certo
statuere possint, and ministri* and ipsa ecclesia, Deum huic ministerio adesse,
and per illum efficacem esse. Sicut inquit Joh. 20. accipite spiritum sanctum.
Exam 6.7, 8. Can. de sacr. ordinis.


Receive ye the holy Ghost.

I will shut up this point with the Judgment of most accomplished Hooker; he
says, Eccles. Pol. lib. Sect. 77.
Knowing therefore that when we take ordination, we also receive the presence
of the holy Ghost, partly to guide, direct, and strengthen us in all our ways,
and partly to assume unto its self for the more authority, those actions which
appertain to our place and calling. Can our ears admit such a speech (as
receive ye the holy Ghost) uttered in the reverend performance of that
solemnity? or can we at any time renew the memory, or enter into a serious
consideration thereof, without much admiration and joy? Remove what these
Ironically spoken to the Presbyterian impugners of the way of the Church of
England in ordination; who impudently affirm that the usage of these words, or
receive ye the holy Ghost is a papistical rite foolishly and injudiciously
retained with her.
foolish words do imply, and what has the Ministry of God besides wherein to
glory? Whereas now for as much as the holy Ghost, which our Savior in his
first Ordination gave, does no less concur with spiritual vocations in all
ages, then the spirit which God derived from Moses to them that assisted him in
his government, did descend from them to their successors, in like auth^rity
and place: We have for the least, and meanest duties performed by virtue of
ministerial power, that to grace, dignifie, and auth^rize them which no other
Officers on earth can challenge. Whether we pr^ach, pray, baptize, communicate,
condemn, give absolution, or whatever ^ dispensers of Gods mysteries we do; our
words, judgments, acts ^^ deeds are not ours, but the holy Ghosts. Suffice this
for this digression about the Apostles supposed extraordinary ability in giving
of the holy Ghost, and for the explication of the second part of Philips work.

3. work.
3. He settles at Caesarea, whereas yet no Apostle had been, and whence we are
not warranted by Scripture to remove him: That he entered Caesarea before any
of the Apostles, the order of St. Lukes history persuades; he came thither,
Act. 8.40. St. Peter who was the first Apostle that came thither, came not till
Act. 10. In loc.
Lightfoot in his Harmony, places seven years distance betwixt these Journeys,
referring all passages in Act. 8. to Act. 34. All in Act. 10, to Act. 41. Two
Objectio^ removed, will perhaps let in more light to this point.

Obj.
Obj. 1. Philip preached till he came to Caesarea, Is not that till exclusive
of his preaching at that place?

Res. Unless Philips gift left him, and his commission expired upon his
entrance of that City, it is most probable he did there what he had before done
elsewhere. Besides the particle (...) rendered till, which is the main sinew of
that Objection, is as well inclusive in other Scriptures of what time follow^,
as of what precedes; so Mat. 1.25. Heb. 1.13. Neither can any solid reason be
given, why it should not be so sensed here, contrariwise so to interpret it
makes most for Gods glory, and Philips faithful discharge of his Office.

Obj. 2. St. Peter preached first to the Caesareans, insomuch that upon his
return from them he is put to an Apology at Jerusalem, why he did so new and
insolent a thing.

I answer first, the first questioned, Obj.
is not always the first agent. Philip might preach to the Caesareans, and not
to be questioned, though St. Peter was; for

1. Upon Philips mission to Evangelize, his particular relation to the Church
at Jerusalem ceased, Sol.
and consequently he was thereof discharged: This is proved partly by the
nature of his Office, suppose it were no more then the Diaconate (and it is
also true of it, if it were the Presbyterate) which is local and personal, such
as in the absence of one, must of necessity be supplied by another Officer;
especially in such a Church as this was, where the clamours of the poor were so
impetuous and importunate, Act. 6.1. And partly by St. Lukes exact description
of Philips several Stages, and leaving him at his Journeys end, not at
Jerusalem, but at Caesarea, Act. 8.40. This perhaps occasioned Calvin to say
Philip went from Jerusalem, Excellentiorem provinciam manda tam. Calv. ad Act
21.8. Lightfoot Harm. ad Act. 10.
because he had a more excellent Office committed to him.

Secondly, The quality of the place Caesarea (being a privileged place, as
situate out of the Jurisdiction of the Jewish Sanhedrim; and being the
residence of the Roman President, mixedly inhabited by Jews and Gentiles, and
reckoned to ly betwixt the borders, that is disputable whether to be accounted
within the Holy Land or without it, or indeed both) protected Philip from being
called to an account by the Jews, or Judaizing Christians, as St. Peter was.

Second Ans. It Is very probable that Cornelius, and his Family entertained the
first notion of Christianity by Philips Ministry, though their through
conversion, baptizing, and enchurching was reserved for S. Peter's ministration:
It being otherwise very hard to conjecture how Cornelius, being origi^ally an
Italian Idolater, should ere St. Peter came, make such a proficiency in
God-pleasing duties, as to be accounted a worshipper fearer of God ((...)) with
all his house ((...),) That passage in St. Peter's Sermon is observable, Act.
10.37. The word I say you know, which was published throughout all Judea, and
began from Galilee after the baptism ^f John. The word (...) rendered ye know,
notes a familiar and elective knowledge, Joh. 13.18. both ocular, Joh. 4.42;
and Intellectua, Joh. 4.29. which expression assuredly St. Peter would not have
used, if Cornelius and his friends were then to hear the first news of Christ.
St. Gregory, and ten more Ancient Fathers cited by A Lapide the Jesuit, say,
Cornelius and his friends were in the state of grace ere St. Peter's coming: And
this A Lapide says is a most true affirmation; he proves it also by many
reasons, Quare Cornelius ante aduentum Petri, a Judaeis quibuscum Caesareae
versabatur, didicit, hausitque fidem explicitam unius Dei, and implicitam
Christi mediatoris coluitque verum Deum, ut Job. etc. A Lap. ad Act. 10.2.

Cornelium certum est, nullos advocasse temere, sed solum eos quos ex suis
habebat, verae u^gioni assentientes quamvis incircumcisos. Cum jam tum divina
providentia ex tenebris ^cem erneus effecisset, ut permixti cum dispersis
Judiae non pauci ex profanis gentibus per or^em terrarum Idololatria abdicata
veram religionem amplexantes ad audiendum evangelium essent comparati. Bez. ad
Act. 10.24.


and concludes with his own Judgment, after this manner. Wherefore Cornelius
ere St. Peter's coming had learned, and drawn from the Jews among whom he lived,
an explicit faith in one God, and an implicit faith in Christ the Mediator;
and worshipped the true God as Job did before him among the Heathens, etc. Beza
upon Cornelius his getting his friends together when he received St. Peter,
has this note. It Is certain Cornelius did not rashly, or promiscuously gather
his friends together, but only such of them, who though uncircumcised, he knew
to be favorers of the true Religion; for divine providence causing light to
spring out of darkness, had already prepared many Gentiles who lived among the
dispersed Jews, to renounce Idolatry, embrace the true Religion, and be ready
to hear the Gospel.

All these Authors grant, that Cornelius was some way or other prepared to
receive the Gospel, ere he sent for Peter; Indeed they do not name Philip to be
employed in that service. But since the Nation of the Jews were generally
enemies to the Christ then manifested, and since the holy Ghost brings Philip
too, and leaves him Evangelizing at Caesarea, Act. 8.40. We do therefore (and
we doubt not deservedly) ascribe it to his Ministry. But we shall not any
longer insist upon it, what makes most for our purpose is most certain; namely,
after Philip is once settled at Caesarea, we are not warranted by Scripture to
remove him from thence. Contrariwise the last mention it makes of him, Har. in
loc.
is as there resident, Act. 21.8. This Lightfoot computes to fall in A. C. 56.
which is two and twenty years after Philips first coming thither: Were it
granted that he was in his Chronology (to establish which, his conjecture is
equally as strong, as any other man's to overthrow it) yet it is certain, that
many acts which necessarily must take up much time, are inserted betwixt the
eight and one and twentieth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Particularly,
S^. Paul's three years abode at Ephesus, and all the works he did after his
Conversion, elsewhere before he came to Caesarea and visited Philip. This shall
suffice to be spoke of Evangelist Philip his work and settlement.

Evangelist Timothy meets us often in several Scriptures, Timothies works.
sometimes with (Act. 16.3. Act. 20.4.) sometime without St. Paul, Act. 19.22.
but till we find him (by St. Paul's first Epistle to him) settled at Ephesus,;
it is hard to fasten any special official works upon him, at least such as are
not common with those before mentioned of Philip: Sure I am his works registered
in that Epistle, and the Definers imaginations of his removal from Ephesus when
they think fit to continue him there no longer, are the foundations of their
Definitions, and the pillars whereupon their whole cause bears and settles:
Besides, if common works bring Timothy into one Definition with Philip, then
the whole structure of his vice-Apostolate, Ordination of Ministers, exercise
of the Censures in and over many Churches, is forthwith overthrown and
demolished, wherefore (or we shall have no further business to do with
Presbyterians) we must reckon Timothies works by those which were committed to
him, or expected to be done by him, by the rules and directions given in that
first Epistle, where we observe, 1. work.


1. He was besought to abide at Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1.3. where St. Paul had before
been, and ordained Officers, or Prophets. Act. 19.6.

2. His principal works were Ordination of new Ministers by Imposition of
hands, 1 Timothy 5.22. 2 Timothy 2.2. 2. work.
And regulation and due ordering of old Ministers, by witnessing to the
Apostles doctrine against Heretics, and Seducers, 1 Timothy 1.3. And by
proceeding to Censures as against private Christians, so against Elders, who
were erroneous in doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.6. or enormous in practice, 1 Timothy 5.19.

3. Most ancient Tradition (not disprovable by any Scripture) there (or at
Ephesus) continues him during his life, 3. work.
and buries him after his death, as shall appear by and by.

The two former of Philips and Tim^thies works are so directly contrary, as
both workmen cannot possibly be of one order; The diversity betwixt Philips,
and Timothies works.
Philip preached to Ethnicks, T^mothy in a constituted church; Philip could not
impose hands, but Timothy is specially required, and empowered to do that work:
In their third and last, or their settlement, both Philip and Timothy agree.
But this wounds all the former Definitions through the fifth rib, and lets out
the heart blood of the cause. Philips settlement has been already evidenced,
and Timothies shall be made appear in fit place; for his coming to Ephesus, and
the works he did there cuts us out work to begin upon; and makes it our task to
find out in this diversity unto whom, whether unto Timothy, or unto Philip, the
name Evangelist is given formally and strictly.

Timothy no Evangelist at Ephesus.
Timothy at Ephesus was not formally and strictly an Evangelist. First, because
the Evanglizate will dash against all the absurdities mentioned in the 1. 2. 3.
7. and 8. exceptions. Secondly, if he was, Philip was no Evangelist. Thirdly,
Prophets were ordained at Ephesus ere he came, or the Epistle was sent to him
thither. This is proved by a double instance. 1. That Act. 19.6. preceded
Timothies sending to Ephesus.
IT IS not so given to Timothy.

First, Because he did at Ephesus all the works differencing the Apostles from
other Church Officers; namely, he ordain^^ Ministers, gave rules for
Discipline, and administered the Censures: If which works constitute an
Evangelist in a strict sense, the Office will be attended with all the
absurdities mentioned in the first, second, third, seventh, and beginning of
the eight Exceptions.

Secondly, If Timothy was, Philip was no Evangelist, because Philips works were
distinct from, and inferior unto Timothies.

Thirdly, What Timothy did, was in a Church where an Apostle had before been,
and ordained Officers preferred in the Catalogue of Church Officers before
Evangelists; 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. This Church was Ephesus; there was
Timothy besought to abide; 1 Timothy 1.3. And there had St. Paul been before, and
ordained Prophets. Act. 19.6.

Two things explained and proved, manifest the validity of this reason.

1. That the passage Act. 19.6. preceedes Timothies being exhorted to abide at
Ephesus.

2. That the twelve Prophets there mentioned were Church Officers; Of these in
order.

First, That Timothy was left at Ephesus after St. Paul imposed hands upon the
Prophets, Act. 19.6. This si proved by the general, and most received opinion
among sacred Chronologers, who (in very great * numbers) time Timothies being
exhorted to abide at Ephesus at St. Paul's second going into Macedonia,
mentioned Acts 20.1. now that this proves our instance, appears thus; Calv.
Proem. in 1 Timothy Bez. Annot. ad 1 Timothy 1.3. Aret. disposit. prioris epist. ad
Tim. Baron. ad Ann. Christi. 57. numb. 53.
St. Paul before his own journey sent Timothy, and Erastus into Macedonia
immediately upon, or (...) at the time of the Ephisme tumult and insurrection,
Act. 19.22. When which was quieted, the Apostle forthwith prepares to follow
them: He pursues his resolutions, and having staid there a little while (three
months, and a few odd days are only mentioned in Scripture, read Act. 20.) he
returns from thence unto Miletum, convenes the Ephesme Elder, and exhorts
them to vigilance, and faithfulness in their several places: This exhortation
he backs with many arguments, among others, with some of his own example, and
three years converse among them. Now supposing (according to the former
Chronologers) that Timothy was returned out of Macedonia, and settled at
Ephesus upon the first day of St. Paul's removal from thence. It ^s certain St.
Paul had been there above two years before, and one of the first acts he did
after his coming thither was Ordination of those Prophets, Act. 19.6. Hence
Beza says, Timothy was exhorted to abide in a constituted Church, because St.
Paul had been there two years before. Dr. Lightfoot computes Act. 19.6. to A.
C. 52. the Mission of the first Epistle to Timothy, Sed ut in ecclesia
constituta nam Ephesi per biennium docuerat Paulus. Bez. ad 1 Timothy 1.3 Harm in.
loc.
to A. C. 55. This if we prove those twelve Prophets to be Church Officers,
will make it a more difficult work to prove Timothies evangilizate, then it
has been accounted by those swarms of writers, who without any more a do
ascribe it to him; wherefore our present business is to prove that these
Prophets were Church Officers, and this prepares matter for the,

Second Instance. Secondly, the twelve mentioned Act. 19.6. were
Church Officers.
Those twelve Prophets mentioned Act. 19.6. were Church Officers immediately
from, and after St. Paul's imposition of hands upon them. This is an assertion
(confessedly) opposed by the authority of many and worthy Expositors, who say
it was used in Confirmation of their Faith, not in Ordination unto Office. But
that it was used in Ordination (I will not say single, and exclusive of
Confirmation) is proved by several reasons.

1. No Scripture treats more formally of a Church Officer, 1. The Text contains
a most formal ordination.
or comes nearer to his Definition; read the words, Act. 19.6. And when Paul
had laid his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came upon them and they spoke with
tongues, and prophesied. Whence note. First, their ordination. Paul laid hands
upon them. Secondly, their inward qualification and gift; the holy Ghost came
upon them. Thirdly, their ministration of their gift, and office flowing from
the two former, they spoke with tongues, and prophesied.

2. They received the gift of Church Officers by the ordinary rite of admitting
Church Officers.
2. As their received gift to speak with tongues was, and has been proved to be
the gift of Church Officers, called as they were Prophets, so they received it
by imposition of hands, which was the ordinary rite of admitting Officers into
the Church; and after they had received the gift, they officially exercised it
in Prophecy. Wherefore should the usage of the rite or ceremony prove little
of it self, it being used in several cases, as confirmation, healing of the
sick, etc. yet collated with the end why they received it, to wit, to
Prophecy, it necessarily interprets the text by Ordination, since no instance
can be given of any upon whom hands were imposed, and the collation of official
gifts thereupon followed, together with the exercise thereof, but those persons
were thereby admitted into the same Office, with those whose gifts they had,
and whose works they did.

Obj. From the gifts received by Cornelius and his friends Answered 1. They did
not receive their gift by imposition of hands. 2. They did not exercise their
gift in prophecy.
Obj. Are Cornelius and his friends objected, upon whom while they were
unbaptized, and attendant upon St. Peter's Sermon, The holy Ghost fell, and they
magnified God Act. 10.46.

I answer. First, they did not receive their gift by imposition of hands the
time when the holy Ghost fell upon them, (...), or while Peter was yet
speaking, being plainly exclusive of the performance of that rite.

Secondly, the exercise of their received gifts is not as here, extended unto
Prophecy; but limited to magnifying of God, (...). which was a duty
performable by private persons, either upon receipt of a special mercy, Luke
1.46. or upon a spiritual experience of Gods presence in his Ordinances; Act.
5.13. Act. 19.17. both which concurred in the present dispensation toward
Cornelius and his friends.

Thirdly, Although these reasons are sufficiently forcible to free our
Assertion from prejudice by this Text, yet because a right and full exposition
thereof may be expected, and may be useful, errors never lodging more
securely, then by the sides of difficult truths; 3. Act. 10.46. fully
explicated.
and it is neither wise, nor safe to draw the Curtains upon them; because what
the Orthodox do not, or dare not explicate for the advancement of verity, the
Heterodox will confidently interpret in favor of haeresie; we shall labor a
little in it. The scope of the whole Chapter is the first enchurching of
Gentile believers, the i^strument whereof was St. Peter, the place where it was
done Caesarea: Many were ^he preparative acts unto it; as Cornelius his, and
St. Peter's vi^ion: St. Peter's backwardness to be employed upon the service,
^ill out argued by the holy Ghost; his setting forth upon the ^ourney, with
certain brethren in his company from Joppa; and the solemn Interview betwixt
St. Peter and his associates, and Cornelius and his friends and family: In all
which is some^hing observable, but because I hasten to the principal matter, ^
pass them over. St. Peter being come, he falls to the business, preaches
Christ and the holy Ghost, nigh the Close of his Sermon falls upon his Gentile
Auditors. This unexpected ^ction astonisheth his Jewish Christian
Fellow-travailers; who were it seems not fully acquainted with Gods purpose
before^and: Wherefore at once to satisfy them, and proceed to en^hurch these
Conve^ts with conviction of all gainsayers (for ^s the present Christian Jews
were astonished, so their brethren ^t Jerusalem calls St. Peter to an account for
it afterward, Act. 11.1, 2.) St. Peter questioneth with his amazed companions
(who doubted, or gainsayed (and perhaps did both) the reality of Gods purpose
to open the door of Faith unto the Gentiles) whither the visible effects of
Gods spirit upon these Converts did not, or ought not to silence all further
objections, and disputes against their admission to Church Fellowship. Far be
it from ^e to charge any crime upon these Christian Jews of which they were not
guilty; I hope I have said no more then the holy Ghost said before me, when he
says they were astonished: for the word (...) rendered astonished, is generally
used even by St. Luke of an unbeleeving astonishment, attended with explicit
doubts and gain-sayings. Thus, Act. 2.7. And they were all ^mazed, ((...)) and
marvelled, saying one to another; Are not all these men Galileans; Act. 2.12,
13. And they were all amazed, and were in doubt ((...)) saying one to another,
what means this? others mocking, said, these men are full of new wine; thus
Act. 9.21. And all that heard him were amazed ((...)) and said is not this he
who destroyed them, and came hither for that intent, that be might bring them
bound to the chief Priests? The two first of these instances concern the
unbeleeving Jews, and Greeks questioning the Divine Power whereby the Apostles
spoke with tongues; the latter refers to the shyness, and doubtfulness of the
Christians to receive the late persecuting, now converted Paul into their
fellowship. Were it needful we could multiply more parallel quotations, but we
judge otherwise; for if the word did not bear this sense elsewhere, it must be
allowed unto it in this place, because St. Peter is said to answer them; ver.
46. which phrase supposes a precedent question; his answer contains an
interrogation, and is recorded, ver. 47. Can any man forbid water, that these
should not be baptized, who have received the holy Ghost, as well as we? In
these words are contained the form, and force of an argument from the greater
to the less, which may be thus framed.

Those to whom God has given gifts suitable to Church Officers, or who have
received the holy Ghost as well as we, or as on us at the beginning Act. 11.17.
or even as he did to us. Act. 15.8. ( i. e. Apostles, they first receiving
those gift^) ought not to be denied a member-ship, or visible admission unto
Church fellowship.

But God has given to these Gentile Converts gifts suitable to
Church Officers, and they have received the holy Ghost as well as we, or as on
us at the beginning, or as he did to us Apostles.

Therefore they are not to be denied a member-ship and visible admission to
Church Fellowship.

Learned Doctor Hammond consents to this exposition and argument; he says. Is
there any doubt, or question to be made of baptizing them, and receiving them
into the freedom of the congregation, unto whom although they be Gentiles, God
has allowed that which is more then baptism, Viz. the descent of the holy
Ghost upon them, thereby fitting them for office in the Church. The sum of
all this is, that the Lord compassionating the frailty, and imbecility of the
believing Jews, and willing to frame them into ^ good correspondency, and unity
of spirit with Gentile Converts, bestows upon the first fruits of the heathens,
extraordinary gifts, ere their enchurching, thereby as it were fitting them at
once for membership and office in the Church.

Object. Do any say, Their ensuing Baptism, not Ordination, is recorded.

Sol. I answer, The mention of their Baptism, not of their ordination, proves
only, that these extraordinary gifts did not privilege them from entering the
ordinary way into membership, or Office; and since they were baptized ere made
members, there is the same reason that they must be ordained ere made Officers;
because not extraordinary designation, but ministerial Ordination, is the
Scripture way of making and continuing the ministry.

Object. Object.
It is further demanded, How we know that these gifts did design them for
Office?

Sol. Sol.
I answer, It was the Apostles practice, both before, Act. 8.14, 15.16, 17. and
afterward, Act. 14.23. wherever they baptized Converts, to ordain and ^et
Officers over them, to feed and preserve them in the faith. Nor may we think S.
Peter had less care of those Caesareans, then of other Believers, when God had
so wonderfully prepared them Officers, ere they were a Church: But if he did
ordain Officers among them, they were either,

1. The Receivers of these gifts; and if so, As who more fit to do the works of
Apostles, then those who had received gifts as Apostles, then such largition of
gifts antedating their private membership, proves (as was noted before) Gods
recommending them at once unto that Church both for membership and office.
Besides we may further learn, That to bestow those Gifts was so far from being
limited to the ministration of the twelve Apostles, as it wa^ not annexed to
the Apostolical, or any other huma^e administration, though the Apostles were
present at their effusion. But the same God who gave them to the Apostles, did
also at his own will and pleasure, bestow them upon others. Sometimes after
ordination, as upon the Apostles; sometimes before it, as on Cornelius and his
friends; sometimes at it, as on S. Paul and Timothy.

2. They were others. If which be true, and Cornelius and his friends, after
the receipt of those gifts, continued private mem^ers, then their rejection was
not only injurious to Gods previous signation, but the constitution of this
Church was diverse from all other Churches; Gifts being separated as well as
Office, from the Community, and private brethren distinguished from gifted
brethren in the Catholic Church, of which this Church at Caesarea must be a
member, or she could be no Church at all: Thus S. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.3. puts Rails
betwixt the Speaker with tongues, and (...), or the unlearned. Beza says, Hos
Idiota^ vocat quasi privatos ut iis opponantur qui ministrabant. Beza in loc.
These unlearned were private brethren distinct from Ministers; and Calvin upon
the place calls them Plebei, or the common people. Besides, we read, 1 Cor.
12.29. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all Teachers? Are all Workers of
miracles? Have all the gift of Healing? Do all speak with Tongues? Whence we
may note,

1. The Apostle as well distinguishes the gift of tongues from the community,
as the Apostleship, Prophetship, or Doctorate, saying, All do not speak with
Tongues, no more then all are Apostles, Prophets, or Teachers.

2. This text limits the universal term all in 1 Cor. 14.31. Ye may all
prophecy, to all, and only all Prophets; for all of all sorts were not
prophets; neither could they prophecy. Besides, as if the holy Ghost consulted
the infirmity of some, and would confront the impudency of others, who
otherwise might loose themselves or others, in the wide term all, in the last
mentioned text, he encloseth it either way, with the express mention of
Prophets, in the precedent and subsequent verses, thus; verse. 29, 30. Let the
prophets speak, two or three, and let others judge: for verse. 31. ye may all
prophecy; and why may they all prophecy? because verse. 32. The spirits of the
prophets are subject to the prophets. Thus has the Reader my sense of the
descent of the holy Ghost upon Cornelius and his friends, before their baptism.
And this shall conclude our second Reason why the twelve prophets ordained by
S. Paul at Ephesus, Acts 19.6. were Church Officers.

3. Reas. Because Presbyterian Commentators allow it.

Necesse est fateri hic agi de Ecclesiae Ephesinae primordiis, Beza ad Act.
19.6.

Perinde percontrari de donis quibus illos peculiariter solebat Deus ornare,
qui gubernaculis Ecclesiarum admovebantur Id. ibid.

Illos Divinitus ad sacrum ministerium vocari, veluti dono linguarum, and
prophetiae. Id. ibid. Proculdubio istius Ecclesiae duces, and gubernatores. Id.
ibid.


Thirdly, We have the Authority of the most noted Presbyterian Commentators,
countenancing our opinion, concerning the twelve prophets. Beza runs as fast as
words can carry him to our side; he says, Of necessity we must confess, that
this text treats of the Original of the Ephesme Church. And again: The Apostles
demanding whether they had received the gift of the holy Ghost, would thereby
learn of them, whether they had received those gifts wherewith God was then
wont peculiarly to adorn Church Officers. Moreover he adds, They were called by
God to the sacred Ministry, to wit by the gift of tongues and prophecy. And
finally he says, without all doubt, they were constituted the Guides and
Governors of that Church. Calvin calls them select men chosen out of a greater
number. And this his opinion is very probable, because S. Paul himself, and
Apollos had before taught at Ephesus (which was the place of the ordination of
the twelve Prophets) with much eloquence, power, and conviction upon his
Auditors, Act. 18.25. Our Assembly agree with these Authors, upon this
occasion; They made the Church of Ephesus one of the platforms for the
Presbyterian Government: But the Independents scoffingly tell them, There was
not room nor number sufficient for their Consistories, Classes, Provincial and
General Assemblies, because the whole Church consisted but of twelve persons.
The Assembly ward the blow, and defend the Cause under the Buckler of Beza's
Opinion; whereupon they make this gloss. Answer to dissent. page 103.
Which way that passage verse. 6. of Paul's imposing hands upon them, and their
thereupon speaking with tongues and prophesying, seems something to propend:
now if it be so, it will be no sound reasoning of our Brethren, that because
they were about twelve, whom the Apostles ordained for Officers, that there
should be no more Disciples. I confess this gloss does not carry an
acknowledgement in the plainest words, but considering how, and to what end the
Assembly urge Beza's Opinion, and what a breakneck to their Cause it would have
been to prosecute it further, since it absolutely destroys Timothy's
Evangelizate at Ephesus, the prudent and impartial Reader will soon resolve,
that the Assembly saw no cause to dissallow it, and that to defend themselves
from assaults of Independencie, they must pull down their own house, with their
own hands. This they warily decline in this place, but in their Annotations
upon the Text, Annotat. ad Act. 19.6. 4. Learned men of the Episcopal judgment
do not gainsay it. Heylins Hist. of Episcopacie part. 1. cap. 4. Sect. 3.
they fall roundly and lustily about it, there they say, The twelve preached
and expounded, as able Ministers of Christ.

Fourthly, This is not only a Presbyterian notion, for learned men of the
Episcopal Judgment, do not a little favor it. Doctor Heylin arguing for
Apostolical Ordination, without the concurrence of any others, makes this text
a proof of it, and says, Which if it were an act of Ordination, as Beza
thinks, and it is likely so to be, because the text says, that they spoke with
tongues, and prophesied; then have we more Presbyters created by laying on of
S. Paul's hands only, without the help of others. Presbyterian reasons for
Timothy's Evangelizate examined.

They are


Unto Doctor Heylin, I could add several others, but his reason to prove the
twelve prophets to be Church Officers, because they did Office-works, or
prophesied, is one of the most principal reasons which can be alleged in that
matter, and for one man to say the same thing which Scripture does, is of equal
force as if a thousand said it, because the same reason which weakens a
Scripture truly asserted by one man, would in like manner invalidate it, if it
were maintained by the whole creation.

Thus have we instanced in what must be said against Timothy's Evangelizate at
Ephesus, more might be added, but we are willing to give The terms Calvinists,
Calvinism, etc. sometime used are intended only for terms of distinction, and
to avoid a more tedious way of Expression, not as marks of disgrace, or
contempt.
Calvinists a fair hearing of what they can allege, in favor of their
Opinion, and if we shall discover a weakness* and insufficiency in their
arguments, we doubt not but enough will be said to prove that Timothy was no
Evangelist, in a Presbyterian sense, or a temporary and wandering vice-Apostle,
during his abode at Ephesus, consequently that the works he was enjoined to do,
and did at that place, were not the proper works of the formal Evangelist.

All that our Opponents say, may be reduced to two heads.

1. He is called an Evangelist. 2. His Office was temporary Object. 1. Timothy
is called an Evangelist. Answ. 1. The name proves nothing, unless it be withal
proved in what sense he is called an Evangelist.
1. He is called an Evangelist. 2. His Office was temporary.
Of these two in order: And first of the first.

Object. 1. Timothy was an Evangelist; for so he is called by S. Paul 2 Timothy
4.5.

I answer, 1. The word Evangelist is there used, but makes nothing to the
resolution of the question truly stated, which is, not who is called, but who
is formally and properly an Evangelist. Philip is called an Evangelist; (but as
has been proved) he did other works then Timothy did at Ephesus, works so
diverse, as both the workmen cannot be of one Order. The usage therefore of the
name, will leave it a perpetual question, whether Timothy or Philip were the
formal Evangelist. Besides, ad^^ Timothy did elsewhere Evangelize, yea grant he
did Evangelize at Ephesus, for no doubt there was Ephesus-Ethnick, as well as
Ephesus-Christian, both in one City, long after the settleme^t of the Ephesme
Church, and Timothy might Evangelize, or bring the first tidings of Christ unto
them. I say, Grant all this, what is it to the purpose, or advantage of our
Opponents, for unless Timothy, ordaining Ministers, and exercising the censures
in the Church of Ephesus, was an Evangelist; all the former Definitions are
lost: But if doing those works he was an Evangelist, Philip was none; and
whoever shall now lay claim to a title either of ordaining Ministers, or
exercising the Censures, ^ and it may be rejected, because they were temporary
works of the ceased Evangelist. To assume therefore out of this propoposition,
That whoever is called an Evangelist, was formally an Evangelist: But Timothy
is called an Evangelist; Ergo he was formally an Evangelist: concludes no more,
then the begging of the question. But to give it its final Answer, we say,

2. The term is used of Timothy in a general sense.
2. The term is used of Timothy in a general sense, relatively to common works,
or to works performable both by him, and by the Evangelist. The holy Ghost upon
that account usually calling both superior and inferior Officers, by one and
the same Title; We will single out a few, out of many instances. The Apostles
had common works with Presbyters (as has been proved) respecting which they
often call themselves Pre^byters. Thus 1 Pet. 5.1. 2 Epist. John 1. and 3
Epist. John 1. but the most presumptuous ignorance cannot thence determine, the
removal of the formal difference betwixt the Apostles and Presbyters, which
were not only distinct in Christ's Institution of the twelve Apostles, and
seventy Disciples, but continued so after the ascension in the constitution of
the Church at Jerusalem, in Apostles and Elders. Presbyter therefore when
spoken of Apostles, must admit of another and larger signification, then when
spoken of ordinary Presbyters. S. Paul often calls his whole Church Service a
Diac^nate, Act. 20.24. Ephe^. 3.7. Col. 1.23. not because he only served
Tables, and there was no difference betwixt him, and a Deacon, but because his
and the Deacons work had some agreement; and he was as painfully engaged about
the souls of the poor Saints, as they were employed about their bodies. The
same Apostle, Ephesians. 4. draws the circumference of all the labors of
Church Officers unto this one small point or center, (...), or for the work of
the Ministry, surely not because Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers, were formally Deacons, but because in their several Stations they
were to minister unto Christ's Body the Church; and their ministrations (as the
Deacons) were toylsome, laborious, full of care, and requiring c^rcumspection.
In the objected Text, Timothy is not only called an Evangelist, but also
enjoined to fulfill his Diaconate, (...), or make full proof of thy Ministry, or
Diaconate, where unless the former latitude of words be allowed, but Evangelist
and Ministry, must be taken formally, then either the Evangelist was a Deacon,
or the Apostle degraded Timothy with the same streak of his Pen, wherewith he
consecrated him an Evangelist. This single Argument procures learned Gerhards
subscription to a Certificate in his own and Luther's name, against Timothy's
Evangelizate; he says, (and Luther said it before him) Whereas Timothy was
already constituted Bishop of the Ephesme Church, Cum jam tum Timotheus
constitutus fuerat Ecclesiae Ephesma Episcopus nec ulterius fuerat Paulum
comitatus, cumque (...) nomen generale addatur, convenientius etiam nomen
Evangelistae accipitur generaliter. Gerhard. loc. com. loc. de minister. Sect.
227. Geneva. 1636.
and did not any more accompany with S. Paul, and whereas the general name of
Diaconate, or Ministry, is added, therefore the word Evangelist is more
conveniently to be taken generally.

3. The Apostle in the same chapter, 3. This chapter and the former Definitions
do not limit his Evangelizate to the same works.
expressly limits the work of Timothy's Evangelizate, not to go about with him,
from place to place, poor S. Paul was now ready to be offered, and the time of
his departure was at hand; nor to constitute new Churches, as his Vicar; but
considering what a black Cloud of persecution hung over the Apostles head, to
be sedulous, diligent, strong and constant in preaching the Gospel, what storm
soever is poured down upon him, his words are, 2 Timothy 4, 5. But watch thou in
all things, endure affliction, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of
thy ministry: Indeed Ministry is a general term, comprehensive of all
Ecclesiastical Services, when it has not bounds put unto it: But a short
review of the Chapter will soon inform us, what the Apostle meant by this
Ministry, and why he would have Timothy so careful to fulfill it, by watching
in all things, and doing the works of an Evangelist: what? verse. 2. Preach the
word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all
long suffering and Doctrine; why? verse. 3, 4. For the time will come, when they
will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts shall heap unto
themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears
from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables. In all this there is nothing
like the works mentioned in the Presbyterian Definitions, nothing but what is
common with a work of Philips, namely to preach the Gospel in despite of all
opposition; Philip did so at Samaria, and so must every Evangelist do,
wherever he comes, because men seldom entertain a new Religion, till they
have strugled hard to retain the old one; and nothing, which is not now
required of every Church Officer at this day. For was Timothy a temporary
Evangelist because he preached the Gospel, was instant in season and out of
season, watched in all things, endured affliction, did the work of an
Evangelist, and made full proof of his ministry in times of persecution, and
heretical Apostasy. Then cowardly Deserters of their Flocks in such hours of
temptation, may allege in their own defense, that it cannot be expected at
their hand to set up a Standard against those overflowing wickednesses, least
they should usurp upon the ceased work of the temporary Evangelist.

4. Calvin and many other eminent Presbyters either doubt or deny the formal
acceptance of the word Evangelist in this place.

Caterum an Evangelistae nomine generaliter significet Paulus quosvis Evangelii
ministros, an vero speciale fuerat aliquid munus in certum est. Calv. ad loc.

Eam non tam Timothei quam aliorum causa scriptam fuisse, facile judicabunt,
qui diligenter omnia expenderent. Multa enim continet, quae supervacaneum esset
scribere si Paulus cum solo Timotheo negotium habuiss^t. Juvenis erat, nondum
ea authoritate instructus, quae sufficeret ad cohibendos homines protervos, qui
contra insurgerent. Calv. proem. in 1 Timothy


4. Whatever Junior Presbyters think of this phrase, [Do the work of an
Evangelist] their Seniors are not so resolute for its formal and strict
acceptance. Calvin is doubtful, he says, But whether S. Paul signify by the
name Evangelist any Gospel Minister, or a special Office, is uncertain. Does
Calvin here doubt how to sense it? Elsewhere he resolves it to me, (and I think
to himself and to all other men who will abide by his reasons) that he never
thought Timothy to be such an Evangelist as he and his Partisans define, to
wit, having a Vicar-Apostleship over all or many Churches; for to establish his
Presbytery, as well over the Evangelists then, as over the Bishops now, he
says, Whoever shall diligently weigh the whole contents of the Epistle, will
easily judge, that it was not writ so much for Timothy's sake, as for the sake
of other men: for it contains many things needless to have been written, if S.
Paul's business had only been with Timothy, who was a young man, not furnished
with sufficient authority to restrain stubborn rebels. But herein as Calvin
took no notice of S. Paul's particular directing of the Epistle unto Timothy,
and single salutation of him, without the least mention of his Presbytery, 1 Timothy 1.1, 2, 3, etc. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, etc. Unto Timothy my own
son in the Faith, Grace, mercy and peace from God our Father, and Jesus Christ
our Lord. As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into
Macedonia, that thou might charge some, that they teach no other Doctrine.
Compare also, 1 Timothy 1.18. 1 Timothy 3.14, 15. 1 Timothy 4.6, 16. 1 Timothy 5.1, 7, 9,
11, 19, 21. 1 Timothy 6.11, 12, 13, 20. so neither did this great Expositor heed
the ^njunction, 1 Timothy 4.12. Let no man despise thy youth; or feared not to be
found in the number of those Despisers. In loc.
Bullinger expounds the word Evangelist by a Gospel-preacher; so also does
Zanchy, as may be seen in his fore-quoted Definition. The lat^r Helvetick
Confession is of the same Judgment, it says, Evangelistae praecones
Evangelii, quomodo and Paulus Timotheum jubet opus implere Evangelistae.
Helvet. Confess. Boster. Genev. 1581 Answ. to Di^^. page 65.
Evangelists were Gospel-preachers, thus Paul bids Timothy do the work of an
Evangelist. To these may be added Zuinglius, Aretius, and Piscator upon the
place. Our Assembly being somewhat overpressed by the Dissenters arguments for
Tim^thy's Ordination by the Apostle, not by the Presbytery, burst out into this
passionate demand, Our Brethren must prove, that Timothy was ordained an
Evangelist; wherein as they harp upon the former harsh string, that an
Evangelist, or other Officer, may be constituted without ordination, for there
is the same reason for one as for another, and for any as for one, so they
testify their diffidence of Timothy's Evangelizate at Ephesus, since his
designment and ordination to do what he did there, is most plainly proved by 1 Timothy 1.3. 2 Timothy 1.6.

We shall hem in this piece with some further Testimonies of Presbyterians both
in judgment and practice, who (whither out of fear of receiving out-ragious
dealing from the more rigid of their Faction, or for other Reasons which
whoever else can more exactly assign them, may do it) taking it as it were for
granted, that according to the principles of others of their Brethren, Timothy
and Titus might elsewhere be called Evangelists, or do such Evangelical works
as are assigned by the Definers, do notwithstanding deny that they were called
Evangelists, or did their works at Ephesus, or Creet, in virtue of S. Paul's
Epistles directed to them. Many might be registered in this Catalogue, we shall
only point at two of the brightest Stars in the firmament of the Churches of
Germany or France. They are,

1. Scultetus (according to the transcript of his opinion by the Author of the
Confessions and proofs of Protestant D^^^es concerning Episcopacie) says, But
Paul taught for some time (...) in Ephesus and Creet, At Paulus Ephesi, and in
Creta aliquando docuerat, ideo Timotheum and Titum ibidem jubet manner non
utique ut Evangelistas, sed ut ecclesiae gubernatores. Id quod etiam epistolae
ad utrumque scriptae evincunt. In his enim non ecclesiae colligendae, ^ erat
evangelistarum, sed collectae gubernandae quae est episcoporum rationem illis
praes^^ suntqueue praecepta omnia ita confirmata, ut non speciatim ad Timotheum
vel Titum, sed generatim ad omnes Episcopos referantur. Ideoque ad temporariam
Evangelistarum potestate^ minime quadrent. Scultet. Com. in Tit. page 10.
therefore he commands Timothy and Titus t^ abide there, not as Evangelists,
but as Church Governors; which also the Epistles written to them both do
evince. For in th^se places Churches were not to be gathered, which was the
work^ of Evangelists, but gathered Churches were to be governed, which was the
w^rk of Bishops. And all his precepts are so confirmed, as they do not
specially belong to Timothy or Titus, but are to be referred generally to all
Bishops: And therefore they square not at all to the temporary works of
Evangelists.

Quomodo appellaveris and Timotheum, Titum and Marcum, s^u Episcopos sive
Evangelistas. Constat eos habuisse Successores Episcopos, haeredes illias
pre-eminentiae. Du Moulin. Epist. 3. ad Episc. Winton.
2. Du Moulin says, However thou shall call Timothy, Titus, o^ Mark, whether
Bishops, or Evangelists, it appears that they had Bishops for their
Successors of their pre-eminency.

These are the Sentences of those two learned Divines, and although I promised
to mention no more, nor shall insert any more of their Judgment, yet because
of its near relation to this subject, and because it may not pass without a
serious remark, of some Readers, I shall close with the Judgment of Holy
L^th^^, (...) super pr^posi^^ones Lyps^^ dijputat. conclus. 13. Luther ^operum.
Tom. 1. fol. 30.^.
who not only proves that in every City there ^ught to be Bishops b^ Divine
Right, according to that of S. Paul to Titus, For this cause left I thee In
Creet; But maintains, That this was the Resolution of his Predecessors, S.
Hierom and S. Augustine.

We hope what has been said sufficiently proves, that this Text, 2 Timothy 4.5.
does not treat of Evangelist in a strict sense. And whoever is so persuaded may
collect enough out of Presbyterian Authors, to confirm him in that opinion, and
withal give him sad and just cause of complaint against the want of honesty,
ingenuity and prudence in late Presbyters, who wilfully and spitefully threw an
Officer out of the Church, because his and Timothy's work of ordination and
censures were one and the same; when they had little of any thing else, but
this ambiguous phrase of S. Paul's bidding Timothy do the work of an
Evangelist, to put a color upon their Attempt: wherein their unbridled
passions, not the teachings of Gods Spirit, or the concurrence of their prime
Leaders opinions, drove them so furiously, as they never heeded either that
they were truckling Divine Institutions under their yesterday Inventions, or
that God was gone out against them, and had taken off the Chariot Wheels of
their Reasons, so that they drove heavily, and plunged Themselves and Cause in
a Red Sea of bloody Absurdities, and Unnaturalness; most whereof are obvious to
our last twenty years experience, and the rest are piled up in great heaps in
the papers passing between the dissenting Brethren, and the Assembly. Or
finally, that the Erastians and Socinians, at diverse Breaches (all of the
Presbyters making) took advantage to bring in the Abomination of Desolation
into the Holy Place. Presbyters in the mean time crying, Reformation,
Reformation, to their new-invented Discipline, as justly as the Israelites said
to the Calf which Aaron made, These be thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, Exodus 32.4. And as wisely dancing naked in the midst
of their Enemies.

Object. Object. The Verb or Participle elsewhere used of Timothy may prove his
evangelizate. Answered negatively.
If Timothy's Evangelizate be not proved by the Noune Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.5.
that is no bar why it may not be proved by the Verb or Participle, evangelize,
evangelizing, elsewhere used of him.

I answer, I am in a manner assured, there is no text where the verb or
participle is used in that sense of Timothy, having made some search after it,
and cannot find it, neither have any whose writings I have seen in this
controversy alleged it. But granting it have escaped both their and mine
observation, 2. Presbyterian Arguments for Timothies evangelizate. or that he
was temporary. 1. In his office which has been already answered and is
referred to that place. 2. in His temporary exercise of his Office at Ephesus.
This is urged by them Generally from his travails. Second Paper.
yet such text will prove little, unless

1. It speaks of Timothy in a distinct sense, because those words are used of
several persons of diverse Orders, as has been before observed.

2. It must have relation to him, doing those works at Ephesus which are
required of him by the first Epistle. Which if it have, then Philip was
strictly no Evangelist; and the Office will be attended with all the
Absurdities mentioned in the former exceptions, against the Presbyterian
Definitions. We deny therefore, till such new Text is alleged, and such sense
justifiably affixed to it, that Timothy was formally an Evangelist, or that the
works he did at Ephesus, were the proper and distinct works of that Officer.

This shall suffice in refutation of the first sort of Presbyterian proofs of
Timothy's evangelizate at Ephesus.

But we have not yet done, for as they endeavor to prove ^t by the aforesaid
Scripture, so by their own suppositions, that he was temporary.

By this temporariness, they understand two things:

1. His Office; or that it was limited to that time. This we trust will need no
further refutation, to a Reader and Considerer of our seventh exception against
the Presbyterian Definitions.

2. His exercise of his Office; or that he was temporarily, or for a time
engaged as an Evangelist at Ephesus; our business is with this latter,
whereupon lies the main weight of their cause, many words they use to evince
it, but upon what grounds, and with what Reasons, we will enquire, and let the
Reade^ judge.

The Womb which conceives, bears and brings forth the re^^ of their imaginary
Arguments, is, Timothy travailed from place to place, without any settled
residence. The Wight Divines tell King Charles the Blessed, that Timothy's
Evangelizate bears with some stress upon this foundation. We will feel how it
does sustain it, and hope to discover it was set thereunder, as the pillars
under Dalilah's house, for the ruin of their cause.

Generally answered by a right stating of the question
Before we transcribe their particular reasons to prove this assertion, or
prepare to examine them: We premise this necessary concession: Timothy went
with, and without St. Paul to diverse Churches. But this is not our question:
But whether after St. Paul besought him to abide at Ephesus, he removed thence
discharged of his official relation to that Church. For if he travailed before
his settlement at Ephesus, and during his travails did distinct Apostolical
works, as ordain Ministers, administer the censures in the several places where
he came: This proves his vice-Apostolate, or rather his admission into the
Apostolical Order; and that the Apostles general charge did not necessitate
their perpetual motion, and restless travailing from place to place, all over
the world; but left them at liberty, their own Age, or the Churches necessity
exacting it, to settle upon some one Church or people, for the well ordering
and governance thereof; they in the mean time committing other People and
Nations, whether converted, or to be converted, to the guidance, oversight and
travails of fit persons. But this we dispute not now, neither need we: for
Timothy's temporariness, Timothy's travels urged particularly. 1. From the Date
of the first Epistle. 2. From some passages in both Epistles. A premonition
concerning the validity of human assignation of the Date of Scriptures,
submitted to consideration, ere the Presbyterian assignation of the Date of
this Epistle is propounded or examined. Tot fore Sententiae, quo^ Chronologi.
Scult. Delit. Evang. Cap. 14. Hanov. 1620. Dub. Evan. lib. 2. cap. 1 Ex
Christian. Theol. Wend. lib. 1. cap. Theol. 9.
discharged of his official relation to the Church of Ephesus, after S. Paul
had besought him to abide there, is principally: urged from his supposed
travail. We demand therefore what affirming proof our Opponents have of their
opinion; and stand ready to receive the charge of any assailing arguments.
Behold they advance in great numbers, and fall as in two Bodies.

1. Arguments drawn from the date of the first Epistle. 2. Arguments drawn from
some passages in both Epistles.
We engage with those from the date first, and face them against the encounter,
with the darkness and uncertainty of humane assignation of the Chronological
Date of Scriptures. This is so freely acknowledged by all learned men, who have
travailed in this subject, as we need not single out this or that particular
Authors confession. Those who have sweat most at this Plough, confessing
voluntarily, That the more they have labored, the further they were off from
satisfaction, in some Enquiries. For instance: The most remarkable period of
Christian Time, is our Saviors Nativity; but persecution, or tract of time,
has now covered it under so much rubbish, as there are few more Enquirers then
diverse opinions about it. This Scultetus acknowledges; he says, There are
almost as many Opinions as Chronologers. Spanhemius compares its investigation
with the search after the Quadrature of a Circle, or Platonic Numbers, and
does observe how others collect above forty several Opinions, which he says,
he will not transcribe, yet by and by, he reckons learned men in great numbers,
not agreeing one with another, nor he with any of them. Pareus and Zanchius
differ full ninety three years from Pererius, Bellarmine, and Baronius in
stating the account; they settle it in A. M. 3929. those in A. M. 4022. now
does such gross darkness cover the face of our Saviors Nativity to dissipate
which, that sun seems to be purposely set in the Scripture Firmament, and did
enlighten the ancient Church to fix both the year and day; Luke 2.1. ad fin. 5.
Think we any modern testimony concerning the date of Scripture writings can be
so firm, as to admit of no denial or dispute, especially when those divinely
inspired writings have no such distinguishing marks within their own Canon, or
explicit references unto other records. And when no argument can be alleged
to maintain them (I reflect particularly upon the assigned date of the Epistle
in question) but as good, The argument from the date propounded.
or better reasons may be brought to disprove them: But least we be thought to
proceed to Judgment unduly, and without hearing of the allegations of the
adverse party, we leave an ear open to receive them: They are; Baron. ad Ann.
Christi 57. Lightfoot harm. ad An. Christi 55. Beza ad 1 Timothy 1.3. Aret.
disposit. prioris 1 epist. ad Tim. Est. proem. ad 1 Timothy 2. Paper of the
Ministers at Wight 1. it is confessed that our assertion. Answered. 1. By
Hypothetical concession.
St. Paul going from Ephesus into Macedonia, Act. 20.1. leaves Timothy behind
him at Ephesus; ^ which place the Apostle sometime after his own departure from
thence sends him this Epistle; But returning to Miletum a short while after
(three months and a few days are only menti^ned in Scripture, and the former
Chronologers compute St. Paul's going into M^cedonia, and returning to Miletum,
within one and the same year) the Apostle convenes the Ephesme elders,
discharges Timothy, and commits the regiment of the Church unto them.
Afterward Baron. ad Ann. Christi 57. Lightfoot harm. ad An. Christi 55. Beza
ad 1 Timothy 1.3. Aret. disposit. prioris 1 epist. ad Tim. Est. proem. ad 1 Timothy
2. Paper of the Ministers at Wight 1. it is confessed that our assertion.
Answered. 1. By Hypothetical concession.
Timothy is often mentioned, as elsewhere employed by St. Paul, or in company
with him: Thus Phil. 1.1. Col. 1.1. Philem. 1. Heb. 13.13.

Hereunto I answer.

First, By Hypothetical concession, and say; should we grant all this, yet
since the Apostles Journey into Macedonia, and consequently the date of this
Epistle, fell nigh three years after his coming to Ephesus, and the ordination
of the twelve Prophets, Act. 19.6. Then to prepare for Timothies travails, our
Antagonists have marched off his evangelizate; for how could he be an
Evangelist, or bring the first tidings of Christ to those who had so long
before lived under St. Paul's, and Apollos his ministry: And who had Officers
preferred unto the Evangelist, viz. Prophets settled among them ere Timothies
coming; besides these twelve Prophets being Church Officers (as has been
already abundantly proved) they were either of the Presbyterial, or Apostolical
Order. If they were of the Presbyterial Order, then the powers of Ordination,
and Censures now challenged by Presbyters, was not their due in the Apostles
time, since these Prophet-Presbyters nigh three years after their ordination
were subject unto Timothy. If they were of the Apostolical Order, their
subjection unto Timothy evinceth a necessity of settling a primacy of Order,
with some super-intendency of authority, and Jurisdiction, upon a chief and
eminent person, within particular Churches and precincts; not one Pope over all
Churches, but a Primate over every national Church; for Titus had the same
place at Creet as Timothy had at Ephesus. It Is not my business to speak of
Timothies Order in this tract, what has been said rather shows what he was
not, then what he was; to wit, he was not an evangelist, because he exercised
Jurisdiction over Prophets; wherein he acted in his own right, and without
usurpation upon their privileges, otherwise the exercise of his power might
have overturned the cradle of that Infant-Church, nothing being more
intolerably provoking to any man, or number of men, then the infringing of
their Liberties. This is all that can be gained by granting that the former
Cronologers have found out the precise date of this Epistle, but it may not be
granted they have said it.

Secondly, We positively deny it, for these reasons. 2. By positive negation,
Because 1. Timothy is sent before St. Paul into Macedonia no mention is made of
his return ere the Apostle followed him thither.


1. Timithy and Erastus (St. Paul continuing sole at Ephesus) are expressly sent
into Macedonia, immediately before the rise of the Ephesme tumult, Act. 19.22,
23. And he sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him, Timotheus
and Erastus, but he abode in Asia for a season. And the same time there arose
no small stir about that way; the residue of the Chapter is spent in a
description of the nature of the tumult; upon what cause it began, ver. 24. ad
fin. 27. with what confusion it proceeded, ^er. 28. ad fin. 34. and by what
descretion it was quieted, ver. 35. ad fin. Capitis. The tumult being over, St.
Paul is observed in the very first verse of the following Chapter to go into
Macedonia, Act. 20.1. no intervenient mention being made of Timothies return;
the words of that text are: And after the uproar was ceased, Paul called unto
him the Disciples, and embraced them, and departed for to go into Macedonia.
All which put together rather proves St. Paul's hastening to follow Timothy,
then Timothies return out of Macedonia unto Ephesus; 2. Timothy accompanies S.
Paul at his re^urn from Macedonia.
for when the uproar which began at Timothies departure was appeased, St. Paul
prepares for the same Journey, and set upon it.

2. At St. Paul's return from Macedonia, Timothy accompanies him, not as one
relating to Asia or Ephesus (for so that City is called, and Trophimus who is
said to be of Asia, Act. 20.4. is called an Ephesian, Act. 21.29.) its Citizens
being specially distinguished from Timothy and the rest of the company, Act.
20.4. And there accompanied him out of Asia Sopater of Berea, and of
Thessalonica Aristarchus, and Secundus, and Gajus of Derbe, and Timotheus: and
of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus; these going before, tarried for us at Troas.
Now should the text leave us to conjecture, whether those of Asia: and the rest
accompanied St. Paul from end to end of his return from Macedonia? or whether
they met him upon the way from several parts (although the former seems more
probable, because we read not one word of their meeting the Apostle upon the
road, In loc.
but on the contrary they are all said, (...), or to accompany, or travail
together with him into Asia, or usque in Asiam, even unto Asia, as Beza renders
it.) To be sure the Text is as clear, and full in excluding Timothy from a
relation unto Ephesus, as in excluding Sopater, Aristarchus, Gajus, and
Secunia^; all of them being named from their respective Cities, except Timothy,
whom St. Luke had before observed to be a Lystrian, Act. 16 1. whereas had
Timothy come from Ephesus, or stood at this time in the relation of a Bishop,
3. The interval betwixt S. Paul's going to and return from Macedonia is too
short and scant for Timothy to effect the works committed to him by the
Epistle. 4. The charge a^ Miletum prophesies somewhet to befall the Churoh at
Ephesus, which the Epistle speaks of as past.
or Evangelist to that Church, he ought to have been named among the Asians, or
Ephesians.

3. The time of Timothies supposed continuance at Ephesus was too little, and
sca^t for the performance of the works committed to him by the Epistle; the
time has been already computed not to exceed half a year; the works were many,
and two of them especially would take up much time, namely ^ leisurely
proceeding in Ordination of Ministers, 1 Timothy 5.^^. and a solid examination of
the charges against misdemeaning elders, ere he censured them, 1 Timothy 5.19.

4. The Elders of the Church of Ephesus being sent for, and present at St.
Paul's charge at Miletum, he says in the future tenses, Act. 20.29, 30. For I
know this, that after my departure shall grievous Wolves enter in among you,
not sparing the Flock, Als^ of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things to draw Disciples after them; the words (...), and (...)
rendered shall enter, and shall arise, are of the future tense. And accordingly
the Apostles immediately following premonition, respects futurity, ver. 3.
Therefore watch and remember, etc. But in the Epistle, which according to the
Presbyterian computation was written some months before the charge was given
at Miletum, he assigns this as his chief end in leaving Timothy at Ephesus;
namely, To charge some that they taught no other doctrine; 1 Timothy 1.3. because
some having swerved from the truth, were turned aside to vain jangling, ver. 6.
and that he had delivered Hym^neus and Alexander, (both confessed Ephesians)
unto Satan, ver. 20. now had these things been done, or the Epistle written
before the charge at Miletum, the Apostles would more probably have warned
those Elders by the rece^t example of those Apostate, and heretical Teachers,
and by his own and Tim^thies former care and vigilance at Ephesus; to practice
the like diligence, and faithfulness in watching against such ungodly
attempters for the future, then to discourse of those evils in a prophetic
style, as after contingencies: Especially since it was this Apostles custom to
mind other Churches of those instruments, whom God had jointly employed with
him for their good; thus particularly he reminds the Corinthian Church of
Timothy, 2 Cor. 1.19. For the son of God Jesus Christ, who was preached among
you by us, even by me and Sylvanus, and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in
him was yea. Besides the Apostles commemoration of his own labors, Act. 20.31.
gave him a hint of Timothies (if Timothy had before labored in this matter.)
And why should the Apostle have omitted it, since both together would have more
enforced his argument; and since all manner of enforcement was no more then
needed, Act. 19.33. objected.
because neither of the Epistles to Timothy (and we doubt not to prove either
of them written after the charge at Miletum) do speak the Church at Ephesus in
a quiet condition. But contrariwise they order Timothies abode and diligence,
least others spread the same, or like pestilent doctrines. Answered, and the
text largely expounded.


Some say, Act. 19.83. refers unto the injuries done unto St. Paul by Apostate
Alexander; for which afterward, ere the Apostle went into Macedonia, he
delivered him unto Satan: This weak conjecture has strong assertors, learned
Beza, and learned Dr. Hammond. But we must enter our dissent against it, and do
not perceive how any one well observing the text (though it be translated most
advantageously for that conceit) can do otherwise; the words are: And drew
Alexander forth of the multitude, the Jews also putting him forward; Ambo. in
loc.
And Alexander beckned with his hand, and would have made his defense unto the
people: Concerning this defense (which whether it were intended for, or against
St. Paul and the Christians, Scripture is silent) Beza, and Dr. Hammond tell us
this fair story; they say The Orator Alexander was St. Paul's most pernicious
enemy, mentioned 1 Timothy 1.14. and delivered by him to Satan, 1 Timothy 1.20.
which Alexander, Ambo in loc.
the Jews at this time carry forth of the crowd into a fit place, where by an
invective Oration he might appease the enraged people, revile them to the Jews,
and derive all their malice upon St. Paul and the Christians.

Our Judgment of this story briefly is, it is but a Tale, For.

First, Those who put Alexander forward, are plainly differenced in the text
from those that drew him forth; the words in the original are (...). This Beza
himself thus translates, Ex tucla vero produxerunt quidam Alexandrum
propellentibus eum Judaeis. And all other translations observe the difference,
except the Syriack, which rather paraphraseth, then translates.

Secondly, The Gentile Ephesians were equally incensed both against Jews and
Christians; Particularly they were so far enraged against the Jews, as
perceiving Alexander to be a Jew, they would not suffer him to speak, ver. 34.
But when they knew that he was a Jew, all with one voice, about the space of
two h^urs cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Besides had not the
Ephesians been offended both against Jews and Christians, the Jews needed not
to have thrust Alexander forward to make any Apology for them; because
Demetrius took his first distaste against the Christians, In loc.
and had thrown the contempt upon them. We are therefore with Beza's good leave
yet to seek for the true exposition of the text, and shall not be able to find
it, till we can assign the difference betwixt those who drew Alexan^^ forth,
and Jews who put him forward.

Doctor Hammond agreeing with Beza in the rest, saw this, and to help Dun out
of the mire, he adds. Those who drew Alexander forth were Sergeants, those who
thrust him forward were Jews, malicious to St. Paul, who questioned and
examined him, and then he was ready to Apologize, Id ubi supra
to avert the danger from himself, and to turn it upon others. This Exposition
he grounds upon a secular usage of the word (...) namely, that it signifies to
examine judicially a suspected, or impleaded delinquent.

But as well this, as Hesychicus his gloss must be mended. For

First, It Is utterly improbable, that the Town Officers should suffer the Jews
to examine their Prisoner.

Secondly, (...) has no such Scripture Signification, nor if it had elsewhere
would this text admit it, till it were proved, that the Magistracy of Ephesus
consisted of Jews.

Thirdly, It Is somewhat too confident (though animated by our translation) to
say, that Alexander would have made his own defense, for the word (...), used
absolutely as here, equally signifies a general as a particular Apology: And
when the Penman of this History (or St. Luke) uses it for a particular
Apology, he joins it in construction with some limiting expressions; thus Act.
24.10. Then Paul after the Governor had beckned unto him to speak; answered;
for as much as I know that thou have been of many years a Judge unto this
Nation, I do the more cheerfully answer for my self ((...).)

Fourthly, It Is yet more confident to say that Alexander intended to accuse
others, for no word properly signifying to accuse, appears in the text. Neither
will the word (...) (which is the only word looking that way) bear it in St.
Lukes Dialect, because elsewhere he places (...), or to make a defense in
opposition unto (...), or to accuse. Act. 24.2. with 10.

The errors whereunto these Authors draw themselves, and confiding Readers,
proceed (I dare say it) from want of due consideration of the several words
rendered drew forth, and put forward; the former (...), rendered drew forth,
although in our Dialect it import a manual violence, yet originally both in
Scripture, and Greek Authors, it signifies a forceless drawing, by reason,
instruction, or entreaty; In* Scripture it is used of a Parents instructing her
Child, Mat. 14.14. And she being before instructed of her mother, (...). In
Authors it is used of a Clients procuring, or instructing of his Patron, or
Councellor. Take we it in either of these senses in this text, it leads us
presently to ascertain Beza's quidam, namely the Christians, who were the
parties in danger; They drew Alexander the Orator forth to make a public
defense.

Obj. Obj.
But may some say, what have the Jews to do with Christians? for if the
Christians drew Alexander forth, the Jews put him forward.

I answer, Christians and Jews, S^l.
had then more to do one with another then they have now, and in this very case
there was a special reason for their unity, and joint acting; for the cause and
danger was the common concernment both of Jews and Christians; both of them
were professed enemies to Diana; both of them were for the most part originally
Jews; and perhaps the enraged Ephesians knew not before, much less would they
in their present rage make any difference betwixt Jews and Christians; sure I
am, the men of Thyatyra did not, but complaining to their Magistrates against
St. Paul and Sylas, they say Act. 16.20. These men being Jews, do exceedingly
trouble our City. Therefore the cause, and danger both of Jews and Christians
being the same, there is no reason why they might concur in the election in a
common advocate to make their joint defense, least both should be swallowed up
promiscuously in those tempestuous waves of popular fury. To this Exposition
good Authors assent; In loc.
namely Aretius, Piscator, and A Lapide; neither is it any whit discountenanced
by the following words, or what is said of the Jews, that they put him forward;
for that word does not always signify a violent haling, and thrusting out of
a malicious intent: In Scripture it is used of trees, budding or sprouting,
Luke 21.30. Among Authors it is used, as well of a parties producing his
witnesses in Court, as of the Judges examination of them; In which cases the
Party is oft-times enforced to use all violences of entreaty, promises of
reward, Subpoena's, and threatenings of hazard to his witnesses, if they neglect
their appearance to put them forward, least the cause should be heard in his
absence, and go against him; the result of what has been said is this, that
the Christians drawing Alexander forth by instruction, the Jews might put him
forward, hasten and encourage him to proceed in the common Apology. And
certainly any one in his case would have needed both Spurs.

This I am persuaded is the true meaning of the place, and I wonder that Beza
and Doctor Hammond neither took notice of it, In loc.
nor of some as learned as themselves, to wit, Cajetane, and Arias Montanus who
deny the Alexander named in this Text to be the same named, and excommunicated
by St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.20. Calvin upon the place leaves it with an incertum est,
or it is uncertain whether they were both one man, or diverse. This is modest,
but the other opinion seems truest. But grant both Texts speak of one and the
same Alexander, this in the Acts gives no colorable reason why an
excommunication should proceed against him, but he was actually excommunicated
1 Timothy 1.20.

Wherefore again and again, we affirm and repeat, that the charge given to the
Ephesme Elders at Miletum was prophetical of those future mischiefs, which
false teachers should do unto that Church, unless they were watched against with
all diligence: And that the Prophecy had in part its accomplishment in St.
Paul's delivery of Hymeneus, and Alexander unto Satan, ere he directed the
first Epistle unto Timothy: Suffice this for the fourth reason against the
assigned date of the first Epistle unto Timothy.

Fifthly, Fifthly, Calvin doubts of the validity of the assigned date.

Vix certo colligi potest ex historia Lucae quando scriptu fuit prior epistola.
Calv. proem in 2 Timothy


The former reasons are I trust convictive to ingenuous Readers of the equity
of our opposing the assigned date of that Epistle; but if any more morose come
a thwart this discourse, we beseech him to observe what Calvin says in this
matter, ere he shoot the bolt of his censure; he says, It cannot be gathered
with any certainty out of St. Lukes history, when the first Epistle was
written. What! cannot Calvin certainly collect it, whom, and whose cause it so
much concerned, since the greatest stress of Timethies Evangelizate bears upon
it? Does the Master builder fear the downfall of his Fabric, since it is founded
upon vix certo, or a ticklish foundation? Are not we rather excusable in
refusing to build thereupon, then venturously to attempt the reedification of
that Babel whose builders are confounded in their language, and either raze
their Tower with their own hands, or prepare Engines, wherewith others may do
it. Besides, St. Lukes history has been consulted and considered, where not
only we cannot find the date, but do find the Presbyterian assignation of it to
be of all others the most uncertain, and improbable.

Those clamours then evaporate as smoke into air, A Presbyterian cavil
obviated by way of corollary. 1. Paper of the Ministers at Wight the same is
manifest. 2. Paper to that which your Majesty And the one reason given by your
Majesty.
wherewith Presbyters so cloy our ears in this controversy, to wit: That
Bishop Timothy is altogether neglected by St. Paul, when he gave the Ephesme
Elders their charge at Miletum; since they are ^et to prove that Timothy was
settled at Ephesus, ere the first Epistle was sent unto him; Besides, the
charge does not commit the same works unto the Elders, as the Epistle does to
Timothy, if it did, such concession might rather be received with prejudice
that they got it no sooner, then with thanks that it was now allowed them,
since they were Presbyters of a long standing, ere the supposed date of that
Epistle; and since Timothy had all the while usurped upon their privileges.
Indeed the charge at Miletum allows the Ephesme Elders the feeding, and
oversight of their particular flocks in such subordination as the Epistle to
Timothy puts them under their superior Officers, which was never denied them,
under the Episcopal Government.

Obj. We are required to assign another date.

Ans. 1. We are not necessitated to do it.


Obj. Some may object and say, since you have denied the assigned date, tell us
when the Epistle was written.

I answer. First, the holy Ghost not revealing it, perhaps rather directs to
our silence with him, then our enquiry without him; especially, because when we
have wearied our eyes, and hearts in seeking it, we shall find no more then
Calvin's vix certo, what whereof an it may, or it may not be true, may with
equal probability be pronounced: I will not say the holy Ghost has hid it from
our observation as he buried Moses his body, because we should not find it; but
I will say, if finding it had been necessary, he would not have concealed it;
besides, when ever it was written,, it concerns one Timothy at Ephesus, which
was a Church having settled Officers ere he came thither, since one of his
first trusts after his coming, was to examine and censure delinquent Presbyters.
1 Timothy 5.19.

Secondly, Will not this satisfy, but my Reader expects that I should rove at
the date, 2. Aus. Conjectured to be written after St. Paul's deliverance from
his first imprisonment at Rome.
as others have done before me. I say probably St. Paul, after his release from
his first imprisonment at Rome, returning to visit his formerly planted
Churches, and yet under his own Jurisdiction, came to Ephesus, where he found
the Garden overrun with weeds, the Church miserably corrupted with heresies and
false doctrines (his Prophecy, Act. 20. being then in some measure fulfilled)
to occur to which mischeifs, give a check to their further increase, and
proceed according to his purpose in visiting the remaining part of his Vineyard
in Macedonia, etc. he settles Timothy at Ephesus, and writes this Epistle to
him. This is all conjectural and probable, I give it my Reader for no more; but

First, It Is a probability not liable to the like absurdities with the former
assignation of the date.

Secondly, It Is much favored, both by the Apostles former practice: Act.
15.36. And some days after Paul said to Barnabas, let us go again and visit
our brethren in every City where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see
how they do; 1 Cor. 11.34. And the rest will I set in order when I come. 2 Cor.
11.28. Besides those things that are without, that which comes upon me daily,
the care of of all the Churches. And by a text in the latter Epistle to
Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.20. expounded.
which mentions St. Paul's being at Miletum long after the charge. Act. 20. It
is 2 Timothy 4.20. Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick; The exposition of this
text will be useful, and the readiest way to do it, is to compare the opinions
of expositors, I find it interpreted three ways.

First, Some say Trophimus was left sick at Miletum, when St. Paul and his
company sailing to Rome, touched upon the Coasts of Asia. Act. 27.2. Thus St.
Chrysostom and Beza. In loc.


Secondly. Some charge corruption upon the text, boldly alleging Miletum is
falsely written for Melite. Thus Baronius and Beza; In loc.
the latter whereof adjoins it to his former opinion, with a quanquam potius
conjicio^, or although I rather conjecture. But we value not his Conjecture,
for.

1. It Is contrary to all Greek copies. Beza dares not cite his ancient
manuscript, but boldly ventures it into the world upon his own Conjecture, as
also, does Baronius. Now must the Church interpret Scriptures by such
Conjectures; certainly God has given his Word to little purpose, since men's
fancies may alter it when, and how they please.

2. It Is against the credit of all translations; the Latin are obvious; the
Syriack is thus rendered by Tremellius. Trophimum autem reliqui aegrotum in
Mileto urbe, or Trophimus have I left sick in the City Miletum.

3. It Is audacious, dangerous, and improbable; Audacious, because it
introduces the Cabala upon the new Testament. Dangerous, because it may be
improved to invalidate the most conclusive Scriptures against heretical
opinions, if the words which make most against them have any common letters,
with words which favor them. Improbable, because a Metathesis, or
transposition of letters will not lay in the words, since Miletum, and Melite
are also written in Greek with different vowels. I shall conclude my
animadversion upon this second exposition, with Dr. Lightfoots censure of Beza,
for the same thing he says; Har. in loc.
He is always one of the forwardest to tax the text for corrupt, when he
cannot clear it.

Thirdly, Others interpret the text of some time after St. Paul's release from
his first imprisonment when he perambulated, and travailed over again his
former Stages: thus A Lapide. The first, and last of these expositions are only
probable, In loc.
the middlemost most improbable and false, our present enquiry is, which of the
two is most probable: Do any say the first is? because Trophimus was not left
sick at Miletum when Acts 20.17. was written, I answer:

Grant it to be true, it wipes away the Dust thrown by Presbyters into the face
of this Controversy; when to weaken Timothy's Episcopate at Ephesus, they say,
St. Paul took his last farewell of the Elders of the Ephesme Church, and gave
them their final instructions, when he told them at Miletum, That they should
see his Face no more, Acts 20.25. whereas hereby they grant, that he visits
them again, and might see, or be seen by them in this Voyage, which according
to the supputation of Chronologers, was under-taken not above four years after
that charge. But wiating all advantages gainable, by insisting upon the
probability of the first Exposition, we renounce it, and close with the latter
Exposition as more probable, for this passage of leaving Trophimus sick at
Miletum, was written ten full years after St. Paul's first voyage to Rome, and
it is utterly improbable either that Trophimus should be left so long sick at
one place, or that St. Paul should now write it unto his Neighbor Tim^thy for
News, for this second Epistle was written to Timothy while he was at Ephesus,
and last of all St. Paul's writings, as will appear by and by in the discussion
of its Date.

Thirdly, It Is allowed by the exact judgment of the late most eminently
learned, and to a miracle judiciously conversant in all sorts of Antiquity, Dr.
James Usher Archbishop ^f A^magh, who in his annals of the World, dates the
first Epistle to Timothy in the 55th year of Christ, not much above a year
before St. Paul's Martyrdom, which sufficiently challenges an allocation of
time to the Date of that Epistle subsequent to St. Paul's Delivery from his
first imprisonment, in which annals, the said excellent man, places the
leaving of Trophimus sick at Miletum in the year of Christ 66. not many Months
before St. Paul's exchanging his Earthly pilgrimage for a Heavenly habitation.

Corollary from the refutation of the first sort of Presbyterian Arguments, to
prove Timothy's travels.
But for the present dismissing all further conjectures, attend me to what is
certain, namely Timothy at the Date of the first Epistle (whatsoever was the
time of its Date) was resident at Ephesus: And so far we have fixed him. When
then did he remove? afterward; (say Presbyters.) If we ask them in what year
of our Lord? they will tell us they cannot tell: But if you will take their
word, you shall hear them say with much confidence, That he did remove.

Proceed we to a further Query, and demand their Proof, their Answer, as the
former, will not want confidence; and aver they have enough, so we will quietly
grant their assigned, and refuted Date of the First Epistle to Timothy. And
they have so ordered their business, as easily credulous persons may readily
believe he was afterward with St. Paul, or employed by him in diverse places, as
appears by Phil. 1.1. Col. 1.1. Philem. v. 1. Heb. 13.13. But I suppose I have
broken the Links of this goodly Argument, and till Timothies Travails can be
chained and linked together by one more strongly tack't, do positively deny
that any of these Texts do treat of him, as removed from Ephesus, and
discharged of his Relation unto that Church. This shall conclude our Refutation
of the first sort of Presbyterian Arguments, in proof Timothy's Evangelizate by
his pretended Travels. 2d. sort of Presbyterian Arguments. for Timothy's
Travels: Or several instances out of the epistles to him


But their other body of Arguments (or instances from several Texts, in both
the Epistles to Timothy) are advancing: And,

1 Timothy 1.3. falls on: The words are, As I besought thee to abide still at
Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou might charge some, that they
teach no other Doctrine. This is always the forlorn of the Cause, I meet it in
Smectymnuus, First, 1 Timothy 1.3. As I besought thee to abide at Ephesus.
in the Divines at Wight, where not? And hereby they would evidence Timothies
occasional, and precarious leaving at, not Authoritative mission to the Church
of Ephesus.

This they say, and I well hoped they would have been weary of insisting on it,
Smectym. page 37. Wight Div. 1 pap. Sect. And first to that of Timothy and
Titus.
when I perceived the Royal Pen (which stooped to examine every thing of any
imaginary weight in the Ministers Papers) disdaining this Objection an Answer:
But finding it not raked up in the quiet Ashes of Silence and Oblivion, but as
fresh and pert as ever among the London Divines, I was troubled to see such a
Trifle, as the vulgar acceptance of an English word to p^evail so far, Jus.
Divin. 2 part, p. 66.
with men pretending either to solidity of learning, or ingenuity of spirit;
for though it may pass current with common Capacities, that to beseech the
doing of a thing, is not the putting forth of an act of power, enjoining its
performance, yet more refined Brains will demur upon it, because they know:

1. Answ. 1. Answ. We are not so much to eye what is said, as who speaks.
Words receive their force and signification from the quality of their
Speakers, who has Authority to command, is equally to be obeyed if he do
entreat: Did not my Servant thus interpret my Language, he would fulfill few of
my most important commands, their ordinary Style, when necessity of performance
concurs with my desire to have them done, being prithee do it: Neither can
there be a more demonstrable Argument of a Slavish spirit in inferiors, to
apprehend themselves less concerned in their Duty, because their Superiour^ do
not furiously rate, but mildly entreat them. I appoint this to the point in
hand thus. Timothy was qualified to impose hands, censure delinquent
Presbyters, and others, ere the Apostle besought him to do them, else he would
never have besought him, and S. Paul had equal authority to command as to
beseech him, for he ordained Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6. And all Ordainers lay the
command of God upon the Ordained, faithfully to discharge the trusts belonging
to their Offices, in the Churches whereunto they are called. Granting therefore
S. Paul did only beseech Timothy to abide at Ephesus, it was of equal force to
engage him to remain there, as if he had used words of the greatest threatening
and charge, especially since the works he enjoined him to do there, even
Ordination of Ministers, and exercise of censures, are of constant and almost
daily use, and he always had a power to do them, and that Church would
perpetually call for its exercise.

2 Timothy understood the word besought of a settlement
Secondly, Timothy thus understood St. Paul's entreaty, upon it he staid at
Ephesus; neither does any Scripture, or good authority remove him from thence,
the last mention which holy Writ makes of him, is as there resident; and
Antiquity there settles him in his life, and buries him after his death (as
shall be largely evidenced by and by: Besides strict observation cannot discern
how Timothy could understand S. Paul's beseeching otherwise then of a
settlement; the words of it are (...), or I besought, or exhorted thee to abide
still at Ephesus. The word (...), rendered abide still, by our Translators, and
remaneres by the Vulgar, as it refers to the next following words, or when I
went into Macedonia, implies that S. Paul had been at Ephesus before, and left
Timothy behind him. As it respects the last words of the same verse, or that
thou might charge some, that they teach no other Doctrine; it interprets S.
Paul's beseeching, by Timothy's residence at Ephesus. Since no work requires
greater diligence, or more constant attendance, Act. 20.28. ad fin. and since
the second Epistle finds Timothy at the same place, and engaged upon the same
works, as shall appear, when we argue for his residence at Ephesus. Beza
translates (...), permaneres, which is fuller to prove fixation, then either
remain or abide, for they do not necessarily require long continuance, but to
permane exacts constant attendance, and a through discharge of all the trusts
of an employment. Thus the word (...) signifies in this very Epistle to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.5, 6. Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate,
continues ((...)) in supplications and prayers night and day; but she that
^ive h^^^ pleasure, etc. Where we may observe the word both to be extended to
constancy, the widow indeed continues in prayer and supplications, night and
day,; and opposed to temporary and shifting Devotions, the luxurious widow
(does not continue, but) lives in pleasure. Elsewhere the word is rendered
cleave, Act. 11.23. Who when he was come, and had seen the grace of God, was
glad, and exhorted them that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the
Lord, ((...)) which certainly the Speaker Barnabas does not intend of a
temporal owning, but of a spiritual adherence to the Gospel; neither do I any
where observe the word to be used of a temporary or transient action, unless
some limiting adjunct, be construed with it, which is not to be found in this
text of Timothy's, but it is in Act. 18.18. And Paul after this tarried there
yet a good while, ((...).) Mat. 15.32. Then Jesus called his Disciples unto
him, and said, I have compassion on the multitude, because they now continue
with me three days, ((...).)

Thirdly, The word (...) here used, ((...), or I besought thee) does primarily,
properly, 3. The original word rendered besought, primarily signifies to exhort.
and most usually signify to exhort and give a charge, but more rarely to
beseech in any Idoneous Author: A truth well known to our Interpreters, and
accordingly they often render it exhort. Thus, among other places, in 1 Pet.
5.1. The Elders that are among you I exhort, ((...)) In this text, as well as
in that of Timothy, the speech is directed by an Apostle to Church Officers,
and I see no reason besides the Translators pleasure, why ((...)) was not
rendered exhort, in both places.

4. Where it is rendered beseech, 4. When it is rendered beseech, it notes an
authoritative beseeching.
it notes entreaty conjoined with authority, concerning most important duties,
duties which must be done, and by no means neglected by the besought persons,
Ephesians. 4.1. I therefore the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you ((...)) that ye
walk worthy of the calling wherewith ye are called: Will any one imagine this
to be an occasional request, because the word beseech is used? What can be
either a more worthy and serious matter for a preachers earnest exhortation, or
for a peoples constant imitation? Thus also 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you ((...)) by us, we pray
you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God. Well was it for S. Paul, that
there was no such acute men as Smectymnuus, the Wight and London-Ministers, in
the Churches of Ephesus and Corinth, otherwise he had soon heard from them,
that if those duties of walking worthy of their calling, and being reconciled
unto God, were not temporary and transient things, not requiring a perpetual
observance, he would have used words of more authority then to beseech them to
do them.

This might suffice in answer to this Scripture, but because Presbyters usually
couple it with Tit. 1.5. whence they wrestledly collect, Titus his temporary
settlement, because he is said to be left at Creet. I shall vindicate that text
also, and speak somewhat more of the unworthiness of those men, in their
imposing upon vulgar capacities. And

Tit. 1.5. explained.
1. The word left is not only used of an occasional dropping of men at a
strange place, but of leaving them at their habitations and settled residence.
Thus Act. 18.18, 19. And Paul after this tarried there yet a good while, and
then took his leave of the Brethren, and sailed thence into Syria, and with him
Aquila and Priscilla; See page 232.
having shorn his head in Cenchrea, for he had a vow; and he came to Ephesus,
and left them there. The word (...), there rendered left, is the same word so
rendered in the text of Titus, and Ephesus was the place of Aquila's and
Priscilla's * residence, 2 Timothy 4.19.

2. The fastening of such interpretations upon S. Paul's ordinations of Timothy
and Titus, unto the great works of preaching the Gospel, and Church Government,
as that he precariously employed the one at Ephesus, and casually left the
other at Creet, is undoubtedly injurious, both to the Apostles gravity, and the
sacredness of the work; When our Savior sent forth the first Preachers, he
continued all night in prayer, Luc. 6.13. and if this be not written for
ministerial imitation, but less solemnity will serve the turn; yet Timothy must
forget how slightly he was complemented into his work, when he yields obedience
unto the precept in 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly upon no man, neither be
partaker of other men's sins; keep thy self pure. Proceed we now to the rest of
the Scriptures urged by Presbyters, in proof of Timothy's travails.

2 Timothy 4.9. Do thy diligence to come to me quickly, objected.

Answer.

1. Their inference from thence, is a false supposition.

2. It does not follow from The text.




A second Scripture urged against Timothy's residence at Ephesus, is, 2 Timothy
4.9. Do thy diligence to come to me quickly.

I answer:

First, This falsely supposes, but proves not Timothy's absence from Ephesus,
and till such proof can be produced, it strongly maintains his residence there,
until the date of the second Epistle.

Secondly, It Is no certain consequence that Timothy went because S. Paul
desired him: the Apostles own Councils were often broken off in such casual
appointments. Thus, Romans 1.13 Now I would not have you ignorant, Brethren, that
oftentimes I purposed to come unto you, (but was let hitherto) that I might
have some fruit among you also, even as among other Gentiles. Thus 1 Thessalonians.
2.18. Wherefore we would have come unto you, (even I Paul) once and again, but
Satan hindered us. And why might not Satan, or other impediment, hinder Timothy
in like case, especially if S. Paul were in such instantaneous hazard of death,
as he speaks of, 3. Granting their inference it proves nothing, unless Timothy
were discharged from his relation to the Ephesme Church. 2 Timothy 4.12. Tychicus
have I sent to Ephesus, objected.

Answer.

1. Their inference is a false supposition.

2. It Is no good consequence.

3. It Is a singular and novel gloss.

In loc.


2 Timothy 4.6.

3. Suppose Timothy went to Rome upon S. Paul's desire, he might, yea he must
return again to Ephesus, because neither S. Paul's desire, nor Timothy's
obedience unto it, could discharge him of his office, no more then a married
Son, is divorced from his Wife, by visiting his dying Father, upon his
entreaty.

A third and last Scripture is urged by the Wight Divines to prove Timothy's
Errantry, it is 2 Timothy 4.12. Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus.

Answ. 1. This as the former falsely supposes, but proves not Timothy's absence.

2. It Is no good consequence to say, Timothy is not at Ephesus, because
Tychicus is sent thither, when nothing is more usual in familiar Letters,
passing betwixt Friend and Friend, then to acquaint each other of other Friends
coming into their parts, whom they may visit, or by whom they may be visited.

3. The text has only two current senses among Expositors, either of which
ruin this gloss of the Wight Divines: some say, S. Paul adds he has sent
Tychicus to supply Timothy's place in his absence, Timothy's residence at
Ephesus, maintained by four propositions.

1. Prop. The second Epistle was sent to Timothy at Ephesus.

Confirmed.

1. Therein S. Paul complained of the Asiaticks Unkindness to him at Rome, as a
thing well known to Timothy.


as a motive to quicken and hasten Timothy upon his Journey. Thus Calvin,
Pomeranus, Piscator, Lightfoot, and A Lapide. Others say, Tychicus was the
express by whom S. Paul sent this Epistle unto Timothy, so Baronius and
Pelecanus,

Thus have we examined what has been said in proof of Timothy's temporary
abode at Ephesus, and are so far unsatisfied with the affirming arguments, that
as a Coronis and conclusion to this part of the Dispute, we will take the
Opponents part, and argue for his settlement. This we shall do in proof of
several propositions, whereof let this be the first.

First Proposition: Timothy was at Ephesus when the second Epistle was sent
unto him. We prove it,

1. Because therein S. Paul complains of the Asiaticks unkindeness to him at
Rome, as a thing well known to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.15. This thou know, that
all those of Asia he turned away from me, of whom is Hermogenes and Phygellus.
The term all is not to be taken universally for every one simply, but
Indefinitely, for a great many, because Onesiphorus is excepted by name, as an
ad^erer to the Apostle, both at Ephesus, and Rome. And this also was known to
Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18. The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus,
for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain, but when he was at
Rome, he sought me out diligently, and found me, the Lord grant unto him that
he may find mercy of the Lord in that day; and in how many thingt he ministered
unto me at Ephesus thou know very well. These two Texts compared together
administer matter to a probable Argument, for Timothies residence at Ephesus at
the mission of this Epistle, but the next puts it out of all dispute.

2. He wills Timothy to salute Aquila, Priscilla, and the household of
Onesiphorus. Fuisse tamen adhuc Ephesi, quum ad eum scriberetur haec epistola,
quia sub finem Aquilam Priscillam, and Onesiphorum salutat. Calv. proem. in 2 Timothy

3. He re-minds him to contest with the same Asiatick Haereticks, against whom
he gives him charge in the former Epistle.


Secondly, St. Paul toward the latter end of this Epistle, wills Timothy to
salute the household of Onesiphorus, and Aquila and Priscilla, 2 Timothy 4.19.
Salute Priscilla and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus; all these were
Ephesians. That Aquila and Priscilla were, appears, Act. 18.18, 19. The like
concerning the family of Onesiphorus, is evident by 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18. Now
Timothy could not give S. Paul's salutations to them, nor would the Apostle
have imposed it upon him, unless they had been his neighbors. This occasioned
Calvin to say, Timothy was yet at Ephesus when this Epistle was written to him,
because nigh the end of it, S. Paul salutes Aquila and Priscilla, and
Onesiphorus. Yea farther,

3. S. Paul reminds Timothy to contest with the former Asiatick Heretics, of
whom he had forewarned him in the first Epistle: this appears by 2 Timothy 1.13,
14, 15. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of me, in faith
and (...), which is in Christ Jesus; that good thing which was committed to
thee, keep by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us: This thou know, that all
those which be in Asia, be turned away from me, of whom are Phygellus and
Hermogenes. 2 Timothy 2.15, 16, 17. Study to show thy self approved to God, a
workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth: But
shun profane and vain bablings, for they will increase to more ungodliness;
and their word will eat as does a Canker, of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 4.14, 15. Alexander the Coppersmith did me much evil, the Lord reward him
according to his works, of whom be thou ware also, for he greatly withstood our
words. Compared with 1 Timothy 1.3, 4, 5, 6. As I besought thee to abide still at
Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou might charge some that they
teach no other doctrine: neither give heed to fables, and endless genealogies,
which m nister questions, rather then godly edifyings, which is in faith; so
do. Now the end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, and of a
good conscience, and of faith unfeigned, from which some having swerved, are
turned aside to vain jangling. Verse. 19, 20. Holding faith and a good
conscience, which some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck,
of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they
may learn not to blaspheme. These texts compared exhibit these parallels: 1.
The same heretics, Hymeneus and Alexander. 2. The same end of their heretical
Oppositions, vain jangling, vain babbling. 3. The same way and means to resist
them: Study to show thy self approved unto God. -- Holding faith and a good
conscience.

4. S. Paul prescribes Timothy to take the same road to Rome, 4. He prescribes
Timothy to take the same Road which he the Apostle had formerly travailed to
Rome Harm. on New Testament. p. 134.
which himself had formerly travailed, compare 2 Timothy 4.13. with 2 Cor. 2.22.
Act. 20.5. This is Doctor Lightfoots argument, and transcribed out of his
harmony, where who pleases may read more, and wherewith we will conclude our
proof of our first proposition.

Second Proposition. 2. Prop. The second Epistle to Timothy was written the
last of all S. Paul's writings.

Two opinions about the date propounded. 1. Modern, which dates it A. C. 59. 2.
Ancient, A. C. 69. The Modern opinion considered and rejected.

In loc.


The second Epistle to Timothy was written last of all S. Paul's writings. We
prove it,

By an examination of the several opinions about the date of this Epistle, and
confirmation of the truest and most probable. Interpreters, are divided into
two opinions in this matter.

Some say, It was written A. C. 59. or the first year of S. Paul's arrival at
Rome, mentioned Act. 27. This is the modern Opinion.

Others date it the last of S. Paul's writings, or in A. C. 69. the Apostle in
that year suffering Martyrdom under Nero. This is the ancient Opinion, we will
consider both in order.

The Modern Opinion, suppose it were true, allows the second Epistle to be
written two full years distant from the date of the first Epistle, the same
Authors acknowledging that to be written in A. C. 57. this in A. C. 59. whence,
and by our proof of the former proposition, it appears Timothy was not so
absolutely discharged of his official Relation to the Church of Ephesus, by the
charge at Miletum, but two years (or four years if Lightfoot's computation be
exact) afterward we find him there engaged upon his old works.

1. Of Ordination, 2 Timothy 2.2. And the same things that thou have heard of me,
the same commit thou to faithful men, ((...)) who shall be able ((...)) to
teach others also. These Qualifications, (...) and (...), in the work of
teaching, are peculiarly requisite to Church Officers, 1 Timothy 1.12. 1 Cor.
15.9. 2 C^r. 2.16.

2. Of Vigilancie against Haereticks, 2 Timothy 2.14. 2 Timothy 4.5. with 1 Timothy 1.3,
4. and 2 Timothy 2.17. 2 Timothy 4.14, 15. with 1 Timothy 1.20.

But we must wave these advantages, and dare not admit modern Writers to have
recovered the true date of this Epistle, for as the foot of their account,
stands upon mere conjectures, (read Baronius and Esthius, Baron. ad. A. C. 59.
Est. proem. in 2 Timothy
its chief Propugnators) so we must have all it grants, and a great deal more,
neither will the Reader think we demand too much, when he has weighed our
Reasons why this second Epistle was not writ only two, but twelve years (or
fourteen years, Lightfoot Har. in loc. Hammond proem in 2 Timothy
according to the accounts of Doctor Hammond, and Lightfoot) after the Apostle
gave the Ephesme Elders their charge at Miletum.

But although neither of the conjectures of Baronius, or Esthius, are worthy of
our or the Readers notice, yet learned Doctor Hammond concurs with them, and
(as is his manner) assigns a fair probability for his so doing; An Objection
of Dr. Hammonds in favor of the modern computation. Ham. proem. in 2 Timothy
he says, It Is not so probable that S. Paul should remember his persecutions
at Antioch, Iconium and Lystra, 2 Timothy 3.11. and what Alexander had done to him
at Ephesus, Acts 19.33. and repeat them to Timothy, fourteen years after the
fact, and just before his death; as at his first coming to Rome, which was but
four years after he suffered them.

To which I answer, 1. S. Paul's principle scope in this Epistle was, to
encourage Timothy unto constancy and stedfastness at his work, whatever
troubles and afflictions befell him: To back and strengthen which Exhortation,
he uses (as other Arguments,) so an argument deduced and drawn from his own
example: To draw which to the life, he interweaves all, or the most eminent
part of his fore-passed sufferings; and presents it in one piece unto Timothy,
as being the face of a man of sorrows, well known unto him, 2 Timothy 3.11, 12.
But thou have fully known, etc. And whereas the Doctor argues from the
intervenient time, betwixt the Apostles sufferings, and the date of this second
Epistle, thereby to invalidate the ancient opinion; we retort it, and say, the
longer it was that some, or all of those troubles befell S. Paul; their urging,
was the more likely way to ^ncourage young Timothy to do or suffer like,
without complaining of the duration of old, or succession of new troubles,
since both happened to S. Paul, who was the pattern whom the Holy Ghost set
before Timothy his eyes, for his imitation.

2. S. Paul's usual practice at his farewell taking of Church Officers, was, to
repeat the whole course of his anteacted Ministry, labors, and sufferings
among them: Thus Acts 20.31. 2 Cor. 11.23, etc.

We will not busy our pen, or our Readers patience, The ancient opinion
considered and maintained.
with transcribing any more conjectures in proof of the modern opinion, about
the date of the Epistle in question; the uncertainty and unwarrantableness of
them, altogether appears widest, when objected to the light shining forth of
Scripture, upon the ancient opinion; a dazzling beam whereof is, 2 Timothy 4.6. For
I am now ready to be offered, First by S. Paul.
and the time of my departure is at hand. The elegancy of the word rendered
offered (though commonly observed) I may not overpass. It is a Metaphor
borrowed from the actual pouring forth of Drink Offerings: Martyrdom is it
seems a kind of bowl wherein the precious blood of the Saints is offered up,
as the most acceptable Drink Offering unto God: He who receives their tears
into his bottle, receives their blood into his bowels (if I may so speak.) But
we cannot pursue the Metaphor, for our business is with the Apostles scope;
which is, the declaration of the imminency and instantaneousness of a mortal
peril hanging over his head; set off (to assure us he spoke upon good grounds)
by a double phrase, 1. (...), or, I am ready to be offered; or to offer up my
self; for the verb is frequently construed actively: Martyrdom is, and ought to
be a Christians freewil offering of himself up to God; and although a Martyr
ought not to run into the fire presumptuously, he ought to be led into it
willingly: But accept we the verb (offered) in which form we please; it is of
the present tense, and notes as well the readiness of S. Paul's Persecutors, to
try his faith and patience; as his resolvedness to act them: This the second
phrase, and last clause of the verse fully confirms; (...), or, the time of my
departure is at hand. Were there any ambiguity in the former, this latter
clause clears the Apostles scope to intend, a nigh approach of a sudden
dissolution.

But Dr. Hammond questions the translation, Objection by Dr. Hammond in loc.
and will have the original rendered: And the time of my departure has been at
hand

Sol.
But, 1. This is against the Authority of the most, and most noted Interpreters
of the New Testament: the vulgar renders it, tempus resolutionis meae instat.
Beza, tempus praestitutum meae dimissionis instat. Tremellius, from the
Syriack, tempus quo dissolvar appropinquat. Castalio, discessusque mei tempus
instat. Piscator, tempus migrationis instat.

2. The Doctors translation cannot be reconciled to the foregoing clause, where
the Apostle expressly says in the present tence, He is poured, or pouring
himself forth.

3. Though the verb (...) be the past tense, yet sacred Grammarians know
nothing is more usual, then such Enallages and Hebraisms in Scripture. Those
who can compare, may judge by the following instances of the same verb, Luke
24.4. Acts 4.1. Acts 10.17. of one near of kin to it, in construction and
composition, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. and of both of their simple and primitive verb, John
1.26.

Besides, to proceed with S. Paul's testimony to the posteriority of the date of
this Epistle, he does in this very Chapter distinguish betwixt his past, and
present condition at Rome, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. At my first answer, no man stood
with me, but all men forsook me; I pray God it be not laid to their charge:
Notwithstanding, the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me, that by me the
preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear, and I was
delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. Wherein who cannot but observe, that he
speaks of a very great danger, and his deliverance from it, he had been in the
mouth of the Lion; afterward he was set at liberty, to preach unto the
Gentiles; but now he was ready to be offered: And that his being in the Lions
mouth, and following deliverance, can no way be so tolerably interpreted, as of
the intervenient time betwixt his first and second imprisonment, and his
confessed pains and labors among the Gentiles, while at liberty. To be sure,
his deliverance out of the Lions mouth, or preaching to the Gentiles; and his
being a second time within the jaws of the Lion, or ready to be offered, cannot
be verified, either of one time, or of one condition.

Furthermore, least Timothy, or any other, should suppose that S. Paul cried
out as a fresh water Soldier, upon the first brunt of danger, and was more
feared then hurt; he assures them, he had gone through so much, that as to a
Captain sufferer, nothing remained but the Triumph, 2 Timothy 4.8. I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there
is laid up for me, a crown of righteousness, etc.: All this speaks the verity
and validity of the ancient assignation of the date of this Epistle, and so
does.

Sound inference out of the Acts of the Apostles; 2. By S. Luke.
We shall deduce it most fairly, by bringing the two computations Ancient and
Modern in view, and face to face. The Modern account says; this second Epistle
to Timothy was written the first year of St. Paul's first arrival, and
imprisonment at Rome. The Ancient computation, says it was written in the
year, when the Apostle dyed at Rome, and some little time before his
Martyrdom: Now let both of them hear what St Luke says. He tells us, he
continues his History till the end of the second year after St. Paul's first
arrival at Rome, but does not observe any hardship endured by the Apostle
within that time; which bare omission, considering how exact this sacred
Chronologer is throughout his History of the Acts of the Apostles, to describe
St. Paul's Persecutions, and dangers at other places (as his expulsion at
Antioch in Pisidia, Act. 13.15. The Jews attempt to s^^^ him at Iconium, Act.
14.5. Their stoning him at Lystra, Act. 14.19. His being scourged at Thyatyra,
Act. 16.23. His many dangers at Jerusalem by the Grecists, Act. 9.29. Act.
21.27. to 35. His hazards by the other Jews, Act. 23.12. and his shipwreck in
his voyage to Rome Act. 27.) gives us cause to believe, that if the Apostle had
suffered any persecution at Rome in the first year after his arrival, St. Luke
would not have omitted it.

Do any say the Evangelist left the mention of the Apostles Roman sufferings to
be recorded by his own Pen. Object.


The contrary is proved. First, by the nature of an History, Sol.
which is either to describe particularly all material passages without
relation, or turning over the Reader to other writings, or to express what it
refers, and whither.

Secondly, By the forementioned sufferings of the Apostle at Antioch, etc.
which as they are recorded by St. Luke, so also are they commemorated by St.
Paul, 2 Cor. 11.25. etc. 2 Timothy 3.11.

Thirdly. By St. Lukes writing somewhat contradictory thereunto, for he not
only omits the mention of Persecutions but contrariwise observes many
extraordinary favors, and kindnesses bestowed upon the Apostle at R^me. Thus;
Act. 28.16. When we came to Rome, the Centurion delivered the Prisoners unto
the Captain of the guard, but Paul was suffered to dwell by himself, with a
Soldier that kept him. And ver. 31.32. And Paul dwelt two whole years in his
own hired house, and received all that came in unto him, preaching the kingdom
of God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ with all
confidence, no man forbidding him. What can? if this be not writ as it were of
set purpose to non-pluss the groundless conceit of St. Paul's treating 2 Timothy 4.
of troubles which befell him in the first year after his arrival at Rome,
especially since S. Luke did not write this part of the History as an ear, but
as an eye witness; for he prefaceth the whole relation with, When we came to
Rome, Acts 28.16. and tells us, he was S. Paul's individual companion throughout
the voyage, Acts 27.4, 5. verse. 7. ver. 29. verse. 37. Acts 28.7. ver. 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15.

Besides, suppose S. Paul met with some severity within the first year of his
coming to Rome; yet it being tempered with so much lenity, it was not only
unbeseeming of Apostolical magnanimity, to cry out so piteously for a little
pain: Ready to be offered, the time of my departure at hand: I have fought a
good fight, etc. but contrary to the common rules of prudence and civility, to
give reviling terms, Lion, etc. behind the back of an Emperor; under whose
nose (even by the testimony of his fellow Traveller and Sufferer S. Luke) he
was treated with so much civility and respect: And might justly have provoked a
far better Prince then ever Nero was, to utmost rage and severity against him.
In the mouth of these two most competent witnesses, S. Paul, and S. Luke, the
truth of the ancient computation of the date of the Epistle in question, might
be confirmed, 3. By History.
and concluded: But Civil Records witness the same thing, S. Paul came to Rome
in the third year of Nero's Reign; Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 2. ex tralat.
Hanmeri.
who till then, and some while afterward, was accounted to be a tolerable
Prince. Let the Reader note what Eusebius says, who is one of the Ancients,
and of the ancient opinion: He says, It is like that the Apology of Paul for
his Doctrine, might have been in the beginning sooner accepted, when Nero was
somewhat milder in affection and dealing; but after that he fell into such
outrageous wilfulness, he was quick with others for the Apostles sake. Besides,
Cardinal Baronius observably notes, in the year of S. Paul's arrival at Rome,
how Nero turned over Pomponia Graecina, who was accused of favoring some new
and foreign Sect (which the Cardinal suspects to have been Christianity) to no
other bar then her husbands breast, who acquits her. This says Civil Records in
this business.

4. By the Fathers.
But what says the Church Antiquities? enough, even in the judgment of
Esthius, who dissents from them: He says, Omnes pene interpretes etc. Est, ad
2 Timothy 4, 5.

5. By Presbyters.

Quam diu vixi manum tibi porrexi, nunc tempus est ut magister tibi sis atque
hortator, Calv. in loc.

Wight Divines second Paper.


Almost all Interpreters agree, that this Epistle was writ last of all S. Paul's
writings, or when he was near his Martyrdom.

Lastly, we have the consent of the most famous Presbyters unto this truth:
Calvin upon the words, For I am now ready to be offered, says, While I lived,
I assisted thee, but the time is come, when thou must be thy own Teacher and
encourager. The Wight Divines after they had vapoured hard about Timothies
travels, at last calmly say, After all this (viz. their instanced texts for
Timothies remove from Ephesus) toward the end of S. Paul's life, after his
first answering before Nero; and when he said, the time of his departure was at
hand, he sends for Timothy to Rome. This the London Ministers transcribe, and
avow it to be their opinion. But if it be true, then have both of them abused
their Readers, by citing several texts in proof of Timothies absence from
Ephesus; when yet notwithstanding they confess, after all this, this second
Epistle is sent unto him. Since we have proved (although they deny it) that he
was then at Ephesus; our Corollary from the whole confirmation of this second
Proposition, is, Annals of the World. ad an. Christ, 66.
That twelve years after the Presbyterian assignation of the date of the first
Epistle, the second finds Timothy at Ephesus, engaged upon his old works of
Ordination and Censures: And with it, although we could allege several eminent
Epispocal Divines, as Archbishop Usher, and others, who submit to the ancient
assignation of the date of this second Epistle, we conclude our discourse upon
this second Proposition.

3. Proposition, 3. Propos. Timothies works at Ephesus are of perpetual use.
The works imposed upon Timothy by the first Epistle, are of constant and
perpetual use, such, without one of which, or Ordination of Ministers, a Church
can neither be constituted, or propagated; and without the other, or
Administration of Discipline, and exercise of the Censures, a Church cannot be
preserved, and kept free from corruptions and errors.

Words are needless to demonstrate this Proposition, Confirmed.
it is so evident in reason. Who dares deny, that Officers form the Church, or
give her, her external being? Or that Discipline and Censures preserve her from
falling into confusion and disorders? This makes me admire, how it can sink
into any man's judgment, which is not a mere bog of Ignorance, that Timothy at
Ephesus, and Titus at Crete, should be of a temporary and discontinued Office,
when they were purposely settled at those places, for the discharge of those
works. The London Divines experienced the force of this truth, when it extorted
from them the following confession; to wit, Nor were these directions given for
that age only, but for all the ages of the Church, Jus Divin. part. 1. p. 74.
unto the end of the world, as appears evidently from 1 Timothy 6.14. compared
with 1 Timothy 5.7. verse. 21. What these directions were, Vide etiam Calvinum,
Bezam, and Aretium ad 1 Timothy 6.14.
they tell us a few lines before, namely, The rules laid down for calling of
men to the Office of the M^nistery, 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, etc. and 1 Timothy 4.14, etc.
What! is it evident by Scripture, that these rules are give^ for all ages of
the Church, unto the end of the World? then certainly thence it necessarily
follows, That such an Officer as Timothy, in such superiority, as the first
Epistle places him over Presbyters, was not a temporary Apostolical
Institution, but a standing Ordinance of Christ: And suppose Timothy did
remove, or was removed from Ephesus, the Office did not remove, and
discontinue, but some Officer might be appointed in his stead, to do those
works, or those directions were given only for that age of the Church, and not
for all ages, unto the end of the world. Suffice this in proof of the third
Proposition.

4. Propos. Timothy as a Bishop lived, dyed, and was buried at Ephesus.
Confirmed. Histor. l. 3. c. 4.
4. Proposition, The best records, of lest questioned Antiquity, say, Timothy in
an Episcopal superiority over Presbyters, lived, dyed, and was buried at
Ephesus.

Timothies Office and settlement at Ephesus, is acknowledged by Eusebius, who
lived A.C. 330. not only as his own opinion, but delivered down to him by
Clemens, a Companion of the Apostles, named in Scripture, and flourishing A.C.
70. and by Hegesippus, who neighboring upon those times, dyed A.C. 160. The
London Divines tax both Eusebius and his witnesses credit: They say, He read
Histories parum attente, or carelessly. But how do these grave Censors prove it?
Do they compare him with his Ancestors, and assign their disagreement? No, they
make a shorter and surer work of it, arraigning him and them before themselves,
and condemning both together: Clemens they say is fabulous. But,

1. Herein they contradict their Brethren at Wight; who citing a passage in
Clemens his writings, which made (as they thought) a little for their purpose,
Wight Divines first Paper.
they give the Book this Elogy, It is the most unquestionable record of
Antiquity.

2. Were Clemens fabulous in some things, that is no prejudice to his verity in
others: What! do the London Divines expect universal infallibility in all
Historians? And because of the fallibity of one, will they give no crdit to
many true Relations: Then devote we to the flames, all the ancient Records of
venerable History; and let us stubbornly contemn all their grave observations,
how nearly soever they concern our present states and conditions. The London
Divines are therefore to prove Clemens fabulous, in fixing Timothy at Ephesus;
and if they can do that, the Fable will not commence in Clemens his writings,
but in the fabulous first epistle to Timothy.

3. Are the Writings fabulous now going under Clemens his name? Not his, but
some Impostors: What is that to the Copy by which Eusebius wrote? Is nothing of
theirs true, of whose Authority Deceivers may make use after their deaths,
under which they may give the fairer color and shade to their errors? What!
have all Gods true servants a privilege to preserve their Writings from
miscarriage; either totally, by the injury of time, or partially, by the
injustice of men? And can none wear their livery, under the shroud of whose
credits, Cheats have vended their own imaginations and errors? Then raze we out
of the Canon, the Proverbs, the Canticles, Ecclesiastes, and all other
Scriptures relative to the Acts of Solomon, because an Apocryphal Wisdom is
masked under his name. Deny we credit to all and every of S. Paul's Epistles,
because the Church has be^ abused with a counterfeit Epistle (pretendedly his)
to the Church of Laodicea: Justify we our irreverent rejection of all
Antiquity, since hardly any one of the Fathers has not been so served?

Hegesippus is the other of Eusebius his witnesses, of whom the London Divines
say, He is not extent. A worthy product of the concentricated brains of a
Provincial Assembly of Presbyters. Hegesippus is not extant in 1653. therefore
there was no such man in 160. The London Divines can find no Writings of
Hegesippus extant in their times, therefore Eus^bius was careless in citing his
Authority in 330. Now whether Hegesippus were extant in Eusebius his time, let
the Reader judge, when he has read the following passage extracted out of his
Ecclesiastical History: He being to prove the Martyrdom of Simeon Bishop of
Jerusalem, says Hegesippus is his testimony; and after he has glossed a
little upon his evidence, he adds, Eccles. Hist. l. 3 c. 29. ex tralat.
Hanmeri.
But let us hear the Historiographers own words; Certain (says he) of the
Heretics accused Simeon the Son of Cleophas, that he lineally descended of the
stock of David, and that he was a Christian; See lib 4. c 20. etc. 21.
he suffered Martyrdom, being an hundred and twenty years old, under Trajan the
Emperor, and Atticus the Consul: thus Eusebius. And much more to this purpose
may be seen in the same Chapter, and elsewhere: Therefore leaving Eusebius, and
directing our speech to the London Divines, we say he did considerately fix
Timothy at Ephesus; and if they had not been more eager to write, then
conscientious or careful what they wrote; and if either their own credit, or
the Churches peace, had had due place in their judgments, they would not have
filled paper with such blots.

Catal. Scrip. Sacr.
Eusebius having fixed Timothy at Ephesus, S. Jerome tells us how long he
tarried there, to wit, He there lived in the Office of a Bishop, there died,
and there he was buried. I know this Catalogue is sometime cited under S.
Jerome, and sometime under Sophronius his name, (who was S. Jerome's
contemporary) the reason is, because either of them had a hand in its
composure: S. Jerome writing their Acts whom Eusebius mentions, one of which
Timothy was, Ad A. C. 109.
and Sophronius adds the rest. The time of Timothy's continuance at Ephesus,
is computed by Baronius to amount to above forty years, and he was no Babe in
History, nor is it advantageous to the Papacy, to allow Timothy's Episcopacie
at Ephesus, it carrying along with it such an Apostolical Succession, as is
inconsistent with S. Peter's ordinary Pastorate, and the Popes peculiar
Succession in it. Lyranus, who was above two hundred years Senior to Calvin, Ex
a Lap. ad Rev. 2.1.
and to the first Settlement of the Presbyterian Government at Geneva, says,
The common opinion interprets the Ephesine angel, Rev. 2.1, 2. by Timothy. But
the Book of the Revelation was written one of the last of Scripture-writings,
and published by S. John long, and long after S. Paul's death. And yet even
then, those who lived nearest Timothy, concluded him to be resident at Ephesus.

Besides, when Timothy died, his office was not buried with him in the same
Grave, Against Heart.
for learned Doctor Raynolds proves a lineal succession of seven and twenty
Ephesme Bishops from Timothy. And long before Doctor Reynolds, Leontius Bishop
of Magnesia maintains in the famous Council of Chalcedon, Council. Chalced. Act.
10.
That from blessed Timothy to his time, there had been twenty six Bishops of
Ephesus. This shall conclude the proof of our fourth and last proposition.

Coeclusion of this part of the discourse.
Thus Timothy's Works and Office at Ephesus have been examined, and we suppose
it has been proved, that he did not stand formally in the relation of an
Evangelist, unto that Church. Neither did he remove discharged of his Official
Relation to her. We have been a long time upon it, but if it be at last well
done, the Reader is desired to impute it to the weight and intricasie of the
matter, not unto my desire or design to impose upon his patience. For in the
preparation to our Definition, it has fared with us as with an Architect, who
building a small Tenement out of the Ruins and upon some part of the
Foundation of a decayed Palace, he spends twice so much time in removing and
carrying away the Rubish of the former, as in the erection of the latter. But
we shall not keep our Reader longer from our Definition, by a tedious and
impertinent Apology, that we have done it too long already. We define from
Philip, as S. Ambrose, S. Anselm, and Theophylact, did before us: This is
observed by those who have read their Commentaries, and we do not doubt but
reasons of sufficient ponderousness have been alleged in this discourse, why
we define the Evangelist by Philip, and not by Timothy.

The Evangelist must be defined by Philip or Timothy.
BUt as we are stepping into our Definition, Obj. Why must the Evangelist be
defined by Philip or Timothy.

Aus. 1. Because none but they two are called Evangelists.

2. Philips works were purely evangelical.

3. Concession of Presbytery.


a before-unthought-of Objection takes hold of our Pen, and demands a Reason
why the Evangelist must be defined by Philip or Timothy?

I answer:

First because none but those two are called Evangelists.

Secondly, Philip did such pure and proper Evangelical works, as the nature of
the Office cannot so certainly or readily be found out, as by them.

3. The most wary and judicious Presbyters content themselves with the sole
nomination of Philip and Timothy, in their Definitions. Thus Zanchy and
Aretius. And with them agrees our Assembly in their notes upon Ephesians. 4.11.
Besides those Definers who insert more names, do it because they conceive their
works were parallel either unto Philip's or Tymoth^'s.

4. The Verb Evangelize, or Participle Evangelizing, are indeed used of many
besides Philip and Timothy; but those of whom they are used, 4. The Verb
Evangelize is used of several others, but little will be drawn from thence to
end this debate.
are of such different Orders and Relations, as little by very much labor can
be drawn from them, toward the Definition of the Evangelist in a proper and
distinct sense Neither did any good Author hitherto, Presbyte^ian or other,
attempt the breaking up of that Quarry. However, the Dissenting Brethren make
an Essay upon it. To what purpose will appear by the following Narrative.

They perceiving their Presbyterian Brethren sped so well, by wresting of words
of many and dubious significations, endeao^ur from (...) or the pa^ticiple
evangelizing, to set up Gifted Brethren in the ruin of Presbyters, as
Presbyters by the Substantive Evangelist had raised themselves in the
depression of Bishops: Accordingly they maintain exercising by Gifted Brethren
to be a Gospel Ordinance, and in proof of it ei^th^ Assembly, Dissenters
Exceptions to the proof concerning the Church at Jerusalem. Page 19.
Although the noune Evangelist may signify an Officer, ye^ the verb or
participle agrees to a gifted brother, (they might have added a gifted Sister,
for their proof will bear it; if it bear an^thing) because as they say, Aquila
and Priscilla taught Apollos and they are not called (...), as having an
^ffice, but (...) as referring to the act, the work they did; and that the word
seems to sound, as if they made it their work. Would the Assembly have had
recourse to the Text where this action of Aquila's and Priscilla's toward
Apollos is recorded, they would soon have found that no such word as (...) is
used in it. The Text is Act. 18.26. and in the Original runs thus: (...). But
the Dissenters craftily conceal the Text, and confidently affirm this
evangelizing by Aquila and Priscilla, as if it were granted on all hands;
having these advantageous but dishonest ends in it, Either the Assembly might
take it upon their words, (as it afterward proved) or if the Assembly should
search the Text, and detect the fallacy, the Dissenters papers were in print,
and spread into the hands, and entertained in the hearts of their party; many
of which never could, more never would see the Assembly's answer; and those who
did, would censure its Authors of reading the New Testament after some corrupt
Copy, their friends having the very Original, which they were most confident
that they faithfully translated. And what a door was here opened to a
perpetual, and never to be silenced clamor. The Dissenters hereby in the
opinion of their partakers, had discovered the formerly hidden privileges of
glib tongued (they call them tender Conscienced) Brethren, and rescued a most
precious truth out of the jaws of Presbyterian tyranny; and let the Assembly
oppose it with never so much Scripture, or reason, they would adjudge it to be
to little purpose, save the further manifestation of their usurping
perfideousness, since the godly and public spirited Dissenters had removed
the vail, and showed all lay-Gospellers the way to confute it, and to maintain
their rights conceeded to them by the holy Gospel. But leave we the Dissenters
to their thoughts, and come we to the Assemblies answer; who instead of making
use of what we have observed, and might with all ease have been observed by
them; and being observed, would have stopped the mouth of all Reply: They patch
together such a pitiful answer, as has as little regard to truth, diligence,
and faithful comparing of Scriptures, as had the Dissenters objection. Wherein
also the Assembly, to the unworthy betraying of a most precious truth, do
weakly grant, what the Dissenters mainly insisted upon: Take it in the
Assemblies own words, Answer to Dissenters, page 31.
We desire our Brethren to pro^^ one text of Scripture, where (...) is used of
any that are not Preachers by Office. We can bring many where it is used of
those that are, even by the Penman of this History. This they write in the
line, and against it cite in the Margint. Luke 8.1. and 9.6. and 20.1. Acts
5.42. and 8.12. and 10.36. These texts are six in number: But Reader, behold
and stand amazed, no one of the first five contain (...), yea, not so much as
(...) in any case, or number, with, or without an article. In the last text,
Acts 10.36. we read (...): but they did never read the text, who join it in
construction with (...) or preaching, as is most plain both by the Original,
(...). And by our Translation, The word which God sent unto the children of
Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, he is Lord of all. But notwithstanding
this gross inobservancy of the Assembly, Jus Divin. part. 1. p. 2.
the London Divines (many of which were Assembly men) repeat and urge this
answer of the Assembly, after nine or ten years of deliberation, as the
Achillean Argument, or Goliahs Sword, against gifted Brethren: But of this
enough. The reason why we mentioned it, is, to show how the Assembly, the
London Divines, the Dissenting Brethren, and to whom Bucanus may be added, Loc.
com. loc. 42. quae. 1^.
agree with us, that the Evangelists Office is only to be defined by them, or
one of them, of whom the substantive is used: But the substantive is only used
of Timothy and Philip: Of the former, in a large and general sense, as has
been already proved; the latter (or Philip) only remains, of whom it is used
strictly and formally, and from whom we define as follows.

Evangelist defined by Philip.
Definition. First Definition.
AN Evangelist is a Presbyter, of singular courage and sufficiency, sent forth
to preach the Gospel unto an unconverted people, or nation, and to baptize them
upon their believing, in order to their enchurching.

Generally proved.
This definition is an abstract of all concerning, or done by Philip, Acts 8.
except working of miracles, which is purposely omitted, because neither Philip,
nor any other Officer, wrought them, as ordinary acts of Office: Who wrought
them once, not having a faculty to produce them, when, or so often as he
pleased, although the occasions were the same: This we shall dispute, as the
matter requires, when in the tract concerning the Apostles, we shall
distinguish betwixt their gifts and Office works. But as touching the point
before us, or our Definition, it may be proved in few more words then it self
contains. Philips Presbyterate appears, both in what he did, as preach and
baptize, Acts 8.12. But when they believed, Philip preaching and teaching the
things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were
baptized both men and women. These will not be denied by our Antagonists, to be
Presbyterial acts of Office, and we trust we shall satisfy all others in the
particular explication and confirmation of our definition, that Philip was of
that order, and no higher, when he did them. And as his Presbyterate is
evidenced in this, so also in what he could not do, as laying on of hands,
verse. 15.16.

Philips courage and sufficiency is attested, both by the time of his mission,
Acts 8.1, 3, 4, 5. And Saul was consenting unto his death: and at that time
there was a great persecution against the Church which was at Jerusalem, and
they were scattered all abroad throughout the regions of Judea, and Samaria,
except the Apostles. As for Saul, he made havoc of the Church, entering into
every house, and haling men and women, committed them to prison: therefore they
that were scattered abroad, went every where preaching the Word. Then Philip
went down unto the city of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them. And by the
temper of the people to whom he went, which appears both in the forementioned,
Acts 4.5. and by verse 34.35. And the Eunuch answered Philip, and said, I pray
thee of whom speaks the Prophet this, of himself, or of some other man? Then
Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and preached unto him
Jesus.

Philips Mission is resolved by the negatively concluding questions, Romans
10.14, 15. How shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? and how
shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear, without a preacher? and he shall they preach, except they be sent? as it
is written, how beautiful are the feet of them, that preach the Gospel of
peace, and bring glad tidings of good things.

The Infidelity of Philips Auditors is demonstrated, partly, by the place of
their habitation, Samaria, whereinto our Savior forbad the Apostles to enter,
Mat. 10.5. Those twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them saying, Go not
into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not.
And especially, by the character of those persons to whom Philip preached, Acts
8.9, 10, 11. But there was a certain man called Simon, which before time in the
same City, used sorcery, and bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that
himself was some great one; to whom they all gave heed from the least to the
greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God; and to him they had
regard, because that of long time he had bewitched them with his sorceries.

Lastly, Philips baptizing the converted Samaritans, in order to their
enchurching, appears by Acts 8.14, 15, 16, 17. Now when that the Apostles which
were at Jerusalem, heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent
unto them Peter and John; who when they were come down, prayed for them, that
they might receive the Holy Ghost (for as yet he was fallen upon none of them,
onily they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus:) then laid they their
hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost: Should we leave our definition
thus, no part of it remains unproved: But to make the whole more evident, he
Definition proved in part. An Evangelist explained.
we will take the frame in pieces, and examine the fitness of every part.

An Evangelist: The Grammatical explication of this word may be expected, and
we shall endeavor the Expectants satisfaction with all possible brevity.

Step we into any (termed) Theological Tracts concerning Evangelists (as if
nothing but criticizing upon a word simply profane, were in hand) a verse out
of Homer, or a sentence out of Cicero, bolts forth upon us. The Poet senseth it
by the reward of good news.

(...) Or,

Reward my news, for the vernal stork is come. The Orator senseth it, by
Sacrifice, upon tidings of our friends health, prosperity, or safe return from
a long and hazardous journey and enterprise. Thus receiving welcome letters
from his friend Atticus, he says, O sweet Letters, to whom I confess a
Sacrifice is due. O Suaves epistolae, quibus evangelium deberi fateor. Cicero
ad Atticum. Pascitur in vestrum reditum votiva Juvenca. Horat.
This custom was familiar with the Romans, upon like occasion: But I shall not
commend to my Readers stomach, what I find my own kerking against; or why need
we beg husks from strang^ers, when in our fathers house there is bread enough.
A diligent Reader of the Old Testament, of the seventies Translation (which all
learned men will readily grant, New Testament Writers had frequently in their
eye) will find the verb (...), or to evangelize, used as extensively by them,
as by any, yea, all other Authors: It has a twofold signification, 1. Secular.
2. Sacred.


(...)
And in both is the Interpretation of the Hebrew Bisher.

In its secular signification, it is used of tidings of several sorts.

1. Bad; when Joab disswades Ahimaas from carrying the unwelcome news of
Absolons death unto David: the seventy use the word (...), or thou shall not
carry tidings; for which the reason is subjoyned, or, because the Kings son is
dead, 2 Samuel 18.19, 20. The news bringer to Eli, of the taking of the Ark, and
of the slaughter of his two sons, and of thirty thousand Israelites, by the
Philistian Army, is in the Original called Hambusher; but the Seventy translate
it, (...), 1 Samuel 4.17

2. Good. The Lepers finding the Assyrians fled, (...)
and their Camp empty, call it, (...), 2 Kings 5.7. and 9. David's Watchmen
seeing Ahimaaz coming from the Camp ward, and acquainting the King therewith:
he forthwith accepts the Omen, and presageth, that the tidings, as the bringer,
were good, (...), 2 Samuel 18.27. And they were so, for the Rebels were
discomfited, and their head (or Absolon) stricken off.

From this latter branch of signification, the word spreads further, and is
expressive of,

1. The reward given to the Messenger of good tidings, when Ahimaaz was over
importunate with Joab to run with tidings unto David, the discreet General
would have taken him off with this, (...), 2 Samuel 18.21, or this journey will
be little to thy profit; for which the reason is presently subjoyned, or,
because the Kings Son is dead. Forster in lexic. ad verb. (...)
Forster to the same sense in fewer words, Non invenies Evangelia, or, thou
shall not find a reward. Thus the Amalikite who killed, or presumed to tell
David that he killed Saul, coming to David with the news, is said to expect
(...), or a reward, 2 Samuel 4.10.

2. The (...), or Triumphal songs publicly pronounced, and danced unto, upon
days of Thanksgiving, for Victories over public Enemies, Psalm. 62.12. (...):
The Hebrew is feminine, and allusive to the custom of the Jewish women, to sing
and dance upon such occasions: See Exodus 15.20. Judge. 5.1. 1 Samuel 18.6. suffice
this for the secular signification of the word in the Old Testament.

In its sacred signification it is used,

1. Of Heathens, performing some joyful solemnity in the Temples of their Idols
(suppose extraordinary Sacrifice) upon the discomfiture of their Enemies: Thus
the Philistines having slain Saul, and routed his Army, are observed to be
(...), or Evangelizing to their Idols, 1 Samuel 31.9.

2. Of the people of God, receiving the publication of their Redemption from
sin, and Reconciliation to God. This is twofold.

1. Typical: The vails of the Law overshadowed the manifestations of the
Gospel: Gods most Reverend name Jehovah, first made known to them, referred not
so much to what he was then to them, as to what he will be, and is both to us,
and them, under their Dispensation: In Isreal's Redemption out of Egypt, passage
through the Red Sea, Sustenance in the Desert, and (not to instance in too many
particulars) in most of Gods providence toward them, and in all their
Ceremonial Worship, Christ was preached: I do not speak my own thoughts, the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, says the Jews were evangelized unto, ere
the Incarnation, Heb. 4.2. For unto us was the Gospel preached ((...)) as well
as unto them; but the Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with
faith in those that heard it. The exact consideration of this Text, will
contribute much to the Conviction of those Gainsayers, who make the Mosaical,
and the present Administration, to be diverse Covenants; whereas in truth they
are but one, and the same Covenant of Free Grace, diversely veiled, and revealed.

Object. Is it said, The Jews sought righteousness by the works of the Law.

Sol. I answer, That is not to be referred to the nature of the Law, or Gods
end in its Promulgation; for the Promise wa^ long before the Law, and could not
be diannulled by it, Gal. 3 16, 17. Now to Abraham and his seed, were the
promises made: H^ says not, and to seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to
this seed, which is Christ. And this I say, that the Covenant which was before
confirmed of God in Christ: the law which was four hundred and thirty years
after, cannot disanul it, that it should make the promise of no effect: But it
did refer to the pride, and misapprehension of some Pharisaical, and self
justifying Spirits; for neither did the generality even of that Sect, seek
righteousness absolutely by the works of the Law, but even in the judgment of
their Gospel Reprover, as it were by the works of the Law, Romans 9.32. Wherefore
because they sought it not by faith; but as it were by the works of the Law
((...)) and they stumbled at that stumbling stone; i. e. they looked too much
at their work done, not at their Savior expected; to whom they were so
frequently necessitated to apply themselves, under that Paedagogy: The
Tabernacle always had a Mercy-seat within it, as well as sometimes a cloud over
it; and the Law of Moses appointed expiatory, and propitiatory Sacrifices for
all sorts of men, from the Prince and High Priest downward, to the lowest of
the people: See Lev. 4.13. ver. 22. and 16.11. v. 32.33. Heb. 7.27. But such
Sacrifices for Princes, Priests, and people of all sorts, neither needed, nor
ought to have been offered, if any person, how exact soever his life and
conversation were, might have stood by the righteousness of his own
performances. But leave we all further discourse of typical evangelizing, and
come we to the second real. This also is twofold.

1. By Christ himself, Isa. 6.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because
the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings, (...), etc. compared with
Luke 4.18.

2. By his appointed Ministers, Isa. 52.7. How beautiful upon the mountains,
are the feet of him that brings good tidings, ((...)) compared with Romans
10.15.

And in one, or other of these two senses, it is used throughout the New
Testament. The Jewish Rabbis conceive, that those Texts in Isaiah do speak so
clearly of the Messiah, whom they do not yet acknowledge to be come, as they
presume from the derivation of the word Bisher, to persuade its mystical
relation, to his miraculous incarnation: For whereas the root whence Bisher (or
to Evangelize) springs, signifies Flesh; for the Etymology whereof, perhaps a
common reason may be assigned, to wit, good news, chearing men's spirits; also
fattens, and makes their bodies fleshy: They strain this string to an higher
note, and say, the word Bisher imports, Verba facere de incarnato, or to speak
of the incarnate Messiah. But leaving this notion to each Readers judgment, we
hasten to a period of this Grammaticism. The seventy Interpreters (to my
remembrance) do never use the noun (...), though Isa. 41.27. fairly called for
it; the Text being a gracious promise concerning the first and great
Evangelist, our Lord Jesus Christ. And accordingly the Hebrew Mebasher, is
rendered by our Translator, one that brings good tidings; And by the vulgar,
Vatablus, Iunius, (...)
Tremellius, and Piscator, Evangelistam. But keeping our selves to what words
the Seventy do use; its observable, that where ever they do use the verb
Evangelize, or the participle Evangelizing, or the Noun Substantive Evangel, in
all or any of the forecited quotations, they would denote thereby, the telling
of some new thing, somewhat whereof the Auditors had not heard before; and
either they were desirous, or it was necessary for them to hear it. And what
sense can it bear better in the New Testament, especially so far as concerns
the Evangelists proper Office and work; both because it has been the usual
signification of the word, and because preaching, to whom the Gospel is not
news, is usually phrased by other terms, as (...), to teach, (...), to feed,
(...), to oversee, and (...), to rule. Be it granted, that these words, as also
(...), may be sometimes used promiscuously, for preaching to Converts, and no
Converts: Certain it is, that (...) in its primary, most proper, and usual
signification, imports the bringing of the first news of Christ, and his
righteousness. Thus it is used, Mat. 11.5. Luke 1.19. and 2.10. and 3.18. v,
43. and 7.22. and 8.1. and 9.6. and 16.16. Acts 10.36. and 8.4. v. 25. v. 35.
v. 40. and 11.20. and 14.7. v. 21. and 15.35. and 16.10. and 17.18. Romans 15.19,
20. Gal. 1.8. suffice this in explication of the first word of our Definition.

Is a Presbyter explained.
Is a Presbyter: We are entering into a dark cave, but we hope not unfrequented,
since we discover the light of the authority of some worthy Writers, hanging at
the mouth of it, to direct our steps. Eccles. Pol. l 5. p 421. Wight Divines
second Paper. Jus Divin. part. 2. p. 68.
Judicious Hooker, describes the Evangelist to be a Presbyter: This his
sentence is quoted by the Wight and London Presbyters; but for what reason I
know not, unless to witness their subscriptions to it, and satisfactions in it;
for neither of them reject, or censure it, or say the Evangelist was of another
Order. The Dissenting Brethren, men of sufficient parts, Answer to Assembly, p.
2.
and piercing into these kind of matters, tell the Assembly, The Evangelist
differed not from an ordinary Pastor, but in extent of power. This company sets
forth from the same stage, though they do not go with us throughout the
journey. We will make our utmost improvement of their company, while we have
it: They acknowledge, that the Evangelist was a Presbyter, and did not differ
from an ordinary Pastor, but in extent of power, wherein (as we suppose) they
yield to his definition by Philip, since Timothy was Superior to Presbyters,
and in his work at Ephesus, very much unlike to an ordinary Pastor, he having
power of Ordination, and Censures over them. But here our Company shakes hands
with us, and we are left alone in a Wood of Objections, where through we must
either cut our way, or be lost in the undertaking.

Obj. The Apostles evangelized.
Object. If the Evangelist be a Presbyter, then only Presbyters evangelized:
But you have granted, and so does plain Scripture allow, that the Apostles
evangelized.

1. Answ. Common works cannot define an order.
I answer, 1. The Apostles as the higher Order, did whatever the inferior order
of Officers did, or could do: But as the Apostles are not thereby sunk into the
inferior order, so neither do common works mount the inferior order up to the
Apostolate; for the Apostles had as well special, as common works, and the
Superiority, and Inferiority of Officers, does not appear in general works, or
what all do, but in distinct works, or what one does, which the other cannot
do.

2. If the Apostles became formal Evangelists, 2. If the Apostles were formally
Evangelists, Philip was none.
by doing common works with the Evangelists, then the distinct acts of the
Apostolical Office, as Imposition of hands in Ordination, etc. must flow into
the definition of the Evangelist. And so neither Philip was, nor can be an
Evangelist, he being both expressly debarred from doing those works, Acts 8.14,
15. and separated from the Apostolical Office, Acts 8.1. and 6.5. and 21.8.

3. Our opinion resulting out of the premises of the two former answers is, 3
Evangelizing in its proper notion cease, when the distinct acts of the
Apostolical Office are wrought among a new converted people.
That although men of both Orders might evangelize, yet the Evangelist is more
properly to be defined by a Presbyter, then by an Apostle; both because Philip
was no more then a Presbyter, and because when once the distinct Office-works
of the Apostolate (as Ordination, Censures, etc.) are performed among new
Converts, the after exercising of their Offices, ought more properly to be
termed, feeding, teaching, etc. then evangelizing: And therefore shall we find
any Apostle in Scripture doing the same works, that Philip did, or called an
Evangelist, as Philip is; the first whereof is probable, the latter most
improbable: The only variation which our Definition can receive is, That the
Evangelist is a Minister (which term is pendulous betwixt Apostles and
Presbyters) doing the same, Obj. 2. Philip was the Deacon, and could not then
be a Presbyter. Ans. This objection can neither be rightly stated, answered, or
avoided, till another question be put and resolved, which is, Whether the
Diaconate mentioned, Acts 6 were the present subordinat^ and incom^tible wit^
Pr^sbyte^
and only the same works mentioned in our definition: Suffice this in answer
to the first objection.

Object. 2. Philip mentioned in the Definition to be a Presbyter, was Philip
the Deacon, or one of the seven, consequently he was not a Presbyter, since the
Presbyterate, and the Diaconate, are distinct Orders, and the latter the
inferior.

Sol. I answer, That Presbyters and Deacons are distinct Officers, and the
latter the inferior, is undeniably proved by the present Church order and
practice, wherein she has not innovated, but insisted in her primitive steps,
shortly after her own Constitution, and her Lawgivers Ascension. S. Paul
treats of Deacons in constituted Churches, whose order was both distinct from
Timothies, and from the order of Presbyters, 1 Timothy 3. per tot.: Whence I
believe the Church has ever since taken her warrant (and I am persuaded
warrantably) to retain Deacons in her Hierarchy, and to assign them such works,
as she betrusts unto them. But whether the seven mentioned, Acts 6. were such a
kind of Deacons; and whether the Diaconate then committed unto them, were as
the present is, sub^rdinate to the Presbyterate, and the work thereof
incompatible to be assigned to a Presbyter, We maintain the negative, for these
reasons: 1. The Apostle Judas Iscariot diaconized in Christ's time.
is a question which must be resolved, ere the Objection can be affirmed, or
avoided. We maintain the negative, for these reasons.

1. While Christ was upon the earth, the Diaconate, or Ministration to the
poor, and stewarding of the temporalities o^ the Church, in an Eleemosynary way
(which was all that was betrusted to Philip, and the rest of the seven, Acts
6.) was committed to Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve Apostles.
Concerning whom Dr. Hammond Hamond. Joh. 12.5.6. Praest pecuniae publica, Aret.
ad Joh. 13.29.
says, He had the charge of receiving all. Aretius says, He was betrusted
with, and set over the common stock. What Judas his work was, and what his ends
were, S. John will inform us: His work appears, John 13.29. For some of them
thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus had hid him to buy those things
that we had need of against the feast; or that he should give somewhat unto the
poor. Upon which last clause (or that he should give somewhat to the poor)
Calvin well observes, Divin assent, Apostoli depauperibus locutum esse, nisi ex
more ordinario Juvandi pauperes. Call. in loc.
That the other Apostles must have divined, that Christ in his speech to Judas,
had respect unto the poor, unless it had been his ordinary custom to give order
for their relief. This then was Judas his work; and a public work it was, but
his ends were private; he undertook to serve the poor, and his brethren, the
better to help himself, John 12.5, 6. Why was not this ointment sold for three
hundred pence, and given to the poor? This he said, not that he cared for the
poor, but because he was a thief, and had the bag ((...), or purse) and bare
what was put therein. I pass by an observation meeting me in this Text, viz.
How easily they may espy supposed, and colorable faults in other men's good
deeds, who will do none themselves, and leave it to the Arbitration of their
own Consciences, whether it proceed from envy, left others be, or be thought to
be better then they; or from Gods just judgment, to render them
self-condemned; however, let them remember Judas. This is all the observable
points of this Diaconate, ere the Ascension. But,

2. The other Apostles diaconized sometime after the Ascension.
2. Judas did not drudge in this inferior service, because his Master foresaw
his treachery; for to do it, was hitherto, and sometime afterward, no
disparagement to any other of the Apostles; for it was one of their works,
after the Ascension, Acts 2.46. and 4.35. In the latter text we read, And laid
them (viz. their charitable contributions) down at the Apostles feet, and
distribution was made to every one, according as he had need. But who
distributed? Aretius and Dr. Hammond answer readily, the Apostles. This their
answer is good, and confirmed by Acts 4.37. and 5.2. but principally by Acts
6.1, 2. And in those days, when the number of the Disciples were multiplied,
there arose a murmuring of the Grecians, against the Hebrews, because their
widows were neglected in the daily ministration ((...)) Then the twelve called
the multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said, It is not reason, that we
should leave the word of God, and serve tables: From whence may be observed:

1. Some persons had already done the Deacons work, otherwise the Grecists
widows could not have been neglected in the daily Diaconate, or Ministration.
Interpreters vary in their Exposition of this term (Diaconate:) Some accept it
actively, as if the Grecists (who were either Jews cohabiting among the
Gentiles, or Jews who did read the Scripture, according to the Greek
Translation of the seventy, or Gentiles proselyted to the Jewish Religion)
complain of the servile, mean, and over-hard employment of their widows: But it
cannot be so sensed in this place, because the Apostles redressing the
grievance, do not distribute an equality of services among Diaconesses, but
betrust the whole Ministration unto Deacons. Others (with whom I agree) take
the word Diaconate passively, or of the Grecists complaint, that their Widows
(in which term is comprehended all their poor: A species of the most helpless,
for brevity sake, being only expressed) were neglected ((...),) or not so much
look^ upon, as other widows, in the daily Ministration, or distribution of
relief unto them.

2. This distribution (against whose presumed partiality the Grecists
complained) was made by the hands of the Apostles; otherwise the complaint had
not come so directly to them, or at least, special mention would have been made
of the Delinquents, either in the Complainants bill, or in the Apostles decree;
whereas otherwise, the injured persons make their address immediately to the
Apostles, complain of their wrong, without mention of any third persons: Si pii
Diaconi qui bona Ecclesiae fidei suae commissa fideliter administrant,
experiantur aliquorum murmur, quasi non haberent aequam ipsorum rationem,
consolentur se exemplo Apostolorum quibus idem evenit, Piscat. ad Act. 6. 1.
Observe. 1.
And the Apostles ordering their relief, do it with solemn protestation of
their own unwillingness to engage upon both works any longer: Acts 6.2. It is
not meet that we (ver. 4.) but we will give our selves. Piscator upon the place
observes: If godly Deacons, who faithfully administer the Church stock
committed to their ear, are notwithstanding murmured against by some, as if
they had not a due regard unto them: let them comfort themselves, by the
example of the Apostles unto whom the same happened.

3. The Apostles lost no glory by thus diacon^zing, because it concerned the
Church in her common nature.

Sunt duae parts Politiae Ecclesiasticae, altera est ministerium a Deo
ordinatum, altera est (...) authoritate Ecclesiae constituta. Chrysostom. ad 1 Timothy
3.1. And why.


3. The splendour of the Apostolate, is not hereby ecclipsed or impaired: The
Apostles neither thought so, at the Imposition, neither do they assign it for
the reason of their deposition of the Diaconate; but the growing occasions for
the exercise of their proper Office-works, as preaching, prayers, etc. Acts
6.2, 3, 4. The reason is evident, because the Church comes under consideration
in a double notion, either as a distinct and particular Polity and Society, or
as a common and general Polity or Society: As the former, she has her proper
Ordinances, Statutes, and Officers, not of her own election, but of her
Lawgivers Institution: These are, and must be perpetually the same, each
Ordinance must always have the same form, each Officer must invariably do the
same works, where the occasions are the same. Otherwise her first frame will be
taken in pieces, and what formed her distinct Society, will be dissolved. As
the latter, she admits or rejects at pleasure, what being used in other
Societies, is useful, or useless, for her occasions. Whatsoever Ordinances or
Constitutions she makes in this capacity, they are variable, she may retain
them as long, or change them as often as she pleases; and while they continue,
she may dispense them by any Officer or member at her own election. We reckon
the Diaconate mentioned Act 6. or the ministration to the poor, and serving of
tables, in this latter sort of Ordinances; and say the primitive Church gave it
entertainment, and the Apostles discharged it as such.

1. Natural light leads all Societies into its practice.
1. Because common beams of natural light, leads all Societies into its
practice; the care of, and making provision for the poor, being a duty
universally commended to all the sons of Adam, who have ability, especially
Governors (such the Apostles were in the Church) neither does any thing more
provoke God, or prejudice Societies, either Sacred or Civil, then the neglect
of this natural duty.

2. Particular Churches may for sometime have no need of the office.
2. The bountiful hand of indulgent Providence, may so enrich a particular
Church, as she may not for a long time stand in need of the actual discharge of
this Office, toward her own members: And yet in the mean time, be as true and
perfect a Church, as any other which has most work for such Deacons; the
reason is, because this diaconizing has no proper relation to the Church, as a
company of believers, but to her, as a mixed Society of poor and rich.

3. The works of this Diaconate, have been separately executed by men of
several orders, namely, by Apostles, Presbyters, and Deacons: By Apostles,
during Christ's incarnation, and after his Ascension, till Acts 6. By
Presbyters, Acts 6. and sometime afterward: By Deacons, from thence forward,
until this day. Now had this Office been properly Ecclesiastical, it would have
been appropriated by Christ to a special Officer, and could not have been thus
shifted from hand to hand; and finally, have descended to a third and distinct
order of men, unheard of in Christ's time; for such is the Deacon barely serving
tables, or ministering to the poor.

4. Our opinion is not novel, nor only ours; for the most eminent
Ecclesiastical writers agree with us in it. S. Cyprian says, 4 Antiquity
consents to this opinion. Meminisse autem diaconi debent quoniam Apostolos, i.
e. Episcopos, atque praepositos Dominus elegit. Diaconos autem post ascensum
domini in caelos, Apostoli constituerunt Episcopatus sui, atque Ecclesiae
Ministros. Cypr. epist l. 3. epist. 9. ad Rogatianum.

A Lap. ad Act. 6.3.

Nos cum dicto Apostolico ad mentem patrum adaptassemus, invenimus eos esse
locutos, non de viris qui mysteriis ministrant, sed de ministerio, quod in usu
mensarum adhibeatur. Cum liber actorum sic habent discipulorum multitudo and
quod and accepimus a Johanne Chrysostomo, haec verba interpretantis in com.
super Act. c. 6. ex sum. concilii. general. Con. 6. Can. 16. Edit. per
Caranzam. Non constat ex Actis Apostolorum, diaconos altaris, sed diaconos
mensarum, and viduarum, institutos, ab Apostolis, Act. 6. Cajetan. opusul. 30.
1. Tract. 11. Vide etiam Bellar. de Sacramento ordinis lib. 1. cap. 6.


Deacons ought to remember, that the Lord elected Apostles, i. e. Bishops and
Governors; But the Apostles, after our Lords ascension into heaven, appointed
Deacons to be Ministers of their Episc^pacy, and of the Church. A Lapide the
Jesuit presents us with a long roll of names, containing S. Chrysost^m,
Oecumenius, Beda, Mariana, Durandus, Cri^^ane, and the Fathers of the sixth
general Council, in the tenth S^^ion; Some whereof, as S. Chrysostom,
Oecumenius, Beda, Ma^^a, and the Fathers of the sixth Council, say, the seven
had no ^^ed Ministry committed to them, by the Impos^tion of hands, Acts 6.
consequently, they were not thereby made Church Officers, in a strict sense:
The words of the Council, because they are remarkable, I will transcribe; they
say, When we had compared the Interpretati^n of the Fathers, with the text of
the Apostles, we found, the Apostles did not speak of men who serve in holy
mysteries, but of those who minister unto tables: Which exposition both agrees
to the w^rds of the text, and with the Exposition of John Chrysostom. Others of
them, as Durandus and Cajetane, say, The Diaconate is no Sacrament: Which is
all one in the language of their time, as to say at this time, that it is no
Ecclesiastical order in a distinct, and special sense. Besides, Cajetane adds,
That it appears not out of the Acts of the Apostles, that the Apostles did
institute Deacons of the Altar, but Deacons of Tables and Widows Acts 6. Thus
he. But furthermore.

5. Presbyters allow it.
5. All reformed Divines, who frame their Altar by the Geneva pattern,
constantly say, No distinct Ecclesiastical Office was committed to the seven,
Acts 6. Accordingly, they not only prohibit their Deacons from preaching and
baptizing, but choose them ^^cally out of the Community; the old Deacons so soon
as new succeed, Negare non possum quin totus Diaconatus sit oeconomicus. Bez.
con. Sarav. c. 7.
being reduced to a private membership. This their practice is defended by
Beza, against Saravia; where he says, He cannot deny, but that the whole
Diaconate is oeconomical. Besides, Calvin makes the Diaconate mentioned, Acts
6. to be such a secular thing, as he takes some pains to excuse the Apostles
for intermedling with it. Verum siqua erat culpa, inecessitati potius qua illis
imputari de^uit. Calv. ad Act. 6 2.

Nihil absurdi erit si dixerimus Apostolos, post quam experti sunt munus illud
sibi non congruere petere ab Ecclesia ut liberentur. Id. ib. Si de eligendis
Diaconis locuti essent Apostoli, antequam ulla necessitat id flagitaret minus
propensum habuissent populum, visi fuissent laborom and molestiam fugere, nec
tam liberaliter multi in eonum manus obtulissent. Calv. ad Act. 6.1.

6. Episcopal Divines favor it.


Good man ^^he is now very jealous and tender of their credit; he says, If it
were a fault, it was rather chargeable upon the necessity of the times, then
upon the Apostles. In good time! that the Apostles did Diaconize, was a fault,
whereof the necessity of the times was chiefly guilty; but not only, for the
Apostles were not altogether blameless; therefore a little after he adds, It
will be no absurdity, if we should say, That the Apostles after they had
experienced the incongruity of that Office, besought the Church that they might
be freed from it: Whereas the Apostles diaconizing, did nothing (...) what was
agreeable to Christ's example, to the clear dictates of the Law of Nature, to
the common usage of all Governors of Societies, or to Christian prudence and
charity. Yea, Calvin himself in his Commentary on the next preceding verse, can
give an account of the prudential reasons moving the Apostles to intermeddle
with it: He says, If the Apostles had spoke of ordaining Deacons, ere
necessity had enforced it, the people would have abated in their respects
toward them; neither would they so liberally have betrusted their estates to
their disposal; but rather they would have slighted the Apostles, for shunning
pains taking, and labor. Thus have I endeavored the satisfaction of well nigh
all sorts of Readers. In the probability of my opinion concerning the Diaconate
mentioned Acts 6. what I have written, rebounds and eccho's from plain
Scripture, from a General Council, from the Fathers, from the Schoolmen, from
Modern, Papal, and Presbyterian Divines. But,

6. Perhaps some, whose satisfaction above all men's, I would endeavor (they
are the obedient Sons of the Church of England) may demand, How far any of her
Worthies consent with me? For answer whereunto, may they be pleased to hear
Judicious Hooker: He says, Suppose we the Office of teaching to be repugnant
to the Office of Deaconship, that they may not concur in one, and the same
person? Ecclesiastical Polity, lib. 5. sect. ^^.
what was there done in the Church by Deacons, which the Apostles did not first
do, being Teachers? yea, but the Apostles found the Office of teaching so
heavy, that they judged it meet to cut off the other charge, and to have
Deacons to undertake it? Be it so; the multitude of Believers increasing in
Jerusalem, and waxing great, it was too much for the Apostles to teach, and to
minister unto tables also; the former was not to be slacked, that this latter
might be followed, therefore unto this, they appointed others. Whereupon we may
rightly ground this axiom, that when the subject of one man's labors, of
diverse kinds, do wax so great, that the same men are no longer able to manage
it, sufficiently as before, the most natural way, is, by dividing their charge
into slips, and ordaining of other Officers. Diaconissae ministrae Ecclesiae
non Evangelii, pari ratione Diaconi quibus praeter pauperum procurationem nihil
concreditur, ministri quidem Ecclesia non Evangelii. Sarav. cont. Bez.

Field of the Church, l. 5. c. 25.

Heyl. Hist. of Episcopacy, part. 1. c. 2. sect. 14.

The question finally resolved.

The grand objection against Philips Presbyterate answered directly; viz. 1.
The objection equally prejudiceth the Apostolate, as the Presbyterate.


Wherein this profound Disputant yields, both that the Apostles sometime
Diaconized, and that they parted with that charge, not by the prohibition of a
Divine Institution, but upon the convenience of a prudential account.

Dr. Saravia says, Diaconesses, and Deacons (to whom nothing but ^^^ing
provision for the poor is betrusted) are for one, and the same reason,
Ministers of the Church, not of the G^spel.

Dr. Field says, The Deacons according to the intendment of their first
Institution, were to take care of the poor, and of the treasure of the Church.
And finally, Dr. Heylin says, The seven were not called to an Ecclesiastical
function, but a Civil trust, no dispensation of the Word and Sacraments, but a
disposition of the common treasure.

Being thus encompassed with a cloud of Authors of all sorts, we hope the way
is now brusht, and cleared* for a free passage to this Conclusion, That the
Diaconate mentioned, Acts 6. was once discharged by men, who were before Church
Officers, neither did it clash against their former trusts, because it and
their ^ther works, concerned the Church in several and distinct considerations.
Now to apply this to the point in hand, and answer the objection against
Philips Presbyterate, ere the work of serving widows and tables was committed
to him, Acts 6. we say,

1. If all doing the Deacons work in the primitive Church, were according to
modern estimation, inferior to Presbyters then so were the Apostles, from
Christ's Ascension, 'till Acts 6.1. for till that time they diaconized, or did
that work, which then they turned over to others. But certainly it did not
prejudice their Apostolical Order; and if the Apostles might officiate as
Deacons, then so might Presbyters; and as well Presbyter and Deacon, as Apostle
and Deacon, were not so irreconcileably distinct, but they might friendly meet
in one person; and for ought the Objection shows to the contrary, in the person
o^ Philip the Evangelist.

2. Philips Presbyterate evinced in six particulars. 1. The whole seven ere
made Deacons, were men full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom.
2. That Philip ere he received the charge of Ministration unto Tables, Acts 6.
was a Presbyter, and continued so afterward, appears,

1. The whole seven are made Deacons, were publicly accounted by the Church to
be (...), men of good report; or, men having a witness, or testimony, that they
were (...), or full of the Holy Ghost, and of wisdom, Acts 6.3. which phrases,
especially the latter, cannot be limited to a prudential management of Civil
affairs (a quality notwithstanding most requisite to their faithful and able
discharge of their new trust^) but must be extended to a discretion and
prudence in Gospel preaching; forasmuch as the phrase (full of the Holy Ghost)
does in other Scriptures refer to the abilities of Church Officers, Acts 11.24.
and 7.55. Luke 4.1. so even in this Text, it refers to the formerly noted
Ecclesiastical abilities and actions of those seven. And the word of wisdom is
ra^ked the leading, and reckoned the most edifying, spiritual gift bestowed
upon Church Officers, 1 Cor. 12.8. For to one is given the word of wisdom
((...)) to another the word of knowledge, ((...)) by the same Spirit.
Expositors sense the phrases, word of wisdom, and, word of knowledge two ways

In loc. In loc.
1. The Papists, Esthius, and A Lapide, etc. and some Protestants, as Calvin,
Beza, etc. and interpret wisdom, by udnerstanding of high and mystical truths;
which Beza peculiarly appropriates to the Apostles, as knowledge unto Teachers.

Sermo sapientiae pastorum est, ut possint sapienter consolari exhortari,
arguere! sermo scientiae doctorum est, ut scienter, perite ac accurate fidei
dogmata sacru literis doceant. Piscat. Phil in loc. Sapientia practica in rebus
agendis, cui opponitur (...) virtus contemplationis in intelligendis, and
dijudicandis rebus Aret. in loc. Sermo sapientia^ ^^ proprie verba: facientium
ad caetum Ecclesiae, sermo scientiae eorum qui in scholit vacan^^ explicandis
s^crae Scripturae, veritati ab Heterodoxia vindicanda juventutis formanda, and
preparanda ad sacrum ministerium Meres. system. Theol. loc. 15. sect. 53.
2. Aretius, Piscator, and Maresius, expound word of wisdom, by a practical
discretion in Pastors, to suit holy discourses to their hearers capacities; the
word of knowledge, by a skill and accurateness in Teachers to handle the
principles of Christian Religion. Both these Expositions refer the phrases,
word of wisdom, and word of knowledge, to the abilities of Church Officers, and
so neither of them prejudice our opinion of the Presbyterate of the seven. But
I prefer the latter Exposition, which also favors our opinion most; for these
reasons:

1. Because the primitive Church in all probability so expounded them; the
Gnostics, who crept into the Church almost with Christianity, arrogating to
themselves the highest seize of speculative knowledge, take their
denomination from (...). knowledge; not from (...), wisdom; whereas had (...)
been interpreted then, as by Esthius, etc. now, these Heretics would rather
have taken their name from thence, Gnostici propter excellentiam scientiae, sic
se appellatos esse vel appellari debuisse gloriantur. August. de haeres, c. 6.
and been called Sophists, because it came up more fully to their pretensions,
as being exclusive of an higher degree, and leaving no room for others to stand
upon their shoulders, and thence to see further into these mysteries; Pride in
heretics (as in the Devil) never thinking it self high enough, till it be most
high.

2. Because the common usage of the word Wisdom, when it relates to Church
matters, is in one, or other, of the two ^^llowing senses.

1. Of Conviction, and silencing of gainsayers, Acts 6.10. And they were not
able to resist the wisdom ((...)) and Spirit by which he spoke: where Wisdom,
and, Spirit by which he spoke, ^^n to be interpretative of, full of the Holy
Ghost and wisdom, ^^ verse 3.

2. Of the accommodation of a discourse to each hearers capacity and
edification, Col. 1.28. Whom we preach, warning every man in all wisdom ((...))
that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Now as both these works
were performed by some of the seven Deacons, the former by S. Stephen, Acts
6.10. both of them by Philip: One of them, when he confuted and convinced the
Samaritans, and Simon Magus, Acts 8.7. ad fin. 12. the other, when he
instructed the Eunuch, Acts 8.36, 37. So neither of them were peculiar to
extraordinary Officers, as they are now falsely termed, but both of them are
common to present Church Officers, ordinarily officiating. S. Paul acquaints
Timothy (and in him all Ministers) both how to attain them, and how to improve
them when attained, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. And that how from a child, thou have
known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise ((...)) unto
salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus (here is the mean to attain
it) All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; (here
is the way to improve it.) Suffice this for the first Reason, for the
Presbyterate of the seven.

2. S. Stephen Preached, and S. Philip Preached and baptized, shortly after
their Diaconal Ordination.
2. S. Stephen forthwith upon his Diaconal Ordination, preached to the
Libertines; and Philip shortly after preached to the Samaritans, and baptized
them; for S. Stephen dyed in travel with his Sermon, Acts 7.47. and immediately
after his death, Philip went forth evangelizing, Acts 8.1. ad fin. 5. But
neither of their Diaconal Ordinations, did empower them to do either of those
works, but only to serve tables; neither do we read where either of them
received any subsequent Ordinatio^, ere they preached and baptized; but
contrariwise, Philip after he had done both of those works, is called one of
the seve^, Acts 21.8. Now si^ce both these works, of preaching and baptizing,
are purely and permane^tly sacred, and of another nature, and flowing from
another Commission, then a Delegation to serve tables, we must of necessity
rank the seven under a suitable order. This could not be the Diaconate, as for
the aforesaid re^sons; so to speak ad homines, or to our modern Presbyterian^,
because they do not admit their Deacons to preach and baptize; neither could it
be the Apostolate, both because of the plain distinction betwixt the twelve,
and the seven, Acts 6.2, 3, 4. And because Philips power, after he had preached
and baptized, did not extend to imposition of hands, Acts 8.14. note also Acts
8.1. The Presbyterate only remai^s, unto which order we must entitle the
seven, till convinced by be^ter reasons, then any we have yet seen to the
contrary.

3. Those who had the care of the poor in the Church of Jerusalem, are called
Elders.
3. Those who had the care of the poor in the Church at Jerusalem, are called
Elders, Acts 11.29, 30. Then the Disciples, every man according to his ability,
determined to send relief unto the Brethren which dwelt at Judea, which they
also did, and sent it to the Elders ((...)) by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.
We shall best discover the drift of this text, by viewing its several
Expositions.

Sic mensis prae fuisse Diaconos and Presbyteris tamen sub essent: nec quicquam
nisi eorum authoritate agerent. Calv. ad Act. 11 30.
Calvin perceiving the here mentioned work did belong to the Deacons, he says.
Elders, not Deaeons are expressed, because the Deacons were accountable to the
Elders, and could do nothing, but under their authority. But herein he looked at
his own, and off the Apostles times; for S. Luke neither there, nor elsewhere,
takes notice of such Presbyterian superintendency over the seven. Besides, were
they accountable (as doubtless they were) where will reason audit their
accounts, but before the Apostles, who constituted them, and immediately
divided that Office from themselves unto the seven.

2. Beza (with whom agrees Dr. Lightfort) likes not Calvin's, Beza in loc.
Lightfoot Harm. ad An. Chrysostom. 55.
but prefers to abound in his own sense: He says, Elders here, and ruling
Elders mentioned, 1 Timothy 5.17. are the same: which if true (as is very
probable) and Elders in both places, are meant of Governors of the Church
stock, then the thing in question is granted, the first Deacons were
Presbyters, and the modern figment of Lay Elders, and their imaginary power to
rule, and neither feed nor diaconize, is utterly destroyed; yea, the main stays
of the Presbyterian Government are cut in pieces: For the Deacons, Acts 6. were
teaching, not Lay Elders, and their work was altogether different, from the
work of Geneva Lay Elders. The Diaconate, and lay-Presbyterate, being in that
Church committed to several and distinct persons. This Exposition of Beza's may
be further husbanded; but because the season is past in this discourse, we
leave its final improvement to another place in the tract of Apostles.

3. A Lapide, with whom his fellow Lorynus agrees, A Lapide and Lorynus in loc.
says, By Elders are meant presertim Diaconos, chiefly Deacons. This he
affirms as the opinion of others besides himself, whom he vails under an alii,
without particular nomination. But what, or who ever they are, who are of his
opinion, I fully agree with him, and them: For who else but the then Deacons
can be understood by these Elders, since the Apostles had so lately and
expressly committed the care of the poor unto them, Acts 6.

4. The Church at Jerusalem, convened in a Synod, is distributed into Apostles,
Elders and Brethren, 4. After the Ordination of the seven, the Church at
Jerusalem convened in a Synod, is comprised in Apostles, Elders and Brethren.
Acts 15.23. This Council was celebrated long after the Ordination of the
seven; and therefore they were comprised under one, or other of thee titles,
Apostles, Elders, or Brethren, or their Diaconal Ordination sunk them beneath a
private membe^ship. Neither could they be private Christians, for this their
works of preaching and baptizing will deny. They were therefore Officers, but
not Anostles, because the twelve divested themselves, when they invested the
seven with the Deaconship. Presbyters only remain, of whose order the seven
were, and under whose name comprehended, or they made no part of that Synod.

Do any run for refuge to the promiscuous use of words, and say, Object.
Suppose Deacons are called Elders in the former, and c^mprehended under their
name in the latter Text: all this may be allowed, and yet prove no more, then
that they were men of age, gravity, and of an elder-like carriage.

I answer, Answ.
this might be a shelter, if the Scripture did not so plainly show the seven
engaged upon Presbyterial acts of Office, as, Preaching and Baptizing;
wherefore their being called, and comprehended under the name of Elders, is an
augmentation of the credibility of our opinion, that they were Elders, both
before, when, and after they were made Deacons.

5. Antiquity consent to this truth.

Haeres. 21. Chrysostom. Hom. 14. ad Act. 6. Theophylact. com. ad Acts 6. Eccles.
Pol. p. 421. Bellar. de Pont. Romans lib. 4. c. 25.


5. Antiquity consents to the Presbyterate of the first Deacons: Epiphanius
(whom Blondel terms optimus pater) in his choice and excellent book against
Heresies, says, The seven Deacons were of the number of the seventy Disciples.
S. Chrysostom in the forecited place observes, that even in his time
Presbyters were entrusted with the distribution of the Ecclesiastical treasure.
Indeed our Learned Hooker and as Learned Bellarmine, undeservedly question
Epiphanius his opinion, above twelve hundred years after his death, alleging
no other besides the null reason of the present Churches contrary practice and
custom for their so doing. But they might have considered, that Epiphanius did
not stand alone in that opinion: And whoever shall insist upon their Authority,
may consider, that others as learned and judicious as they, are fully of
Epiphanius, and of the other Fathers opinion. Thus Saravia, who says, Philip
the Deacon may be reckoned among the seventy. Bishop Downham (who cites Bishop
Bilson, Philippus in hoc ordine censeri potest. Sarav. de diverse. grad.
Ministerii, Cy. de 70 discip. Downhams Defense. l. 3. c. 2.
as of the same opinion) says, And verily to me it seems more then probable,
that those seven were not such as S. Paul speaks of, 1 Timothy 3. and were in
use in the primitive Church, being a degree inferior to Presbyters; for these
seven, or the most part of them, were, as Epiphanius and others do testify,
chosen out of the seventy Disciples, and were no doubt principal men among
them, full of the Holy Ghost, and wisdom, being before this Ministers of G^ds
W^rd. Lastly, Hist. of Episc. part. 1. c. 2 sect. 14.
Dr. Heylin says, That Philip did both preach the G^spel, and baptize the
Converts; or that Stephen did both preach the Gospel, and convince the
Adversary, related not to any power or faculty which they received by the
addition, or access of this new Office; for being they, and all the residue
were of the seventy, as the Fathers say, and that they had received the Holy
Ghost before, as Scripture tell us, their preaching and baptizing must relate
to their former callings But furthermore:

6. Presbyters allow it. Answ. to Diss. p. 31, 32.
6. Presbyters are as forward to give testimony to this truth, as any others.
Our Assembly says, The Dispersion mentioned, Acts 8. (the only nominated
person whereof is Philip, who so long after ward is called one of the seven,
Acts 21.8.) must be understood of Church Officers and Teachers.

1. Because the particle (...), used with the Genitive case in the New
Testament, is always exceptive to the utmost; and therefore (according to our
brethrens sense) would imply, that there was not one believer left in
Jerusalem, besides the Apostles; which cannot be, for the text says, that Paul
brake into houses, and haling men and women, committed them to prison, verse. 3.
And this he did at Jerusalem, Acts 26.10. therefore all the believers were not
scattered abroad the Regions of Galilee, Judea, and Samaria, some of them were
in Prison at Jerusalem. And to what purpose can we imagine did the Apostles
(who in all their motions and stages, were directed by the Spirit of God) tarry
at Jerusalem, unless it were to comf^rt and support the Church there, in the
rage of this persecution, which had scattered their other Officers and Teachers
from them.

2. It appears that they were the Teachers who were all thus scattered, except
the Apostles; for it is said, That they that were scattered, went every where
preaching the Word, ver. 4. Thus far the Assembly.

We desire the Reader to read their words, and weigh their reasons: Be he only
remembered, that by Teachers, the Assembly understand Presbyters: This they say
in several places of that Treatise, and they prove it every where in their
practice; for they do not allow their Deacons, much less any gifted Brethren,
to preach and baptize. And in this very place they urge, that the dispersion
did consist of Church Officers, in opposition to the Dissenters, who would fain
have them gifted Brethren. Let this suffice in answer unto this grand Objection
against the Presbyterate of the seven. But we have not yet dispatched all
Objections.

Object. 3. It will be said, The Apostles laid aside the Diaconal employment,
to give themselves the more entirely to preaching of the Word, Object. 3. The
Diaconate and preaching are in consistent in one Officer, because the Apostles
laid it aside, to give themselves to preaching.
Acts 6.2, 3, 4. which they needed not to have done, if those services had not
been inconsistent in one person. Besides, how could the Apostles decree the
care of the poor unto other Teachers, the same reasons being valid why both, if
any of them, should be exempted from it?

I answer, this Objection is bi-membred, and must be taken into, and answered
in parts. Answered, The Objection is bi-membred, and taken into, and answered
in parts.
Its parts are:

1. The Diaconate was inconsistent with the Apostles Office of preaching.

2. The Apostles laying it aside, to give attendance unto preaching, could not
impose it upon other Preachers. Of these in order.

Answ. part 1. The inconsistency of the Offices was not such as to prejudice
our opinion.
1. Concerning the inconsistency betwixt preaching, and Diaconizing, we say,
things may be inconsistent two ways.

1. In their own Nature, and by Institution. 2. Occasionally, and by accident.
In the former sense, these two services are not inconsistent; for the
Apostles, long after the institution of their office and engagement upon
preaching, ministered personally unto the poor, as has been already proved
abundantly. Indeed the services are diverse, and relate to the Church in several
considerations; but if they had been simply, and by institution inconsistent,
one Officer could never have discharged them both, particularly, the Apostles
could not have diaconized, but thereby they would have either violated and
annulled their Apostolical order; or vilified it exceedingly, when they
ministered to the poor; therefore to preach, and to minister unto the poor, were
not simply inconsistent, were they then inconsistent occasionally, and by
accident: This (so inconsistency be not stretched too far) may be granted,
because the Apostles after they had done both, lay aside one of them: But we
must take care of straining the inconsistency to a total and irreconcilable
separation afterward; for were that the Apostles design in the election of the
seven, S. Paul and Barnabas defeated it, when they carried up the Gentiles
charity to Jerusalem, Acts 11.30. As also, when upon the importunity of the
other Apostles, they were forward to remember the poor, Gal. 2.10. so likewise
S. Stephen exceeds his Commission, almost so soon as he received it, he
disputing with the Libertines, and making them such a Sermon, as except our
Saviors upon the Mount, we have not another so long in all the New Testament,
Acts 7. per tot. wherein had S. Stephen been faulty, it ought not to have
escaped S. Lukes Animadversion, yea, his very Martyrdom; as the stroke upon
Vzzah, might have been registered, as the punishment of his temerity, the least
effect whereof should have been a warning and determent to his brother Philip,
not to trespass further upon Presbyters enclosures, by preaching and baptizing.
Suffice this in answer to the first member of the Objection.

Part 2. Of the Objection, or how the Apostles could derive the Diaconate to
other Teachers, answered.
2. Concerning the Apostles power to impose upon other Teachers, what themselves
deposed, I might answer, It Is sufficient, and ought to satisfy us, that the
Apostles could do it, or they would not have done it: Yet we may furnish our
selves with a further reason why they did it, if we cast but an observant eye
upon the relinquishers; and the time of their relinquishing of this service.
They were the Apostles, the most eminent and followed Preachers; the time when
they relinquished it was (...), or when the disciples were multiplied. And
those multiplied disciples, so far as we have a Catalogue of their number, were
all converted by the ministry of the Apostles, Act. 2.14. with 41. the feeding
of whose Souls, governing of whose Persons; information of whose Doubts, and
confirmation of whose Faiths, must unavoidably cut out the Apostles more
preaching and ruling work then before you had, for to whom should those
spiritual children address themselves in their Soul-affairs, but to their
spiritual Fathers? Wherefore the Apostles commit the Diaconate to the Seventy,
who although they were preachers, had not as yet so frequent occasion for the
exercise of their gifts in preaching. This very reason might persuade and
prevail with the Church in after Ages, when her pale was enlarged, and each
Preachers hands were full of their proper work, to transmit the ministration
unto Tables unto those who we neither Bishops nor Presbyters, but barely
Deacons. We submit this answer so far as it contains our own reasons or
conjectures, to trial at the Bar of each discreet Readers judgment. But so far
as it maintains the first derivation of the Diaconate from Apostles unto
Presbyters, it appeals to an higher Tribunal, as stressing upon S. Lukes
authority, and is sufficient to command belief, without our reasons to persuade
it. Besides Reverend Saravia concurs with us in what is conjectural; He says,
Inferioris ordinis Doctoribus, Prophetis and Evangelistis plus erat otii,
quorum tunc temporis erant magis parts audiendi, quam docendi, tametsi and
docuisse suo modo ex Stephano and Philippo constat. Surav con. Bez. ca. 7. Novi
dogmatis si tantum ministerio mersarum Apostoli Diaconos praefuisse voluissent,
non fuisset opus, eligi viros plenos spiritu sancto, qui paria fore dona* cum
episcopis haberent. Id. Ibid: Exercitatio Stephani, non fuit urius Diei, clarus
miraculis in populo fuit, and in doctrinae conf^^mationem miracula edidit;
essiduum autem fuisse in hoc docendi populum munere, (ratione quacunque fuerit)
c^lligi potest ex verbis falsorum t^stium, eum non cessare loqui bl^sphemos
sermones contra locum sanctum, and legem, unde profecto aut Prophetam, aut
Doctorem, Stepharum fuisse vere creditur. Id. eod. cap. Sect. quis mos dicendi.
Philippum quod atti^et l^nge probabilius est evangelistam, aut prophetam fuisse
ante quam diaconus fieret quam postea.
The Apostles derived the Diaconate to the inferior Order of Ministers,
because D^ctors, Prophets and Evangelists had yet more spare time then the
Apostles had, their duty being rather to hear then speak, though they also did
teach according to their ability, as appears by Stephen a d Philip: And in the
same Section he adds, If the Apostles would have confined Deacons to the
ministration unto Tables, there was no need of chus^ng men full of the Holy
Ghost, who had gifts well nigh equal with Bishops: Besides, he adds, Stephen
did not exercise only one day, but (whatever his order was) his assiduity in
preaching may be gathered both in his fame for working miracles among the
people, in confirmation of his doctrine, and in the testimony of the false
Witnesses, who gave in against him, That he did not cease to speak blasphemous
words: against the holy place and the law; whence it is truly believed, That he
was either a Prophet or an Evangelist, even when he was a Deacon. Finally he
adds, So much as concerns Philip, he was more probably an Evangelist, or a
prophet, ere made a Deacon, then afterward. I shall not make any long gloss
upon this learned man's opinion, only desire the Reader to take notice, That by
Evangelists he always understood the Seventy disciples; and that his Antagonist
Beza writing against him, says of that his opinion, That Suravia was not the
first who though^ so. Quod tu non p^imus arbitraris. Beza con. Sarav loc. ubi
supra.
Suffice this in answer to this objection. But

Object. 4. How was Philip made a Presbyter?
Object. 4. How were Stephen, Phil p, etc. made Pre^byters?

Answ. By Christ's Ord^nances and Institution. Our Assembly say, the Apostles
ordained the fiest Presbyters: But that Christ ordainnd them is proved by two
Propositions.
I answer, As the twelve were made Apostles, by the Ordination and Institution
of Christ, who ordained, designed, separated and appointed other seventy,
besides the twelve, Mat. 10.1. Luc. 10.1. This is evident from Scripture; But
our late Assembly, as has been formerly observed in this discourse, date the
first ordination of Presbyters in Apostolic Practice. This makes it both a
question whether Christ ordained Presbyters himself, or if he did ordain them,
whether he instituted them in the seventy disciples, or in some other persons.
We shall resolve these doubts in the proof of the two following propositions.

1. Prop. Christ, not the Apostles, ordained the first Presbyter.
1. Proposition. Our Lord and Lawgiver Jesus Christ not the Apostles, instituted
the Presbyterial Order. This is proved,

1. Because he instituted the Church,
1. Because he organized and constituted his Church before his death, and left
it formed at his resurrection and and ascension: This, if we prove it, will be
necessary premises, out of which we may conclude our Saviors Institution of
all special Church Officers, and Administrators of Holy Things. We prove it,

1. By his Ordination of those several Officers who have always been accounted
the only Root and Original of the successive Gospel Ministry. Thus he ordained
the twelve Apostles, Mat. 10.1. whose Successors are Bishops. And thus he
ordained the seventy Disciples, Luc. 10.1. whose Successors are Presbyters.

2. By his institution of the several Sacraments, both of which respectively
were administered ere his death; baptism, Mat. 28.29. the supper, Mat. 26.26.

3. By his giving rules about Church Censures and Discipline, Mat. 18.15. It Is
true, the promise of the Spirit, in its larger effusion of extraordinary gifts,
was not accomplished till after the ascension; But this respected the farther
propagation, not the primary constitution of the Church, because the Charisma
then received, or the gift of tongues, Acts 2.4. was such, whose want disabled
the Apostles to deal in the conversion of foreign Nations, ignorant of the
then Jewish language: But without, and before the receiving of that gift, the
Apostles met with the hundred and twenty, and advised upon, and put in practice
the highest Church act, to wit, the Ordination of Matthias, to supply the
vacancy made in the Apostolate, by the defection and death of Apostate Judas,
Acts 1.15. ad fin. cap.

2. The Church at Jerusalem was, as has been proved, constituted in Apostles
and Elders, Acts 15.2. v. 4. v. 6.22. v. 23. Acts 16.4 In all which places,
Apostles and Elders are distinctly named, as the Officers of that Church; but
S. Luke neither there, nor elsewhere, takes notice of the primary ordination of
those Elders by the Apostles: 2. S. Luke testifies for the proposition.
Granting therefore, or supposing, the Apostles could, without prejudice to
Christ's Legislation, ordain and constitute those first Elders, a reason will be
expected, why S. Luke should not record it, since it is his practice so to do
with other Churches? Acts 14.23. And when they had ordained them Elders in
every Church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them unto the Lord,
in whom they believed; and since he observes more, and more numerous
conversions in the Church at Jerusalem, Acts 2.41. and 4.4. and makes a larger
Register of her actions, then of any, all other Churches; and since he takes
notice of her Elders distinctly officiating, Acts 11.30. and 21.18.

Object. Object.
Do a^y say, An argument drawn from authority, does not conclude negatively.

Sol. Sol.
I answer, although it be a rule in some cases, it has its exceptions in
others, and is not, nor cannot be universally true; for where the authority
specially designs the formation, and first constitution of a thing, either what
it says expresses such formation and constitution entirely and absolutely; or
what it says is imperfect and defective. This is our case, for S. Luke's scope
as a Writer and Register of the Acts of the Apostles, is to leave to posterity,
the memorials of the Constitution of the primitive Church, and of her
conservation and propagation till the end of his History: Which constitution of
the primitive Church (for our business is only with that) he either records in
the Acts of the Apostles, or in his Gospel; not in the acts, because the
omission of so material a part, as the ordination of her Elders, Transitio ab
evangelii ( i. e. dictorum and factorum Christi) Historia, ad Apostolorum acta.
Bez. annot. ad Act. 1.1. in Margin.
whereof he was so mindeful in other Churches, would be a shame to his memory
and diligence, and a maim to her, and his History: But in his Gospel:

1. Because therein (which is the History of the Lawgiver, and his Acts) he
Registers the ordination of the seventy, Luke 10.1. who till Calvin's days, were
always accounted Presbyters.

2. The first words of the Acts, evidence the appendicular relation of that
book unto S. Lukes Gospel, Acts 1.1, 2. The former Treatise have I made, O
Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do, and to teach; until the day in
which he was taken up, after that he, through the Holy Ghost, had given
commandment unto his Apostles, whom he had chosen. Beza says of these words,
They are a transition from the Gospel History, i. e. of the words and facts of
Christ, unto the acts of the Apostles: From all which we collect, That although
S. Luke show other Churches in their cradles, yet he leads in the Church at
Jerusalem, as begotten by Christ ere the ascension, and grown up ere the
commencement of the Apostolical History, unto the stature of a perfect body.
Suffice this in proof of the first proposition.

2 Prop. Christ instituted Presbyters distinct from Apostles, in the seventy
Disciples.
2. Proposition. Our Lord and Lawgiver Jesus Christ ordained Presbyters,
d^stinct from Apostles, in the seventy disciples.

Confirmed.
We prove it.

Two opinions concerning the original of Presbyters propounded.
That Christ did institute the Presbyterian Order, cannot be doubted, without
questioning his Legislatorship: But in whom he instituted it, is a dispute
among Authors.

1. That it was instituted in the twelve, at the last supper.
Some say, It was instituted in the twelve Ap^stles, while Christ solemnizing
his last Supper pronounced these words, Take, eat, this is my body. But this is
a Massing Figment, a late Invention, and whatever School it pretend unto, it
never commenced in Christ's.

Rejected. 2. That it was instituted in the 70 di^ciples
Others resolve it was instituted in the Seventy Disciples: Wherein,

Confirmed 1. By the Fathers.
1. The Fathers (truly so called) agree so unanimously, as the most familiar
conversers in their writings say. One of them, Ab initio semper intellexerunt
Ecclesiastici patres, Jansen. Har. Evang. ca. 80.
The Ecclesiastical Fathers from the beginning always thus understood it;
Another, Constanter docent omnes patres, Bell. de clericis. p. 335.
All the Fathers constantly teach it; A third, Communis sententia patrum.
Maldon. ad Luc. 10.1. Prima opinio verior Id. ibid.
It is the common opinion of the Fathers; Maldonate calls it the common
opinion, because of the contrary opinion of a Pseudo-Clement, which he recites,
but adds after it, The former Opinion is truest. I must entreat the Reader to
receive this upon the credit of these Authors, Jansenius, Bellarmin, and
Maldonate, for I must confess I never could spare money enough to purchase all
the Fathers, never had the conveniencie of a long converse where they all were,
or if I had, Praecep totes secundi ordinis. Hieron. ad Fabiolam de 72 Mansion.
Man's. 6.
have hardly yet seen light enough, whereby to read them over. Let me only
add, That S. Jerome (a passage in whose Writings is the Presbyterian Judges)
calls the seventy Disciples Teachers of the second Order.

2. The Schoolmen agree with the Fathers in the Presbyterate of the Seventy
Disciples: 2. By the Schoolmen. Lumbard. lib. 4. sentent. did. 24 c. 6.

Tho. Aquin. 3. par. sum. quae. 67. art. 2. ad 2. De Romans Pontif. l. 4. c. 25.
Denique eodem modo.


They frequently affirming, That present Presbyters succeed the Seventy
Disciples, as Bishops succeed the Apostles. Now if Presbyters succeed the
Seventy, the Seventy were Presbyters: for Succession is always into what the
Predecessor enjoyed, be it Order, Office or Estate. Bellarmine has a peculiar
notion about the succession of Presbyters unto the seventy Disciples; he says,
They do not succeed them prope^ly, but only by similitude. But this destroys
Succession, for the successor ente^s into what the Predecessor enjoyed, not
into somewhat like it. Besides, were it true, it makes the former to be types
of the present Church Officers. Consequently Christ was the typical, and the
Apostles, or others after them, were the real foundations of the Gospel
Ministry.

3. Presbyters consent with the Fathers and Schoolmen in this matter. 3. By
Presbyters.

Secundarii praecones, Call. ad Luc. 10.1. The rest appears in his definition.


Calvin perhaps eying S. Jerome, says, The seventy were secundary Preachers,
and ordained in the secondary place after the Apostles: Our Assembly, when they
were hard set by the dissenting Brethren (who from the Concession of
Presbyters, that their Presbyterian order is founded i^ Apostolic practice,
take advantage to affirm, that the first Church was constituted by Apostles and
Brethren; and to deny, that she was under the Pre^byterian Government, or that
Presbyters were in being, till after Acts 6.) They to rid the good cause from
this grand inconvenience say, The current of Expositors say, Answ. to Diss. p.
38.
That the seventy Disciples were at Jerusalem, among the hundred and twenty
names, of whom we read, Acts 1. who were Teachers by Office. We will set down
upon this assertion a little, and observe somewhat out of it.

1. The Assembly herein contradict themselves, or others of their Brethren, who
to baffle Episcopacy (as Bellarmine did before them) deny, That the seventy
were properly Church Officers: Whereas now, neither their emission, nor
ordination was temporary, but they act at this Assembly as Teachers by Office.
And such indeed they were, and must be accounted, since Christ promises to
continue with his Church all Officers, after his ascension, which he gave to
her, during his descent, and being upon earth, Ephesians. 4.9, 10, 11.

Object.
Is it said, These seventy were at first unfixed travelers, or sent to every
place whereunto Christ himself would come.

Sol.
I answer, The state of the Church then in a great measure ungathered, and
unformed, even in Judea it self, necessarily required the traveling and
journeying of Church Officers from place to place; for they were to gather a
Church (where as yet none was) ere they could feed, or govern it, which could
not any other way ue done, but by travel: But had their Office expired with
their travels, and had not Christ fixed them before his death, the Assembly
could not have found the seventy as Teachers by Office, met with the Apostles
at Jerusalem, immediately after the Ascension.

2. If the Seventy were Teachers by Office, they were Presbyters, both because
the Deacons were not yet in being, as distinct Officers, and because the
current of Expositors (to borrow the Assembly's expression) derives the
succession of Presbyters from the Seventy, as of Bishops from the Apostles.

3. Presbyters were distinct from Apostles, since the Twelve made no part of
the Hundred and Twenty; or if they did, the Seventy, who were also Teachers by
Office, were in like manner a part of that number.

4. The foundation of the Presbyterate in Apostolic practice, is utterly
demolished, since Presbyters concurred with Apostles, in the first public
Church Act after the Ascension, or in the Ordination of an Apostle. Otherwise
those Concurrents could not be Teachers by Office, as the Assembly say they
were, because Christ instituted only two teaching Orders, viz. Apostles and
Presbyters.

5. The current of Expositors wherewith our Presbyters choose to sail, flow in a
Channel distinct from, and contrary to the Presbyterian Government, for they
allow of two teaching Orders of Ministers, whereas this admits but of one. I
dare not undertake to find out the Fountain Head of their Current, but perhaps
the following Authors, together with others, stream from it. Har. evang. c. 8
Jansenius says, (and Antiquity said it before him) Mathias the elect Apostle,
Act. 1. was proculdubio, or without all doubt ere his election to the
Apostolate, one of the Seventy Disciples. This was also the opinion of Lib 2.
hist. c. 9. and lib. 1. c. 12
Eusebius, De Scriptoribus sacris. De Haeres. tom. 1. lib. 1. Har. cap. 97.
S. Jerome, and of Epiphanius. Polycarpus Lyserus, the Continuator of the
incomparable Harmony begun by Chemnitius, and finished by Gerhard, says,
Matthias was raised from a lower, to an higher Order. Besides, S. Peter's
character of the Eligees to stand Candidates for the Apostolate, very much
favor this Opinion, Act. 1.21, 22. Wherefore of those men which have
accompanied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up
from as, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection. This
perhaps occasioned the Assembly to tell the Dissenting Brethren, Nor will we
urge that possibly these are such (they mean the whole Hundred and Twenty)
every one whereof was capable of election to an Apostleship, which was the
(...) of this meeting. Answer to Diss. p. 18.
But it is time to conclude the Explanation of this Member of our Definition
concerning the Presbyterate of the Evangelist, and we will add no more. It
follows.

Of singular courage and sufficiency] Of singular courage and sufficiency.
I put both in the Definiti^, because they may be separated, and because one of
them without the other will make the Evangelist to halt in his employment. Some
are bold, but blind, dare all, and do nothing; others are sufficient for great
undertakings, but they are hen-hearted, or like the horse they do not
understand their own strength and worth. The capacities of men, and Gods
distribution of his gifts unto them are diverse; We will not wander into remote
instances, but keeping to the point in hand, we say, It Is rare to find courage
and sufficiency cohabiting in one person, he is a man of a thousand, who is
both wise and stout: for when the will has got the bit between its Teeth, it
seldom yields to the checks of Reason. But Philip was both of a sound judgment,
and of a high resolution, and so ought every Evangelist to be. Observe

1. His undaunted courage, Philips courage.
facing all charges of affliction with one resolution; and though it fell on
him in several parts and places, it found him every where prepared to make
resistance: Before he left Judea, Saul (and doubtless he was not alone in the
cruelty) made havoc in the Church ((...):) Acts 8.3. The word is a metaphor
borrowed rom the pestilence, which sparing neither place nor person, destroys
every where; and is elegantly expressed in the Text, by, entering into every
h^use, and haling men and women, he committed them to prison. This storm
scattered Philip, and the rest, Acts 8.1, 2, 3.4, 5. But did they shrink in
wetting? No: It was as the dew unto them, and they grew as the Lilly, and did
cast forth their roots as Lebanon, Jos. 14.15. Gods usual method to try the
right strain of his Aquiline Saints, is to expose them to the hot Sun of
persecution, in its several ascents and exaltations. Thus apprehended Christ is
first carried to the High Priest, Mark 14.53. thence to the Council, ver. 55.
next to Pilate, Mark 15.1. from him to Herod, Luke 23.7. Afterward a second
time before Pilate, the chief Priests, Rulers, and people of the Jews, Luke
23.13. and afterward to the Cross, Luke 23.25, 26. Thus S. Paul newly
victorious in one conflict at Jerusalem, is comforted with assurance of success
in another combat at Rome, Act 23.11. when God once finds what the shoulders
of his people can bear, he not only proportions their burden to their
strength, but commands them as more conducing to his glory, and their good; not
to stand still, or sink under it, but so to carry it, as others may discern,
that their load melts away, and is the lighter, the longer they stand under it,
because they feel equal strength from one hand of God supporting them, as
weight from the other afflicting them. Thus to return to the person and point
before us, Philip is hurried out of the heat, into the flame of persecution;
what he suffers at Jerusalem, prepares him for a new trial at Samaria: This
once the Metropolis of the ten, as the other was the Mother-City of the two
Tribes; but now become such a filthy cage of unclean birds, as the Apostles at
their first emission, are expressly forbidden to go near it, Mat. 10.5. Now let
who will be Judge, what person wanting singular courage, durst adventure
himself into such a place; especially if we consider, either what the
Samaritans were in their general Character; or particularly what these
Samaritans were, unto whom Philip Evangelized.

General charecters of the Samaritains.
The general character of those people is, They were the offspring of that
hotch-pot, and medley of Nations, transplanted by Shalmanezar, and settled upon
the possessions of the ten Tribes, 2 Kings 17.24. And the King of Assyria
brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and
from Sephurvaim. and placed them in the Cities of Samaria, instead of the
children of Israel: and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities
thereof. Where soon after their transplantation, fear of being devoured by the
Lions, makes them patch together a mongril Religion, interwoven with the
adoration of their own Idols, and the service of the true God, whom by a pure
Heathenish phrase, they call, The God of the Land, (2 Kings 17.26. ad fin. 32)
for each Gentile Nation, Family, and particular person, had their peculiar
Deities. This Lynsey-woolsey Religion was worn among that people for many ages,
2 Kings 17.41. So these Nations feared the Lord, and served their graven
images, both their children, and their childrens children, as did their
fathers, so do they unto this day (i. e. the day of the writing of this
Scripture.) The Old Testament takes little further notice of this people,
unless in the Books of Ezra, and Nehemiah, Joseph. Antiq. Iudaic. lib. 11. cap.
ult.
where what is recorded of them, agrees with the Jewish Histories, who say,
They never lived in any settled good correspondency with the Jews; but when
Gods mercies flowed in upon Israel, they professed a common Parentage, to share
in their good fortunes; and when the tide turned, they ebbed with it,
protesting they were Medes, Persians and Assyrians, and were ever the
forwardest to help on the calamities of the Jews. To these was Philip sent; And
who but a man encouraged, and enabled of God, would adventure himself among
such an ungracious Gene^ion, especially since Philip was a Jew, whom of all
other Na^ons, the Samaritans most implacably hated, and were reciprocally
hateful to them. And since his errand was to take them off from their long and
deep rooted Superstition and Schism; for from the days of Nehemiah, they had
continued in an open and public rent from the Jewish Church. Upon this
occasion, Manasseh the son in Law of Sanballet, was thrust out of the
Priesthood; for his entermarriage with a strange woman, his Father in Law
netled with the affront, and resolute to revenge the disgrace done to his
Daughter and Family, builds a Temple in Mount Gerizim, in opposition to the
Temple at Jerusalem; where he institutes a solemn Worship, and causes Manasseh
to be consecrated the High Priest: This lets in light to John 4.20. Our Fathers
worshipped in this Mount, but ye say, That in Jerusalem is the place where men
ought to worship. A Schism being made, the Samaritans (as generally all in like
cases are) were obstinate Schismatics, they irreconcileably relinquishing all
communion with the abandoned Church, from the beginning of their Schism, until
Christ's time, Schism in the body mystical, as dissolution of continuity in the
body natural, usually cutting off all means of a further and future unity. We
may relish somewhat of the bitterness and unsavouriness of the Samaritane
spirit, in the woman's denial of a cup of water to our Savior, because he was a
Jew, John 4.9. Then said the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou
being a Jew, ask drink of me, who am a woman of Samaria, for the Jews have
no dealings with the Samaritanes and in the Cities refusing to receive him
within their gates, because he looked as though he would go up to Jerusalem,
Luke 9.52, 53. And he sent Messengers before his face, and they went and
entered into a village of the Samaritanes, to make ready for him; and they did
not receive him, because his face was as though he would go up to Jerusalem.
This is the general character of the Samaritanes.

Particular character of those Samaritans unto whom Philip preached.
But moreover, those Samaritanes with whom Philip was to deal, are branded with
a deeper and more infamous character. They were not only Schismatics, but in
a manner Ethnicks: Simon having so bewitched them with his Sorceries, as they
made a God of him, or to use S. Lukes phrase, Acts 8.10. gave heed to him from
the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God. Their
crime needs no aggravation, nor shall we use any, well hoping enough is said to
prove Philips courage, how he had buckled on the whole Armor of God, and was
prepared to assault the Kingdom of Satan in any place, or among any people, how
barbarous, blasphemous, and pre-ingaged soever, neither was his attempt
boldness, but valor: For,

2. Philips sufficiency. Sent forth.
2. What he set upon, he was sufficient to finish: Hence the Samaritanes are
recorded, Acts 8.12. to believe Philip, preaching the things concerning the
Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, and to be baptized men and women;
yea, verse 13. Then Sim^n himself believed also, and when he was baptized, he
continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the mira^les and signs which
were done.

The sufficiency of Philip is further demonstrated at the enterview betwixt him
and the Eunuch; whom Philip finding to be reading, and not understanding a part
of Isaiahs Prophecy, he not only instructs him in the right meaning of the
Text, but persuades him to yield obedience unto Christ, therefore-spoken of. by
receiving Baptism in his name, Acts 8.30. ad fin. 39. suffice this in
explication of this member of our definition: We proceed.

Sent forth. It Is true, Persecution thrust Philip forward at this time, but
since he did the works of a sent servant, Acts 8.12. compared with Romans 10.14,
15. certainly he was as well carried by Gods call, as hurried by man's rage upon
it; for although the latter may afford an opportunity ( Philip perhaps had not
thought of Samaria, unless he had been perseruted, and driven away from
Jerusalem) the former must give a capacity to do these services: Men may make
way for preaching, but God must make the Preacher. But we shall not enlarge
this point in this place; both because it has been already explicated, and it
will be further made out in the explication of the remaining part of our
definition, to which we hasten.

To preach the Gospel unto an unconverted people or Nation, and to baptize them
upon their believing, in order to their enchurching. To preach the Gospel, etc.
to the end of the definition.


That Philip did do these works, who runs may read in his History; the non
conversion, yea little better then pure Heathenism of his Auditors, appears in
their Devil-Worship, in the person of Simon the Sorcerer: Their conversion, in
receiving from Philip Christ's Doctrine and Baptism in his name; their admission
to a Church state, in emission of the two Apo^tles, S. Peter, and S. John, and
their imposition of hands upon some of them, Acts 8.14, 15.

Object. Object.
Do any say, the Commission to teach all Nations, was only issued out to the
twelve Apostles.

Sol. I answer, Answ.
If so, S. Luke would have recorded no foreign Conversions, not wrought by the
Ministry of one or other of their number, whereas he speaks very little of any
of them, except S. Peter, engaged upon that work: But much of Philip, who was
no Apostle, Acts 8.1. with 5. and of S. Paul, Barnabas and Sylas, who were none
of the twelve Apostles: All whose works were irregular, and as such ought to
have been censured, if the Commission to preach to the Gentiles, had terminated
in the administration of the twelve Apostles. The truth therefore is, that both
orders, Presbyterial, and Apostolical, might preach to the Gentiles, as being
both of them related to the Church, in her Constitution and Propagation. I
grant, all persons of both orders, did not exert this power, but their omission
proceeded not from want of faculty, but from want of opportunity to do that
work: That some of them did it, is a ground why all of them might do it, if
they had occasion. This discovers the difference betwixt an Evangelist, and a
fixed Presbyter; One of them taught in a constituted Church, the other preached
to unc nverted persons, but neither of them were of a diverse order, one from
the other: Had Philip done at Jerusalem, what he did at Samaria, his works must
have been reduced as ordinary acts under the Presbyterial order, because
preaching and baptizing were the common works of all Presbyters, and were
useful as well at Jerusalem, as at Samaria; and because although Philip
preached and baptized, yet he could not lay on hands. What we have written in
this Paragraph, receives allowance by the judgment of the late most learned
Dr. Hammond, Annot. ad Epi. 4.11. no. 6.
The Office of the Evangelist being to preach to unbelievers, requires not the
donation of all the Episcopal power, viz. of ruling, nor the power of all
Ordination necessarily; because when the Evangelist had planted the faith, the
Apostle himself may come, and confirm and ordain Bishops, as we see in Samaria,
Acts 8.17.

Thus have we proved our whole definition, and dare boldly question the
morosest Reader, what it does contain, not proper or agreeable to a yet
continuing Church Officer: Certainly preaching and baptizing are permanent acts
of Office, whose performance is perpetually necessary in a constituted Church,
neither can any new Church be constituted without them; yea, if the Church be
not spread throughout the whole Word; if the Jews, or any other Nation under
Heaven, remain unconverted, they must continue for ever in that desperate
estate, unless the Church can commissionate some Preaching to go unto them, and
to baptize them, etc. What others do, or say, does not necessarily exact our
subscription and conformity: But when we consider Christ's purchase and promise,
we dare not but say, There have been since the Apostles days, are now, and
shall be hereafter, many Evangelists, Opus Evangelistarum per fecerunt hoc est
illis qui de doctrina fidei nihil dum prorsus audierunt, Christum praedicare,
and divinorum Evang^liorum scrupturam tradere magno studio sategerunt. Eusebius.
hist. l. 3 c. 34. ex tralat. Jac. Grinae, Genovae, 1611.
or Gospel Preachers, who out of a zeal f^r Gods glory, and for the good of
souls, courageously adventure themselves as lights into dark places; and God
has succeeded, and will succeed their labors, to give their hearers the light
of his knowledge, in the face of Jesus Christ: The Evangelist being (as other
Officers are, ordinary in a constituted Church, in respect of his Commission
and emission; but the exercise of his Office is by the Churches special
approbation (see Acts 13.1, 2, 3.) not limited to look to sheep already
penned, but extended to gather as many wanderers as he can reduce, and bring
into Christ's fold. All this is very agreeable to Eusebius his definition of the
Evangelist: He says, They did the work of Evangelists, who earnestly preached
Christ, and delivered the Scripture of the holy Gospel to those who had not
before heard of him, or them. We might here conclude our whole dispute, but we
have one necessary caution to add: It follows,

Caution to Itnerants.
It will be a gross mistake in any to apprehend, That our fixation of the
Evangelist in the Catholic Church, intends to justify, or so much as
tolerate, the modern abuse of Hackney Sir John's, and intinerant praters,
Caution to Itinerants.
who run about from place to place, in constituted Churches; and challenge a
liberty to foam out their own shame, impudence and ignorance in all Assemblies.
Christ the wise Householder, keeps better order in his Family, then to allow of
such extravagants; and it is easy to perceive, that they are chaff, not wheat,
since they never fly abroad, but in times of the Churches winnowing and
affliction. This tetter has foully overspread the face of the Churches of
England and Ireland: I cannot promise to cure it, but I will bestow a little
ink upon it. Let these light-heel'd persons, who run before they are sent,
consider,

1. In what relation they stand unto those Churches, whereinto they intrude. 1.
In what relation they stand unto those Churches whereupon they intrude.
Pretend they to an Evangelizate? God be blessed, our people are no Heathens,
are not now to hear the first news of Christ, or to be baptized in his name; or
if they were, sad and miserable were their condition, since most of these
Itinerants are no lawful Ministers; and the change of all such whom by their
endeavors they should pervert, would be from no Church, into a false Church;
before they were Ethnicks, now they would be Heretics: which is by so much the
worse condition, as the undeceiving of an Heretic, is harder to be effected,
then the conversion of an Ethnic, the holy Spirit sooner convincing men of the
vanity of worshipping a falfe God, then of the villainy of adoring a wrong
apprehension of the true God, because the former has only humane invention
and custom to defend it; but the latter shelters it self under the protection
of a wrested word of God, and makes the Spirit of God its co-partener in every
action, which is commenced against it: For these, and other reasons, which
might be added, we cannot allow our Itinerants to be Evangelists. What then! Do
they challenge a Pastorate? neither can this be granted, for our flocks are
already penned, and have their appointed Shepherds. The Doctorate Prophetship
and Apostolate, only remain: But the pretentions of Itinerants to the two
former, will be avoided by what has been tried, againk their Evangelizate and
Pastorate: Do they therefore make a title to the Apostolate? And although they
deny it to others, as Episcopal, and will not admit them to have an Apostolic
power to rule the Church, within a certain limit and precinct? Do they take it
to themselves as Apostolical, and profess either in words or deeds, that the
Catholic Church appertains to their Jurisdiction? We beg them to cast their
eyes upon Apostolic practice, there they will perceive the Apostles confining
themselves to certain bounds, as the Circumcision, and the Uncircumcision, Gal.
2.7, 8, 9. But contrariwise, when they saw, that the Gospel of the
uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the Gospel of the circumcision was
committed unto Peter (for he that wrought effectually in Peter to the
Apostleship of the circumcision, was mighty in me toward the Gentiles) And
when James, Cephas and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace that
was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship,
that we should go unto the Heathen, they unto the circumcision. Although the
whole world was the Apostles charge, yea, because it was so, they judge it
requisite for each to betake himself unto a separate part, as being both most
agreeable to their corporal constitutions, which would not admit them to be in
many places at once, or to travel long, or far without weariness; and being a
readier way to fallow more ground, and further improve the Lords Vineyard, then
if all of them had labored in one place, because then they would too often
plow over the same field, and leave much ground roughly, waste, and untilled.

Besides, the Apostles being separated, and limited to their several lines,
each was careful not to encroach upon another improvement: Thus S. Paul, Romans
15.20. Yea, so have I strived to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named,
lest I should build upon another man's foundation. This he says he did in
accomplishment of an Old Testament Prophecy, concerning New Testament
Preachers, ver. 21. But as it is written to whom he was not spoken of, they
shall see; and they that have not heard, shall understand: The word rendered
strive, or (...), v. 20. notes an ambitious striving, or a striving out of a
love unto, or defire of honor; not that S. Paul was sinfully ambitious, or
commends those who are so; but he uses the phrase, to intimate his engagement
in point of Apostolical honor, to streighten his work by his own line, and not
to build upon another man's foundation; or as he elsewhere phraseth it, not to
stretch himself beyond his measure, 2 Cor. 10.13, 14, 15, 16. (But we will not
boast of things without our measure, but according to the measure of the rule
which God has distributed unto us, a measure to reach unto you, for we stretch
not our selves beyond our measure, as though we reached not unto you; for we
are come as far as to you also, in preaching the Gospel of Christ, not boasting
of things without our measure, that is of other men's labors, but having hope
when your faith is increased, that we shall be enlarged by you, according to
our rule abundantly. To preach the Gospel in the Regions beyond you, and not to
boast in another man's line, of things made ready to our hand.) Wherein upon a
pious score, the Apostle somewhat imitated the jealousy of ambitious men,
seeking honor, The Apostles general charge briefly considered.
not to do any thing which might bar up the way of the accomplishment of their
expectations.

This leads us to a brief answer of another of the Apostles supposed
extraordinaries, or their general charge; which is grounded upon a twofold
wrong supposition.

1. Wrong Suppos. That the enchurching of the whole world, was a property of
the Apostolic Office, so inseparably annexed to the persons of the twelve
Apostles, as it lived and dyed with them. I grant, Christ's precept to teach all
Nations, and promise of a perpetual presence, was given to those twelve; but it
did not concern them either as a propriety of their Office, or exclusively of
all other persons. Had it been a propriety of their Office, S. James who dyed
at Jerusalem, Acts 12. without any further traveling from thence (so far as is
colligible by sacred Records) was properly no Apostle; and we want a Scripture
proof of the proper Apostolate of Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas, Matthew,
Lebbeus, Simon the Canaanite, and Matthias: Or had it only and exclusively
concerned those Apostles, then

1. Others not of their order, as Philip, Acts 8.1, 2. ver. 5. and not of their
number, as S. Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 3. ^ould not have been
employed upon this work: Which persons having undertaken it, wrought more of
it, then all the rest of the Apostles (so far as appears by Scripture) yea, one
of them, or S. Paul dares (and he was directed by the holy Spirit in what he
did) to put his labors of this kind in the scale against the labors of all
the other Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.10. For I am the least of the Apostles, and not
meet to be called an Apostle, because, I persecuted the Church of God: But by
the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace which was bestowed upon me, was
not in vain: but I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the
grace of God which was with me. Elsewhere he calls himself the Apostle of the
Gentiles, Romans 11.13. For I speak to y^u Gentiles, forasmuch as I am the
Apostle of the Gentiles: I magnify mine Office.

2. No conversion-work, or turning of the Gentiles unto the Lord, could have
been left undone at the death of the twelve Apostles, or at the death of their
coaevous helpers. But the contrary is easily proved, by a recurrence to the
original of many Churches now in being, who had remained covered over with the
gross darkness of Heathenism until this day, if the Commission to teach all
Nations, had expired with the Apostles and their Contemporaries. Besides, there
is no hopes of the conversion of the Americans, Turks, Tartars, Persians, etc.
unless the Church have yet a power to employ and send forth Officers upon that
service.

3. The Commission to teach all Nations, would not have been directed to them,
with whom Christ promises a perpetual presence, while they preach and baptize,
unto the worlds end: But it is so directed, Mat. 28.19, 20. Now can any one
imagine, that that Text concerns only persons then in being, since all of them
are gathered to their Fathers many hundred years ago; and since the world is
not yet ended, nor all the Nations converted, nor the necessity of the works of
preaching and baptizing discontinued: Indeed the Apostles and Primitive
Ministers (so many of them as went abroad) were authorized to teach all
unconverted Nations exclusively, i. e. All Nations, in opposition to the proud
conceit of the Jews, that they were the only beloved Nation: Or Nations,
because the Apostles were to balk none, how barbarous or inhumane soever they
were, but to go cheerfully whithersoever God did send them. But to teach all
Nations inclusively, or to make Disciples of all, and every Nation under
Heaven, is a work impossible to be done by the primitive Church Officers, Vsque
ad, haec particula denotat non solis Apostolis hoc esse dictum. quia non in
unam modo aetatem sedusque ad finem mundi, Christus suum auxilium permittet.
Calv. in loc. Indicat se non cum solis Apostolis, sed cum omnibus qui in eorum
locum successuri erant, loqui, quos etiam Apostolos futuros significat. Maldo.
in loc.

Quan quam ergo huic Apostolo commune cum reliquis collegis mandatum erat alias
orbis parts lustrare non tamen duium, sic inter se partitos esse, ut
Jerosolymae residerel quo solebant multi quotidie aduenae conflubre; Id^^^m
perinde erat ac sic Evangelium long lateque promulgasset in locis remotis.
Calv. ed Act. 21.26.


and must admit of Successors, or it can never be done. Calvin upon these
words, Lo I am with you to the end of the world, says, This particle den^tes,
that this was not only spoken to the Apostles, because the Lord promises his
assistance, not unto one age, but unto all ages unto the end of the world:
Maldonate the Jesuit (whose testimony I therefore allege, because as I have
proved before, Papists in behalf of the Papacy, as Calvinists in favor of
their Consistories, allow the distinction betwixt ordinary and extraordinary
Officers, and make the Apostles general charge to be one note of it) upon the
same words says, Christ shows, that he speaks not only with his Apostles,
but with all who should succeed them in their places, whom also he signifies,
that they should be future Apostles. Besides, Calvin in another place grants,
that an Apostle might be constantly resident at one place, and feed, govern and
preserve the Church therein, without any derogation to his Apostleship: It Is in
his Commentary upon Acts 21.16. where S. Paul is observed to meet with S.
James, and all the Elders at Jerusalem. Upon which Text, Calvin gives us this
note, Although it were commonly enjoined to this Apostle, with the rest of his
Colleagues, to travel over other parts of the world, yet there is no doubt, but
it was so lotted out among themselves, that he should reside at Jerusalem,
whither daily there was a confluence of many strangers: and that was all one,
as if he had promulgated the Gospel far and wide in remote places. Whence is
evidently colligible, that the Apostles were not so absolutely necessitated by
the unchangeable sentence of a Divine command, to travel personally the world
over: But that upon the intuition of reasonable considerations, they were at
liberty to take upon them a particular, certain, and fixed residence.

Object. Object.
This prop^sition might have been thus dismissed, but learned Gerhard, whose
works are deservedly valued by learned men, maintains stiffly, That the Apostles
personally, or at least by themselves and others, preached to the whole world
during their life time: For this he allegeth two T^xts, viz. Romans 10.18. But I
say, Gerhard de Minister. Eccles. sect. 225.
Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into all the earth, and
their v^yce unto the ends of the world: Col. 1.6. which is come to you, as it
is in all the world, etc. And perhaps there are other texts alike worded, but
this learned man confines his enquiry unto th^se two; and unto them we shall
particularly direct an answer, which we trust will be of force to answer any
others of like nature, when objected.

Our answer is 1. The term World is equivocal in Scripture, and is taken:

1. For the whole habitable creation, and all the creatures in it: thus 1 Samuel
2.8. The pillars of the earth are the Lords, Answ. 2.
and he has set ^he world upon them.

2. The World is sometime taken for a part of the World: Thus Augustus is said
to tax the world, Luke 2.1. when all knew that not one half of the world was
subject to him: Thus the Pharisees complain of Christ, that the world went
after him, Ioh. 12.17. when I believe it will puzzle any one by Scripture, to
prove that he traveled, or preached unto a tenth part of the world: Learned
Gerhard should therefore have resolved us in which of these latitudes the world
is to be taken in these texts, ere he had so peremptorily asserted his opinion,
especially since,

2. We have over and beside what has been before alleged by us, the opinion
of several the most noted Expositors, who take World in the two objected Texts,
in the second, not first acceptance, as will easily appear by comparing their
Expositions upon both.

For the first, on Romans 10.18. Paereus is the most enclineable Author to
Gerhards opinion, whom I have seen; but after many, Answ. 2. Verum and hoc in
medio relinquendum. Par. in Romans 10.18. ^ omnem terram hoc est Deus jam ab
initio mundi suam ge^tibus divinitatem manifestavit etsi non hominum
praedicatione; Creaturarum suarum tamen Ministerio, nam etsi evangelium tunc
inter ipsas filebat totum nihil ominius coeli, and terrae opifi^ium loqueb^tur
ac testimonium authori suo reddebat, Calv. ad Romans 10.18. Non vuit suo i. e.
Apostolorum tempore permanasse evangelii praedicationem in omnes populos orbis
terrarum, sed id jam tuam magna part caeptum fieri and paula tim impleri nam
nec hodi^ completum id omnino vi^etur. Esth. ad Romans 10.18. Paulatim enim
impletum est, and etiam number impletum est hoc Davidis vaticinum, praeteritum hic
ponitur per futuro, prophetico more ob rei futurae certitudinem, Est. Pisce
enim omnibus probat Apostolus ut dixi non solis Judeis sed, omnibus gentibus
praedicatum aut praedicandum quandoque sse Evangelium A Lapid. Romans 10.18.
and I believe most of them idle words, he concludes, But this is to be left in
the middle, or to each man's judgment. Calvin is notoriously his Opposite: he
says, Into all the world, that is, God from the beginning of the world had
manifested his Divinity, although not by the preaching of men, yet by the
Ministry of his own creatures and although the Gospel was then silent among
the nations, yet notwithstanding, all the workmanship of heaven and earth spoke
and gave their testimony to their Creator. Thus Esthius, He means not in his,
viz. The Apostles time, the Gospel was spread abroad among all people, but
that it began then in a good m^asure, and by little and little was completed,
for as yet it does not appear to be altogether finished. Thus Alapide, who
cites Augustine, S. Anselm, and Origin, and others of the same opinion, says,
By little and little was fulfilled, and even to this day, is this prophecy of
David's to be fulfilled, the preter tense being after the prophetic manner,
here put for the future, for the greater certainty of the thing. And moreoever,
he adds, In all this the Apostle proves as I said, that the Gospel was
preached, or should be at some time preached, not only to the Jews, but also
to the Gentiles.

In tote fere orb. Zan. in loc.

Hyperbole quaedam Esth. in loc.

Exponenda per synechodchen pro maxima mundi part. Daven. ad Col. 1.6.


For the second Text, Zanchy says, the Apostle means by the term, In the whole
world, almost in the whole world. Esthius says, There is a kind of Hyperbole
in the Text. Bishop Davenant says, The term is to be expounded by a synecdoche
of a part for the wh^le. I could add more to this answer, as also in
confirmation of the invalidity of this first Proposition: But of this more
largely (if God will) in the Tract concerning Apostles. What has been said, we
hope is sufficient to evidence the falsehood of the first supposition,
concerning the Apostles general charge. The

2. False Suppos. is, That each Apostle had, and exercised a jurisdiction over
the whole Church, formed into Gospel Order.

The contrary whereof is evident by the former instances, but especially by the
following, namely, When the Apostles came to settled Churches, they were liable
to the directions, yea reproofs (as occasion was) of her affixed Officers: Thus
S. Paul coming from another Church, to the Church at Jerusalem, he is there
directed by S. James, how to behave himself, lest he scandalized the Church at
Jerusalem, Acts 24.18. ad fin. And the day following, Paul went in with us,
unto James, and all the Elders were present: And when he had saluted them, he
declared particularly, what things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his
Ministry: And when they heard it, they glorified the Lord, and said unto him,
Thou see brother how many thousands of the Jews there are which believe, and
they are all zealous of the Law: and they are informed of thee, that thou
teach all the Jews which are among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses, saying,
That they ought not to circumcise their children, neither to walk after the
customs: What is it therefore, the multitude must needs come together, for they
will hear that thou art come: Do therefore this that we say unto thee, We have
four men which have a vow upon them; Take them, and purify thy self with them,
and be at charges with them, that they may shave their heads, and all may know,
that all those things whereof they were informed concerning thee, are nothing,
but that thou thy self walk orderly, and keep the Law. This advice S.
Paul followed, ver. 26. Then Paul took the men, and the next day purifying
himself with them, entered into the Temple, to signify the accomplishment of
the days of purification, until an offering should be offered up for every one
of them. This is our first instance, and were sufficient (had we no more) to
confirm this truth, That no Apostle exercised jurisdiction over the Catholic
Church, formed into Gospel order. But we shall add another, that in the mouth
of two witnesses, this thing may be confirmed: S. Peter coming to Antioch (a
Church where S. Paul had been Prophet, or Teacher, and whence he receives his
Apostolical mission, Acts 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.) where not carrying himself
uprightly in S. Paul's judgment, he both reproves and censures him, Gal. 2.11,
12, 13, 14. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face,
because he was to be blamed; for before that certain came from James, he did
eat with the Gentiles; but when they were come, he withdrew, and separated
himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision: and the other Jews
dissembled likewise with him, Cum Paulus Ecclesiam i^ lam vel maxim pascebat
Petro palam atque in ^s resistebat. Jo. 2. controv. 4. quae. 2. cap. 8. sect.
secundum nostrum argumentum.
insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation: But
when I saw that they walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the
Gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou being a Jew, live after
the manner of the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the
Gentiles, to live as do the Jews. In this Text, whatever the Popes faction say
to the contrary, it is evident that S. Paul reproved S. Peter, which he could
not have done, especially to S. Peter, who was (...), or, The first of the
Apostles, if each Apostle had not had his limits, and was chief within his own
Precinct: Hence learned Whitaker says, S. Paul chiefly feeding this Church,
resisted Peter openly, and to the face.

Object. Do any object what S. Paul says, 2 Cor. 11.28. Besides those things
which are without, that which comes upon me daily, the care of all the
Churches.

Sol.
I answer, The general term all, must be limited unto Churches of S. Paul's
peculiar plantation, or otherwise he breaks his own rule, in boasting of other
men's labors, and of things made ready to his hand. I confess, each true
Minister of either of the sacred Orders, has a general relation unto the
Catholic Church, his ordination into her, capacitates him to minister unto
her, in any part or place whereunto she assigns him, yea, he may occasionally,
or upon request, Officiate in diverse parts or places: But this he cannot do; as
a mere act of Office, where the Church is constituted, and formed, because each
flock is committed to the guidance of her own Shepherd; and a capacity to
perform special official acts, flows from the particular relation, which is
betwixt each Minister and people: Hence the Church was always so careful in her
purest and best days, to set bounds betwixt Bishopric and Bishopric, Parish
and Parish, or (if you would rather have it in the Apostles phrase) betwixt
measure and measure, line and line: for Christian prudence did direct in the
division of all of them, whereby she took the surest course to keep her peace;
for without this order, nothing can proceed regularly in Church affairs,
because the order, unity, and good government of a particular Church, is an
integrant part of the order, unity and good government of the Catholic Church;
and the body is then entire and perfect, and never but then, when there is no
schism in any part. This might be enlarged, but I consider to whom I write,
they are Itinerants, who do not use either to read much, or tarry long in one
place: Wherefore I will add no more to this consideration.

2. Consider in what relation each Church stands to her affixed Officers.
2. Consider each Church has a special relation to her affixed Officers. The
joints and ties of people to their Ministers, and of Ministers to their people,
are mutual and reciprocal, both are tied each to other with one and the same
knot. Our business is with the obligation of the people unto their Ministers:
concerning which we say, search all Ecclesiastical Records, you will find no
settled Church any whit advantaged, but many very much prejudiced by Itinerant
Officers; there are many babes in every room of this Spiritual Nursery, who
will not thrive with several sorts of milk, let their Nurses be never so sound
bodied, or their breasts never so full, and free to suckle them: The shrivelled
estate (not to take notice of the fret like to be occasioned by S. Peter's being
at Antioch, whereat but even now we hinted) of so many weaklings in the Church
of Corinth, after S. Paul, Apollos and Cephas had preached among, or unto them,
confirms this truth by a sad experiment: Their story is remarkable, and in
short thus, S. Paul was their Spiritual Father, who begot them unto Christ, and
for a while thrivingly suckled them, at the breasts of his Doctrine; but
afterward Apollos and Cephas came among them, or their Doctrine was brought
unto them, upon what occasion, or by what means, Scripture is silent: But
whither it came to them, or they went to it, or both, either happened in their
infancy, 1 Cor. 3.1. And I brethren, could not speak unto you, as unto
spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. Now were it not
for the relation which is betwixt each particular Pastor and his flock, one
would think there could arise no hurt to the Corinthian Church, from the
preaching of Paul, Apollos, and Cephas: They were all sound Teachers, but their
bodily constitutions (to pursue the metaphor) or more plainly, their gifts,
abilities in utterance, time of conversion, and of being made Officers, as also
their relations unto that Church, were diverse; whereof Satan taking advantage,
he works a distrust in two parts of the three of her members, against their old
Nurse, or S. Paul, and they waywardly refuse all arms and breasts, except those
of Apollos and Cephas. Nor is this a slender guess at the occasion of their
Schism, since they charge S. Paul with a defect in the gift of utterance, 2
Cor. 10.10. For his letters, say they, are weighty and powerful, but his bodily
presence is weak, and his speech is contemptible; and 2 Cor. 11.6. But though I
be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge, but we have been thoroughly made
manifest among you in all things: Wherewith Apollos was abundantly furnished,
Acts 18.24. And a certain Jew named Apollos, born at Alex^ndria, an el^quent
man, and mighty in the Scriptures, came to Ephesus: And since they put S. Paul
to a proof of his Apostolate, 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. Am I not an apostle? am I not
free? have I not seen Christ our Lord? are not you my work in the Lord? if I am
not an apostle unto others, yet doubtless I am to you; for the seal of my
apostleship are ye in the Lord. Whereas S. Peter is not only noted to be
ordained an Apostle by our Savior, while he was here upon earth, but is
reckoned first in the Apostolical Catalogue, Mat. 10.2. Now the names of the
twelve apostles are these, the first Simon, who is called Peter. This is most
certain, that this Church was the weakest, frowardest and most carnal Church in
the New Testament, and S. Paul shows this fancy of their doting upon diverse
Teachers, as the breach whereat all her confusion entered, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12. For
it has been declared unto me of you (my brethren) by them which are of the
house of Cloe, that there are contentions among you: Now this I say, that every
one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, And I of Cephas, and I of
Christ. Contrariwise he says, that if he only had preached unto her, nothing
could have been wanting to her conversion unto, and confirmation in the faith,
though they had never seen the face, or heard the voice of Apollos or Cephas, 1
Cor. 4.25, 16. For though you have ten thousand Instruct^rs in Christ, yet have
ye not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you all, through the
Gospel; Wherefore I beseech you be ye followers of me.

The Bishops and Pastors of the Church of England, sigh forth the same
complaint, against too to many of her quondam members, religiously averring,
that all the troubled streams of our divisions, have issued from this Fountain
head; for before her order and array was wholly broken, what was more frequent
with many people, then a passionate postposing of Paul to Apollos, voice and
gesture, commending some Preachers to their ears, when solidity, piety, and
their particular relation unto them, would not commend others to their
consciences? How many painful, pious, learned, and succesful Ministers have we
had scorned, slighted, and repulsed their cures, because age, or other
impediment having vitiated their organs of speech, they could not so freely
utter their conceptions, as some young, raw, half fledged Predicants: I would
not throw contempt upon the Ordinances, by any personal defect in their
Administrators, God forbid! what is my burden, would then become my crime. The
truth is (and it occasioned the former expressions, and if any more vilifying
had come to hand, I would have used them) the dregs of this evil, settles upon
their hearts, who measure truth by the volubility of their delivery, not by
their own nature, and the relation wherein they (the hearers) stand unto the
Preachers; for God has appointed a peculiar honor to be given to the affixed
Officers of each Congregation; to them their people owe Subjection,
Maintenance, etc. and to slight them or their Ministry, upon personal
respects, is in effect an undervaluing of their work, and of the Lord Jesus,
who appointed them to do it; because if their works and their Masters, were not
as contemptible as their persons, their hearers would honor their persons, or
at least not aggravate their humane infirmities, for their works and Masters
sake.

It is therefore my humble request unto all Christian people (who live under an
Orthodox, and ordained Minister, against whose call and doctrine they have no
just exception, though many perhaps against his parts and passions, to lay to
heart a few things; for the peoples giddiness prepares tinder, whereupon the
flashes of fiery Itinerants falling, Caution by way of digression, unto the
people, against Itinerants.
it kindles them into a flame of false zeal, and consumes all their affections
and respects for, and toward their own Pastors:

1. Consider how God and the Church have settled this man to be thy Minister,
thy self either explicitly by subscription to his call, or implicitly by
living under his Ministry, and receiving the Sacraments at his hands, have
acknowledged him to be thy Minister. He can prove his call at Gods Tribunal, as
well in the convictions of thy conscience, as of his own: And can he so, where
do expect that preaching should be accompanied with the promised success, if
not with one so authorized? Admit his passions and infirmities are many, search
the Scripture, and tell me whether there was ever any Prophet, Apostle, or
other Minister without them: God makes men, not Angels the Ministers of his
Word and Sacraments; and therefore puts his treasure into earthen (frail,
brittle, corruptible) vessels, that the power may be of him, not of them, 2
Cor. 4.7. Our blessed Savior discovered and reproved many enormities in the
Scribes and Pharisees (the then Teachers of the Jewish Church) but since they
were lawful Ministers, as to their order, though lawless as to their
conversation, our Savior wills the people to acknowledge their Ministry and
Doctrine, Mat: 23.2, 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat, all
therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye
after their works, for they say, and do not: But moreover, admit his parts and
abilities be small: when God appeared, and spoke to Eliah, the strong wind,
earthquake and fire went before him, he was not in them, but in the still small
voice, 1 Kings 19.11, 42, 13. the words Kol demamah dakkah, rendered a still
voice, denote a hissing, slender, (...).
weak and low voice, a voice but once removed from dumb silence, for demamah,
rendered still, notes the stilness of dumb things, Hab. 2.19. and of dead men,
Isa. 15.1. and dakkah, rendered small, notes smalness of dust: Thus God spoke to
Eliah by himself, and cannot he thus speak by his Ministers unto thee; it is not
the first time he has so spoken unto others, Scripture will afford thee many
instances of his speaking much by them, who could speak little for themselves:
Thus by Moses, Exodus 4.10. O my Lord! I am not eloquent, neither heretofore,
nor since thou have spoken unto thy servant, but I am of slow speech, and of a
slow tongue: Thus by Jeremiah, Jer. 1.6. Then said I, Ah Lord God, behold I
cannot speak, for I am a child: Thus by S. Paul, 2 Cor. 10.10. and 11.6.

2. Will not this satisfy? Is any voice more welcome to thee then thy
Ministers? do others speak to thy soul, while he is dumb? know and consider,
God sometimes strikes his Ministers dumb, and makes their tongue cleave to the
roof of their mouths, as a testimony against the rebellion and stubborness of
their hearers, Ezekiel. 3.26. And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy
mouth, that thou shall be dumb, and shall not be to them a reprover, for they
are a rebellious house: It seems Ezekiel had been their reprover, but God would
not suffer him to reprove them any longer, they were so rebellious: he saw it
would be but a spending of his servants labor and strength in vain: The Lord
has an eye upon the pains of his Ministers, and when he intends to cut down,
and cast unprofitable figtrees into the fire, he calls the Husbandmen off from
digging and dunging about their roots: Wherefore soul, whoever thou art, who
have heard truths at any time, with a convinced, or unconvinced conscience,
from the mouth of thy Minister; but now because thou pretendest thou can not
reap any benefit by him, thou resolvest to live under another Minister: Fear
and tremble, lest thy unanswerableness unto, and rebellion against former
convictions, or means of conviction, strike thy Minister dumb to thee, while he
speaks to others, for what should hinder his doctrine from distilling as the
dew and dropping, as the rain upon thy heart, as formerly it did, and still
does upon the hearts of others, but that God will send him upon no more errands
to thy soul, because the first were slighted.

3. Consider whence thy distaste against thy Minister proceeds, whether it be
from a just cause (if there be any such) or from somewhat for which thou owe
him reverence and respect: Rebellious children generally take pet at their
Parents chastizing of them for their good; and babish Christians for the most
part stomach admonitions, rebukes, and exercise of Ecclesiastical Discipline:
Mark S. Paul's council, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. And we beseech you brethren, to know
them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you,
and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, and to be at peace
among your selves: The word (...), rendered know, imports as much as to
acknowledge: Laborers, Prelates, and Admonishers, must be not only known to,
but acknowledged by their people: What they are, and whose they are; what they
are to the Church, and what each member ought to be to them, in obedience,
reverence, and maintenance. And does it signify so much? some may say, why is
the word (...), or, to esteem them, added? was not enough said before, when
knowledge and acknowledgement was required? I answer, if one word had been
enough, the other should have been omitted; the Holy Ghost, who prohibits our
tautologizing, is not himself guilty of the same crime: The duty is
ingeminated, because it must be done, and because for the most part it meets
with so much unwillingness and stubbornness in men, as it is seldom and
difficultly done, especially when (...), Prelates, or those that are over us,
and (...), Reprovers, or Admonishers, expect it from us. The former, exacting
subjection; the latter, supposing a fault, and looking for our acknowledgement
and amendment. Now is this the work, or (...), that very work for which
Ministers must be known, acknowledged, and esteemed by their people (who desire
to be at peace among themselves) (...), or, with more then a superlative and
overflowing honor: Let giddy and hair-brained persons note it, and be ashamed,
who for the most part have little else, but one or other of these two things
(would they heartily and ingenuously confess the grounds of their distasts) to
allege, in justification of their shunning, scorning, and undervaluing of
their Ministers.

4. Consider, itching ears in a people, and their heaping up Teachers unto
themselves, is a dreadful forerunner of their irrecoverable Apostasy from
truth, and a certain symptom of their being exposed unto error; God so
ordering it in vengeance toward them, that as at first they would have none of
his appointed Manna, so to leave them to such increasing viciousness of
appetite, as at last they loath what themselves had cooked. The many thousand
exemplary verifications of this truth in our days, might have seemed strange,
had it not so long ago been predicted, 2 Timothy 4.3. For the time will come, that
they will not endure s und Doctrine, but after their own lusts, shall heap unto
themselves Teachers, having itching ears: The phrase (...), or having itching
ears, notes such importunity of lust, as they must have heaps of Teachers; and
having them, they must receive prejudice by them, as an itchy body will be
scratcht, and being scratcht, it must fester, or the disease run farther, and
sp^ead more upon it. This is elegantly made out in the following verse, ver. 4.
And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto
fables: Suffice this both, for the second consideration for the Itenerant, and
for the appendant consideration, for people liable to his seduction.

3. Consider: For the Itinerant Christians punished as busybodies, can have
no comfort in their sufferings.
3. Consideration, when men professing Christianity, are punished as
busybodies in other men's matters, or as the word properly signifies. as
Bishops in another Diocese, their sufferings are taxed to be, sufferings
contrary to the name of Christ, and consequently deserving a different reward,
1 Pet. 4.14, 15. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, for
the Spirit of glory, and of God, rests upon you; on their part he is evil
spoken of, but on your part he is glorified: But let none of you suffer as a
murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busie-body in other men's
matters ((...).) Let the pious Reader observe diligently among what good
company the Apostle chaineth the busie-body, as also Jer. 14.14, 15. and 23.21.
Jer. 27.15. and 29.9. and v. 31. We proceed to the last consideration.

4. Consider. Scripture condemns all for seducers, who creep into other men's
folds.
4. Consideration, The Holy Ghost never commends any, but plainly condemns all
for deceivers and seducers, who creep into other men's folds, 2 Timothy 3.6. and,
who stretch themselves beyond their line, and boast of things made ready to
their hand, 2 Cor. 10.13. ad fin. 16.

Thus have I brought this Discourse of the Evangelist to a period, and do
solemnly protest before God, Men, and Angels, that I have solely designed, in
fingleness of heart, to bring glory to God, peace to the Church, and good will
among men: My conscience bears me witness in the uprightness of my intentions,
but the censure of the action is before the Lord, and his people, unto whose
merciful judgment and equity, I submit my self, my past, present, and future
endeavors.

Luke 2.14. Glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, goodwill toward
men. FINIS.
AN INDEX Of several of the most remarkable PASSAGES In this DISPUTE.
Note from page 120 the number of the following pages is miscounted, and must
be put into due order, ere the following Index can be serviceable.

A.
APostles, what their Office was, 60 Apostolate not confined to the number of
twelve, 75 Apostles, their Ordination by Chirst, 107, etc. Their Ordination of
others, 119 Giving the Spirit, 205, 217 General charge, 114, 188, 293 Sight of
Christ in the flesh 114 Writing of Scripture, 188 Working of miracles 91, 189
Planting the Church, 67, 68 Their companions distinguished, 69 How they were a
Foundation, 110 They did not derive their Office to Presbyters, 128 Are made
Parish Ministers by the Assembly, 141 (...), explicatur, 233 (...), explic. 83
(...), explic. 304 Ambrosius, 64 Ames. 4, 41, 110, 134, 142, 144, 153, 185
Aretius, 35, 42, 46, 59, 61, 100, 105 106. 115. 142. 213. 228. 234. 252. 266
Assemly of England, 46, 52, 77, 79, 91, 100, 123, 127, 141, 142, 193, 194 219,
223, 257, 276, 283, 285 Assembly of Scotland, 177 Athanasius, 176 S.
Augustinus, 55, 97, 108, 119, 163, 273
B.
Barnabas was an Apostle, 76 S. Bernards shift to verify his prophecy, 181
Bishops are the Apostles Successors, 108, 109, 194. Need not be called
Apostles, 116, 162. The equivocalness of the word Bishop, no prejudice to their
Order, 161. Their titles of Lords justified, 10, 11 Bucer stood to an ordinary
call, 158 Bisher explic, 260 Mr. Baxter, 25, ^36 Beza, 14, 33, 39, 46, 59, 61.
64, 76, 77 80, 81, 105, 115, 119, 162, 210, 213, 217, 218, 228, 231, 237, 248,
252, 270, 272, 275, 280, 282 Bucanus, 35, 42, 46, 200, 257 Bullinger, 51, 224
C.
Christ our sole Legislator, 107, etc. He settled Church Officers for
succession, 113 Church considerable in a double quality, 268. She was formed by
Christ ere his Ascension, 280 Collythus his ordinations vacated, 176 Council of
Spains Canon against Presbyterial ordination, ibid. Cornelius and his friends
received the Holy Ghost ere baptism, and why, 214 Council of Constantinople,
their judgment of Deacons, 269 Covenant unjustly urged against Episcopacy 6, 7
Courtesy, how far we may respect men, 164, etc. Criticisms, where allowable in
Scripture, 40 (...) and (...), explic. 65 Calvin, 2, 9, 10, 33, 41, 46, 50, 53,
59, 74. 75. 83. 84. 88. 91. 92. 96. 97. 100, 105, 112, 119, 136, 139, 140, 158,
159, 197, 209. 213. 218. 222. 235. 243. 244. 251. 252, 266, 270, 272, 274, 283,
294, 296. Note in citing Calvin upon the New Testament, Vtor Augustini
Marlorati Ecclesiastica expositione impressa per Petrum Sanctandraeanum, 1605
Chemnitius, 90, 104, 207 S. Chrysostom, 65, 80, 99, 105, 112. 119, 268, 276.
S. Cyprian, 108, 116. 133, 134, 157, 269
D.
Deacons what their office was, 265, etc. The office of the seven ere
mentioned, Acts 6. 272 Degree and Order wherei^ they differ, 58 Distinction of
Lond^n Ministers rejected, 87. Of the Assembly rejected, 123. Of the Wight
Divines rejected, 124, 126 (...) explic. 65 (...) explic, ibid. Dakkah explic.
301 Demamah, explic. ibid. Bishop Davenant, 175, 296 Bishop Downham, 16, 276
Dissenting Brethren, 10, 19, 51, 85, 141 177, 256, 264
E.
England: the way of the Church of Englands reformation, 171. Her former
practice in annulling Presbyterian Ordination, 173. Maintenance of Episcopacy
as a distinct order, ibid. Evangelist, who, 62, 258. He must be defined by
Philip or Timothy, 255. Not by Timothy, see Timothy; but by Philip, see Philip.
To Evangelize or prophecy, did not constitute either several orders or degrees
of Ministers, 53, etc. Exposition of Scripture, two of the safest rules therein
not observed by Calvin, 37, 38, etc. Extraordinary call denied by Presbyters,
158. see Temporary. (...) explic. 215 (...) explic. 162 (...) explic. 260 (...)
explic. 302 Epiphanius, 276, 285 Eusebius, 250, 252, 253, 285, 290
F.
Faith: profession of says, not the external form of the Church, 134 Faius,
39, 59 Dr. Fern, 7 Dr. Fulk, 2 Dr. Field, 271
G.
Gifts extraordinary considered, 48, 89, 188, 217 Gifted Brethren, the
Dissenters impose upon the Assembly in their behalf, 256 Gospel writers no
Evangelists in a strict sense, 86 Gerhard, 158. 221. 285. 295
H.
Hierarchy, the term justified, 41 S. Hieromes opinion in favor of Presbyters,
briefly examined, 163 Homonymies twofold, 202 Dr. Hammond, 100. 105. 114. 216.
231 246. 247. 266. 289. Mr. Hooker, 32. 85. 207. 264. 271 Mr. Henderson, 46 Dr.
Heylin, 101. 219. 271. 276 S. Hierome, 119. 133. 163. 254. 283. 285
I.
Imposition of hands, what right, 118 I^consistency twofold, 278 Judas, Sylas
his companion no Evangelist, 80 John the Baptist, what Officer he was, 153
Itinerants in constituted Churches cautioned, 290, etc. And the people
concerning them, 301 Bishop Jewel, 152 Irenaeus, 108 Josephus, 287
K.
King Charles the first, and Martyr, 8. 140. 162 (...) explic. 54 (...) explic.
16 (...) explic. 233
L.
Lots in ordination, what ceremony, 117 Legal and Evangelical dispensations,
wherein they agree, 161, etc. Luther stood to an ordinary call, 158 (...)
explic. 272 (...) explic. ibid. (...) explic. 285 Archbishop Laud 186 Dr.
Lightfoot, 112. 119. 209. 210. 213. 228. 237. 243. 245. 246. 275. London
Divines, 18. 37. 41. 47. 49. 87. 91. 95. 100, 120, 134, 146. 152. 153. 158.
193. 194. 239. 252. 257. 264.
M.
Mathias his Ordination by lot expended, 117 Ministry a main knot of Church
unity, 130. It is the external form of the Church, 133 Ministers to be
respected both for prelation and admonition, 302, 303 Ministers, their Divine
right not to be waved, 165. Each Churches special relation to her affixed
Ministry 298 Peter Martyr stood to an ordinary call, 158 Maresius, 36, 46. 73.
134. 272 Dr. du Moulin, 165, 224
N.
Nauclerus his testimony to Pope Hildebrands extraordinary call, 179
New England Divines, 95
O.
Objection, three grand Objections answered: 1. My contemning of learned men,
161. 2. Scandalizing of reformed Churches, 168. 3. Occasioning the Papists to
insult, 178 Order and degree wherein they differ, 58 Diversity of Order,
wherein it consists, 73. 174. First Church Officers, neither of a different
order nor degree from present Church Officers, 53 Ordination, what it is, 120
(...) explic. 103
P.
Pastors, who, 63 Pastors and Teachers may truly say that of S. Paul, Gal.
1.1. 104 S. Paul ordained a Presbyter, 95. Ordained an Apostle, 98. How he was
an Apostle not of man, 102 Perpetual, what is perpetual, 158 Philip was a
proper Evangelist, 258. He was a Presbyter ere Act. 6. 264. etc. His works
compared with Timothies 203 Presbyters agreement with Papists, 123. 144. 145.
191 Presbyterial ordination pretends a warrant but from one Scripture, which
does not sign it, 193 Presbyterial Ordination rescinded, 1. By the Synod at
Alexandria, 176 2. By the Council of Spain, ibid. 3. By the Church of England,
173 Presbyterian Authors, their contradiction in high points of one another,
84. 199. Of themselves, and first Calvin, 75. 84. 88. 159. 222. 2. The London
Divines, 91. 158. 3. The Assembly, 91. 159. 283. 4. Zanchius, 160 Presbyterian
Government censured by the Dissenters, to be humane, 85. 177 Prsebyters know
not the Original of their own Order, 126 Are guilty of what they charge as the
highest crime upon others, 198 Prophet, not a foreteller of future events, 47,
etc. Nor a Reformer of decayed Discipline, 50, etc. But a convincer of the Jews
by Old Testament prophesies, that Jesus was the Messiah, 61 Prophet not
Evangelist next Apostles, 37, etc. Prophets and Evangelists were neither
several orders nor degrees of Ministers, 53, 54, etc. Prophets admitted into
the Jewish Church, no rule for the Christian to do the like, 136. Neither were
these Officers extraordinary Officers, in the same sense of now pretended
extraordinary Officers, 137 (...) explic. 76 (...) explic. 233 (...) explic.
234 (...) explic. 303 (...) explic. ibid. (...) explic. 113 (...) explic. 241
(...) explic. 240 Pareus, 36. 46. 295 Piscator, 39. 42. 47. 62. 96. 105. 115.
117. 234. 243. 248. 267. 272. Polanus, 35, 84
R.
Reformation, what, 147. Two notions of that word, 169 Reforming power, in
whom, 147 Revelations, two notions of it, 93 Revelation makes all Offices
perpetual, none temporary, 106 Dr. Reynolds, 254 Mr. Rutherford, 90
S.
Scripture reasons for its translation into vulgar languages, 39 Scripture
terms, how to be marshalled, when the order is disputable, 44 Samaritanes, who
they were, 286 Seventy Disciples no Evangelists, 83 They were the first
Presbyters, 282 etc. Sylas no Evangelist, 82 Socinians destroy the Ministry
upon Presbyterian principles, 156. 157 225 (...) explic. 247 Saravia, 93. 270.
271. 276. 279. Smectymnuus, 65. 173. 239 Scultetus, 224. 227 Spanhemius, 36.
46. 59. 89. 227 Studeley, 156
T.
Teachers, who, 63. Against Temporary Officers read page 87 Temporary, the term
distinguished, 93. 1. Into time certain and past, and so no Officer temporary,
93, etc. 2. Into time uncertain, whether past, present, or to come, neither in
that sense is any Officer temporary, 137 The danger of the distinction betwixt
temporary and ordinary Officers, 1. In respect of the Pope, 123 144. 183. 2. In
respect of Enthusiasts, 145 Timothy no Evangelist, 79, 212. How he was ordained
by prophecy, 105 how by the Presbytery, 193. His works at Ephesus, 211. They
were different from Philips, ibid. In what sen^e he is called an Evangelist,
220 Arguments in proof of his travels refuted, 227, etc. The date of the first
Epi^tle to him con^idered, ibid. the date of the second, 245 (...) explic. 103
Titus no Evangelist, 79. 194. 244 Tertullian, 21. 131, 132 Thorndike, 119
U.
Unity of the Church, how preserved, 130 Vrs^nus, 36. 46. Archbishop Usher,
238, 251
W.
Will of God, how signified to man, 143 Worship, the preciseness or profaneness
of Worshippers, no certain evidence of its Divine institution, 1, etc. Dr.
Whitaker, 13. 42. 47. 50. 86. 101. 185. 297 Wight Divines, 25. 56. 59. 124.
126. 140. 141. 186. 226. 228. 235. 239 251. 252. 264. Wendelinus, 227
Wollebius, 36. 46. 153
Z.
Zanchius, 13. 34. 42. 46. 47. 141. 158. 160. 169. 296.
FINIS.
Martii 25. 1662.
Imprimatur, Hic Tractatus cui titulus (...), or, The Evangelist yet
Evangelizing, ex Licentia nostra Archiepiscopali.

JA. DUBLIN.

THe Errataes of this Impression are many; the darkness of the Authors
handwriting, and his total absence from the Press, might occasion most of them.
Misspointings, transpositions, pseudographies and smaller redundancies or
omissions of letters syllables or words, are left to the ingenious amendment of
the candid Reader. Grosser errors are for the most part redressed in the
ensuing corrections: wherein also in the 290 page is a testimony of S. Gregory
entirely added. The Errataes with respect to the several capacities of diverse
Readers, are reduced to two classes, viz. Errors in the Line, and Errors in the
Margin.

Errors in the Line.
Pa. lin. read 2 10 Dele but 28 John 7.24 37 while the first 3 40 insinuated 5
23 far 6 15 non Cov. 29 urged against 7 18 consequence 19 dele the 37 what 14 5
2 Timothy 2.4. 28 confirms it 40 by our 42 inconsistent 15 1 simply 28 calling and
averten 16 25 (...) 18 39 poor 19 3 has 12 contrariwise add (as you say) 20
29 your cause 21 29 dele of 22 18 the unpar. 23 42 and add prayed 24 3
according to 25 19 nothing r. less require r. acquire 26 7 toward him 18 dele
and 19 must 30 9 dele more 18 reproof 35 30 add Romans 16.7. 37 5 curam 6 dele
the 33 stowing it 38 39 some hard 39 21 (...) 24 intentiveness 27 singly 37 or
vero 42 41 objection is 46 37 Saravia 48 34 1 Timothy 5.23. 49 12 or silence 52 25
supply 54 33 dele which 42 taught add 1 Timothy 2.7. 2 Timothy 1.11. so did
Presbyters 1 Timothy 3.2. this 56 38 recited 57 31 that the 60 41 1 Timothy 3.14. 61
16 Luke 7.26, 37 of the 63 5 Luke 24.47. 15 dispersed 28 the recovery 33 tend
64 1 Romans 2.20, 21. (...) etc. Thou 4 Heb. 5.12. 65 1 Dunt. 12 maligned 37 romans
15.15. 1 Cor. 3 69 19 second 70 4 Exodus 24.13. 23 and so 36 ascent 71 18
assumed 72 21 Luke 9.1. 26 from 73 14 Genesis 41.40. 15 Acts, add of office 32
shores 76 17 Hebrew Naba. 21 dele Acts 13.5. 35 before him 86 33 140, r. 145.
34 Manes, add, or Scythianus 80 1 dele out 42 dele some 91 37 best 92 12 dele
Io 28 Presbyteries 31 dele not 93 26 to evid. 95 20 prayer, etc. 26 its other
dele other 99 14 them, add Elders 106 36 this the 102 24 of the 103 24 then
the 106 6 but diverse 11 affirm 34 what the 108 29 Successors 109 24 derive 112
5 Mark 3.13, 14. as Sebast. Barrad. Lightf. Jansen. 113 17 ballotting 115 37
(...) 116 4 Numb. 26. 5 Numb. 36. 118 25 and add necessary 119 3 tasks 120 5
Acts 6. 20 S. add. Paul 23 accomplishment 25 only 26 that the 40 the first 42
of these 122 19 accordingly 20 by, add practice of 42 former 123 38
particularly 40 Scamnum 124 1 as 12 only 19 betwixt the 125 39 dele day 127 1
scruple, scruples and anxieties 36 is this, r. is the 128 22 till the, dele the
130 27 ingenerated 131 5 (...) 132 8 in this, add author 133 14 1 Cor. 3.9. 35
Church, add S. Jerome says, Where there is no Bishop, there is no Church, i.
e. 136 3 mystical 6 and conser 39 dele to 137 25 two 42 Deuteronomy. 18. 139 3 against
South 10 general ends 140 23 superstructure 141 25 disserve 37 extinct 144 19
delle that, the r. those 37 more from 145 36 of those 146 19 praecognita 28
blains 147 22 Gal. 4.19, 24 created Ecc. 7.29 148 4 Jeshua 10 Numb. 12.25. r.
25 Deuteronomy. 17. uneffected 149 17 is perishing 22 or settle 27 what the 150 7
their opp. 40 vouch 151 38 that in the 153 34 into a 155 25 immediately 44
Seniour 157 8 he hoped 22 the former, or Apostles 158 21 therewith 37 for if of
159 20 dele are 163 13 Paulinianus 37 justifiable 164 6 any spider-like 8 pour
29 or they 166 6 sue 7 the friends 21 indissolvable 32 proposition 168 41 it
could 169 14 deformity is 174 12 formal 25 of order 175 5 was not then what it
is 179 10 and power 117 21 no notice 179 3 has long 180 2 lived in 41 that S.
Jerome, r. that an Arrian 181 6 belong to 20 dele eight 182 9 protested 184 15
of Trent 185 23 to settle 186 2 page 141. 188 9 page 114. 10 page 292 of this
189 31 or properly, not truly, for then 190 1 from the 12 us these objections
193 41 could not 196 9 page 69. 70 198 7 thirty sixth 201 15 of the 202 23 noun
(...). 28 dele Acts 2.42. Acts 14.15. v. 21. v. 35. and leg. Acts 15.35. 203 11
find his office 32 (...). 204 34 their charge 205 3 dele in 10 which pass 14
dele the 206 12 in all their cities by 18 and visible 33 1 Timothy 4.13. 207 21
exert 22 of his spirit in his employed 208 28 six years 30 A.C. 34. A.C. 40.
209 33 or fearer 34 (...) 210 31 he erres 213 13 one from his 217 26 Tim^thy,
add or 35 1 Cor. 14.16. 219 16 the assaults 225 8 an Evangelist 15 little if
227 20 fall on^ 230 14 (...) 231 8 Apostle 31 Act. 19.33. 34 and as learned 232
6 reconcile 26 contempt of Diana 30 the Jews 39 Hesychius 233 24 (...) 28 Mat.
14.8. 234 9 of a 235 31 dele Timothy, was settled ere, and read, that St. Paul
gave that charge after the first 32 unto Timothy 238 6 waving 16 This third
Exposition is 20 65. l. 27. add (according to his account) 27 attend we 37
they will aver 339 41 apply 241 9 perpetual and constant adher. 38 were not 245
28 opinion, add. sequor Barontum 246 27 principal 247 27 (...) 748 9 ^e of 249
18 Act. 13.50. 42 v. 30, 31. 252 18 must be 42 credit 258 10 their enchurch 257
11 Acts 8.5. 260 20 kecking 40 Hambasher 291 2 2 Kings 7 9. 6 (...) 14 (...) 24
Psalm. 67.12. 262 1 under this 8 (...) 21 thy sced 263 4 Isa. 61.1. 6 (...) 264
5 3.18. add 4.18. 266 25 (...) 33 prints 267 4 (...) 268 15 a distinct 270 41
be so 271 33 of the 272 8 ere made 27 dele and 273 4 (...) 35 (...) 274 41
derived 277 33 derive 278 35 upon the 279 4 (...) 10 they had 280 41 Mat.
28.19. 20 John 4.1. 283 8 Indies 286 2 Hos. 14.5. 289 12 the emission 290 31 or
them, add to Eusebius we may add Gregory the great who expressly favoring our
opinion says, Evangelistas utique appellamus, qui rudibus populis bona
coelestis patriae annunciant qui videlicet Evangelistae and in priori quidem
tempore fuerunt sed and nunc usque Domino largiente permanent quia adhuc
quotidie and infideles populos ad fidem trahi cognoscimus Greg. Hom. 21. super
Ezech. Impress. Parisiis per Gul. Merl. 1562. i. e.

We call them Evangelists, who publish the good things of the heavenly
Country, unto rude people, which Evangelists both were in the primitive times,
and now by Gods permission do continue because hither to and every day we know,
unbelieving people are converted to the faith.

291 30 urged agaiast 292 13 rough 294 13 or all Nations 33 Acts 21.18. 295 28
John 12.19. 300 25 expulsed 301 38 dele Hab. 2.19. r. Jer. 47.6. dele Isa.
15.1. r. 1 Samuel 2.9. 303 13 (...)

Errors in the Margin. Page 13. cont. 4 quaes. 1. c 3. sect. 1. 14. add Beza
in loc. 15. r. vid. Calvin. in loc. p 21. r. reliquimus, 24 add 1 Paper, 25 r.
c 3. sect. 14. 52. p. 14. r. p. 141, 53. p 83. r. p 107. 54. Ferutian r.
Gratian, 77. p 20. r. p 20184. p. 127. r. p. 227. 85. r. our persuasion, 88.
nullubi, r. ubi nullae, 90. 29. r. 292. 191. r. 205 83. r. 111. 90. r, 114.
212. r. 213. 96. 191. r. 205. 105. r. loc. de minister. ecclesiast. cont. 3.
116. Betius, r. Petrus 123. c. 5. r. c 25. 127, pages thrice misquoted, instead
of them read 280, 281, 282, 283, 128, p. 198. r. p. 212, 140. r. 29. 169.
illata, a. juxta, 173, p 51, 176 vitarum, r. Levitarum, quidam qui, r quidam
illis, 182, 1156, r. 1149. 207, Eccles. Pol. l. 5. 210, r. lucem eruens
dispersis Judaeis, 233, r. Poster, p. 65. r- 55. 227, r. c. 5. These. 7. 242, p.
232. r. p. 244. 250. l. 2. c. 22, 251. add Jus Div. 2. par. p. 69. 252, add
Jus Div. 2 part. p. 64. 255. add ex A Lapid. Ephesians. 4.11. 257. p. 3, r. 111,
258. r. Our definition, 261, r. (...) 284, c 8. r. c. 80. 269, no. 6. r. no. B.
294. permittet, r. promittit.

FINIS.

