THE FOUR EPISTLES OF A. G. BUSBEQUIUS, Concerning his EMBASSY INTO TURKEY.

Being Remarks upon the Religion, Customs, Riches, Strength and Government of
that People. As also a Description of their Chief Cities, and Places of Trade
and Commerce. To which is added, His Advice how to Manage War against the Turks.

Done into English.

LONDON, Printed for I. Tailor at the Ship, and I. Wyat at the Rose in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1694.

To the Right Honorable POWLETT St. JOHN, EARL of BOLINGBROOKE, And Baron of
St. John of Bletsoe.
My Lord,
THE Translator of this ingenious and most useful Piece not surviving to see it
published, upon Perusal of the Copy, I found, the excellent Performance and
Merit of the Work did not only deserve just Care of the Impression, but also
some Eminent Person to Recommend its Appearance in the World. I embraced the
Opportunity I had often wished, of expressing in some measure, my Respect and
Zeal for your Lordship; wherein I do but Comply with all Admirers of true Worth
and Honor. Every Body will allow, that a better Guardian could not be Chosen
for this posthumous Offspring; and your Lordship will easily pardon my
imploring your Protection of an Orphan. The Historical Part of this Treatise is
so Just and Exact, and the Remarques in it discover so much of Observation,
Experience and Judgment, that it seemed a proper Offering for your Lordship's
Acceptance; who are particularly happy in a sensible and just manner of
Thinking. Nor has your Lordships Felicity Terminated in a true Discerning of
Things; you have reduced your Sentiments to Practice, and proved the Iustness
of your Notions, by a singular and constant Regularity in your Life. You have
hereby brought an Accession of Reputation to the memory of your Noble
Ancestors, by preserving each Virtue of theirs with its utmost Luster, even in
a vicious Age. You continue to convince the World, that Temperance and
Conversation, Management and Liberality, are consistent Virtues. Prudence,
Justice and Charity have carried an Ascendant in the whole Course of your
Actions. You have not only been happy in having early made Choice of a good
Principle to direct you; but in a constant Adherence to its Dictates. You were
from hence instructed to express, upon all Occasions, a Hearty and Noble
Concern for your Country, which is the true and ancient Test of English Worth;
and I must do our Country the Right to say, they are highly sensible of it; as
appears by that worthy and just Character which is universally given of my Lord
Bolingbrooke. Your Relations and Friends have the next share in your Kindness;
and among the latter, I may truly Rank all Persons of Merit. You have declined
no Opportunity of Obliging any Man of Desert, and through your whole Life, have
not given Occasion to make so much as One Man your Enemy. Wherefore I am safe
in what I have said of your Lordship, and the World will only forgive my saying
so little, in consideration of that Modesty which is Conspicuous amongst your
Other Virtues. Wherefore I shall only beg Pardon for surprising you with this
Address, and Permission to subscribe my self, among the rest of your Admirers,

My Lord, Your Lordships most devoted Humble Servant N. TATE.

The Four EPISTLES OF Augerius, Gislenius, Busbequius, Concerning his Embassy
into TVRKY.
EPISTLE I.
SIR,
AS I promised you, at parting, to give you a full Account of my Journey to
Constantinople; so, I shall now make good my Word, and, I hope, with Advantage
too. For I shall also acquaint you with my Adventures in my Travel to Amasia,
as well as That to Constantinople, the former being less used, and consequently
far less known, than the later. My design herein, is, to allow you a part of
the Solace, of what happened pleasurable to me; for so the ancient Friendship
betwixt us obliges me, to appropriate no Joy to my self, but to communicate the
same to you; but, as for what happened incommodious to me, (as, in so long and
tedious a Journey, some things must needs do,) those I take to my self; neither
would I have you concerned in them, at all; for, the Danger being now past, the
more grievous they were to suffer, the more pleasant will they be, even to my
self, to remember and commit to Writing.

You are not ignorant, that, when I returned from England, after the
Solemnization of the Marriage of King Philip and Queen Mary, at which I was
present, as an Attendant, in the Train of his Excellency Don Pedro Lassus, who,
on that occasion, was sent thither, as an honorary Ambassador, by Ferdinand,
King of the Romans, my most gracious Lord; I say, you are not ignorant, how the
said King Ferdinand, by his Letters, summoned me to this Journey. I received his
Commands, by Letter, when I was at Lisle, on the 3d of November, and I made no
longer stay, than to visit Busbec, only to take my leave of my Father and
Friends; but, taking Tornay in my way, I hastened to Brussels, where I met the
aforesaid Don Lassus, who spurred me on to the Voyage, showing me the King's
Letters to him too, commanding him to press me forward: So that I immediately
took Horse, and made what haste I could to Vienna. My Journey thither was very
troublesome, both by reason of my unaccustomedness to ride upon such
inconvenient Horses, as I could then get; and also because the Season of the
Year was not fit for Travel, the Weather being tempestuous, the Ways dirty, and
the Days short; so that I was forced to borrow a great part of the Night, and
to pass through uncouth, and almost unfrequented, Ways, in the dark; not
without the great hazard of my Life.

As Soon as ever I came to Vienna, I was introduced into the Presence of King
Ferdinand, by his Secretary of State, the Here John Vander Aa: That Prince
received me with the respect he used to show to those Persons, of whose Probity
and Faithfulness he has conceived a great Opinion: He was pleased to entertain
me with a large Discourse, what Advantages he had promised to himself from me,
and how much it concerned him that I should undertake this Embassy, and that
speedily too; for he had solemnly promised the Bassa of Buda, That the Envoy,
he was to send, should be in Buda, without fail, about the beginning of
December next; and, for his part, he was unwilling the Turks should take any
advantage to break their Agreement, upon pretense that he had failed in
performing of his.

There were but 12 Days to the time prescribed, a space little enough to
prepare for a short Journey, much less for so long and tedious a one; and yet
some of those ten Days were to be cut off too, by a Journey, which the King
commanded me to make to Comora, to visit John Maria Malvezius; for the King, my
Master, thought it very advisable for me, who had then but little Acquaintance
in the Turkish Affairs, to consult that experienced Person, and to be informed
by him, ore tenus, of the Manners and Disposition of that Nation; for Malvezius
had been Ferdinand's Ambassador, for several Years, with Solomon the Turkish
Emperor at Constantinople; even from that very time that the Emperor Charles
had, for weighty Reasons of State, made a Truce with the Turks, by his
Ambassador the Here Gerard Velduvickius; for at the same time also, he made an
8 Years Truce with the said Solomon, in the Name of King Ferdinand.

At that time Malvezius was one of the Retinue of Velduvickius; and, when he
was returned from thence, Ferdinand sent him back again to Constantinople, to
reside there as his Ambassador in Ordinary; that so he might prevent the
Incursions of the Turks upon the Kingdom of Hungary, as having an Agent there,
who might complain to the Grand Seignior himself of the Injuries of his Bassa's
and Governors, and demand Satisfaction for the same.

But it happened, not long after, that an occasion being offered of uniting
Transylvania with the rest of Hungary; and the Hungarians themselves did very
much desire that it should be done, as judging it conducive to the Grandeur and
Dignity of that Kingdom; Ferdinand was not willing to neglect so fair an
Opportunity, and therefore he transacted the Matter with the Widow, and Son, of
John the Vayvod, (who was sometimes called King of Hungary) that he might
receive Transylvania in exchange for other Provinces; and seeing these
Transactions could not be wholly concealed from the Turks, Rustan the Grand
Vizier ( Solyman's Son in Law, and the Chief of his Counselors) used to send
for Malvezius, and to demand of him, Whether those things were true, which were
commonly bruited? He stiffly affirmed, That they were utterly false, and offered
to pawn his Head for the Truth of what he spoke. But when Ferdinand was
actually possessed of all Transylvania, so that the Matter could no longer be
dissembled, the Grand Seignior was very angry with Rustan, for giving so much
credit to Malvezius; and Rustan was more enraged at Malvezius, for putting so
palpable a Cheat upon him. To be short, Malvezius is cast into Prison, his
Estate, Goods and Family are seized. He was kept close Prisoner almost two
Years, under strict Guards, whereby he contracted a Distemper, viz. Difficulty
of Urine, which afterward proved Mortal to him, in regard they suffered no
Medicine to be brought unto him, for the Cure of his Dysuria; for, the truth
is, the Turks are always upon the extreme, either over-fond, when they would
show themselves Friends; or over-bitter, when they are Angry. But seeing the
state of their Affairs at that time, by reason of Domestic Discords, was very
unsettled, and thereupon required rather Peace than War; and besides, the
Matter of reducing Transylvania, by Arms, went but slowly and unsuccessfully
on; they were easily persuaded to lay aside the thoughts of War, and to
compound the Matter by a Friendly Agreement.

Matters standing thus, the Turks insisted upon the entire Restitution of
Transylvania; but Ferdinand would by no means quit his Interest therein;
neither would he vacat the Agreement with the Vayvod, as being neither obtained
by Fraud, nor extorted by Force. And to bring down the Turks to those Terms,
Anthony Wrantzius, a Dalmatian, Bishop of Agria, and Francis Zay, Commander of
those Galleys or small Vessels, which the Hungarians call Saicks, (both of them
faithful and industrious Persons, and therefore culled out by Ferdinand for
that Employment) were sent Ambassadors to Constantinople.

Upon their Arrival, Malvezius was delivered out of Prison, and sent back to
Ferdinand with Letters from Solomon. In a small time after his return, he was
sent back by Ferdinand to Constantinople, with his Answer to Solyman's Letters;
and was designed to remain, as his Ambassador in Ordinary there, when once
Peace was established between them. Being on his Journey, when he had reached as
far as Comora (a Castle seated on the Confluence of the Danow and the River
Vaga, a Frontire Garrison against the Turks) the Disease, which he had
contracted in Prison, returned with such Violence upon him, that he was forced
to make a stop, and despairing of his Recovery, he wrote to the Emperor
Ferdinand beseeching him to appoint another Ambassador in his stead.

Upon the receipt of his Letter, Ferdinand was at a stand; he did not fully
believe, nor yet altogether disbelieve, him; he was inclined to suspect, that
the Memory of his former Sufferings, and the fear of future ones, did deter him
from that Employment, rather than the danger of his Disease; and yet, on the
other side, he did not think it creditable for himself to employ a Man that had
so well deserved of him and of the Commonwealth, in any Service against his
Will. But the Death of Malvezius, which followed a few Months after, did
sufficiently convince him, that his Disease was not pretended, to decline the
Employment, but was really a Mortal one.

Upon this, I was substituted in the Place of Malvezius. But being
unexperienced (as I said before) in the Affairs and Manners of the Turks, King
Ferdinand thought it advisable for me to bestow a Visit upon Malvezius, in his
Sickness; that so, by his Directions and Advice, I might be better cautioned
and armed against any Impositions of the captious Turks. Two Days I staid with
him, which was as much as the straitness of my time would permit; and I
husbanded them so well, as to be informed, by him, what I was to act and what
to avoid, in my daily Conversation with the Turks.

Whereupon I posted back to Vienna, and began, with great application and
diligence, to prepare Necessaries for my Journey. But such was the flush of
Business, and so little the time allowed to dispatch it, that, when the Day
fixed for my departure came, though the King did earnestly press me forward, and I
had been toilsomly busy all the day in equipping my self, and in causing Bag
and Baggage to be packed up, even from the fourth Watch; yet it was the first
Watch of the following Night, before I could be quite ready; but then the Gates
of Vienna, which at that time of Night used always to be shut, were opened on
purpose for me. The Emperor went abroad a Hunting that Day, but he told his
Followers, That he did not doubt but that I would be upon my Way, before he
returned from his Sport in the Evening, and it fell out accordingly; yet so,
that I was but just gone before he came home.

At 11 a Clock at Night, we came to Ficiminum, a Town in Hungary, 4 Miles from
Vienna; there we Supped, for our haste was so great that we came Supperless out
of Town; from thence we traveled toward Comora. The Emperor, among the rest
of his Commands, had enjoined me to take along with me to Buda, one Paul
Palinai from Comora, a Man well acquainted with the Rapins and Depredations of
the Turks, and so was best able to assist me in my Expostulations with the
Bassa of Buda, and in my Demands for satisfaction of Injuries received. But he,
not in the least suspecting that my departure would have been so punctual at
the Day appointed, had not yet stirred from his own House, and there was no
Body could tell, when he would come; which uncertainty troubled me very much. I
acquainted King Ferdinand therewith, by Letter, and all the next Day stayed at
Comora expecting his coming.

But the third Day, I passed over the River Vaga, and prosecuted my Journey
toward Gran, the first Garrison of the Turks I came to in Hungary. Col. John
Pax, Governor of Comora had sent 16 Horse with me (of those that the Hungarians
call Hussars) to be my Guard; and he had given them a Charge not to leave me,
till they came in sight of the Turkish Convoy, for the Governor of Gran had
signified to me, that his Soldiers should meet me half way. We traveled about
three Hours through a vast Plain, when, behold! there appeared afar off 4
Turkish Horse; and yet, notwithstanding, my Hungarian Guard accompanied me
still, till I desired them to retire; for I was afraid that if they should come
up to the Turks, some troublesome Bickering would have intervened betwixt them.

As soon as the Turks saw me to draw near, they rode up to me, and saluted me
by my Coach-side; thus we passed on a while togegether, discoursing
interchangeably one with another, (for I had a little Youth for my
Interpreter.) I expected no other Convoy, but when we descended into a low
Valley, I saw my self, on a sudden, surrounded with a Party of about an 150
Horse. It was a very pleasant Spectacle to a Man, unaccustomed to see such
Sights; for their Bucklers and Spears were curiously painted, their
Sword-handles bedecked with Jewels, their Plumes of Feathers party-colored,
and the Coverings of their Heads were twisted with round Windings as white as
Snow; their Apparel was Purple-coloured, or at least a dark Blew; they rode
upon stately Praunsers, adorned with most beautiful Trappings. Their Commanders
came up to me, and after Friendly Salutation they bid me Welcome; and asked me,
how I had fared on my Journey? I answered them as I thought fit; and thus they
led me to Gran, for so the Castle is called, situate on an Hill, whose Foot is
washed by the Danow, with a Town adjoining, built in a Plain. I retired into
the Town, the Archbishop whereof is Primate of Hungary, and for Dignity,
Authority and Opulency, is inferior to no Nobleman of that Kingdom.

Here I was entertained, not after a Courtly, but after a Military, manner; for
instead of Beds, they spread abroad course shaggy Rugs of Tapestry upon hard
Boards; there were no Bed-ticks nor Sheets: Here my Family had the first taste
of Turkish Delights (forsooth;) as for my self, I fared better, for my Bed was
carried along with me, whithersoever I went.

The Day after my Arrival, the Sanziac of the Place (for so the Turks call a
Governor, because a Sanziac (i. e.) a gilded brass Ball, is carried before him
on the top of a Spear, as a Cornet to a Troop of Horse) was very earnest to
speak with me; and though I had no Letter, nor any other Command to deliver to
him, yet such was his importunity, that go I must. And when I came, I found he
had no Business with me, but only to see and salute me, and to ask me something
of my Errand; and thus, exhorting me to promote a Peace, he wished me a happy
Journey. In my Passage, I admired to hear the croaking of Frogs in such a cold
Season of the Year as the Month of December; the cause was, the Waters stagnant
in those Places are made warm by sulphurous Exhalations.

Leaving Gran, I went toward Buda; but, to be sure, I took my Breakfast
beforehand, which was likely to be my Dinner also; for there was no Place to
bait at, before I came to Buda. The Sanziac, or Governor of the Place, with all
his Family, together with the Horse which he commanded, came out of the Town
with me, to bring me on my Way: I could by no means persuade him to omit this
Office of Respect. The Horse, as soon as they came out of the Gates, began to
show me some sport, curvetting and discharging one against another; they threw
their Bonnets on the ground, and Galloping their Horses with full speed, by
them, they took them up by the Points of their Spears; and many such Ludicrous
Pranks did they perform. Amongst the rest of them, there was a Tartar, who had
thick Bushy Hair hanging down over his shoulders; they told me, that he always
went Bare-Headed, and would never have any other fence for his Head, either
against the Violence of the Weather, or the Hazards of a Battle, but his own
Hair. The Sanziac, after he had accompanied me as far as he pleased, returned
home, but not before we had taken our leaves one of another, and he had left
some Guides for my Journey, in my Retinue.

When I drew near to Buda, a few Turkish Chiaux's met me on the way, (they are
in the nature of Pursuivants, or Sergeants at Arms, to carry about the Commands
of the Grand Seignior, or his Bassa's, and are Officers of great esteem in that
Nation,) by them I was brought to Lodge in the House of a Citizen, who was an
Hungarian, where my Baggage, Coach and Horses, was better provided for, than my
self; for the Turks take special care, that Horses, with their Equipage, be
well accommodated; as for the Men, if they have but an House over their Heads
to shelter them from the Weather, they think they may shift well enough for
themselves. The Bassa of Buda sent one to visit me, and to bid me welcome, his
Name was Tuigon, (which in Turkish signifies a Stork,) by him he excused
himself to me, that he could not admit me into his Presence for some Days,
because of a grievous Disease he labored under, but as soon as ever he
recovered a little strength, he said, he would wait upon me. This delay was the
occasion, that the aforementioned absence of Palinai was less prejudicial to
me, than otherwise it would have been, (to say no more,) for he used great
diligence to post after, lest he might come too late, and accordingly he
overtook me a little while after.

I was detained at Buda a long time, by reason of the Sickness of the Bassa;
'twas thought his Disease was Grief, which he had conceived for the loss of a
great Sum of Money, which was stolen from the place in which he had hid it, for
he was commonly reported to be a Penurious and Sordid-Spirited Man. When he
heard, that I had brought the Here William Quacquelben with me, a great
Philosopher, and an excellent Physician too, he earnestly entreated me, that he
might give him a Visit to administer some Physic to him, in order to his Cure.
I easily granted his Request, but soon after was almost ready to repent of my
Facility: For the Bassa grew worse and worse, and, 'twas thought, he would not
have recovered; so that I was afraid, if he had Died, the Turks would say, my
Physician had Killed him; and, by that means, the good Man might have run a
great Hazard, and I my self also might have born part of the Infamy, as being
accessory thereunto; but it pleased God to free me from this Anxiety, by
restoring the Bassa to his Health.

'Twas at Buda I got the first sight of the Ianizaries, so the Turks call their
Praetorian Foot; their Number, when it is fullest, is Twelve Thousand, and
their Prince disperses them all over his Dominions, either to Garrison his Forts
against an Enemy, or to be a Safeguard to Christians and Jews, against the
injurious Rage of the Multitude; for there is no well Inhabited Village, Town,
or City, wherein there are not some or other of these Ianizaries to Protect
Christians, Jews, and other helpless Persons, from the Fury of the Rabble. The
Castle of Buda is always Garrisoned by them; their Habit is a long Garment down
to their Ankles; upon their Heads they wear the Sleeve of a Coat, or Cloak,
(for from thence, as they say, the Pattern was drawn,) their Head is put into
part of it, and part of it hangs down behind, flapping upon their shoulders; in
the Front, or Forepart of it, there arises a Silver-Cone, somewhat long, guilt
over with Gold, and wrought with Jewels, but they were of an ordinary sort.
These Ianizaries usually came to me by Couples; when they were admitted into my
Dining Room, they bowed down their Heads and made Obeisance, and presently they
ran hastily to me, and touched either my Garment, or my Hand, as if they would
have kissed it; and then forced upon me a Bundle, or Nosegay, of Hyacinths, or
Narcissus's, and presently they retired backward, with equal speed, to the
Door, that so they might not turn their Backs upon me, (for that is accounted
undecent, by the Rules of their Order,) when they came to the Door, there they
stood, with a great deal of modesty and silence, with their Hands upon their
Breasts, and fixing their Eyes upon the ground, so that they seemed liker our
Monks, than their Soldiers. But when I had given them some Cash, (which was the
only thing they aimed at,) they bowed their Heads again, and giving me thanks
with a loud Voice, they wished me all happiness, and departed. The Truth is,
unless I had been told before, they were Ianizaries, I should have thought them
to have been a kind of Turkish Monks, or Fellows of some College or other
amongst them. Yet these are the Ianizaries that carry such a 'Terror with them,
wheresoever they come.

Some Turks supped with me often at Buda, and were mightily taken with the
delicious sweetness of my Wine: It is a Liquor that they have but little of in
Turkey, and therefore they more greedily desire it, and drink it more profusely,
when once they come where it is. They continued Carousing till late at Night,
but afterward I grew weary of the sport, and therefore rose from Table, and
went to my Chamber; but as for Them, they went away sad, because they had not
their full swing at the Goblet, but were able to stand upon their Feet. As soon
as I was gone, they sent a Youth after me, desiring me to let them have their
Fill of Wine, and that I would lend them my Silver-Cups to drink it in; for
they were willing, by my leave, to sit at it all Night in some Corner or other
of the House. I granted their request, and ordered so much Wine to be given
them, as they desired, with Bowls to drink it in. Being thus accommodated, they
tippled it out so long, till they were even Dead-drunk, and tumbling down, lay
fast asleep upon the ground. You must know, that it is a great Crime in Turkey
to drink Wine, especially for those who are well stricken in Years; as for the
Younger sort, they think the Offense to be more Venial, and therefore more
excusable in them. But seeing they expect no less Punishment, after Death, for
drinking a little Wine, than if they drank never so much, when once they have
tasted of that Liquor, they go on to drink more and more; for having once
incurred the Penalty of their Law, now, they think, they may sin gratis, and
account Drunkenness as a matter of Gain. This Opinion, and others mo^e absurd
than This, do the Turks hold concerning Wine, of which I will give you a
remarkable Instance: I saw an Old Man at Constantinople, who, after he had
taken a Cup of Wine in his Hand to Drink, used first to make an hideous Noise;
I asked his Friends, Why he did so? They answered me, that, by this Outcry, he
did as it were warn his Soul to retire into some secret corner of his Body, or
else wholly to Emigrate, and pass out of it, that she might not be guilty of
that Sin which he was about to commit, nor be defiled with the Wine, that he
was to guzzle down.

But to return to Buda.

'Twould be too tedious for me to give you a large Description of this Place,
and it were a Task fitter for one that writes a Book, not a Letter; yet not to
be wholly silent, Buda lies in a pleasant place, and in a very fruitful
Country, it is extended all along the Brow of an Hill, so that on one side it
borders on a rising ground, abounding with choice Vineyards, and on the other
side it is watered by the River Danow, running by it; and beyond the Danow,
there is the Town of Pest, and a large Campain adjoining, both which Prospects
are in view of Buda, so that this Place seems naturally designed for the
Metropolis of Hungary. It was anciently Adorned with many stately Palaces,
belonging to the Nobles of Hungary, but those goodly Piles are now either quite
fallen to the ground, or else have many Props to support them from tumbling
down; they are Inhabited mostly by the Turkish Soldiers, whose daily Pay being
but enough to support them, they have no overplus to lay out in Tyling, or
Repairing, such large Structures; and therefore they do not much regard,
whether it Rains through the Roof, or whether the Walls be full of Clefts,
provided they have a dry place to set their Horses, and their own Beds, in; the
upper part they think concerns them not, so that they make a great part of the
upper Stories to be Inhabited by Weazels and Mice.

Besides, it is a piece of Religion in Turkey, not to covet Magnificent
Buildings; for, (say they) it is a sign of a Proud, Lofty, and Aspiring Mind, to
covet Sumptuous Houses, as if so frail a Creature as Man did promise a kind of
Immortality, and an Everlasting Habitation, to himself, in this Life; when
alas! we are but as Pilgrims here, and therefore ought to use our Dwellings, as
Travellors do their Inns, wherein if they are secured from Thieves, from Cold,
from Heat, and from Rain, they seek not for any other Conveniences. So that
all over Turkey you will hardly find a stately House, though the Owner of it be
never so great, or Rich, a Man; the Commonalty of them live in Huts and
Cottages; the Nobles are for handsome Orchards, Gardens, and Baths; but as for
their Houses, though the Numerousness of their Families require large ones, yet
they have no handsome Gate-houses, or Porches, belonging to them, nor
Court-Yards, nor any thing else Magnificent, or worthy of any Admiration.
Herein they resemble the Hungarians, for, except Buda, and (perhaps) Presburgh,
there is scarce any City in Hungary that you can call well built. This Custom,
I suppose, they derived from their Ancestors, for they being a People given to
Camp-discipline and therein trained, did not care a rush for building great
Houses, but looked upon their Towns only as Temporary Habitations, which they
were about to leave.

Moreover, whilst I was at Buda, I was very much taken with the sight of a
strange kind of Fountain that is without the Gate of the Town, in the way
leading to Constantinople, the Water whereof at top was boiling hot, and yet in
the bottom there were Fishes playing up and down; so that you would think, they
must needs be thoroughly boiled, before you could take them out.

'Twas the 7 th of December, before the Bassa was so well recovered as to admit
me to his Presence; and then, after I had sweetened him with some Presents. I
made my Complaint to him of the Insolency and Ravagings of the Turkish
Soldiers; and demanded Restitution of what they had wrongfully taken away,
contrary to the express Articles of the Truce made, and which he himself, in
his Letter to Ferdinand, had promised him satisfaction for, if he pleased to
send an Envoy to Buda. But he, like a cunning Gamester, made as many Complaints
of the Injuries and Losses They had sustained by Our Soldiers: And as for his
Promise to restore the Places they had wrongfully seized and taken away from
the Emperor; he eluded it, by sheltring himself under this Dilemma, Either I
made a Promise, or I did not; if I made no Promise, then you can demand nothing
of me: If I did make a Promise, I know, Sir, you are a Person of that
Understanding as not to conceive, that I can or will perform it; for I am sent
hither by my Master to enlarge, not to diminish, the Bounds of his Empire, so
that I must by no means make his condition worse than it was; it is my Master's
Business, (Sir) not Mine; what you have to say on this Head, pray propound it
to him, when you come to Constantinople: To be short, Sir, you know I am but
newly recovered, and therefore am not in a condition to maintain any further
Discourse. When this course Complement was put upon me, I thought 'twas time to
be gone, neither could I get any thing else from him, only a Truce, till the
Grand Seignior's mind was known.

I observed, that when I was introduced to the Bassa, they observed the old
Roman Custom of crying aloud, Welcome, Welcome; and so wishing an happy Issue to
my Negotiation: I observed also, that the Turks count the Left Hand to be most
Honorable in some particular Cases; the reason they give, is, because the
Sword is worn on that side, and he that is on the Right Hand has, as it were,
the Command of the Sword of him that is at his Left, whereas his Own is free,

Matters being thus composed at Buda, as well as we could, my Companion Palinai
returned to the Emperor, but I, for my part, shipped my Horses, Coaches, and
all my Family on some Vessels, prepared for me on the Danow, and so passed down
the Stream to Belgrade; this was a shorter Cut, and also more secure; for my
Journey by Land to Belgrade would at that time have cost me at least 12 Days,
especially having such a deal of heavy Baggage with me; and, besides, we had
been in danger to be Robbed by the Heyduc's, so the Hungarians call a sort of
plundering Thieves and Robbers: But upon the Water there was no fear at all of
them; and, besides, we compassed our Journey in 5 Days. The Vessel, in which I
was, was drawn along by a lesser Pinnace, in which there were 24 Oars; the
other Vessels had but two large Oars apiece. The Mariners rowed Night and Day
without any intermission, excepting only a few Hours that the poor Souls
borrowed to sleep and eat in. In my Passage down the River, I could not but
observe the venturousness, not to say temerity, of the Turks, who were not
afraid to sail on in the mistiest Weather, in the darkest Night, and when the
Wind blew very hard, too; and, besides, there were many Water mills, with
several Trunks and Boughs of Trees hanging over the Banks, which made our
Passage very dangerous; so that some times our Vessel, by the boisterousness of
the Wind, was driven to the Bank, and there dashed against old stumps of Trees
hanging over, so that it was like to split; this is certain, that she lost some
Planks out of her Hulk, which made a terrible crack and noise when they were
loosed therefrom. This noise awaked me; leaping out of my Bed I advised the
Mariners to be more cautio^s; they lift up their Voices, and gave me no other
Answer than Alaure, i. e. God will help, and so I might go to Bed again, if I
would. Though We sped pretty well, yet I am apt to believe, that, at one time or
other, such dangerous Sailing will be fatal to some Passengers. In our Passage,
I saw Tolna, a handsome Town in Hungary; I cannot forbear to mention it,
because there we had very good White Wind, and, besides, the Inhabitants were
very courteous to us. Moreover, we passed in sight of the Castle of Walpot,
seated on an Hill, and of other Castles and Towns besides; we saw also where
the River Drove, on the one side, and the Tibiscus, or Taise, on the other,
made their Influx into the Danow. As for Belgrade it self, it is seated at the
confluence of the Save and the Danow; the old City is built in the extreme
Angle of the Promontory, the Building is old, it is fortified with many Towers
and a double Wall: Two parts of it are washed by the Save and the Danow, but on
that part where it is joined to the Land, it has a very strong Castle on high
Ground, consisting of many lofty Turrets made of square Stone; before you come
into the City, there is a vast company of Buildings, and very large Suburbs,
wherein several Nations do inhabit, viz. ^Turks, Greeks, Jews, Hungarians,
Dalmatians, and many others. For you must know that ordinarily over all the
Turkish Dominions, the Suburbs are larger than the Towns, but take them both
together, they give the resemblance of large Cities: 'Twas at this Town, that I
first met with some ancient Coins, wherein, as you know, I take a great
delight, and my Physician aforesaid, Dr. Quacquelben fitted me to an Hair, as
we say, for he was as much addicted to those Studies as my self. I found a
great many pieces, which on one side represented a Roman Soldier, placed
between a Bull and a Horse, (for it is known, that the Legions of upper Moesia
did anciently encamp hereabouts) with this Inscription, Taurunum. This City, in
the Memory of our Grandfathers, was twice violently assaulted by the Turks,
first, under Amurath; next, under Mahomet who took Constantinople; but the
Hungarians, under the Banner of the Cross, made such a vigorous defense, that
the Barbarians were beaten off with a great deal of loss. But at last, in the
Year, 1520. Solomon, in the beginning of his Reign, came before it with a vast
Army, and finding it, either by the neglect of young King Ludovicus, or by the
Discords of the factious Hungarian Nobles, destitute of a Garrison able to
defend it, he took that opportunity to assault it, and so easily became Master
thereof. And that Door being once opened, an Iliad of Miseries broke in upon
poor Hungary, of which she is sadly sensible to this day; for this Pass being
gained, there followed the Slaughter of King Le^is Ludovicus, the taking of
Buda, the inslaving of Transylvania, and a flourishing Kingdom hereby brought
under the Yoke no^-without a Terror struck into the Neighboring Nations, lest
they also should partake of the same Calamities: By which Example, Christian
Princes may take warning, never to think their Frontier Towns and Castles to be
strong enough, nor sufficiently provided, against so potent an Enemy as the
Turk. For the truth is, the Ottomans are herein not unlike to great Rivers,
whose swelling Waves, if they break down any part of the Bank or Jitty that
keeps them in, spread far and near, and do abundance of mischief; so the Turks,
but far more pernic^ously, having once broke through the Obstacles that stopped
them, make a vast spoil wherever they come. But to return to Belgrade, that I
may prosecute the rest of my Journey to Constantinople.

After I had provided my self in that City of all things necessary for a
Land-Journy, I left Semandria, heretofore a Town or Castle of the Despots of
Servia on the left side of the Danow; from whence we journied toward Nissa. In
our way thither, the Turks showed us, from the higher Grounds, the Mountains of
Transylvania, with snowy Tops, but at a great distance from us; and, moreover,
they pointed with their Fingers, where the Ruins of Trajans Bridge were: After
we had past the River called Morava, we came to a Town of the Servians, named,
Iagodna; there I observed the Funeral Rites of that Country, which differ very
much from ours; as you may find by this Relation following.

The dead Body was placed in a Temple, with the Face uncovered; near it were
laid Victuals, as Bread, Flesh and a Flagon of Wine: The Wife and Daughter of
the deceased stood by, in their best Apparel; the Daughters Hat was made of
Peacocks-feathers. The last Boon that the Wife bestowed on her dead Husband,
was a purple Bonnet, such as noble Virgins used to wear in that Country. Then
we heard their Funeral Plaints, Mournings and Lamentations, wherein they asked
the dead Corpse, How they came to deserve so ill at his Hands? Wherein had they
been wanting in their Duty and Observance, that he had left them in such a
lonesom and disconsolate Condition? And such like Stuff. The Priests that
ministered in this Service were of the Greek Church. In the Churchyard, there
were erected on Poles or long Staves, several Pictures of Stags, Hinds and such
kind of Creatures, cut in Wood; when I asked them the reason of this strange
Custom, they told us, That their Husbands or Fathers did thereby signify the
celerity and diligence of their Wives or Daughters in managing their Household
Affairs. Moreover by some Sepulchers, there hung Bushes of Hair, which Women or
Maidens had placed in testimony of their grief for the loss of their Relations.
We were also informed, that it was the custom of that Country, after Friends on
both sides had accorded about the Marriage of a young Couple, for the
Bridegroom to snatch away his Bride, as it were by force; for they do not think
it handsome, that a Maid should consent to her own Devirgination or first
Nights Lodging with her Husband.

At a small distance from Iagodna, we met with a little River which the
neighboring Inhabitants called Nissus, and we kept it on our right hand almost
all the way till we came to Nissa; yea, and beyond the Town, upon the Bank
thereof, (where there were some remains of an old Roman Way) we saw a small
Marble Pillar, yet standing, wherein there were some Latin Letters inscribed,
but they were so defaced, that they could not be read: As for the Town of
Nissa, for that Country, it is a decent one, and full of Inhabitants.

It Is time now to acquaint you with the Entertainment we met with at our Inns,
for I believe you long to know. When I came to Nissa, I lodged in a public
Inn, the Turks call them Caravasarai, of which there are a great many in that
Country; the Form of them is this, it is a large Edifice, that has more of
length than breadth; in the midst of it there is a kind of Yard for the placing
of Carriages, Camels, Mules and Wagons. This Yard is compassed about with a
Wall about 3 Foot high, which joins, and is, as it were, built in the outward
Wall, that incloses the whole Building; the top of this inner Wall is plain and
level, and is about 4 Foot broad. Here the Turks lodge, here they sup, and here
is all the Kitchen which they have, (for in the ambient Wall, before spoken of,
there are ever and anon some Hearths built) and here are no Partitions between
Camels, Horses with other Cattle, and Men, but the space of that inner Wall;
and yet at the foot of that Wall, they so tie their Horses that their Heads and
Necks are above it, or at least may lean over it; and thus when their Masters
are warming themselves at the Fire, or else are at Supper, they stand near them
as Servants used to do; and sometimes they will take a piece of Bread or Apple,
or whatsoever else is offered them, out of their Masters Hand. Upon the same
Wall, the Turks make their Beds, after this manner, first of all they spread
abroad a piece of Tapestry, which is fitted as a Saddle-cloth by day, for their
Horses: Upon that they put their Cloaks; their Saddles serve for a Pillow; and
with the long Vests they wear at day, they cover themselves at night. And thus
they take their rest, never provoking Sleep by any other Allurement. There is
nothing done in secret, there all is open, and every Body may see what another
does, unless the darkness of the night do hinder him. For my part, I did
greatly abhor this sort of Lodging, because the Eyes of all the Turks were
continually upon us, stareing and wondering at our carriage, according to the
Customs of our Country. And, therefore, I always endeavored to lodge at the
mean House of some poor Christian! but, alas! their Cottages were so small,
that many times I had not room enough, in them, for placing my Bed; so that
sometimes I slept in my Tent, sometimes in my Coach, and sometimes again I
turned into the Turkish Hospitals; which, to give them their due, are very
convenient, and not unhandsomly built, for they have several distinct
Apartments for Lodgings in them. There is no Man forbid the use of them, either
Christian or Jew, Rich or Poor, they are open equally to all. Even the Bassa's
and Sanziacs, when they travel, make use of them. In these I thought my self
lodged as well as in the Palace of a Prince.

The Custom of these Inns, like Hospitals, is this: They allow Victuals to
every particular Man, that comes in as a Guest: So that when Supper time came,
there was a Servant that brought in a great wooden Dish almost as big as a
Table; in the middle of it was a Platter full of Barley boiled to a Jelly with
a little piece of Flesh, and about the Platter were some small Loaves, and here
and there a piece of an Honeycomb. When I saw this, at first, out of Modesty, I
refused it, saying, that my Servants were preparing my own Supper for me, and
therefore advised them to give it to the Poor: He took it amiss, and pressed it
upon me, alleging, that I should not scorn their slender Provision, that the
Bassa's themselves used to eat of it; it was the custom of their Country so to
do; they had enough left to give to the Poor; and if I would not eat it my
self, I should give it to my Servants; hereupon, I was enforced to take it,
that I might not be counted uncivil by them. Take it then I did, and after I
had tasted a little of it, I gave him thanks. The relish of it pleased me well,
for that kind of Gruel, as it is commended by Galen, so it is very wholesome,
and not unpleasing to the taste. Travelers may be entertained with that kind
of Diet for 3 days, but when that time is expired, they must pack up and be
gone. Here (as I told you) I was well intertain'd, but I met not always with
such good Quarters. Sometimes, when I could not light upon an House, I lodged
in a Stable; my People enquired after a large and capacious one, in one part
whereof was an Hearth and a Chimney, and the other part was designed for the
Herds of Cattle; for that is the Make of the Turkish Stables, that the Herd and
the Herdsman do lodge under the same Roof. I divided that part where the Fire
was from the rest, by the sides of my Tent, and then I put my Table and my Bed
by the Fireside, and lived like an Emperor: As for my Family, they wallowed in
a great deal of clean Straw, in the other part of the Stable: But some of them
fell asleep by the Fireside in the adjoining Orchard or Meadow where Supper
was a preparing; the heat of the Fire was their guard against the coldness of
the night, and they had as great a care not to let it go out, as the Vestal
Virgins had of old at Rome.

I suppose, you will ask me, how my Family did relieve themselves against the
inconvenience of their bad Lodging; especially seeing they could have little
Wine in the middle of Turkey, which might have been some Remedy for their ill
Lodging at night. For the truth is, there is little Wine to be had in several
of their Villages, especially if no Christians dwell among them: For I must
tell you, that the Christians being wearied out with the Pride and Insolency of
the Turks, do many times withdraw themselves from the common Road into desert
Places; which though they are less fruitful yet are more secure; and so leave
their better Possessions to the domineering Turks. And whenever we drew near to
any such Places, where there was no Wine, the Turks would very fairly tell us
of it beforehand; so that I sent my Steward the day before, with a Turk to
guide him, to procure some from the next Villages of the Christians. And by
this means it was, that the Distresses of my Family were something alleviated;
it is true, I could not get any soft Featherbeds or Pillows for them, or other
Blandishments for sleep; the Wine was instead of all: As for my self, I had
some Flagons of choice Wine in my Chariot, so that I wanted none; thus I and my
Family were provided for, as to Wine.

But there was one Inconvenience, which troubled us more than the scarcity of
Wine, and that was, our sleep was miserably interrupted; for we being to rise
betimes in the Morning, and sometimes before day, that we might come the sooner
to our Inns at Night, our Turkish Guides, being deceived by the light of the
Moon, would sometimes call us up at or about Midnight, with a great deal of
noise and clamor. For the Turks have no Clocks to distinguish Hours, nor Miles
to show the distance of Places: Only they have a sort of Ecclesiastics, which
they call Talismans; this sort of People use a kind of Admeasurement by Water,
and when they perceive thereby, that it is Morning, then they cry aloud from an
high Tower, built on purpose, exhorting them to arise and worship God. They
make the same noise in the middle between Sunrise and Noon; and likewise,
between Noon and Sunset; and, last of all, when the Sun is set, they cry out,
with a very shrill Voice, which has no unpleasant Modulation, and which is
heard farther than any Body would think. Thus the Turks divide the day into
four spaces, longer or shorter, according to the Season of the Year: But for
the Nightime, they have no certain Rule at all.

So then our Turkish Guides being deceived by the brightness of the Night (as I
told you before) called us up before Sunrising, and we started out of our Beds
in great haste, that so they might not impute any unlucky Accident, upon the
way, to our slothfulness; in the Morning, we packed up our Baggage, and put my
Bed and Tent in our Wagons, harnessed our Horses, and were ready for our
Journey; only expected the word of Command. But (would you think it?) our Turks,
when they found their Mistake, fairly went into their Nests again; and after we
had waited for them a great while, I sent to them, to tell them, we were all
ready; and now the delay was on their side, my Messengers brought me word, from
them, that the Moonlight had deceived them, and, therefore, they were gone to
sleep again; for it would be a great while before it would be time to go; and
they persuaded us to try to sleep again too. And, thus, we must either unpack
all our things again, to our no small trouble; or else we must endure a great
part of the coldness of the Night in the open Air.

To prevent this Inconvenience for the future, I charged the Turks not to be so
troublesome any more, as to rouse me out of my sleep; for if they would but
tell me over Night, at what time they would rise in the Morning, I would be
sure to be ready at the time appointed; for I had Watches, by me, that I
intended to make use of, which would not fail to acquaint me with the precise
Hour of the Morning; and if they over-slept themselves, they should lay it to
my charge; so that they need not scruple to trust me with the Hour of their
rising. They seemed to be somewhat satisfied herewith, and yet did not lay
aside all their Solicitude neither; for in the Morning betimes, they awakened
my Valet de Chamber, desiring him to go to me, and to see how the Index of my
Watches did point; he did so; and returned Answer to them, as well as he could,
That 'twas much or little to Sunrising, according as he found it. When they
had thus tried him once or twice, and found that he hit the Time right, they
trusted me for the future, and admired the Structure of our Watches, that could
so faithfully declare the Time; so that ever after, we slept out our sleep,
without any Disturbances from them.

From Nissa we came to S. Sophia; the Journey thither, and the Weather, for that
time of the Year, was very tolerable. Sophia is a Town big enough, and well
inhabited both by Citizens and Strangers: It was heretofore the Royal Seat of
the King of Bulgaria; and afterward (if I mistake not) of the Despots of
Servia, whilst that House stood, before it was overthrown by the Turkish Arms.

Afterward, we continued our Journey, for many Days, through the pleasant, and
not unfruitful, Valley, of Bulgaria; all the time we were in that Country, we
had little other Bread, but only Cakes baked under Ashes upon the Hearth; they
call them Togatch. The Women and Maids sell them, (for they have no Bakers in
those Parts;) and when they perceive any Guests a coming, that are likely to
pay for what they have, presently they knead a little Dough, with Water,
without any Leaven; and lay it (upon Tiles) under the Ashes, and so bring it
out piping hot, as we say, and sell them for a very small Matter; other
Victuals is also very cheap there; a good Weather-sheep may be bought for 35
Aspers; a Chicken and a Hen will cost but an Asper; a sort of Coin with them,
of which 50 make but a Crown.

I must not omit to acquaint you with the Habit of those Bulgarian Women. They
commonly wear nothing but a Smock or Shift, made of no finer Linen-thread, than
that we make Sacks of. And yet these course Garments were wrought, by them,
with several sorts of Strip'd-needle-work after a homely fashion: With this
loose party-colored Habit they mightily please themselves, so that when they
saw our Shifts, made of the finest Linen, yet they wondered at our Modesty, that
we could be contented to wear them without various Works of diverse Colors
wrought in them.

But that which I most of all admired in them, was the Tower, (if I may so call
it,) which they wore on their Heads, for such was the Form of their Hats. They
were made of Straw braided with Webs over them. The Figure of them does differ
from the Hats Women wear in our Country, for Ours hang down on the shoulders,
and the lowest part of it is the broadest, and so it arises as it were into a
Pyramid, at Top; but Theirs is narrowest below, and so rises up like a Top,
almost Nine Inches above the Head, but that part of it that looks upwards,
toward the Sky, is both very capacious, and also open, so that, it seems made
to take in Rain, and Showers, as ours are to shelter us against them; but in
that space interjacent between their upper and lower part, there hang pieces of
Coin, little Pictures or Images, small parcels of painted Glass, or whatever
is resplendent, tho never so mean, which are accounted very ornamental among
them.

Those kind of Hats do make them look taller, and also more Matron-like, though
they are easily blown off their Heads, by a blast of Wind, or by any light
motion they fall off themselves.

When they appeared to us in this Dress, methought, they resembled Clytemnestra
or some Hecuba or other, (in the flourishing time of Troy) coming upon the
Stage. This Sight suggested to me some pious Meditations, viz. How frail and
mutable a thing that which is called Nobleness of Birth, is; for when I asked
of some of these Lasses, they that seemed to be the handsomest among them,
concerning their Stock and Lineage, they told me, They were descended from the
chief Nobles of that Country; and some of them were of a Royal Progeny, though
now it was their Fate, (as they said) to marry Herdsmen or Shepherds. For
Nobility is very little esteemed in the Turkish Dominions. For I my self did
afterward see, at Constantinople and other Places, some Descendants from the
Imperial Families of the Catacuzeni and the Paloeologi, living more
contemptuously among the Turks, than ever Dionysius did of old at Corinth; nay,
the Turks esteem no Men for their Birth, but only for their own performed
Accomplishments, excepting only the Ottoman Family; for That they have a high
Veneration, upon account of its Original.

It is thought that these Bulgarians had their Original from Seythia, near the
River Volga, and that they changed their Habitations and came into these Parts,
when other Nations, either compelled by force or prompted by choice, changed
theirs; and that they were called Bulgarians, i. e. Volgarians, from the River
Volga, aforesaid. Upon this transmigration they fixed their Habitation upon
those Parts of Mount Hoemus, that lie between Sophia and Philippopolis, which
are Places naturally strong; where they, for a long time, baffled all the Power
of the Grecian Emperors, and killed Baldwin the Elder, Earl of Flanders, then
Emperor of Constantinople, after they had taken him in an hot Skirmish. Yet for
all this they were not able to resist the Power of the Turks, but were overcome
and miserably enslaved by them. They use the Illyrian or Slavonian Tongue, as
the Servians and Rascians also do.

Before a Man descends into that Plain that lies over against Philippopolis, he
must go through a Forest and a craggy Mountain, which the Turks call Capi
Dervent, i. e. The Gate of the strait or narrow Passage; but in the Plain,
before mentioned, we met with the River Hebrus, having its Original from the
adjoining Mountain, Rhodope. Before we could pass the said Straits, we saw the
top of Mount Rhodope all covered over with deep Snow. The Inhabitants, as I
remember, call it Rulla. From hence flows the River Hebrus, as Pliny says, and
Ovid also affirms the same in this Distick.

Qua patet umbrosum Rhodope glacialis ad Hoemum,
Et sacer amissas exigit Hebrus aquas.
Where Icy Rhodope ope's to shady Hoeme,
And sacred Hebrus wants part of her Stream.
In which Verses, the Poet seems to intimate the shallowness of that River for
want of Water. For though it be a great and famous River, yet, in most Places, it
is fordable: For, I remember, in my return from Constantinople, we forded over
the same Hebrus, near Philippopolis, to an Island on the other side, where we
lay in our Tents all Night; but so it happened, that the Waters swelled that
Night by reason of Rain, so that the next Morning we could not repass the
River, to come into the Road, without a great deal of trouble.

The City of Philippopolis is situate on one of the three little Hills,
disjoined, and, as it were, rent from the rest of the Mountains, and is as the
grace of those little Hillocks. While we were at Philippopolis, we saw Rice
growing, like Wheat, in the watery and marshy Grounds. The whole Plain, about
the Town, is full of little round Hills of Earth, which, the Turks say, were
raised on purpose, as Monuments of the frequent Battles fought in those Fields,
and the Graves of such as were slain there. From hence, leaving the River
Hebrus, something on the Right, and Mount Hoemus, which runs forth into Pontus,
on the left, at last we passed over the Hebrus on a famous Bridge, made by
Mustapha, and so came to Hadrianople, which the Turks call Endrene.

This City was formerly called Orestia, before the Emperor Hadrian enlarged it,
and called it by his own Name. It is seated at the confluence of the River
Mariza or Hebrus, and the two small Currents of Thinsa and Harda, which there
meeting in a joint Stream run into the Egean Sea. This City is not very large
within the Walls; but, if you take in the Suburbs and the Buildings which the
Turks have added without, it is very capacious.

We staid but one day at Hadrianople, and then went forward on the last Stage
of our Journey toward Constantinople, to which we drew nearer day by day. In my
way thither, there grew abundance of Narcissus's, Hyacinths, and (as the Turks
call them) Tulips, which we beheld, not without admiration, that in the midst
of Winter, which is not favorable to such Flowers in other Countries, the
Ground should be so garnished by them. As for Narcissus's and Hyacinths's, all
Greece abound with them; and they are so odoriferous, that, by reason of their
multitude, they are offensive to those Heads that are unaccustomed to such kind
of Smells. But the Tulip has little or no Smell, but its gaudiness and
party-colouredness is its greatest commendation. The Turks are great Admirers
of Flowers, so that, though they are parsimonious enough in other cases, yet for
a stately Flower, they will not scruple to give some Aspers. And the truth is,
these kind of Flowers, though they were presented to me as a Gift, yet they cost
me a great deal of Money; for some Aspers were always expected in requital.
Neither is there any other way of treating with a Turk, but by opening the
Purse-strings, as soon as any Christian comes among them; neither must he think
to shut them again, till he go out of their Country: While he is there, he must
scatter his Coin, and if he get no other advantage by it, yet it makes them
more tracta^le^ For the Turks are so ill-natured, and such undervaluers of all
Nations, but their own, that without this Open-handedness, there were no more
living among them, for Strangers, than in the most desolate and uninhabited
Places, by reason of the excessiveness either of Cold or Heat; but with the
bait of Liberality, you may catch a Turk at any time.

About the midway between Hadrianople and Constantinople, there is a little
Town, called, Chiurli, memorable for the overthrow which Selimus received in a
Battle against his Father Bajazet, out of which he escaped by the swiftness of
his Horse, called, Carabonluch, (i. e.) a Black Cloud, and so fled to the Cham,
or the Precopeian Tartar, who was his Father-in-Law.

Before we came to Selimbria, which is a Town standing on the Seaside in our
way, we saw the Ruins of an old Wall and Ditch, which were made by the later
Emperors of Greece, which reached from that Sea to the Danow, to secure all
that was contained within that Fortification to the Constantinopolitans,
against the Incursions of the Barbarians; and there goes a Story, that when
that Wall was a Building, a certain old Man delivered his Opinion to his Wife,
viz. That that Wall would not so much secure what was within it, from the hands
of the Infidels, as it would expose and subject it to their rage and fury, in
regard it would add Courage to the Barbarians to assault it, and weaken the
Courage of the Grecians to defend it.

At Selimbria we had a most pleasant prospect of a calm Sea; and 'twas very
pleasant to us to behold the smooth Water, and to gather Cockles on the Shore;
yea, to behold Sholes of Dolphins sporting in the Water, which, with the
warmness of the Air, was very delightful to us. It can hardly be imagined, how
mild the Weather was in those Parts, though sometimes it be a little more
boistrous at Chiurli; but here there is, as I may call it, a Thracian Gale, and
an incredible sweetness of Air.

When we came near to Constantinople, we passed over two pleasant Arms of the
Sea, upon a Bridge built over them. I may safely say, That if those Places were
cultivated by Art, as they are naturally Pleasant, the Sun never shone on a
better Country; but, alas! they seem to mourn for the neglect put upon them, by
the insulting Barbarian. Here we had our fill of choice Sea-fishes, which were
even taken in our sight.

When I lodged in those Inns, the Turks call Imaret, I usually observed, that
the cracks of the Walls were all full of pieces of Paper; and thinking
something was the matter, but not knowing what, I took out some of them, and
finding nothing writ therein of any consequence, I was more earnest to know of
the Turks the reason of their so doing; especially, seeing I had observed the
same thing in other Places of Turkey, before. At first, they scrupled to tell
me, as thinking, perhaps, that I would not believe them; or else, not being
willing to impart so great a Mystery of things to such an Alien as my self.
This made me the more inquisitive, till at last some of them, with whom I
became more familiar, told me, That the Turks gave a great deal of deference to
Paper, because the name of God may be written in it: And, therefore, they will
not suffer the least bit of Paper to lie upon the Ground, but presently they
take it up, and thrust it into some chink or hold or other, that so it may not
be trampled under foot; and hitherto, perhaps, their Superstition may be
tolerable, but mark what follows.

In the day of Judgment, say they, when Mahomet shall call up his Followers
from their Purgatory, (to which they were condemned for their Sins) to Heaven,
to be there made Partakers of Eternal Blessedness; There will no way be left
for them to come to their Prophet, but over an huge red-hot Iron Grate, which
they must run over barefoot, (how painfully, you may guess, when you imagine a
Cock to skip through hot-burning Coals.) But at that instant, (believe it if you
can!) all those Bundles of Paper, which they have preserved from being trod
upon, will immediately appear, and put themselves under their Feet; by which
means, they will pass the Iron red-hot Grate with less damage; so necessary do
they count the work of saving a little Paper. And, to add to the Story, I
remember that my Turkish Guides were once very angry with my Servants, for
making use of Paper to cleanse their Posteriors, and thereupon made a grievous
Complaint to me of their horrid Offense, therein; I had no way to put them off,
but by telling them, 'twas no wonder my Servants did do such strange things,
seeing they also used to eat Swines Flesh, which the Turks abhor. Thus I have
given you a taste of the Turkish Superstition; I shall add, That they account
it a damnable Sin, if any of their own People chance (though unwillingly) to sit
upon the Alcoran, (which is a Book, containing the Rites of their Religion;)
and, if a Christian do it, it is Death by their Law. Moreover, they will not
suffer Rose-leaves to lie upon the Ground, because, as the Ancients did fable,
the Rose does spring out of the Blood of Venus; so the Turks (forsooth) hold,
That it had its rise from the Sweat of Mahomet: But I cloy your Stomach with
these Trifles.

I came to Constantinople on the 20 th day of January, and there found my
Colleagues abovementioned, Anthony Wrantzius and Francis Zay; as for the Grand
Seignior himself, he was, at that time, at the Head of his Army in Asia, and
had only left, at Constantinople, Ebrahim Bassa, an Eunuch, as Governor of the
City, and Rustan, but deprived of his Visier-ship; however, I gave him a Visit
and made him Presents, as being mindful of his former Dignity, and of the fair
Prospect there was of his speedy Restitution thereunto.

It may, perhaps, divertise you, and besides it is not wholly foreign to my
design, to acquaint you how this Rustan came to be stripped of all his former
Honors. Know then, That Solomon begat a Son, called Mustapha, on a Concubine
of his, born by the Bosphorus, (if I mistake not) this Youth was in the prime
of his Age, and in great favor among the Soldiers. But the same Solomon had
several other Children by Roxolana, whom he doted on so much, that he made her
his Wife, by appointing her a Dowry; for that is the way of making and firming a
Marriage among the Turks. This Solomon did, contrary to the Custom of former
Emperors, none of which had ever married a Wife, since the days of Bajazet the
Elder; the reason was, because the said Bajazet, being overthrown by Tamerlan,
was, with his Wife, taken Prisoner by him, where he suffered many Indignities,
but none affected him more, than the Uncivilities and Reproaches which he saw
offered to his Sultaness, before his Face. The memory of which Affronts made
such a deep Impression on all those that succeeded Bajazet in the Empire, that,
to this very day, none of them will marry a Wife, that so, whatever chance
should happen, they might never fall into the like Indignity; so that, ever
since, they beget Children on Women of a servile condition, in whose
Misfortunes they may be less concerned, than if they were their lawful Wives.
And yet the Children, begot on such Concubins, are as much esteemed by the
Turks, as if they were born in lawful Wedlock, and they have as much right to
their Fathers Estates.

So then, Mustapha, being of a promising Ingenuity, and in the flower of his
Age; and besides, being the Darling of the Soldiers, and the Common People too,
having so many favorable Circumstances attending him, he, after his Father's
Death, who was now very old, was by the Votes of all designed for his
Successor, in the Empire: On the other side, his Stepmother, Roxalana, with
might and main, labored to prevent it, and to secure the Empire for the
Children begotten on her own Body, and thereupon presuming on her
Marriage-Relation, she ceased not to disparage Mustapha, and to prefer a
Younger Son of her own before him. In this design Rustan was both her
Counselor, and her Assistant too; they drew both in one Yoke, for Rustan
having Married a Daughter of Solyman's, by Roxalana, their Interests thereupon
were conjoined, and twisted one in another.

This Rustan was the chief of the Bassa's, and Solyman's Prime Vizier, having
the chief Power and Authority with him: He was a Man of a sharp and very
capcacious Wit, and a great Grace to Solyman's Government. As for his Original,
he was the Son but of a Shepherd, and yet he seemed worthy of that Dignity, to
which he was advanced, if his fordid Avarice had not been a Blot in his
Escutcheon. And to speak truly, Solomon himself, did observe this Vice in him,
though upon all other accounts, he was his choice and only Favorite: And yet
this Crime of his turned to his Masters advantage, for being appointed by
Solomon to preside over his Treasury, or Exchequer, which sometimes was very
low, he was so thrifty in the management of that Office, that he did not spare
to raise Money, even by the meanest and most contemptible ways. For he laid a
Tax on Herbs, Roses, and Violets, which grew in great Men's Gardens; he caused
the Armor, Coats of Male, Warrior's Horses, of such as were taken Prisoners in
War, to be sold, and by such ways as those he got together such a Mass of Money,
that Solomon was very secure on that part; upon this occasion, I remember, that
a great Man among the Turks, who are usually vindictive enough, that was a
great Enemy to Rustan, yet (to my surprise,) told me, That he would do Rustan
no hurt, though it were never so much in his power, because his Care and Industry
had advanced his Masters Treasury to so prodigious a Sum. There is a Chamber in
the Seraglio, at Constantinople, over which there is this Inscription, This is
the Cash obtained by the diligence of Rustan.

When Rustan was Grand Vizier, and had the entire Administration of all things
in his hands, he was able to turn his Master's mind, hither and thither, as he
pleased, so that 'twas commonly reported among the Turks, That partly by the
Accusation of Rustan, and partly by the Witchcraft of his Wife Roxolana, (for
she was accounted little better than a Sorceress) Solomon was so alienated from
his Son Mustapha, that he took Counsel to put him to death. As to what some
allege, that Mustapha being sensible of the Designs of Rustan and his
Stepmother Roxolana, against his Life, did labor to preserve them, by taking
off his Father, and so seizing the Empire by force; very few do believe that
Story, but look upon it as a Fiction.

On this Occasion, let me tell you, that the Sons of the Turkish Emperors are
the miserablest Creatures in the World; for if any one of them succeed his
Father in the Empire, the rest are inevitably put to death by him. For the
Turks cannot endure any Corrival in Government; and, besides, they are egged on
to this severity by their Proetorian Bands ( Ianizaries and Spahies) who, as
long as there is any one of the Grand Seigniors Brothers alive, never cease
craving of Largesses and Boons, and, if the present Emperor refuses to grant
them, they presently cry out, God save your Brother, God send your Brother a
long Life; by which words they more than intimate their Wishes, that he were in
the Throne: So that the Turkish Emperors are, in a manner, compelled to put
their Brethren to death, and so do begin their Reigns with Blood. But Mustapha
was afraid of such a fatal end; or else Roxolana was willing to translate the
said Destiny from her own Children upon Mustapha: Upon one or other of these
Grounds, it was, that Solomon entertained the thought of putting his Son
Mustapha to death. And the occasion fell out opportunely, for he had War, at
that time, with Sagthama King of the Persians, thither Rustan was sent with a
vast Army. When he drew near to the Borders of Persia, upon a sudden he made a
stop, and wrote back fearful Missives to Solomon; telling him, That the whole
Empire was in great hazard, there was nothing but Treason studied in the Army,
they all cried out A Mustapha, A Mustapha; yea, the Disease was grown to such
an height, that 'twas past his skill to cure it; and, therefore, the Emperor
himself must come, immediately, if he would have the Crown sit safe on his Head.

Solomon was mightily disturbed at the News, and, therefore, posted away
toward the Army, and sends Letters to Mustapha to come to him, to purge
himself from those Crimes, whereof he was formerly suspected, but now openly
accused; if he could do it, he told him, he need no fear to approach his
Presence. Upon the receipt of this Letter, Mustapha was in a great straight; if
he should go to his Father, in such an angry mood, he ran upon his death; if he
refused, that would be interpreted, as a plain Confession of the objected
Crimes. Under this Dilemma, he resolved upon that course, which as it had more
of Resolution in it, so it was fullest of Danger. Away, then, goes he from
Amasia, of which he was Governor, to his Fathers Camp, which was pitched not
far from the place. This he did, either out of confidence of his own Innocence,
or else presuming on the Assistance of the Army, if any severity were meditated
against him; whatever was the motive of his Journey, this is certain, that he
ran unavoidably upon his own destruction; For Solomon ever since he was at
Constantinople, had resolved to put him to Death; and to make the matter more
plausible, he consulted the Mufty, (so the Turks call the chief of their
Priests, as Romanists call theirs the Pope,) and that he might not speak to him
in favor of Mustapha, he propounded to him a feigned Case, thus, There was a
Wealthy Merchant at Constantinople, who having occasion to Travel a long Journey
from home, left the care of his Family, his Wife, and Children, and all his
Affairs, to a Slave of his, in whose Fidelity he put a great deal of
confidence; now this Slave, immediately after his departure, designed to
destroy his Masters Wife and Children, committed to his Care, to embezil his
Estate, and to work against his Masters own Life, in case he should ever get
him into his power; What may be lawfully done, said he, to the Mufty, with such
a Slave? He deserves, says the Mufty, to be Racked to Death. Whether he spoke
really as he thought, or whether he did not do it to curry favor with Rustan
and Roxolana; This is certain, that the Resolution of the Grand Seignior was
greatly confirmed thereby to put his Son to Death, for he was of Opinion,
Mustapha's offense against him, was as great, as that supposed Slaves against
his Master. However it were, Mustapha came into his Fathers Camp, the whole
Army being very solicitous about the event of their Congress.

Soon after he was brought into his Fathers Tent, where all things were hush;
not a Soldier of the Guards to be seen, no Sergeant, no Executioner, in view,
nor nothing of Treachery, that was visible; but when he was come into an inner
Tent, Lo! upon a sudden, there started up Four Mutes, strong and lusty Fellows,
to be his Executioners; they set upon him with all their strength and might,
and endeavored to cast a Cord about his Neck; he defended himself stoutly for
a while, (for he was a Robust Young Man,) as if he had contended not only for
his Life, but for the Empire, also; for without Question, if he had escaped
that danger, and had come in among the Ianizaries, they either out of Affection
to him, whom they dearly loved, or else, moved with the Indignity of the Thing,
would not only have saved his Life, but have gone near to have Proclaimed him
Emperor; And that was the very thing, which Solomon feared of all things in the
World, and therefore perceiving, as he stood behind a Linen Vail in the Tent to
behold the Tragedy, that an unexpected stop was put to his Bloody Design, he
peeped out his Head, and gave the Mutes such a sour and minacious Look, in
reproach of their remisness, that thereupon they assaulted him with renewed
Force, and then threw poor Mustapha down on the ground, and strangled him; and
after they had done, they carried his Corpse out of the Tent, and laid it on a
piece of Tapestry, that so the Ianizaries might behold their designed Emperor.

As soon as the matter was divulged, Commiseration and Grief seized on the
whole Camp, and there was scarce a Man of any Consideration, in the whole Army,
that did not approach to behold so sad a Spectacle, especially, the Ianizaries,
whose Consternation and Rage was such, that they would have ventured to attempt
any manner of mischief whatsoever, if they had had a Leader. As for him, whom
they hoped to be their Conductor, he lay dead on the ground, and therefore now
there was no way but one, to take that patiently which was past all Remedy.

Thus they silently departed with blubbered Eyes, and sad Hearts, to their
Tents, where they both lamented and pitied the woeful Fate of an unhappy
Mustapha, sometimes inveighing against the Madness and Rage of his old Doting
Father, at other times exclaiming at the Fraud and Cruelty of his Stepmother,
and anon Cursing the Wickedness of Rustan, with direful Imprecations for
extinguishing so great a Light of the Ottoman Family, so that all that Day was
a Fasting-Day to them, they did not sip so much as a drop of Water; yea, some
of them continued their Abstinence for many Days after. In short, there was
such a Face of Mourning over the whole Army, which was not like to cease in
many Days, that Solomon in Policy, and in a seeming Compliance with the
sentiments of his People, deprived Rustan of his Office, (it was thought by his
own consent,) and Banished him, as a private Person to Constantinople,
substituting Achmat Bassa to the Grand-Vizier-ship in his room, a Man of more
Courage than Conduct.

Upon this alteration, the public Grief was somewhat abated, and the Soldiers
Rage pacified; for the Commonalty was made to believe, (as you know the Vulgar
are Credulous enough,) That Solomon at last had found out the Wickedness of
Rustan, and the Enchantments of his Wife; and that now, he repented, though it
were late, first, of his Cruelty to Mustapha, and thereupon had banished Rustan
from his presence, and that he would not spare his Wife neither, as soon as he
returned to Constantinople. As for Rustan, he pretended great sorrow, and
departed to Constantinople, without seeming to have the least hope, ever to be
restored to his former Dignity.

But alas! Roxolana, was not content with the destruction of Mustapha, as long
as he had an only Son, who was yet in his Minority, alive; for she did not
think her own, or her Childrens security, to be sufficiently provided for, as
long as any of Mustapha's Race were alive; but she wanted a fair pretense to
accomplish her Design, nor was it long before she found One. She represented to
Solyman^ that as often as his Grandchild, Mustapha's Son, went abroad at Prusa,
were he was brought up, the Youth of that City were wont to flock about him, to
wi^h him all Happiness, and particularly to pray, That he might long survive
his Father: And whither (said she) can this tend, but to prompt him to mount
the Throne, and revenge his Father's death? and to be sure, the Ianizaries will
take his part, (added she;) and thus the death of Mustapha alone will add
little Security to the public Peace and Tranquillity. Religion (proceeded she)
is to be preferred before even the Lives of our own Children; and seeing that
of the Musselmans, (for so they call their Religion, as counting it the best)
stands and falls with the Ottoman Family; if that House fail, farewell Religion
also. And how can that House stand, if Domestic Discord undermine it? And
therefore, Sir, if you will prevent the ruin of your House, your Empire and
your Religion, you must use all manner of means; nay, you must not stick at
Parricide it self, if homebred Disagreement and Feud may be thereby prevented;
for the Safety of Religion will overbalance the Loss, even of a Man's own
Children. As for Mustapha's Son, you have the less reason to spare him, because
his Father's Crime has already infected him, and there is no doubt, but, if he
be suffered to live, he will soon endeavor to Head a Party, to revenge his
Fathers death.

By these Reasons, Solomon was induced to yield to the Murder of his
Grandchild, and thereupon sent Ebrahim Bassa to Prusa, to destroy the Innocent
Youth. As soon as the Bassa came thither, he made it his great Business to
conceal his intended Design from the Child's Mother; for, he thought, it would
be looked upon as an inhuman thing in him, to cut off a Youth, with the privity
of his Mother, and, as it were, before her Eyes. And, besides, he was afraid,
the People would rise in Arms upon the perpetration of so cruel a Fact; and
therefore, at first, Fox-like, he sets his Wits at work to deceive the Mother.
He pretended, that he was sent by Solomon out of respect to her and her Son, to
visit them; that his Master saw his Error, in putting his Son to death, which
he now, too late, repented of; but that the crueller he had been to the Father,
the more indulgent he would be to his Son; and many such colloguing words he
used, whereby he imposed upon the too credulous Mother, who was the rather
induced to believe him, because of Rustan's Disgrace and Fall; and to crown his
Flattery, he presented them with many Gifts. This past on for a day or two, and
then some Discourse was administered concerning their going abroad, out of the
City, to enjoy the fresh Air. And the Bassa, being an Eunuch, persuaded her,
the next day, to take a turn in the Suburbs, she in her Coach, and himself,
with her Son, would ride before on Horseback. The Matter seemed not to afford
any suspicion, and, therefore, she consented, and a Chariot is prepared for
her; but (mark the Fraud!) the Axle-tree of the Coach was so made, on purpose,
that it must needs break, when it came to be jogged in any rough way. Thus she,
in an unlucky time, began her Journey out of the City. The Eunuch and the Child
rode a pretty way before, as if they had occasion for some private Discourse,
and the Mother speeded after as fast as she was able; but when the Coach came
to the designed craggy Place, the Wheel violently hit against the Rocks, and so
the Axle-tree broke. This the Mother looked upon as an unlucky Omen, and,
therefore, in a great Fright, she could not long be restrained from leaving her
Coach, and with a few of her Maids from following her Son on foot. But, alas!
'twas too late; for the Eunuch being come to the House, designed for the
Slaughter, without any more ado, showed the Child the Emperor's Mandate for his
death. He answered, according to the Principles of their Religion, That he
looked upon that Command as proceeding not from the Emperor, but from God,
which must necessarily be obeyed, and so he yielded his Neck to the Row-string.

Thus dyed this innocent and hopeful Youth. When the Eunuch had perpetrated
this wicked Fact he stole out at a Back door, and fled as fast as he could. The
Mother, soon after, beginning to smell out the Fraud, knocks at the Door; when
they thought fit, they opened it, and there she saw her Son sprawling on the
Ground, his Breath being yet hardly out of his Body. Here let me draw a Vail;
for a Mothers Affection to a Son, in such a lamentable juncture, may be better
conceived than expressed. Upon this dismal sight she was hurried back to Prusa;
where she tore her Hair, rent her Garments, filled the whole Town with
Howlings, Moans and Plaints. The Prusian Ladies, with their Daughters and
Waiting-maids, came in Multitudes to her, and were stark mad to hear of so
great a Butchery; and running in that raving manner out of the Gates, all the
Cry was, Where Is the Eunuch? Where Is the Eunuch? Let Us have him to tear him to
pieces: But he, foreseeing what would happen, and fearing, like another
Orphe^s, to be torn Peace-meal by those raging Furies, had cunningly withdrawn
himself, and was out of Gunshot, as we say.

But to return to my purpose. As soon as I came to Constantinople, Letters were
sent to Solomon, then at Amasia, to acquaint him with my Arrival; and, till his
Answer was returned, I had leisure to take a view of the City of
Constantinople; and, first, I had a mind to visit the Temple of St. Sophia,
which I was not admitted to do, but by special favor; for the Turks think that
their Temples are profaned, if a Christian do but put his foot within them.

That Church is a magnificent Pile, and a worthy Structure to behold. It has a
great Arch or Hemisphere in the middle, which has no light but only from the
Sky: All the Turkish Mosks are built after the Form of this. Some say^ That
heretofore it was much larger, and contained many Apartments, which were all
destroyed by the Turks, and only the Quire and Nave, in the middle of it,
standing.

As for the situation of the City it self, it seemed, to me, to be naturally
placed as fit to be the Mistress of the World; it stands in Europe, and has
Asia in view, and on its right, had Egypt and Africa; which though Countries
not adjacent to it, yet by reason of frequent Intercourse and naval Commerce;
they seem, as it were, contiguous. On its left Hand is the Euxin Sea, and the
Palus Maeotis, whose Banks are inhabited round about by many Nations, and so
many navigable Rivers have their Influx into them, that there is nothing grows
in any of the Countries thereabouts, fit for Man's use, but there is a great
convenience of transporting it by Sea to Constantinople.

On the one side, it is washed with the Propontis; on the other, the River
makes an Haven, which Strabo calls, The Golden Horn from the Similitude it has
to an Horn; on the third side it is joined to the rest of the Continent, so
that it almost resembles a Peninsule; and with the continued back of a
Promontory, it runs out into the Sea and a Bay, which is made there by the
River and the Sea. So that from the middle of Constantinople, there is a most
pleasant Prospect into the Sea, and even to the Mount Olympus, in Asia, which
bears a snowy Head all the Year long. The Sea there, is wonderful full of Fish,
which sometimes swim down from the Maeotis and the Euxine, through the
Bosphorus and Propontis, into the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas, and sometimes
they swim from thence into the Euxin, according to the nature of the Fish; and
that in Shoals so thick and numerous, that you may catch them with your Hands.
So that here is excellent Fishing for Mackrel, Tunny, Cod, Porpois and
Sword-Fish. But the Greeks fish more than the Turks, though these later love,
Fish well enough; provided, they be of the number of those, which they count
clean; as for others, they had rather eat Poison than taste them, for, (let me
tell you by the by) a Turk had rather his Tongue or his Teeth were plucked out
of his Head, than taste of any thing they think to be unclean, as a Frog, a
Snail or a Tortois. And, herein, the Greeks are every jot as Superstitious as
they; of which I will give you the Instance following.

I entertained, in my Family, a Youth of the Greek Religion; I employed him as
my Steward. The rest of my Servants could never persuade him to eat any
Periwinkles or Cockles; but, at last, they put a trick upon him; they caused
them to be so high-season'd and disguised, that he, mistaking them for another
sort of Fish, fed upon them most heartily. Whereupon, my People set up a
Laughter, and threw down the Shells before him, whereby he perceived himself to
be cozened: Whereupon, it is incredible to relate how much he was troubled. He
went presently to his Chamber, and there fell a Vomiting, Weeping and
Afflicting himself most grievously, without any Intermission; insomuch, that
two Months Sallary was not sufficient to expiate this Offense; for that is the
Guise of Greek Priests, according to the kind and greatness of the Offense,
they lay a pecuniary Mulct upon those who come to Confess, and they never
Absolve them till they pay it down to a Penny. So much for my Greek.

In the furthest Point of that Promontory which I mentioned before, stands the
Palace (or Seraglio) of the Turkish Emperors: To me it did not seem very
magnificent, either for Work or Workmanship, (for, you must know, that, as yet,
I had not made an Entrance into it.) Under the Palace, in a low Ground, and, as
it were, upon the Sea-shoar, are the Gardens of the Grand Seignior, where the
greatest part of Old Byzantium is thought to have stood.

I hope you do not expect to be informed, by me, why the Chalcedonians, who
built a City over against Byzantium, (the Ruins of the Place are yet to be
seen) were Sirnam'd The Blind; nor shall I tell you the nature of that Sea,
which always runs downward with a vast Stream, but never recoils with any Tide;
nor will I spend time to speak of those Hautgos which were brought to
Constantinople from the Palus Moeotis, such as the Italians call Moronella's,
Botargues and Caviare; the description of all these Particulars would swell my
Epistle to too great a Bulk, (which I think is big enough already) and,
besides, it would be needless; for both the Ancients, and also Modern Writers,
have given Information of those Particulars at large.

To return, then, to the site of Constantinople. There is no Place, in the
World, more pleasantly seated to the Eye, nor more convenient for Trades. But,
let me tell you, that the Building therein (as in all other Turkish Cities) are
not magnificent, nor are their Streets stately or large; nay, in
Constantinople, they are so narrow, that they much eclipse the Beauty of the
Place; yet there are in it some valuable Relics of old Monuments to be seen,
but not so many, as a Man would imagine, considering how many Constantin brought
thither from Rome. It is not my purpose to insist upon each of these
Particulars, yet a word or two of the principal ones.

In the Area of the old Hippodrome, there are two Serpents cut in Brass; as
also, a mighty Obelisk. Moreover, Constantinople does gratify us with the
sight of two memorable Pillars, One over against the Caravaserai, where I
lodged, and the Other in the Forum, called, by the Turks, Au^at basar (id est)
The Woman's Court, wherein, from bottom to top is engraven the History of a
certain Expedition of one Arcadius, who built it, and whose Statue, for a long
time, stood a top thereof. And yet it may rather be called a Staircase than a
Pillar, because it goes winding up like a pair of Stairs. I caused the shape of
this Pillar to be drawn, which I have by me. But the other Pillar, over against
the House the German Ambassadors use to lodge in, the whole Structure, besides
the Basis and the Chapter, consists of 8 solid Marble or Red Porphyry Stones,
so curiously joined together, that they seem, (as the Vulgar believes them to
be) but one continued Stone. For where the Stones are jointed one into another,
upon that Commissure there is wrought a circular Garland of Laurels round about
the Pillar, which hides the jointing, so that they which look upon it from the
Ground, perceive no jointing at all. That Pillar has been so often shaken by
Earthquakes, and so battered by Fires happening near it, that it is cleft in
many places, and they are forced to bind it about with Iron-hoops, that it may
not fall to pieces.

They say, That the Statue of Apollo once stood upon that Pillar, and that
afterward the Statues of Constantine and of Theodosius the Elder were erected
there; but they are all thrown down, either by the force of the Winds, or by
Earthquakes.

The Greeks tell this Story concerning the Obelisk, in the Hippodrome which I
mentioned before, viz.

That it fell off from its Basis, and lay, for many Ages, upon the Ground; but
in the ti^e of the later Emperors, there was an Architect found, who undertook
to raise it up to its Place, but he demanded a vast Reward for his Pains; after
the price was agreed on, he prepared abundance of Ropes, Pullies and other
Instruments, and by that means he lift'd up that vast Stone within one Inch of
the Place where it was to stand; but his present Apparatus being able to raise
it no higher, the People, who in great numbers were his Spectators, were of
Opinion, that all his former Cost and Pains was lost, and he must begin anew to
try to do the Feat some-other way, to his vast Expense and Charge. But he
himself was not discouraged, but being skilful in Mechanic Philosophy, he
caused abundance of Water to be brought up to him, which, for many hours, he
cast upon the Ropes, at which the Obelisk hung; and those Ropes being often wet
and dry (according to their Nature) shrunk a little, and by that means lift'd
up the weight to its designed Station, to the great Admiration and Applause of
the Vulgar.

At Constantinople, I saw several sorts of wild Beasts, such as Lynxes,
Catta-Mountains, Panthers, Leopards and Lions; but they were so gentle and
tame, that I saw one of the Keepers pull a Sheep out of a Lions Mouth, so that
he only moistened his Jaws with the Blood without devouring him. I saw also a
young Elephant, so wanton, that he could dance and play at Ball. Sure you
cannot choose but laugh, when I tell you of an Elephant's dancing and playing at
Ball; but if I should say no more, why may you not believe me as well as
Seneca, who tells us of One that could dance upon the Rope? Or as Pliny, who
speaks of Another, that understood Greek? But that you may not think me an
egregious Forger, give me leave to explain my self: When this Elephant was bid
to dance, he did so caper or quaver with his whole Body, and interchangeably
move his Feet, that he seemed to represent a kind of a Jig; and as for playing
at Ball, he very prettily took up the Ball in his Trunk, and sent it packing
therewith, as we do with the Palm of the Hand: And if this be not to dance and
play at Ball, I know not what is.

Among those wild Beasts, there had been a Camelopardalis, but she died a
little before I came to Constantinople; however, I caused her Bones, which had
been buried in the Earth, to be dug up, that I might inspect the make of
this Creature: It is an Animal a great deal taller in the forepart than in the
hinder; and, for that Reason it is unfit to carry a Man, or any other Burden.
It has an Head and a Neck like a Camel, but a spotted Skin like a Lizard, and
therefore it is called by a Name derived from both (i. e.) Camelopardalis.

It might have been imputed as a piece of great neglect in me not to have
visited the Euxin, especially, having opportunity to sale thither; seeing the
Ancients used to account it as great a piece of Curiosity to see Pontus, as to
visit Corinth. Thither, therefore, I sailed with a prosperous Gale, and had the
Privilege to be admitted into some of the Pleasure-houses of the Grand Seignior.

In the Valves of one of them, I beheld the famous Fight of Selimus with
Ishmael King of the Persians, excellently described in Checker-work. I had also
the view of many of the Orchards and Groves of the Turkish Emperor, which were
seated in most pleasant Valleys; this I may say of them, That they owed little
to Art, but almost all to Nature: So that I could not choose but entertain such
Epiphonema's as these in my Thoughts, O most pleasant Houses for Nymphs! O
choice Seats for the Muses! O Retirements fit for the Learned! To deal plainly
with you (as I told you before) they seemed to me, as it were, sensibly to
bewail their present Posture, and to cry aloud to Christians for their better
cultivation; and not they only, but much more, Constantinople it self, yea, and
all Greece too; which being, heretofore, the most flourishing Country in the
World, is now woefully inslaved by Barbarians; heretofore, it was the Mother and
Nurse of all good Arts and liberal Sciences, but, now, alas! it seems to call
for that Culture and Humanity, which once it delivered down to us; and, by way
of requital, claims the Redemption of our Common Religion from that Scythian
Barbarism, under which it groans; and call it may long enough, for, with Grief
may we speak it, Christian Princes, now a days, are otherwise employed; so that
the Turks do not more domineer over the poor Greeks, than Vices, such as
Luxury, Gluttony, Sloth, Lust, Pride, Ambition, Avarice, Hatred, Envy and
Emulation, do reign over Christians; which do so clog, enervate and depress our
Minds, that we can hardly look up Heavenward; nor can we so unmanacle our
selves, as to aspire to any thing, that is truly Great or Excellent.

Methinks, Duty and Piety should have been sufficient Motives to us, to help
our afflicted Brethren; but if we had been proof against those Incentives, so
that neither brave nor praiseworthy Actions could unthaw our frozen Courage;
yet Profit and Advantage, which are now the great Byas of the World, might have
set us a Gog to recover such opulent and commodious Countries from Infidels,
and to possess them our selves: But, on the contrary, forsooth! we plow the
Ocean, even as far as the Indies, and the very Antipodes, because, there, we
get rich Prey and Spoil at a cheap rate, even without Bloodshed, by imposing on
the simple and uncrafty Indians. It Is true, we pretend the Conversion of the
Heathens, but, if we go to the Root of the Matter, (to our shame be it spoken)
it is their Gold, not their Godliness, is the Gain we seek for. Our Ancestors
carried it quite and clean at another rate, who did not, like Huckstring
Merchants, seek after those Places where there was most Wealth, but where there
was greater opportunity for Noble and Virtuous Atchievments. So that, it was
not Profit, but Honor, which put them upon hazardous and remote Expeditions:
And when they came home, they were more laden with Glory than with Plunder. I
speak this in your Ear, for others, perhaps, may think it a piaculiar thing in
me, to detract from the manners of the present Age. But, let them think what
they will, I see that the Arrow is drawn to the Head, to destroy us; and, I am
afraid, that we, who would not fight for Glory, shall be forced to do it to
save our Lives. But to return to Pontus.

The Turks call the Euxin, Caradenis (i. e.) The Black Sea, it falls down
through narrow Straits into the Thracian Bosphorus, where its Waters are tossed
up and down by many Vortices, Turnings and Windings, occasioned by several
Promontories jutting out into it; and thus, in one days Passage, it descends to
Constantinople, and from thence, almost by the like straight Passage, it breaks
out into the P^opontis. In the middle of the Bay, where it makes its Influx
into the Bosphorus, there is a Rock with an erected Pillar, in the Basis
whereof is writ the Name of a certain Roman, called Octavian, (if my Memory
fail not) in Latin Letters.

On the European Shore there is a Tower, called, Pharos, where they hang out
Lights, in the Night, to guide Sailers by: Not far from this place, a River
falls into the Sea, in the Chanel whereof there are found Stones, little
inferior to Onyxes or Sardonyxes, and, if they be polished, are as shining as
they. A few Miles from that Bay, which I lately spoke of, we may see those
Straits over which Darius waft'd his Army against the European Scythians: And
about the middle between the two Mouths of the Bosphorus, there are two
Castles, whereof one's in Europe, and the other on the opposite Shore, in Asia.
This later was possessed by the Turks, long before Mahomet took Constantinople.
The other was built by him some few Years after he became Master of that City.
The Turks make use of it, at this day, as a Prison for the nobler sort of their
Captives. Lazarus, a Commander, or Prince of the Epitots, not long ago was
taken Prisoner by the Turks, together with some Spaniards at Castlenovo, and
committed to this Tower; from whence making his escape, and being retaken, he
was Impaled, ( i. e.) put to a most cruel Death, by having a Pole thrust through
his Body from his Fundament to his very Neck; yet he endured it with incredible
Patience.

Perhaps you expect that I should here give you an Account of those Floating
Islands, called, Cyaneae or Symplegades: But to deal freely with you, those few
Hours that I spent on the Pontus, I saw no such Islands at all; whether they
had been carried to any other Place, I know not: If you desire to have a more
particular Information concerning them, you may consult Peter Gyllius, who was
an exact Inquirer into such Curiosities; for my Part, I shall record only what
I saw or know to be true. Yet I think it is not fit for me to conceal a Mistake
that Polybius is guilty of; for he propounds many Arguments to prove, That in
tract of time the Euxin will be choakt up with Sand and other Trash, which by
the Danow, the Borysthenes, and other great Rivers falling into it, that it
would be made unfit for Navigation; whereas, the contrary appeared to me, for
that Sea is every jot as navigable, at this day, as it was of old in the days
of Polybius. And though he seemed to have some Grounds for his Opinion, that to
him were Irrefragable; yet time has showed them to be Weak. The like
observation holds in other Cases; for, of old, who would not believe the
Ancients, who affirmed, upon seemingly imaginable Grounds, That the Torrid Zone
was Inhabitable; whereas, later Discoveries have fully convinced us, That those
hot Countries are as well inhabited as any other part of the Terrestial Globe;
nay, when the Sun is at the highest with them, and darts down its Rays
perpendicularly upon them; even at that very time the Ardency of the Heat is so
tempered and cooled by continued Rains, that those Countries are rendered very
fit for Human Habitations. But to return.

After the Grand Seignior was informed, by Letters, of my Arrival, (as I said
before) he sent to the Governor of Constantinople, intimating his Pleasure,
that he should send us to him into Asia, as far as the City of Amasia, or (as
it is writ in ancient Coins) Amazeia, where he then was. Upon this Advice we
prepared all things for our Journey; and, with our Guides, on the 9 th of March
we were wafted over into Natolia, (for so the Turks call Asia at this day:)
That day we went no further than Scutari, a Town on the Asiatick Shore,
opposite to Old Byzantium; where, or very little above it, the noble City of
Chalcedon was formerly thought to stand. The Turks were of Opinion, That when
our Horses, Coaches, Baggage and Train, together with our selves, were all got
over the Hellespont, 'twas enough for one days Journey; especially, considering,
that if we had forgot any of the necessary Accoutrements for our Journey, or had
left them behind at Constantinople, (as it sometimes happened) we might bethink
our selves before we went any further, and fetch them over. The next day we
continued our Journey from Scutari, over Fragrant Fields, full of odoriferous
Plants, and especially Stoechas's, a sweet smelling Spike: There we saw a vast
number of Tortoises, stalking over all the Field, without any fear at all; we
had certainly seized upon a great many of them, as a Prey grateful to our
Palates, had it not been for our Turkish Guides, whom we were afraid to
disoblige; for if they had seen any of them brought to our Table, much more, if
they had touched them, they would have thought themselves so de^^led, that I
know not how many Washings would not have cleansed their imagined Pollution.
For, as I told you before, the Turks, and the Greeks too, are so superstitious,
that they abhor ever to touch of that Animal; so that it being no hurtful
Creature, and no Body endeavoring to catch them, the whole Country abounds
with Tortoises. I kept one of them, by me, a great while, which had two Heads,
and it would have lived much longer if I had been as careful of it as I might.
That days Journey brought us to a Village, called, Cartaly, which I mention,
because I shall, for the future, gratify you with the knowledge of the several
Stages of this Voyage. For though the Journey from Vienna to Constantinople has
been performed by many, yet this from Constantinople to Amasia, has, as yet,
been undergone by no Christian that I know of. From Cartaly we came to Gebise,
a Town of Bitheynia, which some think was anciently called Lybissa, and is
famous for the Sepulcher of Hannibal, who was there interred. From thence there
is a most pleasant Prospect into the Sea, and into the Bay of Nicomedia; here
also grow Cyprus Trees of a wonderful Bulk and Tallness.

Our^ 4 th days Journey from Constantinople brought us to Nicomedia, a City,
anciently, of great Note; but we saw nothing remarkable in it, but the Ruins
and Rubbish of old Walls, with some broken pieces of Pillars with their
Chapiters, which were all the remainders of its ancient Splendour, except one
Castle on an Hill, which was somewhat more entire. A little before we came to
this Place, some Workmen, that were digging under Ground, discovered a long
Wall made with Marble, which (it may be) was part of the ancient Palace of the
Kings of Bythynia.

From Nicomedia, we passed over a Cliff or Ridge of Mount Olympiu, and came to
a Village, called, Kasockly, and from thence to Nice; but 'twas so late before
we came thither, that the first Watch was set. Not far from that Place, I heard
a mighty noise, as if it had been of Men that jeered and mocked us. I asked,
what was the Matter? Whether any of the Mariners, rowing on the Lake Ascanius,
(which was not far off) did deride us, for Traveling at that unusual time of
Night? I was answered, No, but it was only the howling of certain Beasts, which
the Turks call Ciacals or Iacals. They are a sort of Wolves somewhat bigger
than Foxes, but less than common Wolves, but as greedy and devourous as the
most ravenous Wolves or Foxes of all. They go in Flocks, and seldom or never
hurt either Man or Beast, but get their Food by Craft and Stealth more than by
open Force. Thence it is, that the Turks call subtle and crafty Persons,
especially, the Asiaticks, by the Metaphorical Name of Ciacals. Their manner is
to enter into the Tents or Houses of the Turks, in the Nightime, and what
they can catch, that is eatable, that they eat; and if they find nothing else
to devour, then they fall a gnawing of all kinds of Leather things, as Shoes,
Boots, Girdles, Scabbards of Swords, and the like; and they are as cunning as
they are thievish, but in this they are very ridiculous, that they discover
themselves by the noise they make. For whilst they are most busy in an House,
devouring their Prey, if any one of their Herd, that stays without doors,
chance to howl, they all set up a howling likewise; and, thus, forgetting where
they are, they raise up the People of the House, who leap out of their Beds,
and cudgel them soundly.

All the next day we staid at Nice; I believe my Lodging was in the same House
where the Council of Nice was heretofore celebrated. As for the Town it self,
it is seated on the Bank of the Lake Ascanius. The Walls of it are almost
entire, so are the Gates, which are but four, and may all be seen from the
middle of the Marketplace; in each of them there were old Inscriptions, in
Latin, which show, That the Town was repaired by Antoninus, which of them I do
not well remember; but sure it must be by Antoninus the Emperor. There are also
some remainders of his Baths, and whilst the Turks were digging out Stones from
thence to build Houses at Constantinople, they found the Statue of a Soldier in
his Armor, curiously wrought, and almost entire; but they quickly battered it
with their Hammers, even in our view; and when we showed our selves displeased
at their rude Violence, they paid us with a jeer, What, said the Laborers,
will you bow down to worship this Statue, as you Christians use to do to yours?

From Nice we continued our Journey to a place, called, Ienysar. From Ienysar to
Ackbyuck, from Ackbyuck to Bazargyck, from Bazargyck to Bosowick, otherwise
called, Cassumbassa, seated in the narrowest Straits of Mount Olympus; for
almost all our way from Nice, thither, lay through the Cliff of that Mountain.
At Nice we lodged in a Turkish Inn or Hospital, and just against it was a Rock
standing on high Ground, wherein there was a square deep Trench cut, and from
the bottom thereof there issued out a Canal, that reached to the Highway. That
Trench or Ditch, the ancient Inhabitants of that Place used, in the Winter
time, to fill with Snow; that so the melted Snow-water gentlydropping down into
the Road, by the forementioned Canal, might quench the Thirst of parched
Travelers. Such Works as these the Turks count Eleemosynary ones; because they
are for the public Benefit and Advantage of Mankind.

Not far from this Place, on the right Hand, we saw a Town, called, Otmanlick,
borrowing its Name (as I conceive) from Ottoman, the Founder of the Ottoman
Family, who lived there.

From those Straits we descended into an open Campaign; and when we came
thither, we lay the first Night in our Tents, whereby the Heat did not so much
incommode us, as otherwise it would have done; the Place was called Chiausada.
The most remarkable things we saw here, was a Subterraneous House, that had no
Light, but only what stole in at the Roof: We saw, also, that sort of Goats of
whose Hair, or Fleece, (if you had rather call it so) they make the Shagreen or
watered Stuff, called, Camlet; if you would know the nature of that Creature, I
shall not entertain you with a Flam, but give you the true description thereof.

The Hair of this Creature is very fine, and extremely white, and it hangs down
from their Bodies to the Ground. The Goat-Herds do not Sheer but Kemb it off,
and it is, almost, as fine as Silk. These Goats are often washed, in the
Neighboring Rivers, and feed upon the Grass growing there, which is very
tender and dry; and that certainly contributes much to the fineness of their
Wool; for if they are removed to another Place, their Fleece changes with their
Pasture, and their Kids do so degenerate, that one would hardly think them of
the same Breed. The Thread that is spun of that Hair, or Wool, is carried, by
the Women of that Country, to Ancyra, a City of Galatia, where it is woven into
Cloth and dyed, as I shall tell you anon.

Moreover, the Sheep of those Countries have very fat and weighty Tails, (their
Sheep-Flocks consist hardly of any other;) the Tail of any one of them weighs
sometimes three or four Pound, and sometimes eight or ten; yea, they grow so
big in some old Sheep, that they are forced to lay them upon a Plank running on
two little Wheels, that so they may draw them after them, not being otherwise
able to trail them along.

Perhaps you will think I tell you a Romance, but take it on my word, it is a
certain Truth. I grant, such bulky Tails may be of some advantage, because they
are full of Fat; but the Flesh of the Sheep seemed more harsh and rank to me,
than our own Mutton. The Shepherds that tend them, lie Day and Night in the
Fields, and carry their Wives and Children about with them, in Wagons, which
serve them instead of Houses; only, sometimes, they erect small Tents, to lie
under. They wander far and near, sometimes in the open Campaign, sometimes over
Hills, sometimes over Dales, as the Season of the Year, and the necessity of
Pasturage, does require.

I saw also, in those Countries, some sort of Birds, unknown to us, and such as
I never saw before; among the rest, there is a kind of Ducks, which gives a
sound like Trumpeters, or such as blow the Cornet; the noise they make is
almost like the sound of a Post-boys Horn. It is a Bird, which though it has
nothing wherewith to defend it self, yet is very strong and daring.

The Turks are verily persuaded, that the Devils are afraid of them. This is
certain, they are so tenaciously sensible of their Liberty, that though they
have been kept up tame in a Coop, for three Years together, yet if they can but
get an opportunity to escape away, they fly to their wonted Haunts, as
preferring their Natural Seats before their confined Prisons, though they be
crammed and fatned there.

We passed on from Chiausada to Karali; from Karali to Hazdengri; from thence
to Mazothoy; from Mazothoy we passed over the River Sangac, which runs into
Pontus out of Phrygia, and came to Mahathli; from thence to Zugli, thence to
Chilancych; from Chilancych to Ialancych; from thence to Portuguin; and from
Portuguin we reached to Ancyra, called, by the Turks, Angur. We staid one whole
day at Ancyra, partly, because the Turks did not hasten us, for in regard the
Persian Ambassador made an Halt, we were desired to do so too, that we might
make our Entrances, both at one time. into Amasia. I saw nothing remarkable in
all the Villages aforementioned, save that sometimes, among the Turkish
Sepulchers, we light upon some Pillars, or ancient Stones of curious Marble,
wherein there were some Remains of Latin or Greek Inscriptions, but so defaced,
that they could not be read; which Occurrent did resent me very much, for all
my delight was, as soon as I came to my Inn, at Night, to inquire after old
Inscriptions, together with Latin and Greek Coins; and sometimes for rare kinds
of Plants.

As for the Sepulchers, or Graves, of the Turks, their Custom is not to fill
them with Earth, but throw great Stones upon them, for a covering; would you
know the reason? It Is Superstititious enough. The Turks believe, that when the
Devil (God bless us) accused the deceased, and calls upon him to give an
Account how he spent his Life; then his good Genius will defend him, and this
Stone, forsooth, is the Place upon which the Ghost must sit, that he may plead
his Cause with more care; and this Gravestone is huge and bulky, that so Dogs,
Wolves or other Ravenous Beasts, especially, the Hyaena, may not injure his
Corpse, as it lies in the Earth. For,

The Hyaena is a Beast, common in those Countries; she uses to dig up Graves,
and taking out the dead Bodies from thence, carries them to her Den; near which
you shall see a great heap of Bones of Men, Horses and other Creatures; she is
a little lower than a Wolf, but quite as long; she has a Skin like a Wolf,
only her Hair is rougher and full of great black Spots; her Head is contiguous
to her Spina dorsi, without any ver^ebrae at all; so that when she looks
backward, she must of necessity turn her whole Body: Instead of a row of Teeth,
she has but one continued Bone, as Reports go of her. The Turks do ascribe
great Virtue to this Beast, in Philtres, as did the Ancients; and, whereas,
there were two of them at Constantinople, when I was there, I cheapned them;
but their Owners were unwilling to sell them, because they kept them for the
Sultanness (i. e.) the Emperor's Wife, who was thought by amatory Potions and
Magic Art, to have engaged thereby her Husband's Love to her. Here I cannot
choose but take notice of a Mistake, in Bellonius, who thinks the Hyaena to be
the same Creature with that we call the Zibeth or Musk cat.

But seeing I am about describing the Hyaena, I will tell you a Tale, which I
am sure will make you laugh, if ever you have laughed in your Life; it is this.

The Turks have a Tradition, that the Hyaena, (which in their Language they
call Zittlian) understands what Men say one to another; yea, the Ancients
affirmed, that they could also imitate Man's Voice, and thereupon Hunters catch
them by this Wile; they find out her Den, which they may easily do by the heap
of Bones, lying by it, (as I said before) and then one of them goes in with a
Rope, leaving the other end of the Rope in the Hands of his Fellows without,
and when he is creeping in, he cries, with a loud Voice, ever and anon, Ioctur,
Ioctur, Vcala (i. e.) She is not here, She is not here, or, I cannot find her;
whereupon, the Hyaena, thinking she is not discovered, lies close, and he ties
one end of the Rope about his Leg; and then he goes forth, still crying, I
cannot find her; but when he is escaped quite out of the Hole, he cries out
aloud, She is within, She is within; which the Hyaena hearing, and
understanding the meaning of it, (as they say) leaps out, thinking to escape;
but then they hold her back by the Rope tied to her Leg, that they either kill
her, or, if they use care and diligence, take her alive, for she is a fierce
Creature, and defends her self desperately: But enough, if not too much, of the
Hyaena.

I found abundance of old Coins all up and down this Country, especially of the
later Emperors, viz. the Constantines, the Constantius's the Iustin's, the
Valens's, the Valentine's, the Numerians, the Probus's, the Tacitus's, and such
like; in many Places the Turks use them for Weight, viz. of a Dram or half a
Dram, and they call it Giaur Manguri (i. e.) the Money of the Pagans or
Infidels. The like Coins I found in the neighboring Cities of Asia, as at
Amysus, at Synopis, at Cumonme, at Amastris and Amasia it self, whither we were
going. There was a Brasier of that City which grieved me very much; for
demanding of him, Whether he had any old Coins to sell? He answered me, That a
few days ago, he had a large Room full of them, but now he had melted them down
to make Brass-kettles, as thinking them of little value, and fit for no other
use; when I heard this Story, it troubled me much to lose so many choice
Monuments of Antiquity; but I paid him back in his own Coin, as the Proverb is,
by telling him, That I would have given him a hundred Guilders for them; so
that my Revenge was suited to his Injury, for I sent him away as sorrowful, for
losing so full a Morsel out of his Mouth, as he did me for losing the Coins.

As for Plants, I saw very few in my Journey in those Parts, which were unknown
to us in Europe; they were almost all of the same kind, only they were more or
less flourishing, according to the Richness or Poverty of the Soil. The Amomum,
which Dioscorides says grows near Pontus, I very diligently sought for, but in
vain, so that I knew not whether that Plant did not fail in that Country, or
else was transplanted into another.

This Town of Ancyra was our 9th Stage from Constantinople; it is a Town of
Galatia, sometimes the Seat of the Gauls, called, by Pliny, Tectosagum; nor was
it unknown to Strabo. Though perhaps the present Town is but part of the old
Town, called, in the Canons, Anguira. Here we saw a stately Superscription, and
a Sampler of those Tables, wherein the Atchievments of Augustus, were summarily
comprehended. I caused as much of it, as we could read, to be transcribed. It
is cut in the Marble Walls of that Structure, which heretofore was the
Town Hall, but is now demolished, so that one part of it is visible to those
that enter on the right Hand, and the other to those that enter upon the left.
The top Chapiters are almost entire; the middle is full of Clefts, and the
lowermost part of it is so battered with Clubs and Hatches, that it cannot be
read; which Loss cannot be sufficiently lamented by all Lovers of Learning; and
so much the more, because the Commons of Asia, dedicated this City to Augustus.
Here also we were Eyewitnesses of the dying of that Cloth, I spoke of before,
made of Goats-wool, and how they Camlet it, or give it its Water-colour, it is
done thus. They pour Water upon it, and by means of a Cloth-press, cause it to
receive that Color. That is counted the best, which is most variegated in
every part; and if in any piece, the Watercolors do not deeply and uniformly
appear, that piece, though of the same Color and made of the same Wool, is
valued at some Gilders less than another, because it is not so deeply
tinctured. The better sort of Turks, in their old Age, are usually clothed with
this sort of Cloth, and Solomon himself used to wear Vests of it; but Green is
a Color disused much by Christians; and the rather, because the Turks commend
it upon a superstitious Account, as being worn by their Prophet Mahomet in his
older days.

A black Color is counted unfortunate, and is dis^ik'd by them; and when they
see any Man so clad, they look on it as an ill Omen; so that when any of Ours
did approach the Bassa's, in a black Habit, they looked asquint on us, and made
sad Complaints; and the truth is, none of their own appear in black, but either
one that is desperately poor, or else so overwhelmed with some great calamity,
that he regards not what Cloths he wears. A Purple Color is a creditable
Color with them, only it is an Omen of much Bloodshed in time of War: But the
ordinary approved Colors among them, are the White, the Yellow, the Seagreen,
the Violet-colour and Mouse-colour, etc.

The Turks ascribe very much to Augury, and Omens, Good or Bad, so that it has
been known, that some Bassa's have been removed from their Places and Offices,
by reason of a fall from their Horse, as if that were an Omen of some ill luck,
which is averted from the Public, by falling on the Head of that private and
particular Person, who is thereupon degraded.

From Ancyra, we came to a Village, called, Balygazar; and from thence to
Zarekneth; from Zarckneth to Zetmetzii, and to the Bank of the River Halys: As
we past through a Village, called, Algii, we saw, at some distance, the
neighboring Mountains of Synopi, which were red, like Vermillion, and from
which red Lead is called Synopi'.

This Halys is the famous River, which was heretofore the Boundary of the two
Kingdoms, of the Medes, and Lydians, concerning which there was an ancient
Oracle, That when Cr^sus passed it, to make War on the Persians, he should
overthrow a great Empire, which fell out to be his Own, whereas he thought it
would have been the Persians: Near the Bank of this River there was a Wood,
which seemed, to us, to bear an unknown Shrub; but when we drew near, we found
it to be Liquorice, and with the Juice of its Root, we refreshed our selves
abundantly.

Near that River we met with a Countryman, and asking him, by an Interpreter,
Whether that River did abound with Fish? And how they used to catch them? He
answered, That there were Fishes enough, but no Body could catch them. When he
saw we wondered at his Answer, he proceeded: For, says he, if a Man strive to
take them up in his Hands, away presently they swim, and will not stay to be
catched. This Answer was the less surprising to me, because, when we had
lighted upon some unknown Birds, and demanded of the Countrymen, how we might
take them? One or other of them told us, That they could not be taken; for if
any Body endeavored to lay Hands on them, they would fly away.

But one of my Colleagues, Francis Hay, having some Nets with him, caused them
to be cast for the catching of Fish; we took a great Draught of them, and
especially the Silurus, or Shetefish, which are common in the Danow. Besides,
there is in that River, good store of Sea-crabs, or else a sort of Fish very
like them. Whereupon the Turks, who saw our Fishing, wondered at the Industry
and Ingenuity of Christians, who would catch Fish at that rate. Hereupon,
perhaps, you will say, What, are there no Fishermen in Turkey? Which I grant
there are, but very few of them live in those Parts. And, I remember, in
another Place, when the Turks saw us turn the Stream out of its course to catch
Gudgeons at the bottom, they laughed us to pieces. What, said they, do you
catch such small guddling Fish? What are they good for? This Ninny-Hammer did
not understand, that a great many of those Fishes would make a dainty Dish,
enough to suffice many Guests. But the Turks are so parsimonious, that they
don't study their Bellies at all; give them but Bread and Garlic, or an Onion,
with a sort of Bonniclabber, or four Milk, known, in Galen's time, by the name
of Syllabub, but called by them, Ingurthe, they feed like Farmers, and desire
nothing more.

They make this Drink, thus; they dilute this Milk with cold Water, and then
cram Bread into it; this they use in the hottest Weather, and when they are
more athirst; and we ourselves found great Benefit by it, in our greatest
Droughts. It is a Repast very grateful to the Palate and Stomach, and it is of
admirable Virtue in quenching the most vehement Thirst. There is abundance of
it already made for Sale in all the Turkish Inns or Caravasaras, as well as all
other sorts of Soop. As for hot Meat, or Flesh, the Turks don't much use them
in their Travels; their usual Diet, on the Road, are Syllabubs, Cheese, dried
Plums, Pears, Peaches, Quinces, Figs, Raisins and Cornel-berries; all those are
exposed to Sale in great earthen Platters boiled in clean Water; every one
takes what he likes best. Those Fruits, with Bread, is his Food; and the Water,
which remains, serves for Drink. Thus their Meat and Drink stand them in very
little, so that I dare say, one Christian spends more Money; on his Belly, in
one day, than a Turk does in twelve; yea, their most solemn Feasts consist of
Wafers, Cakes and such like Junkets, together with several Dishes of Rice, with
some Mutton and Pullet; for Capons are not yet known in Turkey; but as for
Pheasants, Thrushes, and Birds called Figcaters, they never so much as heard of
their Names. But if Honey and Sugar be mixed with the Water, the Drink is like
Jove's Nectar to them. One sort of their Liquors I had almost forgot, it is this.
They take Raisins of the S^n, and bruise or grind them in a Mill, and then put
them into a wooden Vessel, pouring a certain proportion of hot Water upon them.
This Mixture they stir about a little, and then cover the Vessel close, and
suffer it to ferment a day or two; if it does work well, then they add Lees of
Wine to quicken the Operation. When it first begins to ferment, if you taste
it, it is over-sweet, and that makes it more unrelishable; but afterward it
acquires something of an Acid Taste, which, mixed with the Sweet, is very
grateful to the Palate for about three or four days, especially, if it be mixed
with Snow, of which there is plenty at Constantinople at all times. This Drink
they call Arabsorbet (i. e.) the Arabian Potion, but it will not keep long, but
grows sour in a very little time. 'Twill fly up in your Head, and make you reel
as bad as any Wine, if you drink too much of it; and, therefore, the Turks, by
the Rules of their Religion, are for bidden to drink it. For my part I liked it
very well; yea, that sort of Grapes were very acceptable and refreshing; in
many Places they keep them all Summer long. The way of preserving them, they
told me, was this: They take large Bunches of Grapes stoned (as the hot Sun
quickly ripens them in those Countries) these they put in a Wooden or Earthen
Vessel, in the bottom whereof they, first lay a line of groun'd Mustard Seed,
then they spread a line of Grapes upon it; thus with a lay of Grapes, and a lay
of grinded Mustard Seed, they fill it up to the top, and when the Vessel is
full, then they pour in new Must, as much as will fill all the Interstice, then
they shut it close, and so let it stand till the hot time of the next Year,
when Men stand most in need of Drink. Then these Vessels are broached, and the
Grapes, with its Liquor, are set to sale. The Turks like the Liquor as well as
the Grapes, but I did not so well like the Taste of the Mustard Seed, and,
therefore I caused the Grapes to be washed, and then when I was most thirsty,
they gave me great Relief. I hope you will give me leave to commend a Food to
you, that did me so much good, seeing the Egyptians (though preposterously)
esteemed their Herbs and Plants, which were contributory to their Health, as so
many Deities. But it is time for a Wanderer to return back into the Way.

From the Bank of the River Halys, which (as I remember) the Turks call
Aitoczu, we came to Gonknrthoy; from thence to Choron, and from thence to
Theche Theoi, where the Turks have a stately Monastry for their Priests and
Monks, called, Dervises. These Dervises told us a great Story of a certain Man,
called, Chederles, of an huge Stature, and Graveness of Mind answerable
thereto. They suppose it was the same with our St. George, and ascribe the same
Exploits to him; as the saving of a Virgin, by the Slaughter of a huge and
terrible Dragon, To which they add many Fables and Imaginations of idle Brains;
as that he Traveled over several Countries far and near, and at last came to a
River, whose Waters made those that drank them, Immortal; but in what part of
the World this River is, they cannot tell us; in some Vtopia doubtless! They
say, moreover, that it lies somewhere in a great Cloud or Mist of Darkness, and
that never a Man saw it since Cherderles. As for Cherderles himself, he was
made Immortal, and so was his Horse, or stately Prancer on which he rides, by
drinking the same Water, who now, both, do invisibly travel over the World,
delighting in Wars, and appearing therein to the most Valiant, or to those who
implore his Aid, of what Religion soever they be: Such ridiculous Fancies do
they please themselves with. To which we may add other things as absurd as
those before mentioned, That he was one of the Friends and Companions of
Alexander the Great. For the truth is, the Turks keep no just Account either of
Times or Ages, but make a confused Hodg-podg of all History. When they have a
mind to it, they scruple not to say, That Job was Master of the Horse to King
Solomon, and that Alexander the Great was General of his Army; with suchlike
Stuff.

In that Monastry or Mosch, (for so the Turks call their Temples and Churches)
there is a Fountain that bubbles forth very clear and limpid Water, it is built
about and clad with most excellent Marble, and they ridiculously would have
people believe, that it had its Original from Chederle's Horse, which he pissed
in great plenty in that place. They also told us many Rod^mantad^'s concerning
the Companions of Chederles, concerning his chief Groom, and also concerning
his Nephew by his Sister; all which were buried near at hand, and their
Sepulchers there to be seen, and when any Suppliants come to pay their
Devotions to them, they would have persuaded us, that they received great
Relief thereby; yea, they superstitiously affirm, That the Fragments of the
Stones, and the very Earth it self, on which Chederle's Feet stood, when he
staid for the Dragon, if drank in any Liquor, are very good against Fevers,
against the Headache, and against the Diseases of the Eyes. All the Country,
thereabouts, is full of Dragons and Vipers, so that in the hot Season of the
Year, they are so thick, basking themselves in the Sun, that the Ways are
almost unpassable for Travelers.

I had almost forgot to tell you, that, whereas, the Greeks do usually paint
St. George on Horseback, in their Temples, with his Squire behind him, holding
out to him a Cup of Wine as to his Master, he being (as they believe) their
Chederles; they laugh heartily at that Spectacle.

At this Place we were near our Journies end, for now we had but one Stage more
to Amasia, and that was Baglison; from thence we reached Amasia, April 7; and
thirty days after we left Constantinople; as we were comeing, some Turks met
us, to gratulate our Arrival, and to introduce us with Honor.

Amasia is, in a manner, the chief City of Cappadocia, where the Turkish
Governor of that Province usually had his Residence, for the administration of
Justice, and where he usually forms his Camp. But that Town, ever since
Bajazet's time, seemed to be very unlucky, and of late the miserable case of
Mustapha, has confirmed it to be an unfortunate Seat. Strabo writes, that he
was born there. It lies on the side of two opposite Hills, the River Ilis
dividing the City in the midst, running between them; so that from each part
you may look stoopingly into the River, as from the Seats or Stairs of a
Theater; and one side of it is conspicuous and open to the view of the other.
It is so encompassed with Hills, that there is but one way to it either for
Coach or Wagon.

The same Night we came thither, there happened a great Fire, which the
Ianizaries quenched, as their manner is, by plucking down the Houses adjoining.
Upon occasion of this Accident, give me leave to inform, That the Turkish
Soldiers are well-pleased when a Fire happens; for, whereas, they must be
employed to quench it, and usually doing it by the ruining the contiguous
Houses, they have thereby opportunity to rifle and plunder both; so that they,
themselves, do oftentimes privily set Houses on Fire, that so they may pinch
and steal what they can out of them; as I remember once, when I was at
Constantinople, there were frequent Conflagrations of Houses. 'Twas plain, they
could not happen casually, but must be set on fire a purpose, and yet the
Authors could not be found; but the Fault was commonly cast on some Persian
Spies that were in Town: At last, upon a diligent search, 'twas found that the
Soldiers had stirred up their Fellows, that were a Shipboard, to do the Feat;
that so, during the Fire, they might enrich themselves with the Spoils.

Upon an high Hill, that hangs over and commands Amasia, there is a strong
Castle, wherein the Turks have a continual Garrison, ^^^her to curb the
Asiaticks, who are not very well pleased with the Ottoman Yoke (as I shall show
anon) or else to bridle the Persian, who many times make large Excursions even
as far as this Town, though at such a vast distance from them. In this Hill there
are some ancient Monuments, which, perhaps, were the Sepulchers of the
Cappadocian Kings.

As for the Houses and Streets of Amasia, there is little or no beauty in them.
Their Houses are built of Loom, as they are in Spain, plain at top without any
roof, and what covering they have is of Loom or Clay too. They have some old
piece of a Pillar, Cylinder or Rober, which they turn up and down to stop any
Chink or Crevice, made either by Rain or Wind. The Inhabitants; in former
times, lay down to sleep in the open Air; as for Rains, they are not great nor
frequent in those Parts; but if at any time a Shower falls, the Loomy Droppings
from the Eaves, do woefully dirty the Cloths of those that pass under them. I
saw there a certain young noble Person, living not far from me, at his Supper,
after the old Roman fashion, lying on a Bed. As Soon as I came to Amasia, we
were introduced to complement the Supreme Vizier Achmet, and the rest of the
Bassa's, for their Emperor was then gone abroad; we treated with them a while
concerning the Contents of our Embassy; and because they would not seem to
prejudice us, they lent us a favorable Ear; howbeit, referring all to the Will
and Pleasure of their Emperor. When he came home, we were led into his
Presence, for Audience; but he entertained us (and the Reasons we alleged in
the Speech we made him, according to the Command of my Master) with a sour and
frowning Look. He sat upon a low Throne, not above a Foot from the Ground, but
it was all covered over with rich Tapestry, and with Cushions exquisitely
wrought. His Bow and Arrows lay by his side, he himself (as I said) looked
froward upon us; and yet there was a certain Majesty, mixed with Severity, in
his Countenance. Each of us, as we entered the Room, were led up toward him by
some of his Bed-chamber-officers, who held us by the Arm, (for so they use to
introduce Ambassadors, ever since a certain Croatian, desiring to speak with
Amurath, and drawing near to him so to do, slew him in revenge of the death of
his Master, Mark, the Despot of Servia, who was killed by the said Amurath):
and afterward, as if we had kissed his Hand, we were led backward to the
opposite part of the Room; for the Turks count it an unmannerly thing to turn
any of ones Back parts to their Prince. From thence I had liberty to declare
our Master's Commands; but they suited not with his lofty, imperious Spirit,
who thought that nothing ought to be denied him, for they were daring and high;
so that he, as disdaining them, said nothing but Giusel, Ginsel; (i. e.) Well,
Well. And so we were dismissed to our Lodgings.

At our Audience there was a very full Court, for a great many Governors of
Provinces were there with their Presents; and, besides, the Imperial Horse,
Spahi's, Ianipagis and Vlulags, there were also a great number of Ianizaries.
But among this vast number of Courtiers, there was not so much as one more
eminent for Birth or Parentage; each one, by his Valor and adventrous
Achievements, was the Carver out of his own Fortune. Their Honor arises from
their Preferments, so that there is no dispute about Precedence, but every
Man's pre-eminces is according to the Office which he bears. And those Offices
are distributed at the mere Will and Pleasure of the Prince, who does not
regard the empty Name of Nobility, nor value a Rush the Favor of the
Multitude, or of any other particular Man, but considering only the Merits and
Disposition of the Man, he rewards him accordingly. And by that means,
Employments are bestowed upon such Persons as are best able to manage them; and
every Man has opportunity to be the Hammerer out of his own Honor and
Preferment. Those which at present are the greatest Officers under their
Emperor, were mostly the Sons of Shepherds or Neatherds; and they are so far
from being ashamed of the Meanness of their Original, that they glory therein
among one another; and account it more Praiseworthy to be the Advancers of
themselves, than if they had Honor transmitted down to them from their
Ancestors.

For thus they argue, Virtue is not propagated from our Parents, but is partly
the Gift of God, and partly acquired by good Discipline, and by our own Labor
and Industry; so that as no Son has his Fathers Skill in Music, Arithmetic
or Geometry, derived to him from his Birth, so neither can Fathers bequeath
Virtue as an Inheritance to their Children; for the Soul (say they) is not
communicated with the Fathers Seed; so that a Son must necessarily be born like
qualified as his Father was; but it is infused nto his Body from the God of
Heaven. Thus in that Nation, Dignities, Honors, Offices, etc. are the Rewards
of Virtue and Merit; as on the other side, Improbity, Sloth, Idleness, are
among them the despicablest things in the whole World. And by this means they
flourish, bear sway, and enlarge the Bounds of their Empire every day more and
more. But we, Christians, to our shame be it spoken, live at another manner of
rate; Virtue is little esteemed among us, but Nobleness of Birth (forsooth)
carries away all the Honor and Preferment. But enough of this at present, more
may be spoken on this Argument hereafter; and what I have now spoken about it,
pray keep it to your self, for other Men may not be able to bear my Freedom
herein.

To return then to my Subject; I shall now present you with a surprising
Spectacle, even a Multitude of Persons with picked Turbants on their Heads,
made of pure white Linen folded together in Plates; their other Apparel was
very costly of several sorts and colors, all most radiantly shining with Gold,
Silver, Purple, Silk, Velvet, etc. I am not able to describe the Gaudiness of
the Show; in one word, 'twas the most glorious one I ever saw in all my Life.
And yet in all this Splendour, there was a great deal of Simplicity and
Parsimony too. Those who were of one Order had clothing all of one sort; there
were no foolish Hems, Lacings, Fringes or Borders, as among us, which cost a
great deal of Money, and yet wear out in a day or two. The Silk and Velvet
Suits, which many of them wore, though mightily embroidered, yet cost not above
a Ducat the making and embroidering. They did as much admire to see the fashion
of our Cloths, as we did that of theirs. Their Vests are very long, almost down
to their Heels, which is more graceful, and makes them seem taller than they
are; but our Apparel (forsooth) is so curtailed and short, that it hardly
covers the Parts which Nature would have to be concealed; on which Account it
is less decent. Besides, it seems to take away some Inches from the talness of
our Stature, and look more Dwarf-like. And yet among so great a Multitude, I
took notice of this most laudable Circumstance; 'twas all hush, not so much as
a word spoke among them all, nor no humming noise, as among a tumultuous
Multitude; no justling one of another, but every particular Man quietly kept
his own Station. The Heads of them, which they call Aga's, had Seats to sit
upon, such as their Serasquiers, or Generals, their Brigadiers, Colonels and
Captains, but the Commonalty stood on their Feet: Among the rest, I most
admired the Ianizaries, though there were some Thousands of them, yet they
stood at a distance one from another Stock-still, (as we say) as if they had
been Statues. So that I who was at some distance from them, thought verily they
had been so, till being advised to salute them, as the manner is, I saw them
all bow their Heads, by way of Resalutation, unto me. When we passed from this
Show, behold there was another pleasurable one, which entertained us, and that
was their Horse-Guards, in their March to their Quarters, they Rode upon
gallant stately Prancers, excellently well Trapp'd, Equipped, and Shod. Thus we
were dismissed, but with little hopes of obtaining what we came for.

On the 10th of May, the Persian Ambassador came to Amasia, and brought with
him rich and gallant Presents, as many choice sorts of Hangings,
Babylonian-Tents, curiously wrought within with many sorts of Needle Work,
gallant Horse-Trappings, and Saddles, Scymiters made at Damascus, whose Handles
were studded with Jewels, and Shields of curious Workmanship; but that which
exceeded them all, was the Alchoran, so they call the Book containing the Rites
and Ceremonies of their Religion, which they fancy Mahomet composed by Divine
Inspiration, and which is accounted the most Noble Present of all. They quickly
accorded with him on Terms of Peace, so that it concerned us to be cautious,
who were to find greater obstruction in our Negotiations with them. And to
assure us that the Peace was confirmed betwixt them, they omitted no manner of
extraordinary Respect to their Ambassador. For the guise of the Turks is, (as I
told you before,) to be excessive on both sides, either in bestowing Honor on
their Friends, or in heaping Reproaches on their Enemies. Haly Bassa, Deputy to
the Grand Vizier, treated the Persian with a sumptuous Dinner, which he made in
his Garden, a place far distant from us, and separated also by the interposal
of the River, yet we could see the Manner of it well enough; for, I told you,
the place was seated so steep on both sides the Hill, that the Eye might easily
discover what was done on each side. This Haly is a Dalmatian by Birth, a Man
of a good Wit, and, which is strange in Turkey, very courteous to Strangers. The
Table, at which the Bassa and the Persian Ambassador sat, was covered over
with a Canopy, and the Dishes were served up after this manner: There were One
Hundred Youths, which attended, like Waiters, all of them alike habited; first
of all, they entered one by one, at a small distance from one another, till the
Train of them reached up to the Table where the Guests were a sitting; they had
nothing at all in their Hands, that so they might not be hindered in saluting
the Guests, which was done in this manner; They laid their Hands on their
Thighs, and bowed their Heads downwards to the ground; when this Ceremony was
performed, then he that stood next the Kitchen, took a Dish and gave it to the
next Page immediately before him, he handed it to a Third, and he to a Fourth,
and so from one to another till it came to him who stood next the Table and he
delivered it to the Hands of the Gentleman Sewer, who placed it on the Table.
And thus One Hundred Dishes, or more, were served up to the Table in excellent
Order, without any Noise at all; and when that was done, then those Waiters, or
Pages, saluted the Guests a second time, and so returned in the same Order they
came in; only, of course, those that were last before went out first, and those
which were nearest the Table brought up the Rear. Thus the Second Course was
also served up, so that the Turks are great Admirers of Order, even in the
smallest matters, which we Christians are apt to neglect, even in things of
greatest Moment. At some distance from the Ambassador sat his Attendants with
some Turks of Quality with them.

Peace being thus made with the Persians, as I told you before, yet we could
get no good Terms of them at all, only we obtained an Half-Years Truce, till I
could send to my Master, and know his Answer. I was sent to be Leiger
Ambassador there, but in regard there was no Peace settled betwixt both
Empires, the Bassa's thought it advisable for me to return to my Master with
Letters from Solomon their Emperor, and I was to return with an Answer from his
Imperial Majesty, if he thought fit. Hereupon I was again introduced into
Solyman's Presence, and had Two large Embroidered Vests, reaching down to my
Ancles, clapped upon me; they were so heavy, that I could hardly stand under
them; my Family also, that attended me, were all Clad with Silk Garments of
diverse Colors; in this posture I stalked along, like Agamemnon, or some such
piece of Gravity, in the Tragedian, and so I took my leave of their Emperor,
having first received Letters to my Master, Sealed and wrapped up in Cloth of
Gold, and the chiefest of my Attendants were also admitted to take their
Leaves; and thus after we had taken our leaves of the Bassa's, I and my
Colleagues departed from Amasia, June the 2d. The Custom is, That Ambassadors at
their departure have a Dinner provided for them in the Divan, (so they call the
place where the Bassa's sit to Administer Justice,) but this is done only to
their Friends; that Complement was omitted to me, because Affairs were not yet
in an Amicable posture between them and us.

If you Ask me, What manner of Man Solomon was? I Will tell you, He was an
Ancient Man, his Countenance, and the Mean of his Body, was very Majestic,
well becoming the Dignity which he bore; he was Frugal and Temperate, even from
his Youth, though he might have taken a greater liberty to himself by the Rules
of their own Religion. In his Younger Days he was not given to Wine, nor to
Masculine Venery, which the Turks much delight in, so that his very Enemies
could object nothing against him on those accounts; but that he was too
Uxurious, and his over-Indulgence to his Wife made him give way to the Death of
his Son Mustapha, yet that Crime was vulgarly imputed to that Ascendent she had
over him, by reason of her Enchantments and Amatory Portions. This is certain,
that after he once took her for his lawful Wife, he never had Carnal Knowledge
of any other Women, though their Laws did not forbid him. He is a very strict
Observer of the Mahumetan Religion, and is as desirous to propagate That, as^
to enlarge the Bounds of his Empire.

He is now Sixty Years of Age; and, for a Man of his Years, he enjoys a
moderate proportion of Health, and yet his Countenance does discover, that he
carries about him some hidden Disease, it is thought a Gangrene, or Ulcer, in
the Thigh; yet at solemn Audiences of Ambassadors, he has a Fucus to paint his
Cheeks, that he may appear sound and healthy to them, and thereupon be more
dreaded by Foreign Princes, their Masters. Methought I discovered some such
thing at my Dismission, for his Countenance was as four when I left him, as it
was at my first Audience.

Having thus taken my leave, I began my Journey in the Hot Month of june, and
the Heat thereof was so excessive, that it cast me into a Fever; it is true, it
was a remiss and gentle one, yet it came every Day, to which was added an
Hoarsness, and Defluction of Rheum from the Head, and it held me till I came
quite to Constantinople.

The Persian Ambassador left Amasia the self-same Day that I did, and we went
both out of the City the same way; for, (as I told you before,) there is but
one Passage into, or out of, that Town, it is so shut in by the circumjacent
and unpassable Hills: But the Way quickly does divide into Two, one to the
East, which the Persians took; and another to the West, which was our Road. In
the open Fields, about the Town, we saw the Turkish Camp pitched, with
abundance of Tents. I shall not entertain you with the Stages of my return,
they being the same with those of my Journey thither, only we made a little more
speed, and sometimes Rode Two Days Journey in One. In fine, we came to a
Constantinople, June the 24 th. You must needs think I had a troublesome Journey
of it, having such a Companion with me, as a Quotidian Ague, all the way; so
that when I came thither, I was almost nothing but Skin and Bone: Yet, as Lean
as I was, when I came to rest, and, by the Advice of Quaquelben, my Physician,
used warm Baths, I quickly recovered: One thing I observed in the method of my
Cure, that when I came out of the warm Bath, he would sprinkle me over with
cold Water, which, though it were troublesome to me at the present, yet I found
that it did me much good.

Whilst I staid at Constantinpole, there was a certain Person, that came from
the Turkish Camp in Asia, who told me a Story, that I shall acquaint you with,
because it shows, that the Asiaticks are not very well pleased, either with the
Religion, or the Government, of the Turks; 'twas this, Solomon, says he, as he
was returning Home, was forced to Lodge one Night in the House of a certain
Asiatick and when he went away in the Morning, his Host brought a great deal of
Perfume, and used a great deal of Ceremonies, to cleanse and purge his House,
as if it had been polluted by such a Guest, as Solomon; when Solomon heard of
it, he caused the Man to be Slain, and his House to be levelled with the
ground. This Punishment the poor Man underwent for his Aversion from the Turks,
and his Propensity to favor the Persians.

I staid about Fourteen Days at Constantinople to refresh my self, and then I
entered on my Journey back again to Vienna: But I was entertained with an
Inauspicious Omen, even a very sad Spectacle; just as I was gone forth of the
Gates of Constantinople, I met whole Waggon-Loads of Boys and Girls, which were
bringing out of Hungary to Constantinople to be sold; no Merchandise is more
frequent amongst them, than that. For, as when we leave Antwerp, we meet with
all sorts of Merchantable Commodities Importing into the Town, so here, ever
and anon, there passed by us abundance of Poor Miserable Christian Slaves,
which were going to be sold in the Markets to a perpetual Bondage; there was no
distinction of Age, Old and Young were driven in Herds, or Companies, or else
were tied in a long Chain, as we use to tail Horses when we carry them to
Fairs; when I beheld this woeful sight, I could not forbear weeping and
bemoaning the unhappy State of poor Christendom. And if that Miserable
Spectacle were not Afflictive enough for a new Traveller, take another bad and
mortifying Occurrence: My Colleagues had commended some of their Retinue to me,
which were weary of living in Turkey, that they might be of my Train, in
returning to their own Country: I granted their Request, and having Traveled
Two Days Journey, I perceived one that was Chief among them, (called a Vaivode,
from his Office,) was carried Sick in a Coach; one of his Feet being bare,
without any Stockings, he would not suffer it to be covered, for he had in it a
Plague Sore, which he found more easy to keep open. We were much troubled at
this sight, as fearing that Infectious Disease would spread further; but the
poor Man lived but till we came to Adrianople, and there departed this Life.
Upon his Death another Mischief did succeed; as soon as the Breath was out of
his Body, the rest of the Hungarians ran in greedily to the Prey, one caught up
his Stockings, another his Doublet, a Third his Shift, a Fourth his other
Linen; thus casting themselves, and us too, into a great deal of danger. Nor
was there any way in the world from hindering them.

It Is true, my Physician, like an honest Man, ran in amongst them, and
entreated them, for God's sake, to throw them away, because they would infect
us all; but they were deaf to his Advice. But the Day after we left Adrianople,
those self-same Persons came to him, and complained of a Pain in their Heads,
with a Dejection of their Spirits, and a Listnesness both of Body and Mind, and
desired his Advice; He, (suspecting the Symptoms of the Plague in the case,)
told them, they were well enough served, for not harkning to his Counsel; yet
he would do them what good he could, only, being on his Journey, he was
unprovided of proper Medicines. The same Day I walked abroad into the Field, as
I used to do as soon as ever I came to my Inn, to see if I could find any thing
worthy of my Notice in those Countries, where I met with an unknown Herb in a
Meadow, which smelt like Garlic. After I had plucked some Leaves of it, I gave
them to my Physician to know his Judgment; he looked wistly upon it, and told
me, 'twas Scordium, and lifting up his Hands to Heaven, he gave God thanks for
sending us so opportune a Remedy against the Plague; hereupon he gathers a
great quantity of it, and putting it into a large Pot, boiled it over the Fire.
Then he bid the Hungarians take Heart, and p^^ted the Decoction amongst them,
prescribing the taking of it very hot, as they were going to Bed, mixed with
some Lemnian Earth, and Diascordium, and that they should not sleep till they
had fallen into a great sweat. Observing his Directions, the next Day after
they were much better, and desired the same Potion again, and when they had
drunk it, they grew perfectly well. And thus, by God's Blessing, we avoided
that Infection.

And yet, the residue of our Journey was not without Peril. After we had passed
the Country of the Thracians and Bulgarians, which reaches as far as Nissa, and
came into the Servians Country, reaching from Nissa to Sema^dria, where the
Rascians Country begins; we came at last to Belgrade, the Weather being
excessively Hot and Parching, for 'twas the hottest time of the Dog Days.

At Belgrade, upon one of our Fish-days, we were presented with abundance of
choice Fish, and, amongst the rest, with large full-Bodied Carps, taken in the
Danube, whose Carps are very much commended: My People did Eat very greedily of
them, that was either the cause, or the occasion, which cast many of them into
a Fever; yet all that quantity of Fish, which was enough to satisfy Forty Men,
cost but half a Dollar; and the truth is, other things are as cheap. As for
Hay, it is little or nothing worth, the Meadows are so laden with it, that every
Man may take what he will, provided he pay for the Mowing and Carriage; which
made us to admire the wisdom of the old Hungarians, after they had passed the
Save, who chose so Fertile a Country, as Hungary, to dwell in; where there were
all manner of Conveniences for Human Life; we passed over a great Tract of
Land, both beyond and on this side the Save, and we found the Grass, Barley,
Oats and Wheat, almost parched and withered with drought; but as soon as we
entered Hungary, the Grass was so tall, that a Coach, that went before, could
hardly be seen by another that came after; which is a great Argument of the
goodness of the Soil.

The Rascians, as I told you before, begin at Semandria, and reach as far as
the River Drove; they are reputed to be a fudling sort of People, and not very
Faithful to Strangers. Whence they had their Name and Original, I do not
certainly know; but truly they were kind enough to us; we passed through some
Villages of theirs of less Note, and at last arrived at Esseck, which is almost
enclosed with Muddy Marshes, and is famous for the slaughter of Catzianerus,
and the overthrow of the Christians. Here I was taken with a Ter^ian Ague, I
was so parched with Heat, in Traveling the open Feilds of Hungary; and at
Esseck we passed the Drove, and came to Zasque, where being weary with the Heat
of my Journey, and my Ague, I laid me down to rest, where the chiefest of the
place came to me to bid be welcome; and presented me with large Melons, with
Pears and Plums of several sorts, besides Wine, and other Provisions,
altogether very good, the Noted Country of Campania in Italy hardly bears
better. In the Room where I Lodged, there was a long Table all furnished with
these Viands: My Servants desired the Hungarians to stay to Supper, excusing my
absence, because of my Sickness. As soon as I awoke, and saw such a full-spread
Table before my Eyes, I thought verily I had been in a Dream, and Asked my
Physician, How that came about? He told me plainly, That he himself had caused
the Table to be furnished, that so the very sight of it might refresh me. But
must not I taste of it, said I? Yes, said he, but you must only taste. And so I
Eat a little of it, and seemed to be much the better for it. The Day after the
Hungarians came to me again to present sent their Service, desiring me to
represent their Condition to the Emperor, in regard of the Wrongs they received
from some of their Neighbors. From thence we came to Mohatz, noted for the
Overthrow and Death of Lewis King of Hungary; not far from that Town I saw a
River, whose Water was deep, and its Banks very sleep; here that unhappy Prince
leapt in with his Horse, and was drowned, being for his Fall as much to be
lamented, as for his Imprudence, in ventring with a small and newly raised Army
of his Countrymen, to cope with the more numerous, Veteran, and
well-disciplin'd Forces of Solomon.

From Mohatz we Traveled on to Tul^a, and from thence to Feldnar. There I
passed over the Danube into an Island, pretty large, called Cophis, Inhabited
by Rascians; and so repassing the Danube, I arrived at Buda, (12 Days after I
left Belgrade,) August the 4 th, having lost many of my Horses by the way, who
were Choked with Eating new Barley, and Drinking over-old Water. Besides, I
narrowly escaped Robbing, which these Countries are much infested with,
especially by those they call Heydukes, some of which were afterward taken,
and put to Death at Buda, where they confessed to the Bassa thereof, that they
lay in wait for me, and my Train, under a broken Bridge we were to pass, that so
they might Assault us unawares. And the truth is, a few may very easily
circumvent and destroy a great many Passengers on such Bridges; for the Bridges
are ill-built, and the Planks are set so wide, and gaping one from another,
that you can scarce go over them safe on Horseback, without danger of falling,
if you are never so careful; and if some meet you before, others fall on your
Rear, and others start out from the Reeds and Sedges below, where they hide
themselves, and so Accost you in the Flank, and you can hardly manage your
Horse for Self-Defence, by reason of the Ilness of the Bridge; no doubt you may
be treated as the Romans were in the Caudine Streights, be either taken or
killed, at Pleasure. I know not what it was that deterred them from assaulting
of us; whether it were our Numbers, or the Sight of the Hungarians with us, or
because we were in a long Train, and all were not on the Bridge at once, or
what ever else it was that withheld them, by God's Blessing, we got safe to
Buda. The Bassa of the Town was not then at home, he was gone over to Pest, on
the other side the River, where they had a Council of War, after the manner of
the Hungarians, they call them Rachi. Many Sanziacks were already come thither,
but more were expected, for which Cause, when I desired Audience, 'twas put off
for Three Days, that the Ianizaries and Military Persons might make a greater
Show. Then I was sent for over, and conveyed to his Tent, where he made
Complaints to me of the Injuries that some Hungarians had done to him; It is
usual in those Frontier Garrisons, both for Hungarians and Turks, mutually to
complain of one another, yea, sometimes they that are most in Fault, begin to
complain, first. The Turkish Bassa also added some Minatory Expressions of
Revenge; it may be, he thought that the Sight of his Army would terrify me; but
he was mistaken, for I answered him roundly, That the Hungarians might rather
find Fault with the Turks, than on the contrary; for I my self, in my Travels
had seen some of his Soldiers plunder some Hungarians, subjects of his
Imperial. Majesty, and carry away their Goods. He answered me, That indeed he
had put some contumacious Christians under Military Execution, but they were
such as were under his Master, not the Emperor. Thus, after a mutual
Altercation, I was dismissed, being in very bad plight, for my Ague-Fit was
sore upon me all that Day.

The Day after, I went to Gran, having a Turkish Guard of Horse along with me,
I had a Mind to be wafted over the Danube, and for one Night to lodge in a
Village over against the Castle of Gran, that the Day after I might come the
sooner to Comorra, and be better able to endure my Ague-Fit, which I expected
that Day; and therefore I entreated that Favor of my Guide, that he would send
some Body over, to bring the Ferry-Boat, that was on the other Side, that so
our Passage might be the easier. I found some Difficulty in having my Request
granted, yet, partly to gratify me, and partly to acquaint the Sanziacks with
my arival there, he sent over two Persons; when they were gone an Hour before,
they spyed Four Horsemen standing under a Tree, a little from the
High-way-side; they judged them, by their Habits, to be Turks, and therefore
turned aside to accost them; and as they drew near, they asked them, What News?
They answered not a Word, but made at them with their drawn Swords, and gave
one of them such a Blow, athwart his Face, that he made the greatest Part of
his Nose to hang down over his Chin; and then catching at his Horse, which he
held by the Bridle, he left his own Beast, and mounting it, set Spurs, and
away. The Turks presently came back to us, especially he with a maimed Face,
and with a woeful Lamentation, bid us prepare for the Combat, for we were
Waylaid. I, to encourage my Men, got presently on Horseback; but we came too
late, when the Scuffle was over, for they had more mind to preserve the Prey
they had got, than to fight: And thereupon fled speedily to Iavarin, a Garrison
of ours, to which they did belong: The Turks showed them to us as they were
scouring over the neighboring Hills, that led to Iavarin. Thus we came to
Gran, the Sanziack very friendly gave me a Visit, and among other Discourse he
put me in mind of the Insolency of the Hungarian Soldiers, who could not be
kept from Thieving (said he) Though you the Emperor's Ambassador were in
company of those they robbed; and therefore he desired me, That the Horse they
took away yesterday might be restored. In the mean Time, The Turk, that was
wounded the Day before, stood without in the Entry, with his Nose sewen
together, through which he made a lamentable Moan, desiring me to pity his
Condition: I told him I would give him what was enough for his Cure, and so I
bestowed Two Ducats upon him; he would have had more, but the Sanziac told
him, 'twas enough, his Misfortune was not to be charged upon me.

Being thus dismissed by the Sanziack, I came the same Day to Comorra; where I
expected my Ague-Fit, but when the usual Period of it drew near, I found it had
left me, as if a Fever got in Turkey durst not accompany me into the Christian
Territories: Hereupon I gave God Thanks, who had both freed me of my Ague, and
had also brought me safe to the end of my long and tedious Journey.

Two Days after, I came to Vienna, where the Emperor Ferdinand, my most
Gracious Master, was not at present, only I found Maximilian, King of Bohemia,
there in his Room; whose courteous Reception of me made me almost forget the
Toil of my Journey. But I must tell you, I was so emaciated with my Sickness,
and the Inconveniences of my Journey together, that many thought the Turks had
given me a poisonous Dose; for truly, when I went lately to pay my Duty to the
Archduke Ferdinand, he, being then there, asked one of his Domestics, who I
was? who answered, I was one that came lately from Turkey, and that it was no
wonder I looked so ill, for they who returned from those Parts, used so to do.

Perhaps he was willing to have it believed, that I had taken the Emperor
Claudius's Dose; but, for my part, I know of no such thing; neither do I
question but that after I had rested a while, to recover the tediousness of my
Journey, I shall look as well as ever I did, and I find my self something mended
already.

In the mean time, I acquainted the Emperor with my Return, by Letter, and of
the half-Years Truce I had obtained, and the sum of all my whole Negotiation;
and when he came home from the Diet, I would inform him of all Particulars more
punctually and distinctly.

One thing more I shall acquaint you with, There were many Persons who refused
to accompany me to Constantinople, either for Fear, or I know not what Motive
besides, who wished they had given me any Money, to go along with me, now they
saw me return in Safety. But what says he in Plautus? If you will eat the
Kernel, you must take the Pains to break the Nut: He does himself Wrong, that
thinks to reap part of the Fruit, who took no part of the Pains.

Thus, Sir, I have given an account of my Journey, both to Constantinople and
also to Amasia; I have not dressed up my Narrative with Flowers of Rhetoric, but
have presented you with it, just as I would have related it to you by Word of
Mouth. I know you will bear with the Courseness of my Style, it being
occasioned by my over-eager Desire to gratify you; nor can you well expect
Elegancy from me now in my heat and throng of Business, which I was never
Master of in my greatest Retirements. This I assure you, both for your
Information and my own Content, that I am not conscious to my self of any
Falsehood in the whole Narration, which is the principal Ornament of such
Relations as these. Thus I bid you Farewell.

Vienna, September. 1st. 1554.
EPISTLE II.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, wherein you acquaint me, that you have received
Information of my second Voyage into Turkey; on which Account you express your
wonderment, that I would venture to visit that uncouth and barbarous Country,
once more. And, withal, you desire to know the Issue of my Journey; How I found
Matters at my return to Constantinople; What Entertainment I met with there;
What Proportion of Health I enjoy; Whether my Life be pleasant to me, yea or
no; and, in fine, What hopes there may be of my speedy return to Germany. To
all which you oblige me, upon the score of our ancient Friendship, to give
particular and express Answers; which, to gratify you, I shall accordingly do.

Know then, in the first Place, That you were not misinformed as to my return
into Turkey, the thing is most true; neither could I avoid the Journey, as being
obliged thereunto by Promise; and you know every honest Man is as good as his
Word^ My Case was this, The Emperor Ferdinand, my most gracious Lord and
Master, designed me as his Lieger Ambassador to Constantinople; but his Design
was grounded on this Supposition, that Peace would be first settled betwixt the
two Empires; but Articles of Agreement being not yet fully accorded, nor wholly
rejected neither, there was no reason I should slip my Neck out of the Collar,
till the Matter was brought to some certain issue, either a firm Peace, or a
perfect Rupture. And, therefore, though I foresaw what a Bushel of Troubles I
should run my self into, by my return, and had much rather a fitter Person had
been substituted for the Employment; but no Body being willing to accept the
Charge, I was, in a manner, forced to the Service; it being my duty to comply
with, and obey, the will and pleasure of my gracious Master: For asson as ever
he returned from the Imperial Diet to Vienna, and was informed, by me, of my
Transactions with Solomon, the Ottoman Emperor, he immediately laid his Command
upon me to prepare my self to return, and to carry back his Answer to Solyman's
Letters. It Is true, 'twas the depth of Winter, I was commanded to return to
Constantinople; and, besides, 'twas a very Rainy, Cold and Tempestuous Season;
and, also, my Message was so severe, that I was like to have no Thanks for my
Labor. Here, perhaps, you may twit me in the Teeth, What! twice to the same
Pla^e? To which I answer, Twice and oftener, if there be need; for commendable
Enterprises, the more hazardous, the more Praise-wor^hy.

'Twas in November when I left Vienna, to undertake my second Voyage to
unhospitable Pontus; I will not grate your Ears with the Relation of the Gests
of my Second Journey. I was too vexatious, I fear, in giving you an Account of
my First.

It may suffice to tell you, that I went the same Stages, in a manner, that I
did at first. So then, to Constantinople I came in the beginning of January
(having lost one of my Retinue, (who dyed of a Fever in the way.) There I found
my Colleagues in good Health; but a mighty Change was made in the Turkish
Affairs: Bajazet, Solyman's youngest Son had escaped a great danger, and was
reconciled to his Father: Achmet Bassa, the Grand Vizier, had been strangled,
and Rustan, his Predecessor, was restored to his Place of Grand Viziership; of
whom more hereafter; but at present, I shall acquaint you what course
Entertainment I met with from their Emperor, his Bassa's and other great Men
among them. For their Bassa's (as manner is, before they introduce an
Ambassador to their Prince) being desirous to hear of me, in general, the
purport of my Message; as soon as they understood, that my Master Caesar would
not recede a jot from his Right, but did punctually insist upon it as just and
equal, that the Transactions with the Widow John late Vaivod of Transylvania
and her Son, being made without Fraud, Force or Covin, should be strictly
observed, they were in a mighty Chafe; for you must know, that a long-Series of
happy Success has so elevated the Minds of this People, that they make their
own Wills, forsooth, the sole Rule of all Reason, Right or Wrong. On which
presumptuous Principle, they carried it very haughtily toward us; and told us
the extreme Danger we would run into, if we offered to appear before their
Prince with such an imperious Message. When such menacing Words could not deter
us from demanding Audience; they gave us to understand, That they would have no
Hand in our Admittance; for do you think, (said they) that we are such
brazen-faced Fellows as to bring you, with such saucy Answers, to our King? No,
said they, it will be as plain Mockery to him, which he will never take well at
your Hands: Do you not know, proceeded they, that he is come back from Persia
with a victorious Army; where, his Successes have so exalted him, that he has
put his own Son to death as emulous of the Empire? Whereby, you may guess at
the severity of his Passion. He longs for, and courts, a fair occasion to send
his handy and well-disciplin'd Army into Hungary, to enrich them with the
Spoils of that Country, and to add the residue thereof to his Empire. And,
therefore, if you be wise, don't ^ouze up a sleeping Lion; for thereby you will
but hasten your own Miseries, which are coming on fast enough of themselves.
Such were the Harangues of the Bassa's to us, and the rest of the Turks were of
the same Mind. The mildest Punishment they denounced against us, was, That two
of us would be cast into a nasty Dungeon, and the third (which was to be my
share) would have his Nose and Ears cut off, and so sent back to his Master.

And to strike the greater Terror into us; the Turks, who passed by our
Lodgings, gave us many a sour Look; which was an Argument, that they intended
some cruel Deportment toward us. And the truth is, from that day forward, they
used us more coursely than ever; they kept us up close as Prisoners rather than
Ambassadors; they suffered no Body to come to us, nor permitted any of us to go
forth; and the rest of their Carriage was as intolerable. Thus have they
treated us these six Months past; and I know not how long they will continue
these Severities; but, come what will, we submit to the Will of God. Our Cause
is Just and Honorable, and that gives us relief against their vigorous
Extremities. But leaving the Narration of our own Misfortunes, I shall answer
your desire, in giving you an Account of the Story of Bajazet. For the clearer
Explication thereof, I must acquaint you, that Solomon had 5 Sons; the Eldest,
begot by him on a Concubine, near the Bosphorus, was called Mustapha, of whose
unhappy end you have heard before; but by another Wife, named Roxolana, he had
four, Mahomet, Selymus, Bajazet and Giangir. Mahomet lived till he was married,
(for the Turks call their Concubines, Wives) but died soon after; so that
Selimus and Bajazet of this later Venture only remained alive. As for Giangir,
he came thus to his end; when News was brought to Constantinople, that his
half-Brother Mustapha was put to death; the Youth being of a timorous Mind and
infirm Body (for he was Crook-back'd) fell into a grievous Passion, upon the
Imagination that the like Fate did hang over his own Head; for he could promise
safety to himself no longer than his Father lived; if his Head were once laid,
he that was his Successor would certainly kill all his Brethren, as emulous of
the Kingdom; not one of them would be excepted, and himself being among the
number must look for the same Fate; which Thought struck him into a Disease,
even as if the Bow-string had been already about his Neck, which cost him his
Life; so that now only Selymus and Bajazet remained; Selymus was the Elder, and
'twas known to all, that his Father designed him for the Empire; but Bajazet
was most favored and doted upon by his Mother, whether i^ were out of
Commiseration to prevent his inevitable Ruin; or else out of Motherly
Indulgence, or whatever else the reason was; this is certain, if her Vote could
have carried it, Bajazet had certainly succeeded in the Empire after his
Fathers death. But she must give way to his Fathers Will, who was fully
resolved, come what would, that Selymus, and none else, should succeed him.
Bajazet was not ignorant thereof, and therefore he turned every Stone to stave
off his impending Fate, and, if possible, to prevent his Ruin by grasping at
the Throne. And his Hopes were increased by the favor of his Mother, and of
Rustan the Grand Vizier, who was thought to have espoused his Interests. Having
two such Pillars to support him, he thought with himself 'twas far more
glorious to hazard his Life in contending with his Brother for the Empire, than
to die obscurely by the Bow-string, as a Victim to his Cruelty.

Bajazet having this Project in his Head, began to pick Quarrels with his
Brother, and to maintain a Faction against him; neither was it long before a
fitting Occasion offered it self for him to begin his designed Enterprise, of
rising in Arms upon the Account of Mustapha's death, and the disgust of many
thereupon. For the truth is, Mustapha was so well beloved in his Lifetime, and
so much lamented at his Death, that those who had placed all their hopes of
advancement from him alone, were almost unwilling to live after him; so that
they did but wait for an Opportunity to revenge his Death, or to die as he did:
Others, who were conscious to themselves that they had favored his Party, and
therefore were obnoxious to the present Power, did not care what Hurly-burlies
they made; ready they were for any Innovation, only they wanted a Leader. In
which case, they did not well know what to do. As for Mustapha himself, they
knew he could not be recalled from the Dead; yet it was in their power to
suborn and set up a feigned Mustapha in his stead, as if the true one had been
yet alive. This Design pleased Bajazet (who was the Contriver of the Plot) best
of all, as most conducible to the accomplishment of his purpose. Hereupon, by
his Emissaries, he procures a mean Fellow, but bold and ready-witted, to
counterfeit himself to be Mustapha; and his pretense was more plausible,
because his Stature, Physiognomy and Mien of his Body did somewhat resemble
Mustapha's. This Man begun, first, to show himself in that part of Thrace which
was above Constantinople, toward the Danube, Moldavia and Valachia. This Place
he thought most opportune to raise a Party, because it was full of Horse, which
part of the Turkish Militia did most favor Mustapha. Here he starts up, as if
he had fled in Posthaste from some remote Place, with a few in his Company;
which he pretended was for his own Security: His Followers being asked by the
Country, Who he was? They answered, at first, whisperingly, That it was
Mustapha. Hereupon they were more desirous to know the Truth; and then he was
forced to declare himself, That he was Mustapha, indeed. Having made this
prosperous beginning, he goes on to gratulate his Safety among them, and to
give God thanks. First, he told them, That when he was sent for by his angry
Father, he durst not trust himself to come into his Presence; but, by his
Friends Advice, suborned one, somewhat like him, to represent his Person, that,
by another Man's hazard rather than his own, he might make Trial of his incensed
Father's Inclination toward him. This Man he hired with great Promises of
Reward; but as soon as he came to his Father he was strangled at his Tent-door,
before he had any opportunity to make his Defense; and his dead Body was
exposed to the View of the Soldiery. At which time, said he, there were some
few that smelt out the Project; but most part was deceived by the disguised
Lineaments of his deceased Body, and thought it was he himself that was s^ain.
As Soon as I heard of this, said he, I saw there was no stay for me, but I must
consult my Safety by a speedy Flight; I took but few in my Company, that I
might be the less taken notice of, and thus passing over Pontus and the
Bosphoran Country, I am, said he, come hither; where I promise my self much Aid
from your Fidelity, and, therefore, I beseech you lend me your helping hand;
and seeing I am oppressed by a wretched Stepmother, be you as forward to help
me in my Affliction, as you were all ready to do in my Prosperity. For my part,
I am resolved to revenge my Wrong^, and ^o maintain my Life by force of Arms
For what other Course, pray, can I ^ake? I owe my Life to my Fathers mistake,
who killed another Man instead of me; so that I plainly see, what Fate attends
me, if ever I come into his Power. The miserable old Man is imposed on by the
enchanting Passions of a Stepmother, whom he doats upon, and by the Ministry
of Rustan, to whatsoever Attempt they please. But, thanks be to God, said he, I
have got some Friends left to revenge my Wrongs, and to punish my Enemies. And,
besides, I am not quite daunted, but have a great Stock yet of Courage left;
for I know that the Janissaries, yea, and most of all my Fathers Court are on my
side; and, besides, upon hearing of my Name, I know all those which lamented me
when dead (as they thought) will flock in to me, now they hear I am alive; only
be you pleased to vouchsafe me a favorable Reception, and to protect me till
sufficient Aid come in to me. These were his private, and also his public,
Harangues, wherever he came; and his instructed Followers ecchoed forth the
same Report; yea, some Men of Note, that Bajazet had suborned, sung Notes to
the same Tune. Thus a great Party of Men, unknown to Bajazet, were brought into
the Nooz. For the matter was carried so cunningly, that those who knew
Mustapha, and saw him lie dead before his Father's Tent, yet were afraid to
believe their own Eyes, but suffered themselves to be persuaded, that this was
the true Mustapha indeed; yea, some of Mustapha's Intimates, who knew this was
but a Cheat, yet were so overfond of his Memory, that blinded either with Fear,
Grief or Anger, they wers the first that li^ted themselves under this Pseudo-
Mustapha, as being weary of their Lives without him; which made others
certainly think, that this was the true Mustapha indeed, whom Report had
falsely related to be slain. And, besides, the Impostor himself, by large
Promises and great Largesses, which he said were the Relics of his former
Acquists, (but indeed were the Supplies that Bajazet had provided underhand)
did not cease to cajole and engage his Followers. So that in a very few days he
got an handsome Body of Men together, fit for a little Army, and they increased
every day.

When (lo!) Solomon was made acquainted by Messages and Letters, which the
Neighboring Sanziacks, had, in great trepidation, sent him, what hazard he was
in by reason of the Resort of such Multitudes, to this Pseudo- Mustapha. The
cunning old Man knew one of his Sons must needs be privy to the Plot, and,
therefore, he made haste to disappoint it; chiding his Sanziacks, by Letter,
that they suffered the Matter to come to such an Head, and had not rather
crushed the Cockatrice in the Egg; but seeing they had been negligent hitherto,
he commanded them to make amends for their former Remisness, and to send him
presently the Traitor and his Followers, Prisoners, in Chains, to receive their
condign Punishment; and to facilitate the Matter, he would send Aid to them by
one of his Visiers, Partan Bassa, who had married the Widow of Mahomet
aforesaid; howbeit, he advised them, if they would purge themselves of their
Criminal Neglect, they should quell the Insurrection before his Succor came.
Partan had but a few Troops with him, but they were choice Men, eminent for
Courage and Faithfulness. Solomon took care to cull out Colonels, Captains and
other Commanders of that Gizard for this Service, as suspecting that others
might have been corrupted or enticed to pass over to the Tents of the Rebels;
for, the Truth was, the ordinary sort of Ianizaries, upon account of Mustapha's
Name, did not seem much averse from the Party; and, therefore, did not care
what further Confusions might enhance the Danger on that side

The Sanziacks, as soon as ever they received Solyman's minatory Dispatches,
began to bestir themselves, and to rouse up one another, so that happy was he,
that could do most Damage to the growing Party of the Impostor; some of those
that were going in to him, they intercepted; those that had already joined him
they labored to discourage by terrible Meances and Denunciations of the danger
they were in. In the mean time, the Forces of Partan Bassa were marching on,
and being almost come up to the Place, the Party of the Tumultuous, being not
yet fully settled, seeing so great Preparations made against them, began to be
discouraged, (as is usual with Men in such Circumstances) and to drop off one
by one; and at last the whole Body of 'em most shamefully left their Leader,
and shifted for themselves, the best they could. Their feigned Mustapha, with
his chief Partisans and Setters on, would willingly have done so too, but he
was so watched by the Ianizaries, that he was taken alive, and sent Prisoner to
Partan, who, with a strong Guard, sent him to Constantinople. When he came
thither, Solomon put him on the Rack, and by that means found out the whole
Plot; how his Son Bajazet was at the bottom of it, and had resolved if they had
not been so soon dissipated, to have joined them with a considerable Force, and
so either to have marched directly to Constantinople, or else (if Opportunity
had served him) to have sought out his Brother; but being slow in his Actings,
his Design was nipp'd in the very Bud. When Solomon had thus ferretted out the
Design to the bottom, he caused him and his Abettors to be thrown into the Sea
at Midnight, not thinking it convenient to have the Matter divulged among his
own People, or that foreign Princes should be acquainted with the Domestic
Differences of his own Family.

As for his Son Bajazet, he was mightily exasperated against him for his foul
Offense, and was meditating in his Mind what grievous Punishment he should
inflict upon him. In the mean time, his Wife being a prying Woman, and
therefore allowing him but little space for his Anger to vent and cool it self,
at last falling into Discourse with him of the Affair, she began to excuse her
Son, laying all the Fault on his Youthful Imprudence; and that some of his
Ancestors also had been necessitated to undertake the like Attempts. For (says
she) it is a natural Instinct in all Men to do what they can for themselves and
their Friends, and to save their Lives, if they can; especially young Men, in
the fervor of Youth, are apt to be drawn aside by ill Counselors to
pernicious Attempts; and, therefore, it was but reasonable that his first Fault
should be pardoned, because, if he repented thereupon, his Father had gained a
great Point in preserving his Son; but if he relapsed again into the same
Crime, then the Father was at liberty to inflict deserved Punishment on him for
both Offenses, at one and the same time. But, proceeded she, if you will not
pardon him for his own sake, yet be pleased to do it for mine; and spare our
own common Flesh and Blood: For how, think you, can I bear it, that of two Sons
which God has yet left me, ^our Severity would rend one of them from me? And,
therefore, she entreated him to moderate his Anger, and not to let loose the
reins to Cruelty, though you had never so just an Occasion-Almighty God (said
she) though most Powerful and Just, yet does not always exert his highest
Severities, but tempers them with Indulgence, else Mankind would be quickly
destroyed. And if Clemency be to be showed to any, to whom, pray, more properly
than to a Man's own Children? Bajazet, for the future, will certainly keep
within the bounds of his Duty, and the fear, wherein he now is, will certainly
be turned into the highest Degree of filial Obedience for the Future; if you
please to spare his Life, the Sense of your Indulgence will work this; for
nothing is so obliging to generous Minds as Courtesies received. The Memory of
his Pardon will restrain him from running a second time into the like Offense;
yea, I my self will undertake for him, that for the future he will carry it
toward you, as a most dutiful and obedient Son.

To these Entreaties she added Tears and Blandishments, so that the old Man,
who was Uxorious enough before, could no longer withstand her Importunities,
but changed his Mind; and instead of Punishing, resolved to Pardon his Son; but
on this Condition, that he was to come into his Presence and receive his
Commands. His Mother, being exceeding glad at the good Success of her
Interposal, was not wanting to the Occasion; but presently acquainted Bajazet
by Letters, that when ever he was sent for, he should not scruple in the least
to come to his Father, for she had wrought a Reconciliation betwixt them, so
that not the least Spark of Discontent lay now covered in his Mind against him.
Upon the Receipt of this good News, Bajazet resolves to trust his Father, yet
not without some Relics of Fear; he reflected ever and anon on his Brother
Mustapha, whose Example warned him of the Danger he underwent. However,
conquering his Fear, come he did to the Place of Conference appointed by his
Father, it was called Carestrane, some few Miles distant from Constantinople.

For you must know, that nowadays, it is the Custom of the Turkish Emperors,
never to permit any one of their Sons, when once they are grown up, to set
their Foot within the Gates of Constantinople, (whilst they are alive) for fear
they should ingratiate themselves with the Soldiery, and so set up for
themselves. As he was alighting from his Horse, some of his Father's Servants
were at hand to take away his Sword and Dagger; this struck his guilty
Conscience into a little Fear, though it were accustomed to be done to others,
that they might come unarmed into their Emperor's Presence: But his Mother, who
had placed her self on purpose near his Passage, looked out at a Window, using
these Expressions, Cheer up, cheer up, my Son, by which Antidote he was very
much heartned and relieved.

As soon as ever he came into his Fathers Presence, the old Man bid him sit
down, and then began to blame him very severely for his rashness, in taking up
Arms so causelessly. They may be looked upon, said he, as taken up against my
self; but grant you took them up only against your Brother, yet it takes off
little from your Offense, for if you had had your Wish, the Ottoman Religion
would have been quite shaken, if not overthrown by the Domestic Discords among
our Family, (on the Heirs whereof it does depend) so that if you be a true
Mussulman, such a Crime ought to have been far from your Thoughts: I might
aggravate your Crime (said he) by telling you, That you aspired at the
Government in my Lifetime, which is so contemptuous a Thing, that your Offense
is almost inexpiable: Nevertheless, I am resolved to pardon you, and to show my
self a loving Father rather than a just Judge, that so for the future you may
leave all to God; for Kingdoms, and the Governments of them are not disposed of
by Man's Pleasure, but by the Will of God; if he has decreed that you shall
have the Kingdom after me, no Man living will be able to hinder it: But, if God
had otherwise determined, 'twas a mad Thing in you to go about to resist his
Will, for that were to fight against God; and therefore let me advise you to be
quiet, and not disturb your peaceable Brother, nor interrupt the Quiet of my
old Age; for, I will assure you, if you commit a second Offense, of this
Nature, I will be so far from pardoning you, that you shall have the Severity
of Justice.

Bajazet's Answer was very Submissive, acknowledging his Fault, and promising
Subjection for the future. Whereupon Solomon called for Drink, and caused it to
be given to his Son, (as the Custom is) which was a Sherbet, made of Sugar and
the Juice of certain Fruit. Bajazet had rather have let it alone, as fearing it
might have been his last Draught, but he could not handsomely refuse it, so he
drank a little, and his Father drank a little after him, which freed him of his
Fear. Thus Bajazet was dismissed, and sent away to his Government, his Congress
with his Father having been far more auspicious than his Brother Mustapha's was.

As for the Death of Achmet Bassa, another of your Enquiries, I shall give this
short Relation: Some say, he was put to Death for being too much affected to
Mustapha, and for favoring underhand the Counterfeit Mustapha, and encouraging
Bajazet in his Designs. Others say, That being a mere Robber or Swashbuckler at
first, but advanced for his Audacity, Valor and Skill in Military Affairs, to
that high Dignity, the Punishment of his former flagitious Life was only
deferred to the last Period of it. And some were of Opinion, he was executed
only to make Way for Rustan; for Solomon having promised Achmet never to take
away the Seal from him, as long as he lived; to make a collusive Performance of
his Word, he caused him to be put to Death, before he did it. Some said, That
Solomon gave it out, 'Twas better to dye once than a Thousand Times over; for
the Fear of the Loss of his Grand Viziership, and much more his Survival
thereupon, would have been as a Thousand Deaths to him. Whatever was the Cause,
the Manner of it was this; He came early in the Morning into the Divan, (or
Council Chamger) being ignorant of what was designed against him: By and by
comes a Messenger to him from the Sultan, telling him, That he must die. He was
a Man of a great Spirit, and received the Message as undauntedly as if it had
nothing concerned him; only when the Executioner drew near, to do his Office,
he pushed him away, as thinking it dishonorable for a Man of his Dignity to
dye by the Hands of an ordinary Executioner: But casting his Eyes round about
the Company, he espied a creditable Person, that was his Friend, him he desired
to do that last Office for him, and he should take it as a great Kindness at
his Hands; his Friend, upon his iterated Request, undertook it: Only Achmet
advised, Not to draw the Cord or Bow-string, so as to dispatch him at once, but
when he had strained it a little, then to remit it, that he might breath a
little, and afterward to pull it as hard as he could, until he were dead;
wherein his Desire was answered. Thus Achmet was willing (as it were) to taste
of Death, before he drank his full Draught thereof. Upon his Decease Rustan had
the Grand-Viziership bestowed upon him.

As for my Return out of this Country, which you desire to hear of, all I can
say is, Facilis descensus Averni; he that brought me hither, will, when he sees
good, bring me back: In the Interim, I solace my self in the Company of my old
Friends, my Books, which never fail to afford me Relief both Day and Night.

Constantinople, the Day before the Ides of June 1555. June 12.
EPISTLE III.
SIR,
THE Relations, you heard, was very true; for it is most certain, that all my
Colleagues are returned home, and poor I am left behind, alone. And whereas you
propound several Questions to me, as, What Fate, or what malevolent Star kept
me back from accompanying them in their Return? And why I did not shake Hands
with that barbarous Country, to enjoy the wished for Comforts of my own? And
withal, you demand, What memorable Matters I have seen or heard of since I
wrote last? promising to give credit to whatever drops from my Pen, as if it
were as true as Gospel. And moreover, you desire to know the Course of my
Studies, and how I relieve my self both in my Solitudes and Sufferings? And
whether I go abroad or always stay at home? All these Postulations put
together, will engage me to write rather Commentaries or Diaries, than a single
Letter, especially since you are very earnest to know, How Bajazet's Matters
stand, (concerning which, you say, there are various Reports with you.) You
claim a Promise from me, and unless I perform it, you tell me you will commence
an Action against me, and have already drawn your Breviat against me: Let me
prosecute your Metaphor, and persuade you to stay a while, Leniter qui saeviunt
sa^ piunt magis, says the Old Adage, No haste to kill true Men: But if you are
so much given to Law, take Use and Principal too, rather than I will answer
your Suit, for I am averse from Lawing. And besides, the Distance of Place is
so great between us, that if I should put in an Exception to your Plea, yet
your Writ would hardly abate. However it be, I will rather satisfy your
Desires, than contend with you in the least: When my Colleagues (whose Names I
gave you in my last Letters) perceived, that our Three Years abode in this
Place had produced little good hitherto, either to the making of a firm Peace,
or the continuing the Truce; and that small Hopes of either did appear for the
future, they labored with Might and Main to be dismissed by this Court; and
when, with much ado. Solyman's Consent was obtained therein, (for it is no easy
matter to get a Dismission from hence) then the only Question was, Whether we
should all go, or only those of us that came first, and so had been longest
there? For cunning Solomon, that he might not seem over-desirous of Peace, by
retaining one of us, remitted the Matter wholly to our own Choice. In these
Circumstances, my Companions thought it very advisable, and for our Master's
Service, that one of us should stay behind, and I my self was of the same Mind;
but we resolved to dissemble our Sentiments, and conceal them from the Turks,
so that as often as we had any Discourse with them on that Subject, I always
pretended, I was utterly unwilling to stay behind. It Is true, I told them I
came thither to reside as Ambassador in Ordinary, but it was on Supposition,
That Peace would be made between both Empires; but That not being yet done, I
did not see how I could well stay, but to the Damage and against the Will of my
Master, and therefore it was best that we should all return together. Thus I
reasoned before them, that so I might stay on better Terms, rather by their
Entreaty than by my own voluntary Offer. I knew well enough, that if we all
went away, it would not only open Door for a War, but it would even quite shut
out all Hopes of Peace; which later was not despaired of, if I staid behind:
For whilst Dispatches were sent to and from both Princes, it would spin out a
great deal of Time, in which interval something or other might fall out of
Advantage to our Cause; so that it was better to do any thing, than to
precipitate ourselves into a fierce and cruel War; and yet I was not ignorant,
how prejudicial my stay would be to my self, for thereby my fair and labor
would be doubled, in regard One was to do the Work of Two or Three: Besides,
many Inconveniences might occasionally arise, especially if the Issue of my
Transactions did terminate in a War: And yet, I must tell you, he that
Undertakes the Office of a public Ambassador, must post-p^ne all such private
Difficulties, and make light of them, in comparison of the Public Good of his
Prince and Country. And I had a fair Opportunity to manage this Affair by the
Complaisance of Rustan, who was very desirous of my Stay; for that subtle
Vizier easily foresaw, what a shrewd Step toward a War it would be, if we
should all be gone and leave the Negotiation for a Peace unfinished. The old
Fox was averse from War, upon this account principally, he foresaw, That if
Solomon made an Expedition into Hungary, it was impossible to prevent the
Discords of his Children; for if Selymus were willing to be quiet, yet Bajazet
would attempt Innovation, especially since he was favored by himself, his Wife
and Mother-in-law; and such Commotions, he knew, would be fatal to him: And
therefore, when we were once at his House, he made a long Harangue to my
Colleagues, advising them what to say to their Master at their Return, in order
to a Peace. As for me, he advised me by all means to stay behind, and not to
desert a Business so well begun 'till it came to a desired Issue; and there is
no doubt, said he, but the Emperor, your Master, who always showed himself
inclining to Peace, will approve wellenough of your Stay. Yet, nevertheless, I
continued Deaf to his Request, as far as with Safety I could, and insisted on
my Return; which edged him on the more, to persuade me to stay: What, says he,
will you cut off all Hopes of Peace for ever? Our Emperor longs for nothing
more than to send an Army into Hungary, and he had long since done it, if I had
not made use of some Female Instruments (under standing his Wife and
Mother-in-law) to dissuade him; yea, as it were to pluck him back by the
Sleeve; and therefore, if you be wise, don't you rouse a sleeping Lion to
destroy you. upon this I began to yield a little, and was less peremptory in my
Refusal to stay, only I told them, my greatest Remora was, I was afraid of
their Criminations, that if Matters succeeded not as they would have them, the
whole Blame would be cast upon me (though it was not in my Power to help it) and
therefore they would make me feel the Fruits of their Indignation. But Rustan
bid me, Be of good cheer, whatever the Event were; if unsuccessful, it should
not be imputed to me; if I would but stay, he promised to have me to be under
his immediate Protection, and would treat me (to use his own Word) as if I were
his Natural Brother. I told him, I would consider of it, and so we parted for
that Time.

The next Day we were called into the Divan, (so they call their Council
Chamber) then the same Part was acted over again, only Rustan carried it a
little more covertly, and reservedly, because of the Presence of other Bassas,
there, at last, I yielded to stay behind, only leaving a Memorial with them of
this Import, That I staid behind unknown to my Master, and therefore I would
leave all my Concessions to his Arbitrament, to cancel or confirm; as for my
self, I would be responsible for nothing, nor oblige my self by any Promise,
whatever issue God were pleased to give of my Negotiation. This Memorial did me
a great Kindness after wards, in difficult Circumstances, so that the Bassas
could not for shame treat me so severely in their Passions, as otherwise they
would have done.

Thus, Sir, you have an account of my Stay behind my Fellows, with the Reason
thereof. They left Constantinople about the later end of August 1557. The
Winter following the Grand Seignior went to Adrianople, as his Custom was, both
to strike a greater Terror into Hungary, upon the bruit of his nearer approach
thither, and also for the Conveniences of his Hunting, for there the Winters
are colder than at Constantinople both which he thought conducive to his He
1th. The Country thereabouts is full of Marshes and Stagnant Waters, by reason
of the vicinity of many Rivers; so that there are abundance of Water-foul, as
wild Ducks, Geese, Herons, Storks, Cranes, Bitturns, etc. To catch them, he
makes use of Hawks, or a lesser sort of Eagles, which are so used to the Sport,
that though the Foul fly up to the Clouds, they I fetch him down from thence; but
if they fly lower, then they truss them, and with a mighty Force strike them
with their Bills to the Ground. I am told, That some of his Falcons are so
disciplined and expert, that they will venture on a Crane, even in that part of
the Body where the Wing joins it; and by this means the Cranes Bill can do them
no hurt, and so they tumble to the Ground with their Prey: And yet sometimes
the Hawk pays dear for his Boldness for if he do but miss his Gripe never so
little, presently the Crane runs him through with his Bill and down he tumbles
dead to the Ground.

For this Reason, the Grand Seignior ordinarily every Year, a little before
Winter, goes to Adrianople, and returns not again to Constantinople till the
Frogs begin to be troublesome to him by their croaking. Thither Rustan, a while
after, sent for me by Letter; he appointed some Horse to guard me on the Way,
and Sixteen Ianizaries, whether as a Guard to me, or upon me, I leave to you to
judge: We made long Journys, for he advised us to make haste: On the Third Day
my Ianizaries, being a Foot, began to grumble, the Ways were dirty, as is usual
at that Time of the Year; they complained, That they were forced to march more
Miles, often, in a Day, than they used to do; and that, if their Emperor were
there, they could hardly endure it.

Their Complaints troubled me not a little, because I was loath to disoblige
this sort of People, and therefore I consulted with my Servants, how I might
allay their Discontents, and make them willinger to travel. One of mine told
me, he had observed that they were much taken with a certain kind of Caudle,
Gruel or Pottage, which my Cook used to make of Wine, Eggs, Sugar and Spices;
Perhaps (says he) if they have some of that for their Breakfast, they will be
pliable. This seemed but a mean Expedient, yet we resolved to try it, and the
Success answered our Expectation; for after this sweet Soop, being also further
heated with a Glass or two of Wine, away they trudged, as merrily as could be,
and told me, they would accompany me, on the same Terms, to Buda, if I pleased.

When I came to Adrianople, I was forced to hear the Railings, rather than the
Complainings, of Rustan, concerning the Plundering-Excursions of the
Hungarians. And, by way of Answer, I was as ready to complain to him of the
frequent Depredations and Mischiefs, which the Turks did in Christian
Countries. No marvel, said I, if our retort like for like; for I had just then
received an Express from Caesar, my Master, informing me, what Breaches and
Contraventions the Turks had made of that Truce, which at the Departure of my
Colleagues was agreed upon: How they vexed the poor Peasants with continual
Inrodes, robbing them of their Goods, and made themselves, their Wives and
Children, Slaves.

I must not forget-to-acquaint you, how that the same Day, Caesar, my Master's,
Messenger came to me with an Express. There happened an Earthquake at
Adrianople, which gave him occasion to tell me, That he perceived the same (so
he judge it) at Nissa, S. Sophia and other Places through which he traveled,
so that the Air, included in the Bowels of the Earth, did seem to have kept
Pace with him, by some subterraneous Passages or Caverns, and to have traveled
as far in a Day under Ground, as he himself had done on the Surface of the
Earth; which conjecture afterward seemed to be confirmed, upon the Relation we
received of an Earthquake that happened in Constantinople Four Days after,
which seemed to be the same imprisoned Air, that had made its way, under
Ground, even to that City also.

I leave the Matter to your Judgment, but this is certain, That Earthquakes are
very frequent at Constantinople; for once, when I was there, about Midnight,
my Lodging did so shake, that it was almost ready to fall: This Accident
awakened me, though fast asl^ep, and, having a Watch Light burning by me all
Night, when I saw here a Cup, there a Book, a Table, Board and Stone all
tumbled in an Heap together: I was at first astonished at the Nov^lty of the
Spectacle, till I had recollected my self, and judging it to be the effects of
an Earthquake, I then retired to that part of the House which I thought most
secure from falling. The same Commotion of the Earth continued some Days, but
not with like Violence. Yea, over all that great City, and especially in my
Lodgings, and in the Temple of S. Sophia, you might see the Walls, though very
thick, to chink and gape by reason of the Clefts made by such Earthquakes.

Well, I staid about Three Months at Adrianople, where after I had made a Truce
for Seven Months, in March I was attended back again to Constantinople: When I
came thither I was quite weary to be mewed up in my old Lodging, it was so
close, and therefore I dealt with my Chiaux, (a sort of Officers among the
Turks, which serve for diverse Employments, of which Attendance on Ambassadors
is one) that I might have Liberty (as other Ambassadors had before me) to hire
an House at my own Charge, where I may have the Benefits of Gardens, Orchards,
and a free Air, to breath in. The Chiaux was not averse from my Proposal, for
he saw that the Grand Siegnior's Advantage was concerned therein, who was wont
to hire Houses for Ambassadors, at the yearly Rent of 400 Ducats; and now all
that Expense would be saved: Hereupon I went to an House or Island rather,
hired with my own Money, where there was a broad Field adjoining, where I
resolved to make a Garden, and to relieve my wearisom Embassy, in managing and
planting it: But, see the Spite of it, when the Chiaux found by Experience
that he could not have as strict an Inspection over me, in an open House that
had many Ways to it, with a large space of ground near it, as he had in a
Caravasa (which Word you know the meaning of by my former Letters) because this
later was fenced with Crossbarr'd Windows, and besides, had but one Passage
into it, he began to change his Mind, and thereupon made his Address to the
Bassas, who by this time were returned from Adrianople, that I might retire to
my former Lodging: And I was to look upon This as a great Courtesy too, for
some of the Bashas, in a Debate betwixt them, concerning my disposal, were of
Opinion, that now I was alone, a less House would serve my turn, and so some
Charge might be saved; but the moderatest Party carried it, That I should
return to my old Quarters.

If you desire a Description of the House I lodged in, take it thus. It is
situated on a Rising Ground, in the most celebrated part of Constantinople; in
the Backside thereof there is a pleasant, but somewhat distant, Prospect to
the Sea, which yet is not so remote from it, but that you may easily discern
the Dolphins skipping and playing therein: And also at a vast distance a Man
may see Mount Olympus in Asia, which wears a snowy-white Cap all the Year! It
lyes-open to the Wind from every Quarter, which by ventilating the Air, makes
it more wholesome and healthy. But the Turks are so envious to their Christian
Tenants, that they would cut them off from as many Conveniences as they can,
and therefore they do not only set Iron Grates before their Windows, but do
also add Iron Boards and Planks to hinder the Prospect, and the free Passage of
the Air; and by this means they stop the Mouths of the Neighboring Turks, who
are apt to complain, that they can do nothing in their Houses but the
Christians must overlook them. The House is built in a Quadrangular Form, with
a large Square in the midst, wherein there is a Well. The upper Part of the
House, which is all thereof that is inhabited, is divided into Galleries, which
go round it, and into Lodging Chambers. The Galleries look down into the
Quadrangle within, and without are the Lodgings, which have all a Passage into
them; there are a great many of them, but they are small and uniform, as the
Cells or Chambers of Monks are with us. The Front stands over against the
Highway, leading to the Seraglio; and the Grand Seignior, every Friday (which
is their Sabbath, as the Lord's Day is with us) passes by it to his Devotions,
so that Ambassadors may easily see him out of their Windows. And the Family,
together with the Chiaux and the Ianizaries do obeisance to him in the Porch,
or do re-salute him rather; for the Fashion of the Turks is, that the Greater
does first of all salute the Less, and therefore the Grand Seignior, as he
passes, first salutes the People with a Nod of his Head; and then they very
officiously pay their Courts to him, with Acclamations and Shouts.

The lower Part of the House is designed for the Stabling of Horses; and to
preserve it from Fire within, it is all built with Vaults or arched Roofs, and
without it is covered with Lead. It Is true, such kind of Building has some
Advantages, and it has as many Inconveniences to balance them: For all
things are made therein for necessary use, but nothing for Delight and
Pleasure; there is nothing of Beauty or Novelty that can entertain your Eye;
there is no Garden belonging to it, to divert a Man by walking; there is
neither Tree, Shrub nor green Herb, to delight your Eye, you have only many
Wild Beasts as your troublesome Inmates and Companions; Snakes you have in
abundance, store of Weazils, Lizards and Scorpions; so that, sometime, when you
would fetch your Hat in the Morning, from the Place you left it the Night
before, you find it surrounded with a Snake, as with a terrible Hat Band: And
yet these Animal^ afforded me some kind of Divertisement in my Solitude, (for
you must give me leave to tell you all my entertainments.) I once saw a Weazil
fiercely combating with a Snake and though the whole Family looked upon her,
yet she was not terrified therewith; but tho her Adversary struggled, and made
what Defense he could, yet she victoriously haled him in to her Hole. Another
Time I saw a Weaz^ carrying her Young Weasling from one Place of the House to
another, which, as she was^ doing, she leapt down upon the middle of the Table,
where I and some of my Guests were sitting after Dinner, having a young one
(...) her Mouth, which she very fairly left among us on the Table, and skipt no
farther than the Door, (as if she had waited what Event would be^ide her
youngling) when we had satisfied our selves with the Sight of that, yet
shapeless, Animal, we laid it down upon the Ground, and then the Dam ran
hastily, and snatching it up, carried it to her desired Place. Another time I
saw either a Snake or a Dragon, or a Serpent, trod to Pieces by the Horses
Feet, in the Stable; her Belly was very big, and, after I had caused it to be
opened, I found Three huge Mice therein. 'Twas a Wonder to me, how such a slow
and creeping Animal could catch so swift and so running an one; and after he
had caught him how he could swallow him down, by reason of the narrowness of
his Throat and Jaws. But my Wonderment was soon abated when I beheld another
Snake seize upon a mighty Toad, and after he had him in his Mouth, he began at
the hinder Part, and had devoured a great deal thereof, and yet the Toad was
still alive, and did what he could with his Fore-Feet to deliver himself from
his Enemy: 'Twas in this very Posture when I saw it first, which made me to
admire and to be almost of the Opinion, that I saw a Monster, an Animal with
Two Feet and a Tail, as long as a Serpent, but when I drew nearer, and
perceived what it was, as I hit the Snake with my Staff, to make him let go his
Prey, which at last he endeavored to do, that he might creep the nimbler away;
but whether he would or no, the Toad stuck in his Throat; yet, at last, when
with much-a-do, he had shaken him out, he could not shut his Mouth, but
continued gaping, in an ugly Posture, till we had killed him. Such a Staff, if
we may believe Pl^^y, has a kind of Magical Virtue to help Child-bearing-Women
in the Time of their Labor.

But, for my Part, I was not content with the native Animals of that Country,
but filled my House with Outlandish Ones too; and my Family busied themselves,
by my order, to both our mutual Contents, in feeding them, that we might the
better bear the absence from our own Country: For seeing we were debarred of
Human Society, what better Conversation could we have to drive Grief out of our
Minds, than among Wild Beasts? otherwise Stones, Walls and Solitudes had been
but lamentable Divertisements for us.

Amongst these, Apes led the Van, which making us good Sport, occasioned great
Laughter amongst us, and therefore you should seldom see them without a whole
Ring of my People about them, delighting to observe their Antic Tricks and
Gestures. I also bred up some Wolves, some Bears, some broad-horned Stags
(miscalled vulgarly, Bucks) and common Deer, also Hinds, Lynx's, Ichneumons or
Indian Rats, Weasils of that sort which you call Ferrets and Fairys: And if you
would know all, I kept also an Hog, whose noisome Smell was wholesome for my
Horses, as my Grooms persuaded me: So that in my Nomenclature of other
Creatures, it is not fit I should omit my Hog, which made my House to be
mightily frequented by the Asiaticks: They came thick and threefold to see
that Creature, which is counted Unclean by them, and by the Books of their
Religion they are forbid to eat it, so that it being a prohibited Animal among
them, they never saw one before. Yea, all Turks are as much afraid to touch an
Hog, as Christians are to come near to those who are infected with the Plague.
This Humor of theirs being known, we put a pretty Trick upon them; when any
Body had a mind to send me a secret Message, that he would not have my Chiaux
know of, he would include it in a little Bag, together with a Roasting-Pig, and
sending it by a youth: When my Chiaux met him, he would ask, What he had there?
Then the Boy, being instructed before, would whisper him in the Ear, and say,
That a Friend of mine had sent me a Roasting-Pig, for a Present: The Chiaux
thereupon would punch the Bag with his Stick, to see whether the Boy spoke
Truth or no; and when he heard the Pig grunt, he would run back as far as ever
he could, saying, Get thee in with thy nasty Present. Then spitting on the
Ground, and turning to his Fellows, he would say; It Is strange to see how these
Christians do dote on this filthy impure Beast, they cannot forbear eating of
it though their Lives lay at stake. Thus he was handsomely chouzed, and the Boy
brought me what secret Message was sent me. I keep also a great many sorts of
Birds, as Eagles, Jack-daws, Muscovy Ducks, Balearick Cranes, and Partridges;
yea, my House is so full of them, that if a Painter were to draw it, he may
take from thence the Copy for Noah's Ark. Besides the Delight that I and my
Family take in these Creatures, to counterpoize our long Absence from our own
Country, I got also this Advantage by them, That now I know, by Experience,
what I could hardly believe when I read it in Books. You know a great many
Books are full of printed Stories, what ardent Love some wild Beasts have to
Mankind: I could never give Credit to such Relations, but looked upon them as
Romances, 'till I saw with my Eyes, a Lynx, which I got out of Assyria, so
passionately affected toward one of my Servants, though known to him but a
little while before, that for my part I could not deny but he was in Love with
him: For whenever he was present, she would mightily fawn upon him, and in a
manner embrace him, and almost kiss him; whenever he was about to go away from
him, he would gently lay his Claws on his Clothes, as laboring to retain him;
and when he was gone he would Eye him; and whenever he was in Sight, and
would hardly ever remove his Eye from that Quarter; during the Time of his
Absence he was very sad, but upon his Return he would skip and be jocund; he
could not endure he should be any Time absent, for one Time, when he went with
me beyond Sea, to the Turkish Camp, the Lynx pined away by degrees, would not
eat a bit, but at length dyed.

I was troubled for his Loss, for I had designed him, with another choice
Ichneumon (which I had) as a Present for my Master Caesar, and the rather,
because of the exceeding Beauty of his Skin, which made him look quite another
thing from other Lynxes: The best of the kind are bred in Assyria, from whence
this came, and their Skins are sold here for Fifteen or Sixteen Crowns of Gold
apiece. I question not, but these were the Babilonians Pells or Skins, so much
famed and valued amongst the Ancients, of which mention is made in Law Books;
in the Title of Publicans.

If you please to hear me, I Will tell you another Story of a Bird: I have among
my other Birds, a Baleavic Crane, which differs from the ordinary sort of
Cranes by a white Plume of Feathers, that grows hanging down from both his
Ears; and besides, all the forepart of her Neck-Feathers were black, and the
Turks adorn their Turbants with it; and there is some difference in their
Bigness. This Baleavic Bird was mightily affected with a Spanish Soldier, whom
I had redeemed out of his Cha^ns; when he walked abroad the Bird would walk
abroad with him, though for many Hours together; when he stood still, so did
the Crane; when he sat down she would stand by him, and suffer him to handle
her, and stroke down her Feathers, whereas she would not suffer any Body else
so much as to touch her; whenever he was gone from Home, she would come to his
Chamber Door and knock against it with her Beak; if any Body open^d It, she
would look all-a-bout, to see whether he were in the Room; and not finding him,
she would traverse it about, making such a shrill Din and Noise, that nothing
living could endure it; so that we were forced to shut her up, that her Noise
might not offend us. But when he returned, as soon as ever she fixed her Eyes
on him, she would make to him, clapping her Wings with such an Antic Posture
of her Body as Dancers in a Jig use to do; or as if she had been to prepare
herself for a Combat with a Pygmy. In fine, she at last used to lie under his
Bed at Night, where she laid him an Egg. Thus I have given the Story of the
Loves of Brute Animals toward Man, now prepare your Ears for another Story of
a contrary import, viz. the Cruelty and Ingratitude of another Bruit toward
Man. I had an Heart, that lived very quiet and tame with me for many Months, but
when her rutting or coupling Time came, she grew on a sudden so wild, that
forgetting all our respects, she flew upon every Body that she met, as if she
would have killed them with her Horns, so that we were compelled, for our own
Security, to hamper her, and so shut her up in a walled Place; but one Night,
she broke from her Prison, and run amongst all the Horses, which, as I told
you, in Turkey, use to stand all Night in the Yard, and where she made such a
Tumult amongst them, that she forced the Grooms to drive her to her Hold; she
wounded many of them, which set them into a Rage, so that at last they drove
her into a large Stable, and there I gave them leave, with what Weapons came
next to hand, to destroy her: She defended her self stoutly at first, but they
being Forty to one, at last felled her, and made her pay for her Breach of
Hospitality. When she was dead I cut her in Pieces, and made a Feast for the
Ambassadors that then resided at Constantinople; 'twas a Heart or Stag, of a
huge Bulk, such as use to come in the beginning of Antumn, out of Hungary into
Austria, at Rutting Times; I bought him of some Beggars, that made a Gain of
that Trade; they used to carry him about, and where they asked Alms for God's
sake, at the Name of God they used to bow their Heads, and the Stag by Custom
had learned to do so too, so that the Vulgar did admire the Beast, as if he had
some Sense of a Deity, and therefore he got a deal of Gain to his Keepers: This
Stag, by reason of his Talness, I also designed as a Present for Caesar.

Having made mention of Turkish Beggars, give me leave to acquaint you with the
nature of those kind of People in this Country. There are fewer Beggars here
than amongst us, and they are commonly Pilgrims that travel up and down,
pretending some appearance of Piety or religious Profession; some of them,
besides their Poverty, pretend Distraction and Simplicity; and this sort is
very much esteemed among them, for the Turks count all Madmen and Fools to be
certainly designed for Heaven; and therefore they look upon them as Demigods
here on Earth. Some of those Wanderers are Arabians, who carry Banners before
them, wherewith, as they say, their Ancestors fought against the Christians,
for the Propagation of the Mussulman Religion: They that are of this Rank are
not ordinary Beggars, neither do they ask Alms of all Passengers, but in the
Evening they offer you a Tallow Candle, a Lemon or a Pomegranate, and force it
upon you, but you must give them double or treble the Worth; and by this means
they seem rather to sell than to receive gratis. For the rest, they which beg
amongst Christians are set to do servile Offices amongst the Turks; if a Slave
become lame, yet his Master is bound to maintain him, and the veriest Cripple
amongst them yet brings in his Master some Profit. I remember, once I redeemed
a Spanish Officer, bought by a Turk, who was maimed in all his Limbs, by reason
of his Wounds, and yet his Master found means how to make him get his Living;
he sent him over into Asia, to look to the Flocks of Geese which he kept there;
and by his care in feeding them, he brought in sufficient Gain to his Master.

Now we talk of Slaves, give me leave to digress a little, and to propound a
Quaere, Whether he did well or ill with Christendom, who first abridged the use
of Slaves among them? I know there are many Inconveniences that attend the
Condition of Slaves, but they are over-balanced by the Advantages accruing
thereby; especially if a just and merciful Slavery were allowed by some public
Law, as was of old among the Romans; for then, perhaps, we should not need so
many Gallows's and Gibbets as we have among us, to restrain those, who set an
high Price on their Life and Liberty; to maintain which, their Poverty prompts
them to the most audacious Attempts. Liberty, without an Estate to maintain it,
is none of the best Counselors. All Men are not able to bear Poverty and
Freedom; Mankind, in general, is not so formed by Nature, as to be able rightly
to govern himself; No, he stands in need of a better and wiser Conduct than his
own; otherwise, there will be no end of this Transgressing; for so some Beasts
will always be terrible to Men, unless their Fierceness be restrained by
Manacles and Bonds. But in this case of Slavery, the weaker Mind of the Slave
is governed and esteer'd by the Authority of his Patron or Master; and, on the
other side, the Master is maintained by the labor of his Slave. The truth is,
both publicly and privately, the Turks make a very great Advantage of their
Slaves; if any Houshold-work be to be done, the Slave is ready to perform it;
and, therefore, they have a Proverb among them, He can never be Poor, that has
but one Slave. But then for Works without Door, if there be any Rubbish to be
carried out, or Preparation made for any great Building, the assiduity of
Slaves quickly performs what is enjoined them. This I take to be one Reason,
why our present Buildings do not arrive to the magnificence of the Ancients; we
want Hands (of Slaves) to carry on the Work. I might instance also, that
servile Hands and Heads have been great helps to the Learned, to attain their
so much celebrated Learning and Knowledge. What I have hitherto discoursed
about Slaves, you will look upon as a Divertisement; and so, pray, take it.

This I can assure you of, That the Turks, in their way, do make an huge
Advantage of Slaves; for if an ordinary Turk bring home one or two Slaves, whom
he has taken Prisoners, in War, he accounts he has made a good Campaign of
it, and his Prize is worth his Labor. An ordinary Slave is sold among them for
40 or 50 Crowns; but if he be young, beautiful, and have skill in some Trade
besides, then they rate him at twice as much: By this you may know, how
advantageous the Turkish Depredations are to them, when many times, from one
Expedition, they bring home five or six thousand Prisoners.

The Romans of old were not ignorant of this gainful Trade; which made them set
an high Rate on 20 or 30 thousand Persons, which they sometimes took at the
sacking of Cities, as their Writings show. But a Turk, upon the like Sack,
would make ten times five hundred Crowns of his Prize, though by the Rules of
their Religion they are not to make Slaves of any of their own Sect; nor to
disfranchize them, or set any Price on their Heads.

But to return from this large Digression. I formerly acquainted you with my
Sport in Huming; it follows, in course, that I must say something of my
Fowling. The Turks are favorable to all Beasts, as also to Birds; and
especially to Kites, because, they say, they eat up the Carrion, and keep the
Streets clean and wholesome; and, therefore, abundance of these Birds fly up and
down the Town, as fearless of Gin or Snare, so that they are almost tame; and
when you whistle to them, they come about you, throw them up Meat in the Air,
they will catch it with their Claws. Once I caused a Mutton to be killed, and
called the Kites to prey upon the Entrals; I cut them in pieces, and threw them
up into the Air, by and by come ten or twelve or twenty Kites, and a while
after so many of them, that they almost shaded the House; and they are so bold,
withal, that if you hold out a piece of Flesh, they will be ready to snatch it
out of your Hands. In the mean time, I stand with my Cross-Bow behind the
Pillar, and sometimes when I shot, I made the Tail or Feathers of one or other
of them to fly off, and sometimes I gave one or two a mortal Wound, and made
them tumble down; but this I did privately, when the Doors were shut, that so I
might not provoke the Turks to Indignation.

I must tell you, I have Partridges too (to acquaint you with my whole Stock of
pleasurable Recreations.) You would wonder, as I my self did at first, how tame
they are. They were brought from Chios with red Feet and Beaks; they were so
troublesome to me, by standing at my Feet and picking out the Dust out of my
Velvet Pantofel, with their Beaks, that they might dust themselves therewith,
that to be rid of the Molestation, I was forced to shut them up in a Chamber,
where, in a short time, they grew over-fat and dyed, as my Servants told me;
yet Pliny says, in a certain Place, That Hares and Partridges never grow fat.
You have yet but a small ground for your Wonderment; but, pray, prepare your
Ears for what follows.

The Isle of Chios is full of these Birds, and they live with the Inhabitants
in their Houses; every Countryman, almost, keeps more or less of them under
his Roof, as their Estates are, or their Minds serve them. A public Keeper
whistles them out in a Morning, and they run to him into the Highway, and
follow him into the Field, (as Flocks of Sheep do their Shepherds with us;)
there they stay all Day to feed and bask themselves, and in the Evening he
whistles for them again, and then they covy together again, and return to their
old Lodgings. The Custom arose from hence, as they say: As Soon as ever the
Partridges are hatched, the Countrymen take them up and put them in their
Bosoms, betwe^^ their Skin and their Shirts; thus they carry them about a day
or two, ever and annon moistning their Mouths with their own Spittle. This
Courtesy does so oblige the young Birds, (as Partridges, as well as other
Birds, are mindful of human Civilities, if I may so speak) that they cannot
forget their Fosterers; and yet care is to be taken, that they stay not out in
the Field all Night, if they do so two or three times, they quickly forget
human Hospitality, and return to their own natural free Life in the open Field.
I have taken a great deal of Pains to procure such a Fosterer of Partridges to
send him to Caesar, to teach Emperors that Aviary discipline. It Is true, I
never saw this done with my own Eyes, yet so many creditable Witnesses have
affirmed the Truth thereof, that I believe it as well as if I had seen it. And
I give equal Credit to the Story, I am now about to tell you.

It is so known a Truth in this Country, that he were an absurd Man that would
go about to deny it. They that came to Constantinople from Egypt, (as many do
continually) do affirm it for certain, That Chicken are not hatched, as with
us, by an Hen sitting abrood upon them, but there are some appointed Officers,
that in Spring time, gather all the Eggs of the Neighborhood and put them in a
certain kind of Oven, which they make of Dung and Trash, heaped up together,
and by the heat of the Sun and the hot putrid Vapors, the Chicken, in due time,
(...) imated and break their Shells; and then the Owners come to claim the
C^^ckens, which the Overseers of the Work deliver out to them, not by Tale, for
that would be too tedious, but by Admeasurement. I mention this the rather,
because I read of such a Passage in Vopiscus; where the Emperor Adrian, being
angry with the Egyptians, inveighs against them with this Sarcasm; I wish them,
says he, no greater Curse, than they may always feed on the^r own Chicken,
which how they are hatched I am as^^aam'd to tell. So that without Question,
this was an old Custom among the Egyptians, and, therefore, Adrian upbraided
them with their Food, which he looked upon as obscene, being begotten by Dung
and Dirt. You may think, perhaps, that I am mistaken, but I leave the Matter
with you, and shall now hasten to acquaint you, with the rest of my
Divertisements.

Be pleased then to know, That I have also a Breed of brave Horses; some from
Syria, others from Cilicia, Arabia, Cappadocia, together with diverse Camels,
Sumpture horses, and all Utensils fit for a Journey. For I would have the Turks
believe, that I have now executed all my Masters Commands, and wait only for my
dismission to return home, which I press with great Importunity, knowing that
by reason of the present Discord among them, and the War between the two
Brothers, I may obtain the better Conditions of Peace from them.

As I take Pleasure in my Horses an other accounts, so especially when in an
Evening I behold them brought one by one, out of their Stables, and placed in
the Yard, that so they might enjoy the Night-Air in Summertime, and rest more
sweetly; they match out so stately, and shaking their Mains on their high
Necks, as if they were proud to be seen; they have Fetters on their Fore-feet,
and one of their hinder Feet is tied with a Cord to a Stake

There is no Creature so gentle as a Turkish Horse; nor more respectful to his
Master, or the Groom that dresses him. The reason is, because they treat their
Horses with great Lenety. I my self saw, when I was in Pontus, passing through
a part of Bithinia, called Axilos, toward Cappadocia, how indulgent the
Countrymen were to young Colts, and how kindly they used them soon after they
were folded, they would stroke them, bring them into their Parlors, and almost
to their Tables, and use them even like Children; they hung something about
their Necks, like a Jewel, even a Garter which was full of Amulets against
Poison, which they are most afraid of; and the Grooms, that are to dress them,
are as indulgent as their Masters; they frequently sleek them down with their
Hands, and never use any Cudgel to bang their Sides, but in cases of great
necessity. This makes their Horses great Lovers of Mankind; and they are so far
from kicking, win^ing, or growing untractable by this gentle usage, that you
shall hardly find such a masterless Horse among them.

But alas, our Christian-Grooms treat Horses at another-guess rate; they never
think them rightly curried, till they thunder at them with their Voice, and let
their Club or Horse-whip, as it were, dwell on their Sides. This makes some
Horses even to tremble when their Keepers come into the Stable, so that they
hate them and fear them too. But the Turks love to have their Horses very
gentle, that at a word of Command they may fall down on their Knees, and in
this posture receive their Riders.

They will take up a Staff or Club upon the Road, which their Rider has let
fall, with their Teeth, and hold it up to him again; and when they are perfect
in this Lesson, then for their Credit they have Rings of Silver hung on their
Nostrils, as a Badge of Honor and good Discipline. I saw some Horses, when
their Master was fallen from the Saddle, that would stand Stock-still, without
wagging a Foot, till he got up again. Another time I saw a Groom standing at a
distance, in the midst of a whole Ring of Horses about him, and at a word of
Command they would either go round or stand still. Once upon a time I saw some
Horses, when their Master was at Dinner with me in an upper-Room, did prick up
their Ears to hear his Voice; and when they did so, they neighed for Joy.

And yet this is usual and common to all Turkish Horse, that they run forward
with a stiff and stretch'd-out Neck, so that they cannot easily be stopped or
hindered in their Course, but by fetching a large compass about; which, in my
Judgment, is the fault of the Bri^les they wear, which all over Turkey are of
one Make, and not contrived harsher or tenderer, according to the Neashiness of
the Horses Mouth. I must also acquaint you, That the Turks do not Shoe their
Horses as we Christians do; our Shoes are very open in the middle, but theirs
are broad-web'd Shoes, that so their Feet may be less endangered in
Traveling. Their Horses do also live longer than Ours.

I have seen an Horse of theirs as lusty at 20 Years old, as ours are at eight;
yea, they say, in the Stables of their Emperor, there are Horses of 50 Years
old; and which, for some great Merit, are exempt from Labor, and feed daily at
the Grand Seignior's Charge. The Turks, in Summer-nights, when the Weather is
hot, do not keep their Horses in their Stables, as we do; but do cover their
Backs with Horse-cloths, and so bring them forth into the open Air (as I told
you before;) and for Litter, they have only dried Horse-dung, which they save
all the Year long, and spread under them for their Bedding: As for Straw, they
make no use of it at all, either for Littering, or Feeding them. Their usual
Food is a little Hay, and a small quantity of Barley; with this Meat they grow
not fat, for their Masters love lean Horses, as being fitter for Race, and
Burden, than foul-bodied ones. They cover them with Horse cloths, both in the
Winter and Summer, only they are thinner in the One than in the Other. This
contributes much to the smoothness of their Hair, and is also a good relief to
their chilly Horses, which cannot endure the Cold.

In those Steeds, as I lately told you, I take a great deal of Delight; when,
about Sunset, they are brought out of their Stables, and placed in a row in
the Yard; where I call each Horse by his usual Name, as Arahs, Caramanian, etc.
whereupon they fall a Neighing and give a Glance of their Eyes and stare at me.
Sometimes I go down among them, and give to each of them a piece of Melon-rind
out of my Hand, which makes them know me so well. Thus you see, what Shifts I
am put to, to drive away my Melancholy.

I have also six She-camels, which I keep by me, ready to carry my Baggage, as
I pretend to the Turks; but my true Design is, to bring them to my Master the
Emperor; if peradventure he, with other Chri^^ian Princes, may have a Fancy to
them, to breed them because of their great use.

There are two things of which the Turks make mighty Advantage of, which are
Rice among the Fruits of the Earth, and Camels among the Beasts of the Field,
both of them very convenient in their several Kinds, for long Expeditions; as
for Rice, it is not easily spoiled; it affords very wholesome Nourishment, and a
little of it will serve a great many People. And for Camels, they'^ carry huge
Burdens; they will endure Hunger and Thirst to admiration; and also they
require little Attendance; one Keeper will keep six or eight of them, and no
Creature in the World is more obsequious to his Owner than the Camel; and for
currying of them, they do it not with a Curry-Comb as we do, but with Brushes,
as we do our wearing Apparel; they rather kneel than lie down, on the naked
Ground; and in this Posture they offer themselves to be loaded; if you lay too
much on their Backs they'^ grumble, a little, and refuse to rise, for their
Backs will be easily broken under overgreat Burdens, especially in Ways that
are slippery and dirty. I was mightily taken to see them stand all round in a
Ring, and with their joined Heads, take Water or other Food, out of the same
Basin or other Vessel, with such agreement among them; and when Fodder is
scarce, they live upon tops of Brambles or Thorns; and when their Chops are
bloodied in gathering them, then they eat them down most sweetly.

The S^thians send a great many Camels to Constantinople, but the most part
come from China and Alsyria: From those Countries, there are whole Droves of
them; and they are so cheap, that a Mare of a good Breed is worth an 100
Camels; wherein, perhaps, they respect more the scarcity of Ma^es than the
cheapness of Camels; for good Mares are so scarce in that Country, that he that
gets but one, of that sort, thinks himself a very Croesus for Wealth. They try
whether they are good or no, if they can run down a steep Hill, and not trip
nor stumble. When the Grand Seignior goes upon a military Expedition into the
Field, he carries above 40000 of these Camels with him, and as many Mules for
Burden; and these he lades with all sorts of Victuals, especially with Rice.
They also carry Tents, Arms, and other Utensils of War, upon them, especially
when he marches into Persia.

For, you must know, that the Countries over which the Sophi, or, as the Turks
call him, Chifibas of Persia reigns, are not so fruitful of Provisions, as our
European Countries are. The Reason is, because the Custom of the Inhabitors is,
upon the Approach of an Enemy, to destroy all before them, that so Fire and
Famine might send him further off; so that if the Invader, bring not great
Store of Provision with him, he will be in danger of Starving; and if he once
do approach his Enemy, yet he does not presently open his Store of Provision,
but reserve it for his Retreat; which, he knows, must be through those Places
already wasted by such a Multitude of Men and Beasts, that, like Locusts, have
before pilled all the Country; then, indeed, the Grand Seigniors Stores are
opened, and some small Allowance given out daily to the Ianizaries and other
Dependents of that Prince, enough to keep them alive, and that is all. As for
others, it goes hard with them, unless they have made some Provision for
themselves beforehand; and some of their Soldiers, especially Horse, are so
fore-sighted that in Prospect of such Difficulties, they carry a led Horse
along with them, with Viands and other things to support them, if need be. Upon
this Horse they usually carry some Blankets, that they may spread abroad, as
Tents, to defend them from Sun and Rain; also some other Clothes to wear, and
withal Two or Three Wicker Baskets, full of the best Flower they can get, with
a small Pot for Butter, some Spice and Salt; with these, in case of Necessity,
they kill their Hunger. They take out a few Spoonfuls of their Meal or Flower,
and pour Water upon it; then they add a little Butter, and so seasoning it with
Spice and Salt, they set it on the Fire, and when it boyls, it swells so that
it will fill a large Platter: They eat hereof Twice or Thrice a Day, as their
Store holds out, but without eating Bread with it, unless they have brought
some Biskets along with them: With this thin Diet, for want of a better, they
can live a Month or Two, till they come to richer Quarters. There are some of
them who carry dried Beef, ground to Powder, in a kind of Snap-sack, that is a
more nutritive and a choice Viand amongst them: And sometimes they eat Horse
Flesh, for in a vast Army a great many Horses must needs dye, and if any of
them be more fleshy than others, that makes a great Feast for hungry Stomachs.
And they who have thus lost their Horses, (for you must know that too) when the
Grand Seignior or Vizier removes his Camp, stand in a row before him the Way he
is to march, with their Saddles on their Heads, signifying hereby the loss of
their Horses, and by that mute Sign begging Relief toward buying a new one,
and their Prince gratifies them, at his Pleasure.

Thus the Turks surmount huge Difficulties in War, with a great deal of
Patience, Sobriety and Parsimony, reserving themselves for more favorable
Circumstances. But our Christian Soldiers carry it otherwise, they scorn homely
Fare in their Camps, they must have dainty bits, forsooth, such as Thrushes,
Black-birds, and banqueting Stuff, if they have not These they are ready to
mutiny, as if they were famished: And if they have them, they are undone, their
own Intemperance kills them if their Enemy spare their Lives. When I compare
the Difference between their Soldiers and ours, I stand amazed to think What
will be the Event, for certainly their Soldiers must needs conquer, and ours
must needs be vanquished, Both cannot stand prosperously together: For on their
side there is a mighty, strong and wealthy Empire, great Armies, experience in
War, a veterane Soldiery, a long series of victories, Patience in Toil,
Concord, Order, Discipline, Frugality and Vigilance. On our side, there is
public Want, private Luxury, Strength weakened, Minds discouraged, an
unaccustomedness to Labor or Arms, Soldiers refractory, Commanders covetous, a
Contempt of Discipline, Licentiousness, Rashness, Drunkenness, Gluttony, and
that which is worst of all, they use to conquer, we to be conquered. Can any
Man doubt, in this case, what the Event will be? It Is only the Persian stands
between us and Ruin. The Turks would fain be upon us, but he keeps him back;
his War with him affords us only a Respit, not a Deliverance: When he once
makes Peace with him, he will bring all the Power of the East upon us, and how
ready we are to receive him, I am afraid to speak. But, to return from whence I
digressed.

I told you before, That the Turks use to carry their Arms and Tents on
Horseback to the War, but they are such as belong chiefly to the Ianizaries,
for the Turks are very careful to have their Army healthy, and fenced against
the Weather, let him defend himself as well as he can against the Enemy, that is
to his own Peril; but the Public takes care for his Health; hence it is, that
a Turkish Army is better clothed than armed. They are afraid of Cold, as of
their greatest Enemy; and therefore, even in Summertime, they are treble
clothed, and their inmost Garment (call it a Wastcoat, or whatever you will)
i^ made of course Thread, which keeps then very warm. And to defend them also
against the Cold and Showers, Tents are carried about for them at the Public
Charge; and every Ianizary is allowed as much space in the Tent as the
Dimensions of his Body are; so that one Tent can hold Twenty five or Thirty
Ianizaries; and that thick Cloth, I spoke of, is also supplied out of the
public Store. When it is distributed among them, they take this Course, to
prevent Quarrels; the Soldiers are placed in the Night by Files, in a plac^
appointed for that purpose, and there so many Clothes are brought out of the
Store as then are Soldiers, and every one takes his Dole (...) the Dark, so
that if it is better or worse (...) has no cause to complain. And, for the same
Reason, their Pay is weighed out, not told, to them, lest any one should say,
He was forced to receive Light or Clipped Money; nor do they stay till the very
Day of Pay, but receive it the Day before. The Arms that are carried are
chiefly for the use of the Horse, called Spahi's; for the Ianizaries do usually
fight on Foot with Muskets, at a distance, and therefore when an Enemy is
near, and a Battle expected, the Armor is produced, but usually such as is of
an old make, and are part of the Spoils obtained from former old Fights and
Victories: These are distributed among the Horse; their other Armor is but a
light Buckler. You may easily think, how odly such Armor will sit on a Man
which is given out so hastily; ones Breast Plate is too narrow, another Man's
Helmet is too loose, another Coat of Male is too heavy for him to bear, every
Piece has some Fault or other, and yet they must not complain, they count it
cowardly so to do, for they resolve to fight, be their Arms what they will, so
great Confidence have they in their Victories, and in the frequent use of their
Arms. Hence it is also, that they put their old Foot on Horse-service, which
they were not used to before, for an experienced Soldier (they say) will do
valiantly, either on Horse or Foot-service. In my Judgment, the Old Romans were
of the same Mind, and especially Julius Caesar, who was wont to say, That his
Soldiers would fight well, even though they were perfumed; for when the horsed
the Ten Legions, upon a Conference he was to have with Ariovistus, what was his
Intent, think we? but that they should fight on Horseback, if there had been
need, though they were used to Foot-Service before; and we know amongst the
Romans, their Foot-Service was quite another thing from Horse-Service; but if
you say, Caesar's Design was only to horse his Men for Carriage, but to make
use of their Service on Foot, certainly he had run a great Hazard thereby, if
when Ariovistus's choice Horse were within a stone's Cast of the Romans, and
might have fallen upon them, that then the Legion was to dismount their Horses,
to be disposed of, and ranged into a Foot-Tertia, or Brigade, in an instant:
With us, this would seem very absurd; however it be, this is certain, That
experienced Soldiers will manage a Fight after a different order than we do, so
the Romans did of old, and so the Turks do at this day, with too good Success;
so much for that Subject.

I return, farther to acquaint you, how indulgent the Turks are to all
irrational Animals; it is true, a Dog is counted an obscene and nasty Creature
by them, and therefore they will not harbor him in their Houses; but they
nourish a Cat as a chaster and modester Creature, in their Judgments: This
Custom they received from Mahomet, their Lawgiver, who was so much in love
with a Cat, that when one of them fell asleep upon his Sleeve, as he was
reading at a Table, and the time of his Devotion drew near, he caused his
Sleeve to be cut off, that he might not awake the Cat by his going to the
Mosque.

However, though the Turks have so ill an Opinion of Dogs, that they wander up
and down the City of Constantinople, and have no certain Masters, so that they
are Keepers of Streets and Lanes, rather than of any certain House, and they
live upon the Off^l, which is cast out of their Houses; yet if they see any
Bitch great with young, in their Neighborhood, they give it Bones, and some
Relics of their Table: This they count an Office of Pity amongst them. When,
on this account, I have blamed them for performing such Offices to a Brute,
which they would hardly do to a Man, though a reasonable Creature, like
themselves, and to be sure, not to a Christian; their answer was, That God had
given Reason to Man, as a Fence against all Peril, and yet he did abuse it, so
that if any Inconvenience or Trouble happened to him, it was his own Fault, and
therefore he deserved less Pity: But God had bestowed no Boon on Brutes, but
some natural Notions and Appetites, which of necessity they must obey; and
therefore they were to be relieved by Man's Help and Commiseration; and for
this Reason they take it very ill, if any Brute Creature be put to Torment at
his Death, or that Men should take any Pleasure in tormenting them. This had
like to cost a Venetian Goldsmiths, that lived here, very dear, of late; the
Story is worth the Telling. This Goldsmith did de'ight in the Art of Fowling,
and among other Birds, he once took one about the bigness of a Cuckoo, and
almost of the same Color; he had no great Beak, but his Jaws were so wide and
large, that, when they were stretched a sunder, they did gape most
prodigiously; so that a Man's Fist might be thrust into them; the Man wondering
at this strange kind of Bird, caused him to be fastened to the upper Lintel of
his Gate, with his Wings spread abroad, and his Jaws so extended with a Stick,
that he gaped hideously: The Turks came often by his Door, stood still, and
looked upon it, but when they saw the Bird did move, and was alive, then taking
Pity on it, out they cried, What an abominable thing is this, that an harmless
Bird should be so tormented? whereupon, out they call the Man of the House, and
drew him presently, by Head and Shoulders, to their Criminal Judge, where
Sentence was likely to be pronounced upon him, to be soundly bastinadoed; but
the Bailo of Venice (so they call their Ambassadors or Residents there) hearing
of the Matter, sent presently one of his Servants to demand the Man, and the
Turkish Caddy was so merciful as to let him go; but many of the Turks grumbled
at his Freedom. Thus the poor Goldsmith escaped a Scouring: I laughed heartily
at the Story, for he told it me himself, ^s coming often to my House, and in
what a ^errible Fright he was in for the time; and to oblige me the more, he
brought me the Bird to look upon: It Is of the same Form, as I lately described,
it flies about in the Night, and (as they say) will suck Milch Kine, so that I
am apt to believe it is the Goat-Sucker of the Ancients. Such Commiseration do
the Turks use toward all sorts of Brute Animals, especially toward the Winged
kind.

Over against my Lodging there is a tall Plane tree, whose spreading Boughs
make a Delight some Shade; under that Tree sometimes Fowlers sit with abundance
of such Birds to sell in Cages; you shall have the Turks buy several of these
Birds for a small Matter; and when they have bought them, they will let them fly
out of their Hands; the Bird presently flys up to the Tree, and there she picks
her Feathers, and cleanses them from the Filth contracted in the Cage; she
spreads abroad her Wings and Chirps. The Turks that bought them, say, Don't you
hear how glad this Bird is, and how he gives me Thanks for his Liberty?

If this be so, you will say, What! are the Turks such Pythagoreans, that they
count all Brutes sacred, and will eat none of their Flesh? I say not so, but on
the contrary, they will eat any Flesh set before them, either boiled or roasted,
only they count Mutton the properest Meat, because Sheep are made for the
Shambles, as they say; yet they would not have Men to make a Sport at killing
of them, as if they rejoiced in their Torment. Some of them will by no means be
persuaded to kill small Birds which sing in their Fields and Woods; nay, they
think it some Injury done them, to restrain their Liberty by Caging them up.
But all Turks are not of that Mind; some of them keep Nightingales in their
Houses, for the Melodiousness of their Tunes, and in Springtime they let them
out to hire, to sing. I knew some, that carried Linnets about, so well
instructed, that if a Man showed them a piece of Money out of his Chamber, though
it were at a great distance from them, yet they would fly up to fetch it; and
if the Man would not let it go, they would sit upon his Hand, and so accompany
him from one Room to another, still pulling at the Money; and when they had got
it, as if they remembered their Errand on which they were sent, when their
Master whistled to them in the Highway, down they would fly to him again; and
as a Reward for the Money in their Bills, he would give them a little Hempseed.
But I shall proceed no further in such Stories as these, lest you should think
me a second Pliny, or an Aelian, and that I were designed to write an History
of Animals.

I proceed then to other Matters, and shall give you an Example of the Chastity
of Turkish Women. The Turks take more Pains to have their Wives modest than any
other Nation; and, therefore, they ordinarily keep them close up at home, and
hardly suffer them to see the Sun; but if any necessity calls them abroad, they
go so hooded and veiled, as if they were Hobgoblins or Ghosts. It Is true, they
can see Men through their Veils or Hoods, but no part of all their Bodies is
open to Man's view; for they have this Tradition among them, that it is
impossible for a Man to look on a Woman, especially if she be young and
handsome, without desiring to enjoy her; and by that desire the Mind is
excited, and therefore they keep them all covered. Their own Brothers have
liberty to see them, but their Husbands Brothers have not the same permission.
The nobler and richer sort, when they Marry, do it with this Condition, that
their Wives shall never set a foot out of Door; and no Person living, either
Male or Female, be the Cause what it will, shall ever have leave to see them;
no, not their nearest Alliance, in Blood, except only the Father and Mother,
who at Easter, (their Bairam) are permitted to see their Daughter; and in lieu
of this Strictness, if the Wife have Parents of the better sort, and she bring
her Husband a large Dowry, the Husband, on his part promises, that he will
never have any Concubines, but will keep to her alone.

In other Cases, the Turks have as many Concubines as they will, besides their
lawful Wives; and the Children of both are equally respected, and have as much
Privilege one as the other. Their Concubines they either buy, or take them in
War; and when they are weary of them, may sell them in the open Market; only if
they have Children by them, then they obtain their Liberty. This made Roxolan^
stand upon her Terms with Solomon, in having brought him forth a Son, when she
was a Slave, and thereby obtained Manumission. Hereupon she refused to submit
to his Will any longer, unless he Married her, which he, doting for Love, would
do, against the Custom of the Ottoman Princes.

A lawful Wife, with them, differs from a Concubine, only upon the account of
her Dowry, which a lawful Wife has, but a Concubine has not. And when once
her Dowry is assigned her, then she is a Mistress, Governess of the House, and
all the other Women under her. And yet the Husband has have to lie with which
of them he please at his Choice; and when he makes known his Pleasure to his
Wife, she bids the Maid he desires prepare himself for his Bed; and she obeys,
perhaps, more joyfully than her Mistress commands her. Only Friday Night, which
is their Sabbath, the Wife claims as her due, and she thinks her self wronged,
if her Husband defraud her thereof; other Nights he may lie with which of his
Slaves he please.

Divorces are made among them for many Causes, which Men easily pretend; and
when a Wife is divorced, her Dowry is restored, unless she be put away on a
dishonest Account; but Women have but few; to instance some among them few,
this is one, if their Husband do not allow them due Maintenance; and if they
offer to abuse them against Nature, (a Crime usual among them) then the Wife
goes to the Judge, and tells him, She can no longer endure to live with her
Husband; when he asks the Cause, they say nothing, but pull off their Shoo from
their Feet, and turn it up and down, which is a Sign among them of the unlawful
use of Copulation. The greatest sort among them, that have abundance of Women,
set Eunuchs to guard them, not such as have only their Stones taken out, but
such whose Yards are also impaired; because otherwise they think, such as lost
their Stones only may desire the use of a Woman, though not for Generation, yet
for Pleasure. The great Men also have Baths at their own Houses, wherein they
and their Women do wash, but the meaner sort use public Baths.

A Turk hates Bodily Filth and Nastiness, worse than Soul-Defilement; and,
therefore, they wash very often, and they never ease themselves, by going to
Stool, but they carry Water with them for their Posteriors. But ordinarily the
Women bathe by themselves, Bond and Free together; so that you shall many
times see young Maids, exceeding beautiful, gathered from all Parts of the
World, exposed Nacked to the view of other Women, who thereupon fall in Love
with them, as young Men do with us, at the sight of Virgins.

By this you may guess, what their strict VVatch over Females comes to, and how
it is not enough to avoid the Company of an adulterous Man, for the Females burn
in Love one toward another; and the Pandaresses to such refined Loves are the
Baths; and, therefore, some Turks will deny their Wives the use of their
public Baths, but they cannot do it altogether, because their Law allows them.
But these Offenses happen among the Ordinary sort; the richer sort of Persons
have Baths at home, as I told you before.

It happened one time, that at the public Women's Baths, an old Woman fell in
Love with a Girl, the Daughter of a poor Man a Citizen of Constantinople, and,
when neither by Wooing nor Flattering her, she could not obtain that of her,
which her mad Affection aimed at, she attempted to perform an Exploit almost
incredible; she feigned her self to be a Man, changed her Habit, hired an House
near the Maids Father, and pretended he was one of the Chia^xes of the Grand
Siegnior; and thus by reason of his Neighborhood she insinuated her self into
the Man's Acquaintance, and after some time, acquaints him with the desire of
his Daughter. In short, he being such a Man in a prosperous Condition, the
Matter was agreed on, a Portion was settled, such as they were able to give, and
a day appointed for the Marriage; when the Ceremonies were over, and this
doughty Bridegroom went into the Bridechamber to his Spouse; after some
Discourse, and plucking off her Head-geer, she was found to be a Woman.
Whereupon the Maid runs out, and calls up her Parents, who soon found that they
had Married her, not to a Man but a Woman: Whereupon, they carried the
supposed Man, the next day, to the General of the Ianizaries, who, in the
Absence of the Grand Seignior, was Governor of the City. When she was brought
before him, he chid her soundly for her beastly Love; What, says he, are you
not ashamed, an old Beldam as you are, to attempt so notorious a Bestiality,
and so filthy a Fact?

Away, Sir, says she, you do not know the Force of Love, and God grant you
never may. At this absurd Reply, the Governor could scarce forbear Laughter,
but commanded her, presently, to be packed away and drowned in the Deep; such
was the unfortunate Issue of her wild Amors. For you must know, that the Turks
make no noise when secret Offenses are committed by them, that they may not
open the Mouths of Scandal and Reproach; but open and manifest ones they punish
most severely. I am afraid the Relation of that dismal Example has grated your
Ears. I shall, therefore, now endeavor to make you amends, by acquainting you
with a pleasant Story, which, I believe, will go near to make you Smile. It Is
this.

Upon the Account of the Troubles in Hungary, there came lately a Messenger to
me, with an Express from my Master, the Emperor. The Bassa's would not let him
bring his Letters directly to me, as they were wont to be brought, but they
carried him first into the Divan. The reason of this their unusual Procedure,
was, because they would fain know what Caesar's Letters did contain, before they
were delivered, in regard they suspected I dealt not faithfully with them, in
communicating my Masters Sense, but that I suppressed some of his Concessions.
The Messenger was cunning enough for them; for, having some Inkling of the
Matter beforehand, he hid Caesar's Letters, and only showed them those that were
directed to me, from some particular Friends. Their Interpreter, Ebrahim, a
Polander by Birth, had acquainted them before, that the Letters, that brought
any secret Commands to me, were not written in an ordinary Character, but in a
new kind of way, called Ciphers. As they were searching all my Letters, at last
they light upon One, that was wrote to me by a Friend of mine, a Secretary of
Burgundy. Ebrahim saw, through the thinness of the Paper wherein 'twas writ,
some shining Letters, which were not of an ordinary sort. O, says he, to the
rest, now I have found ^t, don't you meddle with any of the rest of the Packet,
for here is the Secresy in this. Whereupon, the Bassa's commanded him to open,
Read and Interpret it to them, and they all stood listening to hear the News;
but Ebrahim told them plainly, that he could not read one Letter thereof.
That Is strange, says the Bassa's, what did you never learn the Christian
Alphabet, or have you forgot it? Says Ebrahim, this sort of Character is only
known to those who are Secretaries to Princes: They did not well understand
him; but however, say they, if it be so; why do thou not make haste to the
Secretary of the Bailo of Venice, or of Florence? Ebrahim presently makes haste
to them, and shows them the Letters; (they were writ in such a Character that a
Child of ten Years old might have read them;) but both of those Secretaries,
when they saw the Letter was superscrib'd to me, threw it back again before
they had scarce looked upon it; alleging, in Excuse, that such kind of Letters
could be read by none, unless by him who had another Cipher to unfold them.
This was all the Answer Ebrahim could get of them. Upon his return to the
Bassa's therewith, they could not tell what in the World to do: At last, starts
up one (I could not tell his Name) saying, there is a Patriarch in Town, an old
Man, and a Christian, and, besides, a great Scholar; if any Man living can read
these Letters, it must be he. When they came to the Patriarch, he told them, he
could not read a Title of them, for they were not writ in Greek, Latin, Hebrew
or Chalde^. Thus they were disappointed there also. At last, Haly Bassa runs to
Rustan (otherwise a Man not ready to jest) and says to him Cardassi, (Brother
in Turkish.) I remember, I had once a Servant, an Italian, who was skilled in
all Letters and Tongues, I do not question about he could have read the Letter;
but, alas! he is lately dead. At last they being at a stand what to do, thought
it best to send the Letters, which they could make no use of, to me: I knew all
the Matter by Ebrahim beforehand, (neither could it be kept secret;) whereupon
I began to stamp and fret that they had intercepted my Letters against the Law
of Nations, and in contempt of Caesar who sent them; and, withal, I bid Ebrahim
stay, and to Morrow he should see that Letter translated for the Bassa's. The
next day, when Ebrahim appeared in the Divan, they asked of him, Whether I
could read those Letter? Read them, says he! as easily as his own Name; and
thereupon he produced some of them translated before them, viz. what I had a
mind to discover. Whereupon, says Rustan, this Ambassador is but a young Man,
and yet we see he can understand what the old Patriarch could not so much as
read; without doubt, if he live to be old, he will prove a very Nonsuch of a
Man. For that reason it was, or perhaps some other, that a while after, having
Conference with Rustan about our Affairs, he treated me more familiarly than he
used to do, (which was a rare thing in him) and at last he asked me, Why I
would not turn to their Religion, and to the true Worship of God? If I would do
so, he promised me great Honor and large Reward from their Emperor Solomon. I
told him, I was resolved to continue in that Religion, wherein I was born, and
which my Master Caesar did profess. Be it so, replayed he, but what then will
become of your Soul? I subjoined, I hope well, for that too; whereupon he,
after a little Pause, broke forth into these Words. It Is true, indeed, and I am
almost of your Mind, that they who live holy and modest Lives in this present
World, shall obtain eternal Life in the next, be they of what Religion they
will. That Is an Heresy, that some of the Turks have taken up, neither is
Rustan thought to be a true Mussulman in all Points. The Turks think it a Duty,
and a Work of Piety in them, to persuade a Christian they have any good Opinion
of, to their Religion; for then they think, they shall save a Soul from
Destruction, and that they count a great Honor to themselves, and the greatest
Charity they can do another Man, to make him a Convert to their Religion.

I shall now acquaint you with the Effects of another Conference I had with
Rustan, whereby you may see, what daily Feuds are between the Turks and
Persians, upon the account of Religion. He asked me one time, Whether the War
did continue between Spain and France? I told him, It did. It Is strange, says
he, that they should fall out that are of one and the same Religion: I replied,
it is no otherwise between those two Princes, than it is betwixt You and the
Persians. The Dispute is not about Religion, but about Civil Right, Provinces,
Cities and Kingdoms, which both lay claim to. You are quite mistaken, says
Rustan, we are not of the same Religion with the Persians, but do count them a
more Profane and Heathenish sort of People than you Christians are. But to
return to the Affairs of Hungary.

Since my last return to Constantinople, Matters in Hungary have received a
very great Alteration, it would be too tedious to describe them particularly;
and, besides, it were not conducive to my Design. Isabella, Wife to King John,
is returned into Transylvania, together with her Son, having refused the
Transactions and broken the League made with the Emperor Ferdinand; and the
Transilvanians, terrified by the Turkish Arms, have again submitted their Necks
to the Old Ottoman Yoke. Matters succeeding thus prosperously with the Turks,
they are not therewith contented, but grasp at all Hungary too; and, besides
other Places, they resolved to besiege Sigeth, which signifies in the Hungarian
Language, an Island, or Place naturally very strongly situated. And for this
purpose they chose a General, who, upon the account of the Prosperity of his
Arms in former times, created great confidence in his own Men, and struck as
much terror into his Enemy: His Name was Haly Bassa, an Epirot, who had had
good Success in Hungary before, and especially in the Battle, wherein he
overthrew Sfortia Palavicin, and the Bishop of Five Churches. He was sent for
from the utmost Bounds of the Turkish Empire toward Persia, and came with a
great Expectation to Constantinople: My Colleagues were yet here with me,
pressing for a dismission. 'Twas the pleasure of the Bassa's that we should see
him, in regard we counted him, as they thought, a very Thunderbolt of War.
When we came to him, he received us courteously, and made a great Harangue to
this purpose: That we should study Peace, and rather than suffer Hungary to be
wasted with Fire and Sword, we should accept of those Conditions, which the
Grand Seignior had offered us. We answered him, That we desired nothing more
than Peace; provided, it might be had upon tolerable Conditions; but those
which they offered, were against the Honor and Dignity of our Master. Thus we
took our leaves, after he had treated us with a Cup of Water diluted with
Sugar. This Haly was an Eunuch, but the Constitution of his Body did seem to
add to the vigor of his Mind: He was low of Stature, bloted in his Body, of a
Bay-coloured Countenance, a sour Look, frowning Eyes, broad Shoulders and
sticking up, between which stood his Head, as in a Valley. Two Teeth were
prominent in his Mouth, like Boars Tusks, his Voice hoarse; in a Word, he was
the Fourth Fury. The Day after he makes great Preparation for his Expedition
into Hungary; where having spent some Time to provide Materials, he at last
marches against Sigeth, and beats off those which were repairing Dabock, a
Castle of Caesar's; but Caesar, being acquainted long before with his Design,
sends Ferdinand, one of his Three Sons, a young Man, yet comparable, for
greatness of Mind, to any of the old Generals, to oppose the Torrent of Haly
Bassa's Force, and by his Valor to retrieve Affairs in Hungary: He had no
great Force with him, but with a select Body of Horse he faces Haly's Army; the
Turks that were present related to me, That 'twas a goodly Sight to behold the
Splendour, Order and Boldness of those Forces. Haly, being naturally of a fierce
Disposition, and having a far greater Army, was even mad, to think, that an
handful of Christians should dare to look him in the Face.

There was a moorish Piece of Ground between both Armies, which could not be
passed without great Danger; Ferdinand had no need to pass it, for his Design
was only to relieve Sigeth, and to raise the Siege: But Haly Bassa was not in
the same Circumstances, for unless he would make a base and unhansom Retreat
(as the Event afterward showed) 'twas altogether necessay for him to do it: So
that he, seeing to what Straits he was brought, resolved to put all upon
hazard, and accordingly he bent his Bridle, to turn his Horse toward that
inconvenient Place; when, behold one of the Sanziacks, that was near him, whose
Name I remember not, taking notice of the extreme Danger he was running into,
leapt from his Horse, and taking the Bassa's Horse by the Bridle, Sultan, says
he (for so the Turks call the great Dignitaries among them) Here you see into
what a Ieopardy you were like to cast both your self and your whole Army; you
don't consider what an incommodious Place this Marish is: The Christians are
ready on the other side with Arms in Hand and Courage in their Heart, to
receive us, when we are half drowned and half covered with Mud; and thus they
in good Order, will assault us, being disordered and out of our Ranks, and will
make use of all our Imprudence, to obtain a most assured Victory over us: Nay,
rather moderate your Anger, and return to your self, and reserve so many brave
Men, with your self, for the Service of your Prince, and for better Times. Upon
this Speech, Haly, as if he had remembered himself, drew back; and there was not
any Turk amongst them, but was forced to confess, That the whole Army was saved
by the Advice of that Sanziack.

When this Matter was carried to Constantinople, though the Vizier, and the
Chief Bassas could not deny the Thing, yet they thought it dangerous to suffer
the Example of so audacious a Fact in the Sanziack to pass unpunished: It Is
true, they did mutteringly commend both his Fidelity and his Prudence, yet to
suffer Disobedience to a superior Officer to pass without a Punishment, they
thought it a dangerous Case in Military Discipline, so that he was called back
to Constantinople, and there was cashiered for a Time; and when this Offense
was sufficiently punished, as they thought, then they bestowed upon him as good
a Command; so that every Body saw ^is Punishment was inflicted rather for the
preservation of the Discipline of War, than for any due Merit of his Offense.

But Haly, a while after, having lost a great part of his Army, by reason of
the Assaults and Ambushes of the Hungarians, made an ignoble and shameful
Retreat to Buda, where for very Grief he breathed out his hateful Soul.

But Arck-duke Ferdinand, on the other side, returned to Ferdinand^ his Father,
with the deserved Laurel of Victory, having performed an Exploit, not only of
great Advantage for the present, but of much greater Benefit to future Ages, by
the exemplarity thereof; for hereby he made the Turks to know, that if they
proceeded on to press upon Caesar, that he wanted neither able Soldiers nor
expert Commanders to chastise their Insolency.

Yet the Turks of those Borders did not carry it with any great Modesty; for
while Haly was yet encamped at Sigeth, our Men had scaled the Walls of Gran,
and taken the City, having a Castle near it of the same Name, where they got a
great deal of Booty, and carried away the Inhabitants, being most Women and
Children.

A Messenger was sent immediately to Haly, to acquaint him with the Loss; who
coming into his Presence, by the very Consternation of his Countenance
portended some great Mischief to have happned to them. The Bassa presently
asked him, How things went? and what was the Cause of his great Fear? Sir, says
he, the Enemy has taken and plundered Gran, which great Blow occasions my
Grief. A Blow, Fool, says the Bassa, tell me of a Blow, when I have lost my
Genitals (to which he pointed with his Hand) that show me to be a Man: Thus did
he scoff at the Consternation of the Messenger, and undervalued the Loss of
Gran, which was easily recoverable; not without the Laughter of the Bystanders.

Moreover, in Croatia and the adjoining Countries, several inroads were made by
both Parties, and each side did alternately suffer for their over-boldness and
supine Security, Let me give you an Instance, which was joyous to me, and I
hope will not be unpleasant to you to hear of, though it happened somewhat
before the beforementioned Passage^ at Sigeth; but in Writing an Epistle, I do
strictly observe the Order of Time.

News was brought to Rustan, from those Parts, That a certain Confident of his,
whom he highly esteemed, and called Cousin, had fallen upon a Party of
Christians, as they were celebrating a Wedding, and being at a sufficient
Distance, as they thought, from the Turks, counted themselves secure; when
behold this bold and unwelcome Guest, with armed Forces, came in upon them,
spoiled their Mirth, slew some, took some Prisoners, among whom was the
unfortunate Bridegroom, with his unbedded Spouse: Rustan did much rejoice at
this Exploit, and in all Company highly commended the Stratagem of his Kinsman,
for performing it.

A pitiful Case, you will say, rather to be lamented than related: But these
are the Tragical Sports of insolent Fortune; yet Revenge followed him at the
Heels, Rustan's Laughter was soon turned to sadness: For a little while after
one of the Belies or mad Sparks, a sort of mad Horsemen among the Turks, so
called by their outrageous Boldness, came post to him out of Dalmatia, and told
him, That a parcel of Turks had made an Excursion into the Enemies Country, and
had got great Booty, but setting no bounds to their Avarice, they, at last were
encountered with a Party of Christians, Dragoons or Musketeers, who woefully
routed them, slew many Sanziacks, and amongst them his Achillean Cousin, lately
so much extolled by him. This sad News made Rustan burst forth into Tears, so
that his fit of Laughter was justly requited: But hearken to the close of the
Story, which is not unpleasant; When this Dalmatian Trooper, who brought the
News, was asked by the Bassa, in the Divan, How many were there of you? He
answered, Above Two Thousand five hundred: And how many of the Christians? I
think, said he, they were not above Five Hundred, unless there were more of
them in ambush, as we suspected. Fie for Shame, said the fretting Bassa's, what?
a just Army of Musulmans (so they call the Men of their own Religion) to be
beat by so small a handful of Christians, you are goodly Warriors indeed^ fit
for to eat the Sultan's Bread, are you not? The blunt Fellow, nothing dismayed,
replied, You are quite beside the Cushion; did I not tell you, that we were
beaten by Musketeers? 'twas the Fire defeated us, not the valor of our
Enemies; we had come off Conquerors, if we had contested by Valor only; but
who can fight against Fire, the fiercest of Elements? and what Mortal can stand
if the very Elements fight against him? This bold Answer of his, being as
saucily pronounced, made the Bystanders ready to burst out into a Laughter,
though on this sad occasion to them.

This Matter did mightily refresh my Spirits, which were over-grieved at the
Remembrance of the former Mis-hap of the Marriage Feast. This Story informs us,
That our Pistols and Carbines, which are used on Horseback, are a great Terror
to the Turks, as I hear they are to the Persians also; for once, upon a Time,
there was a Fellow that persuaded Rustan, when he accompanied his Prince in a
War against Persia, to arm Two hundred Horse of his Domestics with Pistols:
For they, said he, will be terrible to our Enemy, and will also do great
execution upon them. Rustan hearkened to his Council, and furnished out a Party,
as advised; but before they had marched half way, their Carbines or Pistols
were ever and anon out of Order, one thing or other was broke or lost, and
scarce any Body could mend them: Hereupon this Party was useless, and the Turks
were also against this Armature, because it was sluttish (the Turks being much
for cleanliness in War) the Troopers Hands were black and sooty, their Clothes
full of Spots, and their Case-boxes that hung by their Sides made them
ridiculous to their Fellow Soldiers, who therefore jeered them, with the Title
Medica Menturi, or Mountibank Soldiers; hereupon they apply themselves to
Rustan, complaining of this ill-favored, useless Armor, which could do no
Service against an Enemy, and entreating to be restored to their usual Weapons,
their Bows and Arrows, which, at their Desire, was accordingly granted them.

The mention I made a while ago of things acted in the Confine of Hungary,
gives me occasion to tell you, what the Turks think of Duels, which amongst
Christians is accounted a singular Badge of personal Valor: There was one
Arslambey, a Sanziack, that lived in the Frontiers of Hungary, who was very
much famed for a Robust Person; he was expert at the Bow, no Man brandished his
Sword with more Strength, none was more terrible to his Enemy; not far from him
there also dwelt one Vlybey, a Sanziack also, who was emulous of the same
praise, and thus emulation (initiated perhaps by other occasions) at length
occasioned Hatred and many bloody Combats between them. It happened thus,
Vlibey was sent for to Constantinople, upon what occasion I know not; when he
came thither, the Bassa's had asked many Questions of him, in the Divan,
concerning other Matters, at last they demanded how he and Arslanbey ( A^sta
signifies a Lion in Turkey) came to fall out? Hereupon he makes a long Narration
of the Grudges between them, with their Causes and Progress; and to put a fair
Paint on his own Cause, That once Arslanbey had laid an Ambush, and wounded him
treacherously; Which, said he, he need not to have done, if he would have
showed himself worthy the Name he bears, seeing I have often challenged him to
fight Hand to Hand, and never shunned to meet him in the Field. The Bassa, as
being offended, thus replied, How durst thou challenge thy Fellow Soldier to a
Duel? What, was there never a Christian to fight with? Do both of you eat your
Emperors Bread? and yet, forsooth, you must go about to take away one
another's Lives? What Precedent had you for this? Don't you know, that whoever
of the twain had dyed, the Emperor had lost a Subject? Whereupon, by their
Command, he was haled to Prison, where he lay pining many Months^ and was, at
last, with Difficulty, released, yet with the loss of his Reputation.

It Is quite otherwise with us Christians; ours do many Times draw their Swords
against one another, before ever they come in sight of a public Enemy (the
more's the Pity!) and count it (forsooth) a brave and honorable Thing: What
shall a Man do in such a case? when Vice Usurps the Seat of Virtue, and that
which is worthy of Punishment is counted Noble and Glorious. But to return,

I know you are inquisitive, and therefore give me leave to acquaint you with
the Public Entrance, which the King of Cholcos made into this City. His
Kingdom is by the River Phasis, in a Creek or Bay of the Euxine-Sea, not far
from Mount Caucasus; his Name is Dadianus, a Man of a tall Stature and
promising Countenance, but of a rough-hewen Disposition, as some say. He came
with a great Train, but very Threadbare, and sorrily garbed. The Italians, at
this Day, call the Colchians Mingrelians: They are some of that People
inhabiting between the Caspian Gates, (called by the Turks, Demit capi (i.e.)
IronGates) and the Portic and Haircanian Seat: They are at this Day called
Georgians, whether from that sort of Christian Religion, which they profess, or
whether that be their ancient Name (which seems most probable,) is not fully
determined. The Albanians and Iberians are reckoned a part of them. The Cause
of his coming is uncertain, some say, he was sent for by the Turk; for when he
makes Wars upon the Persian, if the Colchians and the People of that Tract join
with him, they may give him notable Assistance. But the vulgar and more
credible Opinion was, That he came to desire the Assistance of some Galleys
against his Neighbor, the Iberian, who had slain his Father, which if he could
obtain, then he would become Tributary to the Sultan. For, you must know, that
there is an old and inveterate Hatred between the Colchians and the Iberians.
Once there were some Overtures of Accommodatio^ between them, and a Conference
was had thereupon, between great Numbers of both Nations; at this Meeting, they
began, first, to try who should be the greatest Drinkers; in which Contest, the
Colchians were overcome, and fell fast asleep. The treacherous Iberians made
use of this Opportunity, and hurried away honest Dadianus, as yet Snoring, into
a Chariot, and shut him up Prisoner in an high Tower, as if he had been lawful
Prize taken in War. To revenge this Injury, and to recover their King, the
Colchians levied an Army of 30000 Men, who were commanded by the Wife of the
Captive King; a Woman of great Spirit, and not unskilled in Horsemanship, nor
handling of Arms. The Commanders, in this Army, wore huge and intractable Coats
of Male, and were also armed with Swords and Spears pointed with Iron. They had
also amongst them, a Party of Musketeers, a strange Sight in that Country. As
for the common Soldiery, they had no other Arms but Arrows, or Stakes burnt at
one end, or great Wooden Clubs. Thus they rode on Horseback, without Saddle or
other Furniture.

This rude and discomposed Multitude, drew near to the Place where their King
was in Custody, but were soon terrified with the Discharge of a few Guns, from
the Castle, and run back a full Mile; but then taking Heart, on they came
again, but were repulsed with the like Noise as before. Dadianus perceiving
help so near, did cut his Bed-cloths into a kind of Ropes, and so let himself
down by Night, through his VVindow, and fled to his own People; which Stratagem
of their King, and the successful Issue thereof, is highly praised by that
People, even to this very day.

The Country of Colchis abounds with all sorts of Fruits, growing almost
naturally, except Bread-Corn, Wheat and Barley, and these Grains would grow
there also, if due Tillage were used about them; but the People are very idle,
they only sow Millet at random, which yields such an Increase, that one Crop
serves them for two Years; their chief Subsistence is thereon, neither desire
they any other Corn. Their Vines grow at the foot of high Trees, and mounting
up to their Boughs, yield them much Wine, and pretty good. These Vines last
for many Years. Their Bees^^ like themselves, live in their Woods, and supply
them with Wax and Honey; all the Pains they take, is, to find them out. The same
Woods yield them plenty of Venison; as for Phesants and Partridges, they abound
all over the Country. A great proof of the Fertility of their Land, are their
Melons, which, besides their extraordinary sweetness, do often grow three Foot
long.

As for Coined Silver, they have little or none, and of Gold less; few of them
know what it is: So that they may seem a very happy People, who are without so
great a Temptation to Mischief. And yet I think few of us do envy them this
Happiness, because none can grow rich among them; yet they have that value for
Silver, that when they receive any in Traffic, with Foreigners, as some of
them must needs do, they transfer it all to the use of their Temples, for
making Crucifixes, Chalices and such like Ornaments, which sometimes their
King, on pretense of public necessity, does seize upon, and hurry all to his
own use.

Their only way of Commerce among themselves is by Exchange of Wares; if one
have overmuch of a Commodity, he brings it into the Market, and receives what
he wants in-Exchange; so that there is no need of Money, their Commerce is by
Bartering or Commodity.

They pay also their Tribute to their King in the Products of the Earth; they
supply him with all Necessaries largly, both for Meat and Drink, and Apparel,
for maintaining of his Household, and for rewarding the Deserving. And, indeed,
he has an unexhausted Revenue, not only from Tithes, and other Regalia, but
from those Gifts which are daily bestowed upon him; and yet he is as liberal in
bestowing them, as he is ready to receive them.

His Palace is, as a public Granary, stored with all manner of Provisions;
which are disposed to all that need out of his Royal Bounty, especially if that
Years Harvest has disappointed the Husbandman. The Custom is, that if any
Merchant come with his Ship thither, he makes a Present to the King, either
small or great, nothing is refused, and the King bestows a Banquet on them a
Shore. The manner's thus.

There is a large Building, on both sides of which are the King's Stables,
where a long Table is placed for the King; he himself sits at the upper end,
and, at a moderate distance, ^it the rest. The Table is well furnished,
especially with Venison, and with Wine enough; the largest Drinkers are the
welcomest Guests. The Queen, with her Female Attendants, has a Table in the
same Room, but apart by themselves; and then they junket freely without much
regard of Modesty; they carry themselves like Anticks, fleering, nodding,
whickering like so many Medea's, if there were Iason's ready for them.

After Dinner, the King, with his Guests, goes a Hunting; and, in VVoods, under
the Shadows of large Trees, the common People do disport themselves, keeping
Holy Day in Drinking, Dancing and Singing. They hang their Fiddles on long
Poles or Borders, and then striking them with a Stick, they sing the Praise of
their Mistresses, or of their valiant Men at the Tune. Among their Hero's
(unless I am misinformed) they often mention one Rowland; how he came into that
Country I know not, unless he passed thither with Godfrey of Bullogn. They tell
many prodigious Stories of this Rowland, as ridiculous and improbable as any
Romance among us.

Whilst they are thus idle and sullied, Dissoluteness must needs follow; and,
to speak Truth, Chastity is a rare Virtue among them. The Husband will offer
his own Wife or his Sister, to the Pleasure of a Stranger; and if they can but
thus please their Wives, they care for little else. Neither are their Daughters
kept under any stricter Discipline; it is hard to find a Damsel unvitiated among
them; yea, some have born Children at ten Years old; and if you scruple to
believe it, because of the smalness of their Bodies, at your Request they will
produce you such a young Infant, not much bigger than a large Frog. Whereas,
otherwise, they are a tall and comely bodied People. But they are so devoid of
all Civility and courteous Entertainment, that they think they grace one every
much among other Barbarities, when they meet you, they make a certain sound in
their Throats like B^lching.

In one thing they show a great Dexterity of Wit, and that is in Stealing. He
that pilfers most neatly, is counted a brave Fellow; but he that does it
bunglingly, is esteemed a Dunce and Blockhead, not worthy to live; and even his
own Father or his Son, will sell or exchange him for a small Matter to
Merchant-strangers, to be carried away they care not whither.

An Italian Merchant who had been in these Parts, told me, That a certain
Priest of theirs, stole away his Knife as he was in their Temple; he perceived
the Theft, but dissembling it, he gave him the Sheath also, that he might put
up his stolen Ware.

When they go into their Temples, they have a good esteem for the Images of the
Virgin Mary, of Peter and Paul; but above all, they venerate the Image of St.
George on Horseback, they fall down prostrate before it, kissing every part of
it, even his Horses Shoes. They say, he was a valiant Man, a great Warrier,
that in a single Combat did openly fight Hand to Hand with the Devil, and
either conquered, or, at least, foiled him.

I Will acquaint you with one Passage more, which you cannot but stand amazed at.
It Is this.

The Princes of the East are always presented with Gifts at any Audience.
Dadianus, in compliance with this Custom, brought Solomon a Cup or Dish of
Carbuncle, so bright and shining, that in a dark Night a Man might travel by
the Light thereof, as well as at Noonday. I cannot believe it, you will say: Nor
do I. Neither can I be angry with you for suspending your Belief; but whatever
you and I do, let me tell you, there are enough that do believe it. The most
Judicious think it to be a small Goblet of Onyx or Gravale, which was lost in
Shipwreck, when a certain Prince of Persia was flying from his Father to
Constantinople, and driven, by a Tempest, to the Colchian Shore, where it was
taken up. He brought also 20 white Hawks, called, Falcons, there being Plenty
of them in that Country of Colchis.

This is all I can inform you of, concerning the Colchians and their Manners;
let me now proceed to answer your Demands concerning my self, and my own way of
Living. I seldom go abroad, unless I receive Letters from my Master to be
delivered at the Court; or, unless I am commanded to expostulate with the
Bassa's concerning the Rapines and Cruelties of the Turkish Garrisons, which is
ordinarily twice or thrice a Year. Perhaps, if I would desire leave to ride
about the City with my Keeper, it would not be denied me^ but I have no mind to
be so much beholding to them; for I would have them to think, that the
straitness of my Confinement or Imprisonment is not valued at all by me; and,
to speak Truth, what Comfort can I have to ride up and down among a Parcel of
Turks, who will either slight or else jeer, and reproach me? No, I like the
Country and the Campaign better, rather than that City, which is so full of
Ruins, and which retains nothing of its ancient Glory, besides its Situation.
It Is true, 'twas once a Competitress with Rome it self, but now, alas, it is
woefully inbondaged; Who would not pity to behold it? Who so hard-hearted, as
not to be affected with the mutability of human Affairs? And who knows how near
we are to the same Fate? I keep my self within my own Doors, conversing with my
old Friends, I mean, my Books, in which is all my delight. It Is true, for my
Health sake I have made a Bowling-Alley, where, before Dinner, I use to play;
and, after Dinner, I practice the Turkish Bow.

The Turks are wondrous expert at Shooting at the Bow; they accustom themselves
to bend them from 7 or 8, to 18 or 20 Years of Age, and hereby their Arms grow
stronger, and their Skill so great, that they will hit the smallest Mark with
their Arrows. Their Bows are not much stronger than ours, but for their
shortness much more tractable; they are not made of single Wood, but of a
String and Ox's Horn, fastened together with much Glue and Flax. These sort of
Bows, though never so strong, the Turks, who are used to the Sport, can easily
draw even to their very Ear; and yet one that is not accustomed thereto, though
never so strong a Man, cannot draw to that height, so as to strike a piece of
Money, set upright between the Bow and the String, in the Angle where it is put
into the Notch.

They aim their Arrows so sure, that in a Fight they will hit a Man's very Eye,
or any other part they design to strike. In the place where they Exercise, you
may see them direct, by their stroke so artificially, that 5 or 6 of their
Arrows will stick round about the White in the Butt, (which is usually less
than a Dollar) and yet not hurt or touch it. They stand not above 30 Foot from
the Butt: In the Thumb of their right Hand, they use Rings of Bone, on which
the String lies, when they draw it; and with the Thumb of their Left Hand, they
draw the Arrow by a knot of eminent juncture; far otherwise than they do with
us. Their Butt is made of a Bank of sandy, gravelly Earth, raised about 4 Foot
high from the Ground, and firm'd with Boards round about. But the Bassa's, and
those that have great Families, do train up their Servants in this Exercise, at
their own Houses, where the more skilful do teach the unexperienced. Some of
these in their common Bayram, (for they also have their Easter) gather
themselves together in a great Plain about Pera, where, sitting over against
one another cross Legged, as Taylor's do with us, (for that is the Mode of
their sitting) they begin with Prayer (so the Turks begin all their
Enterprises) and then they strive, who shall shoot an Arrow furthest. The whole
Contest is managed with a great deal of Modesty and Silence, though the number of
Spectators be very great. Their Bows are very short for this Exercise, and the
shorter the better, so that they are hardly bendable, but by well-practised
Persons: Their Arrows also are of a peculiar kind. He that conquers has a
Linnen-Handkerchief, such as we use to wipe off our Sweat, wrought with
embroidered Needle Work, for his Reward; but his greatest Encouragement, is the
Commendation and Renown he gets. It Is almost incredible how far they will shoot
an Arrow; they mark the place, with a Stone, where the furthest Arrow, for that
Year, was pitched. There are many such Stones in the Field, placed there time
out of Mind, which are further than they are able to shoot now adays, they say.
These were the Marks of their Ancestors Archery, whose Skill and Strength, in
Shooting, they acknowledge they cannot reach to. In diverse Streets and
Cross-ways of the City Constantinople, there are also such Sports, wherein not
only Children and young Men, but even the graver ^ort do exercise themselves
in. There is one that takes care of the Butt, who waters it every day,
otherwise it would be so dry, that an Arrow (the Turkish Arrows being always
blunt) would not stick therein. And he that thus oversees the Mark is very
diligent to draw out and to cleanse the Arrows, and throw them back to the
Archers, and he has a Stipend from them sufficient to maintain him. The Front
of the Butt bears the Similitude of a little Door, whence, perhaps, was derived
the Greek Proverb; that when a Man missed the Mark, he is said to shoot Extr^
januam, besides the Door; for, I suppose, the Greeks used this way of Butting,
and that the Turks borrowed it from them. I grant the use of the Bow is very
ancient among the Turks; but that hinders not, but when they conquered the
Grecian Cities, they might still retain their way of Butting and Bounding their
Arrows. For no Nation scruples to transfer the profitable Inventions of other
Nations to themselves, as I might instance in Great Ord^nance and in Muskets,
and other things, which though not our Inventions, yet the Turks borrow their use
from us.

It Is true, they could never yet be brought to the Printing of Books, nor to
the setting ^locks public; the Reasons are, That their Scripture ( i. e.)
Alchoran, would no longer be called Scripture, or Writing, if it were Printed,
(that is their Fancy;) and for Clocks, they suppose, that the Authority of their
Emraim, and of their ancient Rites would be diminished, if they should permit
the use of them. In other Cases, they ascribe much to the ancient Institutions
of other Nations, even almost to the prejudice of their own Religion. I speak
of their Commonality.

All Men know how averse they are from the approving of Christian Rites and
Ceremonies; and, yet, let me tell you, that whereas the Greek Priests do use,
at Spring time, a certain way of Consecration to open the Sea for Sailors;
before which time, they will hardly commit their Vessels to the Waters. The
Turks also observe the same Ceremony. For when their Vessels are ready to sail,
they repair to the Grecians, and ask them, Whether they have consecrated the
Sea? If they say, No, they desist; if Yea, then they set sail and away. 'Twas
also a Custom of the Greeks not to open the Pits, in the Isle Lemnos, for the
digging out of the Earth, called, Agosphrogd, before the Feast of the
Transfiguration of our Lord, viz. August 6. The Turks also observe the same
Custom; and, whereas, the Grecian Priests did anciently celebrate the Liturgy
at that time, the Turks will have them do so still; and they themselves stand
at a distance as Spectators only: And if you ask them, why they do this? Their
Answer is, That there are useful Customs practiced of old, the Causes whereof
are not known. The Ancients, they say, saw and knew more than we; and,
therefore, we will not violate their Customs, lest we do it to our Loss. This
Opinion has so far prevailed among some of them, that I know some, who in
private will baptize their Children, alleging, they believe there is some good
in that Rite, and that it was not instituted, at first, without just Cause.

Having acquainted you thus far with the Turkish Exercises, let me add one
more. They have a Custom derived from the Parthians, that they counterfeit
flying away on Horseback, and presently turn back and kill their unwary
Pursuers. The way they learn to do it, is this: They erect an high Pole, almost
in plain Ground, with a Brass-globe atop of it; about this they spur their
Horses, and having got a little beyond, the Horse still Galloping, they
presently turn about, and flying along, shoot an Arrow into that Globe. The
frequent use hereof makes them to expect, that their Bow being turned in their
sight, their unwary Enemy is shot through.

It Is time now, you will say, that I return to my Lodging, lest my Keeper be
angry with me. Well then, what time is left me from beholding these Exercises,
I bestow it all on my Books, or in Conferences with my Friends the Citizens of
Pera, originally Genoeses, or others, yet not without the leave of my Chiauxes.
These Fellows are not always in the same Humor, they have their lucid
Intervals, and, also, sometimes, are more tractable than at others. When it is
fair Weather with them, the Ragusteans, the Florentines, the Venetians, and
sometimes the Greeks, with other Nations, come to visit me, on one Account or
another; sometimes, also, I converse with Men of more remote Countries, coming
hither, whose Conversation does much delight me.

A few Months ago, there came thither a Merchant from Dantzick, who had the
sole vending of Amber: He wondered what use the Turks put so great a quantity of
it, as they bought, to; or, whither they sent it: At last, he was resolved,
That they sent it into Persia, where that kind of Juice or Bitumen is highly
esteemed; for they adorn Parlors Studies and Temples therewith. He bestowed
upon me, a Wooden Vessel full of that Liquor, they call Tuppeabier. It was most
excellent Stuff. But I laughed extraordinarily at my Guests^ both Greeks and
Italians, who, not being accustomed to this Liquor, could not tell what to call
it. At length, because I told them, 'twas good to preserve Health, they thought
it was some Medicinal Drug, and called it a Syrup; but they sipp'd and syrupp'd
it out so long, that, at one Dinner, they emptyed my Barrel.

This liberty my Chiauxes (who are changed ever and anon) do sometimes give me.
They are not only willing I should go abroad, but also do invite me so to do:
But I, as I told you before, use to refuse them, that so they may not think
they can do me either good or hurt; and the pretense I make use of is this,
That I have tarried so long at home, that now I am grown to the Walls of the
House, so that if I go forth, it would fall. I will not, therefore, stir
abroad, say I, till I go for good and all into my own Country.

As for my Family, I am glad that they go abroad sometimes, for thereby they
learn to bear the Absence from their own Country, the better.

But yet when they make use of this liberty, the drunken Turks do often meet and
quarrel with them in the Streets, especially, if no Ianizaries be with them;
and though they be, yet sometimes there happen Blows on both sides: And,
therefore, it is troublesome to me, to excuse my Domestics, when they are
clamoured against; yet, I confess, the surlyness and vigilance of my Chiauxes,
in keeping fast my Doors, do, in great part, ease me of that troublesome
Office. Let me relate to you a late Example of this kind.

There came lately to me a Messenger from my Master, the Emperor, one Philip
Baldus, an Italian, he was 60 Years old, and riding faster than his Age could
bear, he fell into a Fever. My Physician prescribed him a Clyster, and the same
being brought by the Apothecary, my Chiaux would not let him in, nor suffer the
Physic to be brought to the sick Man: Inhumanely enough, you will say,
especially seeing the Chiaux had carried it courteously to me a long time; but
now he was enraged on a sudden, that it was intolerable, for he threatened to
cudgel every Body that came to me. After he had thus affronted me, I thought of
a way to let him know, how little I valued all his Bugbear Threats, which was
thus. I set one of my Servants to stand within my Gate, and to bar it;
commanding him, to open to none, but at my Command. The Chiaux comes in the
Morning to unlock the Gate, as his Custom was, but his Key availed not, for
'twas bolted; on the inside he spyed my Man, through the Chinks, and calls out
to him to open it. Not I, says he; hereupon the Chiaux began to be angry, to
fret and to prate. Prate, while you will, says my Servant, neither they self
nor any of thine shall come in here: For why should I open to thee, more than
thou to me? Thou keep us shut in, and we'll keep thee shut out; do thou shut
the Door without, and to be sure I Will shut it within. What, says he, did your
Master command you so to do? Yes, said I: However, says the Chiaux, let me come
in and put my Horse in the Stable: Not a jot of Stabling for your Horse here,
said he. Let me then have some Hay and Provender out for him: Not a bit, says
he; go and buy it in the Neighborhood, there is enough to be sold. I was wont
to make the Chiaux to sit down at Meat with me, or else to send him something
from my Table; but now the Case was altered, he stood fasting as he was, at my
Door, his Horse^ being tied to a Plane-Tree, over against it.

The Bassa's, and other Grandees, using to pass by that place in their return
from Court, and knowing, by its Trapping, that it was the Chiaux's Horse,
gnawing of Hay under the Plane-tree, they demanded the Reason, why he was not
shut up in the Stable, as heretofore? He up and told them all the Matter, that
as he shut up us, so he and his Horse were shut out, so that the one could not
get Food, or the other Provender. When the rest of the Bassa's heard this
Story, they laughed heartily, and from that time held it fruitless to go about
to terrify me with such frivolous Vexations as the shutting of my Doors.

But a while after that Chiaux was removed, and then we had more Liberty.
Rustan himself was satisfied how vain his Menaces were by this Story I shall
now relate.

There came a certain aged Sancto, of great Esteem among them for his Piety, to
pay his Court to him; and, among other Discourse, he told Rustan, That seeing
the Sultans Children were at Discord one with another, which was likely to
occasion great Troubles in their Empire, why he did not make Peace with the
German Emperor, that Solomon may be secure from Danger on that side? I desire
nothing more, says Rustan; but how can I bring it about? His Demands I cannot
yield to, and my Demands he will not accept, nor can I compel him so to do; I
have tried all ways to bring him to my Terms, I have kept him in the nature of
a Prisoner these many Years, I have dealt coursely enough with him; but, alas!
he is but hardened the more thereby; when I would shut him up as close Prisoner
in his own House, then he bars his Door on the inside, that no Body can come at
him; thus all my Labor is in vain: If another Man had been so hardly dealt
with, to avoid the durance, he would have turned to our Religion; as for him,
he cares not a Rush.

This was Rustan's Discourse, as some present thereat informed me.

The reason of their surly carriage, is this: The Turks are very suspicious
that the Agents of Christian Princes have a great Latitude in their
Commissions; so that they have Power to alter, as occasion serves; if they
cannot at first get favorable, then they may except of harder Terms. To get
out of them the full of their Commissions, they vex their Persons, shut them up
close, threaten War, and abuse them all manner of ways.

Some think, that a certain Venetian Resident did much encourage the Turks to
these Courses; for when the Dispute was between the Venetian and Turk, about
Napoli di Romania, their Agent had a Charge to try all other ways of
Accommodation, without surrendering the City; but if no milder Terms would do,
then he had liberty to part with that City, rather than to engage in War with
the Port: Some Venetian Traitor declared this part of his Commission to the
Turks, unknown to the Resident himself; who rather denied that he had any other
Commands, than what he had then propounded, which were the gentlest Terms. The
Bassa's judging themselves to be deluded, were very angry, and bid him have a
care what he said; their Master was not to be mocked, they knew well enough
that he had other Commands, and thereupon, they recited to him the full of his
Commission; so that now, said they, if you do not tell us, we shall look on you
as a Liar and Impostor, and then he would be punished as such; and his
Commonwealth would certainly be ruined, if the implacable Anger of Solomon did
once, on this Occasion, stir him up to War against them; and, therefore, speak
now, or for ever hereafter, hold your Peace: Our Master will not use
Entreaties, he has Power enough, God be thanked, to command Obedience.

The Venetian Agent was so surprised at this Discourse, which he did not so
much as dream of, that he up and told them all. For which yet, he was very much
blamed in his own Country.

Ever since that time, the Turks have indulged their Suspicions, That the
Christian Agents do deal but partially with them; and, therefore, they must
humble them to tell all the Truth; upon this they imprisoned Veldalic, the
Emperor Charles's Ambassador, 18 Months, and my Colleagues more than three Year,
and at last sent them away, without doing any thing. As for my self, I know not
how long I shall be kept in this durance; for my part, I see no end thereof.

When Baldus, that ancient Man of whom I spoke before, came to me, they
suspected that he had brought me new Commands, which allowed me to yield to
harder Conditions of Peace; and they feared that I would conceal them, because
I was well aware of their intestine Discords; so that by dealing harshly with
me, they thought to extort the whole truth from me. Upon the same Design Rustan
once sent me a large Gourd, called by the Germans Wasser-plutzer; they grow
very sweet at Constantinople, their Seeds are red within, and they came
originally from Rhodes. By this Present, sent unto me by my Secretary, Rustan
did jestingly insinuate the fear of a War; it was brought me when the Weather
was very hot, and the Juice is good to cool inward Heat. He sent this
Complement with it, That I should make use of the Fruit fitted for the time, it
would refrigerate in this hot Season; but I should know, withal, that a great
number of those Plants did grow about Buda and Belgrade, of a much larger size
than that which he sent me, meaning thereby Canon-Bullets. I returned Thanks
for my Present, and told him, I should make use of it; but for Buda and
Belgrade, 'twas no great wonder they grew there, seeing there was Plenty of
them, even of a larger size at Vienna. It pleased me to let Rustan know by my
Answer, that I could return Quibble for Quibble.

But to return to the Affairs of Bajazet, which you desired to be further
informed in.

You may remember that his Father dismissed him some Years ago, upon this
Condition, That he should never hereafter affront his Brother, nor raise up new
Tumults in the Empire, but should live quietly and peaceably, as a Brother
ought to do. He should remember his Promise made to himself, and not vex him in
his old Age, if he did, woe be to him. These Threats had weight with Bajazet, as
long as his Mother lived; he kept his word rather to retain her good Will and
Indulgence toward him, than that he had any Consideration either for his
Brothers love or Fathers good Will. However, quiet he was for his Mothers sake.
But two Years after her death, looking upon himself as desperate, he cut the
Cords of all filial Obedience, and began to resume his former Designs against
his Brother, and to execute his Animosity with greater spite: Sometimes he
laid Ambushes for his Life; at other times he attempted it by open force, and
now and then he sent Parties of his Men into his Brothers Province, (their
Provinces being contiguous one to the other) and if he could catch any of his
Domestics, he used them ill for their Masters sake; in ^ine, he left no Stone
unturned, to lessen his Brothers Credit, seeing he was not able to reach his
Life.

Besides, he had several Partisans at Constantinople, who endeavored to draw
over the Grand Seignior's Guard to his side, and he did not doubt but as his
Design ripened, to come privately to Constantinople, and there to abscond among
his Friends, till opportunity favored his appearance in public. Solomon was
made acquainted with all his Designs, by Letters from his Son Selymus, and
warned him to take care of his Life; for if he did not look upon these
nefarious Attempts of Bajazet, as pointed against himself, he was much
mistaken: For he did not care what he did either against God or Man, provided
he might gain the Kingdom thereby. Your Life, Sir, said he, is aimed at as well
as mine, and he would wound you through my sides; his Design was contrived long
ago, but now he only seeks opportunity to execute it; and therefore, pray,
prevent his Wickedness, before you irremedilessly be circumvented by him: As
for my self, I can easily bear all his Injuries, but the greatness of your
danger does more nearly concern me.

These Informations from Selymus did more and more incense Solomon against
Bajazet; so that he put him in mind of his Duty, by Letter, telling him what
great Clemency he had used toward him, and what Promises he had reciprocally
made to him: Call to mind, said he, those ancient things, it is not so easy for
you to get a new Pardon. Leave off wronging your Brother, and creating trouble
to me: I have but a little time to live; when I am gone, God will show which of
you shall reign; in the mean time, don't you disturb the public Peace, nor the
Tranquillity of my gray Hairs.

But these Expostulations wrought little with Bajazet, who was fully determined
to do his utmost, than to yield his Neck tamely to his Brothers Sword; for he
saw plainly that would be his Fate, if ever Selymus mounted the Throne.
However, he answered his Fathers Letters submissively enough; but his Words and
his Deeds did not agree, neither did he intermit the prosecution of his
intended Design.

When Solomon saw this, he resolved to try another Course, and to remove his
two Sons to a greater distance one from another; and, therefore, he commands
each of them, on a prefixed day, to leave his Province ( Chiutna was Bajazets,
and Magnetia Selymus's) and Bajazet to go to Amasia, and Selymus to Iconium.
This was done, not out of any disfavour to Selymus, but only to please Bajazet,
lest he should break out into Extremes, when he was removed from his
Government, and not his Brother from his. Withal, he laid his Command on them,
the more they were severed by distance of Place, the more they should be united
by Concord of Mind. For (said he) vicinity of Habitation does often breed Discord
betwixt Brethren, and Servants on both sides do ill Offices to enrage and
exasperate the Minds of their Masters one against another; and, therefore, obey
my Commands; he that refuses, I shall count him a contumacious Son. Selymus
immediately left his Province, as being confident of his Fathers Favor. But
Bajazet made many Tergiversations, and when he was gone a little way he stopped
his Journey, complaining that the unlucky Province of Amasia was allotted, as a
bad Omen; because his Brother was slain there. I should rather, said he, go to
any other Province besides, than where the miserable exit of my Relations will
constantly come to my Mind, and wound my very Soul; and, therefore, he desired
his Father to suffer him to Winter at least where he was, or else in his
Brothers Province. But Solomon would grant neither of those Requests. By this
time, Selymus was marched with an Army which was augmented with some Forces
from his Father Solomon, (for they were both afraid of Bajazets Plots) against
his Brother, who yet made many Halts and Delays; when, behold! on a sudden, he
fetched a compass about, and appeared with his Army on the rear of his Brother,
going toward Pratias, a City of Bithinia over against Constantinople in the
Asiatic Shore; his Father gave consent to his March, as not well pleased with
the cautation of Bajazet. For, they thought thus with themselves, that if
Bajazet could win over the Guards to himself, and march to Pratias, or even to
Constantinople it self, their Matters as to Solomon and Selymus, would be in
great hazard; and, therefore, out of a common fear, 'twas thought most
advisable for Selymus to stay there, where he might expect most Aid in case of
Necessity from the vicinity of the Capital Cities. For Selymus had not yet
Force enough to encounter his Brother in open Field, without hopes of Success.

When Bajazet saw his Brothers Army in his Rear, and that he got nothing by his
Delay, save the certain Knowledge, that Selymus should reign if his Father
dyed, as his Fear added to his Sickness gave some Likelihood thereof; hereupon,
he wrote Letters to his Father, wherein he laid grievous things to the Charge
of his Brother Selymus, as, that his present March did plainly declare, what a
wicked Intent he had toward his Father, who was come ^o near the Metropolis,
that he might treacherously compass the Empire, and that he might have but a
short Passage over if his Father dyed. But if his Father's Life should impede
his desire, then he would suborn some Paricide or other to take it away; and
yet this is the Son, forsooth, said he, that you have in your Bosom, as if he
were a very Nonsuch for filial Obedience; whereas I, said he, who never
entertained a bad Thought against you in all my Life, but was always observant
of your very Becks, am rejected and cast out of Favor; and yet the sum of my
Demands is only this, that an unlucky Province might not be designed for his
Government. To his Words he added Entreaties, humbly beseeching his Father to
gratify him with any other Government, either that which his Brother left, or
any other more fortunate one than that of Amasia; and, says he, I shall expect
an Answer in the Place where I now abide, lest if any Request be granted, I be
forced to March a great way back; but if your Ears be deaf to my Request, then
I will March to what Province you shall command me.

And the truth is, Bajazet had reason to be averse from Amasia, for it is a
Custom among them to build much on Auguries and ill Omens.

But these Letters were otherwise understood by Solomon, who was well
acquainted with his Sons Fears, and knew that he affected a Government not so
remote, but nearer to Constantinople, that thereby he might have the better
opportunity for Innovations.

Thus Bajazet made one Excuse after another for his Delay, and seemed to retard
his Fathers Pleasure; he listed Soldiers, increased his Army, raised Money, and
provided all things necessary for his own defense, and the Conquest of his
Brother. Solomon looked upon his Design against himself, yet the crafty old Man
dissembled it what he could. For he was unwilling to make Bajazet quite and
clean desperate. He was now grieved that the Eyes of all Nations were fixed on
that Dissension between his Sons, and therefore he designed to use some Delay,
that the Matter, if possible, might be composed with as little noise as might
be. And, therefore, he answered Bajazet's Letters mildly, telling him. That as
for the change of Provinces, he was fully resolved to be obeyed therein; and,
therefore, he and his Brother would do well immediately to repair to their
respective Armies.

As for other Concerns, he need not take care of them, for he himself would so
order Matters, that neither his Brother nor he should have any Cause to
complain. Solomon chose Perian, the Fourth Vizier Bassa, to carry those Letters
to Bajazet; and that he might seem to deal impartially between them both, he
sent Mehemet, the Third Vizier Bassa, to Selymus. He also laid a Charge on both
those Bassa's, not to stir a jot from either of his Sons, till they had both
entered on their respective Governments; which was wisely done by Solomon to
leave such faithful Monitors with his Children, which would daily put them in
mind of their Duties.

Accordingly, Selymus did willingly admit his Fathers Bassa, but Bajazet, whose
Mind was wholly set upon imbroiling the State, could not endure to have one of
his Fathers Counselors obtruded upon him, to be a Witness of his Designs, and
to be a Tell tale to his Father. And, therefore, he dismissed the Bassa, who
was willing to have staid, having first courteously treated and presented him
with Gifts, according to his present Ability; and he did it with this pretense,
that he had none else to represent his Cause impartially to his Father, but
only himself; and, if he would do him so good Offices, he promised not to be
ungrateful to him. He wished him also to tell his Father, that his Commands
should always be to him as a Law, but that he was forced to do what he did, for
fear of his Brother Selymus, whose Injuries and Affronts he could no longer
endure. By this Message of Pertan, Solomon was assured of Bajazet's Design,
though to color the Matter, and to put a blind on his Fathers Embassy, he
pretended he would hasten to Amasia. However, Solomon was not slow in his
Preparations against Bajazet, for he commanded the Beglerbeg of Asia, though sick
of the Gout, to assist his Son Selymus with a Body of Horse, and he sent also
the most Faithful of his Guards to accompany Mehemet Bassa, (who was also
returned from his Embassies) into Asia on the same Errand; and he himself
pretended he would gird on his Sword and follow them. But, alas! the Guards
showed themselves very unwilling to the Service; for they abominated the War
betwixt Brothers, as an impious thing. For against whom should they draw their
Sword? Was not Bajazet Heir of the Crown too? This unnecessary Discussion (said
they) may be composed without Blood, neither are we to be forced to sheath our
Swords in one another Bowels: As for Bajazet, he is forced to do what he does,
in a way of Self-preservation.

When these Rumors came to Solyman's Ears, he sent for the Mufti (the High
Priest of the Turks) from whom, as from an Oracle, they expect Answers to their
Doubts, and propounds a Case to him in these Terms.

How them Men ought to be dealt with, who durst disturb the Peace of the
Empire, by taking of Towns, and raising both of Men and Money, while he was
alive: As also what he thought of those, who were assistant to him in that
Design, and fought under his Ensigns; and, lastly, what was to be done with
those who refused to engage against him, but rather justified his Practices?

The Mufti's Answer was, That such a Person with all his Followers were worthy
of Death; and they that refused to Fight against him were to be abominated, as
Profane, and Deserters of their Religion.

This Answer was divulged among the Commonalty, and by the Chief of the
Chiauxes was transmitted to Bajazet.

A while after there came a Chiaux to Constantinople, who had been sent by
Solomon to Selymus, but had been intercepted by Bajazet; by whom he sent a
Message to their Father, to this effect; That he would never fail in expressing
his Duty to his Father, and that he never took up Arms against him, but was
resolved to be obedient to him in all things. The Dispute was only between his
Brother and himself, who sought his Life, so that he must fall by his Brothers
Sword, or his Brother there by his. This difference might be decided in his
Fathers Life, and, therefore, he desired him not to interpose or assist his
Brother, but to carry himself in an exact Neutrality; but if (said he) you pass
over into Asia, (as Report says you will) to assist Selymus, don't you think, I
shall be speedily reduced; for I know whither to retreat; and, let me tell you,
the first day you set foot in Asia, I will destroy all by Fire and Sword, and
will make it as desolate, as ever Tamerlin or the War of our Enemies ever did.

When this Message was delivered to Solomon, it did much disturb him,
especially when word was brought to him, that the Town of Arvar, which Selymus,
his Son, was Sanziack of, was taken by Bajazet; and after he had exacted a
great Sum of Money from them, had plundered and sacked it notwithstanding.

But Selymus, when he heard that his Brother marched toward Amasia, and was
already come as far as Hucyras, being now freed form the suspicion of
Treachery, which he feared, marched also himself toward Iconium, wherein he
had put a Garrison till his arrived.

'Twas none of the least of Solyman's cares, which distracted his Mind, lest
Bajazet should seize on Iconium, and so march into Syria, from whence there is
a large Passage into Egypt, a Province not fully settled in Subjection to the
Turks, and not forgetting the ancient Governors of the Circassians or
Marncasses, longed for a change. And if Bajazet once got thither, he foresaw it
would be a very hard Matter to beat him out, should the neighboring Arabians
assist him; who, in hopes of Booty, were ready to take any side. And if with
much ado, he could have been driven out of Egypt, yet from thence he might
easily be wafted over into any of the Christian Countries; whereupon Solomon,
by all means, sought to stop his March thither, (because he thought it would be
Bajazet's last Shift) and to that end he had written to most of the Governors
of lesser Asia, to be watchful and to assist Selymus, when he called for their
Aid. And accordingly Solyman's Army forced a Camp before the Walls of Iconium.
For he thought it best to be slain there, than wait for the Auxiliaries of his
Father, and not to hazard his All on the doubtful Issue of a Battle.

On the other side, Bajazet knowing what a hazardous Enterprise he had
undertaken, was as vigorous to support his Cause; he hired a great Body of
Horse, called Chiarts, perhaps formerly Gordianes, Men noted for Valor, in
whom he put great Confidence.

They, as soon as ever they came into his Army, began the representation of a
Battle on Horseback, which had so much of Truth in it, that many of them were
slain, but more wounded. His Camp was pitched in the plain and open Fields of
Aucyra, from which City he was supplied with many Necessaries, and at the
Castle thereof he placed his Concubines and Children. From those Merchants,
that were Rich, he borrowed Money, upon Terms of Re-payment with Interest, if
God gave him Success. Form thence, also, he was furnished with Arms for his
Soldiers.

Besides his own Family (consisting of very many among the higher sort of
Turks) and the Chiauxes before mentioned, those that were of his Mothers or his
Sisters, and of Rustan's Faction, came in to him; so did very many of
Mustapha's and Achmet's Favorites, fierce and skilful Warriers; for they
grudging at the undeserved Death of their Master, were resolved to revenge them
with the hazard of their Blood; some also came under his Banner out of
Commiseration of his depressed Condition, as being necessiated to fly to Arms,
his last and only Refuge.

A great many favored Bajazet, because he was so like his Father, whereas
Selymus had not one Feature in his Face resembling him. It Is true, he was very
like his Mother, a Woman hated while she was alive; he was a Big-bellied Man,
with swollen Cheeks, and his Face of a deep and uncomly Redness; insomuch, that
the Soldiers would seemingly say, He was crammed with Barley Pudding. Besides,
he lived a slothful, banqueting, idle Life; neither was he courteous, or of
easy Access, nor did he oblige any Man by Largessee or Bounties: The Reason he
gave, was, That he would not offend his Father, by aiming at popular Applause.
Thus he became dear to his Father only, but dis-respected of every Body else;
yea, those Persons did most disdain him, who coveted a munificent and an active
Emperor. The same Soldiers that were wont to call Bajazet, Softi (i. e.) a
seddentary Man, and given to Ladies; when they saw that he took up Arms, and
ventured his All to defend himself and his Children, now extolled him to the
Skies, as a Man of extraordinary Valor. Why (said they, reasoning among
themselves) should his Father abdicate a Son, that is his express Image? Why
should he prefer his slothful, pot-bellied Brother before him, that had nothing
of his Fathers disposition in him? As for Bajazet's taking Arms, Necessity
enforced him thereunto, and therefore, he was not to be blamed; for did not
Selymus, their Grandfather, do the same? What greater President could there be?
For he did not only arm against his Brother, but Necessity also compelled him
to hasten his Fathers death; and yet by this Procedure he established the
Kingdom to himself and his Posterity. Now if Solomon did rightfully possess
that Kingdom, so unjustly gotten, why should his Son be denied to take the same
Course? Why should that Fact be vindicated so severely in him, which was
accounted Lawful in his Grandfather? And yet the Cause was much different (said
they); for Bajazet did not take up Arms against his Father, but wishes him a
long Life; nay, he would not hurt and Hair of his Brothers Head, if he could be
sure of his own Life, against him; but it is always lawful to resist Force by
Force, and, if possibly, to prevent ones own certain Ruin. These Discourses
caused many to fly unto Bajazet, and his Army being now of a moderate size,
without any delay, he marches toward his Brother, putting his Life, Fortune
and the hope of the Empire, upon the Event of the Battle; for thus thought he
with himself, my Valor (at least) will be commended, if it be not prosperous;
I will endeavor if I can, to break my way into Syria, and if I succeed
therein, my Business is done.

Selymus waited for him under the Walls of Iconium, having a vast Army,
increased by Forces sent him from his Father, and well furnished with skilful
Commanders; and besides all other Necessaries, secured with great Ordnance on
every side. Bajazet was nothing terrified at all those Disadvantages, but
as soon as he came in sight of his Brothers Army, he exhorted his Own, though
inferior in Number, in this sort.

Now, says he, the long wished for Hour is ^ome, wherein you may show your
Valor; do you act as Men, and let me alone to reward you. All my Fortune is in
your Hand; my Misfortunes have been irksome some time, but now here is an open
Campaign, wherein I may change them for the better, and forget all the Miseries
of my former Life. If you Conquer, you may expect from me Honor, Dignity, and
all kind of Rewards, befitting Men of Valor. One Victory will complete all our
Hopes, though never so vast, and that you may get by your superabounding Valor.
As for my Brothers Troops before your Eyes, they are a Company of Buffoons
under a slothful General; you may easily make way through them with your
swords; what Force he has with him of my Fathers, though they are his in Body,
yet they are mine at Heart. It Is Selymus alone that stands in the way, both of
my Vassals and of your Happiness too, and therefore, let us both revenge our
selves on a common Enemy. And for their Multitude don't fear them, Conquest is
got by Valor, not by Number. God Almighty uses to assist the Rest, not the
Most; certainly, if you consider how the savage Enemy thirsts after your blood,
you will preserve yours by shedding theirs. In fine, said he, I will not only
speak, but do; let me be your Pattern; do you Fight but as valiantly for my
safeguard, as I shall do for your advancement, and I Will warrant you the battle
is our own.

Having finished his Oration, he made toward the Enemy with an undaunted
Courage, and in the Front of his Army showed himself both a brave Soldier and a
skilful Commander, so that he was Renowned also by his very Enemies. The Battle
was bloody, and many fell on both sides, and Victory seemed to hover in the
doubtful Wings; but at last she inclined to that side, where was more Force, a
juster Cause, and better Counsel; just in the nick, there arose such a Wind
that it carried the smoke of the Ordinance into the very Faces of Bajazet's
Army, so that they fought blindfold, as it were; whereupon Bajazet, after much
bloodshed on both sides, was forced to sound a Retreat; but he made it with so
little of Trepidation, and so leisurely, that he seemed a Conqueror rather than
a Conquered; neither did Selymus make out of his Camp to pursue him, being well
contented to see his Enemy turn their Backs.

After this, Bajazet considering he had disobeyed his Father's Commands, by
indulging his own Humor, and being cut off from hi March into Syria, which he
had designed, resolved to move in good earnest toward Amasia.

Solomon had presently a Messenger sent him of this Victory, and immediately he
posted over into Asia. His Bassa's would not let him go before; But now (said
they) you must make haste to press upon Bajazet in his Misfortune and to
prevent his Recruit; for if his secret Favorites should declare for him, they
might cut them out further Work. The Report of your Passage over, will both
discourage your Son and terrify all his Followers; and, therefore, make haste
lest he serve you as sometimes your Father did, who was more formidable after
he was Conquered than before, so that his very Overthrow was the Cause, why at
last he prevailed. Neither did they thus speak without Cause; for it is
incredible how much that Fight, though unfortunate, had added to Bajazet's
Renown. That he was so hardily Valorous, as with a small handful, in
comparison, to set upon the well disciplined Army of his Brother, strengthened
too with his Fathers Force; that he was not daunted with the disadvantage of
the Place, nor the roaring of the great Ordnance, and that he carried himself
in the very Battle not as a raw General, but an expert Commander. It Is true,
said they, his Success was not answerable, but his Valor was not Inferior;
and, therefore, let Selymus boast never so much of his Victory to his Father,
this we are sure of, that of the Two, Bajazet deserved to be Conqueror; neither
did his Brether prevail against him by true Force, but through Strength. These
Discourses concerning Bajazet, showed him to be Popular, and thereupon they
double his Fathers trouble, and his desire to ruin him; resolved he was none
but Selymus should succeed him in the Empire; for besides that he was his
eldest Son, he had been always faithful and obedient to him; but Bajazet had
been contumacious, and gaped after the Throne in his Life time; and he feared
him the more, because he was esteemed a very valiant Prince, and because also
he had openly assaulted Solomon against him.

For these Reasons he passed the Sea into Asia, but with a Resolution not to
stir from the Shore, but to assist his Son Selymus's Affairs, only at a
distance. For why, thought he, should I run any hazard to bring my own Force
nearer, lest my Army not fully settled in their Obedience, should be reapted to
a Revolt.

I my self saw Solomon march out of Constantinople in the Year, 1559, June 5th.
though against the Will of my Chiaux. Let me here present you with a Scheme of
Mirth, and like a Braggadotio-soldier, tell you of two Battles I had at once;
for why, I have leisure enough (unless you count my Cares my study) and the
larger I am in my Scribbling, the more time do I borrow from my Troubles. Hear
then my Contests.

When I was certainly informed that the Sultan was ready to pass over into
Asia, and that the day was fixed for his Departure, I told my Chiaux that I had
a mind to see him march out, and therefore he should come betimes in the
Morning and open the Doors, for he used to carry the Keys of my Doors home with
him at Night; he promised me courteously, he would do so. Then I took order
with my Ianizaries and my Interpreters, that they would take me an upper Room
in the Way the Emperor was to pass, convenient for my View. They obeyed my
Commands; when the day was come, I rose before 'twas light, and expected that
my Chiaux had opened my Doors, but finding them shut, I sent several Messengers
to him, to come and let me out, both my Ianizaries that waited within Doors and
Druggermen that waited to come in; this I did, through the Chinks of the Gate,
which was very old; but the Chiaux still spun out Delays, pretending he would
come presently: Thus I spent some time, till I heard the noise of the Guns,
which the Ianizaries use to shoot off, when their Emperor takes Horse, then I
began to fret and fume, seeing my self so deluded; my just Indignation did
affect the Ianizaries themselves, they told me, that if my People would thrust
hard with them, they without would so press upon the Valves, which were loose
and old, that the Bars would fall out; I took their Counsel, and the Doors flew
open accordingly, and out we went, hying to the Room I had hired.

My Chiaux had a mind to frustrate my Desire, and yet he was no bad Man
neither; for having communicated my Request to the Bassa's, that he was not
willing that any Christian should behold their Prince marching with so small
Force against his own Son, and, therefore, said they to him, do you promise him
fair, but be sure to delay him tell the Sultan is a Shipboard; then you may
devise some Excuse or other for your Compurgation: But he was caught in his
own Craft.

When I came to the House where a Room was hired for me, behold it was shut, so
that I could no more enter into that, than I could go forth of my own; when I
knocked, no Body answered; hereupon the Ianizaries again told me, that if I
commanded them they would break open the Doors, or else would go in at Window
and open them. I told them they should not break open any thing, but if they
would go up to the Windows they might; they presently did so, and opened the
Door. When I went up Stairs, I found the House full of Jews, a whole Synagogue
of them; they looked upon it, as a Miracle, that I should enter, when the Doors
were shut; but being informed of the Truth, an old grave Matron, in comely
Habit, profer'd her self, and complained to me in Spanish of the Violence I had
offered to the House; I told her, she had done me wrong, in not keeping her
Word, and that I was not a Man to be thus deluded; she seemed unsatisfied, and
the time would not admit further Discourse. In short, I was allowed one Window,
which on the back side looked out into the Street, and from thence, with a
great deal of Pleasure, I beheld the whole Proceeding as they passed out of the
City.

The Gulupagi and the Vlupagi marched two by two; the Selchers one by one, and
Spahi's (which are the Names of the Grand Seigniors Horse Guards)^
distinguished by their Ranks and Troops, they were about 6000. besides a vast
number of the Domestics of the Prime Vizier, and of other Bassa's. The Turkish
Horsemen yield a gallant Show; the best Breed of Horse is from Cappadocia and
Syria, and the adjacent Countries; he is trapp'd with Silver Trappings, studded
with Gold and Jewels. His Rider's clad with a Coat or Vest made of Silk Velvet,
or other fine Cloth of Scarlet, Purple or dark Blue Color, intermixed with
Gold and Silver. He has two Cases hanging by his sides, one holds his Bow, the
other his Arrows, both of neat Babylonian Workmanship, and so is his Buckler
held in his left Arm, strong enough to resist Blows made by Arrows or Clubs: In
his right Hand, unless he desire to have it free, he carries a light Spear, for
the most part painted with Green; his Scimitar is studded with Jewels, and made
of Steel, and it hangs down from his Saddle. What need so much Armor, say you?
I Will tell you. They use them all; and that dexterously too, you will reply. How
can he use that Spear and the Bow too? What! will he take up his Spear when he
has broke, or thrown away his Bow? Not so neither, For he keeps his Spear as
long as he can; but when he has occasion to use his Bow, the Spear being light
and easily manag^d, he puts it between his Saddle and his Thigh; so that the
Point thereof sticks out backward; and thus he presses it down with his Knee,
as long as he pleases. But if he fight only with the Spear, then he puts up his
Bow into his Case, or else with his left Hand places it behind his Shield. But
it is not my present Design to acquaint you with the Turks expertness at Arms;
they have obtained it by long Use and Experience in War. Their Heads are
covered with very fine White Cotten-Linnen, in the midst whereof stands up a
Tust made of Purple Silk, divided chamferingly; some of them wear black
Feathers a-top.

After the Horse, a large Body of Ianizaries followd, being Foot, and seldom
taking any other Arms than Muskets. The Form and Color of their Cloths is
almost one and the same, so that you would judge them all to be the Servants of
one Man's Family. They have no prodigious Habit among them, nor any thing rent
or torn; their Clothes will wear not soon enough, they say, without their
tearing of them; yet in their Feathers, Crests, and suchlike military
Ornaments, they are overcurious, or rather proud, especially, the Veterans in
the Rear, you would think a whole Wood of walking Feathers were in their
Fire-stars and Frontals; after them their Officers and Commanders follow on
Horseback, distinguished each by his proper Ensign. In the last Place marches
their Aga, or General. Then succeed the chief Courtiers, amongst whom are the
Bassa's; then the Foot of their Prince's Lifeguard in a peculiar Habit,
carrying their Bows bent in their Hands, for they are all Archers; next the
Princes Led-Horses, all with curious Trappings. He himself rode on a stately
Prauncer, looking sour with his Brows bent, as if he had been angry; behind him
came three Youths, one carrying a Flagon of Water, another his Cloak, another
his Bow. Then followed some Eunuchs of the Bedchamber; and, at last, a Troop
of about Two Hundred Horse closed the Proceeding.

After I had the satisfaction of viewing all this, my only care was now to
appease my Hostess, she that at my entrance spoke to me in Spanish, for I heard
she was very familiar with Rustan's Wife, and therefore I was afraid she would
represent things unhandsomly against me; to prevent which, I sent for her, and
told her she should have remembered her Bargain, and not have shut her Door
against me who had hired a Room; but though, said I, you don't remember your
Promise, I Will perform mine; yea I will be better than my word: I promised you
but 7 Pistriots, but here is 10 for you, that so you may not repent your
Admittance of me into your House. When the Woman thus unexpectedly saw her Hand
filled with Gold, she was presently melted down into a Compliance, and the
whole Synagogue of them fell to blandishments and giving me thanks, and the
Woman that was Chrony to Rustan's Wife, made one in the Consort, for she always
in my Landladies name gave me great Thanks: They brought forth Grecian Wine and
a Banquet, but I refused to eat, but with the great Acclamations of all the
Jews, made have to be gone, that I might manage a new Combat with my Chiaux,
for keeping my Doors fastened, when I should have come forth.

I found him sitting mournfully in my Porch, where he began a long Complaint,
that I ought not to have gone abroad without his Consent, nor to have broke
open the Door: that I had violated the Law of Nations thereby, and such like
stuff. I replied in short, That if he had come betimes in the Morning as he
promised, he had prevented all this; his breach of Promise had occasioned it,
for his intent was only to delude. I demanded also of him, whether he looked
upon me as an Ambassador, or a Prisoner? For an Ambassador, says he; if for a
Prisoner, said I, then I am not an Instrument to make a Peace, for a Prisoner
is not his own man; but if an Ambassador, as you confess, then why am I not a
Freeman? Why cannot I go abroad when I will? Captives use to be shut up, not
Ambassadors; Liberty is granted such in all Nations, they may claim it as their
public due: He ought to know, that he was not appointed to be my Sergeant or
Keeper, but to assist me, (as he himself used to say) with his good Offices,
that so no other man might do any injury to me or mine.

Hereupon he turns to the Ianizaries, and quarrels with them, for giving me
advice to break open the Doors, and for being instant with my Servants therein.
They denied I had need of their advice: I commanded them to open them, and they
obeyed; there was no great ado about it, the Doors were old, and flew open
presently; there was nothing either lost or broken. Thus the Chiaux was forced
with me to hold his peace, and I never heard any more of the matter.

A while after I had also leave to pass over the Sea, for the Turks judged it
conducing to their Affairs, to Treat me kindly in their Camp, as the Ambassador
of a Prince in Alliance with them; and to that end, I had a handsome Lodging
provided for me near their Camp, where I had all the Conveniences imaginable: I
lived there three Months, and had the opportunity to view the Camp of the
Turks, which was extended all over the neighboring Fields, and to discover
some parts of their Discipline: You will not find fault with me, if I acquaint
you with something thereof. Know then, that I clothed my self as Christians do
in that Country, and with one or two Attendants walked up and down their Camp
incognito. The first thing I saw was the Soldiers of each Body quartered with
great Order in their several Ranks, and that with a great deal of silence,
('it is far otherwise in Christian Camps) all hush, not a quarrel, breath, or
noise amongst them in their Jollities. Besides, they are wonderfully cleanly,
no beastliness, no noisome smell to offend Eye or Ear; all their Ordure they
bury under ground, or throw it far enough off. When they have occasion to ease
Nature, they dig a Pit with a Spade, and there bury their Excrements; so that
there is no ill smell at all. Besides, there are no Drinking-matches amongst
them, no playing with Cards or Dice, (the Bane of the Christian Army:) I only
heard one common Soldier playing a doleful Ditty on an Harp ill tuned, and his
Fellows were howling rather than singing; it was a Soldier's farewell Word in
the Borders of Hungary, and he canted out the last words of his Fellow-Soldier,
who died of his Wounds on the Grass bank of the Danow; he abjured that River,
because the Streams thereof were to glide to his own Country, that it should
commend him to his Friends there, and tell them that he died no ignoble nor
unrevenged Death for the glory of their Nation, and increase of their Religion.
His Fellows groaned out, Thrice happy he, O that our Case was like his. For you
must know, the Turks are of this opinion, That no Souls go more directly to
Heaven than those of valiant Men, who lost their lives in the Field; and that
Virgins do pour out daily Prayers to God for their safety.

I had a mind to pass through their Shambles, that I might see what Flesh was
sold there; I saw only four or Five Weathers at most hung up dressed; it was
the Shambles of the Ianizaries, who were at least 4000: I wondered so little
Flesh could suffice so many; and was answered, They used but little flesh, but
a great part of their Diet was brought from Constantinople: When I demanded,
what that was, they showed me a Ianizary near at hand, who was lying down, and
was boiling Turnips, Leeks, Garlic, Parsnips, and Cucumbers, seasoning them
with Salt and Vinegar; and Hunger being his best Sauce, eating them as
heartily, as if they had been Partridge or Phesant.

Their Drink was that which was common to all Animals, viz. Water; by this
frugality they consult the Health of their Bodies, and also the saving of their
Money. And the very time wherein they did this, caused me to admire the more;
it was their Fast, (or as we call it, Lent) at which time among Christians even
in well governed Cities, as well as in Camps, there is nothing but Sporting,
Dancing, Singing, Revelling, Drunkenness, and such like Madness; insomuch that
a Turkish Envoy coming once at that time of the year, reported at his return,
That the Christians at certain times grew mad and raging, but sprinkling
themselves with a sort of Ashes in their Temples, they recovered their Wits
again, so that they did not seem the same Men; thereby denoting Ash Wednesday,
and its Eve. The Turks fearing this, were struck with a great Amazement,
because they have many Medicines amongst them which cause Madness, but very few
that procure a speedy recovery therefrom.

For the Days immediately preceding their Fasts, they do not alter their
private way of living in their Worshipping; rather on the contrary, they abridge
themselves of some of their daily Commons, that they may provide for their
Fasts, lest a sudden abstinence might be prejudicial to their Healths.

The time of their Fast is so appointed, that every Year it comes fifteen Days
sooner than the former; the reason is, because they fill not the 12 yearly
spaces of the Moon: Hence it comes to pass, that their Fast kept in the early
Spring after six Years, happens at the beginning of Summer; for they measure
their Fasts by the course of the Moon, and there are none more irksom to them,
than those which fall out in the long Summer-days; for while they fast, not a
bit, nor so much as a drop of water goes down (neither dare they so much as
wash their Mouths therewith) before the Star appear in the Evening, the longest
Day of Abstinence, being hot, and daily too, must needs be very tedious,
especially to the poorer sort, who live by their dusty labor: yet before
Sunrise (though not after) while yet the Stars shine in the Firmament, it is
lawful for them to eat; and therefore they better endure their Winter Fasts.
And that they may not be deceived by the darkness of the Weather, their Priests
hang out Lights in Paper-Lanthorns from the top of their Moschs, (from whence
they are wont, by sound of Voice to call them to Prayers, as we do by Bells:)
And this shows that their Eating-time is come, whereupon entering presently into
their Temples, and worshipping God in their way, they return to Supper.

In the close of their Summer-Fasts, I once saw a great many of them to go into
a Tavern over against my Lodging (where Ice was always to be sold coming from
Mount Olympus in Asia) and there they asked for Icy-water, which they drank
jetting strangely backward; for the Turks count it profane either to Eat,
Drink, or Piss, in a standing posture, unless in case of necessity; but they do
it bending their Bodies; as Women do with us when they make Water. And whereas
in the dusk of the Evening I could not well discern the meaning of that
Posture, I was told that most of them drank a draught of cold Water, to make
way for their Meat, for otherwise it would stick to their Jaws and they could
not swallow it; and besides, this moisture of their Palate did quicken their
Appetites.

In their Diet they are not choice, and after their Fasts they may eat any
Meat, which was lawful for them to do at other times. If they fall sick, they
omit their Fasts, but with this condition, that when they recover they must
fast so many Days over, as they neglected before. But when they are near an
Enemy, and ready to fight, lest fasting should weaken their Bodies, they are
allowed to eat; and if a blind Superstition detains some of them, then their
Emperor, at Noon, in the sight of his whole Army cuts his Dinner, and by his
example they are encouraged to do the same.

They use Wine at no time of the Year, they count it profane and irreligious so
to do, especially they abhor it on their Fasts, then no man is so much as to
smell to it, much less to taste it.

I often asked why Mahomet was so strict, as to forbid his Followers the use of
Wine; In answer to my demand, they told me this Story, That Mahomet making a
Journey to his Friend, at Noon entered into a House where there was a
Marriage Feast, and setting down with the Guests, he observed them to be very
merry and jovial, kissing and embracing one another, which was attributed to
the cheerfulness of their Spirits raised by the Wine; so that he blessed it as
a sacred Thing, as being an Instrument of much Love amongst Men: But returning
to the same House the next Day, he beheld another face of Things; as gore blood
on the ground, an Hand cut off, an Arm, Foot, and other Limbs dismembered,
which he was told was the effect of the Brawls and Fightings occasioned by the
Wine, which made them mad, and destroy one another: Whereupon he changed his
Mind, turning his former Blessing into a Curse, and forbidding it, as an
Abomination, to all his Disciples.

For this reason all was quiet in the Camp, and the greatest composure
imaginable, especially at their Feast-time; so much did Camp-Discipline and a
strictness received from their Ancestors prevail upon them.

The Turks punish all flagitious Disorders very severely; their Punishments
are, loss of their Places, sale of their Goods, basting with Clubs, Death; but
Club-basting is most common, from which the Ianizaries themselves are not free,
though they may not as such be put to death; their lighter Offenses are chastised
by the Club, their more heinous by cashering or degrading, which they count
worse than death, because commonly they are put to death afterward; for being
stripped of the Ensigns of Ianizaries, they are banished to the farthest Garrison
of the Empire, where they live contemptible and inglorious, till upon any light
occasion they are put to death, yet not as Ianizaries, but as common Soldiers
only.

And here let me acquaint you with the patience of the Turk in receiving that
Punishment; they will receive sometimes an hundred blows on their Legs, their Feet
and Buttocks, with wonderful patience; so that diverse Clubs are broke, and the
Executioner cries out, Give me another: yea, sometimes the Chastisement is so
severe, that several parcels of torn flesh are cut off from the wounded parts,
in order to their ease; yet for all this, they must go to their Officer, who
commanded them to be punished, they must kiss his Hand, and give him Thanks;
nay, they must also give the Executioner a Reward for beating them: the Club
they are beaten with, they count sacred, and that it fell down from Heaven, as
the Romans counted their Praise to do, and as some Relief to their Misery; they
count those parts wounded with the Rod or Club, to be free from any Purgations,
and Expiations after this life.

When I told you, that the Turk's Camp were free from Broyls and Tumults, I
must except One, which was made by my own Men: The Occasion was this, Some of
my Servants had a mind to walk out of the Camp, without any Ianizaries to
attend them; only taking some Italian Renegado's that professed the Turks
Religion. Let me tell you by the way, that these Italians are of good use in
that Country, especially in redeeming of Captives, for they come to their
Masters, and pretend they are either their Kinsmen, or their Countrymen, and
therefore out of Compassion to them, they desire to buy them as their Pastrons,
for a Price agreed, and so they set them free: But if a Christian should make
the same profer to them, they would either refuse him, or hold him to a far
greater Rate.

But to return; Some of my People as I told you, gadding abroad, they light
upon some Ianizaries, who came from Swimming and Washing themselves in the Sea,
without the Badges of their Order on their Heads, only some Linen being very
slighlty wrapped about them. These Ianizaries reviled my People, knowing them
to be Christians; for that is the guise of the Turks, to reproach Christians;
it is a Principle of their Religion, they think thereby to incline them to
exchange it for a better, as they count theirs to be: My Folks being thus
provoked, return Jeer for Jeer; from Words they came to Blows, the Italians
assisting my Men, the cause of the Scuffle was, that one of the Ianizaries lost
the Linen Covering off his Head, which was thrown I know not whither: Hereupon
the Ianizaries hye to their General, complaining of their Wrongs and loss
received by my Servants, for they watched them, and found them returned to my
House: Their General presently sent for my Interpreter, who was present at the
Conflict; He was seized upon sitting at my Door, and they were pulling of him
away. I beheld it from a Gallery above, and was much concerned, that any of my
Family should be taken forcibly from me without my Consent, to be carried to
the Bastinado, (for I understood something of the Matter before) for I could
not imagine he would be returned to me without being well beaten, he being one
of the Turk's Subjects. Whereupon I ran down, and laid hold on him, commanding
him to let him go; they did so grumblingly, but hasted presently with far more
grievous Complaints to their General; who commanded more of their Company to go
and seize those Italians who of Christians are said to become Turks; yet he
charged them to offer no Violence to me at the House where I lodged. They came
back presently, and with a great Noise and many Threats, demanded those
Italians; but they foreseeing what would come to pass, had sailed back to
Constantinople: Much Clamor there was on both sides, at last my Chiaux which
at that time was an old decrepid Man, out of jeer thrust some Pistols into
their Hands unknown to me, to buy a new Bonnet in the room of that which was
lost, and thus the Dispute ended.

I have been the more punctual in relating this Story, because on this
occasion, I understood from Rustan's own Mouth, what Opinion the Sultan had of
the Ianizaries: For he hearing of this Scuffle, sent a Messenger to me, to
desire me to cut off all occasion of Dispute with the Ianizaries as the worst
of Men: You know, said he, it is a time of War, wherein they may be said to
reign, rather than the Sultan, who stands in fear of them himself This he spoke
as being well acquainted with the Sentiments of Solomon, who always susp^cted
some Men of their own to lie in wait against their Militia, which would break
forth when he had no Opportunities to prevent it.

And the truth is, though there may be some use of a standing Guard and
Mil^tia, yet there are also many Inconveniences attending it, of which this is
the chief, their Emperor is very fearful of them, lest having the Sword in
their Hands, they should alter the Government as they pleased, of which there
had been many Presidents, yet there are ways also, wereby this may be prevented.

While I was in their Camp, there came Albertus de Vbiis, a worthy and learned
Person, as I think born at Amsterdam, as an Envoy from my Master Caesar; He
brought with him some Presents for their Sultan, as some Goblets gilt with
Gold, with a Clock neatly made, and carried like a Tower on an Elephants Back;
as also some Money to be distributed amongst the Bassa's: Solomon would have me
deliver these Presents in the Camp, that the Amity betwixt Him and my Master
might be more publicly known, and so no Danger at all to be feared from the
Christian Arms.

But to return to Bajazet, after the Fight at Iconium, who retired to his
Government of Amasia, pretending to live quietly there, if his Father would
permit him so to do. For why? He had sown his wild Oats, and for the future
seemed pliable to obey his Fathers Will; and for this he employed sundry
Persons to carry submissive Letters to his Father, begging his Pardon: Neither
did Solomon pretend that he was averse from Reconciliation with his Son, and
therefore he admitted his Messengers into his Presence; he read his Letters,
and answered them mildly. So that the Report was spread over all the Army what
an Agreement was like to be between Father and Son; what he had done amiss, was
to be imputed to the hot Blood of his Youthful Age, provided he would show
himself Obsequious the residue of his Life. This Solomon did by the Advice of
his Bassa's, for the cunning old Man would not declare himself, till he had
brought Bajazet into the Nooz of his own Power. He was terribly afraid, lest
out of Desperation he should march furiously into Persia (his only Place of
Refuge) with so great Post-haste, that all his Sanziacks should not be able to
prevent them. To prevent which Mistakes, he sent many Letters to all the
Governors upon the Borders, to watch Bajazet, and not to suffer him to escape,
if he attempted it.

In the mean time, he put all those of Bajazet's Party that he could light
upon, to the Rack; and when he had got out of them what he could, he put them
privately to death; amongst which were some that Bajazet had sent to be his
Companions to his Father.

The Kingdom of Persia at that time contained all the Countries between the
Caspian Sea, and the Seas of Persia, with some part of Armenia the Greater,
(though Solomon by taking of Babylon, Mesopotamia, and part of Media had
abridged their Empire very much) and other far Countries even to the Empire of
the Homaium Patisach, as the Turks call him, and over that last part of Land
Sagathmas was King: The Father had been formerly over-thrown by Selymus in a
great Fight in the Field of Chalderon; and from that time the Persian Affairs
began to decline, for Solomon a fierce Enginier pressed upon the very Face; and
Thamas being much inferior to his Father's Courage, made but a weak Defense:
For he was wholly given to Sloth and Idleness, and would sit in his Palace
amongst a Crowd of Harlots, amorously pleasing his Humor; and sometimes
consulting Magicians concerning future Events: He had little Care of
Administering public Justice to his People. This Neglect of his opened the Door
to all Injustice and Oppression in every part of his Empire: For the Strong
oppressed the Weaker, and Innocence could find no Justice or Defense in his
Court.

Notwithstanding this malevolous Instruction, yet the Persians have so sacred
an Opinion of their Prince, that they believe him happy, that can but kiss the
Door of his Palace; and the Water wherein he washes his Hands, they use in
order to the Cure of several Diseases. He has many Children, but the most
promising is Ismael, like his Grandfather both in Name and Nature; a beautiful
Prince, and a Capital Enemy to the Race of the Ottomans. It Is reported that he
was brought forth into the World with his Fist all bloody, whence 'twas
vulgarly said, That he would be a Warlike Person; and when he was but young he
confirmed that Report, by obtaining a great Victory over the Turks. But when
his Father made Peace with Solomon, 'twas agreed betwixt them, that Ismael
should be sent Prisoner into the Bowels of his Kingdom, that he might be no
Obstacle to the intended Agreement: And yet as ill used as he is after his
Fathers death, it is thought he would succeed in the Empire.

But Solomon fearing that Sagathamas, (or as we call him, the Sophi) would be
more mindful of old Grudges, than of the late Peace to which he was in a manner
compelled, and that if his Son went thither, he should have much ado to get him
thence, and perhaps it might occasion a long War between the Empires, did use
his utmost endeavor to stop or take him, before he could come thither. The old
Man had not forgot that a few Years before Helcas, Thamas's Brother had fled to
him, and had been supported by him, and it cost his Brother dear to recover
him, and therefore he feared that Thamas would serve him the same sauce, and
perhaps recover by the Sword all the Countries he had taken from him. The
Design of Solomon was kept very secret, yet Bajazet's Friends smelt it out, and
therefore advised him by no means to trust his Father, but to consult his
Safety, by avoiding his Misery, what way soever he could. And Bajazet was
persuaded so to do upon a small occasion, (as often great Matters turn into
little Injuries.) There was a Soldier of Bajazet^s taken in Solyman's Camp,
and hanged up as a Spy, because that Bajazet had listed him, after his Father
had given him strict charge to list no more Soldiers. This was warning enough
to Bajazet to pack up and be gone. Now Solomon thought himself sure of Bajazet,
and to deceive him the more, he caused his Army to begin their March the Day
after Easter, back to Constantinople. But Bajazet, after Prayer, upon
Easter Day, summoned all his Relics, and began his unfortunate Voyage toward
Persia; he knew well enough that he went to the old Enemy of the Ottoman House,
but he was resolved to try the mercy of any body, rather than fall into his
Fathers Hands. There marched out with him all that were able to bear Arms, none
were left behind but weak Persons, Women and Children, that were not able to
bear the Toil of so long a Journey; amongst which was a young Child of his own,
with his Mother, whose Innocence he thought would protect them from his Fathers
Cruelty, and therefore he thought it best to expose them to his Clemency,
rather than make them Companions of his woeful and miserable Fight; and the
truth is, Solomon as yet uncertain what would become of the Father, spared the
Life of his Infant Son at present, and sent him to be Educated at Prusia.

I would have returned to Constantinople, the Day before Easter, but had a
great mind to see, how the Turks did observe that Festival; and I was not sure
that ever I should have so fair an Opportunity again. They were to Celebrate it
in the open Field, before the Emperor's own Tent. I therefore caused my
Servants to take a Room in the Tent of a Turkish Soldier, that stood on a
rising ground, and looked down on Solyman's Tent, which was over against it:
Thither go I at Sunrise, where in an open Plain, I beheld a vast Multitude of
Turbanted Heads silently standing, but repeating the last words of their
Priest. Every Rank was ranged orderly, and standing, that in the open Field
they seemed to be a Wall one to another: The most Honorable had their Station
next the Emperor's Train, uppermost in the Camp, and their Turbants as white as
Snow: Such diversity of Colors did affect me with a great deal of Pleasure,
and the rather, because they stood unmovable, as if they had grown upon the
Place; not a Cough, Schriek nor Word to be heard; no, nor the least moving of
the Head to look backward, or about them: At the Name of Mahomet, they all as
one Man, bowed their Heads, even to the Knee; but when the Name of God was
pronounced, they all fell Prostrate on their Faces, and Kissed the Ground.

And the truth is, the Turks are very careful and ceremonious in the acts of
their Worship, for if a Man does but scratch his Head when he Prays, they think
his Prayer is lost. For thus say they, If a Man composes his Body so reverently
even when he speaks but to a Bassa, how much more fitting is it we should do it
to God, who is infinitely greater than the greatest of Men?

After Prayer, the whole Knot of them was broke asunder, and they ran up and
down ranging over the Fields: Anon the Emperor's Dinner is served up, which the
Ianisaries carry away Dish by Dish, and eat it with a great deal of Jollity and
Mirth: It Is an allowed Custom for them so to do, on that day, their Emperor
being provided of a Dinner elsewhere. When I had beheld their Show, I returned
with a great deal of pleasure to Constantinople.

The remainder of my Task, is to acquaint you what became of Bajazet, and then
I shall ease you of the trouble of Reading, and my self of Writing. He, as I
told you, with his Invincible Band, Marched out of Amasia with such speed, that
his coming prevented the Report thereof; and those Bassa's who designed to
observe his Motion, he came upon them unawars. He put a notable Cheat upon the
Bassa of Constantinople; for whereas, there were ways in his Province by which
he might March, and he himself had beset the chiefest of them; he sent some
before him pretended to be Runaways, to inform him, that he was gone the
furthest way about; which he giving Credit to, removed his Troops thither to
prevent him, and so left him a free passage.

He put the like Trick upon the Bassa of Erzerumen, for knowing that the
Passage through the Province would be very hazardous, he sent some before him
with a counterfeit Message, to Salute him, and tell him, that his Misfortunes
had reduced him to the top of all miseries, and therefore he desired him that
he might rest a day or two in his Province, at least to procure his Horses to
be relieved and new Shod.

The Bassa granted his request, whereas, it was not a commiserating his Case,
or that he favored his Side, but perhaps that he might amaze him a little till
he had got all his Troops together to ensnare him; for they were scattered, as
not dreaming he would be so soon upon him. However Bajazet Marched continually
on, allowing his men no rest by day, and very little at Night. The Bassa of
Erzerumen seeing himself Deceived, made haste to join himself with the other
Bassa's in his Flight.

For you must know, as soon as Solomon heard his Son was gone from Amazia, he
commanded a great many Sanziacks and Bassa's to follow, and upon pain of Death
to bring him either Alive or Dead; but all in vain, for Bajazet Fled faster
than they could Pursue: The Bassa of Casgan, aforementioned, paid dear enough
for letting him escape, for Solomon put him out of his Place, but Selymus put
him to Death, together with his two Boys, though not before they had been most
inhumanly Butchered. Selymus and Mehemet Bassa, and Beglerbeg of Greece,
persued Bajazet a far longer distance. Solomon was much troubled when he heard
of his Escape, as being well assured, he would make toward Persia; and
thereupon he was about to gather all his Force both Horse and Foot together,
and so March away to declare War against Persia: But his greater Counselors
stopped his March, alleging the hazard he would run amongst an ungrateful
Soldiery: And besides, say they, what if Bajazet out of his temerity and
rashness should send a Company about Pontus and the Palus Moeotis, and so march
back to Constantinople in the Emperor's Absence, where he might by promising
Liberty to Captives, and to the Agiomaglans, get upon the Throne, now empty of
a Prince? These Advices restrained Solomon from his Intention.

Bajazet all along his March, caused Labels to be fixed to the Doors of the
Houses, that he would give double Pay to all the Soldiers that would Revolt to
him; which made Solyman's Soldiers suspected by their Officers, and the rather,
because the Common Soldiers suffered many Speeches in favor of Bajazet. After
much ado, Bajazet escaped to the River Araxes, which is the Bounds betwixt the
two Empires of Turkey and Persia; and after he had passed this River, he scarce
thought himself secure, but appointed some of his own Soldiers to Guard the
Banks, that so the pursuing Sanziacks might not pass over: But they being but
few, were easily discomfited ever the Turkish Commanders passed farther into
Persia, till at last they met with a great Body of Persian Horse, whose
Commanders demanded of them, why they Invaded another Prince's Territories?
Their Answer was, they were to fetch the Fugitive Son of their own Prince. The
Persians told 'em, 'twas contrary to the League to come Armed into their
Dominions; there was Peace betwixt Sagathma and Solomon, which they ought not
to Violate: As for Bajazet, their Prince would do what was fitting; in the mean
time they should retreat to their own Country: With this Reprimand they direct
their March backward. In the mean time immediately Messengers are sent from
Persia, to Bajazet to bid him return, and to know the cause of his coming, and
also to spy what Force he had brought with him. Bajazet Answers, that his
Brother's Insolency and Father's Displeasure, had driven him out of his own
Country, and he was come to Persia, as the only Altar for an oppressed Prince;
and therefore in confideration of the uncertainty of future Affairs, he hoped
he would afford him Protection, being destitute of all things. The Persian
Answered, He was not well advised to repair to him who had made Peace with his
Father; upon this condition, they were both to Serve the same Friend and Enemy,
which League he could not Violate; nevertheless, since he was come, he bid him
Welcome, he would do his utmost to reconcile him to his Father. Thus his first
Entertainment in Persia was Promising enough; naught but Gratulations,
Feastings, friendly Entertainments, and Merry-makings, by which subtle Men
disguise their Meanings; yea, mention was made of an Affinity also, that
Orchanes, Bajazet's Son should Marry one of the Sophi's Daughters; yea, they
gave him hopes, that the Sophi would never be at quiet, till Solomon had
bestowed upon him the Government of Mesopotamia, or Babylon, or Arzerum, for
there, say they, you may live Commodiously withour fear, as being at a great
distance both from your Brother and your Father too; and if either of them
should deal hardly with you, you will have a Father-in-Law to fly too, which
will afford you Sanctuary: Such Discourses were received among the Vulgar,
whereby Bajazet's thoughts might be diverted from the apprehension of present
danger. The Sophi sent many Ambassadors to Solomon on this Errand, but whether
he dealt sincerely with Bajazet to reconcile him to his Father, yea, or no,
might be a great question, seeing in the mean time, he contrived all ways to
Destroy him; for Sagathmas was in a mighty fear, lest he should nourish a
Serpent in his Bosom, and which increased his rancour, was the wicked design of
some who persuaded Bajazet to attempt the destroying of Sagathmas; for one of
Bajazet's Commanders was heard to say, Why do we not Kill this Heretic, and
Possess his Kingdoms? For without doubt, he will one day be the ruin of us all.
These wild Discourses coming to Sagathmas's Ears, put him upon a Project more
necessary than plausible; for Bajazet had not many Forces, but very warlike
ones; and there were many Valiant Men among them that were ready to attempt any
Invasion, and therefore he had reason to fear. He was conscious also that he had
added new Kingdoms to his own, as being Conquered on pretense of Religion; and
who would secure such sickly Subjects, who were weary of their present State
and coveted a Change? To these nothing could be more Oppressive, than the
coming of Bajazet, though he is more in my Power, than I am in his, and therefore
I were best improve the Opportunity, and treat him no longer as a Guest, but as
an Enemy to be Chained up. To compass which, no method was more advisable than
to sever him from his Forces, for then he may be more easily Trapp'd; by open
Force it is hard to Seize him, his Soldiers being well Trained and Disciplined,
but mine slothful, unaccustomed to Arms, and besides at a great Distance one
from another. Hereupon Bajazet was desired to separate his Forces, it being
allowed it was Commodious so to do. He could not withstand the Proposal, though
intelligent Men foresaw the danger thereof: But, alas, he that was under
another Man's Roof, must now be at their Beck who Maintained him, especially
since it would breed a suspicion if he entertained so much as the report of
Perfidiousness in his Host that entertained him. Hereupon his Men were divided,
never to see one another again, and Quartered where the Persians pleased; and
being put here, very shortly after Slain by the more numerous Persians, their
Arms, Horses, and all else they had, fell a Prey to the Conqueror. At the same
time Bajazet was clapped up in Prison, with his Children; and to increase the
indignity of the thing, he was haled even from a Feast, to a Dungeon.

Thus have I here satisfied your desire, in acquainting you with the stay of
Bajazet: It Is time now to consider what will become of him for the future: Some
think he will will Retreat to Babylon, or suchlike Province, on the Borders of
each Empire, to be Sanziack thereof. Others think it a desperate Case, and that
there is no hope of his Life either from Solomon or Sagathmas; but that he will
either be sent back hither to be put to Death, or Strangled in Prison there.

For the Persian weighed every thing in his Thoughts, when he put Bajazet in
Prison; he knew he was of an aspiring and courageous Spirit, far superior to
his Brother; and if he should Succeed his Father in the Empire, it might do
Persia much more mischief than ever Solymus could, for he was but a slothful
Prince, and not at all for War, and therefore some thought he would never
escape out of his hands; for to besure he can never be his Friend, because he
has injured him so much. Some think one thing, and some think another: For my
part, I think it will be an intricate Business. For, as Bajazet is in Troubles,
and the issue undetermined, they will not easily make War on Christendom in
this Juncture. They labor to obtrude on me certain Conditions of Peace, having
some Letters that will please my Master, but they allow me no Copy of them, as
heretofore they were wont to do, so that I suspect Fraud in the case, and
therefore do peremptorily refuse to send those Letters to Caesar, unless first I
know their Contents; and if they deceive me by a false Copy, then the blame
lies at their door, not at mine; so that by this means I shall free my Master
from answering their Captious Letters; for I am sure he will accept of no
Conditions of Peace but such as are Honorable ones. But you will say, if you
refuse to accept of their Conditions of Peace, it is one step toward a War. Let
it be as it will, I judge it more advisable to leave all free to the events of
future Ages. But the not sending their Letters, if that be a Crime, I shall
take it on my self, and I shall easily clear my self, if the issue of Bajazet's
Affairs do not answer their Expectation; seeing it is yet very difficult, though
not impossible, for the Turks are not irreconcilable to those Ambassadors who
study to do their Master the best service they can amongst them; and besides,
the declining Age of my Prince will be some advantage to me, who is fitter for
rest and quiet, than for the News of an unnecessary War; for their Bassas think
as men. It Is true, my Pains will be lessened hereby, but I count them best
bestowed if they succeed at last.

Thus Sir, I have written you a Book rather than a Letter; whereas if I have
offended you, the fault is yours rather than mine; what I did was at your
request, and readiness to please a Friend, has always been counted a Virtue in
Friendship. Yet I hope these things will be as pleasant for you to read, as
they were delightful for me to write; for let me tell you, as soon as I put Pen
to Paper, I love to be prolix, that so I may as it were deceive my Confinement;
that I may wander abroad in my Mind, and be Conversant with you as in Presence.
What things seem frivolous and needless, you must take them as proceeding by
word of Mouth in familiar Conferences amongst Friends. Men may be allowed to
tittle tattle in a Letter as well as in common Discourse; if I were to write
Inscriptions for Churches and Temples, to be seen of all Men, Circumspection
and care must be used, but not when I write to you and a few priv^^e Friends. I
aim not at Fame; if my Lines please you, I have enough. You will say perhaps I
might have writ better Latin; I grant it, but what if it were beyond my
Ability; it was not for want of any good will; and yet let me tell you, what
good Latin can come out of uncouth Greece or barbarous Turkey? If you take my
Lines in good part, I shall trouble you no more till my return to Vienna, if
ever God permit me so to do. Excuse my Trouble.

Constantinople, June 1. 1560.
THE FOURTH AND LAST EPISTLE.
SIR,
I Acknowledge your Kindness and ancient Respect, in congratulating my Return;
and whereas you require an Account of the residue of my Embassy, and what
Occurrences have happened since my last to you, I will remember my Promise to
you, and I shall not disoblige so choice a Friend; take them all in a Medly
together, what comes next to Hand, as my Memory suggests the things more, and
things less serious. My beginning is with the Mournful; it is this. I was
scarce settled in my Spirit which was troubled for Bajazet's Misfortune and
Death, when lo, I was struck with another Message as sorrowful as that. We were
all in a great expectation of the Success of the Turkish Fleet, which sailed
toward the Isle of Meniage, (now called G^rse,) upon News that the Spaniards
had prevailed there. For Solomon (being advertised that Bland was taken by the
Christians, and that they had added new Fortifications to the old Castle
therein, in which they had yet a very strong Garrison,) could not endure to be
thus checked in the midst of all the Prosperities of his flourishing Empire.
Hereupon he equipped a Navy with Auxiliaries to relieve those that were
Mahumetans like himself; and made Bana Commander of his Fleet. He furnished his
Ships with a Select Company of Soldiers, and yet was doubtful of the Event;
because the Voyage was long, and they were to engage with an Enemy redoubled
for Valor. For you may please to be informed, that the Turks for a long time
have had a great Opinion of the Valor of the Spaniards, as knowing that they
have waged great Wars, and came off with good Success. They had heard of the
Emperor Charles, and of his Son Philip the Heir of his Valor as well as his
Kingdoms. The report of this Power made the Turks very solicitous; so that
those that went the Voyage, made their last Wills, as if they should never
return to Constantinople again. Thus the whole City, both those that went, and
those that staid at Home, was filled with anxiety. But alas, their Fleet sailed
with a prosperous Gale, and came upon the Christians unawares; which struck
such a terror into them, that they knew not how to Fight or Fly: Some nimble
Vessels made their Escape; the rest were either taken by the Enemy, or split or
dashed in pieces on the Sands. The Duke of Medina the General, and John Andrew
Donna the Admiral, fled to the castle, from whence they escaped in a dark Night
undiscovered through the Enemies Fleet to Sicily.

Pitual sent hither a Galley to give an Account of this Victory, and as a
Testimony thereof, he caused a Bannet, wherein was the Image of our Savior
Christ upon the Cross, to be pulled along the Sea, at the poop of the Vessel.
As soon as it arrived in the Haven, the Loss of the Christians was presently
divulged, and the Turks congratulated one another for their Victory. They came
thick and threefold to my Door, and asked my Servants in a Jeer, whether they
had any Brother or other Friend in the Spanish Fleet: if you had, said they,
you may shortly have the opportunity of seeing their Faces here.

Besides, they highly extolled their own Valor, and blamed the Cowardice of
the Christians. Who, say they, shall now be able to stand before us, seeing we
have Conquered the Spaniards? My People were forced to hear this sad News to
their great Grief; but Gods Will must be done: Our only hope was, that the
Castle in which was a strong Garrison, might hold out against the Turks till
Winter, or some other Accident had raised the Siege. And yet our Hopes were
mixed with Fears, that the Conqueror would take that too; and so it fell out,
for the Besieged wanted all things, especially Water; so than Don Alveras de
Sand, the Governor thereof, a Stout Man, Courageous Person, and an Old
Soldier, perceiving that it was no longer recoverable, with a Jew in his
Company, got a Boat, and made his Escape toward Sicily, that so he might not
behold the Surrender of so important a Place, which he thought would be looked
upon as a Blot in his Escutcheon, though the extremest necessity had compelled
it. When he was gone, the Soldiers opened the Gates, and let in the Turks,
hoping to find them the more merciful, because of their easy admittance. But
Don John of Castile would by no means leave the Fort which he commanded, but he
(and his Brother) valiantly repulsing the Enemy, was at last wounded and taken.
The Castle was stoutly defended by the Spaniards for Three Months space, though
they wanted many Necessaries, and which was the worst of all, had no prospect
of Relief. The Weather was hot, and they almost parched with Thirst. They had
but one Cistern to hold Water in, which was not big enough to serve them all;
so that they were compelled to weigh out their Water by Measure, only enough
for a single Man to keep Life and Soul together. This Cistern Water was
increased with a mixture of Seawater, and by some curious Art made fresh. This
Secret was told them by a certain Alchymist: But all had not that faculty or
opportunity; for you should see some lie parching on the Ground, ready to give
up the Ghost for very Thirst, saying as well as they could speak, Water, Water;
and if a little was brought, they were relieved for the present, but when that
Moisture was spent, then they relapsed to their former Drought, and dyed
thereof. Thus many perished, besides the Wounded, who could have no help of
Chyrurgery to cure them in that desolate place.

In the Month of September, the Victorious Navy of the Turks returned to
Constantinople, bringing the Christians Captives, with their Galleys along with
them; a joyful Spectacle to the Turks, but a sad one to the Christians that
lived amongst them. That Night it lay at Anchor near the Rocks over against
Byzantium, that so they might enter the Port the next Day in greater Pomp and
Splendor. Solomon came down into an Apartment in his Gardens near the
Seaside, that from thence he might see the Prisoners entering in. Don Alveras
de Sand was in the Poop of his Admiral Galley, and with him Don Sanctius de
Leydia, and Don Belliger de Requemus, one Commander of the Sicilian Galleys,
the other of the Neopolitan. The Galleys of the Christians were despoiled of
their Ornaments, as Streamers, etc. and hall'd in Barques, that they might
appear base and contemptible in the sight of the Turks. They who observed
Solyman's Countenance that time say, that they perceived no sign of Insolent
Mirth therein. This is certain, that when I saw him going to his Devotion the
next day, his Countenance was not altered from its usual hue, as if that
Victory had not concerned him at all; so well was this cunning old Man able to
bear the breath of his smiling Fortune, that he was unmoved under it.

The Prisoners were afterward brought into the Seraglio, but so miserably
hunger-starved before, that some could not stand on their Legs, others fell
down in a Swoon for very feebleness; others had Arms in a Jeer put upon them,
in which posture they died; the Turks insulting over them on every hand, and
promising to themselves the Empire of the whole World; for who now shall be
able to stand before us, (said they,) seeing we have overcome the Spaniards?
There was a Commander in the Turkish Fleet, with whom I had some Acquaintance,
who had taken the great Banner of the Neapolitans Galleys, being Imperial
Eagles embracing one another; being informed that he was about to present it to
Solomon, I thought good to prevent him; and sending him Two Silver Tasters, I
obtained the Banner, that so the Ensign of Charles the Fifth might not remain
in the Hands of Infidels, to the eternal Infamy of the Christian Name.

There were amongst the Prisoners, besides those above mentioned, these Two
Eminent Persons, Don John of Cordona, the Son in Law of Don Bellinger, and Don
Gasto, the Son of the Duke of Medina, who though but a Youth, yet had a noble
employment in his Fathers Army. Don John promised to give a great Sum of Money
to be left Prisoner at Chios, (which was inhabited by old Genoeses,) which was
accordingly done. As for Don Gasto, he was hid by Pihulius, in hopes to have a
large Price for his Redemption; which design of his had almost proved his
overthrow: For Solomon by some means or other smelt out the Cheat, and was
grievously vexed that Pihulius should serve him such a Trick; so that at the
Instigation also of Rustan Gasto, he was sought after, that so Pihulius might
be punished; but Gasto died in the Search, some say of the Plague, others by
the procurement of Pihulius himself, that he might tell no Tales. This is
certain, upon the most diligent search, he could not be found. However Pihulius
was afraid to come to Constantinople to appear before his angry Master, lest he
might be imprisoned there; but he hovered with a few Galleys about several
Islands of the Aegaean Sea, pretending diverse Excuses for so doing. But at last
Solomon by the persuasion of the chief Eunuch of his Son Selymus, gave him his
Pardon in these Words, I for my part forgive him his great Offense, but God
Almighty the just Revenger of all Wickedness, inflict just Punishment on him in
the Life to come: So strongly are the Turks persuaded, that no evil Fact should
pass unpunished.

But for Don John of Cardona, he fared better, for by the care of Adam a
Dissicksleim, Baron of Austria, who Married his Sister, and by my sponsion for
him, he returned safe into Spain. As for Don Sanders, he was brought into the
Divan, and there Rustan demanded of him, what his Master meant by invading
other Men's Rights, when he could not maintain his own. Sanders answered, The
Question belonged not to him to answer, 'twas his part only to execute his
Masters Commands as faithfully as he could, wherein Fortune had been against
him. However he begged the Bassa upon his Knees, in regard he had a Wife and
Children at Home, that they would speak a good Word for him. So Solomon Rustan
answered, that their Emperor was of a Merciful Disposition, and that they would
intercede for him. Thus was he sent Prisoner to the Castle called Caradenis: He
was not gone far, but he was sent for back again, because the chief of the
Bedchamber had not seen him; a Man of a greater Authority with his Prince.
Upon this Countermand, some say, that though otherwise Valiant, he was a little
faint-hearted, as fearing he was brought back to his End; but it proved
otherwise. As for the other prisoners, the chief of them, as Sauchims de Leyva
with his Two Natural Sons, and Don Bellinger himself, were sent into the Castle
of Pera, or Galata.

As soon as I was made acquainted with their Condition, and in what want of all
things they were, I thought it my Duty to do my best to relieve them; and
thereupon I sent some to comfort them, and to promise them all good Offices
that lay in my power. And from that Day forward, my House was a common
Receptacle for all the Prisoners; and I did them all the Kindness I could. For
you must know, that the Turks think their Prisoners well enough provided for,
if they allow them Bread and Water; they have no regard to any Man's Age or
Condition, or to the time of the Year, whether they be Sick or Well, Healthy or
Crazy, Old or Young, it is all one to them, they are all treated after one and
the same manner. Hereupon, I was forced to provide several sorts of Reliefs,
for several necessities, different Diseases requiring different Cures. There
lay a great Company of Sick Persons in a certain Temple of Pera, a Town over
against Byzantium, whom the Turks cast out as Abjects; and many of them
perished for want of convenient Pottage to relieve their Sick Stomachs, and
recover their lost Strength; when I was told thereof, I dealt with a Friend of
mine, a Citizen of Pera, desiring him to buy some Weather Sheep every day, and
boiling of them at his own House, to distribute the Flesh to some, and the
Broth to others, as their Stomachs could bear; which was a great Relief to
abundance of them. But those which were in Health, required another sort of
Relief; my House was full from Morning to Night with several Complaints; some
were used to good Diet, and a piece of brown Bread which was their daily
Allowance, would not go down so well with them; some that used to drink Wine,
could not bear the perpetual use of Water only; some wanted Blankets to cover
them, as being never used to lie on the bare Ground; some wanted Coats, others
Shoes; but the most part desired ^ome Footing to gratify their Keepers, that
they might deal the more Mercifully with them. Money was the only Remedy for
these Mischiefs, so that every day some Guilders were expended by me on these
accounts. But these Expenses were tolerable, compared with greater Sums which
were desired of me; or else they prayed me to be their Surety for payment of
their Ransom Money; and herein every one was very forward with his Pretenses;
one alleged Nobleness of Birth; another, that he had great Friends and
Alliances; a Third, that he was a Commander in the Army, and had much Pay due
to him; a Fourth, that he had Cash enough at Home, and was able to make
repayment. Some boasted of their Valor in the Fight; every one had something
to say for himself. When I demanded of them whether they would be sure to repay
me? God forbid said they, for what more unjust, than to defraud a Man who has
restored us to our Liberty, even out of the Jaws of Death?

And the truth is, it was very grievous to me, to hear a Man come and tell me,
unless I can lay down 200 Guilders for my Redemption, I am undone for ever; I
shall be sent over into Asia to be made a Galley-Slave, to tug at the Oar,
without any hope to see my own Country again: There is a Merchant Sir, that
will deposite Wares amounting to that value, provided you will promise
repayment. This was the Allegation of almost all of them; which could not but
affect me, as knowing it to be most true, That if they were not relieved, many
of them must needs perish; and none could better do it, nor could they more
justly expect it from any Man than my self. But, you will say, it is not good
trusting any Body living; to which I answer, Can any Man be so prodigiously
ungrateful, as not to repay what was laid out to save his Life; and grant that
One or Two may not have ability to reimburse me, what is that to the purpose.
It Is not lost, that which is laid out to relieve the Oppressed. But sure the
greater part of them will perform their Promise. For these Reasons I was
induced to pass my word for 1000 Ducats, which has made me so much in Debt,
that I know not how to get out; but I fear have freed them from Fetters, and
clapped them on my own Legs.

I am the larger on this Subject, both to purge my self from too much facility,
which I know some will accuse me of, in being ready to believe every body; and
also in some measure to blame my self for the slackness of some in their
repayments whom I have undertaken. For I foresee I shall be a great Loser by
the Business; for I must necessarily make Payment on the Day, when my Word was
once passed: And besides, I heard that some whom I had Released, had Laughed at
my Craziness, in believing what they said to be true; so that my case is but
bad, if I should judge of the rest by them. But be it as it will, I thank my
God, that I have been able to do so many good Offices to so many distressed
Persons; I do not repent it, for Virtue is a sufficient Reward to it self. I
covet not that any Honors should be conferred on me, nor any Statue erected
for my Beneficence; my utmost ambition is, that they would be so grateful, as
to pay me what I laid out of Purse, to save their lives; of which I despair not
from so cordial a Nation as the Spaniards are. For my part, I rejoice not only
that I did them a good turn, but that thereby I gave an Example and
Invitation-to others to do the same.

There live many Merchants in Pera, Italians by Stock, who are very assistant
in relieving Christian-Prisoners; but one of them deserves to be particularly
mentioned by me, for the absurdity of his Opinion, differing from all the rest.
He was an Italian Greek, (i e.) one that resembles both those Nations in his
Birth and Manners. When his Country Men were mercifully busied in relieving
Prisoners, he could never be persuaded to give one Farthing toward so pious a
Work; and being blamed for it, his Answer was, (which he uttered in a barbarous
and blunt Italian Style, the Greek being more familiar to him,) I know not,
says he, what these Men are; but this I know, that the just Judgment of God
has brought them into this miserable Condition; for my part, I will not oppose
the Will of God, let them abide in that place God has set them; you who do
boldly withstand what God has decreed, may pity them if you please: But I will
not spare a Doit to release them, though you use never so many Arguments to
persuade me. But enough of this vain and foolish Opiniator. This Loss at Sea,
together with the Misfortune of Bajazet, struck a great Terror into me, that
the Turks made more insolent thereby, would hearken to almost no Conditions of
Peace. This public Calamity was seconded by a private one; the Plague had
invested my House; one of my Faithful Servants died thereof, and the rest were
terribly afraid of the Infection.

But before I speak of that, there was another case surprised me, arising on
this account.

Solomon grows every day more Superstitious than other in the Rites of his
Religion; he was wont to delight himself in Music, and in the chanting of
Young Singers, but all this was laid aside, by means of a certain old Sybil,
noted for Sanctity, who told him, that if he left not off that sport, he would
be severely punished after his Death. He was so moved herewith, that he cast
his Musical Instruments, though richly studded with Gold and Jewels, into the
Fire and burnt them. And whereas he formerly eat his Meat out of Silver Dishes,
now he was persuaded to use none but Earthen Platters; he was also
over-perswaded by her to abridge the use of Wine, wherein he was told a great
liberty was used, which his Prophet would be angry at, if he suffered it.
Hereupon an Edict was published, that for the future no Wine should be imported
into Constantinople, either to Christians or Jews either.

This Edict did much concern me and mine, who were never wont to drink Water;
and what other Liquor could we have, if Wine were forbid. Our long absence from
our Country, and the uncertain issue of Embassy, were a sufficient
Mortification to us, without this other Inconvenience of change of Diet, which
must needs endanger our Health. Hereupon I desired my Interpreters to intercede
for me in the Divan, that I might retain my ancient Right. The Bassa's Men were
of different Opinions in the case; some alleged, we ought to be content with
Water as well as they; for what would the Neighborhood say, if Christians may
drink Wine, and themselves be severely forbid the use of it. If Christians in
the midst of Constantinople, might ingurgate what Wine they please, the stink
thereof will spread far and near, and profane all; yea, the Mussul-men
themselves, when they came to us, would return belching out the smell of Wine.

Hereupon we were likely to be cast in our Case; but at last a more favorable
Opinion, viz. Of those who plead that the sudden change would be insufferable
for us, and occasion many Diseases, if not Death it self. Whereupon we were
allowed the Freedom of one Night, to get in what Wine we could, which was
brought to the nearest Landing-place, from whence we were furnished with Horsed
Carriage to convey it to my Lodging with as little Observation as might be, all
being done in the Night. Thus I stored my self, and kept my Privilege.

Some of the Grecians played a pretty prank with the Sultan on this account,
when they knew that he was to pass through a Road full of Vineyards on both
sides, they set a great many Laborers at work to root out the Vines; some of
them they lay in the Highway; others they loaded on Carts. The Emperor passing
by, and demanding the Reason for so doing, they answered, That seeing by his
Edict they were forbid the use of Wine, they were cutting down their Vines to
make Fuel for the Fire. For shame, says Solomon forbear, you do not understand
my Command aright; though I forbid the use of Wine, yet I allow the eating of
Grapes, as one of the best Fruits that God has allotted to Mankind; only you
are not to express and adulterate their Juice, nor tun it up in Hogsheads, and
so make it quite another thing. What will you cut down Apple Trees also,
because they bear not Wine? Get you gone you Buzards, and spare your Vines.
Thus the Greeks were fooled in their Project.

But to return to the Story of the Pestilence which was within the Walls of my
House; whereupon I went to Rustan to desire leave for me and my Family to
remove, and to go into a less contagious Air; this I desired not with any great
confidence of obtaining my Request, (for I knew the Rigidness of his Opinion,)
but only showing care for the Health of my Family. He answered the Messenger,
he would acquaint Solomon with my Desire, and if I came the next day, I should
have his Answer. Accordingly I sent and received this Answer from him; the
Emperor wondered what I meant, in desiring to move my Habitation; is not the
Pestilence God's Arrow, which will always hit his Mark? If God would visit me
herewith, how could I avoid it? Is not the Plague said he, in my own Palace,
and yet I do not think of removing? And therefore he wished me to abide; where
I was forced to stay in a Pestilential and Infected House.

But Rustan dying of a Dropsy soon after, and Haly, then Second Vizier of the
Bench succeeded him, a Prudent and Courteous Person as any was amongst the
Turks, I sent him a Present, a large Garment of Silk, in way of Congratulating
his new Dignity. He returned me this Courteous Answer, That he would always be
my Friend, and upon any occasion I should not scruple to make my Address to
him. And I found him as good as his Word, for when my House a while after was
re-visited with the Plague, which swept away many of my Servants, and amongst
others, my chief Physician: I sent the same Message to Haly which I had done to
Rustan before; who answered me, for his part he was very willing I should
remove my Habitation, but that it were better for me to ask leave of the Sultan
himself, least said he, if he casually light upon any of your Servants walking
at random up and down, he should take it in great disdain that so much liberty
was granted them without his knowledge: And yet, proceeded he, I shall propound
the matter so cautiously to the Prince, that I do not doubt of his Assent. And
accordingly soon after, I received a Message from him, that I might remove
whither I pleased. Whereupon I chose an Island called Principo, for my
Dwelling, about Four Hours sail from Constantinople. It was the pleasantest of
all the little Isles contiguous to that City, for the rest have no Village at
all in them, or but one at most, but this has Two.

The Physician I lately told you of, died at my House of a Plague, it was my
old Friend Dr. Williams, the choice Companion of my long and tedious
Pilgrimage: The occasion of the Sickness was this, It seems amongst the rest of
the Prisoners I had redeemed one, as the Event declared, who was Sick of the
Plague. My Physician did assiduously attend him, till he got the Infection
himself; for he was guilty of that singularity of Opinion, that there was more
Fear than Danger; for at the same time, said he, there are wont to arise other
Diseases, which Men are apt to think is the Pestilence; so that Pestilential
Remedies are usually applied to every common Sore or Boil; thus he flattered
himself though he was deeply infected; yet he did not suspect it to be the
Plague till it was past Remedy, and he was ready to dye under the Hands of his
Attendance. The Day before he died, he sent me word he was better; and desired
to see me, if I pleased to bestow a Visit upon him: I did so, and sat a great
while by his Bedside; he related to me how ill he had been, and that his Sight
as well as his other Senses had been so weakened, that he knew no Body; but now
said he, my Senses are restored, and if I could be freed from my Distillation
that hinders my Breath, I should be presently well; and at my Departure, I told
him that I heard that he had a rising in his Breast; I have so, says he, and
thereupon he threw aside his Blanket, and showed me his Breast; but there is no
danger says he, in it, for it came from buttoning my Doublet which I put on too
strait. Toward the Evening according to custom, I sent Two of my Servants to
watch with him, who while they were putting on him a clean Shirt, he himself
espied a Purple Spot in his Breast, which they told him was but a Flea-bite;
and by and by he discovered more and greater ones. No, said he, These are not
Flea-bites, but Tokens of approaching Death; and therefore let us spend this
Night in Prayer and holy Conference preparatory to my latter end, which he did,
and in the Morning with full assurance of God's Mercy, he departed this Life.

Thus was I bereaved of my special Bosom Friend, and the common Wealth of
Learning had also a great loss of him; for he had made Observations in his
Travels which he intended to publish, and would have been very useful to the
World, if Death had not prevented his laudable Design. His Skill and
Faithfulness was so much prized by me, that if the times had suffered me to
return, I knew none fitter to leave in my place at Constantinople than himself,
had he outlived me.

After his Death, my Cares seemed to be doubled, nay, if I should have left
them behind, I had returned but half my self as it were. Well, his Soul is at
rest, and I erected a Monument, as a due testimony to his Virtue. But to return
to our Island.

I lived there very pleasantly for Three Months. It was a private Place,
without any trouble or noise; there were only a few Greeks, with whom I
diverted my self; but never a Turk to interrupt my Mirth. As for the Turks of
my Household, they created no trouble to me, I might go whither I would, and
pass from one of these Islands to another at my pleasure, without any
molestation from them. There grew there several sorts of Plants, as Lavender,
Sharp-pointed Myrtle, Cottonweed, and abundance more. The Sea full of diverse
sorts of Fishes, which I took sometimes with Net, sometimes with Hook and Line.
Several Grecian Fishers with their Boats attended me, and where we had hopes of
the greatest sport, thither we sailed, and cast our Nets. Sometimes we played
above board, and when we saw a Crab or a Lobster at the bottom, where the Sea
was very clear, we would run him through with a Fish-spear, and so hale him up
into a Vessel. But our best and most profitable sport, was with a drag Net,
where we thought most Fish were, there we cast it in a round; it took up a
great compass, with the long Ropes tied to ends thereof, which were to draw it
to Land. To those Ropes the Seamen tied green Boughs very thick, that so the
Fish might be Frightened, and not seek to Escape. Thus we brought great Sholes
of trembling Fishes near the Shore. And yet in this danger they were naturally
instigated how to save themselves; some would leap over the Net, others would
cover themselves in the Sand that they might not be taken; others strove to
bite the Meashes of the Net, though made of course Flax or Hemp, of which kind
were the Synodontes, Fish armed with strong Teeth, and if one made way for
himself, all would follow him, and so the whole Draught would escape, and not a
Fish left for the Fisher. To remedy this inconvenience, (for I was aware
thereof,) I stood with a Pole in my Hand, beating the Water, that I might keep
the Fish from biting the Net. At which my Attendants could not choose but
laugh, yet for all this many of them escaped. So sagacious are Fishes where
they are in extreme danger. Yet notwithstanding the Fugitives, we brought a
great many Fishes ashore, a Sea-Bream, Scorpion-Fishes, Dragon-Fishes,
Scare-Fish, Jule-Fish, Chane or Ruff-Fishes, whose variety did delight my Eye,
and the enquiry into their Nature, did hugely please my Fancy: So that at Night
I came with my triumphant Vessel laden with Prey. The next day I presented Hali
Bassa, and his chief Steward, with part of my Acquests, who took it very kindly
at my Hands.

Sometimes I took delight with an Iron Spear made on purpose to catch Shrimps
or Cramps, which are there so thick, as if they grew in that Sea: Where I
observed the Master-Shrimps lying Two by Two, the Male and the Female, and
sometimes more of them, of which Cicero, Plini and Athenaeus speak so much^ I
confess, I think some of these Relations concerning them are rather Fabulous
than true: For they say, that this Shellfish does gape in order to catch other
small Fishes, and when she has got them, yet she shuts not her Shell till the
Pinnophylax bite it, and by this warning she closes her Shell, and with her
Mouth the Pinnophylax divided her Prey. The Figure of these Pinnae you have in
Bellonius. The sharp part of it sticks in the bottom of the Sea, as if it grew
there; and by these sticking Fibers, she draws in her Nourishment, as appears
by this, that when she is loosed from her hold, she dies for want of
Sustenance, as Herbs and Plants do. And it is probable, that the Pinnophylax
chose this sort, as a Defense against other ravenous Fishes, where it may lie
quiet even in stormy Weather, and go in and out at her pleasure. Yet I speak
not this, to detract from the Credit of those worthy Authors I mentioned
before, but only to leave the matter to more curious Enquirers. We quickly
laded our Boat with these Pinnae, they are but a course Fare, like Muscles, of
which you would be soon weary; but the Fishermen advised me to keep the
Pinnophylaxes apart, for they would make a goodly, wholesome, and graceful Dish.

Amongst the rest of the Islands, there is one untilled and uninhabited,
whither all sorts of Monsters do resort, Star-Fish, Saw-Fish, Grape-Fish,
Sea-Horses, Prodigious Cockles, a round yellow Fish like an Orange; no ordinary
Fish there, but Thornback, and a certain Fork-Fish, with a terrible Prickle. I
remember we took one of them, who making at us, run her self through.

When tempestuous Weather hindered me to see the Sea, then I delighted my self
to find out strange and unusual Plants at Land. I would sometimes go afoot all
over the Island, having a young Franciscan Monk in my Company, a Jolly Fellow,
but very Fat, and not used to travel on Foot; I took him out of a Monastry of
Pera to be my Partner in my Walks; he was so corpulent and pursy, that when I
went on pace to catch my self an Heat, he would follow me at a distance panting
and blowing, with these Words in his Mouth, What need all this haste? Whom do
we run from, or whom do we pursue? What are we Carriers or Posts that must make
speed to deliver some important Letters? Thus he muttered, till the very Sweat
pierced through all his Clothes. In fine, when we came back to our Lodging, he
threw himself upon his Bed, woefully complaining, and crying out, he was undone:
What Injury have I done, said he, that you thus go about to destroy me? And in
this fretting Posture we had much ado to persuade him to eat a bit for his
Dinner.

Now and then some Friends visited me from Constantinople, and from Pera; yea,
and some Germans also of Haly's own Family; of whom when I asked whether the
Plague was abated? Mightily, said they? How many then die in a day? Almost Five
Hundred, said they. Good God, quoth I, call you that to abate, when then does
it rage? They replied, when about a Thousand or Twelve Hundred die in a Day.
The Turks entertain this Opinion concerning the Pestilence, that every Man's
Destiny is writ by God in his Forehead; so that it is a foolish thing in them,
to think to decline or avoid it. This Opinion makes them fearless of the
Plague, but not secure from it. So that as soon as ever any Man dies of the
Pestilence, they will take off his Clothes yet sweaty, and Linen, and rub
their Faces with them. If it be the Will of God, say they, that I shall dye
this way, it will most certainly come to pass, if not, it will not hurt me.
Thus a large Field is open for Infection; so that whole Families are sometimes
swept away by that Disease. Whilst I abode in these Islands, I got acquaintance
with one Metrophanes, a Metropolitan, who presided over a Monastry in Chalcis,
one of those Islands; he was a Learned and a Virtuous Man, very desirous of
agreement between the Latin and the Greek Churches; so that he differed from
the Humor of the rest of the Grecians, who esteem the Latins as Men of an
impure and profane Sect; so much does every Man abound in his own Sense.

When I had lived about two Months in those Islands, some of the Bassa's began
to suspect my long Absence, and told Haly, that perhaps I might make my escape,
for I had Ships ready at my command, and other Conveniences might easily be
procured; and therefore it was more advisable I should return into the City. He
answered them, He had that Confidence in my Word, that he believed I designed
no such thing. Nevertheless he sent a Chiaux to me to advertise me thereof: The
Chiaux very cunningly pried about to see if he could discover the least
Preparation for an Escape, but finding none, after I had presented him, he
returned to his Master with his Message from me, That he might rest secure, for
I never intended to break my Word. Thus I continued three Months in my
Retirement, and returned of my own accord into the City without any Compulsion.

Form that time forward I had a great Familiarity with Haly, and our Discourse
was still of Peace: He is a Dalmatian by Birth, and the only Courteous Man I
found in that Barbarous Country: His Nature Mild and Gentle; his Person of
easy Access; he is of a deep Understanding, capable of managing the greatest
Affairs, having much Skill in Military as well as Political Matters, for he is
an old Man, and has passed through the greatest Offices of that Commonwealth.
His Stature is Tall, and his Countenance filled with a lovely Gravity: He has
a mighty Love for his Master, and consults by all means imaginable his Repose
in his Old and Sickly Age. What Rustan thought to do by Austerity, Severeness
and Minatory Expressions, that Haly endeavors to compass by Mildness,
Moderation and Friendship. Rustan was always Severe, Fierce, Self-willed, his
Word must pass for a Law: It Is true, he knew well enough his own Circumstances,
and what the Times did exact of him, and what the Old Age of his Prince
required; but he was afraid, that if he carried himself complyingly, either in
Word or Deed, the Vogue would be, he did it out of Covetousness, of which he
was vulgarly suspected: And therefore, though he was desirous of a Peace, yet
he would abate nothing of his wonted Stiffness; but if Propositions were
offered to him, not pleasing to his Fancy, he would almost thrust a Man out of
Doors; so that I scarce ever parted from him but in an angry Mood. One time
when I was treating with him of Peace, if I had nothing else to say, he bid me
^e gone: I presently rose up and went my way, only telling him, That I could
propose no other Conditions than what my Master allowed me to do. Which words I
pronouncing with more Fervor and Passion than I was wont to do, he called back
my Interpreter and asked him, Whether I were Angry? He answered, No. What, said
he, if I should obtain what he desires of the Sultan, do thou think he will
perform his Word to me, in presenting me with the Sum he promised me? No
question, said the Drugger-man, but he will be as good as his Word to a Tittle.
Then, says Rustan, go home and ask him. I had then 5000 Ducats, which make 6000
Crowns, lying by me for any sudden Emergency; I loaded my Interpreter with
them, and bid him carry that to Rustan, and tell him, That this Sum was but the
Earnest of what I had promised him, but the rest would follow, if my
Negotiation were brought to an Happy Issue, for by no means would I be worse
than my Word. He seemed to be pleased with the sight of the Money, but returned
it again to me, bidding my Drugger-man to tell me, That he no ways doubted of
my Faithfulness, but the Matter of the Peace stood yet on Ambiguous Terms;
neither could he certainly promise a good Issue, for he did not fully know his
Master's Mind. But let the Ambassador, said he, keep it for me, as my
Treasurer, till he sees the Event. Thus was the Money brought me back again; and
Rustan died a while after.

Here give me leave to acquaint you with the Bounty of my Master, the best of
Emperors; for that Money lying dead by me, I acquainted his Imperial Majesty,
That I would lay it out for one Years Expense (which amounted to just as much)
in my Embassy. But I repented afterward of this my Frankness, especially
considering what Pains I had taken in my Employment for so many Years together;
my Mind gave me I was Deficient to my self, in not desiring that Sum for my own
use, seeing I knew I served a Liberal Master, who put a just Value upon every
Man's Service, and rewarded him accordingly; and therefore I might have desired
that Money (which was snatched, as it were, out of the Fire) for my own use; for
I knew some Courtiers would have asked greater Sums for less Merit and Service.
Upon second Thoughts I put my Master in mind of my oversight, and desired his
Favor, that the said Sum might be returned entire to me: He was graciously
pleased to grant my Request, and commanded so many Ducats to be told out for me
out of his own Exchequer: Which Badge of his Favor, if I should be unmindful
of, I were unworthy to breath in the common Air: But to return from whence I
digressed.

Haly and Rustan were of quite different Humors and Dispositions: Haly lived a
blameless Life, free from Sordidness, and never feared that his Courteons
Deportment would procure him the Sultan's Ill Will; but Rustan on the contrary,
was a Mony-monger, Avaricious, and his Conscience hing'd at his Purse-strings:
Rustan's Conferences with me were very short and Concise; but Haly would spin
out time on purpose; and that he might entertain me the longer, he would season
his Discourse with a great deal of Facetiousness; insomuch that the Turks, who
attended on the account of Business or otherways, would murmur and grumble that
he spent so much time with me, that thereby they had not convenient Opportunity
to transact their own Concerns with him. And the truth is, there was somewhat
of Mortification to my self in it too, for I usually was sent for to him in the
Afternoon, and I went Fasting, that I might be readier to deal with so acute a
Man: In our Conferences he pressed this as a Principal Point, That each of us
would propound that which we thought most conducive to the Service of our
Masters respectively: His Master desired Repose in his Old Age, which was
seated with Success and Victory; and he thought my Master also desired Peace
and Quietness; and therefore if he studied the Tranquillity of his Realm, he
should by no means rouse a sleeping Lion. The Minds of Princes, says he, are
like Looking-glasses having no innate shape, yet the shape of all things
objected to them pass through them; so Princes Souls, free of themselves, are
impressed by the Images of all things as they are represented; and therefore we
must lay nothing before them, but what is profitable for their Affairs: For as
good Cooks temper their Sauces, not to this or that Man's Palate, but for the
Gust of all the Guests; so we, in Proposition of Peace, must weigh
Circumstances on either side. This and much more did he friendly communicate to
me; yea, at all times he showed himself Courteous, and when I requited his
Courtesy with any extraordinary piece of Respect, he thought himself doubly
obliged. Once as he was returning from the Divan, and came to a cross way where
he was wont to salute his Fellow Bassa's at parting, turning his Horse too
nimbly, and leaning on his Neck, both Horse and Man fell to the Ground: When I
heard of his Mischance, I sent to know whether he had got any Hurt by his Fall?
He returned me Thanks, and told me, He got no Hurt, but 'twas usual for an Old
Soldier to be apt to Stumble and Fall. Then turning to the By-stander: This
Christian Agent, says he, has, I thank him, a mighty Love for my Person.
Sometimes in Discourse he would tell me, That he had got Wealth and Honor
enough, so that now he studied only to leave a Savoury Memory behind him, by
doing good to Posterity.

When our Treaty of Peace had proceeded on fairly a long time, and I was in
good hopes of an happy Conclusion, an unlucky Accident happened, which might have
embarrassed the whole Affair: A certain Greek Despot, by the help of Caesar's
Soldiers which guarded the Frontiers of Hungary, had broke into Moldavia, and
driven out the Vaivod thereof, possessing it for himself. This Business gave a
great Alarm to the Turks, as not knowing but such beginnings might end in
greater Mischief; and indeed the Danger was considerable, though the Turks
thought it Prudence to dissemble their Forces. Haly intended to speak with me
about it, as I understood by one of his Domestics; and accordingly he sent for
me a few hours after: I confess I was somewhat troubled at the Message; I was
afraid, that my Negotiation being in a promising way to a good Issue, this
Matter would spoil all. When I came, he entertained me with his wonted
Courtesy, and after much Discourse tending to the concluding of the Peace, he
showed no sign of Discontent at all in his Countenance, till I was just about
to take my leave of him and go away, then he bid me sit down again, for
something was come to his Memory which he had forgot: Don't you hear, said he,
that your Germans have made an Inroad into Moldavia? No, said I, neither do I
believe it; for how should the Germans come to a place so remote from them as
Moldavia? It Is most certainly true, said he, I have it by several Expresses,
and I will send one of your own Country Germans to convince you of the Truth
thereof. This Onset gave me occasion to tell him, That if any of this were
true, I was sure it was not done by the Consent or Command of my Master Caesar.
The Germans, said I, are a Free People, and used to serve other Nations in
their War; and perhaps some of them had taken Pay under Foreigners: But, in my
Judgment, the Cause of these Commotions arise from the Hungarian Nobles of that
Neighborhood, who being provoked by the daily Injuries of the Turks, labor to
cry Quiet with them. And to speak the Truth, I think they are not much to be
blamed, if upon so great Provocations they labor to revenge themselves; do not
your Soldiers do so on the Borders of Hungary? What Plunderings and
Devastations do they make in the Emperor's Territories there? Here we talk of
Peace, there is nothing but War and Bloodshed: And for my own part, I am held
as a Prisoner, neither do my Friends know whether I am alive or dead? And truly
they that have suffered so much Damage from you, are worthy rather of Praise
than Blame, if they take any Opportunity of Revenge. Let them retaliate, said
Haly, provided it be within Hungary, and the Borders of Hungary, but it is
intolerable they should Range as far as Moldavia, which is but ten days Iourny
from Adrianople. To which I replied, That Men of the Sword did not much study
Points of the Law or Civility, but used to take the first Opportunity to
revenge themselves wherever it was offered. Thus I departed from him, neither
did he seem at all to be Angry, nor was a jot more Morose in my after-Addresses
to him.

During these Transactions with the Vizier, the French Ambassador did me a
great Courtesy; there were thirteen young Gentlemen, some Germans, some
Hollanders, in Prison at Constantinople upon this remarkable occasion; they
took Ship at Venice, in a Vessel that every Year carried Pilgrims to Jerusalem,
and their Charta-part was to that purpose; some of them traveled on the
account of Religion, others to see Foreign Countries, but they all met with an
unlucky Omen, for just at the time that they landed in Syria, the Malteese had
landed some Soldiers and plundered the Seacoast of Phoenicia, carrying away
some of the Inhabitants Prisoners: Whereupon those Syrians who had lost
Parents, Children and Friends, having no other visible way of Satisfaction,
seized on these Gentlemen in the Venetian Vessel, pretending they were some of
the Pirates; and if they did not procure their Friends to be released, they
should be kept in Slavery themselves: And though they were showed the Privilege
from the Government of Venice, and were put in mind of the Public Faith, and
the League betwixt them, yet all was one, away they must be sent Prisoners to
Constantinople: And their Youth was a great Prejudice to them, for the Bassa's
thought such young Simplings would never undertake so long a Voyage on the
account of Religion, for the Turks never begin their Pilgrimages till they be
Ancient.

When I heard of this Disaster, I did what I could to release them, but all to
no purpose. The Bailo of Venice was applied to, because under the Protection of
that Republic they fell into this Danger: He granted 'twas all the reason in
the World they should be released; But what Justice, said he, can we obtain
among such an Inhumane and Barbarous People? In the mean time I applied all the
Relief I was able to their distressed Condition: But one day, far beyond my
Expectation, they all came to my House, and told me, That they were sent as a
Present to me by the French Ambassador, who had obtained their Liberty. I was
mighty glad of their Releasement, and sent great Thanks to the Ambassador,
whose Name was La Vigne. The manner was thus, when he was about to take his
leave of the Sultan, and to Kiss his Hand, as the Custom is, he thrust a
Schedule into it, wherein he desired that the Gentlemen might be released in
Favor to his Prince, because their Voyage was occasioned upon the account of a
Pilgrimage for Religion. Solomon granted his Request, and released them
presently: Whereupon I supplied them with Accommodations for their Voyage, and
sent them first to Vienna, and then home into their own Country.

This La Vigne at first was mighty strict and cross to me, and used all his
Arts to bring me into the Bassa's Dislike without any Fault of mine: He told
them, I was a Subject to the King of Spain, born in the Low Countries, and that
I served the Spaniards more than the Emperor; and that I acquainted him with
every thing that was done at Constantinople; and that I had Emissaries in Pay,
who related to me the very Secrets of that Empire, amongst whom was Ebrahim the
chief Druggerman of Turkey. This he did before the Peace was made between Spain
and France, but when those two Princes were agreed, on the first opportunity he
did retract what he had spoken.

La Vigne was a Man of a prodigious Liberty to speak; he would tell all he
knew, let it be taken how it would. This made Rustan himself to avoid his
Company; whilst at the same time others were backward to converse with Rustan,
because of the soureness of his Humor. He sent once to Rustan to desire
Audience: He told the Messengers, his Interpreters, That he might send his
Errand by them, for his Business might be as well done in his Absence as
Presence. Yet La Vigne would needs come himself, where he spoke that which
grated Rustan's Ears. What do you think, says he, that you have got Buda, Gran,
Alba Regalis, and other Hungarian Towns, from the Christians by Force? No, I
deny it utterly, it is our Dissension that gave you Opportunity to take them: If
there had not been continual Wars between the Kings of France and Spain, you
wo^ld have been so far from possessing those Towns, that Charles V. would
hardly have suffered you to live quiet at Constantinople it self. At which
Speech Rustan was so provoked, that he told him, What do thou tell me of the
Kings of Spain and France; if all the Christian Princes join their Arms
together against my Master, he cares not a Rush, he will easily conquer them
all. And thereupon he withdrew himself into his Bedchamber, and bid the
Ambassador be gone. I must needs acquaint you in this place, with the Relations
I have heard concerning that People which inhabit the Tauric-Chers^ners, who
are reported to have been originally Germans, as their Speech, Manners and
Countenances seem to declare; I had a great desire to meet with any body of
that Nation, from whom I might procure some Tracts written in that Language,
but I could not obtain it; yet at last I met with an Accident which in part
satisfied my Desires: There came two Envoys from that Nation to the Sultan, to
make some Complaints or other; and my Interpreters lighting upon them, did (as
I had desired them, if ever they had Opportunity) invite them to Dinner to my
House. One was a tall Man, carrying an ingenious Simplicity in his Countenance,
so that he seemed either a Flemming or a Batavian: The other was shorter of a
well-set Body, and browner color, a Greek by Birth, but by frequent Commerce
with that People, he had got much of their Language, and seemed to forget his
own: Being asked concerning the Nature and Manners of that People, he answered
very pertinently, That they were a Warlike Nation, that inhabited many Towns
thereabouts, from whence the Cham of Tartary, when he pleased, used to draw
forth 800 Musketeers, the chief Prop of his Army. Their chief Cities were two,
one called Maneup the other Scivarin. He added much more concerning the Tartars
and their Barbarity, yet he confessed that there was some very ingenious Men
amongst them: If you asked of the highest Affairs, they would answer briefly
yet very oppositely; insomuch that the Turks said ordinarily of them, That
other Nations had their Learning in their Books, but the Tartars had eaten
their Books, and had their Wisdom in their Breasts, from whence they could draw
it out as they had occasion, as Divine Oracles.

They are Slovenly in their Deportment, for if you set any Soop before them,
they eat it not with a Spoon, but with the hollow of their Hands. Their Meat is
Horseflesh, not roasted but heated under the Saddles of their Horses, to which
Hunger was their best Sauce.

Their Prince is served in Siver, his first and last Dish being a Horses Head,
as Butter uses to be served up first and last with us. He repeated many German
Words, amongst others, which were unintelligible to us, perhaps his Memory
failed him, so that he mixed homebred and Foreign Words together; to every
word he added the Article Tho or The. The Words which were ours, little
different from them, were these:

Broe, Bread. Plut, Blood. Stul, a Stool or Seat. Hus, a House. Wingart, a
Vine. Reghen, Rain. Bruder, Brother. Schwester, Sister. Alt, Old Man. Wintch,
Wind. Silvir, Silver. Goltz, Gold. Kor, Wheat. Salt, Salt. Fisct, Eish. Hoef,
the Head.
Thurn, a Gate. Stern, a Star. Sune, the Sun. Mine, the Moon. Tag, a Day.
Oeghene, the Eyes. Bars, a Beard. Handa, the Hands. Boga, a Bow. Miera, an Ant.
Rinck or Ringo, a Ring. Brunna, a Fountain. Waghen, a Wagon or Coach. Apel, an
Apple. Schieten, to shoot an Arrow. Schlipen, to Sleep. Kommen, to come.
Singhen, to Sing. Lachen, to Laugh. Criten, to Weep. Geen, to go. Breen, to
roast. Schwalch, Death.
Knauen Tag was Good-day with him, Knauen was Good, and several such words he
used, not well agreeing with ours, as, Jel, Life or Health. Jeltsch, alive or
well. Jel uburt, let it be well. Marzus, Marriage. Schuos, a Spouse. Baar, a
Stone. Ael, a Stone. Menus, Flesh. Rintsch, a Mountain. Fers, a Man. Statz, the
Earth. Ada, an Egg. Ano, an Hen. Telich, a Fool. Stap, a Goat. Gadeltha,
Beautiful. Atochta, Evil. Wichtgata, White. Mycha, a Sword. Lista, a little.
Schedit, Light. Borrotsch, the Will. Cadariou, a Soldier. Kilemschkop, drink up
your Cup. Tzo Warthata, as thou have done. Jes Varthata, he did it. Ich
malthata, I say.
When he was desired to number, he said thus, Ita, tua, tria, fyder, fyuf,
seis, sevene, just as we Flemmings; for you Brabantars, who speak German-like,
do highly value your selves, and undervalue us, as if we pronounced Seven more
coursly: He went on reckoning Athe, nine, thiine, thiinita, thiinetua,
thiinetria, etc. Twenty he called Stega, Thirty Treithyen, Forty Furdeithien,
an Hundren Sada, a Thousand Hazer. He also sung us a Song in that Language,
which began thus: Wara war a ingdolou:
Seu te gira Galizu.
Hoemisclep dorbiza ea.


Whether these People be Goths or Saxons, I cannot tell; If Saxons, then, I
suppose, they were transplanted thither in the time of Charles the Great, who
dispersed that Nation into many remote Countries, as appears by the Cities of
Transylvania, which to this day are inhabited by Saxons; and possibly he might
transplant the rest of the Nation as far as Taurick Chersoness, where they
still retain the Christian Religion, though surrounded with the Enemies
thereof: But if they are Goths, then I judge they chose their Inhabitants there
next to the Getis, and perhaps most of that Tract of Land between the Gothic
Isle and Procopia, (as now it is called) was heretofore inhabited by Goths.
Hence we read of the Names of sundry Goths, as West-Goths, and East or
Ostro-Goths, who overrun the World with their Victory, and were the great
Seminary of Multitudes of Barbarians. This is all I could hear of these
Procopensians concerning the Taurick Chersonese.

Let me now tell you something of the City and Country Cathay, which I learned
of a certain Turkish Pilgrim, who use to Travel over the World on account of
Religion, and to worship God on high Mountains and desert places. He had
traveled over a great part of the East-Country, where he was acquainted with
the Portuguese; but having a desire to visit Cathay also, he joined himself to
some Merchants, who in great Numbers used to Travel to this Country: It Is a
Journey that not many will undertake, it being so dangerous, and the way thither
so full of strange Nations, who use to plunder Travelers in their passage:
When he left Persia behind him, he came to Samarehand, to Borchar, and to
Taschan, and other Towns inhabited by the Successors of Tamerlain: When he had
passed by these places there were mighty Deserts, and some Countries inhabited
by Wild, and others by a more civilized, People; yet the Country was generally
Poor, so that they were forced to carry their Victuals along with them on a
Drove of Camels: This Company they call Caravans. After some Months travel they
came to the Streights, entering into Cathay, (for you must know, that a great
part of that Country is Mediterranean, and encompassed by such huge Mountains
and Rocks, that it is accessible but in a very few Passages, where their King
has his Guards and Garrisons:) When the Merchants come thither, they are asked
What they bring? Whence they come? and How many they are? When the Guard is
informed of the Truth, they make a Smoke by day, or else kindle a Beacon by
night, which gives warning to the next Beacon, and so from one to another till
they come to Cathay. This Advice cost them but some Hours, which otherwise
would take up many Days, the way is so long: When News is brought to the King,
he sends backward by the same way of Conveyance what his Pleasure is, whether
they shall all be admitted to enter, or only some, the rest being either
excluded, or made to stay longer: When they are admitted, they are guarded all
along to their several Inns or Lodging-places, where they may have all things
for their Money, till they come to the King himself. Here every one brings forth
his respective Ware, and presents the King, whose Privilege it is, to buy what
Ware he pleases in the first place; and then they sell the rest to the best
Chapman. This they must do within certain limits of time, within which they
must return; for the Catharians cannot endure that Strangers should live long
amongst them, for fear they should infect their Country Manners. Thus is the
Caravan dismissed very friendly, and returns by the same Stages they went.

This Traveller told me, That they were a very Wise People, and lived in good
Order and Government, having a distinct Religion of their own, differing from
the Christian, Jewish or Mahometans, but nearest to the Jewish, except their
Ceremonies.

Printing has been in use among them for many Ages, as appears by their
several Printed Books: For Paper they use the Cases of Silkworms, it is so
thin that it will bear Printing on one side only, the other is blank: In this
City, he said, there were a great many Shops full of Musk, which was the fresh
Foame of a certain Beast as big as a Kid. A Lion is highly prized amongst them,
there are none of them in that Country, and therefore they value it at a great
Rate, and they will give most for it. This is what I could learn of this
Wanderer concerning Cathay, believe it as you please: I asked him farther,
Whether he had brought back any rare Root, Fruit or Stone, out of that Country:
He told me, he had brought nothing but a little Root for his own use, which he
would bite and eat a little of when he was Faint or Cold, and it would
presently heat and relieve him; and thereupon he parted it, and gave some to
me, telling me I must use it very sparingly: I desired Dr. Williams, my
Physician, then alive, to taste of it, who by its biting and inflaming taste,
judged it to be a Tree Wolf-leaf.

Let me now tell you another wondrous ^tory of a certain Wandering Turkish
Monk, ^e wore a Cap and White Cloak down to his Heels, with long Hair, such as
Painters draw the Apostles with: He had a promising Countenance, but was a mere
Impostor, yet the Turks admired him as a Miraculous Man; my Interpreters were
persuaded to bring him to me, that I might see him; he dined with me soberly
and modestly enough; afterward he goes down into the Yard, and upon his return
he takes up a huge Stone, and struck it diverse times on his naked Breast, as
many blows as would have felled an Ox: Then he took a piece of Iron, that was
heated in the Fire on purpose, and thrust it into his Mouth, where he stirred
it up and down so that his Spittle hissed again; 'twas a long piece of Iron,
thick and quadrangular in that part which he thrust into his Mouth, and it was
red-hot as a live Coal: Then he put the Iron into the Fire again, and after I
had bestowed a Largess on him, he saluted me and departed. My Domestics
wondered at the Prank, all but one, which pretended he knew more than all the
rest; O, says he, he is but a mere Cheat; and thereupon he takes hold of the
stronger part of the Iron, pretending he could do as much as the Juggler; but
he had no sooner grasped it in his hands, but he threw it away, and his Fingers
were well burnt for his Audaciousness, so that they were many days a curing.
This Accident caused his Fellows to Laugh, and jearingly to ask, Whether the
Iron were hot enough yet, and whether he would touch it again or not?

The same Turk, while he was at Dinner, told me, That the Prior of their
Monastery was a Man Famous for Sanctimony and Miracles, for he would spread his
Cloak over a Lake near adjoining, and sitting on it, would row up and down
whither he pleased: And that he would strip himself naked, and be tied to a
Sheep newly killed, tying Arms to Arms, and Leg to Leg, and so would be thrown
into the hot Oven till the Sheep were baked fit to be eaten, then he himself
would be taken out without any harm at all: You will not believe it, neither do
I, only I relate what he told me; but that part concerning an hot Iron I saw
with my Eyes.

And yet I must tell you, the matter is not so much to be admired, for without
doubt, the Fellow, when he went down into the Yard to fetch a Stone, had
fortified his Mouth with some Medicines against the Violence of the Fire, such
Medicines being suitable as you know; for I remember once at the Coast of
Venice, I saw a Juggler melt Lead in the Fire, and wash his Hands therewith, as
if it had been common Water: But enough of this.

I told you before, that I had a little more Freedom some time before Rustan's
Death, which was grateful Love on one account, because it gave me Opportunity
to converse with Strangers and others which frequented my House, whose
Acquaintance might be instructive to me; and yet this Liberty was not balanced
without Inconvenience, it gave my Servants opportunity to Straggle abroad, and
sometimes without the Iannizaries, and so they met with many Affront, which
cost me some trouble: I Will tell you of one, by which you may judge of the rest.

Two of my Servants passed over in a Boat to Pera, they went alone, either
because the Iannizaries were not at home, or else they thought it needless to
take them; one was my Apothecary, the other Master of my Wine-Cellar; when they
had done what they went for, they hired a Boat to carry them back to
Constantinople; they were scarce set down in the Boat, but there came a Youth
from the Caddy or Judge of that Place, commanding them to come forth, for the
Caddy must be wasted over in that Boat: My Servants told him, There were Boats
enough to carry over the Caddy, besides that which they had hired, and
therefore they would not come forth: Hereupon he endeavored to force them; so
that from Words they came to Blows. This being done in the sight of the Caddy,
who was coming down to the Boat, it made him run to help his Boy, (who was
thought to be his Ganymede) but the Steps toward the Sea being slippery, by
reason of Ice, (for it was Winter) he fell headlong into the Sea, and had been
drowned if his Companions had not relieved him: Here upon a Clamor was raised
all over Pera, and the Vogue went among the Turks, that my Servants had laid
Violent Hands on the Judge^ and had almost drowned him: My Servants were seized
and carried before the Judge of Capital Case: They fetch forth Clubs, and
Stocks to put their Feet in, that they might beat them, as their manner is, on
the Soles of them: In the interim, one of my Servants, an Italian, in a petting
Chuff, cried out, Beat, strike, Dogs, strike; we are wronged, we are Innocent,
we are Servants to Caesar 's Ambassador, and doubtless when your own Emperor
shall know how we are abused, he will make you smart for it. One of the Turks,
hearing him cry out so boldly: Do You think, said he, that one-ey'd thing is a
Man? No, for certain he is an One-ey'd Cacodaemon, (for he had a Blemish in one
of his Eyes.) The Waywade also, ( i. e.) the Judge in their Language,
perceiving the Boldness of the Man, was in a stand what to do, but thought it
best to send them to Rustan for to punish them: Thither went the whole Rout,
with a pack of False-Witnesses, ready to give false Testimonies against the
Innocent; for the Turks count it Meritorious to give in Evidence against a
Christian; you need not Summon them to appear, they came of their own accords,
as it happened in this Case: They all cried out before the Grand Vizier, That
those Rogues had beaten their Judge, and if they had not been seized, would
have drowned him: My Servants denied the Crime objected, alleging that they
were falsely accused, and that they were my menial Servants. By this time Rustan
understood, that there was more Noise than Right on his Country-mens side; yet
to still the Fury of the enraged Multitude, he told them, He would punish them
severely, and sent them to Prison. The Prison was a Safeguard to them against
the Fury of the Multititude; then the examined Witnesses, the most Credible
amongst them, and found that my Servants were Guiltless, all the Fault lay at
the Caddy's door. In the mean time I sent my Interpreters to demand my
Servants, but Rustan thought fit to refer the Matter to the Divan, lest, if the
Sultan should hear of it, he might suspect, that in the Caddy's Case he had
been bribed, and so his Injury neglected. I had at this time some intimate
Acquaintance with Haly, to whom I sent my Druggerman with a grievous Complaint,
that I might not suffer Wrong to the end of the Chapter; Haly undertook my
Cause, and bid me rest confident that my Business would soon end to my
Satisfaction. But Rustan came not off so handsomely, he feared that it might be
thought that Money had made him more execrable, and therefore he had rather the
Business had been compounded with the Caddy, and wished me to offer him a few
Ducats to appease him, 25 were enough. I gave him Thanks for his Advice, but
returned answer, That if he desired me to throw so many Ducats into the Sea, I
would willingly do it for his sake, but 'twas not Money in this case would do,
but Example: For, said I, if this be the Case, that he that did my Servants an
Injury, must be paid for his Labor, a larger Fund than mine would not suffice;
for if a Man tear his Clothes, if he intended to do my People an Injury, he
knew where to have Money to buy new ones, which was an unworthy thing, and by no
means to be endured by me. Thus were my Servants, by the Mediations of Haly,
sent home to me. When the Bailo of Venice heard of their release, he sent for
one of my Servants present, and desired to know of him, what that Business had
cost me? Not a Doit, said he. Then said the Bailo, If it had been mine, it
would have cost me 200 Ducats before I could have come off. But the sorry Judge
suffered most of all; for he was put out of his Office, the Turks accounting it
an absurd an heinous thing to be beaten by a Christian, as he confessed he had
been.

As for the Release of the Spanish Commanders, it was obtained by my Mediation,
they were these, Sandaeus Commander of the Landforces, and Leva, and
Requisenaeus, the one Admiral of the Neapolitan, the other the Silician
Galleys. In short, I Will tell you how I compassed their release: The Peace made
between the Kings of Spain and France, did much trouble the Turks, as being
Inconvenient for their Affairs, especially considering that they were not
comprehended in it, as at first they thought they should, yet they dissembled
the matter at present, but sought for an Opportunity to show their dislike
thereof. Solomon had writ to the King of France, that he agreed to the Peace,
yet would have him remember, That old Friends are not easily made Enemies, nor
Old Enemies Friends.

This Disgust of the Turks did much advantage my Affairs: To which Haly Bassa's
Kindness did contribute very much, and Ebrahim's great desire to serve me, and
to be thankful to me.

You may remember I told you before, that when La Vigne did accuse me to the
Bassa, at the same time he forgot not Ebrahim, b^t told them, that he
discovered all the secret Counsels of the Turks to me. This Ebrahim was the
chief Drogerman, (i. e.) Interpreter of Solomon, a Polander by Nation, and
therefore more hated by La Vigne, because in a deadly Fewd that was between
Codognatus a former Ambassador of the same King; and in jest he seemed to take
Codognatus his part. I shall not trouble you with the Contest betwixt them, it
being alien to my purpose: This is certain, that La Vigne was mindful of the
Affront, and could never endure Ebrahim, but when he had Access to the Bassa
every third Ward was against him; neither did he desist from complaining till
Ebrahim was thrown out of his Place: For my part, I was not much concerned for
Ebrahim's Disgrace; I had never such an extraordinary kindness for him, so as
to lament his Loss, for I found him many times cross to my Affairs; only it
troubled me, that 'twas noised abroad, he lost his Place for my sake. Hereupon
I assisted him in his Privacy what I could; for I knew it troubled him, to be
thrown out of Office, and therefore I used him as an Interpreter or Messenger,
betwixt me and the Bassa in the Transacting about the Peace. And Haly admitted
him out of Respect to me, because he was Degraded without any just Cause. In
fine, I never left till I got him settled into his Place again; which Courtesy
did so oblige him, that in Gratitude he showed me all the good Offices he
could, in all Company and on all Occasions: And he had the greater Opportunity
so to do, because of the Offense the Turks had taken of the French, for the
making Peace with the Spaniard. On which account, when the Noble Salvatus was
sent by the most Christian King, to procure the Liberty of Sandaeus, he was
wholly and absolutely refused. Sandaeus was in mighty expectation of that
Embassy, believing he should never be released, if that Negotiation had not
effected it; and therefore he was at great Expense to buy Presents for the
Grand Seignior, and other great Men upon his Release. All which signified
nothing, for Salvatus went away without effecting any thing: When he was gone,
the Servants and Solicitor of Sandaeus came to me in a great Fright; and told
me, they durst not acquaint their Master with the unsuccessful News of
Salvatus's Intercession for his Liberty; for all his Hopes depending thereon,
they were afraid the Transaction would either make him desperate, or cast him
into some fatal Disease; and therefore they desired me to acquaint him first by
Writing; I refused, alleging, That I had not common Places enough to draw
Comfort from, for a Man in so deep a Distress. For Sandaeus was a Man of a
great Spirit, full of Hope, and without any Fear; and Men of such Dispositions,
as they hope for what they desire, so if they are disappointed of their Hopes,
they are so cast down, that it is hard to raise them to any tolerable frame of
Spirit.

Whilst Matters stood thus at a stand, in comes Ebrahim my Interpreter, very
opportunely; and falling into discourse about these Spanish Prisoners; he told
me plainly, That if I did but demand their Liberty, I should certainly obtain
it; and what he spoke was upon good grounds. He had formerly given me some
blind Hopes, that I might procure their Release if I set my self about it; but
I gave but little heed to his Suggestion: For not being certain to conclude
Peace, how could I attempt such a Thing. Besides I was afraid, lest my
Interposition might hinder the Success of Salvatus's Negotiation: But he was
gone, and Ebrahim whom I had so much obliged, persisted in the same Opinion. I
began to hearken to him; yet telling him, he should have a care he did not
engage me who was his Friend, in a ridiculous Business; or without doubt I
should be laughed at if I succeeded not therein, the Matter being thought
difficult to be compassed in common Opinion, and Salviatus having attempted it
in vain; yet he advised me to proceed therein, and amused me with good Success.

Upon this Encouragement, I wrote to Sandaeus, how fruitless Salviatus's
Embassy had been, yet I wished him not to despair; for if any Credit at all
were to be given to a Turk, there was good hope of his Affairs; and then I
related what Ebrahim had told me.

Having laid this Foundation, I advised with some Friends who were well skilled
in Turkish Affairs; they wished me all good Success, but were very doubtful of
them, especially seeing the King of Frances's Ambassador had been denied, and
the issue of Peace was yet undetermined; and moreover, the Turks are hardly
ever induced to release great Men; yet I wrote to my Master the Emperor, to let
him know what Hopes I had, and desired that I might in his Name beg the Release
of those Prisoners. To be short, upon great Gifts and more Promises made to the
Bussa's, for their Favor in the Case; the Day before St. Laurence's Day, all
the Prisoners were released and sent to my Lodgings.

Sandaeus and Leyva were at great odds one with another, so that they would not
eat together, but I was forced to spread their Tables apart; Requisena did eat
with Leyva, and Sandaeus with me: So we went to Supper. The French Ambassador's
Steward came to me, bringing me some Letters; Sandaeus asked of him, If he knew
him? Yes Sir, said he, I think you are Don Alvarez: I am so, said he; Pray
remember me to your Master, and tell him, that I have obtained my Liberty by
means of the Emperor's Ambassador, and that you have seen me abroad with your
Eyes: I see you indeed, Sir, said he, but so, that I can scarce believe my own
Eyes. Sandaeus did thus Accost him, because his Master the French Agent, would
never believe that Solomon would release those great Men at the Emperor's
instance: And the truth is, before they could obtain their Liberty, their Mufty
which is as an Archbishop amongst the Turks, was consulted, Whether a great
many Turks might not be released for a few Christians; for I had promised, that
about Forty Turks of an ordinary Rank, who were Prisoners with us, should be
released for them. The Mufty answered, That there were two Opinions on the
Case; one Pro, the other Con; but he was for the Affirmative.

It now remains that I acquaint you with the last End of Bajazet, who I told
you before, was put in Prison by the Persians: Many Messages had passed between
those two Princes on that Occasion; and an Ambassador came once from Persia
with Presents, a Tent curiously wrought, Assyrian and Persian Tapistry, with
the Alcoran, and some Beasts of an unusual sort; as an Indian Ant, as big as
any ordinary Dog; a fierce and biting Present. The Cause of the Embassy was
pretended to be, the Reconciliation of Bajazet with his Father; they were
received very Honorably, entertained with rich Banquets, of which Haly sent me
a part, eight huge munificent Dishes full of Sweetmeats. 'Twas the Custom of
the Romans to send Dishes from their Feasts to their Friends; the Spaniards do
it to this Day; and the Turks from their great Feasts carry home something,
especially if they have Wives and Children; they many times carried home whole
Napkins full of good eatable Bits from my Table; and though they pretend to
Cleanliness, yet they would sometimes daub their Silk-cloaths with some
Collation-drops.

Let me tell you a Story to this purpose, which I know will make you laugh
heartily, as it did me at first hearing thereof: For we are not such Cato's,
but yet sometimes we may season our Care with moderate Laughter, which shows
that we are Men.

It Is the Custom of the Turkish Bassa's, some Days before their Fast, (which we
call Lent) to make a public Feast or Entertainment for all Comers, none are
excluded; yet generally none but Servants, Friends, and Relations come: There
is a Napkin made of Leather spread over a long Tapistry on the Ground, full of
Dishes; the Table will hold abundance of Guests; the Bassa himself sits at the
upper end, and the choicest Guests next to him, and then the ordinary Guests in
Ranks till the Table be full. It will not hold all at once, but some stand by
till others have Dined, which they do in great Modesty and Silence; and then
they drinking a draught of Honey diluted with Water, Salute their Landlord, and
away they go; when they are gone, others sit down in their places, and a third
Class after them; the Servants still taking off the old Dishes and ^etting on
new. A certain Bassa making such a Feast, invited a Singiack to sit next to
him; an old Man of the Sect which the Turks call Hayges, (i. e.) Learned Men,
sat next to him: This Haggie seeing such a plenty of Victuals before him, had a
mind to carry home some to his Wife after he had filled his own Belly; but
looking for his Handkerchief to fill it with Victuals, he found he had left it
at home; being then in a straight, he bethought himself, and resolved to fill
his Sleeve that hanged on on his Back; but mistaking the Singiack's for his
own, he stuffed it full of Dainties, and stops it in with a piece of Bread that
nothing might fall out; he was not to touch his Sleeve till he had laid his
Hands on his Breast or Thigh, and so Saluted his Entertainer as their Custom
is; when he had done that, he took up his own Sleeve and finds it empty, at
which he was much amazed, and returned home very sad: A while after the
Singiack also rose from the Table, and having Saluted the Bassa, at every step
his Sleeve cast out the Dainties it was replenished with, unknown to him; and
seeing a Train of Junkets behind him, he blushed for shame: The Company fell a
laughing, but the Bassa imagining how it came to pass, desired him to sit down
again, and so he sent for the Haggai; when he came, he accosted him thus: I
wonder that you being an old Friend, and having a Wife and Children at home,
did carry home nothing to them, seeing my Table was so well Furnished. Truly,
Sir, said he, 'Twas no Fault of mine, but I think my Genius was angry with me;
for I stuffed my Sleeve with Viands, and yet when I came forth I found it empty.
Thus the Singiack was cheated, and the Frustration of the Haggai, together with
the Novelty of the Case, occasioned no small Laughter amongst all the Company.
But to return to Bajazet.

His Case was desperate, between an angry Father that required to have him
given up, and a false Friend, who pretended to detain him: Sometimes Solomon
dealt mildly with the Persian, putting him in mind of the League between them,
that they were to have the same Enemies and Friends: Sometimes he taxed him
with War, if Bajazet was not surrendered; and thereupon he placed strong
Garrisons on all the Confines of Persia, he filled Mesopotamia and the Banks of
Euphrates with Soldiers, especially the Veteran ones, whom he had employed
against Bajazet, over whom Mahomet the third of the Viziers Bassa's, and
Beglerbey of Greece was made General, for Solomon was returned home: Moreover
he solicited the Georgians dwelling between the Hircan-Sea and Pontus,
bordering on Persia to Aid him against them: They answered courageously, That
they were not strong enough themselves to Cope with the Persian; but if he
himself came upon the Place with an Army, they would then show themselves Men
of Courage against the Persians as their common Enemy. The Hircanians also and
the Posterity of Tamerlan were sollicitous to join Arms: Solomon himself gave
forth, that he would go to Aleppo, (a City of Syria, seated on the Banks of
Euphrates) that from thence he might make War on the Persian: Nor was the
Persian himself without Fear, for he had often experienced the Dint of
Solyman's Sword. But the generality of the Turks were averse from the War, and
looked on it as a wicked and detestable one, and this cooled the Sultan. A great
many Soldiers, especially Horse, forsook their Colors, and returned to
Constantinople without leave of Officers; and being commanded immediately to
return, they did so; but so unwillingly, that Solomon plainly saw their
Aversion from the Service.

Whereupon Solomon, seeing he could not get Bajazet alive out of the Persian's
Hands, (who feared his Revenge if ever he came off clear,) descended to the
next thing, which was, to have him strangled there, and he hoped to obtain his
end this way; because the Persian had lately acquainted him by Letter, that he
had been very remiss in so great an Affair. I have sent diverse Ambassadors to
you, said he, but you send nothing to me but empty Letters, or Messengers; and
therefore to convince me that you are real in the Business: Send some
considerable Ambassadors of your prime Nobility with whom I may Transact,
according to the greatness of the Affair. As for himself, Bajazet had been a
great Charge to him before he could be taken, and therefore 'twas fit an
Account should be had of those Expenses. Solomon thereby saw that Money was
required, and therefore by the Advice of his Bassa, he resolved to take any
other course, rather than to involve himself in an unnecessary War with the
Persians. Hereupon Hassan Aga, together with an old Bassa, one of the
Bedchamber, was sent by Solomon into Persia: They departed with ample
Commission in the midst of the Winter; they made great haste, insomuch that
they lost several of their Retinue in the way: At last they came to Casbia to
the Sophi, and desired to see Bajazet; they found him in a ^asty filthy Prison,
his Beard and Hair so long, that till he was shaved he could hardly be known;
but then Hanan knew him by the lineaments of his Face, having been brought up
with him from a Child, and therefore he was chosen as the fittest Person for
this Embassy. They agreed that the Persian should be repaid what he had laid
out, and should have many rich Presents besides, provided they would destroy
Bajazet; The Hassan returns and gives an account to his Master, who thereupon
sent the Expense by him, with the Gifts, who were guarded by the Turks to the
Confines of Persia. Thus Hassan again returned to be the Executioner of Bajazet
with his own Hand, for so Solomon had commanded: When the Bow-string was about
his Neck, he desired but one thing before his Death, which was, to see his
Children, and to take his last leave of them by a Final Kiss, but that was
denied. This was the end of Bajazet and his unfortunate Designs; the way he
took to save himself was his Ruin; his four Children under-went the same Fate;
the newborn Infant which he left at Amusia, whom his Grandfather had removed
to Persia to be Educated there, when his Father was dead, a trusty Eunuch was
sent to Persia to destroy him too; but the Eunuch being tenderhearted,
procured a certain Porter, a hard-hearted Fellow, who cared not what desperate
Pranks he played, to join with him to help dispatch the Child. This Fellow went
into the Room, and as he was fitting the String to the Infant's Neck, the poor
Child lifted up its self as well as he could, and embracing him in his Arms,
offered to kiss him, which did so mollify his wretched Heart, that he fell
down in a Swoon. The Eunuch stood at the Door, and wondering at the Delay, went
in and found the Fellow sprawling on the Ground, whereupon he was forced to
execute the Charge himself, and so strangled the poor Child. By this Passage it
appears, that Solomon spared his Nephew hitherto, not out of any Principle of
Mercy, but out of an Opinion the Turks have, that Matters if they succeed well,
are pleasing to God; and therefore as long as 'twas uncertain what the Aim of
Bajazet's Designs would be, he would not imbrue his Hands in his Child's Blood,
lest if Bajazet had succeeded, he might seem to have resisted the Will of God:
But when Bajazet was slain, then he thought God had determined the
Controversy, and that his Son also might not be spared, lest the Proverb
should be verified, Of an ill Crow, an evil Egg. I had a long Discourse with my
Chiaux upon this Subject when I was in the Island (as abovesaid) and had
liberty to Sail from one to the other. It happened once, that as we were
returning in our Skiff, the Wind being against us, we could not double a
Promontary that reached pretty far into the Sea, that we were forced to Land
and take our Dinner a-shoar; for I always carried some Provant along with me in
the Vessel for fear of the worst; and their Turks were also forced to Land upon
the same Stress of Weather: Our Table was spread in a great Meadow, my Chiaux
and my Interpreter sat at Table with me; mention being occasionally made of
Bajazet, the Chiaux began to inveigh bitterly against him for taking up Arms
against his Brother. I pleaded for him, and said, he was worthy of Pity, who
was forced to do what he did: There was an inevitable necessity upon him,
either to submit himself to a certain Death, or to save his Life by taking
Arms. However the Chiaux persisted still to execrate his Undertaking, whereupon
I pleaded thus; You accuse Bajazet as Guilty of an horrid Offense, but you
acquit Solomon the Father of your present Emperor, who took up Arms against his
Father. We do so, said the Chiaux, and we have reason for it, for the Event
showed, that what he did was by God's Approbation, and was predestined in
Heaven. If you argue from Success, said I, then the wickedest Fact, if it
prosper, may be reputed to God as the Author, and then he may be made the
Author of Sin, if Good and Evil must be interpreted only by Events. We dwelt
awhile on this Discourse, and were very eager upon it, whilst either of us
defended his own Opinion; we alledg^d many Places of Scripture; Can the Vessel
say to the Potter, Why have thou made me thus? I will harden Pharaoh 's Heart.
Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated: and others of like Import.

The Turks that were not far from us, admired at what we Contested so earnestly
about; and after we rose from the Table, my Chiaux went to them; they gathered
themselves in a Ring about him, and I saw them harkening to the Discourse he
made, with great Attention; and at last, at Noon, they were all silent, and
Worshipped God according to their Custom. I thought long till my Chiaux
returned to me again, that I might know why he prated so amongst his Comrades;
I was afraid, though he was a fair Conditioned man, yet that he might Represent
what I had spoken to him, to my prejudice: At last when the Wind ceased, we
went Aboard again and followed our Course. The first thing that I did, was to
ask of my Chiaux, What serious Discourse he held with his Countrymen? He
smiled, and made me this Answer: We were disputing about Predestination, and I
told them what you had alleged Con and Pro; bywhich it was plain, that you had
read our Books, and was well read in the Scriptures, so that there was nothing
wanting to your Happiness, but to turn to our Religion, which in the Prayers
you saw us make, we desired of God. When News was brought to Constantinople
that Bajazet was dispatched, I was afraid that our Affairs, which were in an
hopeful way of Conclusion, would now meet with a Rub at last; the Misfortune of
Bajazet might overturn all, make the Turks more Insolent, to undo what was
done, and to propose harder Conditions. I had passed over some Difficulties; as
the Loss of Gerba, and the Imprisonment of Bajazet, and the Vaivoods expulsion
out of Moldavia; but there were two terrible ones, at Bajazet's Death, and he
hired another that I Will speak of by and by.

Haly sent one of his Domestics to me, to tell me that Bajazet was dead for
certain, that therefore I should not defer the Peace, in hopes of his Success:
I should remember, that Princes of the same Religion are more easily Reconciled
than those of contrary ones are; and therefore I should use no more
Pergiversation, nor seek Knots in a Bulrush, as the Proverb is.

This Message troubled me much, yet because I thought that the Relater might be
partial, I sent up and down the Town amongst my Friends, to know what certainty
they had of Bajazet's Death; They all returned me answer: That he was most
certainly dispatched. Whereupon I resolved to pluck in my Sails; there was no
hopes for me to obtain better Conditions; it was well if I could maintain my
Ground, and stick to my former without any change: The Emperor of the Turks had
seen them, and was not much averse from them; some small Alterations were made;
something I wished I could have added, other Things were dubiously expressed,
which a malign Interpretation might raise Scruples about. I did my endeavor
that these might be taken out, or rendered and made more favorable on our side.
My Master Caesar had seen and approved those Conditions, yet still I could not
satisfy my self, till something more favorable was added; whilst I was doing
this, I was accosted with Haly's Message as aforesaid.

I met also with another grievous Rub; some Noblemen of Hungary had Revolted
from the Vaivoodans of Transylvania to the Emperor, ( i. e) to speak the truth
had returned to that Duty, and the Garrisons also which they commanded yielded
to Caesar. This new Accident might have disturbed all, for the Turks had a
specious pretense to allege, That while Conditions of Peace were on foot once,
such Alteration ought to have been made; if Peace were cordially desired, all
Things were to be returned to their Pristine State: but let Revolters speed as
they pleased, what they had possessed ought to be returned to the Vayvode,
their Client and Vassal. But Haly was so far from pressing this, that one
express Condition was, that those Things should be ratified, which he willingly
assented to. But the Ambassadors who came lately from the Vayvode, were very
much troubled at it, they rubbed upon the galled place, and filled the whole
Court with their Clamours, that their miserable Master was deserted, the Law of
Alliance broken, and Enemies preferred before ancient Friends. All the rest of
the Bassa's were moved with their Complaints, only Haly stood firm to me, so
that the Articles of the Peace were not altered at all. For my part, though I
knew that the Terms would be allowed by my Master Caesar, yet because there want
not Sicophants in Prince's Courts, who go about to obscure the best Services of
their Ministers, especially if Strangers; I therefore thought it fit to leave
all to the Pleasure of my Master: I told Haly, that though the proposed
Condition did not fully answer the Expectation of my Master, yet I hoped he
would Acquiesce therein, if an Agent of theirs were sent along with me to
explain the Things that were obscure, upon which any Controversy might arise;
and that Ebrahim seemed to be the fittest Man for this purpose, by whom Caesar
might write back his full Mind concerning the whole Project; this was easily
assented to. Thus an end was put to this long and tedious Business.

It Is a Custom, that when Ambassadors upon fair Terms depart from
Constantinople, the Bassa's do entertain them with a Feast in the Divan; but I
was willing to wave that Badge of esteem, because I would have all left in
suspense, and referred to the good Will and Pleasure of my Master.

I had a mind before my departure, to buy some gallant Horses, and therefore
ordered my Servants to go often to the Markets, to see if they could find any
such. Haly being informed thereof, had some of his own brave Horses to the Fair
to be sold; My Servants had their Eye presently on 'em, and asking the Price,
they told them 120 Ducats, they offered 80, not knowing whose they were; which
was refused to be taken: A Day or two after, the same Horse with two more near
as good, were sent me by Haly for a Present; one was an Arabian ambling Nag,
exceeding well shaped: When I gave him Thanks for my noble Present, he asked me,
Whether I did not think that Horse which my Servants offered 80 Ducats for,
was not more worth? Much more, said I, only they had a Command from me not to
exceed that Price, till perhaps some sudden Defect might afterward show that I
had bought Horses too dear. He advised me also how to Manage their Turkish
Horses; as that I should give them but little Meat; that I should make but
short Journeys at first, till they were used to the Roads; and that I should
make nine or ten Days Journey to Adrianople, which used to be compassed in
five: He gave me also a choice Vest wrought with Gold, and a Box full of
Alexandrian Treacle, the best in the World; and a Glass full of Balsom, which
he highly prized, Complementing me thus: Any other Present, said he, are such
as Money can procure; but this is such a rare Gift, that my Master cannot send
a choicer to the best Friend or Allies he has; I got it, said he, when I was
Governor of Egypt, which Place I held some Years: there are two sorts of that
juicy substance, one which is drawn from the Oil of the decocted Leaves of the
Shrub on which they grow which yet is black and not much worth; the other does
distill from the Bark of the Tree when it is cut, which is yellow and genuine,
and mine was of that sort. He desired likewise, that I would send him some
Presents, as a Coat of Mail ^itted to his large and full Body, and a strong
Horse that was sure footed; for he was so big and pursie, that no Horse could
be easily found fit to carry him; and with all kind of Varnishing matter coming
from the Maple, or some other Tree, wherewith our Artists use to Inlay their
Tables. As for Solomon, he gave me no Gifts but common ones, such as other
Ambassadors have had at their departure, and such as I received from him
formerly at my Audience of leave; only he inveighed against the Heydukes, and
the Insolency of the Garrison of Syeth: To what purpose is it, said he, to make
Peace here, if they continue the War thus. I told him, I would acquaint my
Master, and that I did not doubt but he would afford a Remedy thereto, and thus
by good Fortune about the end of August, I entered upon my desired Journey,
carrying with me a Truce of Eight Years, as the Fruits of my Eight Years Abode
there, which may be continued for a longer time, unless some considerable
Change do happen. When we came to Sophia where the Way parts, one to Rhagusa,
the other to Belgrade, Leyva, and Requisena, desiring of me to part Company,
and to go to Rhagusa, that so they might more easily pa^s to Venice and Italy,
and procure those Gifts which they promised to send to the Bassa's, and repay
the Money they had borrowed at Constantinople; and that they would send Letters
of Thanks by me to Caesar, to give him due Acknowledgments for their Release:
Which Service they would willingly have performed in Person, if their other
Occasions had not hindered. I easily assented to their Requests, and I was the
better pleased, because Requisena being a very old Man died before he came to
Rhagusa: If I should have denied their Request, it might have been thought my
Refusal had contributed to his Disease.

So that Sandaeus and my self passed the rest of our Journey without any great
Inconvenience; for the truth is, he is a very jesting Man, and if he be
troubled with grief, yet he knows how to cover it, and to pretend mirth
outwardly. In our way many Pleasurable Things offered themselves; sometimes we
would alight and try which of us could run fastest; I being lean could easily
outrun him who was fat and pursie, as being newly come out of Prison. As we
came near to any Village, Ebrahim would ride up to us, (for he with his Turks
followed greatly on Horseback) and beseeched us by all that was dear to us, not
to be seen on foot by the Villages, for it would be accounted a disgraceful
thing for us amongst the Turks. Upon whose Advice sometimes we would go again
into our Chariot, but sometimes we did walk afoot still.

One of Sandaeus's Facetious sayings, I shall not pretermit; when we came from
Constantinople the Weather was very hot, and so it continued upon the Way, so
that it palled my Appetite from Food, a very little served my Turn; but
Sandaeus being a robust healthy Person did eat like an Horse, and would ever
and anon tell me that I must follow his Example and eat like a Man of mettle;
yet all his Advice was to no purpose, till about the beginning of October I
drew near to the Borders of Austria; and there partly on the account of the
Country, and partly of the Season of the Year, I began to be more healthy, and
to take a larger proportion of Food.

When Sandaeus observed that I had a better Stomach than formerly, he began to
vapor over me exceedingly, pretending that 'twas by his Advice and Example
that I had learned to eat my Meat, and that I who was so many years old had
need of him as a Monitor to advice me to take due Sustenance for my Body; so
that if he were obliged to me for his Release, I was as much beholding to him
for teaching me to take my necessary Food. In these Ludicrous Repartees we came
to Tulna where we were accosted with some Trouble. Sandaeus u^ed to lie in the
same House, if it were capacious enough to hold us both, if not, then he took
his Lodgings at some Neighboring House, that he might not incommode or
straighten me: He was willing to do so at Tulna, and therefore he desired that
the Ianizaries whom I brought with me from Constantinople to Buda, to be my
Harbingers on the Way, to find out a convenient Lodging for him: One of my
Servants and a Doctor of Physic, a Spaniard, whom Sandaeus had released at
Constantinople at his own Charge, went along with the Ianizary. It happened
that they lighted on the House of another Ianizary hard by, who was appointed
as Governor of the Place to guard Passengers; for the Turks use to appoint one
or two Ianizaries in every noted Town to protect Christian Passengers from
Violence; by which Office they get no small Profit: But this Man had committed
some Offense or other, was put out of his Office, and therefore was of a very
surly and untoward Humor. My People viewed all his House, and not finding it
for their turn, were going away; the Ianizary first, my Servant next, and the
Physician last of all. In the Interim, the Ianizary, Master of the House, being
walking in his Garden, was told, that some Christian Passengers were seeking
for a Lodging at his House: Whereupon he threw himself into a Rage, with a Club
like Hercules in his Hand, and without speaking a word, strikes the Physician a
great Blow on the Shoulders as hard as ever he was able; the Physician to avoid
the second Blow, ran out of the House: My Servant looking back, saw him lifting
up his Club to strike him also, but he having a thing like an Hatchet in his
Hand, held it cross-ways over his Head, and so kept off many a lusty Blow, till
at last the Handle of the Hatchet by his often striking began to break; Then my
Servant was enforced to close in with the Ianizary, and was about to cleave his
Skull with his Weapon; Whereupon the Ianizary fled, and my Servant not being
able to overtake him, threw the Hatchet after him, which cut him in the Hams,
and felled him to the Ground; by which Accident my People escaped: But the
Physician cried out, that he was a dead Man, and that all his Bones were broke
in pieces. Sandaeus heard his Complaint, and though he were vexed, yet he could
not choose but smile, as thinking that the Doctor was more afraid than hurt:
But that which grievously vexed and tormented him, was, left on this occasion
he should be carried back to Constantinople: He was of Opinion that the Bassa's
had not dealt sincerely in his Case, but had made only a pretense of
Releasement to gratify me, but did really seek an occasion to hall him back
again there to Rot in Prison. And for the same cause he was much offended with
that Servant of mine who had wounded the Ianizary, especially for saying, That
he was very sorry that he had not killed him outright upon the Spot. His Words
to him were these: Honest Henry, (for that was my Man's Name) Prithee be not so
Passionate, it is no Time nor Place to show thy Valor here; we must bear
Affronts patiently without any just Imputation of Cowardice; will we, nill we,
we are in their Power: This unseasonable Passion may bring great Mischief to
us; perhaps it may occasion us to be brought back to Constantinople, and there
our whole Negotiation may be Reversed, or at least hazarded so to be. Thus new
Troubles may arise, and a new Race of tiresom-labour to be run. I beseech thee
therefore, as for other Reasons, so for my sake among the rest, restrain thy
Passion.

But Henry turned the deaf Ear to all his Persuasions; for the truth is, he was
a self-willed inflexible Fellow; and when he was angry, not capable to hear
Reason. What care I, replied he, if I had klll'd him. What! Did he not design
to kill me? If but one of his many Blows had not missed, he had knocked me down
like an Ox; were I to be blamed if I slew him, who would have slain me first? I
am sorry withal my Heart, I did not give him his Deaths Wound: But for the
future (Take my Word for it) I Will spare never a Turk of them all; but if he
Assaults me, I Will give him as good as he brings, though it cost me my Life.

Sandaeus did not like this surly answer: But the Ianizary who had received the
Wound, aggravated the Matter; upon whose Complaint, two Jews that could speak
Spanish, came to me, and told me, that he was dangerously hurt, and if he did
not give him Satisfaction, the matter would not so soon be passed over, but
would create great Trouble to me. I answered them as I thought fit; but because
I knew the Calumnies and Guise of the Turks, I thought it best speedily to
prevent them; and therefore sent presently one of the Youths to Ebrahim,
desiring him to let one of his Servants to be a Guide to one of mine to
Constantinople, a sudden Emergency had necessitated this Journey. Ebrahim
wondered what the matter was, and came presently to me to know; I told him I
desired a better Convoy from Hali Bassa, otherways I was out of Hopes ever to
reach home, for two of my Servants were like to be killed; and then I told him
the whole Story with the Circumstances thereof: Ebrahim soon perceived how much
his own Freehold was concerned therein, and therefore desired me to have a
little patience till he spoke with the Ianizary; to whom he presently hyed, and
found him in Bed; he chid him grievously for being so abusive to us, and told
him, that I had made Peace with the Port; and was in great Favor with Solomon,
and all the Bassa's, that they had denied none of my Requests, but had granted
me several Concessions for my own sake, and that he himself was sent back to
Convey me safe into my own Country, and to take Care that I might be Honorably
Entreated by the way: That he was the first Man that offered me the least
Affront; and that I was sending back one to Constantinople to Complain thereof;
which, if I did, it may cost him his Head. This took down my Ianizary's Crest,
and put him into a terrible Fear besides.

The next Day we continued our Journey to Buda; and the Physician
notwithstanding his great Bruise, was as well able to Travel as any of us: When
we came in sight of Buda, the Bassa thereof sent some of his own Family, with
several Chiauxes to meet us; and amongst the rest, there was a Troop of young
Men on Horseback, which drew our Eyes after them in respect of the Novelty of
their Garb; their Heads were uncovered, and shaven upon their Crowns; there was
a long Line cut with a Knife, and in the Wound they stuck Feathers of several
sorts; and though Drops of Blood distilled down from their Wounds, yet they
dissembled their Pain, and rode merrily on as if they Ailed nothing at all:
Just before me there walked some Footmen, of which, one had his naked Arms
a-keenbow, and both of them had a Knife, (such as we call Oragensian) run
through their Arms above their Elbow; the one was naked all the upper-parts to
his Navel, the Skin of his Loins being so cut in two places both above and
below, that a Club being run through them, hung down from thence as from a
Girdle; another had a Horseshoe nailed to the Crown of his Head, and it was so
old, that the Shoe and the Skin grew together.

In this Posture we entered Buda, and were Introduced to the Bassa, with whom in
the Presence of Sandaeus, I had a long Discourse concerning the Validity of the
Truce I had made. In the Passage to him there stood those hardy Youngsters who
so much undervalued their Pain; casting my Eye upon them, the Bassa demanded,
what I thought of them? I think, said I, that they are brave Fellows; only they
do that to their Skins, which I would not do to my Clothes for I had rather
have them whole than slashed. Whereupon the Bassa laughed, and dismissed us.

The Day after we came to Granand, from thence to Gomarra, the Frontier
Garrison of the Empire, situated on the River Wage; on both sides its Banks the
Garrison of the Place with the Seamen, called their Nassadists waited for us.
Before I passed over the River, Sandaeus came to me, and embracing me in his
Arms, gave me Thanks for completing his Liberty: He told me plainly, he
thought the Turks had but dissembled with him, and therefore he was in
perpetual fear, lest he should be hauled back to Constantinople to dye in
Prison; but now being in the Emperor's Territories, he acknowledged himself to
be eternally obliged to me.

A few Days more brought us to Vienna; Ferdinand the Emperor was then at the
Imperial Diet, with his Son Maximilian, about Inaugurating him King of the
Romans. I acquainted Caesar with my Return, and with Ebrahim's coming, and
desired to receive his Commands concerning him; for he had a great Desire to
wait upon the Emperor at Frankford: His Highness's first Answer was, That 'twas
best for the Turks to stay at Vienna till his Return, for it was not advisable
to carry an Enemy through the very heart of the Country, so long a way as 'twas
from Vienna to Frankford. And on the otherside, Delays were dangerous, and
might create Suspicion in the Turks for some unfair dealing. As for Ebrahim and
his Retinue, there was no danger in suffering them to pass through the most
flourishing part of the Empire; yea it was desirable rather, that thereby they
might take an Estimate of the Strength and Greatness thereof, especially having
so great an Opportunity at present, to take notice at Frankford with how great
Unanimity of all the Electoral Princes Maximilian was chosen and designed
Successor to the Emperor his Father: When I wrote back to the Emperor according
to the Purport aforesaid, he assented that Ebrahim and his Retinue should come
to Frankford. We began our Journey thither by the way of Prague, Banberg, and
Wirtzburg.

Ebrahim passing through Bohemia was willing to perform his Court to Archduke
Ferdinand, but the Archduke would have it Incognito. When we were a few Days
Journey from Frankford, I thought good to Ride a Day or two's Journey before,
to acquaint the Emperor with some Things relating to my Embassy; which I did,
and came to Franckford, that Day Seven Years but one, wherein I took my Journey
from Vienna to Constantinople. I was then received by my Master with all
imaginable Kindness, not that I deserved it, but 'twas his innate Goodness and
Custom so to do. You may imagine with your self, how joyous a thing it was to
me, after so may Years to be returned safe to the Presence of my glorious
Master, who was pleased kindly to accept of the Fruits of my Embassy; and told
me, that I had done all Things well, and that I should find the Effects of his
Favor. He came to Franckford the Day before the Inauguration, late in the
Evening when the Gates were shut, and all the following Day they were not to be
opened by ancient Custom: But his Imperial Majesty gave express Command that
they should be opened for the Turks. They had a Place assigned them, from
whence they might behold Caesar Elect to pass by with great Pomp and Splendor;
it appeared to them a Glorious and Magnificent Spectacle, for so indeed it was^
to behold amongst others of Cesar's honorable Train; three Dukes or Princes,
each of which could raise a great Army in his own Territories; to wit, the
Saxon, Bavaria and Brandenburg: They saw also many other Monuments of the
Dignity and Greatness of The Emperor. A few Days after Ebrahim was introduced
into his Presence, where he declared his Errands, and presented the noble Gifts
that the Sultan had sent him. the Emperor had confirmed the Peace, he rewarded
him amply, and sent him back with large Presents to Soliman.

I am very willing to leave the Court, as not being pleased with that kind of
life, but some private Businesses does as yet detain me. I know the tediousness
of Court-Attendance; much Mischief lies under an appearance of Splendour, much
of Disguise, but little of Candor is there; all Courts are subject to Envy; as
faithful Friendship is hard to be found, where change of Mind may occasion a
Man's sudden Ruin: For Princes themselves are but Men: I have seen a Man enter
into the Court with a thousand Attendants, but his Princes Displeasure sent him
packing away scarce one in his Company. A Court does not know that which is
truly good, till it is too late; it is altogether lead by Shows, Shadows,
Fallacies, and Popular Mistakes: As those are fortunate Men who can lead such a
Life in safety; so give me leave to live to the Muses and my self, and to grow
old in a Country Cottage, but with some few and trusty Friends; if any life be
desirable in this earthly Pilgrimage, it is this, or none at all. Look upon the
Court, and you will find there a debauched Noble preferred before a good Man.
So that he that would represent a good Man amongst Courtiers, must paint as Ass
amongst Apes. I speak of common Courts, for I know that our Court, as well as
some others, are illustrated with many Excellent and Noble Personages. However^
Solitude and Quiet affording Vacation to Study, is preferred by me before the
Crowd and Noise of Courts. But I am afraid, lest the best of Princes should
stop my Retreats. It Is true, he gave me leave to depart, but upon this
Condition, that I should return when called upon. If he commands me to Court
again, (for who am I that can withstand the Desire of so Gracious a Prince:)
This one truly Comfort will be left me, that I shall behold every Day the Face
of the Devoutest of all Emperors; (or to Phrase it otherwise) to Contemplate
the living Image of true Virtue. For assure your self, that the Sun never
Beautified a better Prince then this, nor one who carries and weilds the
Scepter more justly. Though it be true, that the Majesty of Empire is a
Glorious Thing, yet to desire Empire, and to carry ones self worthy of it, is
more Glorious. I speak not of his Birth, nor the Nobleness of his Ancestors, he
needs not such foreign Helps; his own Virtue is prop enough. Many Emperors
have been, though unworthy, raised to the Throne; but his own Virtue raised him
thereunto.

Again, Some have managed the beginning of their Reign innocently and justly,
but soon after they have degenerated into licentiousness of Life, and corrupt
Manners of all sorts: Forgetting themselves to be Men, they would be esteemed
as Gods, and adored as such, endeavoring to be placed among the Gods; whereas
they were unworthy to be reckoned in the number of Men. All Men's Necks cannot
bear the Burden of an high Estate, to which if they are advanced, they forget
themselves. It Is an hard thing to be able to compass all that a Man desires,
and and yet it is as hard to desire nothing but that which is good. But as for
our Prince his Eyes are not dazzled by Greatness; no Man retains Virtue more
constantly than he, nor takes greater heed that his pure Mind be not defiled by
the hate of his Fortune. He was always of this Opinion, That as Majestic Robes
do affect the Eyes of Spectators, so the Sanctity of Manners should much more
incline their Minds. Whereupon he highly studies Piety, is a holy Worshipper
and Adorer of God, and lives always as in his Sight and Presence; he squares
all his Actions throughout the whole course of his Life by a Divine Rule an
Prescript: Whatever happens either Prosperous or Adverse, he looks upon God as
the Author, and receives it gratefully as proceeding from his Hand. Thus he
lives an Heavenly Life even upon the Earth; he is not ignorant, whose Image he
bears, and therefore all his Words and Deeds are directed for the Public Good,
for which he thinks he was Born, and therefore Prefers it before his Private
Advantages; He is so Intent herein, that some blame him for being overmuch
addicted to the Commonwealth, and neglecting his own Children and Family: He is
extremely Courteous to all his Subjects, as if they were under his particular
Care, and Himself the Father of so vast a Family. What poor Man has ever
desired his help in vain? Who is there that has not experienced his
Liberality? He thinks that Day lost wherein he has not done some Good to some
body. As he is Beneficent to all, so he is singular kind to his Domestics: not
a Man of them can say, that ever he was neglected by them. He knows their way
of Life, the Deserts, yea and the very Names even of the meanest of them: Though
he be so great a Prince, yet he counts it not below himself, at convenient
Opportunity to warn the Negligent, and put them in mind of their Duty; and if
they mend their Manners, to reward them accordingly: So that they depart from
him, rather as from a Father than a Master. It Is also his Guise, his Custom,
when he has been angry with his Servants for some Days, when upon his
Amendment he has pardoned him, the memory of the Injury is quite forgotten, he
esteems them as much as he did before. He Administers Justice with great
Equity, and that to himself as well as others, for he thinks it unreasonable to
prescribe Laws to others, and break them himself; or to punish them in others,
which he allows in himself. His passions are conquered and confined within the
Rule of Reason; his Life is free from Hate, he knows not how to be Angry, nor
to reproach others; there is no Man living that ever heard him Backbite, though
they were none of his Friends: He never speaks rudely of any Man, and his
Speech is always honorable concerning them in their absence; Probity is safe
under his Guardianship; but malice, force, fraud, Evil, and bad Manners are
exterminated, Offenses and wickednesses duly punished. The old Romans had
Censors of Manners imposed upon them, to retain the People in their Duty; but
here there is no need of any Censor, the Life of the Prince is Censors enough;
he is an Example to all, what they should fly and what they should follow. Good
and learned Men which may profit the Commonwealth he highly esteems, with these
he is Conversant, and laying aside His Majesty, Treats them Friendly as his
Equals; yea, He Emulates their Virtues without respect, whether they were
Paternal and Hereditary, or gotten by their own Industry. With these he spends
the little time he had ^eft from Public Business: These are the Persons highly
Esteemed by him, as judging it a Public Benefit to restore due Honor unto
Virtue. He himself being curious by Nature, and desirous to know something
worthy of a Man, has always some Questions to propound the Learned, and
sometimes he interposes some witty Querks of his own to the Admiration of his
Hearers. Thus he has got a considerable Stock of Learning, so that you can
hardly question him in any thing, but he can give you some account thereof. He
is skilful in many Tongues; first, in the Spanish which is his Mother's Tongue,
next in the French, German, Latin, and Italian; He can Express himself pretty
handsomely in the Latin, yet not so, but that sometimes he breaks Priscian's
Head, a Fault blameworthy in a Grammarian, but allowable in an Emperor.

What I have said of him, all Men living know to be true, but perhaps some
impute this as a Defect, that he is not so much given to Alms, nor is not a
Military Person: For, say they, the Turks carry all in Hungary, and we don't
Help nor Relieve them as we ought; we should have Fought them, not Languages,
and joined Armies in the Field; that it might be known whom Providence would
have to bear Rule: I confess this Objection savours of Darkness, more than of
Prudence, and therefore let me fetch the Matter a little higher. I am of this
Opinion, That the Genius of Emperors is to be judged of rather by their
Councils, than by their Fortunes or Events, and that by those Councils, the
Times, our own Strength, the Nature and Power of our Enemies is to be
Regulated. If a Common Enemy well known to us, and Famous for no Victory,
should Invade our Borders, 'twere Cowardice not to oppose them if we have Force
enough. But if the Enemy be such who seem sent as a Scourge from God, (such was
Atala of old, Tamarlane in the Days of our Forefathers, and the Ottoman Princes
in our Age) Whom nothing can withstand, who lays all waste before him, to
Oppose such an Enemy with small and new levied Forces, would not be only Rash,
but even Madness it self. Solomon comes terrible, I say, by his own and his
Ancestor's Successes: He Invades Hungary with 20000 Horse, he draws near to
Austria, and threatens the rest of Germany; his Troops are fetched from the
very Confines of Persia; his Army is furnished with many Nations, each of the
Three known Parts of the World Conspire therein for our Destruction: He like
Lightning strikes down all before him with his battering Army, of the Terror of
his Name, he roars and Hovers in our Borders, striving to break in sometimes
here, sometimes there. Some Nations of old when they have been threatened with
such and such Potent Enemies, have left their Native Country, and have sought
out other Habitations. To be unmoved in small Dangers, is but a mean kind of
Praise; but not to be Terrified by the coming of so great an Enemy, who has
laid Waste so many bordering Kingdoms, seems to me an Herodian kind of
Constancy. Amidst these Dangers Ferdinand Heroically abides in the same Place,
he deserts not his Station; but being of an unconquered Spirit, abides in the
same Seat and State: He could wish his Forces were sufficient to put all to the
hazard of a Battle, and that nothing of Madness were imputable to him upon that
account; but Prudence does moderate his generous Efforts: He sees with what a
great Hazard of his Faithful Subjects, and the Ruin of all Christendom, and
unsuccessful Battle will be fought, and that the Public should pay for his
Rashness, is very unwilling; he considers how unequal the Combat would be
between 25 or 30000 Foot, with a small number of Horse, and 200000, supported
with a veterate Body of Foot, what Hopes there may be of Success in that Case,
the Example of former Times, and the Bloodshed at Nicapolis, and at Varna, and
the Fields of Mohach, as yet white with the Bones of Christians slain there, do
sufficiently inform us. It Is the part of a foolish Commander without duly
weighing his own and the Enemies Strength to rush into Battle, where his Loss
can be only excused with an unwise, I had not thought. It Is all in all what the
Enemy is with whom we are to cope, wherein if you will not believe, yet you may
believe the gravest Author that ever wrote of Military Affairs; such was Caesar,
he counted it a Happiness to Lucull^s and to Pompey, that they had to do with a
sloathful Enemy, over whom they got Victories without Dust or Sweat; and when
he himself had obtained such an easy Victory over Pharnaces, he was wont in
jest to say, I came, I saw, I overcame: But if he had had to do with the People
of those Countries, then Esseminated by Luxury, but now hardened by Want,
Frugality, Hunger, Cold, and Severity of Discipline, unto all Patience and
Audacity, he would have told us another story. Hence it is, that Livy reasons
upon good grounds, that Alexander the Macedonian would not have had the same
Success against the Roman Enemy, as against the Persian or Womanish Indian:
There is a great deal of difference between a Warlike and a Luxurious People,
and unaccustomed to Arms. It Is true, the Multitude of Persians, struck an
Admiration, That there was more Toil in Killing, than in Overcoming them. And
in my Judgment, Hannibal's Three Victories at Trebia at Thrasymine, and at
Cannae, did far Exceed all the Exploits of Alexander: For why? the one overcame
Valiant Warriors, the other had to do with the sloathful People.

Fabius maximus had as much Courage, as Titus, Sempronius, Caius, Flaminius, or
Varro; but he had more Judgment: That great Commander knew that he had to do
with an Enemy educated in the Camp, always versed in Arms, skilful in Military
Discipline, who by a singular Fate or Felicity, had obtained many Trophies; and
therefore he was not rashly to Venture all, but to use Delay to weary him out;
that was the only Hope left against so great an Enemy to evade his Assaults,
and to drill on the Combat till an Opportunity was afforded for a Remedy. In
the mean time, he was to be watched, restrained, and as it were, nibbl'd at;
wherein he was so happy, that Fabius, one as much Renowned as Scipio himself,
who ended the War against Hannibal; for who knows whether Scipio would have
ever overcome him, if Fabius had not first stopped the Course of his Victories;
to overcome by Prudence is as highly to be prized, as to overcome by Force. The
former have nothing common with Beasts, but Force has.

The Emperor Ferdinand had the same Design with Fabius maximus, if his and
Solyman's Forces had been equal; his first Work would have been, to put all to
the hazard of a Battle; but the inequality considered, his next Design was, to
stop an overflowing Flood in Walls and Banks, and herein employed his utmost
Endeavor. It Is about Forty Years since Solomon in the beginning of his Reign
took Belgrade, slew Lewis King of Hungary, and thereby promised himself the
possession of that and other Countries; in hope whereof he Besieged Vienna, and
renewing the War, he reduced Ghnitzium again, threatened Vienna at a distance.
But what did he get by this great Preparation of Arms, his vast and innumerable
Forces? He was forced to stick in that part of Hungary which he had already
taken. He that was wont to Conquer vast Kingdoms by one Expedition, did now
subdue only some weak Castles and small Towns, which cost him dear: It Is true,
he saw Vienna once, but never after: It Is said, that Solomon wished his Life to
be prolonged, to see three Things finished; viz. The Structure of his Temple, a
sumptuous and magnificent Work; the repairing of the old Aquaeducts to bring
Water enough into Constantinople, and the Conquest of Vienna; the two first he
has accomplished, but at the third he sticks, and I hope ever will; so that he
always calls Vienna, his Ignominy and Disgrace. But to return.

The Emperor Ferdinand may doubtless be Registered among the famousest
Captains, for though he had far less Aid than the Danger required; yet he was
Master of himself, and principally by his Courage, he has endured so great an
Impression of a Powerful Enemy for so many Years together: So that he deserves
a greater Praise for the preserving a great part of Hungary for better Times,
than many Warriors do, who with multitude of Military Preparations, and
favorable Opportunities have got many Victories over Kings and their Armies,
The less Assistance he has had in a necessary Time, by so much the more, the
Valor of his Mind has more Eminently appeared: Whosoever does not put all
upon one Event and the height of Happiness, not considering the Power of the
Enemy, and the seasonableness of Assaulting him, must needs conclude, That it is
next to a PRODIGY, that the kingdom of Hungary, distracted with long Discord,
was able to be defended so long, and that all of it is not already brought
under the Yoke of so powerful an Enemy: It Is God's great Mercy, and our Princes
infinite Care that has prevented it, whilst he is Combating with one
Difficulty, another arises in view, greater than the former. The Enemy is in
sight, Friends afar off, the Auxiliaries of his Brother Charles too far off
Germany; though next to the Fire, yet weary in sending of Aid; the hereditary
Countries exhausted by Contribution, and the Ears of many Christian Princes
deaf when Aid is desired of them; would rather do any thing, than that which is
incumbent upon them; upon that he is forced to sustain the Enemy only with his
own Arms, with the assistance of some Hungarians, Austrians, and Bohemians, and
sometimes by hiring some Italian or Spanish Soldiers at a vast Expense; he
maintains the Confines of Hungary with Garrisons fifteen Days Journey long; so
that he had always Soldiers in Pay, even in time of Truce: A Truce is sometimes
necessary, and when the coming of a Tyrant is feared, and the Time affords not
the Opportunity of Resistance, it is seasonable to send Embassies, and to
mitigate him at present, that so great a Calamity may be averted from miserable
Hungary.

Whilst our Prince is exercised with these Fears, he can hardly sleep a whole
Night together, he watches for the Good of the Commonwealth; so great a Matter
requires a perpetual Vigilance and constant Care: And do not you think I
slatter him? what I write is as true as History. He has but few Assistants in
his Government, but very good Men; the Chief of whom, not unknown to you be
Name, are, Iohanes Tranezed, Rudolphus Harva, both Eminent for their
Faithfulness and Prudence.

I shall dismiss you after I have acquainted you with our Prince's private
Deportment, he rises every Day at Five a Clock in the Morning, even in the
coldest Winter Months; and first, he performs his Prayers to God, then he goes
to the Council to Treat of Matters pertaining to the Public Good, till
Dinnertime; he follows the same course in the Afternoon, till Supper-time: I
mean his Counselors Supper, not his own; for he himself never Sups, eating but
once a Day, and that sparingly too; and he is as abstainous in Drinking; only
he closes his Dinner with a double Glass of Wine; he passes the Night chastely
ever since the loss of his Royal Consort: He cannot endure Toys nor Trifles,
which others are taken with; He will have nothing to do with Jesters, Fools,
Parasites, the common Delights, and yet Plagues of Courts: He hates Idleness,
he is a very great Husband of his Time, if he has any to spare from public
Business, which is but rare; he spends it in Conference with good and learned
Men, who are his great Delight, and do ordinarily attend him while he is at
Dinner, mingling Discourses concerning several Things. I believe that several
of the Commons would not change their Life for his, it is so strict and severe:
What Man is there that does not set apart some part of his Time to indulge his
own Genius? Who would willingly deprive himself of all Delights? To whom would
it not seem irksom to grow old in perpetual Care and Business. This seems like
a Servitude, not a Domination: But our Prince is of another mind; neither does
he dissemble it in his ordinary Discourse: He says, He was Advanced to so great
an Office by God, not for his own sake, that the Reins of Government were not
put into his Hands to wallow in Pleasures and Delights: The case of Succession
in Kingdoms and Empires, differs from the condition of private Inheritances; in
these latter no Man is denied to indulge himself in the Conveniences of his
Patrimony. But so many Nations are entrusted to him by God, that he might have
the Care and Labor, and they the Benefit of his Care, so that they should
obtain Rest and Quiet by his Sweat.

In Hunting alone he spends a little time, not so much for Delights-sake, as
for Health; as when he finds his Body to decay, and his Mind to sink, by
continual sitting many Days together, he chooses one Day to refresh himself
with the freer Air in the open Field; and that Day early in the Morning, and in
Winter some Hours before Sunrising, whatever Weather soever it be, he goes
abroad to Hunting, and sometimes he does it in the Afternoon; for I remember
when I attended him at Dinner, I heard him say; I have done my Duty this Day; I
have dispatched all Businesses that are on the File, I will spend the rest of
the Day on the Care of my Body. Thus he returns late at Night with the
slaughter of a Boar, Stag, or Bear, and betakes his wearied Limbs to rest,
without Eating or Drinking. Let no Man then upbraid with the want of Trajans,
Veruces, and Theodosius's; those Miracles of the Ancients in our Days: I dare
take my Oath, that there is more true Virtue in our Emperor, than there was in
all of them put together. But the Admiration of so great a Man transports me;
It Is not my Design to speak of his Merits, they require a Volume not an
Epistle; besides they require an Ingenuity far exceeding mine; and therefore my
end was only to put you in mind of these Things, that you may know what Master
I served. I close all with this public Prayer, That he may return late to
Heaven, whose Virtuous and Sanctimonious Presence, alleviates the Miseries of
our Age.

Concerning the Greek-Books which you enquire after, and the Rarities, and the
wild Beasts of an unusual kind, which you hear I have brought back; they are
hardly worth the mentioning: Amongst them, there is one Iohneumon very gentle,
which is known for its cruel hate with the Crocodile and Asps; I had also a
Weazle of that kind, as they call Musk-Cats, very beautiful; but I lost that on
the way: I have many brave Horses, such as no Man ever brought from thence
before, and six She-Camels: I brought back no Shrubs nor Herbs, but in Picture,
which I left in the Care of Mathiolus, with some other Things, many years ago.
I sent him Tapestry and Linen after the Babylonian fashion, with Swords, Bows,
and other Trapings: I have also many other Things made of Horse-Hides,
curiously wrought after the Turkish fashion; 'twas better to say, I had them;
for in so great an Assembly of principal Men and Women at Francfort, one asked
one Thing, and another another; so that I have but a small matter left: the
rest of my Gift was well bestowed; but I was sorry that I was prodigal of one
Balsom, Because Physicians call the truth of it into question, as not answering
all the Marks that Pliny gives of it: Whether it be that the force of those
ancient Plants from whence it flows, be weakened by age, or from any other
cause; this I know for certain, that it flows from Shrubs In the Mattarcan
Gardens near Cairo.

Before I left Constantinople, I sent one Albercarus a Spanish Physician into
Lemnos, on the Sixth Day of August, to be present at the digging out that noble
Earth, desiring him to write me the certainty concerning its Place, Origin,
manner of Extracting and Use, which I know he will do, if he be not hindered: I
had a mind to go thither my self to be an Eyewitness thereof; but the Turks
not giving me leave, I deputed him in my stead: I bring back also abundance of
old Coins, the chief of which I shall present my Master with. Besides, I have
whole Waggon-loads, if not Ship-loads of Greek Manuscripts, and about 240
Books, which I sent by Sea to Venice, from thence to be carried to Vienna: I
design them for Cesar's Library; there are many of them common, but some
choice; I rumag'd every Corner to procure such kind of Merchandise as my last
gleaning.

I left one behind at Constantinople, all very well written in great Letters;
it was Diascorides, with the Figures of Plants, wherein there were some few
Things of Cretiva, and the Book of Birds; it is in the possession of a Jew, the
Son of Hammon, who in his Lifetime was Solyman's Physician: I desired to buy
it, but the Price frighted me, he rated it at 100 Ducats; a Price fit for
Cesar's Purse, not mine; however I will not cease to press Caesar to redeem so
Famous an Author from that Bondage: it is very much injured by Time, and so
eaten with Worms on the outside, that a Man will harrdly take it up if it lay
in the Streets.

But enough of Letters, you may expect my self very shortly; I shall reserve
what remains till we meet: In the mean time, do you take Care to provide some
good and learned Men, by whose Conversation and Discourse, I may wipe-away all
that tedious Irksomness remaining in my Mind, from my long abode among the
Turks.

Franckfort, December. the 16th. 1562.
Farewell.
BUSBECKEUS HIS ADVICE About the Method how to manage WAR against the TURKS.
WHen the City Sardis was taken by Caius King of the Persians, his Soldiers
were ransacking it, and Slaughtering the Inhabitants in every Quarter: It is
Recorded, That one of Cyrus's Soldiers broke into Cresus's Bedchamber, the
King of Lydia; and not knowing who he was, drew his Sword, and would have ran
him through: At which Accident Cresus's Son was very much moved, but till that
time was Dumb and could not Speak. But behold the Strings of his Tongue were
suddenly loosed, crying out, he spoke some words, which deterred the Soldier
from slaying the King. Thus filial Piety, and the Groans of his Father's
Danger, made him able to speak, whom Nature had made Speechless till that very
time: The like Providence, though on a different Occasion, has happened to me,
whom Love to my Country will not suffer me to be any longer mute, no though I
am but a rude and unskilful Orator, and who never yet offered any thing to
Public Cry: But the extreme Hazard of my Country compels me now to roar and
cry out; not that I think that I can thereby daunt the Enemy from cutting our
Throats: (For his Savageness is such, that he will not be frightened hereby;)
but that I may warn Christian Princes to take heed to themselves, and that I
may warn my Countrymen, that whilst Time lasts they would Aid one another, and
consult their Safety: For (O Heavens!) what mischievous Unhappiness is this,
and what a Womb of Miseries, that barbarous Enemy the Turk having Conquered
Nations almost without number, by the Ruin and Destruction of so many Kings
and Kingdoms, has opened his way to us also, and points his Sword at the very
Throat of our Country; yet truly we are not concerned, nor stir not at all to
Aid distressed Christendom: If Fire break out in the City where we live, every
body leaves the Care of his private affairs and uses endeavors to quench it:
But we, alas, that would be accounted Lovers of our Country, yet in this her
Jeopardy, we do show our selves only Idle and Sluggish Spectators; her
beauteous Love which the Enemy will soon spoil, our Worship and Religion, which
he will soon make us to abjure, and the silent Supplication of our Wives and
Children, that we would not suffer them to be hauled into the basest of
Slaveries, do no way affect us. The sloathfullest of all Animals when they find
their Young to be in danger, will not be restrained by any force, but will run
through Fire and Water to help them. And shall we on the contrary, though
valiant Men, betray our Posterity, and expose them to the Injuries and Abuses
of such cruel Enemies for want of our Assistance to Relieve them. For pray tell
me what other Hopes can you have? what^ Defense? what Safeguards? Can you place
any Hope in the Goodness and Clemency of that Enemy, who since he publicly
showed himself upon the Stage of the World, has caused Rivers of Humane Blood
continually to flow? Or can you put any Confidence in his Equity and
Moderation? Alas, he values not Peace nor Leagues, not a Straw, no Common Laws
of other Nations are a jot regarded by him, no Modesty, nor no Consideration of
that which is Honest does keep him within his Bounds: He will violate his
Faith, his Oath made to any man that is a Christian, when it is for his own
Advantage; he thinks it so far from being a Sin, that he counts it a pious and
a sacred Thing. Beside, his profane Religion stirs him up against us; the
Emulation of his Ancestors, and the desire of enlarging his Empire, puts Arms
into his Hands; and that cursed and insatiable Thirst after all our Estates
hurries him on upon us. For we are quite beside the Cushion if we imagine that
either our Conscience, or our Forgetfulness of Injury received, will contribute
at all to our Security; no, the modester we are, and the more observant of
Peace and of Leagues, and of that which is just and right, we show our selves
to be, by so much the more we shall provoke the Insolency of this Enemy aginst
us; for we owe not these things to our Valor or Goodness, but to our Fear,
Sluggishness, and despair of our own Affairs. And the truth is, we have no
reason to put any Trust in our Enemy, if we have none in our selves; and in
this case, what remains but we do as Men that have received the Sentence of
Death, quietly to prepare our selves for our last Stroke, with blinded Eyes to
receive the Blow. And if you should imagine that either his Force or his
Fortune should fail him, we may answer our selves, by considering that from an
obscure Original his Victories obtained both by Land and Sea, and that in a
very short space of Time have made him Famous all the World over? The Fire
began by him, from such beginnings he has almost consumed the greatest part of
the World. The Eastern People being wearied by him do dread his Arms; as the
Assyrians, Barbarians, and Americans, the Edge of whose Sword even the Sythians
themselves now also have often felt, and the Ethiopians too in another part of
the World, who were formerly secured by the Heat of the Country, I need say
nothing of Europe, for we have seen Belgrade taken, Vienna Besieged, and Preys
driven even from the Gates of Lintz; Such toward our Destruction has Solomon
alone been able to make, besides his other Victories: But alas, it is the Guise
of our Christian Kings to continue Peace among themselves from Generation to
Generation, though it be but for a Spot of Land, whereas every single Emperor
of the Ottomans, (I speak it with as much Grief as Truth) have heaped up
KINGDOMS upon KINGDOMS by their Victorious Success: So that as many Countries
as those once flourishing Nations, the Assyrians, the Persians, the
Macedonians, and the Romans, so Comprehended within the Bounds of their
Empires; the Turks alone now seem to possess. And will not all this make us to
see our Danger? What Sea is there? what Mountains? what Deserts? What remnant
of People between them and us, from whom we can expect any Relief against their
Injuries? No, all is lost and spoiled. Alas, their Swords are at our very
Throats, who should have struck a Terror to us at a far greater distance; so
that now the very Blood of our Country, and our own last Breath, is like a
Sanguinary Quinsie, and we have not this crum of Comfort left us, which is
oftentimes found even in the greatest Calamities, that we can have any solid
ground of hope, that these our Miseries be not long lived. Other Barbarous
Nations have oftentimes brought grievous Calamities on many Christian Provinces
by sudden Tempest; thus the Goths, Vandals, Huns and Tartars, have overrun
many Countries, and brought great Havoc upon them; which Miseries seemed the
more tolerable, because there was hopes that they would not be perpetual: And
therefore after the Storm was over, those Places which were Weather-beaten and
almost destroyed, did again recover their former Splendour. But this Enemy is so
watchful, and observes that strict Discipline and Course, in preserving the
Places that he has gotten, that when he Rules and Reigns, and has once set
his Foot, he suffers not himself to be removed from thence: So that to speak by
way of Allusion, That Corn can never ripen again, whom once his Horses heels
has trodden to the Ground. So that it is hard to discern, whether he be more
happy in acquiring, or more resolute in maintaining his Conquests.

Seeing then we are surrounded with so great Dangers, Why do we not lay our
Heads together? Why do we not try all ways, and turn every Stone? Why does the
ingenious Necessity which would effect admirable Works, lie stupid and dormant
in us? The wildest of Beasts may be our Authors in this place, apprehending
themselves in the greatest danger; how strongly will they strive for their own
liberty, who in a case of Life and Death, will valiantly set up and attempt any
thing for their liberty; they will try all means, that so they may find a way
to escape: In fine, They will lose their Life rather than their Liberty.

But perhaps some may make this Objection, What then do you advise to secure
the present State of Affairs, against the Dangers and Mischiefs that hang over
our Heads? It is easy for any body to do: But what Remedy is there for it?
This is the Question we ask of you; speak something to this Head if you can say
any thing.

I answer, I will take you at your word, and will declare my mind, and that in
short: First is to be used Arms; Arms must be opposed to Arms; nothing can well
be done without Arms; the Safety of our Country is to be maintained by Sword
and Buckler, or we must all Perish, every Man: This is as true as the Gospel,
but God forbid that it should be; let us rather fly to our Arms, which are not
hid under Ground; and if they were, yet we were with great Diligence to pluck
them out; neither are they to be far fetched from remote Countries, but they
are near us, they are ready, and, if we will our selves, we have them in our
hands. There are gallant Men enough bred up amongst us; we have a numerous
Youth fit for War, who are ready to spend the last drop of their Blood for
their Country and for their Religion: We want neither Horses, nor Iron, nor
Gold, nor Forces, nor Engines, nor great Guns, nor other Utensils for War; the
Divine Bounty has largely supplied us with a considerable hand, with all
things necessary to undertake and perfect great Designs, provided always that
we do not refuse to make use of them. I say, we want only Will, and force of
Hands, which we ought seasonably to apply, while a competency of Strength
remains, and before all things run to rack irreconcilably; for otherwise we may
look back upon neglected Advice, when it is in vain and to no purpose; and then
we shall be served as those Sick Men, who whilst it was seasonable, and their
Strength entire, did even kick at the mention of Physic; and could by no
manner of means be persuaded to make use of Healthful Potions in season; but
when the opportunity is passed, and the Disease is come to the height, that
their weakened Bodies cannot bear Physic, then they seek for the Physician and
his Remedy to no purpose. Their Example ought to forewarn us before the Enemy
has wounded us all over, and whilst no Wounds are Mortal, and whilst we have
yet some Blood left in our Veins; to apply a Remedy in time; that is, to hasten
to our Arms: to prepare our selves vigorously for our Defense.

If we do thus, then we may make our Supplications to God, and may fairly hope
that he will not turn his Back to us; but if we pretend Piety as a Cloak for
our Sloathfulness, think to take a shorter cut, which is, to implore the Divine
Aid against the Mischiefs that hang over our Heads by Prayer, without our own
Pains, Labor and Study, certainly God will turn the Deaf Ear to so unjust a
Petition. No, we ought in the first place to do our own Duty, and to fill up
the Measure of Diligence, Stoutness and Valor, which God has given us
principally for this end and purpose. We should imitate the Husbandman, who
does in vain expect a plentiful Harvest from God, unless he first Plow, Sow and
Reap. God has appointed a sure and fixed Order in these Sublunary Things,
which by no means ought to be slighted or neglected; has propounded many
Rewards to Pains-taking, Diligence, Assiduity, Cunning, and to Virtue; which he
has denied to Sloathfulness. Would you be a Scholar, would you understand
Music, Astronomy, or the Mathematics, you must first take pains to learn
them, and that with might and main? Heaven will not Inspire you with these
things if you be Idle; no, you must take Pains to attain them in that way, and
by those designs which God has appointed; he has given you means to attain
them, provided you be not wanting to your self; make use of them in the first
place, and then God will give you his Blessing and Increase. In the like
manner, would you defend your Country, would you conquer your Enemy, and would
you enjoy Victory, you will never be able to do it by sitting Idly and
Sloathfully at home; no, you must up and be doing, take Arms in hand, and
exercise diligently therein; you must confine your self to Toil, to Heat, to
Drouth, to Hunger.

Being thus accoutred you may implore the Divine Aid; thus you may go hopefully
on into the Field, for you have done that Duty, and you have duly used the
Means which God has vouchsafed you; you have observed his Order, and have not
despised the Laws which he has fixed; and in this posture we may commend the
Issue of the thing, by our devout Praise, and Integrity of Life, to his
Clemency and Goodness. For Victory is not in our Power, but it is God's
Privilege alone to bestow it; and yet sometimes we see that those are made
Partakers thereof, who do not lawfully and in due order seek it of him: And if
it happen otherwise sometimes (which it seldom does) it is next to a Miracle;
for we ought not to tempt God, nor to undertake any thing rashly. And in my
Judgment Cato spoke very pertinently, when he exhorted the Senate to take Arms
against Catiline, in these words, It is true, the matter is dangerous, but you
do not fear it, though you ought greatly so to do: But such is your
Sloathfulness and Effeminacy, that you dally with it, looking one upon another,
as if you trusted in Mortal Gods for your Safety, who have oftentimes preserved
this Commonwealth in the greatest of Dangers. I must tell you, that the Aid of
God is obtained, not by bear Wishes and womanish Complaints: No. But if we be
Vigilant, if we be Active, if we take Advice, then all things will succeed
prosperously: But if thou give up thy self only to Wishings and Wanderings, it
is in vain to ask help of the Gods; they are angry, and will s^it in thy Face.
Let us therefore do what belongs to us, let us stand armed in our Camp ready
for the Work and Onset, and then we may lawfully implore God's Aid and
Assistance.

But here some Good and Thinking Men lay a Block in my way, alleging, That
this Method to heal our public Calamities, has been oftentimes tried, but
never succeeded: And that Christians, as often as they have joined Battle with
the Turks, have been worsted by them.

I own the Objection, and acknowledge that there is great weight in it; and the
Truth is, my chief Design in writing this Monitory, was to give a full answer
thereunto. You say that we have hitherto prevailed by Force of Arms little
against the Turks; grant that it is so: But pray tell me what Arms we have
used? It is worth our while to dwell a little upon this Point. When public
Fame had informed us, that the Turk, with a numerous Army, was infesting our
Borders, and drawing near toward us; it is true indeed, we endeavored to
gather Forces also; but what Forces were they, or what manner of Soldiers did
we List; Were they Victorious? Were they such whose Valor had been proved in
former Battles, and which had been accustomed to Conquer? By no means, but
rather Men of quite another Gizard: Drums were beaten up all over the Country,
and at their Sound there came in Men higly pigly for hope of Gain; perhaps
three to one of them had hardly wore a Helmet before, or ever looked an Enemy
in the Face: And the rest were the Scum of the Country, as Thieves, Debauchees,
Gamesters, Men over Head and Ears in Debt, and suchlike.

Excepting only a very few, who were not at all influenced by the Justness of
their Cause, nor by their Love to Religion, nor desire to exercise their
Valor, but by a Licentious Impunity for Drinking, Diceing, Plundering,
Whoring, and committing Sacrilege; and in a word, whom all manner of Flagitious
Wickedness brought together. With such a Rabble-rout, or rather with the
Horridest or worst of Mortals, hateful both to God and Man, do we begin this
Sacred War against so great an Enemy. Hence it is, that our Camps do seem
rather a Riotous Wake, than a Convention of Soldiers; for amongst them Luxury
Corruption, Lust, Impurity, Drunkenness, Tumults, Brauling, and Bloodshed,
turn all things up-side down. And yet this is the goodly Soldiery (forsooth)
that we are to raise at great Charge, and also to fetch from far with much loss
of time, when the matter requires the greatest speed imaginable. The Luxuries
of Campania broke the Army of Hannibal's, which before was hardy and accustomed
to Toil: But as for us we have need of no Campania to debauch us, for our
Soldiers do bring Effeminateness and Feebleness enough into the Army when they
are first Listed. And therefore if they meet with no Enemy to fight with, yet
in the space of a Month, either the Heat of the Dog Days, or the first pinching
Winter Colds, do destroy our Troops, though never so great. And can we wonder,
if with such Soldiers as these, we can obtain no Success against such a
Welldisciplined Enemy? Alas! If any of us have a private Grudge one against
another, or if we are to travel through a place infested by Robbers, we do not
go hand over head as they say, but we commit the guard of our Persons to such
Spectators as will stick by us: Besides if any Business happen of more than
ordinary weight, we use not to commit the Management thereof to any, but Men of
great Experience and Skill. But in this grand Affair, where the Safety of all
is at Stake, we are so careless, that either we send forth an unsuitable
Soldiery, or else such as is almost conquered before it looks an Enemy in the
Face; and this heartens an Enemy whom so many Victories have already made
Famous. I return to what I spoke in the beginning, that we must defend the
Public Safety by a choice and fitting Soldiery, or else we can have no hopes
but to be utterly destroyed.

But you will say, What kind of Soldiers would you have? I answer, Those of our
own Country, and chosen out of our Neighborhood; for seeing haste is very
available in Military Affairs, and that it is especially necessary against so
nimble an Enemy as the Turks, we need an Army which is not to be far fetched
nor long staid for, but such a one as is ready at hand, and as it were always
at our call. And we are not to take every one that comes, or that we light upon
by chance; but having taken enough, all which are able to take Arms, we are
with great Judgment to cull out the best of them: In which choice we must take
especial care, that we pitch not upon a Man who has been daintily bred, and
highly fed; or whom a depraved Education has infected with Vice, and Idleness
has not corrupted; that no Hair-brained, Mad, Contumacious, Turbulent or
Seditious Fellow be listed; but such only as are not delicate, but fit to
endure Toil; and such as having a good habit of Body, do in their very
Countenances hold for it a certain Simplicity, Probity, and greatness of Mind.
On which account I had rather fix upon one that was accustomed to a Stirring
and Laborious, than to a Sedentary Trade; upon a Countryman rather than a
Citizen; upon one born upon a Mountain, rather than in a Valley; upon a mean
Man, rather than a rich Grub. When you have made this good Choice, then I would
have you instruct the Soldiers in Military Precepts, and the Knowledge of Arms;
I would have him accustom himself in his Armor, to handle and brandish his
Pike, with Skill to use his Sword and Pistol, to keep his Rank, and to march
swiftly under his Armor; to write true Prose; to hate Wickedness more than
Death; to love Piety; and in his common Discourse, not to speak a word
reproachfully against God: The same Person must be obedient to his Commander,
and patiently endure his Correction; let him be as Furious as he will toward
his Enemy, but Gentle and Tractable amongst his Fellow Soldiers: His Diet
should be sparing, not at all inclinable to Gluttony or Drunkenness. And in the
last place, He must be content with his Pay, and abstain from all Plunder, but
when his Commander gives him leave.

Thus, I say, ought the Soldiers to be disciplined, who must look so great an
Enemy in the Face: And yet I would not have this Man to be presently brought
into the Army, he being as yet raw, to join him with the Victorious to fight
for all, but rather should be placed in some Posts or Garrisons, that so by
Excursions and lighter Combats, by degrees he arrives to be accustomed to Wars:
And by this means he may be accustomed to bear Wounds, to endure the sight of
an Enemy, and by degrees to cast off the Fear which all Novelty is wont to
introduce. When the Soldier is thus disciplined and trained, I dare assure you
he has laid a Foundation for hope of good Success: So that the chiefest of our
Pains and Labor, is, especially, to be employed herein, that we may get Men
skillful in Arms, and experienced in Military Discipline, by whom those
Freshwater Soldiers which I spoke of, may be instructed in the true and genuine
Precepts of the Art Military: I would have such Commanders set over these Men,
which are full of Valor, Continence and Sobriety, not at all tainted with the
foul guilt of Avarice; that so they may not only make this young Fry, the
growing hopes of our common Safety, skillful at their Weapons; but also by the
Example and Integrity of their Lives, may show them the way to all Virtue; that
so this Army may be trusted with our common Safety, when Opportunity shall be
offered to fight an Enemy. And if we have such Commanders as these, there will
be no fear of false Musters to cheat the common Treasury; by which Abuse of
ordinary Commanders, we see, by daily Experience, that the King's Exchequer,
though never so full, is hardly able to pay his Army any long time; and in
Battle they run a great risk, when Generals, being deceived by the relation of
their Captains, do believe that their Army consists of more Men effectually
than it really does.

But before I proceed, an Opportunity is here offered to me, to give an Answer
to the Opinions of some good Men, all whose knowledge being circumscribed
within the Bounds of that Age and Country wherein they were born; and having
never traveled any farther, do highly wonder at what I speak; and do regret it
as a mere unusual and ^npracticable thing; for thus they argue, Our Ancestors
did many Famous Exploits in War, with such kind of Soldiers, and in the same
way of Military Discipline which we use at this day.

I confess, by way of Answer, that they did so, but it was when they coped with
Enemies who were guilty of the same Vices and Defects as themselves: As the
Army was unexperienced, hastily listed, foreign, weak, and without Discipline
on the one side, it was so on the other; and their Force amongst them equally
guilty, one was as good as the other; sometimes a Battle was fought with no
great loss on either side: As if two maimed Men, two blind Men, or two lame Men
should fight, the Match is equal on both sides; but if you set a Maimed Man to
fight with a Sound, a blind Man with one that sees, a lusty Man with one that is
Lame, you will quickly find a difference. If we were to fight among our selves,
with our Neighbors and Countrymen, we might then commit such Errors; for they
being as bad as we, there would be not great difference between us. But now the
case is altered, for we have to do with the Turks, a Vigilant, Industrious,
Sober and Experienced Enemy, used to Hardships, very Skillful in, and Observant
of Military Discipline. But what are they the better for that you will say? I
will tell you, By this means they have overcome all the Countries from the very
Borders of Persia, even to the Walls of Vienna. How our Arms are able to cope
with his, I wish that we were ignorant of, and that our daily Overthrows were
not too dear a Document to instruct us. And do we as yet stand in doubt,
whether we should defend our Faults rather than amend them? But you will
farther say, These are new and unusual things which you propose. I answer, The
reason is, because we have a new and strange Enemy, whose Power and Skill is
such, that it requires a more than ordinary Diligence to cope with him.

The Diseases called the Sweat and French Pox, were heretofore strange and
unknown; and when Physicians, with all their Art, were not able to Conquer them
by common and ordinary Remedies, at last they were instructed, by the Deaths of
many Patients, to seek for new Remedies against new Diseases; and their
Diligence herein was so Prosperous, that both those Diseases, which were
unconquerable before, did yield to their Remedies. This Design of Physicians,
we ought to imitate in our Wars against the Turks; it is in vain to use the
ordinary Method of Fighting at this time of day; we must rather take another
course, and apply new Remedies to new Mischiefs. Though the Truth is, this
Method is not new but most Ancient, by which the People of Rome, to their great
Praise, did heretofore Conquer the whole World: And it is so far from being
unused in our Age, that the Enemy, of which we speak, has used no other means,
both to endanger our Safety, and also in a manner to equal his Empire with the
Roman.

I shall speak more largely of this hereafter, when I have answered the
Difficulty which these very Objectors have pre-conceived in their Minds: For
such is the guise of this Effeminate Age, that if a thing be never so Excellent
and Beneficial, if it has any thing of Difficulty in the Execution thereof, is
put by as if it never could be effected. The Persons of whom I speak, being
tainted with this Imbecility of Mind, having experienced that they could not
prevail in an ordinary course of Arms; and being deterred from trying my Method
by the Difficulty thereof; they fall at last to this Opinion, That we can no
way prevent our Destruction, but by making Peace, or a Truce, with the Turks,
by any means whatsoever: And this their Opinion they so much hug, as if it were
Jupiter's Altar, or the Statue of the Emperor. And therefore they think that we
must turn every Stone, either by Prayer, or by Price, or by any unworthy way
whatsoever, to make him our Friend: But they do not consider, that amongst all
Difficulties this is the greatest, and which we can least of all hope to
overcome. For can we imagine that such a Capital Enemy, after that he has
marched over so many Countries, and taken so much Pains to come to us, when he
sees himself almost Master of his Wish, and having so great a subject of
Praise, such an Opportunity of Booty, and such an Occasion of enlarging his
Empire and Religion, that he should suddenly stop, as if he were Thunderstruck,
and proceed no farther? But grant there were any hopes of Peace, who is so mad
as to fight with an Enemy so powerful, if he can help it? Or who is so blind as
not to foresee, that sure Peace is to be preferred before the doubtful Hazards
of War? But let me tell you, that you quite mistake the case; for neither Peace
nor Truce is in our Power: We have lost all hopes of Peace, and therefore are
compelled to a War; there is no room for any Advice or Deliberation of our own;
for we are hurried on by a fatal Necessity, as unwillingly as we are pushed on
violently to a War, which of necessity we must manage and go through. Why do we
fruitlesly draw back? Why do we cast about for delays? Why do we Chouse our
selves with the vain Dreams of Pacifications? We vainly fancy to our selves
Safety in the midst of the Flame; and by our Delay we nourish the Mischief
which we might remedy if we were watchful; and for want of foresight, we render
our Wound uncurable.

But you will say, It is very good to keep off the Miseries of a War as long as
one can.

I grant it, unless the Delay tend to heighten our Miseries soon after, and
engage us to our certain Ruin: As if a Physician do flatter his Patient, and
defer necessary Remedies, till the Disease comes to that height, that Death
must inevitably follow. So we see that our Affairs do sensibly decline; and on
the other side, the Enemy grows stronger every day; and as he catches from us
to add to his own, so thereby he does fairly take his way and passage to us,
and make all things ready to hasten our Destruction; that so all Impediments
being removed, he may give us an Alarm whenever he pleases, and when we least
think of it: With a well-provided Army he might destroy us as it were fast
a-sleep, and unprovided of all things: All his Designs tend to this, this is
the only thing in his Eye; at which time, though too late, we shall think our
selves induced to those Straights, that no hope being left, we must certainly
Perish: And this will be the Issue of our Delay, and our unseasonable
Backwardness; and therefore I admonish you again and again, while time is, and
the matter will bear, that we suffer not our selves to be ^linded with false
Hopes, and so sit still and ^o nothing; in which we may remember how great
Overthrows we have received; and also we may forsee the last Ruin of our
Commonwealth approaching; therefore we must make use of a quick-sighted
Judgment in the case, least by our mistake in so great a Matter. We apply false
Remedies instead of true ones, to our dangerous Miseries; and when we have cast
up all our Accounts, and find upon what Hinge our remaining Hope turns,
foregoing all other Methods, we must very diligently apply our selves to that
alone, wherein neither Labor, nor Difficulty, nor Novelty, nor any other
Pull-backs to Slothful and Feeble Minds, should in the least make us to slacken
our Pace; no, our carriages must be as high as the Matter is great; so sublime
a Matter requires no low or abject Frame; rather Necessity requires that we
should be lifted up even above the Capacity of our Age; and that in part at
least, we should imitate the Valor of those Heroes, who out of their great
Fortitude and Constancy, overcame the greatest Difficulties; who never thought
any thing more base and unworthy of themselves, than to be deterred by the
Greatness of any Difficulty or Let, from bringing the Design to a happy Issue,
which in their thou h^s was conjoined with the Dignity and Advantage of the
Commonwealth wherein they lived.

I shall give you an Instance only in one o^ them; and that is, Lycurgus the
Law-give^ of the Lacedaemonians, who having a Design amongst the rest of his
Institutions (wherewith he would commend the best constituted Commonwealth of
the Persians to be to Posterity) to introduce an Equality of Goods amongst the
Citizens, and equally to divide the Estate and Possessions of all, that what
was taken from the Rich might be added to the Poor; so that no distinction was
to be between the Citizens but what Virtue made.

In this Design he met with a great many Adversaries, especially those which
had great Wealth and personal Estates, and were well Monied besides. For they
took it in great Disdain, that the Possessions either left them by their
Ancestors, or else got by their own Industry, should be rent away from them,
and transferred to strange Owners. This Matter seeming to them both unjust, and
also absurd; the great Difficulty of enacting such a Law, was objected to
Lycurgus. But he still persisting in his Purpose, and being resolved to finish
what he thought was right and wholesome for the Commonwealth, there arose
thereupon daily bro^lings and dangerous Hurly Burlies, in which Scuffles
Lycurgus lost one of his Eyes: That Accident might have sufficiently warned the
good Man, how difficult an Enterprise he had undertaken, and consequently might
have deterred him from persisting in his Enterprise; but might rather have
engaged him to lay aside his Design of accomplishing a Thing so successfully
attempted, and which had cost him one of his Eyes. But it happened quite
contrary; for this Hero was so far from desisting upon the account of his
loss, that it rather added Spurs to him to prosecute the same Cause the more
eagerly. Neither did he give over, till the Law he had propounded concerning
the eqality of Goods, was enacted Nemine contradicente.

This being the Foundation of those of his famous institutions, he established
such a Commonwealth, that the Race will never have the like, and his Name with
a high Admiration of his Virtue, is Celebrated even to this very Day. Yet this
he did when he was in fear of no Turk, nor of any other Enemy that threatened
Ruin and Destruction to him: And shall we at this time of Day withdraw our
Soldiers from any Burden, wherein the stress of our Safety lies? For shame let
us shake off this sloathful Temper, unworthy both of us and the Christian Name;
and leaving off all other vain and fallacious Thoughts, let us run to our Arms
as our only Refuge under God. The Romans did so when any great Misery
threatened their Commonwealth, they went and betook themselves to their Arms;
they stopped all Law Suits, and the Senate enjoined the Consuls to take care
that the Commonwealth received no damage. We ought to do the same much more,
for we are in danger not only of some common Loss, but even of the universal
Ruin of the Christian Commonwealth. We must run I say to our Snapsacks, we
must catch up and handle our Arms, and think of nothing else. Our Military
Discipline which is much depraved, is to be united, and the old way of fighting
is to be recalled and perfected; we are as it were to proclaim a Vacation, to
shut up Shop, and set by other Things, to act and perform this one Thing with
our most earnest Endeavors: This we must do if we would have our Commonwealth,
our Selves, our Wives and Children; or lastly, our Religion and Liberties
preserved entirely unto us. For if the Turks prevail, they will not leave us a
jot even of common Honesty, much less any Dignity, Liberty, or Religion; no
Nation in the World can lose so much as we. Take my word for it, it is the
worst of Mischiefs to be overcome by the Turk: If he Conquer us, (and I wish he
had not a fair Prospect so to do,) He will make Havoc of all, he will drive,
carry away, dissipate, burn, profane, and tread all Things under foot. To
prevent which Spectacle and Suffering, let us high to our Weapons, to our Arms,
and as ( Probus) let us Fight it out. When he was declared Emperor, the
Commonwealth had received many Losses, which proceeded from the Corruption of
their Military Discipline; and therefore his chief Design was to amend that;
and this was the reason that he gave that first Motto to his Soldiers, and his
Deeds were agreeable to the Motto; for in a little time he so advanced and
restored what was quite decayed before, that the common Name which lay under a
Reproach among the Nations, was again restored to its former Majesty and
Greatness. Let us follow his Example, and use the same Method in Fighting; let
us furbish up our old blunt and rusty Arms, and make them as good, and shine as
bright as ever. And from which Endeavors, no Labor and Difficulty ought to
avert us, As I said before; so the Charge and Expense ought to be the least
Difficulty of all. For when can we lay out our own Money better, than when our
Life it self may be comfortably expended? Or how can we spend part of our
Estates upon more advantageous Terms, than thereby to preserve the whole?
Herein we do but imitate good Husbandmen, who spare no cost to enclose, to
hedge about, and to strengthen the Bounds of this Land, provided they may
establish their Estates and Possessions in safety thereby; for they know that
an Estate is but a ticklish and slippery Thing, as long as it is subject to
sudden Casualties, or to the Assaults of Robbers. Besides, Mariners in a
dangerous Tempest use to throw out their most precious Lading into the Sea,
rather than to endanger the loss of their Ship and of their Lives to boot; and
Physicians make no scruple to cut off one part of Man's Body, if thereby they
provide for the rest of the Members, and of the total remainder. For as long as
such an Enemy is near us, who can promise to himself any firm or lasting
possession of what he has; seeing that he may expect every Day that this
wicked Neighbor will take all from them, and transfer it into his own
Exchequer? To what purpose is it then to sow, or to reap, to carry home, and to
lay up in Garners, seeing the Enemy counts all thine, as much his own as what
he now possesses, being formerly taken from the Asiaticks, From the Grecians,
from the Thrasians, from the Bulgarians, from the Illyrians, and from the
Hungarians; to say nothing of other People? Our Estates and Possessions are by
us exposed to his Avarice, without a due Guard of such Soldiers as I have
spoken of, as a quantity of Goods, or of rich Household stuff cast out into the
Street, without any Repair, and under no Lock and Key, is open to Thieves. But
if we are so mad as to pretend Want, and to counterfeit Poverty for our Excuse;
let us take heed left our Enemy, being made Rich by our Spoils, do not convince
us of a Lie, by our Destruction, and to our eternal Infamy.

And yet let me tell you, we need not spend all that we have, for they require
not the Expense of all that we have, but out of Wartime we should be very
Frugal, and in time of War our Expenses should be moderate? and far more easy
to be born, than the Cost which was expended in raising a common and tumultuary
Soldiary. By which means we shall obtain two Conveniences; one, that the Money
may not be transported out of the Bounds of our own Country; the other, that
Officers and Commanders may not have opportunity unlawfully to enrich
themselves; for now adays he is counted a brave Fellow, that by such kinds of
Stratagems can cheat and cousen the Commonwealth. But these things belong to
another Place, for at present I did not design to speak of every thing
particularly, but in general, to give the Sentiment of the whole Matter.

Let us therefore imitate the Prudence of the Romans, in providing for the
Safety of their State and Commonwealth, who always chose Soldiers of their own
to defend themselves; for otherwise they had never been able to repel the
fierce Inrodes of the Gauls, or to have coped with the Stubbornness of the
Italians, who ever and anon Revolted from them; nor could they have preferred
their Empire entire against the Force of Hannibal, nor would they ever have
triumphed over Philip and over Antiochus, unless they had had Soldiers of their
own to fight their Battles, unless they had followed the Method which I have
spoken of in Training up their Soldery: It Is then seasonable for me at this
time to enlarge upon this Subject, that it may plainly appear, that I introduce
no Novelty, but propound an old Example which we are to follow. All that have
written of the Affairs of Rome do agree in this, as you may see in their Book.
The Romans took a^ extraordinary Care in Choosing, in Disciplining, and in
Exercising their young Soldiery. I shall not tire your patience in citing many
Authorities, but in brief I shall urge only the Testimony of one grave Author,
well skilled in the ancient Military Discipline; and that is Vegetius, who in
diverse places of his Book, containing the Institutions of the Roman Militia,
Dedicated to the Emperor Valentinian, has these Words; In every Battle it is
not so much the multitude of Soldiers and unskilful Valor, as Art and Exercise
which procure the Victory. For we see that the Romans Conquered the whole
World, by no other Method, but by the Exercise of their Arms, by the Discipline
of their Camps, and by their accustomedness to War; for how else could the
Romans being few, have born up against the numerous Army of the Gauls? How
could their low statured Soldiery look the tall Germans in the Face? As for the
Spaniards, it is a clear case that they exceeded us not only in their Number,
but in the Strength of their Bodies? The Africans were always Superior to us
both in Stratagems and in Wealth; and it is beyond all doubt, but that the
Greeks are Superior to us in Acts and in Prudence: But a Remedy to all these
Inconveniences, was a new Soldiery discreetly chosen, whom they taught the use
of Arms, whom they taught the Law of Arms, and strengthened their Discipline by
daily Exercise; they meditated beforehand upon the Events which were wont to
happen in Fights and Battles, and were severe Punishers of the Negligent and
Sloathful. For Skill in Military Affairs does nourish a Boldness to Fight. No
Man fears to do that which he believes that he thinks he has rightly learned
to do: For in a fight, a few Men well Exercised are likeliest to obtain the
Victory; whereas a rude Rabble of Soldiers is more exposed to the Slaughter.
Whosoever therefore thinks to overcome the Turks in a public Fight, by the
Assistance of God, and the Conduct of an unconquered Empire, let him earnestly
desire to complete his Troops out of such listed Soldiers. And he will find in
a short time that such Juniors diligently chosen and well-trained both in the
Morning and in the Afternoon too, will in handling of their Arms soon equal
those Veterans who Conquered the whole World. Neither should your Imperial
Majesty be concerned, because the Custom is changed which obtained here before;
for your Highness is of that Foresight and Felicity, that for the Safety of the
Commonwealth, you can both devise New Methods, and also restore the Old; every
Design seems difficult before you enter upon it. To be sure, if knowing, and
Prudent Persons be appointed to make the Levies, a number of Men fit for War,
may be easily Listed and carefully Trained; for Diligence, Conquers all. It Is
not length of Age, or number of Arms which makes the Art Military, but
continual exercise of Arms: An undisciplined Soldier is always a craving, though
he has been Listed never so long, etc. It is past all doubt, that Rusticks who
live in the open Air, are the fittest to bear Arms; they are able to endure
heat, they care not for refreshing Shades, they are ignorant of the use of
Baths and other Delights; they are plain-hearted, contented with a little, and
their Limbs are hardened to endure all Toil; they learn from their Country
Labor, to deal with Iron, to Plow the Land, and to bear Burdens. And I know
not by what Fate he is least afraid of Death, who is least acquainted with the
Delights of Life.

Let us now enquire at what Age Soldiers ought to be Listed; if we observe the
ancient Custom, none but young Striplings are to be Listed: For what we learn
from ones Childhood, we imbibe that not only more speedily, but more perfectly
too. Besides the Skipping and nimble Alacrity is to be practiced before the
Body grows stiff with Age; for it is nimbleness grounded upon Exercise, that
makes a stout Warrior. And therefore we should List none but young Men, as
Salust speaks, That as soon as Youth was able to endure War, it learned the
Art Military in their Camps by daily Practice. For it is much better, that a
Disciplined Youth should complain, that his Age is not yet fit for Battle, than
that he should grieve that he has past his sighting-time. And by this means he
may have time enough to learn all; for the Art-Military is not easily to be
obtained, whether you endeavor to teach Horse or Foot, the use of the Bow; or
whether you would teach a Man in his Armor, all the Gestures and Modes of the
Art-military; as that he should not leave his File, nor disturb his Ranks; and
how he should cast his Javelin with a good Aim and a strong Arm; as also how to
cast up a Trench, and to fix Pallisadoes knowingly; how to handle his Buckler,
and by side-blows to escape the flying, Darts; how wishly to avoid a Blow, and
boldly to strike. If a young Soldier be thus Instructed, he will be so far from
Fear, that it will be a Pleasure to him to meet the stoutest Enemy in the
Field. And therefore let him that is to List Soldiers, take special Care that
by their Countenances, by their Eyes, and by the make of all their Limbs, he
choose those that are likely to make good soldiers, for Stoutness, may be
foreseen in Men, by many Indications, as well as in Horses and Dogs, etc. Let
therefore the Youth which is designed for Martial Employment, be of watchful
Eyes, holding his Head upright, broad Chested, brauny Shoulders, strong
Fingered, with long Arms, a thin Belly, with slender Thighs, the Calf of his
Leg and Feet not superfluously big, but compacted with hardened Nerves. When you
shall find these Marks in a new listed Soldier, you need not much care whether
he be Tall or no; for it is beter to have Soldiers Valiant, than high Statured.

It follows in the next place, that we enquire of what Trades the Soldiers we
choose or refuse are on: Fishers, Fowlers, Confectioners, Whitsters; and all
those who belong to Female Employments, are to be rejected: But Black-smiths,
Coach-makers, Butchers, and such as hunt the Stag and wild Boar, are fit to
make Soldiers of: And to speak the truth, the Safety of the Commonwealth turns
upon this very Hinge, viz. The Listing of young Sodiers that Excel in Mind as
well as in Body; for the Strength fa Kingd om, and the Foundation of the Roman
Name, do consist in the first choosing of the Soldiery. Nor are we to think,
that the Impressing of Soldiers is a mean Employment that ordinary Persons may
be entrusted with. No, Sertorius of Old, amongst the rest of his laudable
Qualities, was of another mind; for the Youth to whom the Defense of the
Provinces, and the Stress of the War is to be committed, ought to be well born,
if such can be had; and also to be of credible Conversations; for Generosity
makes a man fit to be a Soldier, and he that is ashamed to run away, becomes
thereby a Conqueror: What Benefit is it to Discipline a sluggish Fellow, and to
be at vast Expense to entertain him in a Camp? That Army never did Conquer in a
Battle, where the Press-masters were negligent in listing their young Soldiery.
We find it by dear and costly Experience, that our Enemies give us many
Overthrows, because that in a long time of Peace, we are negligent and careless
in calling out our Soldiery.

For whilst Gentlemen follow Civil Employments, and raw Soldiers are chosen by
Favor and Dissimulation, such Persons take Arms, as their Masters disdain to
employ any other ways. Hence it follows, that great Men should use great
Diligence in choosing out a young Fry of Soldiery: But alas our long Security
has shut this care quite out of doors: Where can you find a Man that can teach
others any thing but what he himself has learned before? The Lacedaemonians
were the first who collecting, Experiments of Fights from Events, induced the
Art Military, which is thought to be maintained either in Valor or in happy
Success, to a Formulary Art, Discipline and Skill; it was them that first of
all commanded the Officers at Arms to teach their young Soldiery, their Method
and various manner of Fighting. O Men to be highly praised and admired! Who
were willing to learn that Art principally, without which other Arts are to no
purpose: The Romans also following their Methods, have attained the Precepts of
Martial Discipline, and have written whole Books concerning it.

How much the Discipline of the Lacedaemonians did prevail in Fight, is
sufficiently declared by the Example of Xantippus (to omit others) who with his
Carthaginians overcame Attillius Regulus and his conquering Roman Army, not by
Valor, but in a manner by Art alone, and took him Prisoner; and thus by one
Combat he triumphantly made an end of the War. In the like manner Hannibal,
when he was about to march into Italy, provided himself of a Lacedemonian
Doctor of Arms, by whose Advice he destroyed so many Consuls, and such vast
Legions, that he himself was inferior to them in Number and in Force. He
therefore that designs peace, let him prepare himself for War: He that covets
Victory, let him Discipline his Soldiery diligently beforehand: He that
desires good Successes, must fight by Art not by Thought; for no body will dare
to challenge or provoke that Enemy whom he knows will conquer him if he join
Battle with him.

It was their Custom in Wintertime to provide Tiles and Slates, and for want
of them Flags and Straw, they covered certain Sheds for the Horse, and certain
Hovels for the Foot, wherein in stormy or windy Weather, their Army was
disciplined dry over head; and in other Winterdays, when it did neither Rain
nor Snow, then they were trained in the open Field. This they did constantly,
least by intermitting the Custom, the Minds and Bodies of their Soldiers might
be Infeebled. It is also very convenient for Soldiers, very often to cut down
Woods, to carry Burdens, to leap over Ditches, to swim in the Sea, or in
Rivers, to march with full speed, or to run in their Armor, or with their
Snap-sacks on their Backs; for daily labor in the time of Peace, makes Toil
more easy in War. Whether therefore that Army consists of their own Legions or
of Auxiliaries, be sure to exercise them every day. For as a well-exercised
Soldier desires to fight, so an undisciplined one is afraid of a Battle.
Lastly, We must know that in a Fight, Skill avails more than Strength, for
without Skill at Arms, a Boor is as good as a Soldier.

The same Vegetius acquaints us with many excellent things in several places of
his Book relating to the same purpose, which for brevity sake I omit, as how
young Soldiers ought to be exercised for a March, to run a Ring, and to
Swimming; besides they are to learn how to Prick rather than to Cut; and how to
level their Darts or Stones aright; to be Skillful at the use of the Bow, to
carry heavy Burdens, to keep Rank in an Army, and carefully to fortify their
Camps. All which things he that has a mind may read in him. I shall only add
for a close that which follows.

He that would use Diligence in the Choosing and Exercising of young Soldiers,
may easily raise an Army, able to imitate the valor of the Ancients; for
Martial Hearts are not degenerated in Men, neither are those Lands Barren,
which brought forth the Lacedaemonians, the Athenians, and the Marsians of old.
No, it is only the taste of Peace which has wrought our Men partly to delight
in Idleness, and partly to betake themselves to Civil Employments; and by this
means the care of Military Exercises began first to be neglected, and after
that to be di^used, and last of all quite forgot. And it is no wonder that this
should happen in our Age, when after the Carthagnian War, for four and twenty
Years or more, Peace, Idleness, and disuse of Arms, had so enervated those
Romans who always used to conquer before that, in the second Carthagenian War
Hannibal was too hard for them. Neither could they arrive at the Haven of
Victory, till by the loss of so many Consuls, of so many Commanders, and so
many Armies, they had again relearn'd the intermitted Use and Increase of Arms.
Upon the whole it follows, the Iuniors are always to be listed and exercised;
for it is cheaper to Discipline our own Men, than to hire Strangers for Pay.

By these Sayings of Vegetius alone, to which all Historians give their
Consent, it is sufficiently manifested for what was the old Warlike Discipline
amongst the Romans: Neither was it observed by the Romans alone, but by the
Persians before them, and in some sort by the Macedonians also; and by all
other People who have left a Glorious Name unto Posterity. As you may see in
Xenophon, a very skillful Warrier, who writing of the Method that Cyrus the
Great, took in Listing and Exercising his Soldiers, makes it to be not much
different from the usage of the Romans which I have spoken of. And with an Army
thus prepared, he in a very short time added the Empire of all the East to his
Dominions. I might add also the Testimony of Arrianus, no mean Writer, who
brings in Alexander declaiming against the Macedonians, and accusing them as
unmindful of Courtesies received from him, in these words, Philip my Father,
says he, received you into his Care and Protection, when you were a sort of
wandering and vagabond People, destitute of all things, and many of you but
Shepherds clothed with Skins; for which also you are forced continually to
fight with the Illyrians, the Triballes, and with the Thracians your
Neighbors; he brought you down from the craggy Mountains into Plains and
well-tilled Valleys; instead of skins he clothed you with stately Raiments, he
instructed you in Arms, he taught you Military Discipline, so that now your
Arms and Valor were able to defend you against your Neighbors, as well as the
Situation of your fortified places, etc. By which words it appears, on what
Foundations the much celebrated Military Discipline of the Macedonians was
built, to wit, of Rustic Mountainers, and of Shepherds.

Diodorus Siculus delivers also what is agreeable to the things before spoken:
Philip, says he, when he bent his Mind to recreate their Military Discipline,
took special care that his Soldiers should be well furnished with decent
Armor, and that they should be trained up in Warlike Exercises. Moreover he
found out the Order of the Phalangis, which was proper to the Macedonians, the
Pattern whereof he took from those Heroes in the Trojan War, who joined Buckler
to Buckler. The same Diodorus speaking of Alexander 's taking the City
Halicarnassus, with these valiant Soldiers, now become Veterans, has these
words, The Veteran Macedons, who during their whole Lives were always
conversant in Difficulties and Dangers, and under the Pay of Philip often
obtained the Victory, did thus arrive at the highest pitch of Valor: They
excelled others in Prudence, and in the Knowledge of the Art Military, whilst
they bitterly upbraided the Cowardice of the Fresh Water Soldiers that refused
to fight; they themselves in the mean time gathering into a Ring, and joining
Bucklers together, received their Enemy, who even thought themselves Conquerors
before, and having slain Ephialtis, and many others, they compelled the rest to
fly into the City, etc.

Alexander the Great did owe the Conquest of the East, and the large Extent of
his Empire, to the Valor of those Soldiers; but perhaps the Persons
abovementioned may object, That our Times differ from theirs, those things
have been long out of Date, and that it is a Childish thing to raise them as it
were out of their Graves, and to bring them into use again: We ought therefore
to be contented with the Wisdom of our own Age.

To which I reply. That what was useful in those Days, is as fit to be used in
our Times: Yet I will not urge Reason to those who will not willingly hearken
thereunto, but I will lead them to the very Fountain of Experience. Let me then
ask these Objectors, why they are so over-wise to detract from other Men's
Counsels, and can bring forth no better of their own. What, will they deny that
the Turks are good Soldiers? Perhaps out of Obstinacy they will not grant them
to be such. I will therefore answer for them, That he who has struck such a
Terror into the whole World, and laid all waste before him, upon the account of
his Victories, may well be reckoned a good Soldier. I ask them again, How is
this Soldier listed, and how is he trained up? If they say they know not, I
will tell them what I my self have seen to my own Cost: A Turkish Soldier is a
Man so born, so listed, so trained and exercised, as the Romans were of old,
and as ours ought to be: Yea, he is in a worse Condition; for as to those
Soldiers who offer themselves to be listed, when the Turk goes in any Military
Expedition, which they call Alcangi, they are little esteemed among the Turks;
that Soldier is the only Man, who is continually under their Emperor's Pay, and
by Judgment and good Reason, is at length advanced into the Sultan's Guards.
This Soldiery is thus chosen, The Sultan sends some Men every Year into several
Provinces, who take away the third or fourth Child from Christian Families.
When the Drove of these Youths arrive at Constantinople, they who have the most
ingenious Aspect, are chosen out for the Domestic Uses of the Sultan himself,
or of the Bassa's, or other Nobles; the rest are brought into a certain place,
where abundance of Countrymen meet, and they desire such or such a Youth from
the Overseer of the Business; he receives from him a piece of Gold, and
delivers him the Youth he desires, having first taken notice of the Youth's
Name, Country and Condition, with his Age, and other Marks, whereby he may be
known all his Life-long. All these being recorded, it is lawful for him,
whether he be a Citizen or a Countryman, to carry the Youth into Asia, or what
part of the World soever he lives in, and there he uses him as his Slave in
continual Toil and Labor: His Food is Bread and Water, and sometimes a little
Pottage with Fruits or Herbs: His Apparel is sufficient only to defend him
against the Weather. Besides, he is instructed in the Mohammedan Religion. In
this Ignorance of Delights, far from the Blandishment of his own Relations, he
grows up into a robust and sturdy Fellow. This Man is again demanded of his
Fiduciary Master and transferred to the Wars; and from this Seminary, the
Legions of the Janissaries, when they are defective, are made up: When he comes
to be listed among the Janissaries, his Pay at first is about one Ducat and a
Half per mensem, for that they think is enough for a Fresh Water Soldier. And
yet that he may not want Food, he has his Meat gratis with that Company, into
whose Chamber he is admitted; but upon this Condition, that he serves them in
the Kitchen and other necessary Offices. The Skillfulness of that Chamber
instructs him in the use of Arms, and fits him for Service; and when this Tyro
has gotten a little Knowledge in Military Affairs, though not equal with his
Fellows, is only hoped to mount higher by his Valor; and if he carries himself
bravely in any Service, then his Pay is increased, and is reckoned a complete
Janizary. This hope does excite such Youngsters to many valiant Attempts, so
that they equal the very Veterans in Valor, and obtain the full Pay of
Janissaries, which at the highest is but eight Ducats a Month; and yet if his
Valor or Desert call him up to a higher Place, either he is made a Commander
amongst the Janissaries, or is listed among the Pretorian Horse called Spahies.

The rest of the Youths before spoken of, are employed in several Works at
Constantinople, sometimes two or three hundred of them Cleanse the Court-Yards,
removes Rubbish, carry Stones, Timber, and other Burdens: not One of them is
idle, but must Earn the Bread he eats. These Youths also when they are grown up
to Transfer to Land or Sea-Service, and those of them that are Chosen for the
Court, do many times mount to great Dignities: For the General of the
Ianizaries, Admirals of Fleets, Beglar Begs, and the Viziers Bassa's themselves
are Elected out of these; yea, the Daughters of Sultans are given in Marriage
to them.

Thus have I given you a Plain Account, what is the Rise, Choice, Discipline,
and Education of the Turkish Soldiery, so formidable all the World Over: I deny
not, but there are other ways of Military Advancement amonst them, but this is
the most usual; sometimes they make Soldiers of those Youths whom they have
taken in War, or by frequent Incursions into Christian Countries, after they
have detained them for several years in the Seraglio: and when they have lost
all Memory and Sense of their own Country, and the Religion thereof, and have
been Instructed in Arabic, and in the Turkish way of Arms, by their
Eunuch-Masters, then they send them abroad to perform the Military Service they
are most fit for. Moreover the Slaves of the Bassa's, and other Nobles got by
War, or otherwise, are many times listed Soldiers; but not rashly, or hand over
head; but having first tried their Strength and Valor both of Body and Mind,
to obtain the Station they are designed for. And the truth is, I have
oftentimes admired the Force of the Turkish Discipline in this case, when I saw
seemingly abject and contemptible Persons in a few years, to have made that
Advance, as not only to be able to perform the Duty of a common Soldier, But
even of a Commander also, fit to Teach and Instruct others.

Sometimes when for my own Refreshment, I looked out at my Windows, the
Neighboring Turks showed me some Officers that were Teaching the young Fry the
Use of Arms: I demanded of what Country they were? I verily thought, they must
be either Parthians, Bactrians, or Massagets; but when I was told that one was
an Hungarian, the other a Croat, a third a German; I was struck with
Admiration; But supposing they had obtained their Skill at Arms, from the Use
of them amongst Christians, and supposing them to be Noble Persons and
Gentilely Bred; I proceeded to demand, Whether they knew what kind of Life they
lived amongst Christians? After a little Recollection, they answered me, That
one had told them his Father was a Cook, another was intimated a Monk, and the
third was Servant to a Victualler; but being taken in a time of War of Truce,
with other Booty, they were brought to Constantinople, and admitted into the
Family of this or that Bassa. Here I was struck again with Wonder! And
demanding, How such kind of Fellows could come to be so great Warriors? They
told me, The Masters they served, had certain Men at their Houses well skilled
in Arms, to whose Discipline (if they were thought Tractable) they were
Consigned over, where they so much profited in a little Time, that they
Surpassed their Equals, and had performed so bravely in succeeding Wars, that
they obtained Praise from all, and Dignity from their Prince, as a Reward of
their Valor. When I heard this, I was much aggrieved that our Manners should
so differ from the Turks; for if they have got a Man that promises any thing,
they rejoice in him, as a precious Treasure, and spare no Pains or Cost in his
Cultivation, especially if he be fit for the War. But alas, it is quite contrary
among us; if we have but a good Dog, a Hawk, or a Horse, we are over-joyed, and
spare no Pains to bring him to Perfection in his kind: But if we have got an
Ingenious Man into our Hands, we don't take so much Pains in his Institution:
For our parts we take delight in well Disciplined Dogs and Hawks; but the Turks
take a greater in the Culture of Man, who is more Excellent in his Nature than
a Beast.

From what has been spoken, it is Evident, That it is no new thing to List
Soldiers Judiciously the way that I contend for; 'twas used both by the Romans,
and by both Conquering Nations: Neither is it so obsolete or so remote from the
Custom of our Age, as it may not be again called back into Use: For we find by
daily Experience, how the Turkish Arms so Cultivated do prevail. Let it not
therefore seem i^ksom to us to borrow this necessary Part from them who have
borrowed so many useful Things from Us: If we thus do, we shall quickly find a
good Discipline will avail as much for our Safety, as a bad has hitherto
contributed to our Ruin. This is the only Anchor left in a dangerous Tempest,
to preserve the floating Ship of our Commonwealth; every Thing is established
and preserved by that which raised it at first; as Kingdoms and Empires have
been obtained by Military Valor, and well-appointed Armies, by the same way
they must be preserved. Take away Arms, remove Soldiers, neglect Discipline,
and a Kingdom will either fall of it self, or be a Prey to the Conqueror. The
Diadem and Scepter does not preserve the Majesty of a Kingdom, as the Sword; in
vain you wear the one upon your Head, or carry the other in your Hand, unless
your Sword be girt by your Side: That Empire is but Weak and Maimed, that is
not supported by Arms: When I speak of Arms, I mean not shadowy glittering
Ones, but true solid and viceless Ones.

That which is Corrupted and Degenerate from its Perfection, does more hurt
than good: As long as the Romans kept up their strict Military Discipline,
their Legions Conquered the remotest Parts of the World; but after Discipline
came to be Corrupted, and their Valor Effeminated, by neglecting old
Institutions; they not only lost the greatest part of the Empire, but Rome it
self was not free from Plunder within its own Walls; So that the City Erst, the
Head and Prince of all Nations, was now exposed as a Prey and Laughing Stock to
them all, who plucked away their Spoils from her, as the rest of the Birds did
their Feathers from Aesop's Chough.

But our Circumstances are the more pressing, because the deadly Wound does
threaten our own almost naked Bowels; and there is no way but this left to
secure our Lives. Sometimes Rulers when new Dangers threatens them, are fain to
apply Remedies accordingly to the Genius of their Subjects, and thereupon to
warp sometimes from the Rule of Right: But our Straits are such, that when the
Ruin of our Country is before our Eyes, we must immediately use those Means
which may prevent our Ruin; if our Enemy were afar off, then we may send for
raw Soldiers from far Countries remote from Enemies; but we who are within cast
of Dart, and ready to Fight Hand to Hand, must commit our Safety to no Arms but
those that are tried and approved Ones.

But some may o^ject, That this our Military Preparation will be too slender to
oppose the Torrent of the Turkish Force.

I answer; I here only show, how the solid Foundation of a constant Army may be
laid, the rest of the Building will follow of course, and Auxiliaries being
added, will soon make up a great Army; and such Auxiliaries will speedily come
in, when it shall be reported, that we have already a Body of an Army to which
they may resort; for Nature it self will prompt them to assist those who are
ready to undergo all Dangers with themselves: And on the other Hand, it does
alienate from those who are unarmed and unfit to resist offered Wrongs.

Hence Zenophon says very excellently, That those who are ready with Arms in
their Hands, have many Friends, and no Enemies; for all will fly to their Aid
in doubtful Times, as to a Castle of Refuge, and none will oppose him, when he
knows he has power enough to hurt his Enemy when he please. Hence it comes to
pass that whilst we loiter and slacken our Endeavors, as despairing of our
Safety, and depend only upon our Hope and Aid from Others; even our very
Friends and Relations will despise them, and forsake them, and will rather join
with the bold daring Enemy, though of another Religion. So great is the force
of expeditious Arms. In the Name therefore of God Almighty, let us buckle on
the Helmet, and with Arms in our Hand, oppose so great an Enemy. We our selves
should be first Initiated in the Religion of Armed Palas, we should devote our
selves to her Studies; put our Hands first to the P^ow, and do our Duty; God
will supply all the rest, and Aid will not be wanting to those who are Voic'd
not to be wanting to themselves. Let us not rest till we have got at least
Twelve Thousand Foot together; (of the Horse, I will speak in another place)
besides ordinary Garrisons, and those Chosen out of our own Country, well
Trained and Exercised. When this our Practice shall be made known, not our
Friends only, but even Strangers will send us in; on Hope for Aid: And if those
Hopes should fail, yet our own small force being in Garrison in Summertime,
may suppress the Force of the Enemy; and in Winter we may make such Inroads
upon their Borders, that they would repent their provoking of us: And by this
means they would be forced to seek for Truce from us, which we can hardly now
by Petition obtain from them; and they will also observe the Conditions more
strictly, than now they do; but as our present Case stands, we are tossed with
every VVind: If our Garrisons be in danger, and some sudden Assault requires
speedy Aid, we have no Force at all, either to help our Own, or to stop the
Current of our Enemies Successes; I grant that these things require our
singu^ar Care and Study; neither can we place our Thoughts and our Delights on
a fitter Subject; no Field of Praise lies more open to us than that wherein we
Exercise our Troops every Day, and advance them for Military Exploits. Let
others please themselves with Gilded Houses, and some with Pleasant Cardens;
Others with Ornamental and Gaudy Houshould-stuff, as Pictures, and the like,
etc. but let all our delight be in these Warlike Preparations, even in time of
Peace: Let us value our Selves to our Friends upon this account only; for what
can be more grateful to any Guest of ours, than to see a number of Choice
Youths shining in their Arms; of strong and nimble Bodies, Exercising
themselves with Guns, Spears, or Swords; nimbly turning their Bodies at the
Beck of their Commanders, and by the Cheerfulness of their Countenance woing an
Enemy to Fight withal. Such sorts of Youth videlicet, The Ianizaries, the
Turkish Emperors call their Sons, as the Hope and Foundation of their Empire.
Philopemen the last Emperor of the Greeks, when he saw the Warlike Glory of
his Country to decline, and to be ready to give up the Ghost out of Cowardice
and Neglect of Military Discipline; and as a Lover of his Country, being
willing to prevent its Ruin, he got a brave Train of Grecian Noble Youths
about him, which he Instructed in the Art of War; and coming once with this
Train in his Military Habit, into a Theater of Greece, full of Spectators, he
was mightily H^zza'd and commended by the whole Assembly; for they were
sensible of the Merit of such a Citizen who was willing to Retrieve the Glory
of his Country, and to Excite the Youth thereof to valiant Feats of Arms. And
why may not we Christians get the same Applause, and do that which is
acceptable both to God and Man, if we undertake the declining Cause of our
common Safety, and vindicate our Military Praise to its ancient Dignity.

But I shall put an end to this Discourse, when I shall have told you the
Grounds thereof; when I have Admonished and Adjur'd Christians to shake off
that drousie Fit under which they lie, and so run in to the Help of a decaying
Commonwealth. The Danger is as great as ever was; let us then bestir our selves
to maintain those Seats with that Credit which our Ancestors have got for us,
and deliver them down to our Posterity; and the only way so to do, is this, To
Repel Force with Force, to run to our Arms, and that not fortuitous,
tumultuous, and foreign Ones, but our own Country Ones, Listed and Trained up
with great Judgment, and choice Reasons. We should herein imitate valiant
Soldiers, who when they are Besieged in a weak Fort, and are ready to fall into
the Hands of a cruel Enemy, they stir up all their Strength, and do their very
utmost to preserve themselves.

But if we be otherwse minded, and through Cowardice or mistake, be wanting to
the Commonwealth, or our selves, there are but these two ways left, either we
must leave our own Country and Hereditary Possessions, as a Prey to the
Conqueror, or else we must dye, or be made Slaves; (Of the Two, if we be so
degenerate) let us rather leave our Habitatations, our Lands, Goods, and
Houses, than suffer our very Blood to be sucked, the Chastity of our Wives and
Children to be exposed, or those Indignities suffered with so many People of
Asia, Africa, and Europe, from the furthest Eastern Countries, even to our
Borders do undergo: If we walk in their Steps, we may, fear the same Ruin.

But why, pray, should we Transplant our ^ves, let us rather Fight it out, and
cheerfully buckle to those ways of Defense which God has mercifully supplied us
with. To our Arms, to our Arms, with Valor and Courage, our only Hope under
God. This becomes the Christian Name, and the greatness of the Danger we are
in, and this may prevent our impending Ruin.

The ORATION of Ebraim Strotschen, a Polonian, sent Ambassador by Solomon
Emperor of the Turks, to Ferdinand the First, Emperor of Germany, made at
Frankfort on the Main, before the States of the Empire, in the Sclavonick
Tongue. Nov. 27. 1562.
MOST Powerful and Serene Ferdinand the Elect Emperor of the Christians; My
Master the most Powerful and Unconquered Emperor of the Turks, has sent me as
his Ambssador a long Journey both by Sea and Land, with some Special Commands,
both to Congratulate your Health and Happy Government: Asalso to declare the
great Benevolence and Respect he bears toward your Majesty; and he hopes that
this Friendship begun upon account of the former Embassy is increased, by the
evident Tokens of an injuring Friendship which he has showed toward your
Majesty, which God prosper on both sides.

Having thus spoken, he stopped awhile, and then proceeded thus:

That your Majesty may have an evident Token of my Masters good Will and
Friendship toward you; he has Released all the Christian Captives for your
sake, which otherwise should not be Redeemed for Gold nor Silver, nor the
Intercession of any other Prince. His Majesty has done this for no other
cause, but to confirm the Friendship between the two Crowns; and he likewise
hopes and desires the same by Me, that you would Release those Turks that you
have Prisoners in any of your Dominions, and that unperverted in their
Religion. He also wishes Long-life, a quiet old Age, and a pacifick Government
in the Administration of your Kingdoms, which be desires also might be happily
transmitted to your Posterity. He promises also to use all means that this
League and Truce between the Two Crowns, shall not in the least be Impaired by
any of his Subjects. He also desires that your Majesty would give a particular
Answer to each Branch of his Letters; which if you shall do, my Master and your
Majesty would vye Offices of Friendship one with another, and will seriously
endeavor that this League begun between two aged Princes may increase every
Day more and more, and may receive Augmentation of Establishment, by new and
growing Evidences.

Having ended this Discourse, he desired the Emperor to acquaint him which of
the August Assembly was Maximilian his beloved Son and Heir of the Empire:
Caesar pointed to him with his Finger, sitting at his Left Hand; then the
Ambassador turning his Face^ toward him, bowed his Body, after the Parthian or
Turkish manner; and laying his Right Hand upon his Breast, wished him a long
and happy Life, with a joyous Succession of the Roman Empire, and Prosperity in
all his Affairs, adding these express words; That he did not doubt, but that he
proceeding from so Noble a Stock, would not be inferior to his Father, but
rather according to the Notation of his Name, Maximilian, he would be Greater
and famouser than his Parent. Then turning to the Emperor, he presented him the
Gifts that he had brought, viz. Two high-priz'd Goblets of Native Crystals,
beset with precious Jewels; together with a choice Turkish Horse, adorned with
Golden Trappens and Jewels, and also four Camels, the best in all
Constantinople: These he presented to the Emperor, excusing the Leanness of the
Horse and Camels, contracted by so long a Journey, as the space of Four Months.

The COPY of the Prudential Letters given to the said Ambassador by his Master,
upon the Eight Years Truce, by the German Emperor.
I Lord of Lords, Reigning over the East and West; that am able to do, and not
do, what I please; Lord of all Greece, Persia, and Arabia, and Ruler over all
that can be Subjected either to King or Lord; the great Hero of these Times,
and the Valiant Giant of the wide World; Lord of the White and Black Sea, and
of the Holy City Mecha; Shining with the Splendour of God; and of the City
Medina, and of the Holy and Chaste City of Jerusalem; King of the Noble Kingdom
of Egypt; Lord of Jonia, and of the Cities of Athens; Senate of the Holy Temple
of God: Zabilon, and Bassio, Retham, and Magodin, the Seat and Throne of the
great King Nashin Reta, and Lord of the Island of Algeus, and Prince of the
Kingdoms of Tartary, Mesopotamia,; and of the Medes, Georgians, and all Greece;
of Moria, and Anatoria; of Asia, Armenia, Valakia, Moldavia; and Emperor of all
Hungary: With many other Kingdoms and Dominions; the Thrice Great Emperor
Sultan, Solomon; the son of the Great Emperor Selin: Who has Power from God to
bridle all People, and Ability to open the Bars and Gates of all Cities and
Forts: All the ends of the Earth, none excepted, are put into my Powerful
Hands: The Lord of the East, from the Land of Tsin unto the Borders of Africa,
whom God has made strong by the Edge of the Sword; Amongst whose Powerful
Kingdoms, Cesars inexpugnable Castle is accounted one of the jest; and the
Empire of Alexander the Great, was but small in respect of my Hereditary
Dominions; the Valor of the whole World, and the Virtue of the Firmament is
with me. Seeing King Ferdinand, who art the Powerful Lord of all Christianity,
and the Elect Vessel of the Powerful Christian Faith, Created and Chosen
Emperor of the Romans, and of Bohemia, of the Vandals, Croats, and many other
Countries, King and Ruler. Seeing, I say, that awhile since you sent your
Chosen Counselor and Ambassador, Augerius a Busbeck, to our Court, the Refuge
of Princes, and the Throne of Grace, to them that desired it; with Letters of
Friendship to renew the Ancient Peace and Contract of Amity between us: Which
Letters were Dated in the Year from the Prophet Jesus; (upon whom, and upon our
Prophet Mahomet, be the Light and Peace of God) 1562. the First Day of June:
Desiring of us, to grant the Truce for Eight Years; during which Time, no
Cities, Countries, or Forts of his, should be Molested by our Arms, but his
People should live in secure Tranquillity, etc. To which Request, we answer:
That such a Truce, firm Concord and Friendship shall be continued between Us
for Eight Years, on these Conditions: First, That Urinis should send Yearly to
our Court, as a Pledge of the Truce, 30000 Hungarian Ducats, together with the
Remainder due for Two Years past^ and for that we Promise, that we will not
Interpose in any Offices either of Friendship, or of Enmity, as to the
Hereditary Dominions of the Son of King John, whether Situate in Upper Hungary,
or in the further Part of the Teise; all of which belong to Us by Right of War.
Moreover the Son of the said King John, during this Eight Years Truce, shall be
Obliged to be Obedient to Us; not to undertake any War against You, or to
M^lest your Subjects with Fire and Sword^ not to exact any Money, or drive any
Prey from Them. And we likewise do Promise, That we will take no Occasion to
destroy your People by Fire or Sword, but will devoutly observe this Eight
Years Peace and Concord. Moreover, Balaski Michael, and Nicholas Bathol, and
some Others, shall be included in the same Conditions of Peace, and shall be
subject to you, and the Son of King John: And if any of yours, or if his
Subjects, have taken away any Goods or Lordships in time of War, from whence
new Dissentions may arise; Our Will and Pleasure be, That such Matters shall be
put off undetermined, until the Time of this Truce shall be Expired. And if
perhaps new Controversies shall hereafter arise between us, upon the account of
our Mutual Jurisdiction which cannot be composed; Let each of us keep their
own, without any Contention or Strife. Moreover, some Towns Situate on the
Da^ow and Tatta, may remain as they now do; so that the Soldiers in the
Garrison of Tatta, shall have no Right to Infest the Villages upon the Danow.
Moreover, If from this time of Peace, any of your Nobles have some of my
Subject Prisoners, they shall set them free without Ransom; that so this Peace
and Concord shall be more firmly kept. All and every of these, we will and
faithfully Promise that they shall be duly Observed till the end of the Eight
Years aforesaid: And for that purpose, we have caused these Letters of
Confederation to be Published from the Court of Our Magnificence; and have also
taken Care, that a Copy of these Letters, together with my Edict thereupon,
should be sent to all the Commanders and Officers of all my Forces both by Land
and Sea, to be faithfully observed by them.

The Condition of this Truce shall Comprehend our true Vayvords of Valachia and
Moldavia; and that none of your Hungarians, Croats, Sclavonians, or others,
should be molested or troubled by any of Mine, on any pretense whatsoever. But
if some of yours making Inrodes from your Castles shall Plunder some of ours,
they shall be ^ound to make Restitution; and if any Fugitives of ours shall
carry away their Master's Gold, or other Goods, and seek shelter from you; the
Goods are to be restored, and the Fugitives punished in Terrorem; for the Goods
of Fugitives belong to their Masters: The like is to ^e done, if your Fugitives
fly to us. Moreover, It shall be lawful for your Commander to Fortify Towns
and Castles upon the Borders of Hungary, and to Import Victuals and Arms, but
not beyond their own Bounds. None of your Subjects in Hungary, or elsewhere
shall be carried away Prisoners, during this Truce; if they be, they shall be
presently Released: Besides, if any Ambassadors and Christian Princes shall
Reside at our Court, for the dispatch of Business, they shall have free Leave
to walk up and down, to go and come: And moreover shall be handsomely Assisted
by Interpreters, to declare their Errands; and if by reason of the Co^s^^e^ of
each other Countries, some Differences do arise between our Subjects, those
Disputes shall be Determined by discreet Persons, chosen on both Sides; that
the Causers of those Disputes shall be punished as Truce Breakers. Moreover, We
forbid Duels on the Borders of both our Countries: And we desire that this
Truce, and every Article hereof, may be publicly Read in your Dominions, and
Command given that they be Obediently kept. We have Promised the same before,
and your Ambassador lately sent, desired it in your Name; and humbly besought
us, that this Peace may be firm and established by Imperial Oaths, and by these
Letters of Credence, as if we Our Selves had been present. And therefore I send
these Letters of Peace to you, that your Commanders and Soldiers may be bound
to Observe them, as long as they shall not Act contrary thereunto; so long
these Articles of Peace be Confirmed between us. In Testimony whereof, I Swear
by the True and Living Creator of Heaven and Earth; by the true Signs of our
Great and Venerable Prophet, by my Imperial Power, and by my True Faith, that
none of my Captains, Commanders, etc. shall presume, or attempt to do any thing
in Breach of this Eight Years Truce; Commanding also all the Jurats of our
Potent Emperor, the Rulers of Valakia and Moldavia, and King Stephen himself,
with other Commanders on our Borders, that they observe these Conditions
toward your People, Cities, etc. as I my self will do: Nor that they commit
the least Breach, to the Prejudice of any of your Subjects. In short, I shall
Ascribe great Reverence and Authority to this Great and Potent Friendship; so
that I will not vary a jo^ to the Breach thereof. And whereas your Ambassadors
have desired me to Release some Christian Captives without R^nsom; I have
granted the same to your Friendship, which otherwise no Money could have
released; especially hoping that you would Release all the Turks that are
Prisoners with you. These Letters of Peace and Confederation, were Dated in our
Imperial Palace and Throne of our powerful City Constantinople, in the Year of
our Great and Venerable Prophet, 969. Sept. 1.

It Is to be observed, That the Turkish Ambassador had 23 Persons in his Train;
the greatest part whereof were Commanders of Buda in Hungary, He had also 29
Horses and 6 Camels.

The Names and Sirnames of the Turkish Ambassador, and his Attendants, from
Constantinople and Buda, which entered into Frankfort with him.
EBraim Strotius, a Polonian, Ambassador had 23 Servants, and 29 Horses, 6
Camels. The Bassa of Buda had 7 Servants, 10 Horses. Rassius Mustica of Five
Churches, 3 Servants, 4 Horses. Istraphius Zauschus, 2 Servants. Percham
Zauschus, 2 Servants. Bermanus Bily of Buda, 2 Servants. Durac Bulius of Buda,
2 Servants. Dellius Constraff of Buda, 2 Servants, 3 Horses. Hossen Bulius of
Buda, 2 Servants, 3 Horses. Duraston of Buda, 1 Servant, 2 Horses. Dalli
Achmal, 1 Servant, 3 Horses. Odoverdas, 1 Servant, and 2 Horses. Kadulius, 2
Horses. Ballius Sachemius, 2 Horses. Mustafa, 1 Servant, Hussam.
FINIS.
Books printed for and sold by J. Tailor at^ the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1. DR. Salmon's Practical Physic. 2. Dr. Yworth's new Art of Brewing 3. --
His whole Art of Distillation. 4. Logic, or the Art of Thinking. 5. Lord
Viscount Shannon's Moral Essays. 6. -- His Characters and Discourses. 7. -- His
Letter to an Atheistical Acquaintance^ 8. Dr. Salmon's, with Dr. Sydenham's,
and Monsieur Blankard's new Method of curing the French Disease. 9. Love's
whole Art of Surveying. 10. Strode's easy Method for the Art of Dyalling. 11.
Plutarch's Morals, Vol. 5. Englished by several Hands. 12. Culpeper's Directory
for Medicines. 13. Kirkwood's new Family Book, with a Preface by Dr. Horneck.
14. Abbade's Truth of the Christian Religion, Englished. 15. Gouges Words to
Saints and Sinners. 16. -- His Christian Directions. 17. Councellor Manner's
Legacy to his Son. 18. Ryder's new Practice of Surgery. 19. Evelyn's French
Gardener with Cuts. 20. Gilbert's Florists Vade Mecum. 21. Baxter's Call to the
Unconverted. 22. Osborn's Works, Divine, Moral, Historical and Political. 23.
Virgilius Notis Minelii. 24. Quintilian's Declamations Englished. 25. Le
Grand's Historia Sacra. 26. Newton's Complete Arithmetician. 27. The Modern
Courtier. 28. Miracles performed by Money, a Poem. 29. The Humors of a Coffee
House, a Poem. 30. Foxes and Firebrands. 31. A Defense of their Majesty's King
William and Queen Mary. 32. Strode of Combinations, etc. 33. The Swordman's
Vade Mecum, by Sir William Hoop. 34. Dyer's Works. 35. Vanity of the Creature.
36. Public Devotions, by Mr. Camfield. 37. Mr. Boyles's Heads of History. 38.
-- His Medicinal Experiments or Collect of choice Remedies Part 3. 39. The
Travels of Monsieur Thevenot into Persia and the East Indies.
Books printed for and sold by J. Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1. SIR Simon Dewes's Journal of all the Parliaments in Queen Elizabeth's Time.
2. Bacon of the Government of England. 3. Abbadie's Vindication of the
Christian Religion. 4. Mr. Boyle's Christian Virtuoso. 5. -- His Experiments
and Observations Phisicae. 6. An Enquiry into the Constitution, Discipline,
Government, Unity, and Worship of the Primitive Church by an Impartial Hand. 7.
Family Devotions for Sunday Evenings throughout the Year, in 2. Volumes: 8. Mr.
Edwards's Enquiry into difficult Texts, with a probable Resolution of them, in
2. Volumes. 9. His Discourse on the Authority and Style of the Holy Scriptures,
in 2. Volumes: 10. Meige's English Grammar. 11. Dr. Payn's Practical Discourse
of Repentance. 12. Florist's Vade Mecum. 13. Harris's Enquiry into the Acute
Diseases of Infants.

