ENGLAND'S BANE, OR The Deadly Danger OF Drunkennels Described in a Letter to a
FRIEND: WHEREIN Are many convincing Arguments against it, and many aggravations
of it, in Professors of Religion; and many other things tending to a
Reformation of that Beastly Sin.

BY EDWARD BVRY, late Minister of Great-Bolas in Shropshire.

Isa. XXVIII. 1. Woe to the Crown of pride to the Drunkards of Ephraaim, etc.
Hab. II. 15. Woe to him that gives his neighbor Drink, that put thy Bottle
to him, and make him Drunk also, etc. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at
the Bible and three Growns in Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel. 1677.

Licenced and Entered according to Order.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THough these following lines were at first designed for a private Person, and
so adapted to his condition, yet seeing there are many, Oh too many sick of the
same disease! and Drunkenness is become a public distemper in poor and rich; I
thought it not amiss to make my Receipt public also. This disease is become
epidemical, and all the Physicians in England know not how to set a stop to it,
it is like a mighty torrent that bears down all before it, so that Drunkenness
and Adultery seem to strive for the Pre-eminence. Now though I cannot imagine
that my little Dam can set a stop to this fierce Flood, which doubtless will
soon mount over it, and bear it down, yet being made in some small Stream it
may possibly do some good, or however, when I have done my duty, and witnessed
for my God against this debauchery, My reward will be with my God, and though
Israel be not gathered my labor will not be in vain, Isa. 49. 4 etc. and I
shall stand up at last in my lot to witness against those that now shut their
eyes against the light: If these Lines meet with any that are not guilty, let
them bless God that has made them to differ, and let them be preventing
Physic against future temptations, and let him that stands take heed least
he fall. But Reader, If thou art guilty, consider well the strength of Reason,
and the sorce of Scripture arguments here brought, for thy Conviction, and shut
not thine eyes against either, for the time will come God will open them, and
if thou can not speak as much Reason and Scripture for Drunkenness, as bear
thou find against it, take heed of resisting God, and the Message he has
sent thee, for I am sure thou can not resist his judgments, which he has
threatened against such wilful offenders, and it is hard to kick against the
pricks. I know this discourse runs cross to the humors of the Time, and the
sinful inclination of corrupt nature, yet though the Physic seem sharp it is
safe, old Diseases are not usually cured with Cordial Syrups, nor old feastered
Sores with lenitive Plasters, a gentle reproof will not work upon an
incorrigible Person, or gray Headed Sinner; some happly may quarrel the
Language, as well as the matter, because the Pills are not Sugared, but when
there is Fire in the Town, men stand not to make an eloquent Oration, but cry
Fire, Fire, I write to those that many times can neither speak Sense nor
understand Reason, to those who had rather be accounted Good-fellows, than
either good livers or good Christians; and my design is to make them better
Livers, rather than better Rhetoricians, and seeing they sin in English why
should they be reproved in Latin, they had need have one speak loud enough,
lest they are asleep, or amidst the crowd of their Drunken Companions; for then
it is hard to make them hear or regard. All the Plagues of Egypt could not
awaken Pharaoh till the red Sea convinced him; neither could all the Miracles
of Christ convince the Jews till Titus Vespatian swept them away: the Sodomites
when struck with Blindness, yet were not cured of their madness, till Fire, and
Brimstone convinced them of their folly, and it is to be feared, that nothing
but Fire and Brimstone will awake many of our drowsy Drunkards; this will make
them see God spoke in earnest what they took in jest. If any pretend they make
no profession of Religion, and therefore are not concerned with part of the
Book, it being adapted only to such, this will prove but a bad excuse, they
never pretended to serve God, and therefore may the more freely break his Laws,
but I conceive all those that own that there is a God, make some profession to
serve him, but let their profession be what it will, without Holiness they
shall never enjoy Happiness, and truly till a man break off from wicked Company
there is little hopes of a Resormation. When Peter was in Caiphas's Hall, he
soon learnt to deny his Master, when Joseph was in Egypt he learnt to swear by
the life of Pharaoh; If Solomon will have Pharaoh's Daughter to Wife, he shall
have her Idols also. The Fuller in the Fable, would not dwell with the Collier
for fear of a Smut, and whoever would avoid Drunkenness must avoid Drunken
companions: he that would avoid Infection must beware of Infected Persons, and
Infected Places; a man that would be Chaste must not live in a Brothel-house,
and he that would be sober must not haunt Alehouses and Taverns. I shall add no
more at present, but wish that what I have written may be beneficial to that
end for which it is written. I now rest,

Thy unfeigned Welwisher Edward Bury.
Eaton, Jan. 1. 1676.
A DISSWASIVE FROM Drunkenness.
Dear Friend,
THE Love I bear to you, and your Relations, puts me on this unpleasing, and
perhaps ungrateful work of Reprehension, your Extravagancies of late years are
too manifest to be concealed, and the course you take in spending your Time,
wasting your Estate, imparing your Credit, and indangering your Soul in
frequenting Alchouses and Taverns is so bad, that it calls for a speedy Remedy
or you are like to be undone: and after so many Admonitions, so many Reproofs,
so many Promises and Protestations, and Resolutions of Reformation, yet nothing
is done; this has been no small grief to me. In this distemper therefore give
me leave also among other Physicians to prescribe you some Pills, which though
they may seem untoothsom, may prove wholesome, and may be the better swallowed
being Sugared with Love; a feastered Sore is seldom cured with gentle
Lenitives, a desperate Disease must have a desperate Cure, what the event of it
may be as to you I know not, or what effect it will work upon you, however my
reward will be with God, and my judgment with the Most High: you may read my
Commission, Lev. 16. 17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart, thou
shall in any wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin to lie upon him. He is no
friend to your Soul that is a friend to your Sin; it is true Solomon advises,
not to reprove a Scorner lest he hate thee, but rebuke a Wise man and he will
love thee, Prove. 9. 8. and by your reception of this, you will discover your
Wisdom or Folly, David bid, Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness,
let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break my
head, for my prayer also shall be in their calamities, Psalm. 141. 5. and we
find he loved Nathan never the worse for a sharp reproof; it is a Christians
duty, much more a Ministers, which we owe to all that offend, much more to our
Relations, Rebuke them sharply (says the Apostle) that they may be sound in
the Faith, Tit. 1. 13. and though it should not be scalding hot, yet it should
have some heat, though railing and reviling should be laid aside, yet Zeal and
Fervency are necessary ingredients; it is true Christ bids us, not give holy
things to Dogs, neither to cast Pearls before Swine, lest they turn again and
rent us, Matthew. 7. 6. yet Like I not their judgment, who to save themselves a
labor of reproving make all Offenders to be Dogs and Swine, and never make a
trial of them: should you prove thus, I should hereafter take Christ's advice,
it is a sign of a galled Back that cannot endure rubbing, and of a galled
Conscience to kick against reproofs: it is a good observation of one, that
Admonition and Reprehension whether it be true or false, whether it come from a
Friend, or a Foe, never does a Wise man harm, if true, he knows what to amend,
if false, of what to beware. To judge the Wound incurable, bebefore it be
searched, or before we have made an experiment, is but uncharitable dealing, I
choose rather with the compassionate Samaritan to pour in Oil and Wine. The
usual mode of flattery to skin over the sore, is not safest, it is better if we
search it to the bottom, though it make it smart, but to leave apologizing I
shall address my self to you in these Ten following Considerations, and desire
in the Words of a Minister, of a Friend, and of a Relation, and as you will
answer the contrary before the Great God, the scearcher of all Hearts, at your
peril lay them to heart examine their weight, and the evidence of Truth, that
comes along with them, and if you cannot give a satisfactory Answer to them,
leave off those Courses you follow, shake off the Company you keep, apply your
self to the duty of Religion, and remember from whence you are fallen, and do
your first works.

Consid. 1. Consider Drunkenness is such a Sin, as takes away the use of reason
and turns a Man into a Beast, yea makes him worse than a Beast, he that in the
Creation was made little lower than the Angels, is now become lower than the
Beast, and the time is coming if repentance prevent not, that the Drunkard will
wish he had been made a Beast; what is it that differenceth a Man from a Beast
but the use of Reason, but if Reason be drowned, as it is in the Drunkard where
lies the difference, thus Whoredom, Wine, and new Wine take away the heart,
Hos. 4. 11. By Circes Charms Vlisses's men were turned into Beasts, Strong
Drink is as powerful, for this turns them into Swine, Nebuchadnezzar had his
understanding taken from him, and a Beasts Heart given him, and so have these,
it is true they retain the shape of Men, and that is all, for they much resemble
Swine in this also, in their nasty behavior, wallowing in their Vomit, and
moiling themselves in their Dung, and dirt, but they are very brutes in their
understanding, but many sorts of Beasts are more capacious of Instruction than
they are in their Drunken fits; you may better instruct a Horse, and Mule, and
a Spaniel Dog, than you can them, if you speak reason they understand it not,
neither can they speak sense: Oh the horrible nature of fin, that so transforms
so glorious a Creature: the Wicked in Scriptures are oft-times compared to, yea
called by the names of Beasts for their beastlike qualities, as the Lion, the
Bear, the Leopard, the Bull, the Serpent, the Fox, the Cocatrice, the Asp, and
many other, but the Drunkard is fitly compared to a Swine for nastiness, for I
know not any other Creature that will drink till he Burst; and does delight so
much in Swill, and wallowing in the mire: the very sight of a Drunkard is
enough to overset a man's stomach, his nasty belches, vomits and other more
filthy demeanours. He may also very fitly be compared to an Aerffe, a Beast
bred in the North of Suetia, who when he has caught his prey, glutteth himself
as long as his skin will hold, and when he can eat no more, straineth himself
between two trees, till he has vented backwards what he has taken, and then
fills again, and spends his time in filling and emptying, and is not this the
very practice of a Drunkard? does he not continue from morning till night,
filling and emptying his Belly, by Vomiting or otherwise, as the Daughters of
Danaus are feigned to do their bottomless Tubs, which run out as fast as they
pour in? do not many of them drink all the Wit out of their Heads, and all the
Money out of their Purses, and yet with the Horseleech still Cry give, give,
are not many as covetous of Drink as others are of Gold, and and can never say
it is enough, they have a dry Dropsy, the more they Drink the more they may, and
thus they spend the time from morning till night, yea some from one weeks end
to another, filling and emptying as a Brewer does his Barrels, and live the
very lives of Swine, drinking in their swill, and wallowing in the mire, sleep
and snort, and up again and at it; nay they are worse than Beasts who do but
their kind, and answer the end of their Creation, they retain what God gave
them in the Creation, but these do not, they lose not only Gods Image, but the
use of Reason also, nay sense it self, and their locomotive faculty, which
Beasts keep: some of them go upon all four, some are Dead-Drunk and cannot
stand, the Beast is serviceable in his kind, the Drunkard good for nothing but
to spend and consume: Oh that such a noble Creature should unman himself, and
yield to so poor a temptation as a cup of Drink, and sell his Reason at so low
a Rate, if therefore you would not thus Beastify your self and make your
condition worse than the Beast that perishes, if you would not make your self
an unprofitable burden to the Commonwealth, and the object of Gods infinite
hatred, take heed of this detestable vice.

Consid. 2. Consider also how much this Beastly sin of Drunkenness does
debauch, defile, deform the Body of man which should be the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, Holy and Honorable: yea how it weakens it, fills it with diseases,
distempers, and disorders, which often prove mortal, and set a Period to Life
it self: the Body of man is in it self a famous Fabric, a beautiful Pile, a
sumptuous Structure, and bespeaks God for it is Author, and of all the visible
Creation seems to be Gods Masterpiece; if we take it in pieces and consider it
in its parts, you will find it an excellent piece of work, every piece being so
useful and exact, nothing wanting, nothing redundant; the Heart, the Liver, the
Brain, the Brain, the Muscles, Sinews, Nerves, Arteries, Veins, and Ligaments,
and the several Members of the Body, yea the whole is a beautiful piece dropped
out of the hands of a choice Workman, but this filthy vice does so deform,
deface, and defile it, that it looks not like that which God Created it to be,
how does it deform the Face? the Nose, the Eyes, the Cheeks are red and
pimpled, the Face swollen like a Bladder, the Countenance disturbed, writhen, and
deformed. How many beautiful comely Faces, both of Men and Women are thus
spoiled? set on fire, and bedecked with Pearls and Rubies, Pimples, Pushes, and
rough and rugged Skin? To whom (says Solomon) is redness of eyes? etc. to them
that tarry long at the Wine, to them that seek mixed Wine. What meazil Faces,
what swollen Bellies, Legs and Thighs, and other parts usually have they, and
commonly their diseases and distempers within are not fewer than their
deformities without: for this filthy vice quenches the natural heat, and drowns
the vital spirits, impairs the health, weakens the Body, and is the seminary of
many diseases, Gouts, Dropsies, Fevers, and what not, and disposes it for a
dissolution, and in a few years, even in young men, we may evidently see a
wonderful change, a strange Metamorphosis in those addicted to Drunkenness,
they become lothsom to others, and burthensom to themselves, that their Legs
are not able to do their office to carry them, as they would do nothing, so now
they can do nothing that is good, they are unfit to live being good for
nothing, and most unfit to dye; and as they are like Hogs, always desiring
their Swill, so they are fit for no other society; they are Swine, and like
Vlisses's men desire no other happiness, they think there is no Heaven but in
their filthy Swinish pleasure, no good-fellowship but amidst their Pots, no
such delight on earth as to make each other Drunk, and no love like to this;
and thus they live undesired, and die unlamented, except by those of their own
fraternity, who if their means be spent, matter not to see each other hanged
out of the way when they once come to be troublsome; if therefore you would not
be troubled with those deformities of Body, and not only race out the Image of
God, but also the Image of a Man, if you would not be pointed out in the Street
for a Drunkard, and known by the Buttry door, Buttons upon your Nose and Face,
if you would not be filled with diseases, and infirmities incident to this
Vice, such as you are never like to be freed from while you live, if you would
not make your self loathsome to God and Man, and unfit your self for any
calling, occupation, or business whatsoever, if you would not disable your self
to do any duty to God or Man, take heed of this filthy Vice; for this by the
just Judgment of God, oft-times follows upon these lewd courses: it is not in
vain the Holy Ghost pronounces Woe to him that rises early in the morning that
he may follow Strong Drink and continue till night, till wine inflame him. Some
part of their Woe is in this life, but the greatest part is reserved for
hereafter, yet most men are insensible of it, we may say of the Sword and
Drunkenness, as the Women did of Saul and David, The Sword has slain
Thousands, but Intemperance Ten thousands.

Consid. 3. This filthy Swinish Sin of Drunkenness, for I know not how to give
it a fitter epithet, does not only take away the beauty of the Body, and fill
it full with diseases as before I proved; but it is also the Grave to bury the
good name, where it will for ever rot, and stink in the Nostrils of God and
good men, and makes it go out in a stinking snuff: A good name (says Solomon)
is rather to be chosen than great riches, Prove. 22. 1. and indeed cannot be
purchased with Gold, many men that have purchased great Estates could not
purchase a good Name. Now the Drunkard, a right Prodigal, sells his name as
cheap as Esau did his Birthright, for a little Drink, as Lycimacus did his
Kingdom for a draught of Water, yea, and that when he has enough before, and
brings an Odium upon himself which he can never blot out; for as a good Name
may continue when Riches are gone, so this blot lies upon him when his Drink is
gone, A good name is better than precious Ointment, Eccl. 7. 1. It comforts the
Heart, with the Smell it holds up the Head, and chears the Heart, and leaves a
good savor behind it; it is durable and preserves from putrefaction, when the
name of the wicked shall rot, it smells sweet when the other goes out in a
snuff; the Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance, but the other are
either buried in Oblivion or remembered to their shame, this filthy Vice rots
the Name that it is never remembered but with obloquie; when mention is made of
Heliogabalus, Sardanapalus, and such beastly Belly-gods, with what contempt do
we speak of them? Tiberius was in scorn called Biberius for his excessive
Drinking; this one bad one drowns all other good parts in a Man; is it not the
constant language of Men when they see a Drunkard, yonder goes a Toss-pot, a
Swill-bowl, a Drunken Swine, a Belly-god, do you see how he reels? how he
vomits? it would turn a man's Stomach to see him, here lies the Cloak, there the
Hat, there the Swine lies sleeping, snorting, wallowing in his Vomit more fit
for the Dunghill than the House, for the Company of Swine than Men; and when he
is dead this may be his Epitaph, Here lies one that made his Gut his God, and
Drinking Healths was his greatest Devotion, he was his own Executor, he lived
undesired, and died unlamented: and indeed, no wise man will willingly be seen
in his Company, for as it is a blemish to keep company with a Whore, so it is
with a Drunkard; He that keeps company with a riotous person shameth his
Father, Prove. 28. 7. Yea, they shame themselves, and many get a Blot not easily
removed; these men are like the Locusts, all belly from head to tail, and make
little use of the rest of their Body. In the Fable where the Hands and the Feet
and other parts that complained of the Belly for devouring all, and doing
nothing, denied it food, whereupon the whole Body faints, etc. This shows their
ignorance, for there the Belly contributes to each part for their sustentation,
but if ever there be reason, it is certainly the other parts has reason, has
here cause to complain of the Belly; for it robs the Back and other parts, and
devours all, and fills the Body with loathsome diseases: It Is Fabled the Giant
Briareus had an hundred Hands, and fifty Bellies, but some men have one Belly
would devour as much as an hundred Hands can get, and commonly the greatest
Bouzers are the greatest Buzzards and are fit for nothing but to Drink: These
not only shame, but undo their Families, Friends, Children, and Relations, and
are a shame to the place they are bred, to the Church and Nation where they
live; they are (as one says) the Devils eldest Sons, and therefore when they
come to their Inheritance in Hell, they will be sure of a double Portion: they
bring much Grist to his Mill, and have done their Father much Service, and may
expect good Wages; some of them have been well educated, received many Talents,
have Learning, Parts, Gifts, and Endowments, which they have not only lost, but
obliterated Reason it self, and God has deprived them of those Talents, and
bestowed them on others, and will condemn them to utter darkness, Mat. 25. 28,
etc. And whenever they die, they shall leave a stink behind them, for did you
ever find a sweet savor proceed from a putrified member. If therefore you
would preserve a good name, and merit a good report among the wisest, soberest,
most serious persons, take heed of this odious sin which certainly will brand
you with Infamy, and load you with obloquy and disgrace.

Consid. 4. As this Sin does deform the Body, and blemish the Name, so it also
debauches the Soul, and inclines it to all manner of wickedness, for what Sin
is so odious, that a Drunkard in his cups will refuse to do, when the Drink is
in, the Wit is out, and when he is heated in his Drink, he is Pot-valiant, and
will prove the Devils Champion, and undertake any enterprise: we have known, or
heard it at at least, when in Drink some have killed their Fathers and Mothers,
ravished their Sisters, murdered their best Friends, and nearest Relations, and
do we not daily see, though not Perhaps every individual Drunkard, they are
commonly great Swearers, Blasphemers, flying out in their Cups at the very Face
of God, are they not usually great Liars, ribald filthy obscene speakers,
quarrellers fighters reproachers, and what not? what service soever the Devil
has for them to do, they are pressed to do it, though he sets them about the
most dangerous unreasonable work in the World, and the basest drudgery; the
Taverns and Alehouses are the Devils Schools, where his Language of Hell is
taught, and his Shop, where men are trained up in his work, and commonly out of
Hell you shall scarce hear any speak his Language more naturally, then there:
for here commonly are some old artists provided to instruct the rest in this
Devilish art of Hellish Rhetoric, and to discourse here of Religion, Holiness,
and the Power of Godliness, seems as unsuitable and unsafe as to discourse of
the Protestant Principles before the Spanish Inquisitors, or the Conclave of
Cardinals, yea some are ready to quarrel that man that names God except in an
Oath, or vain speech, as one that comes to torment them before the time, and
comes on purpose to spoil their sport. Now what pleasure can a man take in such
Company? Solomon advises, Prove. 22. 24, 25. Make no friendship with an angry
man, and with a furious man thou shall not go, lest thou learn his ways, and
get a snare to thy Soul: And the like reason holds here among debauched
sinners, where never good can be learned, many temes evil, he that touches
Pitch shall be defiled, and he that meddles with a wicked man gets himself a
blot, he that danceth among the Devils Lime-twigs is commonly snared in them.
The Drunkards are Leperous persons, no clean person should associate himself
with them, they have a Plague Sore upon them, and we may well fear the
Infection. Man is an imitable Creature, and like the Camelion apt to change
with the Company, and like Drink apt to smell of the Cask, and this Sin is as
Infectious as the Plague it self, and more dangerous; that only kills the the
Body, this Soul and Body, their acts usually increase the habits, and at last
bring it to a Custom, and Custom is a second Nature, and after a while that Sin
which at first men stumble at, at last it is as easy as Water to run down the
Chanel, it is a sure sign of an ungracious Heart to delight in wicked Company,
Noscitur ex comite qui non dignoscitur ex se. What Solomon speaks by way of
caution concerning the Whorish Woman, may be applied here, Prove. 5. 8. Remove
thy way far from her, come not nigh to the door of her House; this would be
safe in this case, he that would not be burnt must dread the Fire, he that
would not hear the Bell must not meddle with the Roap, to venture upon the
Temptation, and then to Pray lead us not into Temptation, is like him that puts
his Fnger into the fire and Prays that it may not be burnt, or leaps into the
Sea wilfully, and prays against drowning; custom in Sin boldens a man, hardens
his Heart, and sears his Conscience: at first a man deals by Sin, as the Fox in
the Fable with the Lion, at first he is terrified, the next time a little
bolder, afterward approaches nearer and discourses him, the application is
easy, He that walks in the council of the Ungodly, will e're long stand in the
way of Sinners, yea and sit in the seat of the Scornful, Psalm. 1. 1. In those
societies you can hardly choose but hear some mock, or scorn blurted against
the Power of Godliness, which methinks should savor ill-with a Gracious Heart,
yea with an ingracious man, and spoil all his mirth; strict Holiness must needs
be censured, at least for needless scrupulosity; or how can persons satisfy
themselves in their debauched practices; at first it may be, such discourse may
trouble them, having drunk in other Principles, but in time this will wear off,
and down well enough, and at last become natural, and the throat of your
Conscience wide enough to swallow these Gudgeons without straining, and in
process of time a Camel will not choke you, I have read of some and heard of
one in our times that by little and little inured themselves to eat poison, and
at last Spiders, Toads, and such like would serve them for food: some men at
first feared an Oath, but by little and little learnt to swear little Oaths, or
something like Oaths at first, and afterward the greatest would down without
chewing, till they come to this, they scarce knew when they swore, it was so
usual as in some distempers the Excrements pass from them without their
knowledge. Joseph in Pharaoh's Court learnt to Swear By the life of Pharaoh:
probably he would have scrupled it when under his Fathers tuition. And is it
any wonder if men learn worse words in a worse School? many men amongst us have
taken such a cursed habit of Swearing and Cursing, that if the Law were duly
executed, all their Estates would not pay their Mulcts; they deal with Christ
as a Kennel of Hounds do with an Hare, pluck him to pieces, wound and tear him,
what in them lies, limb meal, neither his Blood, nor his Wounds, nor his Head,
nor his Heart, nor any other part shall escape, and they even dare Vengeance it
self, to punish them; like Mad-Dogs they bite and snatch at all, and would make
all as mad as themselves, and is this company to be desired by a civil man, and
in their quarrelling also and contentions, which is not unusual upon the
Ale-bench, they are like Firebrarnds ready to kindle one another, not only
Swearing and Railing but also fighting, Quarreling and Murder it self is the
effect of Drunkenness, but perhaps you will say you are not guilty of Swearing,
Cursing, Quarrelling, and such like, but it is almost impossible you should be
otherwise; how can you discourse them but in their own Language, and I fear I
have some grounds for my fear that you have lost some degrees of Innocence, and
cannot wash your hands from these transgressions: but suppose you are not
actually guilty, are you not accessory to the Oaths and Curses which you do not
reprove? and that you do not reprove them is evident, by their delight in your
Company. Can you hear the name of God Blaspemed, his Children abused, strict
Holiness which is Gods Image derided, and hold your Peace? and testify not your
dislike, doubtless you make their Sins your own by connivance; were there true
Love to God, to his Word, his ways, his Image, his People, you would have
something to say in their behalf, or break off society with Gods deadly
Enemies, their Sin will be laid at your door: Can you hear your Pot-valiant
Companions Blaspheme God, and have nothing to say in his Cause? Can an
ingenious Child here his Father abused and hold his Peace? many in their Cups
are like the Thracians when it Thunders and Lightens, they shoot up their
Arrows toward Heaven, that by this means they may bring God to a more
reasonable Composition; many when they cannot speak sense can speak Bsasphemy,
and when they cannot speak Reason can speak Treason, and can you wipe your
Mouth and say you have not offended? and all this is nothing to you when it is
daily done in your company, and are not you guilty of the many Acts of
Drunkenness? if not of your self, of others, when you Drink and Pledge their
Healths which is the Devils Shooinghorn, to draw on Drunkards, yea perhaps
force others to take a greater proportion of Drink than they can bear, do you
really think God gave his Creatures to be thus abused? Read Hab. 2. 14, etc. Woe
to him that gives his Neighbor Drink, and puts the Bottle to him, and
makes him Drunk that he may look upon his nakedness, etc. If you do the Work
you are like to have the Wages, many an Health drunk on Earth that will be
pledged in Hell, if you would not debauch your Soul, and be guilty of these and
other Sins which are the usual Fruits of this filthy Vice, beware of it betimes.

Consid. 5. This Sin of Drunkenness among other flagitious crimes is a great
promoter of that filthy Sin of Adultery, which lays a man open to the righteous
Judgments of the great God, Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13.
3. It was the judgment of some of the Ancient Fathers, and that not without
reason, that a Drunkard could not be Chaste, for he that breaks the hedge of Gods
Law, what can hold him? If a Divine Precept cannot restrain him, but for the
love of a Cup of Drink he will be a transgressor; who can think but if the
Devil mend his Wages, he will mend his Work; or when a Man or Woman has no
more reason than a Beast, why should they not act as Beasts? Without
distinctions of persons, here commonly are neither temptations, provocations,
opportunities, nor importunities wanting, and if the fear of God be absent, and
how can that he present where the wilful breach of his Laws are daily acted,
what can restrain them? Venture non habet Aures. He that will break one Command
knowingly, what should restrain him from the breach of another, which Nature
does every way as much incline men to? That Man or Woman that is not Abstinent,
I cannot see any great grounds to believe they are Continent; Lot in Sodom
though he doubtless had many provocations, and temptations to Lust, and many
examples of this nature, yet could withstand them, And his righteous Soul was
vexed with the unclean conversations of the wicked Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8.
but too much Wine lost the reins of Reason, and he became a brute, and
committed Incest with both his own Daughters: had not David believed that Wine
was a provoker of Lust, he never had tempted Vriah with it to provoke him to go
home to his Wife to cover his Adultery, Rioting and Drunkenness precedes
Chambering and Wantonness, Romans 13. 13. The first evil (says Ambrose) of
Drunkenness is the hazard of Chastity, and truly those that will be persuaded
to be Drunk, I think it is no great business to persuade them to Adultery also,
for as a filthy Lake is full of Froggs though no Fish can live in it, so the
Drunkards Heart is full of Lust though no Grace can thrive there. Bacchus is
the Pander to Venus, and Wine is the Fuel to heat the Oven; when the Belly is
full of Wine the Heart is full of Lust: They are (says the Prophet) hot as an
Oven, Hos. 7. 7. Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus. When the Fuel is
withdrawn the Fire cease. It Is Solomon's Council, Prove. 23. 31, etc. Look not
upon the Wine when it is red, when it gives its color in the Cup, when it
moves it self aright. (and why so?) At the last it biteth like a Serpent, and
stingeth like an Adder. (why what is the event?) Thine eyes shall behold
strange women, and thy lips shall utter perverse things: This is the Danger,
this is the Sting, Venture aestuans (says Jerome) spumat in libidinem.
Drunkenness is the Gallery that leads to Letchery, Vina parant animos Venere,
says another. When men are heated with Strong Drink they are like to hot Iron,
the Devil which is the Smith with his Hammer of Temptation, may forge them into
any shape; they are then like Wax softened, they will take any impression, they
are then like Paper, you may write what you will upon it, or make what blot you
please, and the Devil is apt to write his own name upon them, and to draw a
Conveyance to pass over their Souls to him, Jer. 5. 7, 8, 9. When I had fed
them to the full they then committed adultery, and assembled themselves by
heaps into Harlots houses. They were as fed horses in the morning, every one
neighing after his neighbors Wife. Shall not I visit for these things, says
the Lord, and shall not my Soul be avenged on such a nation as this. That heat
which is got in the Tavern is often cooled in the Brothel-house; the Blood heated
by Bacchus is cooled by Venus: Chastity seldom sleeps in a Drunkards bed,
neither does Virtue lodge with so foul a Swine. Venus as it is Fabled was
engendered of the Froth of the Sea, and Venery is produced by the fumes of
Strong drink. The Devils office is not to quench Fire but kindle it, he kindles
the Fire of Lust by the Fire of Drunkenness, and the Fire of Hell with both;
experience proves this point, for since Drunkenness came so much in fashion,
Adultery is not ashamed to show its head; when the one was driven into corners,
the other was ashamed to be seen, but now men hang out rotten fruit in the
sight of the Sun, and declare their Sin as Sodom and hide it not; men are not
ashamed to be seen reeling in the Street, vomiting in the Marketplace, or
place of Judicature, and with Zimri to bring their Whores to the Tent door
before the People, or with Absalom spread a Tent on the top of the House that
all may take notice of it, But what will they do in the end thereof? Now they
assemble themselves by troops in the Harlots houses, but it will be bitter in
the latter end. Wicked men and seducers wax worse and worse, deceiving and
being deceived: Those that heretofore were ashamed to be seen in an Alehouse,
much more in a Whore-house, now make it their Glory; They glory in their shame,
and are ashamed of their Glory; that River of wickedness which at at first was
fordable now overfloweth the banks, and knows no bottom. Jer. 6. 15. Were they
ashamed when they had committed abomination, nay they were not at all ashamed,
neither could they blush, therefore they shall fall among them that fall, etc.
When sin creeps into corners there is some hopes it will not be charged upon
the Nation, but when it becomes brazen-faced, and braves Authority it self, and
sends chalenges to Heaven it is ripe for judgment: a beautiful Harlot is one of
the Devils Lime-twigs to catch Fools, which he lays with great success, which
brings much Grist to his Mill, and much advantage to his Trade; she like the
Cackatrice kills with her looks, but those that are deluded by her, shall one
day wish they had been blind before they had seen her; I cannot accuse all
Drunkards of Whoredom, but of all Men and Women I should the most suspect them,
for those that have thrown off the reins of Reason, I know not what should rule
them, those that break the Cords of Gods Law I know not with what they should
be tied, those that are false to God I know not what should make them true to a
yoakfellow, those that fear not to Blaspheme his Name, abuse his Creatures,
undo their Families, their Wives and Children, venture upon the wrath of God,
the loss of the Soul, the loss of Heaven, and the pains of Hell, and all for a
little Swinish Pleasure in Drink what should hinder them from Adultery? if they
imagine it will bring them as much or more Pleasure than it, what should keep
them in awe? not the Law of God, not Conscience of Sin, not fear of Hell, or
hopes of Heaven, for all these could not hold them before. Solomon tells us,
Wine is a mocker, strong Drink is raging, and he that is overtaken with it is
not wise. Prove. 20. 1. Whordom, Wine, and new Wine take away the heart, Hos. 4.
11. For a Whore is a deep ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow pit: She also
lies in wait as for a prey, and increases the transgressors among men, Prove.
23. 27, 28. But there are some that affect the name of Roaring Boys, which
without Gods mercy will retain the name for ever. If God has preserved you
from this filthy Vice, this Souldamning Sin of Adultery, bless God For it leads
to the Chambers of Death, Prove. 7. 27. The Harlots house is the way to Hell,
going down to the Chambers of Death, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. and if you would be
preserved from this Sin, which will lead you as an Ox to the slaughter, and as
a Fool to the correction of the Stocks, Prove, 7. 22, take heed of this Sin of
Drunkenness, which is the readiest road to it, fly from it as from the face of
a Serpent.

Consid. 6. This filthy nasty Sin of Drunkenness destroys the Estate, ruins the
Family, beggars the Posterity, and exposes them to want and poverty, and should
you invent a way to ruin your self, and family, you can scarcely pitch upon any
surer and more certain way than this is: Scripture Reason and daily experience
prove this so evidently and fully, that it cannot be denied, He that loves
pleasure shail be a poor man, and he that loves Wine and Oil shall not be
rich, Prove. 23. 20, 21. Be not amongst Wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of
flesh, for the Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness
shall clothe a man with rags, and the experience of all ages, of all Nations,
of all Cities, Towns, Countries, and Villages, are undeniable arguments to
prove this, and save me a labor to speak much of it, few but can evidence this
truth by experience: How many ancient Families in our times and in our
Neighborhood, have by Drunkenness been everted and overthrown? nay, where do
you see one that is much addicted to this vice, but there is a sensible decay
in his Estate? perhaps there may be some that have large Revenues coming in,
left them by their Predecessors, whose Estates are not quickly perceived to
moulder away, but doubtless there is a Worm eating at the root of this Goard,
that in time will make it wither; God will blow upon it, and a secret curse of
God will dry up this their Euphrates; many have turned Houses, Livings,
Lordships, down their throats, and many of the great ones that have Thousands
per annum, cannot keep both ends together, and no wonder when Gods Laws are
violated, that nothing they do prospers: there are many men (as one says)
drink God out of their Hearts, Health out of their Bodies, Wit out of their
Heads, and Money out of their Purses, the Ale out of the Barrels, Wives and
Children out of doors, the Land out of quiet, and Plenty out of the Nation, and
when all is done they have nothing to show for it but some Buttery door
Buttons, a red firey measled pimpled Nose and Face, a diseased, dropsical,
gouty, deformed Body, and a Leprous Soul, and do procure such an insatiable
thirst that can never be satisfied, the more they drink the more they may, as
Solomon says, He that loves Silver shall not be satisfied with Silver; so he
that loves Strong Drink will never think he has enough, they drink not only
the poors part, for which they shall be called e're long to a strict account,
they being Gods stewards, to give them their meat in due season, Mat. 24. 45,
etc. but these gormundizing wretches devour also their Childrens Portion, even
that which was left them by their Predecessors, expose them to want and
beggary, how many poor Children had been better if they had never seen such
Parents? How many Wives and Children lie weeping and wailing, and wringing
their hands at home, not having Bread to eat, or Clothing to put on, when
their Prodigal Husbands, or Fathers are merry enough amidst their Cups, and
Queans, devouring that which should sustain them, but these will prove
bitterness in the latter end, and God will make them vomit up those sweet
morsels they so greedily swallowed; see the Doom of such Offenders, Matthew. 24.
49, etc. Many a poor Labourer that has but from hand to mouth, and with his
work can scarcely maintain his Children with Bread, yet is so addicted to this
bewitching Vice, or so won upon by cursed company, that oft-times he spends in
a day what should maintain his Family a week, and so expose them either to
Begging, Stealing, or Starving, and many spend that in youth, should maintain
them when they are old, sell their Estates, ruin themselves, and if the Parish
make not provision, either Beg or Steal, and often end their days in Prison or
on the Gallows. There are many that fear poverty more than Hell, and think that
the greatest argument against Drunkenness, which yet is to be feared, are like
to have the one in earnest of the other, for neither Poverty, nor Hell can make
them leave this Beastly Sin; God will give such something in hand, and the
Devil will pay them the rest of their wages, and those that keep such men
company get a blot to their own Souls, Prove. 21. 17. Noah got nothing amongst
the luxurious old World, nor Lot, in intemperat Sodom. The Prodigal spent his
Substance with riotous living, Luke 15. 13. and there are many Prodigals in our
age, there are many that like Livius are their own Executors, and may boast as
they did that left their Heirs nothing Praeter Coelum and Coenum, the Air to
breath in, and the Ground to tread upon. Some drink the Cloth off their Backs,
the Money out of their Purses, the Beds whereon they lie, and the Houses
wherein they live. Oh the bottomless Gulf of a devouring Throat! which like the
Horseleech cries give, give, and can never be satisfied, or like Hell that
never says it is enough; these men fall oft-times from Luxury to Beggary, from
Beggary to Thievery, and from thence to the Halter; from the Tavern to Tyburn,
from the Alehouse to the Gallows: I need not give you examples of this kind,
every place is full, yea too full, you cannot open your eyes but you must see
them, and in them foresee what is like to be your condition, if you follow such
courses; like Sins will bring like Judgments. Now therefore if you would avoid
this certain mischief which unavoidably will follow this wicked Vice, the ruin
of your estate, the undoing of your Wife and little Children, exposing them to
those Miseries that Want and Beggary are attended with, if you would not undo
your self, and your Posterity, and bury your Family in the ashes of ignominy:
If you would keep your your self out of Debt and Danger, out of Prisons and
Fetters; if you would not procure the Wrath of God, and force him to cut you
off by some untimely death, or the Curses of a ruined Family; if you would not
procure the grief of your Friends, and the scorn of your Enemies, leave off
these courses betime, and break off your sinful society, which are the Cords of
Vanity with which the Devil draws you on in his service, and by Custom they
will be Cart-ropes to ty you faster to him, and lead you after him to Hell it
self.

Consid. 7. Drunkenness unfits a man for any Calling, Place, or Office in
Church or Commonwealth, for any employment, vocation, or business whatsoever,
for any duty either to God or man, either to our general or particular calling,
and consequently it renders a man an useless, unserviceable, unprofitable
burden of the Earth, and like Salt that has lost its savor, thenceforth good
for nothing but to be trodden under foot, or to be cast off; or like a rotten
member to be cut off and not cherished, lest it infect the other also. The
ancient Romans commanded such should be banished, lest by their ill example
they should infect those that were sound: such as these have a Plaguesore
running upon them, and are not fit for human society; they are Leperous persons
and ought not to come into the Camp amongst the clean. Whatever Calling,
whatever Place, whatever Office they are in; they are still bringing dishonor
to God, and grist to the Devils Mill, when they are put into the Magistracy
they do abundance of mischief. Prove. 29. 2. When the righteous are in authority
the People rejoice, but when the wicked bear rule the People mourn, these men
make sad the hearts of those whom the Lord would not have made sad, and
strengthen the hands of the wicked: for how can they execute Judgment and
Justice when they themselves are void of Reason, or how can they punish
Offenders, when they themselves are chief in the transgression? or, how can
they take Gods part when they themselves are his sworn Enemies? or hinder the
Devils work which they design to promote? Prove. 31. 4. It is not for Kings O
Lemuel to drink Wine, nor Princes Strong Drink, lest they drink and forget the
Law, and pervert the Judgment of the Afflicted. Many crack their Brains with
drinking, as Swine do their Bellies, and are thenceforth good for nothing. But
men are but so much the worse, by how much the better they should be: It was
said of Bonosus the Emperor, that he was born, non ut Vivat sed ut Bibat, Not
to Live but to Drink, and when he was overcome in Drinking by Probus, he hanged
himself, and it was said of him, There hangs a Tankard, not a man. Ephesians. 5. 18,
Be not drunk with Wine wherein is excess, but be ye filled with the Spirit,
intimating all excessive Drinking is downright Drunkenness; those that rule
according to Law, should live according to Law, otherwise they throw down with
the one hand what they build with the other, and do more hurt by their Example
than they do good by their Office: Did you ever see a Swearer, Drunkard, or
Debaucht Fellow, Stockt, Whipped, or punished by a Drunken Magistrate? If the
Devil can get such into Office, he need not fear but his Work will be done: and
as he is unfit for the Magistracy, so for the Ministry, and much more unfit; If
he be not a fit guide for the Body, much less for the Soul, they stray
themselves and therefore are unfit to be others guides. Isa. 28. 7. They have
erred through Wine, and through Strong Drink are gone out of the way, the
Priests and the Prophets have erred through Strong Drink, they are swallowed up
of Wine. Hos. 4. 11. Whoredom, Wine, and new Wine take away the Heart. One Lust
calls upon another, as one Soldier does upon another in Fighting, or as those
did, 2 King. 3. 23. Now therefore Moab to the spoil. Solomon joineth giving the
Heart to Wine, and giving it to folly both together, Eccles. 2. 3. and commonly
those that serve one of these Masters, serve the other also; and this is
thought by some to be the beginning of Solomon's Apostasy. Drunkenness in a
Minister, is no less unseemly than in a Magistrate, and it is severely forbidden
in both; God absolutely forbids any Priest to drink Wine, or Strong Drink in
their approaches, and addresses unto him, Lev. 10. 9. Ezekiel. 44. 21. There are
none more affected than such as those that will be Drunk with them for company,
If they will, says God, Prophesy of Wine and Strong Drink these shall be the
Prophets for them, Mic. 2. 11. yea God complains of such, Isa. 56. 12. Come say
they, we will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with strong Drink, and to
morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. Esa. 56. 12. But a Woe is
pronounced against such, Isa. 28. 1. Woe unto the Crown of Pride, to the
Drunkards of Ephraim, and Christ gives his Disciples a Caution, and doubtless
not without need, and if they needed who does not? Luke 21. 34. Take heed lest
at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeting and Drunkenness, and the
cares of this World, and that day come upon you at unawares. The best of us
have Corruptions within, which if watered with Temptations without, will
produce this as well as other Sins. Tit. 1. 7. A Bishop must be blameless, the
Steward of God, not selfwilled, not soon angry, not given to Wine, etc. And
indeed how is that man fit to rule the Church that cannot rule his own Family,
nay his own appetite? or can he be a guide, that goes himself so far out of the
way? or how can any man void of Reason rule his Children, Servants, or any
under his charge, when he is made a Beast and Drink rules him? Nay, what
calling is that man fit for in this condition? for in every calling there is
some labor or some care, or some thing or other requisite, which a Drunken man
is unfit for. Now if the Devil can get such as these in Office, especially in
the Magistracy or Ministry, (and he will do it if his own wit, or his
Instruments Interest can do it) what a deal of service do they do him? Court
fashions spread themselves over the Country; what an influence had the Kings
of Israel and Judah over the People, as they were wicked, or as they were good,
so reformation, or deformation was promoted: when Rulers themselves are wicked
they are a shelter to impiety, and terror to good works: yea, what Duty either
to God or Man, is a Drunkard fit for? what can he do? can he Pray? Alas he
cannot speak! or at least speak sense or Reason, and suppose he could, How
loathsome do you think such a Prayer would be to God, that is performed, that is
accompanied with belching and vomiting? What will he Pray for? for the Pardon
of that Sin he never intends to leave, and for those Graces he never intends to
act or exercise, or can he hear, or read, or meditate? Alas his condition
suffers it not! His Heart is made sick with Bottles of Wine, Hos. 7. 5. The
like we may say of any Duty, or Office to God or Man, or any Employment for his
own good, and the good of others; therefore I may well say of him, he is an
unuseful and unprofitable Creature, good for nothing but to do just like
Pharaohs lean Kine, that eat up the fat ones; they devour what should keep
others; If therefore now you would not be disabled, for any business, for your
self or others, for any Calling or Business, for any employment in the
Commonwealth; nay, for any Duty to God or Man, in your general or particular
Calling, if you would not be rendered useless, worthless, and unprofitable, if
you would not live merely like a Drone, good for nothing but to devour, to fill
and empty, if you would not live undesired, and die unlamented, take heed of
this Swinish Sin which will certainly thus render you useless.

Consid. 8. As Drunkenness unfits a man to live, so it unfits a man to die, and
Woe to that man that is neither fit to live nor to die, and yet oft-times it
hastens his Death, and puts a Period to his Life; and unhappy is that man whom
the World is weary of; and Heaven disclames. What is said of the Bloody and
deceitful men, may well be said of the Drunkard, He does not live out half his
days. Many of our Gallants, or Roaring-Boys, (as they style themselves) are cut
off in the flower of their age, in the prime of their youth, while their bones
are full of marrow, and when they end their Roaring on Earth, it is to be
feared they sing the second part in Hell: many by Drinking other men's Healths
lose their own, yea oft-times Life and all; a Hellish custom hatched there,
invented by the Devil as a Shooinghorn to Drunkenness, and Excess, and as some
of the Fathers write, A Custom derived from the Pagans and Infidels to us, and
was in use amongst them, and was a Drink Offering Sacrificed on their Knees to
their Dunghil-Deities, to the Devil himself, as part of that Service, Homage,
Worship, Devotion, Fealty they paid to him: and the Devils seem unwilling that
this Ceremony should be left off, or any circumstance thereunto belonging, it
must be upon their Knees, and sometimes attended with the breaking of the
Glasses, burning of their Hats, Coats, or other Garments, etc. What prodigious
madness, Hellish folly is this? and to make the Sacrifice complete, it must be
powdered or salted with horrid Blasphemies, Damnings, and Rammings, as if they
had been in Hell to learn the the exact language of the Devil and the damned;
and it is to be feared, that many drink Healths of Damnation here, that they
shall be pledging in Hell to all eternity: for God is more dishonored, the
Creatures more abused, and devoured, the Devil more obeyed, served, and adored
by this, than almost any other Sin. Their Healths are oft-times made to great
men, whom they adore, making Gods of them, and Beasts of themselves; and hence
many times grow quarrels, strifes, debates, fightings, stabbings, and death it
self: yea, I suppose there are more Drunken quarrels occasioned by their
Healths than by any other thing whatsoever, (Whores excepted:) sometimes they
challenge the Field, sometimes they give each other the lie, and the stab, and
oft-times comes to bloodshed; for when the Drink is in the Wit is out, and the
greatest friends in a moment prove the greatest enemies, and those that even
now professed the greatest amity, suddenly show the greatest enmity, and sheath
their Swords in each others Bowels, as we read, Alexander in his Drink killed
his dear friend Clit us, only for disallowing his profuse Healths, and had he
been suffered would afterward have killed himself; and it was not long before
he and thirty five more of his consorts killed themselves by immoderate
Drinking at one time, and forty of his Companions at another. But we need not
look far for Examples, our own Age, our own Nation, our own Neighborhood
yields us too many: how many of our Gallants, and youthful Gentlemen, within a
few years, and a few miles have caught their death by their excessive Drinking,
and died of Surfeits: almost every Parish, Town, and Hamlet, may afford
examples of some that have come to an untimely end this way, either in their
Drink killing one another, and so come to the Gallows, or breaking their necks,
drowning, burning, scalding, and some such accident, or by Surfets, Feavors,
Gouts, Dropsies, or some dangerous uncurable Disease gotten this way, which
puts a period to their Lives, and Drinking: or that by this means run into
Misery, Danger, Debt, Poverty, and dye on a Dunghill, in a Barn, etc. for want
of sustenance; or end their days in Prison: these and such like are the fruits
and effects of this filthy Sin; this Sin is as one calls it, A flattering
Devil, a sweet Poison, the bane of virtue, the Mother of vice, voluntary
madness, the Author of quarrels, contentions, strife, and debate. The
Drunkard's heart is a fit receptacle for all Vice, for as Frogs live and thrive
in a filthy lake, a stinking ditch where no Fish can abide, so Vices are
nourished here, but no Virtue can live but is poisoned. When the old World
could not overcome Noah, this filthy Sin did; this sets it self against the Law
of God, of Grace, of Nature, and of Nations, it is the grief of Friends, the
scorn of Enemies, the ruin of Families; it opens Hell, and shuts Heaven Gates
against us. The Soul where this filthy Pestiferous weed grows, is like that
which was sowed with Salt, it became baren to every thing that was good. The
Graces of the Spirit of God cannot abide to dwell in such a nasty House, or to
lodge with such a filthy Bedfellow, for as Smoke drives away Bees, so
Drunkenness drives away the Spirit of God, all holy desires, and good
resolutions, and quenches all holy motions, and is as water to the Fire,
extinguishing all hopeful beginnings, it is like the Mare mortuum wherein no
good Fish can live; and therefore if you would not be accessory to your own
death, both of Body and Soul, if you will not run the hazard of a sudden or
violent, or untimely death, or fill your bodies with Surfets, Feavors, Gouts,
Dropsies, etc. by intemperance; take heed in time of this filthy Sin for these
are the natural Products of it, and God does usually witness against it by such
judgments as these.

Consid. 9. Consider the horrible Judgments which God the righteous Judge has
brought upon offenders in this kind. In the time of the Law as we may see,
Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19, 20. God commanded, If a Father had a Son that was a Glutton
or a Drunkard, and upon reproof and correction would not amend, the Father of
that Son should bring him out to the Elders of the City, and they should stone
him: Now if Magistrates are negligent of their Duty, and will not punish this
Sin according to its, demerits and if the Ecclesiastical Courts take little
notice of it, then God is forced to take the Sword in his own hand, and cut off
the putrified member, and though he be slow, yet many times he strikes home,
nay he does not spare his own people, yet he lets them blood as a Physician,
not as an Executioner. As for the other, though he reserves many till the
general Assizes, to have their doom, yet some he hangs up in Chains, that
others may hear, and fear, and do no more so wickedly. Noah though a good man,
and escaping the pollutions of the old World, was after tainted with this Sin;
God suffered him to uncover his nakedness, and to be a laughingstock to his own
Son, who by this means entailed the curse to him and his Posterity, and the
generation then to come had cause to bewail the act. Righteous Lot, whose
righteous Soul was vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked Sodomites,
fell through this Sin to that of Incest, for this seldom goes alone, and became
the Father of the Moabites and Ammonites, two cursed generations, haters of God
and his People, which had he lived to see would have been a further trouble to
him. My intention is not in reciting these examples, to rank them amongst
Drunkards, or confer that odious name upon them; for it is not our bare simple
act deserves, or can fasten such an imputation upon them; A godly man by the
subtilty of Satan's temptations, and the prevalency of corruptions, or
inadvertency, not knowing the nature of Wine (as it may be imagined of Noah, if
not of the other) may fall in the Sin, but there is difference between a Sheep
falling in a foul way, which rises again, shakes himself, and takes better
heed, and a Swine that wittingly, willingly and delightfully wallows in the
mire: A Godly man through imprudence, or want of heed may have a fall, and lose
some degrees of innocence which is great cause of shame and Sorrow, but those
that make it their Trade and daily practice, best deserve the name. But Gods
dealing with others is more severe, Elah the King of Israel drinking himself
Drunk in his Steward's House, was killed by Zimri his own Servant, a sad death,
especially at such a time when he was most unfit to dye; the like had befallen
Nabal in his Drunkenness, had not wise Abigail prevented it, and when he heard
the danger he was in, his heart became as a stone within him, and he died, 1 Samuel 25. 36, etc. Amnon one of holy David's ungracious Sons, who before had
ravished his Sister Tamar, and when his heart was merry with Wine, was slain by
the Command of his Brother Absalon, 2 Samuel 13. 28. Benhadad and the thirty two
Kings that were with him being all Drunk, a sad example to their Servants, had
his mighty Army defeated by a handful of Ahabs men, and hardly escaped with his
life. Belshazzer carousing Wine with his Wives and Concubines in the Vessels of
the Temple, had the Handwriting sent by God upon the Wall, which foretold his
ruin and destruction, which suddenly fell out accordingly. Holofernes in his
Drink was killed by Judeth, and should we examine the Records of all ages, you
may find God's terrible hand stretched out against men of this profession; some
have grown so audacious as to drink Healths to the Devil himself, such a beast,
or rather Monster was Pope John the twelfth, or as some reckon the thirteenth.
A Lincolnshire man drinking a Health to the Devil fell down dead in the place;
three more in Germany for the like offense were all found dead the next
morning. In Almain in the year 1580, one drinking a Health to God, stretching
his hand toward Heaven, with a cup of Wine, was dead in that posture, neither
by strength could be removed, the other by the people was hanged on Gibbets
before the door. I have heard also of some struck suddenly dead in the very
act, some drowned, some scalded to death, some choked with the Drink, some
broke their necks, some lying in the way were slain by Carts, some in their
Drink murdered their Parents, many that have caught surfets and died upon
them, he that would read more examples of this nature, may find them in Beard's
Theater of Gods Judgments, and in Mr. Clearks Treatise upon the same subject,
but the experience of our own times may spare us that labor; for who is so
great a stranger in the neighborhood he lives in, but may add examples of this
nature? how often do we hear and see men struck dead in the very act, or suddenly
after with Surfeits, or otherwise were it but convenient, the time, the place,
the persons names might be produced; and no man of discretion that takes any
notice of Gods dealings in the world, but may add some experience which shows
Gods hatred of this detestable Vice, for I think he has not more eminently
appeared against any Sin except it be against Atheism, Blasphemy, Adultery, or
Persecution of the power of Godliness, than against this; If therefore you
would not be guilty of your own death, and become the object of Gods infinite
hatred, and dreadful Judgments: If you would not run violently upon your own
destruction, and force God to cut you off as an unprofitable unuseful member,
beware of this Sin, for doubtless it is the ready way to temporal and eternal
death; and if death arrest you by such a Sergeant as this, your case is
lamentable.

Consid. 10. But the greatest danger is yet behind, and that is the loss of the
Soul, which is ten thousand times greater than the loss of life, Skin for skin,
and all that a man has will he give for his life; yet the Soul is in more
danger than it, and where this Sin is predominant, it is a sad sign of an
ungracious heart, and that the wrath of God hangs over their heads, God
pronounces woe to such, and who then can speak peace, Woe to the Crown of Pride
the Drunkards of Ephraim: Woe to those that rise early to drink strong drink,
and continue till night, till Wine inflame them. Woe to those that are mighty to
drink Wine, and men of strength to mingle strong Drink. Woe to him that gives
his neighbor drink, and puts the Bottle to him, and makes him drunk. Does
God speak in earnest or in jest? or can he, or will he make good his
threatenings? If so, what a woeful condition are Drunkards in? it is for this Sin
that Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure, Isa. 5.
14. These are the men Whose end is destruction, whose God is their Belly, whose
glory is their shame, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19. They Sacrifice to
nothing else but the Creature, Thus says the Lord to such, drink and be
drunken, and spew, and fall and never rise again, this is spoken to those that
make it their business to drink, and make others drunk also, Jer. 25. 27. These
are plying the Devils work, and he is preparing them their wages, which he will
pay them at the day. Those that now so profusely spend and wast Gods good
Creatures given by him for an higher end, the time is coming, and will not be
long, if Repentance prevent not, they will not be able to purchase one drop of
water to cool their tongues: Remember this all ye that forget God lest he tear
you in pieces when there is none to deliver. Without Repentance Hell will be
your portion, and the place of your habitation, and endless, easeless, and
remediless Torments are the wages which the Devil pays to his miserable
Servants, for their most faithful service: see the doom of your elder Brother,
Matthew. 24. 49. etc. that neglecting the duty God required at his hands, to give
his fellowservants meat in due season, and doing the work the Devil enjoined
him, in beating them, and eating and drinking with the Drunkards, He was cut in
sunder, and his portion appointed him with Hypocrites; and that unfaithful
unprofitable Servant, that hid his Talent in the earth was cast out into utter
darkness where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 25. 30. and if
only those shall have the sentence of absolution at the last day, that have fed
the hungry, clothed the naked, relieved the stranger, etc. Mat. 25. 34, etc.
What will become of you that spend the poor's part, yea and pluck the very meat
from the mouths of your Wives and Children, and make many others want meat by
your extravagancies: you know not but some may this day be in Hell, tormented
in those flames, for those very Sins which you occasioned them to commit and no
doubt many more will be, which may be a sad reflection upon your own heart. If
God should give you repentance, this may be a Corasive to you, you help to
destroy men, but cannot give repentance; but if you repent not, the blood of
their souls will be required at your hand; and did you know the price of this
blood you would beware. The time is coming a separation will be made between
the precious and the vile; and though the Wheat and the Tares grow together,
ere long they shall be separated; the wheat shall be gathered into barns, but
the tares shall be bundled up; Swearers with Swearers and Drunkards with
Drunkards, and burnt with unquenchable fire. Drunkenness is compared by some to
Chain-shot, it sends men to Hell by clusters; some other sins to single
Bullets, that kills but one at once. There are many that have knowledge enough
in other things, and yet know not the way to Heaven; they can search Natures
Garden from end to end, but cannot search their own hearts: they are well
skilled abroad, strangers at home. They are like the Lamiae, a sort of Witches
that were blind at home, quick-sighted abroad. They are skilled in all Courts
but the Court of Conscience, but let them have never so much knowledge, they
are really fools, to sell their souls to Satan for so low a value as a
belly-full of Ale. They are worse than Esau, that sold his birthright for a
Mess of Pottage; or a King I have read of, that lost his Kingdom for a Draught
of Water. Can we imagine those are Christians, that cannot deny themselves in a
Cup of Drink, when they have enough before. The first Lesson in Christ's School
is Self-denial, and if we deny not, forsake not Father, Mother, Wife, and
Children, yea hate all and our own lives, we cannot be his Disciple. Can those
men lay down their lives for Christ, that cannot deny their sensual Appetite?
Was it ever known that a Debaucht Drunkard ever suffered for him? As Drink
increases their Thirst, and the more they drink the more they may; so
Drunkenness increases Hellfire like Oil, which will never be quenched. The
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life; Romans 6. 23. Nay God
tells us as plain as he can speak, that a Drunkard shall not go to Heaven, 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom
of God; be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers,
nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor
Covetous, nor Drunkards; nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God. Gal. 10. 19, 20, 21. Now the works of the flesh are manifest,
which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Heresy,
Envying, Murder, Drunkenness, Revilings, and such like; of the which I tell
you before, as I have also told you in times past, that they which do such
things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And I fear that most Drunkards
are guilty of many of these: What now can you say for your selves, why this is
not your portion? Do you think God is not just, will he speak one thing and do
another; or is he not able to do as he says; and that you shall go to Heaven
notwithstanding? See what God says to such, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, etc. He that hears
the words of this Curse, and blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall
have peace though I walk in the stubborness of my heart, adding Drunkenness to
Thirst, the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man;
and all the Curses that are written in this Book shall lite upon him; and God
shall blot out his name from under heaven. However great Offenders in this life
may escape temporal judgments, yet spiritual judgments, which are far more
dangerous, seize upon them; blindness of mind, hardness of heart, searedness of
conscience, a reprobate sense, strong delusions, etc. and eternal judgments dog
them at the heels; the Devil that now sets them on work, takes notice of their
work, that he may not be behind with them with their wages: but what this wages
is, the tongue of men nor angels cannot fully describe; for though the torments
themselves are exquisite, yet the duration is an aggravation: though the pain
of loss be inexpressible, and the pain of sense be insupportable, yet Eternity
is unimaginable; and though the pain of sense be ten thousand times beyond our
conceiving, yet the perpetuity of it will be the greatest torment; and the word
Never will be a Hell in the midst of Hell. If the Drunkard were to suffer but a
thousand years in Hell, for every Cup of Drink he has drunk above measure (and
this would be dear-bought pleasure) yet were there hopes an end would come: Ah!
but what is this to Eternity? Oh Eternity, Eternity, how shall we conceive of
thee, how shall we number thee? If this be the Drunkards portion, we may well
say as the Holy Ghost does, Woe to them. Job. 10. 50. If I be wicked woe to me.
If the aching of the head, says one, came before the Drinking of the Wine,
which usually follows it, there would be few Drunkards. But I think we may well
say, If but one hour the pains of Hell were felt by them, it would make them
sober all their life. If now you would not lose the use of Reason, and be
transformed into a Beast, if you would not bring upon your Body Deformities
without, and Infirmities within, if you would not bring reproaches upon your
self, and bury your good name in obloquy, if you would not debauch your soul
and incline it to all manner of wickedness; if you would be preserved from that
filthy sin of Adultery, to which this inclines you; if you would not waste your
Estate, ruin your Family, undo your Wife and Children, and bring them to
beggary; if you would not unfit your self for any calling and Employment, or
any Duty to God or Man; if you would not by intemperance hasten your own death,
and set a period to your life; if you would not bring the horrible judgments of
God upon you, and force him to cut you off in the midst of your days; and if
you would not lose your Soul, and suffer the vengeance of Eternal Fire; take
heed of this filthy, beastly sin of Drunkenness, which carries all those evils
and many more in the belly of it.

Thus you see what Charge I have drawn up against this sin of Drunkenness, and
much more may be said; for it is a fearful Mother, and most sins are bred in the
Womb of it, or fed or fostered by it; for in sin almost nothing can be named
but Drunkenness does patronize it, and excites men to the practice of it: I do
not hereby intend or mean that all that are addicted to it, are guilty of all
other villainy; some perhaps never blasphemed or murdered, yet this in others
is the cause of blasphemy and murder; neither do I mean that all that ever
were overtaken with Drink, that they are thus to be termed: A Godly Man may
have his slips, though this is rare; but there is a difference between a Sheep
and a Swine, as I said; the one falls into the Mire unwillingly, the other
wallows in it; so here some are surprised unawares as it is conceived Noah was.
These by repentance wash away their spot, and others seek occasions, and are
not well till they find them. And now though I have done with Drunkenness in
the general, yet have I not done with you in particular, for I conceive your
sin admits of many aggravations, which some other men's sins do not; and that is
worse in you then in them: some of those I shall draw up against you, that if
possible I may shame you out of it; for though this sin by some is compared to
Hell; few fall into it that recover; and by some to the Gout incurable; yet I
having known some have recovered, I am not out of hope. The aggravations are
these:

Aggra. 1. Consider your Education, which was Civil, nay, not only Civil but
Religious, you are extracted from those that were Ancicient professors, trained
up in Family Duties, Prayer and Praise; the Word of God was read in the Family,
and many a prayer put up with you and for you, you were dedicated to God in
your Baptismal Vow, which since you owned and were listed into his company; and
shall all this be lost upon you: it had been better then for you that you had
had Turks or Pagans for your Parents. Many an Exhortation and loving Admonition
you have had; the danger of sinful courses you have been told; you have had
examples and presidents of a Holy Life before you, and some of the contrary,
and you have seen the difference: The Family you live in, has been a House of
Prayer; and will you now make it a Cage of unclean Birds? You have been warned
of the Devils Temptations, and the Worlds Allurements; you have seen the
difference between those that have resisted them, and those that yielded to
them. Consider in whether of their cases you would rather be when death calls
you; and whether a day spen in Prayer, or a day spent in an Alehouse, will then
bring most comfort; you have lived under the powerful means of Grace all your
days, and heard thousands of Sermons, besides other Ordinances, and are all
those lost: Remember what Christ says of Chorazin and Bethsaida, and
Capernaum; It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, or Sodom and
Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, than for them. A fruitless Tree in the
Vineyard, is more in danger than if it grew in the Desert: Others may say I
never knew the danger of such a course, my Parents rather encouraged me then
otherwise; but what can you say, or what excuse can you make.

Aggra. 2. The many Convictions which you had upon your Spirit, will witness
against you that yours is not a sin of ignorance, but against knowledge and
conscience, and those sins as they make the greatest gashes in the Soul, so
they will make the greatest noise in the Conscience; those that sin ignorantly
are to be pitied, but those that sin wilfully deserve to be punished: He that
know not his Masters will, and does things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten
with few stripes; but he that knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be
beaten with many. Some ignorant Souls may persuade themselves that Drinking and
Swilling is the chiefest happiness, but I dare appeal to your Consciences in
cool blood, whether you do not know to the contrary; you have been better
instructed, and and doubtless have felt a better relish in something else; God
has sent you into his Vineyard to work, and will you leave your work before
the evening, when the time of receiving your wages comes; you have been planted
in the Vineyard, hedged about with Gods providence, watered with the Dew of
Heaven, and he has expected fruit year by year, and will you still be barren,
or worse than barren; will you bring forth wild Grapes, Grapes of Sodom, whose
clusters are bitter; what could he have done for his Vineyard that he has not
done for us? Well ere long he will pluck up his hedge, and take away his fence;
he will lay by his Basket and take up his Axe; he will bid cut him down, why
cumbreth he the ground. Lucifers punishment shall be greater, because he was an
Angel; and Julians, because he was a Christian; and Judas, because he was a
Disciple; and Capernaum, Corazin, and Bethsaida, because they enjoyed the means
which others wanted. If you have knowledge in the head and not grace in the
heart, you will carry your own Mittimus to prison with you; or like Vriah,
Letters to cut your own Throat: you sin with a Candle in your hand, when others
ignorance may excuse them, a tanto, though not a toto: your knowledge will
increase your guilt and heighten your torments.

Aggra. 3. Nay, you your self have made a profession of Religion and owned your
Baptismal Vow; you have held out a Lamp in your hand, but it is to be feared
have no Oil in your Vessel, the want of which now makes your Lamp shine so dim,
and you to walk in darkness; you performed many duties, and put up many
prayers, and made many promises to God and Man of your Reformation. Oh let it
not be to tell the World how far a Hipocrite may go and fall short of Heaven;
and let them know, whatever you said you meant nothing less: With what face can
you ever call God Father, or ever beg for mercy at his hands, thus to use him;
or beg power against sin, when you mind nothing less than a Reformation. Are
you inded willing to lose all the pains that ere you have taken in Heavens way,
now you have born the burden and heat of the day, and for ought you know, the
time of your receiving reward is at hand. Many a day and many an hour you have
spent in Prayer, Humiliation, Hearing, Reading, Christian Conference,
Meditation and such like Duties; and will you now outrun and lose them all:
Shall all your Petitions be lost, as foolish Boys lose their Arrows, shoot
them, and then mind them no more: If a Righteous Man turn from his
Righteousness, he shall die in his sin; Ezekiel. 3. 20. all his Righteousness,
shall not be remembered. Is the way of Holiness too severe, or will heaven be
had upon easier terms; or were the Godly from the beginning of the world all
deceived, which took Holiness to be the only way to Happiness; and is there a
nearer way found out than they dreamed of; and was Christ himself deceived that
told us the way was narrow, and the gate strait that led to Life, and few there
be that find it; or was the Holy Ghost mistaken when he said, Drunkards,
Whoremasters, Swearers, etc. should never enter Heaven: Or can you imagine you
may dance with the Devil all day, and sup with Christ at night; or do the
Devils work and receive Christ's wages; or are you willing to take up with the
Hypocrites a portion; or do you love your company so well, that you will go to
Hell for company: you carry your own condemnation with you. If Religion be not
good, why did you profess it; if it be, why do you not practice it? Or does
Religion teach you such courses? I know some will be apt to charge Religion
with it from your practice; and say, see what your professors are, they will be
drunk as well as others; but the Apostle tells us, Titus 2. 12. That the grace
of God, that brings Salvation, teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Have
you found out a better master, better work, and better wages, it is well; but
praise in the parting. The world hates you because of your profession, and will
you make God hate you for your Hypocrisy? Would you reconcile God and the
World, it will never be; or would you have your good things both here and
hereafter? You will find the mistake, you must renounce the one or the other;
Heaven will not be had in a Vicious Course of Life.

Aggra. 4. This course of life in you, that have been a professor of Religion,
is exceeding injurious both to God and man; if you never had pretended better,
none would have expected better at your hands: but to be wounded in the house
of our friend, to have one with whom we took sweet counsel together, and walked
to the house of God in company; he lift up the heel against us: this would
trouble a David himself. The former hopes you gave us, the noise you made in
the world of more than ordinary sanctity, is an aggravation to your crime: the
higher men clime, the greater will be their fall. How does this make sad the
hearts of those that the Lord would not make sad, and strengthen the hands of
the wicked. If Israel play the harlot, says God, yet let not Judah offend; you
did run well, who hindered you, you began well and you end ill; you began in the
spirit, and will you end in the flesh: What a blow will this be to Religion,
when the chief prop in such a family shall not only break, but like an Egyptian
Reed, run into our hands. What a discouragement is it to an Army, when a chief
champion not only turns his back, but revolts to the enemy? What a dishonor is
this to God, to leave his service and serve his greatest enemy. How will the
enemy in sult, Lo (says they) you see what a master they serve, for all their
brags, they are soon weary of his service. David's sin caused Gods enemies to
blaspheme, and for that cause God told him The Sword should never depart from
his house. How does this sadden the hearts of the godly, and fill their faces
with shame? How is Religion loaded with aspersions, as if there were no real
difference between the godly and the wicked? These, say they are your
professors, they will take their cups as well as others. Poor doubting Christians
are discouraged, and think they shall never hold out, when such Cedars are
shaken, and such Champions foiled. Others are encouraged in their sin, and are
apt to say, let them have their fling, they will come bank again to us ere
long. What account will you give of this to God at last, what iniquity have you
found in him, that you are departed from him? Is there any thing in religion
that causes you to forsake it, or has God ever given you any cause? Testify
against him, has he been a barren wilderness to you? Is there more real worth
in your pot companions, which have wrought your ruin if God prevent not, both
of Body and Soul; than is in the communion of Saints? and had you rather be
hearing swearing, cursing, and blaspheming than prayers, or praises unto God?
Consider the Blood of your own Soul, and the Soul of your Children and
Servants, that are like to be undone by your example; and of many others that
are either hardened in their sins, or discouraged in their duties, will be laid
at your door: Consider the price of this Blood, before you are too lavish of
it; one Soul is worth a world, and do not sell it for pots of Ale.

Aggra. 5. The many Covenants, Promises, Vows, and Engagements, which you have
made to God for better Obedience, and the many Promises and Engagements which
you have made to Ministers and other Christians, and which you have so often
broke, are no small Aggravation to your sin; so that you cannot commit this sin
at so cheap a rate as some others may: It Is better not to vow, then to vow and
not preform. In your Baptismal Vow, which you have since owned and ratified,
you were dedicated up to God, and devoted to his service; and it is sacrilege
to divert things dedicated up to God to profane uses: You then received
Press-money, and listed your self into Christ's Company, and promised to fight
under his Banner; and that his Enemies should be your Enemies, and you would
maintain War while you lived against sin, the World, and the Devil; and he
promised, you so doing, you should have what ever was necessary here, and
Heaven it self for a reward; and to this Covenant you have often set your other
Seal in the Sacrament, and will you after all these Vows and Covenants to God,
and Promises to Men, treacherously and perfidiously revolt, change sides, and
join with the Devil, Gods sworn enemy; and that to fight against him, his cause
and people, and the power of godliness, which you did profess. What cause has
God given you to do thus? Testify against him, was he ever worse than his word
to you, nay, he was before-ahand with his promise; he gave you a better
portition in the world than thousands of your brethren; you may eat the fat,
and drink the sweet, when others must moil and toil and cark and care, and all
little enough to prevent poverty: All that you have is from him; he gave you
limbs, when others are lame; sight, when others are blind; health, when others
are sick; liberty, when others are imprisoned; you have the use of reason.,
when others run raging in the streets; yea, you have your life and breath and
all from him, and how dare you then provoke him; you have not only mercies for
this life, but for the life to come offered also; the means of Grace, the
tenders of Mercy, Christ and Heaven, and Glory; and for which of all these good
things do you hate God, and leave his service? Can the Devil or your
Pot-companions better reward you? Can they defend you from the dreadful
judgments of a sin revenging God; can they secure you under the shadow of their
wings? If not, how dare you provoke this God? Are you stronger than he, if not,
why do you take up weapons of defense against him? Was there ever any hardened
himself against God and prospered? God will avenge the quarrel of his Covenant;
and where are you then? Do you know what it is to be an enemy unto God, or to
have God to be an enemy unto you; if you did, it might send you trembling to
your Grave; if you are his enemy, and his enemy you are while you serve the
Devil, for his servants you are to whom you obey; you may expect he should deal
with you as with an enemy, and then what evr judgments you have heard, or read
of, either threatened against, or executed upon any graceless wretch; you are
not sure but, nay, you may expect that it may be your portion: and how ever, he
may suffer you here to fill up the measure of your iniquity, yet he will pay
you home, full measure and running over. It Is better for you to have all the
Men on Earth, and all the Devils in Hell against you than God; you are but a
worm, and if he tread upon you, he leaves you dead behind him; if he withold
your breath, you return to the dust, and all your thoughts perish; there is no
struggling out of his hand: Woe to him that striveth with his master, let the
potsheard strive with the potsheard of the earth, Isaiah 45. 9. You can get
nothing by this contention.

Aggra. 6. This Carriage and Demeaning of yours, how ever it may for a time
seem pleasing to your self, is yet offensive to God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and it is the grief of all good men that know it; to your friends and
relations, and all that fear God: that God takes it to heart, you may find by
his often complaint of and expostalations with the Children of Israel in their
revolts; you may find in three parables in Luke 15. of the lost Sheep, the lost
groat, and the prodigal Son. It was he that lost the Sheep, and seeks till he
finds it, and then receives; he is the Father of the prodigal Son, and his
prodigality was his trouble; as may easily appear by his rejoicing at his
return: yea, Christ tells us there is joy in the presence of the Angels, when a
sinner returns; and if there could be sorrow in Heaven, sure it would be at
their revolting back: the resisting the motions of Gods Spirit, is called a
grieving of, or a quenching of it; and if each Saint have his Guardian Angel,
as some imagine, and it may seem probable; for they are guarded by the Angels:
we may imagine they rejoice when we do well, and as far as they are capable,
are troubled at our falls and slips: and what sorrow and sadness, also must
this be to your relations, put your self into their condition; how sad would it
be to you, to have a Child, the only hope of the Family, to ruin himself and
his posterity; to have a young fellow take such extravagant courses, to have a
Brother or a Sister thus debaucht; what grief is it to a Godly Minister, that
traveled in Birth till he thought Christ had been formed in you, and then
suddenly see all his hopes dashed, all his exhortations, admonitions, reproofs,
prayers, etc. lost upon you; how may it trouble and shame him that ever you
were of his society: your Christian Friends, and those of your society, how may
it trouble them, that you are gone from them, and with Demas have chosen the
World before Christ; to think what will become of you, and of your Family, and
of your poor Soul, when death shall separate it from your Body, and where you
will stop that are running down the hill so fast, and whether of a professor
you may not as others have done, turn persecutor; for those that forsake God,
no wonder if they forsake their Friends also, and those that hate God will hate
his Image also. I wish this be no more than my own surmise and fears: In a
word, There are none that carry the face of honest men, but will be troubled at
this your Apostasy; and there are none but the Devil and his Instruments, your
Pot-Companions and Brethren in Iniquity, that will rejoice that you are brought
back again into the Devils slavery: These are the Dalilah's that hugg you in
their bosom while they betray you; these are the Sirens, that by their Song
intend to wrack and ruin you: and if you think this is your only way to
happiness, ere long you will find your mistake and your judgment will alter.

Aggra. 7. In this course of life you lead, the loss of your precious time
which is given you for an higher end, is no small aggravation to your fall; for
though you meet with other considerable losses by this extravagant course of
yours, yet no temporal loss is comparable to this: this cannot be redeemed with
Silver nor Gold, Jems, nor Jewels; nay if the World were sold to its worth, it
could not call back one day that is past; and yet alas how prodigal are many
of their time, as if they knew not how to waste it fast enough; they drink and
play and rail it away; nay go purposely to drive away time: that did they but
know the value of it, would prize it at a higher rate; but the time is coming
you will know the worth of it by the want of it. God has placed you in his
Vineyard, given you work to do, and sufficient time to do it in; if you idle
away this time, and your work be undone, what wages do you expect: Amongst
other Talents he has given you this Talent of time; if either you not use it
or abuse it, what can you expect but the doom of the unprofitable servant that
hid his Talent in the Earth. You have a little time in the World to spend, and
it is but a little; and one of these days they will say of you, He is dead also;
for you see younger and stronger are gone before you, and your turn may be
next; how as you spend this time, so it will fare with you to eternity. This is
the Harvest of the Soul, if you lay not in provision for the Winter with the
Be, you are like to want with the Grasshopper: this is the market day to lay
in provision for the following week, and to buy Oil; if this season be let
slip, the door will be shut against you, and we know not how soon this day may
be over, which will never dawn again: you have a great deal of work to do, and
work of great concernment; if it be not finished in the time, you are undone;
you are in a race, and your Soul is the prize you run for; and will you either
stand still or run back: you are in the field fighting with cruel blood-thirsty
enemies, who will make no truce with you but upon more unreasonable terms than
Nahash the Ammonite offered to the men of Jabesh Gilead, Which was to thrust
out all their right eyes, and lay it as a reproach on all Israel, 1 Samuel 11. 2.
But the Devil will make no truce, but the everlasting destruction of Soul and
Body: And will you cast by your Armor, and yield to his mercy; and revolt from
him that will warrant you the Victory, if you will but keep the field: you are
in a journey on life and death, and will you now turn back, or run after
Butterflies, when the Sun grows low and you have far to go; when you must be
sure to tread these weary steps back again, or lose your life: Much of your
time is already spent, and your work undone, and what you have done you are
again plucking down, and making your work every day more and harder. Consider
you will repent or not repent, If you do not repent you are undone; for no
unrepenting sinner shall come to Heaven; if you do repent it will cost you more
pains, dolor, trouble and grief, than ever the pleasure of your sin was worth;
you must vomit up all those sweet morsels which you have swallowed with so much
delight. Eternity lies before you, and one of these days Death will open the
door and let you in. What apprehensions then will you have of these courses,
when you see an infinite Ocean of eternity before you, and all your friends and
pleasures departing from you and forsaking you: Now what good will your merry
company do you, what comfort can they bring, where are now your merry meetings,
and your drunken revels? Will the thoughts of them cheer up your hearts, those
that were your Counselors and Consorts in your Vanity, now will be your
Companions in your Misery. Those for whose sakes you lost your Soul, your God,
your Glory, what will they, what can they do for you if you miscarry together:
you will curse the time that ever you saw each others faces, and those that now
give such big words against God and Godliness, will then call upon the
Mountains to fall upon them, and the Hills to cover them: Well such a day will
come, and we know not whether you have a day to live, or what may be in the
womb of the next morning: Our Savior Christ advises to prepare for it; Luke
21. 34, 35. And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so
that day come upon you unawares; for as a snare shall it come on all them than
dwell on the face of the whole earth. How dare you spend a day in an Alehouse,
that do not know if you have another to live: But as the Poet says, Fleres si
scires unum tua tempora mensem, rides cum non sit forsitan una dies. Many a man
would weep and mourn, if he knew he had but a month to live, that now laughs
and rejoices and has but a day to live. This time which now you so lavishly
spend, neither in your general nor particular calling, must be accounted for;
and what the price will be God only knows: and at death, whether do you think
the time spent in Humilation, Prayer, Hearing, Reading, Meditating, Christian
Conference; Exhorting the Careless, instructing the Ignorant, comforting the
Dejected, visiting the Sick, relieving the Poor; and generally in Acts of Piety
and Charity; will bring most comfort: or the time spent in Drinking and
Drabbing, in Hawking, Hunting, Carding, Diceing, Cocking, Playing, or such like
Vanities? I know not what your thoughts be now, but I know what they will be
hereafter; God has allowed us no time to spend idly, but all should be spent,
either in our general or particular Calling; or that which may enable us
thereunto: but there are many that can spare no time from their Recreations,
either for the one or the other; but time will be better valued.

Aggra. 8. By your accustoming your self to this filthy sin, you are grown more
bold and impudent in it; it has almost, if not altogether, taken away the
conscience of sin: you are almost come to that pass as those that God
complained of, Jer. 6. 15. Were they ashamed when they committed abomination?
Nay, they were not ashamed, neither could they blush; therefore they shall fall
amongst them that fall, etc. Is not this your condition? Nay, do you not rather
boast of it? And indeed this sin is grown very brazen faced in our days; the
time was when, They that slept, slept in the night; and those that were drunk,
were drunk in the night. This sin was a work of darkness, and like the Owl, was
ashamed to be seen by day; but now it fears no colors, men are not ashamed to
be seen reeling in the streets, or vomiting in the Marketplace, or dead-drunk
at noonday, or swearing in the Magistrates presence; such a height of Impiety
men are arrived at: but there was some hopes when sin was driven into corners,
but there is little when it dares Authority and beards the Magistrate himself.
By often sinning men come to be past feeling; like a Workman's hand, by much
labor is hardened. Conscience when it is often checked and snub'd, at last
leaves checking; and the Devil sears it with his hot iron, that it becomes
unsensible; but at last it will speak, and will not hold its peace: the Devil
at last makes a pathway over the heart, and so all the seed is lost that falls
upon this Highway ground; and men become Sermon proof, and Ordinance proof:
they can sit still and have Hellfire flasht in their faces, and not regard it.
What God speaks of the Leviathan, Job 4. 24 is true of them, in another sense;
Their heart is as firm as a stone, yea as hard as a piece of the nether
millstone. The Acts of sin increase the habit, and at last it becomes as
natural to them to sin as to live; and they draw in iniquity as they draw in
their breath: they commit sin as easily as water runs down the Channel. Custom
breeds a second nature, of such does God speak, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots; then may ye also do good, which are
accustomed to do evil. Some vainly promise themselves repentance hereafter, but
their deceitful heart puts a cheat upon them; there is not one of many that
send repentance thus before them, that ever overtake it. Those that have long
accustomed themselves to sin, and those that have long enjoyed the means of
grace, and are grown Sermon proof; and those that have made Profession of
Religion, and fallen back, it is a rare thing to see them prove true Converts. How
much of this concerns you, let your own Conscience judge; I do not say God will
not receive such when they do come, but I have not observed many such willing
to come.

Aggra. 9. By this sinful course of yours, you also disable your self for doing
that good in the place which God requires at your hands, and otherwise you
might do, either to the souls or bodies of others: for the soul you have a
great deal of knowledge, and might have been very instrumental of doing good in
your place, either by admonition, exhortation, reproof, counsel, comfort, or
such like; but you have made your self incapable almost of doing any good this
way, by your bad example: Who will think you are in earnest, when your actions
give your tongue the lie? Who will not think you do not believe your own words?
Do not you throw down with the one hand what you build with the other? Who can
think that you believe there is indeed such a deformity in sin, and such a
beauty in holiness, that observes your life and conversation? How can you say
to your Brother, Let me pluck out the mote out of thy eye, when you have a beam
in your own? Will not he quickly say, Physician heal thy self: Qui alterum
incusat probri ipsum se intueri oportet. He is an unfit reprover, that is
guilty of the objected crime. And for the Body you likewise disable your self
for doing that good that God requires, and which otherwise you might do. God
has given you a competent estate, whereby you may be helpful to those that
want; he gave it to this end, to feed the hungry and cloth the naked; to be
ready to do good, willing to distribute, and to be rich in good works. Think
not that you are the chief Proprietor, you are but a Steward, and must give an
account; you may not do as you will with what you call your own: but if you
dispose of your Estate according to the mind of God, he will give you
sufficient wages. But by this your extravagant courses and excessive spending,
you waste not only your own part, but Gods part also; which he has reserved
for the poor. All men are his servants, and what they have are but talents
lent; to some five, to some two, and to others one; and where much is given,
much will be required. The great Householder provides meat for all his Family,
but he keeps Stewards under him, to see they shall not want; and to give them
their meat in due season: and you are one of these. If now you beat your fellow
servants, and eat and drink with the drunken, your Lord will come when you are
not aware, and give you your portion with hypocrites; Mat. 24. 49, etc. The
poor have a right to what you enjoy and can spare, and though they cannot
challenge it and take it, yet God will vindicate their cause if it be denied or
withheld. How much might you promote Religion and Gods interest in your
neighborhood, were your life and conversation exemplary? But now you do more
harm than good by your example, and it had been better the Country had not
known you; and that you had never known your Estate, if you thus proceed.

Aggrav. 10. The Excessive wasting of your Estate, is no doubt a great sin in
you at any time; but at this time of scarcity especially, is a very great
Aggravation. When there is complaining in our streets, and the Children cry for
bread; when there is none to break it, and many poor Families are ready to
perish for want; and a supply can hardly be found: When Corn has been at such
an excessive rate, 8 and 9 Shillings the measure. Eye the many poor Householders
that before made a handsome shift to live, are now forced to beg with their
Wives and Families; and some it is believed have perished for want of Bread. Now
at this time, when the hand of God is so evidently stretched out against us,
that you and such as you, if you were unconcerned, should thus waste and devour
the good creatures wilfully; which should keep poor Christians; and one of you
swallow down more in one day, than would keep a considerable Family with Bread
a week. Will not the Lord visit for these things; and will not his soul be
avenged on such a people as this? The great Householder has provided bread
enough for all his Family, but that some of them by Gluttony and Drunkenness
devour what the others should eat. Will he not call them to an account at last?
See how he likes of it, Isa. 22. 12, 13. In that day did the Lord call for
weeping and for mourning, and to baldness and girding with sackcloth; and
behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, etc. and it was
revealed in my ear by the Lord of hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be
purged from you till you die. God also threatens those, That they shall go
captives with the first that go, that drink wine in Bowls and anoint
themselves with chief ointment, and forget the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6.
6, 7. And the blood of those which have perished for want of those creatures
which you have wilfully wasted, God will lay at your door. In a word, consider
your pious Education, your former holy Conversation, the Convictions upon your
spirit; knowing and acknowledging your courses bad: The profession of Religion
you have made, the encouragements which you gave, the sading of the hearts of
the Godly, the strengthening the hands of the wicked, the vows and covenants
you have made to God, and promises to men; the grief you bring your friends and
relations, the hardening of your heart by custom, the disabling your self to do
good to soul or body; and the wilful wasteing of the creatures in this time of
need; will all rise up in judgment against you.

Obj. 1. But it may be you will object and say, You do not drink to
Drunkenness, you can carry it away well enough; you stagger not over it,
neither do you vomit as others do: And though I fear this excuse cannot always
be pleaded, yet if it were taken for granted, it is but a Fig-leaf to cover your
nakedness, and will prove too thin and short. A Man may drink to excess that
can carry it away as you say. We read of Benhadad, whom God himself tells us
was drinking himself drunk with the thirty two Kings that were with him; and
yet could give directions to his Soldiers: yea, escaped away on Horseback
with his Army. The trial of Drunkenness which we have amongst many, is not the
same with Gods: many think that Man is not drunk that can crawl out of the
Carts way, or rise himself out of the Fire, or hit Fingers with another; but
they are not competent Judges in that case, that are themselves so nearly
concerned. It Is not only Drunkenness that trips up a Man's heels, that he cannot
go nor stand, but when a Man over-affects Drink, or spends too much time, or
too much money; or wastes the good creatures needlessly; that drinks too much
for his purse, or too much for his health, or too much for his reason: For a
Man has no more reason to drown his time, to drown his estate, or his credit,
than he has to drown his wit; for all these are Talents for which he must be
accountable. But suppose you are stronger than others, and can drink more; is
this therefore a Warrant so to do; see whether God seals it or no: Isaiah 5.
22. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of strength to mingle
Strong Drink. Must God be dishonored, the Creature abused, because thou have a
stronger brain; it is pity mercies should be so abused: but besides this guilt,
are you not in the mean time guilty of the Drunkenness of others; have you not
forced them to it, that you may laugh at their folly? See then what the Lord
says to you; Hab. 2. 15, 16. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor Drink, that
put thy Bottle to him, and make him drunken also; that thou may look on
their nakedness: Thou art filled with shame for glory: drink thou also, and let
thy foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned
unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy glory. Now if you glory in your
strength to drink, and this too common; consider this Text, and see what will
be the issue: The Cup of Gods Indignation will be such as you cannot bear; thy
own sins are great enough, you need not other men's.

Obj. 2. Perhaps you will say, We have the Examples of many, yea, many great
Men, and many learned Men, and of some good Men also, for our imitations: Yea,
this Disease is Epidemical and grown common, both in Court and Country; and
when a fashion is become National, it is no discredit to wear it; and it is true,
the more is the pity: Examples of great ones are very prevalent, and if bad
infectious; these are Stars of the first Magnitude; and like the primum mobile,
carry all before them: and they have often times a hand in the transgression, and
leave an infectious air, that few can escape that comes near them. What a sad
Example did Benhadad and thirty two Kings that were with him give to their
followers, when they were all drunk: but will this excuse serve our turns
before God; did it excuse poor Men before the Flood, that great ones did thus
or thus; or in Sodom, that the Rulers were in the transgression? Should they
command sin, they are are not to be obeyed; because it is forbidden by a greater
Authority: how much less when we are left at liberty. Great Men are not always
good Men, neither is their example always imitable; 1 Cor. 1. 16. Not many Wise
Men after the Flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble are called: The greatest
number commonly are the worst, and the greatest men not always the best: had
Nooh followed the examples of the ^^^at ones of his age, he might have been
^^^wned for company: It was better be in the (...) alone, than in the Flood
with company. I ^^^nking and drabbing is too much in fashion in these times,
but it is a bad fashion, and that for which the land mourns; and God has a
controversy with us; and threatens to pluck the Cup from the Drunkards Mouth;
4 Hos. 1. 2, 3. and such customs are better broken then kept. The way to Hell
is most trodden, and most men's custom is to walk in it; but woe to that man that
follows that fashion: We must not follow a multitude to do evil. We are the
sinful offspring of Adam, and therefore like him we frame excuses, and seek to
lay the fault upon another: I was forced, I could not help it; I must pledge the
Health: But had we known there had been Poison in the Cup, we would have helped
it. Harpaste, a Woman in Seneca, being in the night suddenly struck blind; she
blames the darkness of the House, the Sun for not rising, etc. but would not
acknowledge her own Deficiency. Thus it is with us, any shall be faulted so we
be free; like the man that had a Thorn in his foot, yet imputed his halting to
the roughness of the way; no man can live in such an age, but he must do as
others do; but no man should break Gods Command to please any Man's humor.

That the sin is grown National, it is so much the sadder, and presages a
National judgment; as Sodoms sins and the sins of the Old World did; and
Isreal's before the Captivity: When it hid it self in corners there was hopes,
but when it dares the Magistrate, and sends a Challenge to God himself; the
Ulcer is desperate, and the Member more fit to be cut off than cherished: When
rotten Fruits hangs out in the sight of the Sun, and Men declare their sin as
Sodom and hide it not; what can we expect but Sodoms Plagues: But blessed be
God there is no force upon us, Men may be sober if they will, and many are; yea
many Noble and Learned: why do you not follow their examples which is worth
imitating. I know vicious great Men, are like Load-stones that draw Iron; that
if a Chain of Iron be near, the Loadstone draws the first Link, then the
second, till the whole Chain comes; so the Devil puts such an influence in men,
that one draws his neighbor and he a third, till most are corrupted: or rather
they are like to Jet that draws Straws, or light refuse; but no solid thing:
They are like to Gunpowder, when one corn is fired it fires the next, and that
another, till all be in a flame. The Devil is like a cunning Angler, he holds
out the Bait, but hides himself behind the Bush: many are fastened with the
Bait before they see the hand that holds it. The Devil does not thrust a Man
into an Alehouse by the Head and Shoulders, this might terrify him; but he
sets Good-fellows at the Ale House door to call him: And then he apprehends no
danger. And for the falls of the godly as they are rare, so they are not
recorded for our imitation but caution; they show not what we should do, but
what we should beware: they are as Sea-marks, set up to warn others; and what
mad Pilot will rush upon such places, where he knows other Ships have there
been split. The best men are not always to be imitated; we must follow Paul as
he follows after Christ; to the Word and to the Testimony: This is a sure guide.

Obj. 3. But I must do as others do, or I shall be mocked, scorned, and had in
derision; should I refuse their healths, what would they think of me? Answ.
This is an unsafe Rule to follow: Some break their Necks, hang themselves; must
we needs follow them for fear of a scorn; some turn Thieves, Hackers; and come
to the Gallows; and must we follow them also. If you do as others do, you must
fare as others fare, and receive your wages together: If you follow the
greatest company, it will be in the worst way; for most miscarry and go to
Hell. Christ tells us broad is the way that leads to Destruction, and many men
go that way. Who is it that will mock you for keeping the Commands of God? Not
one that loves God, Ior oves your Soul, or that carries the face of an honest
Man; and those that have neither good word for God, or for any good Man, for
the Word of God, or the Image of God; what matter is it if they have none for
you: Those that hate God and Godliness, and every thing that looks like God;
that love none but those that will damn their own Souls with them for company;
what is their love worth? Will you venture for their love to have Gods hatred,
and to go to Hell to bear them company? Were a Malefactor going to Execution;
and laughed at you that you would not bear him company; would this move you so
to do? By this rule indeed Daniel might have escaped the Lions Den; and the
three Children the Fiery Furnace; but not the wrath of God. Probably God was
mocked in the Old World, and Lot in Sodom; but they could not mock them out of
their innocence: It Is better have the Devil mock them, than God mock them;
Prove. 1. 24. Take heed of being mocked out of Heaven, lest when you come to Hell
you be laughed at for your labor. The seed of the Serpent will always oppose
the seed of the Woman; and faithful Isaac shall meet with a scoffing Ishmael;
Gods Ark and the Devils Dagon cannot stand together: Christ and Belial cannot
accord: the world will love her own, and cannot abide that Christ should pluck
one feather from her wing. If you are content to take up with the World, and
the World shall pay you your portion, then it is not best to cross the World; if
not it is impossible to please it: God willl not allow us to do the Devils
drudgery for fear of a scorn from his servants. Christ gave no dispensatition
to break his Laws rather than be scorned.

Obj. 4. But though I do follow these Courses for a while, yet I intend
hereafter to repent and to reform. Why may not I do as the Penitent Thief did?
And you may (says one) as rationally conclude that the Sun shall stand still
at your command, because it did so at the Command of Josuah; or that the Sea
should divide to let you pass, because it did so for Israel: Or that you may
spur your Ass and make him speak, as Balaam did: Or that you may take a journey
and leave your money behind, in hope to find a purse of Money in your way, as
some others have done. Were not these think you mad conclusions, and truly this
is as reasonless. One man in five thousand years was saved by late repentance,
therefore I shall be a second, when five thousand men in one year miscarry upon
the like account. God does seldom work such miracles, where the means of grace
is afforded; perhaps it was the first Sermon that ever this Thief heard, but
you have heard thousands: There are indeed many, that like you, send repentance
and religion before them to sixty; but such men seldom ever overtake it. Do you
really think that God will take up with the blind and the lame, will he give us
leave to sacrifice the prime and marrow of our time to the Devil, and give him
the dregs and the refuse? Will he suffer you to do the Devils work all day, and
receive his wages at night? No, no, most men deal by God, as bad Debtors do by
their Creditors, beg more time, and put it off from one week to another, and
then break and never pay? So they break their time with God, but never come to
make good their promises. More Objections might be answered, but there is none
that can stumble a rational unprejudiced man: and I have already far exceeded
my intended limits, I shall therefore draw toward a conclusion.

Thus have I performed a Christian, though perhaps an unwelcome duty, in
putting you in remembrance of what you knew before; if you would not lose all
your pains for Heaven, and all the duties that ever you performed; and have
them all thrown back into your face as dung: If you would not lose Gods Favor,
the benefit of Christ's Merits, your own Soul, Heaven, and Happiness, Consider
from whence you are fallen and return and do your first works: If you have
found out any nearer, easier way to Heaven than ever any yet could do;
demonstrate it, and convince us of it; but before you venture your Soul upon
it, be sure it ends there: the attempt of any such experiments will prove vain;
for if there be any but the path of Holiness that ends in Happiness, then call
me a false Prophet; or if there be any other way into Gods Holy Hill, than by a
pure Heart and clean Hands, then am I content to be called a deceiver; but if I
be deceived God himself has deceived me, who tells me, Without Holiness no one
shall see God; without Faith no one can please God; without repentance we shall
all perish; that no unrighteous person shall enjoy Heaven, and no unregenerate
man shall ever enter there; that those that live after the flesh shall die;
that the ungodly shall go into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into
Life eternal: Those that think otherwise will find that God speaks in earnest
what they took in jest. The time is coming, that you will find it had been
better for you that you had never known the way of life, then having known it
to depart from it. If you give up the Reins to corruption, it will mislead you,
and prove a treacherous guide; if you decline the way of self-denial, you will
miss of Heaven; for none ever come there any other way Loose licenciousness and
carnal liberty, is diametrically opposite to it; wicked company if you forsake
them not, will be your bane; and if repentance prevent it not, you will curse
the time that ever you saw each others face. What ever Society or Party a man
be, what ever Religion or Opinion, though in the most Reformed Church, and in
the Society of the strictest Christians; yet without the power of Godliness,
and the practice of Holiness, he shall never go to Heaven; for no unclean thing
shall ever enter there: no dirty Dog shall tread upon that pavement. Or what
ever his Profession, or seeming Holiness has been, yet if he backslide, he
shall die in his sins, and his righteousness shall not be remembered: The
backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways; Prove. 13. 20. He that
puts his hand to the plow and looks back, he is not fit for the Kingdom of
Heaven; if any draw back, Gods Soul shall have no pleasure in them.

Thus have I made bold, perhaps you may think too bold, to tell you my thoughts
of your present condition; perhaps you may dislike it because it is not in the
Language of your flatterers; but to skin over a sore is not the way to cure it;
The rebukes of a friend are better than the kisses of an enemy. Rebuke a
Wiseman, says Solomon, and he will love you. Let the Righteous smite me, says
David, Psalm. 141. 5. it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall
be an excellent Oil which shall not break my head. What event it will have upon
you I know not, or what entertainment it will meet with I cannot tell; though
you will not receive it, my reward will be with my God, and my judgment with
the most High, whose Errand it is I am come upon; and he that knows the secrets
of all hearts, knows whether it be in love or hatred that I have dealt so
plainly with you: Had I hated you, I know no more effectual means to ruin you,
than to encourage you in this sinful course; and if I meet with hatred for my
love, it is no more than I am acquainted with Well if you neglect this warning
and miscarry, these lines will be a witness upon record against you; and I my
self shall stand up in my lot to bear witness for God, that he sent you this
warning by me: but my end and design is next to Gods Glory, your Reformation
and Salvation; which as it is my desire, so it shall be the prayers of him who
is

EATON. April 30. 1675. Your faithful Monitor EDWARD BVRY.


FINIS.
Books to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside.
SErmons upon the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the Colossians, by Mr. John
Daille: Translated into English by F. S.

Thomas Taylor's Works, the First Volume, fol.

These two Treatises next following, are written by Mr. George Swinnock.

The Door of Salvation Opened, by the Key of Regeneration.

The Incomparableness of God in his Being, Attributes, Works, and Word, opened
and applied.

An Antidote against Quakerism. By Steven Scanderet.

An Exposition on the Five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon. By Will. Greenhill 4to.

The Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace opened: Preached in New England,
by Peter Bulkely, 4to.

God's Holy Mind touching Matters Moral, which himself uttered in Ten Words, or
Ten Commandments; also an Exposition on the Lords Prayer. By Edward Elton B. D.
4to.

Fiery Jesuit, Or an Historical Collection of the Rise, Increase, Doctrines,
and Deeds of the Jesuits. Exposed to view for the sake of London, 4to.

Horologiographia Optica; Dyalling Universal and Particular, Speculative, and
Practical; together with the Description of the Court of Arts by a new Method.
By Sylvanus Morgan, 4to.

The Conversion of a Sinner.

Heart-Treasure; or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and heart
of every Christian, with soul-inriching Treasure of truths, graces,
experiences, and comforts.

The sure Mercies of David, or a second part of the Hearts Treasure.

Closet Prayer, a Christian Duty, All three by O. Heywood

Of Quenching the Spirit, the evil of it, in respect both of its Causes and
Effects, discovered. By Theophilus Polwheile.

The greatest Loss, upon Matthew. 16 26. By James Livesey.

A Defense against the Fear of Death. By Zach. Crofton.

Gods Sovereignty displayed. By Will. Greering.

The Godly Man's Ark, or City of Refuge in the day of his Distress in 5 Sermons;
with Mrs. Moor's Evidences for Heaven. By Ed. Calamy.

The Almost Christian discovered: or the False Professor tried and cast.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against Temptation. Both by M. Mead.

The True Bounds of Christian Freedom: or a Discourse showing the Extents and
Restraints of Christian Liberty, wherein the Truth is settled; many Errors
confuted, out of John 8. ver. 36.

The Lords day enlivened, or a Treatise of the Sabbath. By Philip Goodwin.

The Sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of Christ, two Sermons. By Will. Bridge.

A Plain and Familiar Method of instructing the younger sort, according to the
lesser Catechism of the late Reverend Assembly of Divines. By Tho. Lie.

FINIS.

