THE Husbandmans COMPANION: CONTAINING One Hundred Occasional Medirations
Reflections and Ejaculations, Especially Suited to Men of that Employment.

Directing them how they may be Heavenly-minded while about their Ordinary
Calling.

By Edward Bury Late Minister of Great Bolas in Shropshire.

Psalm. 77.12. I will meditate also of thy works, and talk of thy doings.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and 3 Crowns in Cheapside near
Mercers Chapel, and at the Bible on London Bridge, 1677.

Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

To the Worshipful his much Honored Friend, Rowland Hunt of Boare-Eatton In
the County of Salop, Esquire, And to the Virtuous and truly Religious Lady
Frances Daughter to the Right Honorable the Lord Paget, his Pious Consort, E.
B. Wishes Increase of Grace here, and Glory hereafter.
Sir, and Madam,
I Foresee there may two or three questions arise upon this my undertaking, in
which you may desire satisfaction; the first may be, why I write at all? the
second, why I write on this subject? and the last, why I prefix your Names to
what I write? To these I shall answer in order: For the first, though I hope
Gods glory and the public good, be chiefly intended, yet my own satisfaction
is also included; for I being set apart in my Education for the work of the
Ministry, and dedicated thereunto in my Ordination; and though I have but one
talent, I would not have it wrapped in a napkin, when an account is required how
I have employed it, lest I be found speechless, Aulaedus sit, qui Citharaedus
esse non potest, a man may be useful that is not excellent, and therefore I
thought it my duty what howrs I could spare from my secular employments, should
be improved, and employed for the good of souls: as for your second demand, why
I write upon this subject, seeing so many have gone before me, and what I do is
but Alcinoo pomo dare, or in our English dialect, to light a candle when the
sun shines, or bring coals to Newcastle? to this I answer, if this lesson be so
well taught, it is a shame it is no better learnt: I fear there is not one of
ten amongst Christians, but are guilty of the neglect of this profitable duty,
which I suppose would bring the soul more real benefit, then many litigious
controversies about the modes and circumstances of worship, about which many
argue themselves not only out of Charity, but out of their Christianity, and
lose the substance, while they strive about the shadow, and fill their heads
with notions, rather then their hearts with graces: I conceive it is real
communion with Christ, and the life of faith, that makes the soul fat and
flourishing, and I think that meditation does conduce as much to this as any
duty whatsoever: prayer I know brings in supplys from heaven, and so does this;
and these two usually are concomitant, and where the one is neglected, the
other is seldom well performed: Meditation like the Be fetches honey both
from flowers and weeds, yea, this divine Alchymist extracts gold out of the
coursest Mettles, and is the true Philosophers stone that turns all into gold,
and gold it self into a spiritual substance; those books which reduce religion
into practice (which in our days lies much in the theorick) and serve to
reconcile the head and the heart, and maintain the vitals of religion, and the
power of godliness, and further our great design for heaven, should be well
studied, and of them I think store is no sore: By this heavenly art of divine
meditation, wisdom may be extracted out of folly, as Solomon gained
instruction by beholding the field of the sluggard, Pro. 24.30. etc. and
doubtless man was not placed in the world as Leviathan in the Sea, to play
therein; nor endowed with so many excellent faculties to be like bruit beasts,
only idle spectatours of the works of God; The use of reason doubtless was
given for an higher end, to help us to view the Creator in the glass of the
creature, and every thing lends a helping hand to a willing mind in this work;
There is no man so busy if not sinfully employed, but may find some time every
day to converse with God, and now and then make a journey to heaven, and view
those Caelestial mansions prepared for those that love God; There is none so
dull-witted, if honest hearted, but may learn some profitable lessons in
natures school; the least worm or gnat, or leaf of a tree, will point out God,
to an observant Christian: That Meditation is a Christian duty; none that
pretend to religion or to reason it self, will deny, and that to meditate upon
Gods works as well as his word, is our duty, is evident; God sometimes sends us
to the ox, and ass, to learn our duty, Jsay. 1.3. sometimes to fowls of
heaven, the stork, the crane, and the swallow, Jer. 8.7. sometimes to the
pismire or ant, those despicable insects, Pro. 6.6. and 30.25. and all to learn
our duty; David learned humility by beholding the moon and the stars, Psalm.
8.3, 4. and Christ grounds many of his excellent sermons upon the various
occurrences that daily fell out, as we see in the parable of the sower and the
seed, the tares of the field, and the drawnet cast into the Sea, the leaven,
the mustard seed, the fruitless figtree, and many others: what heavenly use
does he make of earthly things, and all this is for our imitation, that by this
means we may of these earthly materials frame to our selves a Jacobs ladder to
ascend to heaven; for all those visibles will mount us up to behold
invisibles, and give us a Pisgah sight of the heavenly Canaan, even of those
things within the vail: And that soul that has this heavenly art, can set it
self on work, and need not be idle or ill employed, for time will fail us, and
death surprise us, before we can have searched natures garden from end to end,
or gathered honey from the several flowers: here we may walk at liberty, and
crop what flowers we please, and no man is damnified thereby; in other respects
our bounds are set, hitherto may we go and no further, but in this we have an
unlimitted circuit: meum and tuum, which has set the world in a flame, hinders
not in this case, the poor here has as much liberty as the rich, and the
servant as his master, for with the Be we may suck sweetness from our
neighbors fields and flowers, without his leave or license, and feed upon his
pasture without any damage to him; It Is true in these my meditations I have
contented my self with a small plot, and but seldom past the bounds of a
garden or orchard, but had the publishing of it been designed at the first, I
should not have tied up my self in so short a lether, when the whole creation
lay before me; The book of the creature stands open to us, and God may be read
in every line of it, otherwise why does God discover to us the state of the
fallen angels, and of the rich glutton, and the state of the damned, if no
profitable use could be made of it: no place is so barren as a barren heart,
each dead tree will yield some fruit to us, if the soul be not dead: I have
plucked here and there a flower, as others have done before me, and he that
comes after us may find as good as any we have gotten: Those I have gathered
are rather to comfort the heart, then to please the fancy, rather to benefit
the soul with their virtue, then to please the eye with their beauty; their
nature (if I mistake them not) is to draw the heart and affections to God, and
cool and deadden it to the world and sin; But a gracious heart is then required
to make the extraction, for if it be mixed with the dregs of hypocrisy it will
prove useless: The hypocrite like a puppet in a play, may counterfeit man's
shape and gestures, yea, like a parrat his voice, when he understands not what
he says or does, yea, such a one mars all he sets his hands to; but a good man
has an holy heart, as well as a holy tongue, and this will prove a
soul-satting Ordinance to such a man; this will raise up the heart to hoaven,
which is one of our surest evidences for heaven; If any yet plead, there are
too many books on this subject extant already, the more shame for us then that
the duty is so much neglected, that is not sufficiently taught, that is not
sufficiently learnt, and I fear those that are readiest to make the objection,
are not the most conscientious in the performance of the duty: There are many
that make conscience of morning and evening prayers in their families, that
spend little time in this duty; if any quarrel at the language these
meditations speak, let them know, my design is, to make men live better, and
not to make them speak better; if they speak the language of Canaan they will
be understood by true Israelites, and will be owned by those that had rather be
fed then flattered; it is a distempered stomach that must be fed with
kickshaws, truth looks best in the plainest dress, and a diamond needs no
painting, via trita est via tuta, and plain sense is the best orthography of an
honest heart. In short, the reason why I write upon this subject is, not to
please men's humors, or satisfy squeasy stomachs, but because I judge this to
be a necessary, though much neglected duty, and therefore most necessary to be
treated of.

As for the last of your demands, why I praefix your names to it, I think there
are none that knows both you and me, and my engagements to you, that need
stumble at it; but I shall answer it, first negatively, and then affirmatively,
I do it not, because I think you have more need of it then others, for I know
but few better able then you to gather such flowers as these for your selves;
But it is, because I think you are better able to judge of it then most are,
and if you think I have not mist my way, I care not much what those say, that
never travailed in this road: I speak to those that understand the language,
for to others, happily I may seem a barbarian: A hypocrite may pretend to the
language, but understands it not, he spoils this as well as all his other
duties; I present this first to you, for if it pass this text, I matter not
much what many others say of it; And also that thereby I may tell the world,
rather then you, what my thoughts are of you, and to point them out a pattern
for their imitation; for I verily believe, and I think upon serious
observation, that the several branches of both your families, do maintain the
vitals of religion, and the power of godliness in as eminent a manner, as any
family of your rank that I know in the Nation, and keep themselves as unspotted
in the world, and as free from the contagious diseases of the times: And he
that is the searcher of all hearts, knows, I speak my thoughts without flattery
or fauning, and I do it for no sinister end: but (as Solomon did commend the
good huswife, Pro. 31.29. that God may be glorified for his bounty to you, and
your hands may be strengthened in well doing, and others may take example by
you, and your lives may be for their imitation. I cannot praise my present any
further, then from the truth of the heart that sends it; had it been better, it
had been sent with a better will: I send it as a poor man does a present to his
superior, not to supply his wants, but to manifest his love, thankfulness and
dependence upon him; or as a debtor to his creditor, who when he cannot pay the
debt, pays the interest, or at least testifyes his willingness, if ability be
wanting: What I have done in this my undertaking, I judged to be my duty; David
bids us, commune with our own hearts, Psalm. 4.4. and he calls upon others,
Psalm. 66.16. come and hear all ye that fear the Lord, and I will declare what
he has done for my soul: I have not the confidence to think, that this or any
thing I can do can pass the test of this critical age, or indeed can contribute
much to the adorning of the spouse of Christ, I know a handful of goats-hair
was not formerly rejected, neither will a cup of cold water where there is no
better, nor two mites where there is no more, by him from whom I expect my
reward: When you can write fairer then the Copy which will quickly be, you may
lay it aside, and give it to some one that cannot, for whose sake it was
chiefly written: but that it may prove beneficial both to you, and yours, and
to the Church of God, for the advancing of the the power of godliness, and the
life of religion, and the restoring this too much neglected duty of holy
meditation, shall be, and is, the desire and prayer of him, who is

Eaton Jan. 12. 1676. Your ever obliged Servant, Edward Bury.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Have here presented thee with a bundle of Meditations, most of them
occasional; I am not so conceited as to imagine there is any great excellency
in them, nor so foolish to trouble my self to write or others to read them,
did I judge them altogether useless; the duty I know is necessary and
beneficial, and many Christians can write a probatum est upon it, and say it
has been so to them, however it is too much neglected by the most; I have not
long since published some directions how to perform the several parts of Gods
worship; amongst the rest this of meditation was one; and that which is set or
solemn was chiefly insisted upon, but that which is occasional more briefly
touched, which indeed cannot well be bounded, but is varied according as the
time, place, object, and other circumstances vary, and as the will or capacity
of the person requires, and therefore may be better taught by example then
rule: This minded me of some occasional Meditations that had formerly warmed my
heart, and not knowing but they might warm others also, and might be a means to
restore this beneficial though too much neglected duty, and therefore
gathering together, and reveiwing my scattered papers, and making some
additions, substractions, and alterations, I reduced them to the method here
presented: that it is every Christians duty I think none will deny, and that it
has been the practice of believers is easy to prove: this was Isaac's
practice, Genesis 24.63. and it was David's work, as the whole book of Psalms
testify, see Psalm. 63.6. and 77.12. and 119.15. and 143.5. and many other
places, wherein we see he meditated both on Gods word, and on his works, both
by night and by day, and makes it the character of a child of God or a blessed
man so to do, Psalm. 1.2. and a mark of one ripe for destruction not to regard
the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, Psalm. 28.5. What I have
here written is chiefly for thy imitation, and my desire is that thou may
take out this lesson, prove an artist, and set up for thy self, and follow this
gainful trade that has formerly brought so much glory to God, and so much
profit to poor souls: The method herein propounded is easy, and the duty to an
honest heart not hard, yet remember it is the practick part that is like to do
thee most good; here may thou learn to spend thy time, and pass away thy
solitary hours better then most men do, for whether thou be at home, or abroad,
in public or in private; this duty may be in some measure performed, yea, by
every man, in every place, in every company, and in every employment, though
all places are not alike, a gracious heart can steal a thought into heaven, and
by a Meditation, and private ejaculation hold converse wtth God, at any time,
neither slave nor servant, though in a Turky-gally can be deprived of this
liberty; The want of this heavenly art, or the not using of it is the cause of
the mispence of so much precious time, and that there are so many barren empty
hearts as we daily find; for as the Be gathers honey both from flowers and
weeds, so does a diligent man from every thing he sees, hears of, or observes;
time is such a precious jewel, that it should not be squandred away, and I know
not well how it may be better improved then by Meditation, for this
spiritualizeth all we set or hear of; it makes a man never idle, nor ill
employed, and drives on a rich trade for the soul, and either leads the soul to
heaven, or brings heaven to it; I know meditation may be abused, some meditate
how they may be rich, either by hook or by crook, the ambitious man how he may
be honorable, the voluptuous man how he may enjoy his pleasure, but a
Christian how he may enjoy his God, and secure his soul; some study mischief
upon their beds, some with the spiders gather poison, where the Christian like
the be gathers honey, and the very business a Christian is about will furnish
him with matter sufficient for his work; if the heart be not barren every thing
will be fruitful, and there is none so dull if not spiritually dead, but may
gather something from visibles to mind him of invisibles; No ship that sails
either to the East or West Indies, brings home richer lading then meditation
does, if rightly steered; This is the chewing of the cud, that turns all to
nourishment, the true Philosophers stone that turns all to gold; by this means
the spirits and quintescence of all earthly things are extracted; it is true of
a Christian endowed with his heavenly art, what the Poets feign of Midas, every
thing they touch turns to gold, and gold it self into a better substance; the
hardest flint, the barrenest tree, the most withering branch, or fading leaf,
will yield good fruit to this artist, yea, better fruit then the gardens of the
Hesperides, which are feigned to bear golden apples, and every sheep will bear
a golden fleece, better then ever Jason fetched from Colchis; By meditation a
Christian is carried into the third heaven, with Paul, whether in the body, or
out of the body be scarcely knows, and there is enabled to see things
inutterable, this makes invisible things visible, and gives a man a
Pisgah-sight of the heavenly Canaan: This heavenly artist can with Daedalus
make himself wings to fly aloft, and can break prison at his pleasure, neither
need he fear the melting of the wax: This keeps the heart in order, and
prevents its strayings, it keeps vain thoughts from rising, or at best from
roosting: There man's heart is like a mill, if it want grist, it sets it self on
fire, and if there be no corn to grind for God, the devil will throw his tares
into the hopper: The heart it always well or ill-employed, and will never be
idle; holy meditation puts a man out of satan's road, when otherwise he is in
continual danger of falling into his snares, or by being surprised by his
wiles, when the idle person is commonly snared and taken; by this grace is
strengthened, and corruption weakened, our evidences cleared, communion with God
maintained, and acquaintance with our own hearts gained; it is the way to store
the understanding with knowledge, to subject the will to Gods will, to warm the
^ffections, and to put life and heat into all our duties; this discovers to us
the sinfulness of sin, and vanity of the creatures, and the fullness of Christ;
this reaches out to us some of Canaans grapes, some Pisgah-sights of glory,
even of those things within the veil, and a taste of those pleasures which are
at the right hand of God; such a taste as this, made Moses despise the
pleasures of Pharaohs court, and Galeacius esteem all the wealth in the world
not worth one days communion with God; this lets us see, there is a worm of
vanity bred in our chiefest earthly enjoyments, and eats out the very heart of
them, and if they are abused, they will breed and feed the worm that never
dies, and kindle that fire that never shall go out; These and a thousand such
lessons meditation will teach us, and fastens every lesson upon the heart; who
then would not follow so gainfal a trade, and practice so fruitful a calling?
Did it enrich the body as it does the soul, we should have many proficients in
this School; some pretenders there are to this duty, but they rather pretend
then intend it, they throw down the hammer before they have driven the nail to
the head, and lay down the premises, but stay not to raise the conclusion; they
follow not the work till they come to resolution and practice; they are like a
man that strikes fire, gathers wood, but leaves off before it be kindled, and
so all his labor is lost; This duty enables a man with Paul to die daily, and
with Stephen to see God, with Moses to talk with God, and with Enoch to walk
with God; It fits a Minister to preach, and the people to hear, neither of
which can be well done without it; that sermon that is not well set on by
meditations, seldom heats the preachers heart, and then the people seldom feel
it, for a dull and drowsy preacher, makes a dull and sleepy people; when the
minister preaches his own life and experiences, this is the life of preaching;
This meditation is a serious bending of the mind upon some useful subject till
we bring it to some profitable issue; Occasional meditation (which is it we
now treat of) arises from some occasional object presented to our senses or
understanding, by divine providence, of which though examples may be given, yet
hardly can it be restrained, or brought under rules, for it may be varied
according to the variety of the objects presented, or other accidents,
occurrences, or circumstances that offer themselves, or the will of the person,
or his ability; the objects that offer themselves are various and innumerable,
for there is nothing in rerum natura, but may be a fit object for occasional
meditations; God has given us a large field to walk in, and choice of flowers,
pluck what we will, to put into our nose-gay; we may gather honey from flowers
and weeds, out of our own or neighbors fields without offense; which way
soever we look, within us, or without us, above us, or below us, before us, or
behind us, or on either side, we may see suitable matter for our meditation;
above us we may see the sun, moon and stars, those glorious lamps of heaven,
who offer themselves not only to our view, but also to our contemplation, their
light, their heat, their influence, their various though unerring motions,
their magnitude, altitude, number, nature, splendour, virtue and effects may
breed admiration in us, as well as in David, Psalm. 8.3, 4. and 19.1. or should
we descend to sublunary things, to the fiery or ayery regions, and observe the
several meteors in both, that present themselves to our view, we may find
matter not only for meditation, but also for admiration; if we consider a while
the wind, the snow, the rain, the frost, the ice, etc. all brought out of Gods
treasury, Psalm. 135.7. the thunder, and lightning with their strange effects,
the strange apparitions often seen in the air, comets, blazing-stars, dragons,
fire-drakes, etc. armies fighting in the air, Lions, bears, horses, and many
other things there resembled, raining blood, wheat, frogs, stones, etc. all
this may raise our admiration; veiw but the rain bow in its shape and various
colors; it deserves our consideration; The powerful influence of these
superior bodies, in exhaling, and retaining those hugh weighty and towering
clouds, those bottles of heaven in the open air, and watering the earth with
them at their makers pleasure, without which neither man nor beast could
subsist; who can view those things without consideration? or if we look upon
the earth out of which we were taken, we may find matter enough to exercise
our thoughts; observe this huge and massy globe hanging in the air upon
nothing; consider it as it is distinguished into hills and dales, and woods and
forests, adorned with sumptuous buildings, Towns and Castles, abounding with
trees of all sorts, with corn and grass, with herbs and flowers, watered with
rain and showers, rivers, springs, and fountains, inhabited with a thousand
times ten thousand living creatures of all sorts, men and beasts, fowls, and
creeping things, all maintained at the great householders charge, who preserves
them in their several kinds; consider also the perenity of rivers, the cause,
and perpetuity of springs of all sorts, some hot, some cold, some sweet, some
bitter, some salt, some fresh, some medicinal, some not, this observation may
take up some time: or should we consider the several minerals lodged in the
concaves of the earth, as of gold, silver, brass, tin, iron, lead, allom,
brimstone, coals, lime, stone, and much more, and how useful and necessary
these are to human life; This may teach us many profitable lessons: Or should
we go to sea to see the wonders of the deep, and observe how the huge and
roaring element is restrained and bounded by an almighty arm, that says,
hitherto shall thou go and no further; or if we consider the ebbing and flowing
of it, a wonder in nature, or the numberless number of living creatures
therein, which are fed and cherished by those salt and brackish waters, yet
retain their sweetness, or if we consider the cause why those waters alone are
salt, and so remain, though a thousand fresh rivers daily run into it, together
with their strange creatures therein produced: these considerations will take
up much time, but of all the creatures God has made, none yield more matter
for meditation, then angels and men; Angels, both the good and the bad, their
nature, essence, and offices, and man considered in his body and soul, the
order, use, comeliness and proportion of the several parts, the vegetative,
sensitive, and rational faculties of the soul, the understanding, will and
affections, the memory, conscience, and many more, the several senses whereby
the soul comes to understand things here below, these things deserve
consideration; but to let pass the works of creation, and consider a while Gods
works of providence, these will take up much of our time; we may see and
observe the course of nature, the generation and production of the several
species, with their preservation, protection, and the provision made for them,
by their Creator; he maintains the several species by his providence, that for
ought we know there is not one kind of them extinct since the creation; nay,
the power of man was never able to destroy those kinds that are noxious to
man, and therefore hated by him; yet are these maintained by divine providence
at his own cost and charges; But his providence is more clearly seen and
discovered in his providence to man, especially to his own Church, in
maintaining a handful of men against their numerous enemies; these are
preserved as lambs amongst wolves, and is the bush that is ever burning, yet
never consumed: he spread a table for them in the wilderness, in dispight of
their enemies; the wonderful providence of God for his Church in all ages, in
Scripture-times, and down to this day, may fir us with much matter for
meditation: The word of God also as well as his works may yield much matter for
contemplation; it furnished David for meditation day and night, every Book,
every Chapter, yea every verse is fruitful abundantly, that had we the years of
Methusalem, the time would be too little to run through the Scripture, and to
consider of all that is held forth therein; here are precepts and promises,
threats and examples, for our good, here is the great work of our redemption
treated of, which the angels desire to pry into, and eternity is little enough
to admire: herein we may behold the subtilty of Satan in tempting man, man's
frailty in yielding to the temptation, the nature of sin in throwing man out of
paradise, and angels out of heaven; the wisdom of God in finding out a remedy
to save some, the love of Christ in dying for them, etc. Nay by meditation we
have liberty to ascend heaven also, and veiw those caelestial mansions prepared
for those that love and fear God; but I shall add no more, lest I make the gate
too big for the structure, only this is my desire, and shall be my prayer, that
it may tend to Gods glory, and his Churches good, and so I rest,

Thine and the Churches Servant, Edward Bury.
Eaton, Jan. 12, 1676.
The CONTENTS.
Med. 1. UPon the Earth. p. 1 Med. 2. Upon digging the Earth. p. 4 Med. 3. Upon
a Tuft of green Grass. p. 6 Med. 4. Upon a barren plat of ground. p. 9 Med. 5.
Upon the Earth bringing forth weeds. p. 13 Med. 6. Upon a Bush of thorns. p. 17
Med. 7. Upon the diligence to be used in a Garden. p. 21 Med. 8. Upon birds
picking up the seed. p. 25 Med. 9. Upon refreshing rain after a dry season. p.
29 Med. 10. Upon the plucking off the tops of weeds. p. 50 Med. 11. Upon the
care men take of their Gardens. p. 54 Med. 12. Upon a neglected Garden. p. 58
Med. 13. Upon the fading of Beautiful flowers. p. 61 Med. 14. Upon Stones in
the Garden. p. 64 Med. 15. Upon worms in the garden. p. 70 Med. 16. Upon an
heap of Ants or Pismires. p. 75 Med. 17. Upon the Diligence of the ants. p. 80
Med. 18. Upon the gorgeous dress of Flowers. p. 85 Med. 19. Upon a Garden
spoiled through bad fence. p. 90 Med. 20. Upon a Mole spoiling the garden. p.
95 Med. 21. Upon the springing up of the seed. p. 99 Med. 22. Upon a sudden
Drought. p. 105 Med. 23. Upon flowers seemingly dead in winter, yet flourishing
in the spring. p. 111 Med. 24. Upon fine flowers foul-sented. p. 115 Med. 25.
Upon sweet smelling flowers. p. 120 Med. 26. Upon herbs withering in a dry
season. p. 124 Med. 27. Upon the difference between the various sorts of
flowers and vegetables. p. 130 Med. 28. Upon withering herbs and flowers. p.
135 Med. 29. Upon the soringing of herbs in soringtime. p. 140 Med. 30. Upon a
withering knot of herbs. p. 144 Me. 31. On the unknown virtues of many
vegetables. p 149 Med. 32. Upon some despicable weeds, yet useful. p. 154 Med.
33. Upon the constant supply vegetables need. p. 159 Med. 34. Upon the sudden
withering of flowers. p. 164 Med. 35. Upon the sympathy and antipathy of
vegetables. p. 169 Med. 36. Upon the Marigold and other flowers. p. 175 Med.
37. Upon a rose among thorns. p. 178 Med. 38. Upon a bed of Camomile trampled
upon. p. 184 Med. 39. Upon receiving in of the fruits. p. 188 Med. 40. Upon the
beating out of the seed. p. 192 Med. 41. Upon the winnowing of the seed. p. 197
Me. 42. Upon clean seed fown yet brings forth chaff. p. 202 Med. 43. Upon the
pleasures of a garden. p. 207 Med. 44. Upon an adder lurking in the grass. p.
211 Med. 45. Upon a Toad. p. 216 Med. 46. Upon the coursing of a hare. p. 220
Med. 47. Upon the labor and pains men take about worldly things. p. 224 Med.
48. Upon the diligence of the spider. p. 229 Med. 49. Upon small flys caught
in a spiders web. p. 234 Med. 50. Upon the worthlesness of a spiders web. p.
238 Med. 51. Upon the painful and labourious Be. p. 243 Med. 52. Upon the
taste of honey. p. 248 Med. 53. Upon the sting of a Be. p. 252 Med. 54. Upon
bees killed for their honey. p. 257 Med. 55. Upon the sluggish drones. p. 262
Med. 56. Upon the gandy Wasp. p. 267 Med. 57. Upon the painted Butterfly. p.
271 Med. 58. Upon a gnat playing with the candle. p. 276 Med. 59. Upon many
creatures dead in winter. p. 280 Med. 60. Upon beggars at the door. p. 285 Med.
61. Upon the singing of birds. p. 289 Med. 62. Upon provision made for birds in
winter. p. 294 Med. 63. Upon birds building their nests. p. 298 Med. 64. Upon a
small bird feeding many young ones. p. 302 Med. 65. Upon the prating of a
Parrat. p. 306 Med. 66. On a kite killed by a Fowler eating his prey. p. 310 Med.
67. Upon a kite soaring, yet minding her prey. p. 315 Med. 68. Upon a Bird in a
cage. p. 319 Med. 69. Upon a bird with a clogg at her foot. p. 324 Med. 70.
Upon birds observing their seasons. p. 328 Med. 71. Upon a snail. p. 333 Med.
72. On a snail carrying her house with her. p. 337 Med. 73. Upon men's misery,
labor, and pains. p. 342 Med. 74. On the difference between a well manured,
and neglected Orchard. p. 347 Med. 75. Upon a great tree springing from a
kernel. p. 352 Med. 76. Upon a crab-tree afterward grafted. p. 356 Med. 77.
Upon the pruning of a tree. p. 361 Med. 78 Upon suckers in a fruit bearing
tree. p. 366 Med. 79 Upon a fair but fruitless tree. p. 370 Med. 80. Upon a
great tree spoiling others under it. p. 375 Med. 81 Upon an old, yet fruitful
tree. p. 380 Med. 82. Upon a leavy yet barren tree. p. 384 Med. 83. Upon a dead
tree. p. 389 Med. 84. Upon a tree seemingly dead in winter. p. 394 Med. 85.
Upon a great tree tossed with the wind. p. 399 Med. 86. Upon trees green in
summer, but stripped off all in winter. p. 403 Med. 87. Upon a tree green all the
winter. p. 408 Med. 88. Upon trees decay for want of dressing. p. 413 Med. 89.
Upon promising trees after blasted. p. 418 Med. 90. Upon leaves falling in
Autumn. p. 422 Med. 91. Upon a fruit-tree pelted with stones. p. 427 Med. 92
Upon fruit left on the trees after shaking. p. 431 Med. 93. Upon the many
enemies fruit trees have. p. 436 Med. 94. Upon a fair apple rotten at the core.
p. 441 Med. 95. How little comfort the world can afford without food. p. 445
Med. 96. Upon the worth of meat, to those that know the want of it. p. 450 Med.
97. The world is not a resting place. p. 455 Med. 98. Upon sickness spoiling
all earthly delights. p. 459 Med. 99. Upon a rainy day. p. 463 Med. 100. Upon
cold winter-weather. p. 468
Reader,
Carp not at faults mere literal,
For in this age such are but small;
Nay let not words mistook offend,
The most I fear have deeds to mend:
Let him whose works from faults are free
Be first that throws a stone at me:
Men's works have faults since Adam fell,
Mend those that follow, So fare well.
PAge. 25 line 25 for out read on. p. 27. l. 4. not left out. p. 93 l. 8 that
left out. p. 95 l. 9. for then r. that. p. 102. l. 3. f. stars, r. clouds. p.
102. l. 17. for word r. clouds. p. 120 l. 9. f. and r. of. p. 139 l. 11. for
this stake r. the stake. p. 153 l. 11. for way, r. wall. p. 161. l. 13. for
savages, r. slaves. p. 169 l. 13. for occulta r. occultae. p. 181. l. 17. f.
David. r. Daniel. p. 184. l. 23. for petivit r. petunt. p. 200 l. 27. for ware
r. wine. p. 200. l. 29. for volunt. r. nolunt. p. 215. l. 13. bane left out.

Divine Meditations Consisting of Observations, Applications, And Supplications.
Upon the Earth.
I. Meditation.
WAlking in the garden in the cool of the day, among other things that offered
themselves to my consideration, I observed my mother the Earth, whence I had my
original, and out of whose womb I had my being: I considered how near of kin I
was to those senceless clods that lay under my feet, and that I was made of the
same matter, a little more refined, and molded up in a better form, and was
made by God a little walking breathing clay, and shortly must return to my
first matter, for dust thou art (says God) and unto dust thou shall return.
These and the like thoughts had a various operation upon my soul; sometimes it
put me on to admire the workman, that out of such a rude and indigested mass,
such course stuff, could make so glorious a piece as the body of Man is, and
could indue it with such excellent parts, and such noble faculties, and make it
such a rich cabinet fit to hold that precious Jewel the soul; which when I had
a little considered I began to glory, that I was made a man, and did not remain
a senseless clod; But on the other side, when I considered my original, and the
rock whence I was hewn, and the hole of the pit whence I was dug, and that I
could say, to corruption, thou art my father, and to the worm, thou art my
mother, and my sister, Job. 17.14. I who was even now proud that I was a man,
began to vail my peacocks plumes, when I beheld my black feet, and to wonder at
my own folly; and when I beheld my mother, and my relations, I saw there was
small cause of pride, and little cause to boast of birth or blood, or great
parentage or relations: it is a shame and sin for an angel to be proud, much
more for a dunghill-bird: Oh my soul! bless God, that thou wast made a man, and
not a clod of clay, a rational creature, and not a brute beast; thou wast clay
in the hands of this potter, and might have been the most despicable
creature that ever dropped from his fingers, but he has made thee little lower
then the Angels, and crowned thee with honor and dignity: what cause then have
thou to admire thy Creator, who made thee thus to differ, and made thee capable
of communion with him here, and enjoying him for ever? but beware of pride that
reigning damning sin, that turned Angels out of heaven, Adam out of Paradise,
and many thousands into hell; boast not of the greatness of thy stock, the
nobleness of thy blood, the honor of thy progenitors, except thou ascend as
high as thy great Grandmother the Earth, who opened her womb to bear us all,
and ere long will open her mouth to receive us all, where we shall be resolved
into our first matter; then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and
the spirit shall return to God that gave it; it is true, thou had a more noble
Father in whose image thou wast made, but this image is lost, and thou art
become more deformed then thy Mother: Oh my God! as thou have indewed me with
more noble faculties then many other of thy creatures, that I might be better
able to serve thee, enable me so to do; renew thy image in me, which was lost
by the fall, and give me sincerity without which my condition will be worse
then the beast that perishes, whose misery ends with his life, but mine will
begin at my death: where much is given, much will be required; as thou have
made me a man, let me act as a rational creature, and answer the ends of my
Creation.

Upon digging the Earth.
2. Med.
DIgging and delving into the bowels of my Mother the Earth, to bury those
seeds from whence I expected a future increase, that portion of Scripture came
fresh into my mind, Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy
bread, till thou return to the ground out of which thou wast taken, for dust
thou art, and unto dust thou shall return: me thoughts my work as it was a just
punishment laid upon me for my sin, so it did much resemble the digging of my
grave, and put me in mind of my mortality; I began to think that ere long some
one would do that for me which I did for these poor seeds, lay me to sleep in
the grave, till the Resurrection, and that my mother earth was as ready to
receive me as them; the pains and aches I felt, the sensible decays in nature,
my gray hairs, etc. fastened this cogitation more home upon me; I then began to
think of the vanity of man, that was but even now crept out from being earth,
and for a time made a great stir and bustle in the world, and then made as much
haste out again; and like as stage players every one acting a part, upon the
stage of the world, some longer, some shorter, some better, and some worse, and
then an exit comes, and they disappear. The godly they act a Comedy, which
begins bad, but ends well; the wicked a Tragedy which always ends in confusion;
yet whatever part men act, few are willing to go off the stage; the old man
that has outlived his teeth, his hair, his sight, and hearing, and can hardly
use his limbs, and senses, yet is loath to die; too evident a sign his work
for which he came into the world is not done, viz. to make his peace with his
God, and to get an interest in Christ, and title to glory; the godly while they
are here, are every day quenching those coals which sin has kindled, with the
tears of true repentance; the wicked are carrying every day a faggot to
increase that fire, that never shall be quenched: thus it is in the world, as in
a Fair or market, there is a great crowd, some going one way some another, and
every one driving on some design or other: O my soul! must thou ere long be
separated from the body by death, how stands the case with thee? art thou
prepared for such a change, or art thou not? how does thy pulse beat? suppose
this were to be the day of thy dissolution, could look death in the face with
comfort? have thou made thy peace with thy God? have thou got an acquittance
sealed with the blood of Christ? a discharge of all thy debts? have thou
provided another habitation against this shall be disolved, and moulder into
dust? when this earthly tabernacle shall be dissolved, have thou a building not
made with hands, but eternal in the heavens? have thou acted thy part well upon
the stage of the world, that thou may go off with applause? ^f not, ^s better
thou had not been born; for if death meet thee unprepared, as thy body
moulders into dust, so must thou down to everlasting darkness, there to suffer
eternally the demerit of thy sin. Oh my God! take me not away before I be fit
to be lodged in thy bosom: kill me not before my sin be killed; if any thing
that is necessary be wanting, Lord give it in, and let me not be deceived in so
great a thing as the salvation of my soul: Let my sins die, and let my soul
live: Let me see the funeral of my vices before others see the funeral of my
body.

Upon a Tuft of green Grass.
3. Med.
WAlking into the Garden as at other times, to take the air, I fastened my eyes
upon a green tuft of grass that grew besides me; the sight of it brought to my
remembrance what I had often heard and read, viz. that the damned in hell
should suffer exquisite torments, such as the tongue of men or angels are not
able to express, and that for as many millions of years as there are
grass-piles upon the earth, sands on the sea shore, stars in heaven, and motes
in the Sun; and yet after all this long tract of time their torments shall be
no nearer to an end nor they to a delivery, then they were the first day they
were cast in; This made me a little to consider the number of piles that was in
this little tuft, and when I found it too hard for me to number them, I
considered what was this tuft to one pasture, or that to one Parish, or that to
one County, or that to one Kingdom, or that to the whole world: this made me
to cry out, Oh Eternity, Eternity! who can conceive of thee? who can fathom
thee? Oh the horrible nature of sin that provokes a merciful God to lay such
heavy strokes upon his poor creatures! Oh the love and pains of our dear
Redeemer! what did he suffer to quench those flames, and discharge those debts
for his people, in suffering what was due for their sins? and oh the madness of
men and my own folly, that knowing there is such a remediless gulf before us,
run on so madly toward it, and that for momentary pleasures, deceitful
riches, worthless honor, or filthy sin, do venture the soul upon the pikes of
danger: Oh the misery of poor unregenerate wretches! what will you do in the
latter end? who amongst us shall dwell with devouring fire? who amongst us
shall dwell with everlasting burning? Esaias. 33.14. Tophet is prepared of old,
even for the King it is prepared, the pile thereof is fire and much wood, and
the breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone does kindle it, Esaiah 30.33.
Were a man compelled to lie upon a feather bed but one year without turning or
stirring, though other comforts were afforded, how painful, how tedious would
that year seem? but what is this one year to eternity, or what is a featherbed
to scalding lead, and burning brimstone? or what is that to hell torments? Oh
Satan! how do thou deceive us? Oh world! how do thou ensnare us? Oh sin!
how do thou bewitch us? Oh heart! how do thou betray us to this deadly
danger? Oh earth! how do thou betray thy fastest friends, and payest them off
with pains for pleasure, and buyest their souls for a thing of naught? Oh
Satan! who would be thy servant, if this be thy wages? and yet how many fish
come to thy net? and how prosperous have thou been when thou have baited thy
hooks with the world? Oh my soul! is Eternity such a fathomless gulf, without
bank or bottom? how stands the case with thee? art thou for everlasting joy or
endless torment? what interest have thou in the one, or what hopes to avoid the
other? what have thou that a hypocrite cannot have? or what do thou that he
cannot do? God surely expects great difference in the work, when there is so
much in the reward; give thy eyes no sleep, nor thy eyelids no slumber, till
thou have some comfortable assurance of the love of God in the pardon of thy
sins, and the salvation of thy soul: make peace with thy Creditour before thou
art cast into prison, otherwise there must thou remain till thou have paid the
utmost farthing: If death surprise thee before thou art ready, hell will be thy
lodging: get oil, trim up thy lamp, get on thy wedding garment, that thou be
not shut out into utter darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth:
Oh my God! make me such as thy own soul delights in, give me in the
qualifications thou have made necessary to Salvation; thou know my wants,
Lord supply them; my debts, oh forgive them; my corruptions, Lord subdue them,
and bind up my soul in the bundle of life; write my name in thy book, and at
last lay me up amongst thy Jewels.

Upon a barren plat of ground.
4. Med.
WHen I perceived one plot in my garden fruitful, and another barren, and
observed the difference between the one and the other, how lovely, how amiable,
how pleasant the fruitful plat seemed to me, how fresh and fragrant, how green
and ardent it was, how it was diapred with various colored flowers, beautiful
and lovely: and how loathsome, unseemly and unhandsome the other looked, where
nothing appeared but briars and thorns, weeds and thistles, with stones and
rubbish, which was a fit receptacle for toads and serpents, and other venomous
vermin; I began to consider it was yet possible to reduce this plot into a
better form, and turn it to a better use: And hereupon I caused the rubbish to
be stockt up, the weeds to be plucked up, and the stones picked out, and after I
dug and manured it, and had an effect answerable to my expectation; for when
it was sown with better seed, it brought forth better fruit: The unlovelinesse
of this plot when overgrown with weeds and rubbish, produced this following
Meditation: I thought it lively represented a heart barren of grace and
goodness, but fruitful of briars and thorns, sin and wickedness, which is
more odious to God then this plot was to me, and yet how lovely a fruit bearing
Christian is in his eye, the one is like a loathsome muck-heap which stinks,
the other like a watered garden that yields a sweet favor, like a garden of
spices, Cant. 4.14. the one brings forth fruit for Gods basket, the other
fuel for the devils fire; all the seed sown upon it is lost, and choakt with
briars and thorns, and all the rain that falls upon it does but make the weeds
more rank and flourishing: their grape is the grape of Sodom, and of the fields
of Gomorrah, their grapes are grapes of gall, and the clusters are bitter,
Deuteronomy. 32.32. they hatch cockatrice eggs, and weave the spiders webs; vanity or
villainy is their trade, Heb. 6.7, 8. the earth which drinks in the rain that
comes off upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is
dressed, receives a blessing from God, but that which bears thorns and
briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. The
fruitful Christian watered with the word and spirit, bringing fortth a harvest
of holiness; and fruit trees fit for meat, were not to be destroyed, Deuteronomy.
20.14. but fruitless trees are for the fire, Mat. 3 10. But oh how much of this
sterile barren ground is amongst us? that resist all the offered means of their
recovery, and rave and rage against both the physician and the physic; and
though often watered, bring forth nothing but briars and thorns, whereupon all
the seed, and all the rain that falls upon it is lost: and when God expects
fruit, behold wild fruit; and yet this wild and barren ground, if well
manured, and God breathe upon it, may prove good land: this consideration made
me with the servant in the Gospel cry out, Lord, spare them one year more, that
I may dig about them, and dung them, that it may not be my fault that they
perish, nor laid to my charge: oh my soul! art not thou this barren plot, where
nothing but briars and brambles can thrive, or at least wise but little good
fruit appear? God has done much for thee, hedged thee about by his providence,
watered thee with the dew of heaven; sent many of his servants to manure thee;
whence then this trash and rubbish? whence then these tares and weeds? was not
good seed sown? why have thou not answered the great Husbandmans expectation?
what could God have done more for his Vineyard, then he has done for thee?
well, look to it, if thou remain fruitless, ere long he will pluck up thy
hedge, pluck down thy wall, take away thy fence, and leave caring for thee, and
turn in the wild boar to devour; he will lay down his basket, and take up his
axe; Oh the patience of a patient God! that has born with thee for many years,
but will ere long, if thou remain fruitless, pronounce the sentence, cut him
down, why cumbreth he the ground; and if this be the danger of barren souls, do
what in thee lies to make others fruitful also: hereby (says Christ) is my
father glorified if ye bring forth much fruit: Oh my God! Paul may plant, and
Apollo may water, but thou give the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6. The harp yields no
sound till touched by the hand of the Musician, and my heart will never be made
good till thou strikest the stroke: it is God alone must say to dry bones, live;
man can but speak to the ear, but God speaks to the heart; Lord speak home to
my heart, and the work will be done; If means and ordinances would have served
turn, the work ere now would have been effected: Lord, leave me not to other
husbandmen, for they cannot make me fruitful; Oh be thou my Gardener, and my
soul shall flourish; blow upon thy spices, and they will send forth a sweet
savor.

Upon the Propensity of the Earth to bring forth weeds.
5. Med.
When I observed the natural propensity of the Earth to bring forth briars,
and thorns, and weeds, and thistles, and such unprofitable trash and rubbish,
and that it brought forth, fed, and fostered those of its own accord, without
labor or pains, or any help of man; nay, man without much labor and toil
cannot destroy or keep them under; but choice flowers, profitable herbs, wheat
and rye, and other useful grain, springs not up at so easy a rate, there must
be pains taken, digging, plowing, harrowing, setting, sowing, weeding, fencing,
watering, and a great deal more, or no good crop can be expected: This
Observation made me think, that this was the fruits of the curse laid upon the
Earth for man's sake, Genesis 3.17. Cursed be the ground for thy sake, In sorrow
shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life, thorns also and thistles shall
it bring forth to thee, etc. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread,
etc. me thoughts the earth in this respect, did much resemble a stepmother, to
the best seeds, and choicest fruits; but an own Mother to weeds and rubbish;
this she brings forth, and brings up as her own, the other she disowns, but as
she is hired or forced: and if she be not carefully watched, will either starve,
or choke them; and she will suffer her own brats to eat the meat that should
nourish them, and suck her breasts till they are dry: and they shall flourish
while the other pine: This raised up my Meditations a little higher, and I
thought the earth in this respect much resembled the world, who will willingly
nourish no children but her own, and plays the stepmothers part with Gods
children, when the wicked which are her own brats are hugged in her bosom; if
their father look not to them they are thrown to the walls; if any be wronged
it shall be them; and if any want be, they shall suffer: the world loves her
own, Joh. 15 19. however dogs worry one another, yet all agree against the
trembling hare: Herod and Pilate are made friends, when Christ is to suffer,
and all wicked men are enemies to the power of godliness; This propensity also
of the earth to bring forth weeds, and to starve the choicest plants, made me
think it resembled also the heart of man by nature, which is a fruitful field
for briars and brambles, and the weeds of sin which grow there without
planting, but it is barren of any thing that is good; it is hard to get a good
motion, a good inclination, a good resolution to prosper in that soil, but the
heart naturally produces evil thoughts, wicked words, and bad actions, which
are the usual product it brings forth: The herb of grace must be planted by
the finger of God, and watered with the dew of heaven, or it will not prosper,
most of the good seed sown there by the Preachers of the Word is lost, and
comes to nothing; for either it falls among stones, or thorns, or by the
highway-side, and so is choked, or starved, or stole away; and devoured,
except the heart be well manured, and the nature of the soil changed; except it
be well fenc't and guarded, yea, watch't and observed, nothing that is good
will grow there. It Is not in vain that God bids us, break up the fallow ground
of our hearts, and sow not among thorns, Ier. 4.3. Hos. 10.12. and God is fain
to plow deep furrows by affliction, before he can reach the roots of the weeds*
Oh my soul! art not thou this earth that lies under the curse, where nothing
but trash and rubbish thrives and prospers? how comes it otherwise to pass,
that thou art so prone to sin and so backward to obedience? vices naturally
spring in thee, without help or labor, without plowing or sowing, and are rank
and flourishing; but grace thrives not without much ado, if at all: how comes
it to pass, that so much seed has been sown, and so little fruit appears? but
that it is choakt by trash and rubbish, or picked up by the fowls of the air; if
the devil by his temptation sows his tares there, he need neither weed them nor
look after them, they grow fast enough of themselves, the heart cherishes and
nourishes them as her own; but the herb of grace grows not so easily: A good
thought is hardly brought to a good resolution, nor a good resolution to a good
action; these are usually stifled in the womb; but the product of sin is much
more easy: O my soul! see that the soil of thy heart be changed, and true grace
be there planted, and the weeds of sin rooted out, or thou art still under the
curse: Oh my God! rather plow me and harrow me, and pluck and tear me in pieces
by affliction, then suffer me to be barren or useless ground: be thou the
husbandman, and my heart will be fruitful, and yield her increase: blow upon
thy garden, and the spices will send forth a sweet smell: let the sun of
righteousness shine upon it, and the dew of heaven water it, and let it be
planted by thy own hand, and fenced about, that the wild boar of the forest
may not devour it, and it will be no longer barren; speak the word, and the
work will be done.

Upon a Bush of thorns.
6 Med.
OBserving a bush of thorns springing up in a place where I expected better
fruit, I caused them to be stockt up and put into a gap, where a fence was
wanting, for the securing the garden, and the preserving herbs, and flowers
from damage and detriment; this occasioned this following Meditation; As these
being a fruit of the curse, spring up of their own accord without labor or
toil, so sin and corruption, a fruit of the fall, do naturally spring up in the
soul, without any pains; and as the earth own these, so does the heart own sin,
as its own proper product; God cursed the earth for man's sake, Genesis 3.18. and
thorns and thistles it has since brought forth: This made me consider, how
faithful God is in the execution of his threats as well as of his promises; and
of how dangerous a nature sin is, that produces such effects; how happy we had
been if we had not sinned, and how miserable by reason of sin; Had not man
fallen, the earth had not been cursed, but would have yielded her increase,
probably, without labor and pain, and man might have solaced himself in the
contemplation of God, and held communion with his Creator, and have had nothing
to break his peace with his God; My contemplation upon this occasion went
further, I considered how fitly the Holy Ghost had compared wicked men to
thorns, Micha. 7.4. the best of them is as a briar and the most upright of them
is as a thorny hedge, 2 Samuel 23.6. the sons of Beliall shall be all of them as
thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands, but the man that
shall touch them must be fenced with iron, and the staff of a spear, and they
shall be utterly burnt with fire in the same place. Thorns as they choke the
good seed, and nothing can prosper that grows near them; so it is with wicked
men, a godly man shall not live by them, but he shall be molested, if not
infected by them; yea, wicked Magistrates themselves, and those that sit on the
place of Judicature, may fitly be resembled to a thorn; when the poor sheep
comes for shelter, he is sure to leave some of his coat if not of his skin
behind him; I considered, this also was the fruit of the fall, otherwise man
had not been endued with such noxious qualities: whereas now wicked men like
the Amorites are as pricks in the eyes, and thorns in the sides of every true
Israelite: These also are the tares, which the devil sows amongst Gods wheat,
to molest it, and these are like to grow together till the harvest: I
considered also, that as some use was made of thorns, for the defense of better
fruit, so the wise God does make some use of wicked men for the good of his
people, sometimes he makes them his skullions to scour off their rust, and
make them brighter, whereby they fully themselves, and when their work is done
they shall be turned off; Sometimes they ar^ his rod to afflict his Saints,
Isa. 10.5. Oh Assyrian the rod of my anger, etc. but when the child is
reformed, the rod shall be burnt; and sometimes he has made them a defense for
his Church, Revel. 12.15, 16. The earth helped the woman, and swallowed up the
flood, which the dragon cast out of his mouth after her; an example of this we
have in David, when he was in great distress, compassed about by Saul, on this
side the mountain, and on that side the mountain, in eminent danger, ready like
a trembling partridge to have fallen into the hands of the greedy falcon; a
messenger came to Saul, saying, the Philistines do invade the land, and he
withdrew his army, and departed, 1 Samuel 23.26. these Philistines were but
thorns, yet were they a defense to David and his followers, and God at last
will deal with wicked men as with thorns, reserve them for the fire, for what
good they do to the godly is for ends of their own, and not for their sakes:
the Philistines minded not David's good, nor the King of Assiria Gods peoples
reformation, nor Haman Mordecai's and the Jews advancement: O my soul! can God
turn a curse into a blessing, and can he bring good out of evil, and of these
thorns make a fence for better fruit? admire his wisdom, and bless his name:
has he done thee good by these thorns, whose nature were to do hurt, bless him
for it he might have made thee the thorn, and for the present have stopped a gap
with thee, and reserved thee to everlasting burning; if he has grafted thee
into a better stock, and thou brings forth better fruit, no thanks to thee:
and if thou see any, as yet retaining their old natures, desire not presently
their burning, though they trouble thee; God may make better use of them; a
persecuting Saul may become a preaching Paul; and a wicked Manasseth a true
convert or he may make them otherwise serviceable to his people; Be not
therefore like the disciples that would presently call for fire from heaven,
upon the inhospitable Samaritans; if they perish, their misery will come soon
enough; they may say to thee, as sometime a Soldier did to some that upbraided
him, grudge me not my grapes, I am like to pay dear enough for them; seeing I
must die for stealing them; it is thy wisdom rather to see thou be not of that
number, or otherwise thou will be reserved for the same condemnation: O my God!
such as these I was, and such I had been had thou not made the difference,
and too much of that nature remains in me to this day; Oh that thou would
thoroughly change me! plant me into that noble Vine, that I may bring forth
better fruit; yea, purge me that I may bring forth more fruit.

Upon the diligence necessary to be used in a Garden.
7. Med.
When I considered how much time and pains, sweat and diligence is necessary
to keep a garden in order, and make it that it may answer the expectation of
the owner, what digging, delving and manuring, what planting, setting, sowing,
fencing, weeding, watering, etc. must be used, and all little enough, and
perhaps too little to produce a good crop; This Observation made me to reflect
upon my own soul, and to consider whether ever I had taken so much time or
pains, or been at so much cost for it, the only garden God delights in, and the
chiefest I should look after, as I have been for a little spot of earth: here
it is the herb of grace should grow, and this should be a garden of spices,
Can. 4.10. This Consideration made me blush at my own folly, when I considered
how careful I had been of a poor worthless piece of ground, and had bestowed
so much pains and cost upon it, which yet yielded but a little pleasure, and
less profit, and in the mean time neglected the soul which is of ten thousand
times a greater concernment; and when also I had considered the fruitfulness of
my garden, and the barrenness of my own heart, I concluded, had I bestowed as
much time and pains in planting, watering, and fencing that, as I have done in
this garden, it would have yielded better fruit then I can expect thence: Well
may I say with the Spouse, Cant. 1.6. they made me keeper of the Vineyards, but
my own Vineyard I have not kept: I have not taken Gods counsel, Ier. 4.3. break
up the fallow ground of your hearts, and sow not among thorns; and when I
considered how unfruitful my heart was, I concluded it had not been
sufficiently humbled, but the seed was sown among worldly cares and fears, and
discontents, and those thorns had choked it, seeing no more fruit appears: I
considered therefore how needful it was for God to plow long and deep furrows
on my back by affliction, that he might come to the root of the weeds; and this
same thing quieted me under some dark dispensations of providence; I considered
what a folly it was for a man that will not suffer a weed in his garden, and
yet will suffer the weeds of sin in his soul, though they are far more
pernicious to the herb of grace there planted, then the most pestiferous weeds
in the world can be to the choicest flowers; and yet one reigning sin is a
greater deformity to the soul then a thousand weeds can be to the fairest
garden: Oh my soul! why art thou so prodigal of time, and pains, of cost, and
care, of sweat and industry for a very trifle, and in the mean time neglect thy
greatest concerns, thy self, thy God, and thy eternal happiness? when did
thou take so much pains for heaven as thou have done for the earth? why art
thou digging and delving in the earth, as if happiness were hid under the
clods, when thou may be solacing thy self with thy God? God has not been
wanting, to thee, but thou have been wanting to thy self, he gives thee time to
run thy race, when thou leavest thy way to run after butterflies, which if thou
take, they will but foul thy fingers: Thou have been pruned and dressed by many
choice gardiners, why yet art thou fruitless? lay thy hands to the work, tear
up those weeds that hinder the flowers: Do thou expect happiness here below,
why else does thy affection grovell upon the ground? Will a handful of herbs,
or a bosom full of flowers give thee content? Oh what a poor happiness do
thou take up with! Is there no better to be had? serve a better master, and
thou shall have better wages: be a better husband, and thy gains will be the
greater; and sow in a better soil, and thou will have a better increase. Oh my
God! what answer shall I return for all the pains, and cost, and time thou have
bestowed upon me: O Lord, how have I slighted thee! O heaven, how have I
undervalued thee! how have I suffered the world to bewitch me, and steal away
my heart from my God? divert my thoughts, rend my affection from these earthly
vanities; let me see more excellency in Christ then the world affords, then
shall I be as covetous for grace as others are for gold, and take as much pains
for heaven as ever I did for earth, and be as zealous for God as others are for
sin, and improve my time for the spiritual advantage of my soul.

Upon Birds picking up the seed.
8. Med.
WHen I had sown my seed in the garden, I perceived that which lay uncovered
was made a prey to the fowls of the air who picked it up, and devoured it, this
brought to my mind our Saviors parable of the sower and the seed, wherein he
discovers the reason why though so much seed be sown so little fruit appears,
the fault is not in the seed, for that is good, the good word of God, though
sometimes the envious man may mix tares with it; Neither is the fault always in
the sower, though sometimes it may; for many of them are faithful, and
painful, but for the most part it lies in the ground, in the heart, where the
seed should be entertained; we find here there was but one fourth part good,
and oh that the one tenth part of those that hear the word were really such;
some of the ground was highway ground, not fitted and prepared for a crop,
never plowed deep enough, the seed indeed was sown upon it, never in it, it was
never covered or harrowed by Meditation, nor set out by consideration, and
therefore lies liable to be picked up by the wicked one, who will be one at
Church, whoever is absent; he makes a pathway over the heart, and hardens it
against the word, this makes many so Sermon-trodden that they receive no
impression; some we find was sown in stony places, where it had little earth,
and less root, these rejoice to hear it at present; these have some meltings,
and some sudden pangs of joy, but they are too violent to hold out, and like a
hasty rain slide away, and soak not in, and leave but a dew behind them; they
are enlightened by a flash of lightning, and not by the sun beams; they are
moved by some external principle as clocks or watches, or other engines, but
the root of the matter is not in them, and therefore withers away, and comes to
nothing, like corn on the housetop, for when persecution arises, they are
soon offended, and Christ may take heaven to himself for them, if this be his
rate of it: some seed was sown among thorns, and these sprung up, and choked
it, the cares of the world, and the deceitfulness of riches choke it; few rich
men can handle these thorns, and not prick their fingers; most overload
themselves with earth, and so lose heaven, they set their hearts with Saul upon
the asses, when a kingdom is before them: these like dissembling hosts,
welcome us into Innes, and at last cut our throats; and there is but a little
good ground, and that also brought forth variously, some an hundred, some
sixty, and some thirty-fold; every man cannot excel, we should strive after
the highest pitch of godliness, and content our selves with a low frame of
spirit, but not despair, though we fall short of it; God accounts it good
ground that brings forth any good fruit to maturity: This consideration made me
reflect upon my own condition, and call my self to an account what sort of
ground my heart was, since so much seed has been sown, and so little fruit
appears; Oh my soul! how comes it thus to pass, that thou art barren and
unfruitful, how comes it to pass, the seed is lost after so much labor, pains
and care, so much manuring and cultivating? what could God have done more for
thee by the way of means, then he has done? why then bring thou forth wild
grapes? art not thou the high-way-ground? and has not the devil hardened thy
heart, that it is become sermon-proof, and Ordinance-proof, and does he not
pick up the seed which lies lose upon it, and is not covered by meditation? art
not thou a forgetful hearer? and how can that fructify that is thus stole
away? or was it not sown among stones? no wonder then if fruit appear not,
where a root cannot be had: trust not to all stirring of the affections: Herod
heard John Baptist gladly, and reformed many things, but if the stone of the
heart be not removed, and a heart of flesh given thee, how can corn be expected
upon a rock that was never softened, mortified, or made fruitful? or was it not
sown among thorns? did thou not suffer the thoughts, the cares, the fears of
the world, or the love, desire of, or delight in riches, to choke it? when the
heart brings forth such fruits, the word cannot prosper; when the vessel is
full of water, it can receive no other liquor: O my soul! if this be thy case,
beware of it, and prepare thy heart to receive the seed, and harrow it in by
Meditation: what good will meat do, if not eaten and digested? or what good can
physic do if not taken? or a plaster if not applied? or the word if not set
home to the conscience, and reduced into practice? empty thy heart of all
distrustful cares and fears, break up the fallow ground of thy heart, and sow
not among thorns. Oh my God! if thou be not the husbandman, there will be no
good crop; If thou direct not the plow, there will be no good furrow; If thou
bless not the seed and the labor, all is in vain; Paul may plant and Apollo
water, but God gives the increase: If God set not a hand to the work, old Adam
will be too hard for young Melancthon, and the devils tares will thrive better
then the good seed; Man can but speak to the ear, God can speak to the heart;
no plaster can heal if God be not the Surgeon; no food can nourish, if God be
not the nurse; Lord reach my heart, cure my wounds, remove nay distempers,
empty my soul of froth and vanity, that the water of life may be received: Say
to my ears, Ephphatha, be opened, and they will hear; and to my heart, be soft,
and it will be done; Say to these dry bones, live; take my stony heart into thy
furnace, or what good will it do to preach to a stone? all the water that falls
upon it, will be spilt, and all the means of grace lost: Lord, speak the word,
and it will be done; command my heart, and it will obey.

Upon refreshing rain after a dry season.
9. Med.
WHen I saw after a dry season, wherein the fruits of the earth languished for
want of moisture, that when a refreshing shower of rain came, how they
flourished, grew, and increased, and how fresh and fragrant these were, which a
little before hanged the head, and droop't; I plainly then saw, that all the
pains, and all the cost, and all the care, which men were at, even about these
earthly enjoyments, signifies nothing, if God deny his blessing, if the
influences of heaven were but restrained, what would all our care and labor
signify? we may rise early, lie down late, and eat the bread of carefulness,
and all to little purpose, but how few look up to the true cause of plenty or
want; The most are like to hogs under the tree, that eat the crabs, or acorns,
when they fall, but regard not whence they come; and murmr if they have them
not; I considered the earth wanted the influences of heaven, and the heavens
wanted a commission from God, and till that was sealed, the creatures could not
be supplied; it was in vain to quarrel, the one or the other; nay, man had no
cause to quarrel at any but himself where the obstacle lay; for had not he
sinned, the creatures had not suffered; This made me a little consider the
course of nature, and how one creature depends upon another, and every one
seems to be made for another rather then for it self; The Sun, the Moon, and
Stars, those glorious lamps, and beauty-spots of heaven, in their uncessant and
unerring courses, power out their heat and light and influence, upon the earth,
and by this means the creatures are generated, and the earth refresh't, without
which influence it would be but a barren, dry, and unprofitable heap, and all
things therein would languish, and die. The earth not ungrateful for received
favors, conceives and produces corn, and grass, herbs and flowers, plants
and trees, and other vegetables, both for the use of man and beast, whereby the
vegetable and sensitive creatures are maintained, beasts of the field, fouls of
the air, fish of the Sea, and all creeping things are fed, and cherished: these
again offer themselves for food or service to man, their little Lord, and he
alone is made capable of communion with his creator; and especially fitted for
his service: When I had seriously considered this subordination among the
creatures, and that every one seemed to mind another good rather then his
own, this led me up to a first cause, to enquire who directed them to an end
they knew not, and led them by a rule they understood not; and when I
considered that all those famous works were made, and thus subordinated each to
other, and thus directed for the sake of man, this made me break out with the
Psalmist upon the like occasion: Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of
him, or the son of man that thou regardest him; thou have made him a little
lower then the angels, thou have crowned him with glory and dignity, Psalm. 8.4,
5. I considered that all this rule and dominion, glory and dignity, was given
him, that he might serve, and honor his Creator, whose image he did in the
Creation most lively represent, but above all sublunary creatures, none have
more deviated from the rule God has given them, nor transgressed his laws, nor
frustrated the ends of their creation, more then man, by whose fall the beauty
of the newly burnisht world was soon stained, and the glory of it soon
ecclipsed. This made me wonder, that God suffered such enemies to live upon the
face of the earth, to be lords over the works of his hands: Oh the patience,
and long-forbearance of a merciful God! that such rebels that have their life,
and breath, and being from him, and are guilty of so many acts of treason, and
rebellion against heaven, should yet be preserved and provided for as they are,
and so many offers of mercy tendered to them: Oh my soul! has God done so much
for thee, was this glorious fabric of the world made for thy sake among
others? are the creatures, yea, the angels themselves set a work for thy good?
and does thy great benefactor only require the pepper-corn of homage, and the
thankful acknowledgement of what thou have received, and obediential homage for
the time to come? and do thou deny him that? art thou fed and clothed,
maintained and preserved by his providence and care, and have thou any meat to
eat, or drink to drink, or clothes to put on, or health, or strength, or limbs,
or senses, or peace, or plenty, or life, or breath, or any other enjoyment, but
what he gives thee? and is a thankful acknowledgment of these favors denied
by thee? he does not need thee, neither can thou add any thing to his glory,
yet he takes himself honored by a thankful obediential observation of his
commands; but alas! how much time did thou spend, before thou did cordially
yield any thanks to him for his benefits? and how much wanting art thou in it
to this very day? he makes his sun to shine upon thee, and his rain to fall
upon thee, he gives thee fruitful seasons, and fills thy heart with food and
gladness, it is doubtless then thy duty to devote thy self wholly to his
service, and give up not only thy name, but thy heart to Christ; Oh my God!
do thou expect service from me, enable me to do it; I am by nature a
senceless stock or stone, dead in trespasses and sins, put life into me, and I
shall perform the actions of life, I cannot act without thy assistance; give me
help from heaven, for vain is the help of man, open my lips then shall I show
forth thy praise; enlarge my heart, then shall I run the ways of thy commands,
touch my tongue with a coal from thy altar then shall I trumpet out thy praise;
seek thy servant, and I shall be found.

Upon the plucking off the tops of weeds.
10. Med.
IN a dry season, when the bottles of heaven were stopped, and the clouds were
bound up, the rain restrained, and the showers withheld from the earth, so that
it was parched hard and dry, and gaped in vain for cooling, moistning,
refreshing, softning showers; I observed some persons when they could not get
up the weeds by the roots, tare off their heads, which when they had done, the
garden seemed pleasant to the beholders, and gave content for a while to the
spectators; who imagined there had been a through-reformation; but not long
after, when a shower of rain distilled upon it, the cheat appeared, the weeds
sprung up as fresh and flourishing as before, yea, like hydra, with more heads
then at first, so this partial reformation was discovered: This observation
afforded this Meditation, I thought it much resembled a partial reformation in
the soul, when men begin their reformation at the wrong end, or take a wrong
course to kill the tree of sin, as many do, they crop and lop off some
branches, and let the root alone, this is not the way to destroy it; many tear
off some of the tops of the weeds but let the root remain in the soul, which
when it is watered with the devils temptations, and the worlds allurements, and
animated with fit occasions and suitable opportunities, they spring forth
afresh (it may be) with more heads then before, and then the cheat appears,
that those sins were not killed but laid aside: An evident example we have of
this in Herod, who convinced by John Baptists preaching, that his courses were
not good, sets upon a reformation, falls out with many of his sins, lops off
here one bough, and there another, but lets the root remain firm, which
afterward spring forth and show themselves: It is said, he reformed many
things, but he left much work behind undone, to the undoing of his soul: The
sore was only skinned over, and was not sound at the bottom, and after broke
out with more violence and greater anguish, like a torrent of water damned up;
when the dam breaks, it runs more furiously; So did Herod's corruption, even to
the taking away of John Baptists head, who before had set some stop to it: And
thus it is with many seeming Converts, that after prove wicked apostates, and
persecute the truth that they did formerly profess, the root of the matter was
not in them. Hazael did not believe so much wickedness to lodge in his heart,
as the Prophet spoke of, and afterward appeared: An apple rotten at the heart
may have a fair outside, but the rottenness within will in time rot the outside
also; when the fountain is corrupted, it is impossible to purge the stream: If
the heart be rotten, all that thence proceeds will have an ill savor: This
half reformation has been the undoing of many forward Professors in our days;
they reformed their lives but not their hearts; they lopt off some boughs, but
meddled not with the root; they went to cleanse the stream, but not the fountain;
and in a little time the corruption within, breaks forth into the life and
conversation without; and the unclean spirit that was cast out, takes to
himself seven more worse then himself, and enters in, and the last end of that
man is worse then the beginning, Mat. 12.45. The devil deals by such when he
has reduced them, as a Jaylour with one that has broke prison, lays on more
bolts: Runagate Christians are the devils greatest devotes, and such apostates
very hardly (if ever) are reduced: O my soul! how stands the case with thee?
have thou not weeded thy own garden thus, and rather tore off the lops of the
weeds then plucked them up by the root? how comes it else to pass that upon
every shower of temptation they are so apt to spring up again? look about thee
if thou will not kill sin, sin will kill thee; and if thou will kill the cursed
tree, stub it up by the roots, and not lop off here one branch, and there
another, for if the root be dead, the branches will soon wither; but if the
root live, the branches will revive: The way to cleanse the stream, is to purge
the fountain; for sweet water cannot proceed from a stinking puddle: if the
tree be good, the fruit will be good also; if the spring be not dried up, it
will sooner or later overflow the dam: the way to cure the sore is to heal it
at the bottom; and heart-reformation is the best way to life-reformation:
hypocrisy within will like a botch at length break forth, and a rotten heart
will ere long rot the life also: O my God without thy assistance all my
endeavors will prove vain: the devil, the world, and my own deceitful heart
will beguile me, let me not strive in my own strength, nor fail of thine
assisting grace; rather cast me into the furnace, then suffer my corruption and
dross to remain in me; and rather plow deeper furrows by affliction, then
suffer the roots of the weeds to remain in my heart: turn me, O Lord, and I
shall be turned; convert me, and I shall be converted; let me not take up with
a partial reformation, and let nothing less then the death of sin give me
content.

Upon the care men take of their Gardens.
11. Med.
WHen I considered how careful many men and women are to keep their garden in
order, and what pains and cost they are at in this thing, and what time is
spent to this end; and how many are employed in this work, walling, fencing,
and securing it, in digging, dunging, weeding, and much more; there must not a
rarity be wanting, that love or labor, or money can procure; there must not a
weed be seen, nor herb, nor flower out of order; what is dead must be
supplied, what is wanting must be had, and what is superfluous must be cast
away; the tenderest must be secured from frost and scorching sun, and the whole
must be formed, after the newest mode and latest fashion: the alleys and walks
must be swept and trimmed, and rolled, and levelled; the grass mown, and kept
under, and all so exactly done, that it may appear to be an earthly paradise, a
place of pleasure and delights: And observing also, that all this while those
very persons so curious, and so neat in shaddows, yet neglect the substance,
and suffer their own souls, and the souls of their Children, servants, and near
relations, the gardens God only takes delight in, to be sadly out of order; and
though they make choice of the choicest, skilfullest, painfullest men for the
other, they let out these gardens to the devils dressing, without regard who
sows tares and poppy, cokle, and darnell, weeds and rubbish, thorns and
thistles in them; and whatsoever bad is, which grows and flourishes without
control, and choakes all the good seed, that is there sown, these men are made
keepers of others vineyards, but their own vineyard they have not kept; these
men suffer the devil to make a pathway over their hearts, when they only look
to the ways in their gardens: I have often wondered at their stupidity in
spiritualls, that are so ripe-witted in temporalls; and that those that are so
good husbands for the body, should be such bad husbands for the soul, and those
that take so much pains for a little imaginary pleasure here, should altogether
neglect the true pleasures, everlasting joys, at the right hand of God for
evermore; Oh the stupendous folly of men, to prefer pebbles before pearls, and
gold before grace, and a handful of flowers before an heartfull of holiness,
and the shadow before the substance, and earth before heaven, and a garden
before paradise: well, however they do now, the time is coming, these men will
find their mistake, and will alter their mind, and change their judgment,
when grace will be accounted the choicest flower in the garland, and a dram of
it will be of more value then a cabinet of Jewels, and holiness will then prove
the best fashion, though many now disdain to wear it: Oh my soul! art thou not
guilty thy self of those sins, which thou so sharply chargest upon others? does
not this show that thou look too much abroad, and too little at home; art
thou not too deep in the transgression, which thou now castest upon others? and
puts other men's sins in the end of the wallet before, and thine own behind out
of sight; thou art blind at home and quick-sighted abroad, and see the mote
in thy brothers eye, and not the beam in thine own; have not thou thy self been
more prodigal of thy pains, thy time, thy cost, thy sweat, for mere trifles,
then ever thou have been about thy greater concerns? and is any man's folly more
conspicuous then thy own? have thou not had thy ears open to those bewitching
Siren songs of pleasure, and been more tickled with earthly sensual delight
then with communion with God in his worship and service? when the world has
smiled upon thee, how unwilling have thou been to die and to be with God? and
have laid cut thy self, thy strength, thy time too much for earthly enjoyments,
to the neglect of heavenly riches; sweep therefore before thy own doors, before
thou complain of the foulness of the street; pluck out the beam out of thy own
eye, before thou offer thy helping hand to thy brother, to remove his mote;
throw the first stone at thy self, reform what is amiss, and then thou may
reprove another more boldly; get thy affection weaned from the world, and thy
eye fixed upon better riches, and more enduring pleasures, lest God give thee
these for thy portion, and what then will thou do in the latter end? Oh my God,
what shall I say to thee? how shall I answer thee? my iniquity is found out
this day to be hateful; had I spent but my time for spiritual advantages,
which I have prodigally wasted for very trifles, it might have been much better
with me, had I planted and sowed in a more fruitful field, I might have had a
better crop: Lord, wean me from the dugs of carnal delights, though it be with
the gall and wormwood of afflictions, and suffer me not to surfeit on the worlds
dainties, leave me not to my own will, then shall I undo my self, feed me with
food convenient, and it suffices me.

Upon a neglected Garden.
12. Med.
WHen I saw by experience how soon a neglected garden grows out of form and
fashion, and in a short time comes to be a rude and indigested heap, grown over
with weeds and nettles, trash and rubbish, destroyed with moles, inhabited with
toads, serpents, or other vermin, the wall broken down, the fence decayed,
beasts and swine making a prey of it, the one tearing off the tops, the other
digging up the roots of the tender plants, the herbs and flowers dying,
withering or decaying, choked by the weeds, or starved for want of
nourishment, nothing flourishes but weeds, and nothing appears but confusion,
and the whole appearing more like a wilderness, then a garden; This sight
brought to my mind the state of the poor soul, when it is neglected, and not
heedfully observed, then all run to ruin, and tends to confusion, nothing that
good is, prospers; nothing that is bad, but flourishes; corruption and sin get
the upper hand, and grace is kept under; the fence is let down, the watch is
neglected, and the devil, that wild boar of the forest, destroys the tender
vines, roots up every good inclination, spoils every good motion, intention and
resolution, and lays all waste; how many have I known, who when they have been
under good Masters, good parents, good Ministers, have been very hopeful, and
towardly, and were likely to have made good instruments in the Church, for Gods
glory, if not pillars in the house of God; while their graces, and good
inclinations were well watered and they received encouragement in their
religious courses; then the flowers of grace seemed to flourish, and good
desires, holy intentions, and resolutions, to bud forth, and hopeful beginnings
showed themselves, and promising parts gave hopes of future increase; But when
these fire-sticks, not well kindled, were once removed from those that set them
a burning, they were soon extinguished; when they had changed their
habitations, their company, when they were left to themselves, or to those that
were careless of them, they went out of themselves, and vanished in a smoke, or
in a snuff; then their corruptions soon gathered head, and their graces were at
an under; they soon grew rude, and brutish, and given to sensuality, and the
herb of grace for want of rain and nourishment, watering, and weeding, was
soon suffocated by vice, and in short time these men lost that which they
seemed to have, and their souls looked no more like a watered garden, but a
barren wilderness, or a dunghill covered with noisome weeds, and the dam which
religious education had erected, being broken down, the stream ran more
violently; and it is not unusual to see vice so much prevailing, that they turn
persecutors of what before they professed: oh my soul, is not this in part thy
case? are there not sensible decays of love in thee? is not thy zeal for God
abated, and thy courage in his cause decayed? are not thy graces choked with
weeds, and the wheat overrun with tares? where is the kindeness of thy youth,
and the love of thy espousalls, when thou wentst after God in the wilderness?
have thou not with the Church of Ephesus, lost thy first love? do thou not
grow more strange with thy God, and does not God grow more strange with thee?
where is that heart and fervor which did appear in thee? that life and
activity in his service? has not the cooling wind of the world abated this?
and thou beginnest to be (as the world calls it) more moderate, or (as God
calls it) more lukewarm, the weeds of sin begin to overtop the herb of grace;
do not these grow rank and flourishing, when grace grows weak and feeble? grace
like the house of Saul grows weaker and weaker, when sin like the house of
David gathers strength; well, beware betimes; if thou grow lukewarm, God will
spew thee out of his mouth: if thou bear wild grapes, he will pluck down thy
fence, and lay thee waste; if thou art barren, he will cut thee down; and cast
thee into the fire; oh my God, without thy assistance I shall bring forth no
fruit, or worse then none, wild grapes, grapes of sin and disobedience; my
sins like a bloud-hound will dog me at the heels, and find me out, the weeds
of sins and the thorns of cares will suffer no good herb nor flower to
flourish, if God weed them not out: Oh, pluck up those weeds, keep under those
thorns, and make up those decays in this thy garden, let the north-winde and
the south, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out, Cant.
4.16. that I may be serviceable to thee, and profitable to man; let my fruits
be ripened, my graces greatned, by the breathing of the Holy Ghost, then shall
I serve thee with thy own, and give thee of thy own; 1 Chronicles. 29.14.

Upon the fading of Beautiful flowers.
13. Med.
WAlking in the garden, I fixed my eyes upon the flowers there growing; I
considered the variety, beauty, and splendor of them; how glorious they
appeared, after a cooling shower of rain, and the refreshing beams of the
shining Sun, how pleasantly they looked, how sweet they smelt, filling the
ambient air with their sweet savor, delighting the beholders senses with their
color, shape, and scent; and when on the other side, I considered how vain and
fading all this glory was, how transitory these beautiful creatures were, and
how their glory past was as the morning dew, which when the Sun in his glory
appears, quickly vanishes; when I considered, that the same day I saw them in
the height of their pride, and in their lowest debasement; to day they are
(says Christ) and to morrow they are cast into the oven: the same day ofttimes
sees them both admired, and despised, hugged in the bosom, and cast out upon
the dunghill; me thought this did lively resemble the vanity of all humane
felicity, how transitory it is and uncertain, and how little solidity is to be
found in any thing under the sun; Now they flatter, and seem beautiful to the
eye, and suddenly they wither, vanish and disappear: If we look upon their
little Lord, and the owner of these things, we shall find him as frail and
brittle, as fading and transitory as these; this day you may see him in the
strength of his youth, and his bones full of marrow, and to morrow death
seizes upon him, and the worm sweetly feeds upon him, Job. 24.20. they are cut
down as the grass, and wither as the flower of the field, Psalm. 37.12, 13. How
frequent is it in Scripture to compare man to grass, and to a fading flower?
Esaias. 40.6, 7. all flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the
field, the grass withers, the flower fades, because the spirit of the Lord
blows upon it; surely the people is grass, Psalm. 92.7. when the wicked
springs as the grass, and when the workers of iniquity flourish, it is that
they may be out off for ever; and as man is thus frail and brittle, fading and
transitory, so are all these sublunary things; there is no stability, no
sollidity in them, they are like the moon every day showing a new face; now
waxing, now waning; or like the Sea, sometimes ebbing, sometimes flowing; now a
full sea, and a few hours after low water; we may see many men flourish like
green bay-trees, and suddenly taken away, and the place that knew them shall
know them no more; now in the height of honor, and suddenly in the gulf of
disgrace; now flourishing in riches and quickly pincht with poverty, our age
can witness all this; if our own Nation yielded not sufficient examples, we
might pass over into Ireland for proof, where a hundred thousand were suddenly
stripped of all; and for beauty, those that have most gloried in it, in a short
time by a disease they have been deformed: so for friends, those that love to
day, do hate to morrow; the like we may say of all earthly enjoyments: Oh my
soul, if earthly delights, how pleasing soever be so fading, and transitory,
here thou see thy folly, in spending so much of thy time in planting,
pruning, fencing, and watering so fading a gourd, and so perishing a plant, and
contenting thy self with a painted nothing: beauty is but skin-deep, and when
the frost of sickness, or the wind of old age comes, it will wither; death
will equal the fair with the foul, the young with the aged: riches are no
surer, they take themselves wings, and fly away; strength will decay, and
Sampson himself cannot grapple with death; honor is the emptiest of bubbles,
and he that this day is ascending the highest round of the ladder, of
promotion, may suddenly break his neck in the fall, as Haman did: but there is
a beauty which will never fade; grace and holiness will never change color;
there are riches which will be certain, laid up where neither rust corrupts
nor theives can steal or plunder; there are honors which will last to
eternity; pleasures at Gods right hand, that never shall have end; there is
meat that perishes not, but endures to eternal life; spend not thy time in
seeking after these gilded nothings and painted vanities; Oh my God, bestow
these things upon me, that will do me good; these garments will adorn me, and
make me beautiful in the eyes of God, and good men; this food will nourish my
soul, and these riches will make me rich indeed; put me not off with such
trifles as the world affords, and with which the devil pleases fools and
franticks; the riches of Christ, the jewels of grace, the crown of glory, are
worth wishing for, working for, suffering for, striving, fighting, running,
wrestling, yea, dying for, when all other things are not worth the pains and
sweat which usually are spent upon them: Lord, no portion but thy self will
satisfy, no husband but Christ will serve my turn, no pleasure will please but
those at thy right hand, no jointure but a kingdom will content; Lord, give me
these though thou take from me all the rest.

Upon Stones in the Garden.
14. Med.
OBserving in the garden many stones mixed with other soil, and considering how
useless, fruitless, and unprofitable they were, yea though they had the same
husbandry bestowed upon them, the same sun to shine upon them, and watered with
the same showers, though they had the same seed and labor, the same mucking
and manuring, the same tilling and weeding, as the other soil had, yet were
never the better, never the softer, or more pliable; they remained stones,
still fruitless and unprofitable; yea, though I broke them in pieces: I could
neither mollify them, nor make them fruitful, nor profitable, but they were
hurtful and pernicious to the place they were in; neither axe nor hammer, fire
nor water could change their nature; neither fair means nor foul, the summers
sun, nor winters frost could not change them, they were still the same:
hereupon I caused them to be gathered together and cast out of the garden; to
mend a foul way; and by this means that which before was a detriment now became
a benefit; This Observation helped me to this Meditation, it brought to my mind
the nature of a stony heart; oh how lively do these stones represent this to
us; the stony heart is of the nature of a stone, mercyes cannot melt it,
judgments cannot break it; see this in Pharaoh, his heart after all the
judgments continues stone still, good seed sown in a stony heart brings
nothing to perfection, neither can it take any deep root, as we see in the
parable of the stony grounds, they receive the word with joy, but have not
root, and therefore soon wither; they only taste of the good word of God, Heb.
6.45. as cooks do of their sauces (says one) they let nothing down, they
digest it not; this ground though never so carefully husbanded, even by Christ
himself, the wisest husbandman, yet brings no fruit to maturity; I have
sometimes wondered how wicked men could sit under the powerful means of grace,
and Ministry of the Word, and have hellfire flasht in their faces, and yet
never startle at it, though the same sins which their consciences know they are
deeply guilty of, are again and again condemned to hell, and it be proved that
those that live in such sins shall never go to heaven; and the Chapters and
verses alleged where God does sentence such sinners to hell, and exclude them
out of heaven, yet they remain as insensible as blocks, or stocks, or the
stones they tread upon, or the seats they sit upon, or the pillars they lean
against; and what wonder is it that one stone should be as insensible as
another? And on the other side, when the melting promises of the Gospel are
pressed; and God, and Christ, and heaven, and happiness, everlasting pleasures,
and treasures, glory and happiness is offered, this makes not so deep an
impression, as the offer of one shilling, nay, of one penny, will from a man:
Does not this plainly prove, that these men's hearts are senceless stones? Now
it is the nature of some stones, fire will not melt them, water will not soften
them, nothing will mollify them; so it is of wicked men, neither mercies, nor
judgments will work upon them; Pharaoh was such a stone, nothing would work
upon him, though he was broken to shivers, each piece retains its natural
hardness, it is stone still, but such stones that will not be fitted for Gods
building; he will employ them otherwise, and make stepping-stones of them, God
will not lose by them; if they will not serve for one use, they shall for
another. It Is true he has a furnace, that can melt them, and happy is he that
is cast into it, if they miss of that they shall be reserved for the infernal
furnace; where they shall always burn but never be consumed, neither shall any
of their dross ever waste; in the mean while as God made use of thorns (as
before was noted) so can he of these stones, for the good of his Church; oh my
soul, this was thy case, this was thy condition by nature, out of the same rock
wast thou hewn, and out of the same hole of the pit wast thou dug; thy heart
was as hard as the nether millstone, and resembled the flinty rock, that would
neither bend nor bow, and was as insensible of spiritual things, as the stones
in the street, much water was spilt upon this rock, which could not be gotten
up again; much washing was bestowed to make this blackamore white, but all in
vain; many a melting Sermon thou have heard, and did remain stone still; how
is the case at present with thee? what is thy present condition? has God
melted thee in his furnace? has he changed thy nature? has he fashioned thee
anew, and molded thee into a better shape, and given thee a better form? has
he taken away the heart of stone, and given thee a heart of flesh? has he
fitted thee for his own work? and hewn, and squared thee for his own building,
to be united to Jesus Christ the chief cornerstone? if so, bless God for it,
for it was his own work, thou wast not able to fit thy self, nor all the
Ministers in England to help thee, had not God put his hand to the work; but if
thou retain still thy old inflexible nature, as hard and senseless as ever, if
thou be unpollished, rough and craggy, notwithstanding all the pains God has
bestowed upon thee, after so much melting, and so much hewing, well may thou
fear thou will be cast out amongst the rubbish, as unfit for Gods use, and
reserved for the fire of hell, which will neither refine thee, nor yet consume
thee; Oh my God, great pains and cost thou have been at with me, but I have not
answered thy pains, nor quit thy cost; I remain still rough and hard,
notwithstanding all the blows of thy workmen: but Lord, if thou would blow
the fire, I should melt, if thou would lay thy hand upon the workmans axe, I
should be squared and sitted for the work: Lord, rather lay great blows upon
me, then suffer me to be unpolisht, or cast out into the rubbish; take away the
heart of stone, give me a heart of flesh, that I may melt at thy mercies, and
tremble at thy judgments.

Upon worms in the garden.
15. Med.
WHen I was digging in the garden, I observed many worms and other insects
which divine providence had there disposed to be fed and cherished, but by what
I know not: here, it is like, they had their birth, and first being, here they
led their lives, and here (for ought I know) they will finish their course, and
take their ends: I considered that the same providence that had appointed out
my place and station, where I should be born, where I should lead my life, and
where I should end my days, had appointed, the like for them; and when I had
spent some time in this Consideration, what a poor miserable piece man is, by
what names or titles soever dignified or distinguished, that is so near a kin
to these despicable creatures, these silly helpless worms, they have the same
father, and the same mother, and were made of the same matter, by the hand of
the same workman, and were made of dust, and unto dust they must return: we may
say, to corruption, thou art my father, and to the worm, thou art my mother and
my sister, Job. 17.14. Holy David, a great man, both for worth and dignity,
beloved of God, and King of Israel, yet remembers his original, and this made
him humble, he cries out Psalm. 22.6. I am a worm, and no man; what then are we,
poor shrubs, that we should have high thoughts of our selves, or entertain a
proud conceit of our own worth: we may find in Scripture man is frequently
called a worm, from the similitude that is between us and them, being poor,
helpless, shiftless creatures, Job. 25.56. Behold, even to the moon and it
shines not, and the stars, are not pure in his sight, how much less man that
is a worm, and the son of man which is a worm, Esaias. 41.14. fear not thou worm
Jacob, and ye men of Israel, I will help thee, etc. And truly as to the body,
there is not much difference, but in the shape; they were made of the same
matter, dug out of the same hole of the pit; were clay in the hand of the
same potter, and ere long shall be reduced to their first original, and had God
pleased, the man might have been the worm, and the worm the man; yea, the most
of men have the very nature, and disposition of worms; they moil, and toil, and
dig, and root in the earth, and bury themselves in it, their affections grovell
upon the ground, and aim at no higher an end, nor carry on no higher a design
then Scraping muck together, and mind no other happiness but how to make
provision for back and belly; fitly therefore do they bear the name of
muckworms, and ere long they shall lodge together in the dust, where man shall
be made a feast for worms, Job. 24.19.20. as drought and heat consume the
snow-waters, so does the grave those which have sinned, the womb shall forget
him, the worm shall feed sweetly on him, he shall be no more remembered, Esaias.
51.8. the moth shall eat them like a garment, etc. this is the portion of poor
man, from which grace it self cannot exempt him: Holy Job was not free, Job.
19.25.26. for I know that my redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the
latter day upon the earth, and though after my skin worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God, etc. Oh that this were well minded by our
dainty dames, that now plaster and paint, and spot their faces, to take their
prey, and spend their time in wanton dalliance, and put far from them the evil
day; Oh that they would consider, it is not long before they shall dance after
deaths pipe, down to the chambers of darkness, where they must make their bed
in the dust, and the worms shall make their nests between their breasts; and
eat out these wanton windows of love, and messengers of lust: Oh what an
humbling consideration might this be, if well thought on, to those that now
scarce think the ground good enough to tread upon, and must not have the wind
to blow upon them, or the sun to see them; and go in an antic dress, and study
how to pamper worms meat, and go like petty angels, little thinking, they are
so near akin to poor despicable worms: Oh my soul, wast thou as clay in the
hand of the potter, and made of the same mold with this poor worm, bless God
that has made the difference, it was in his power to have made thee the worm,
and this worm the man, then had thou lain liable to be dashed by every foot;
but God has made thee a rational creature, capable of Communion with himself,
and enjoyment of him for ever; let the thoughts also of thy original, dust thou
art, and unto dust thou shall return, keep thee humble; have still in thy mind
the worm thy mother, and sister: it is a sin and shame for an angel to be
proud, much more for a dustheap, and one of these days, thou must make thy bed
in the dust, and this earthly tabernacle will be dissolved; provide therefore a
new habitation, a house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens? Thou
have a better part indewed with more noble faculties then these poor creatures
have, which if not provided for, thou art a thousand times in a worse condition
then they are; thou wast made for an higher end, and fitted to do God better
service, but they never transgrest their makers will nor Creators laws, as thou
have done, and if thou art not regenerated and born again, thou had better
never have been born, or else made a dog, or toad, or poor crawling worm, whose
misery ends with life, when thine will begin at thy death; these serve God
better in their kind then thou have done; Oh my God, it was thy will there
should be a difference between me and these irrational creatures, thou have
indewed me with more noble faculties, and did create me in thy own image, and
made me, Lord, over the work of thy hands; but oh how soon was this image
lost, and I disabled for the work I was created for; I became as a lost sheep,
O seek thy servant, that I may be found: I am the prodigal, incline my heart to
come home to my fathers house; and open thy arms and heart to receive me; give
me in those qualifications that are necessary to thy service, renew thine image
in my soul, pardon my transgressions, and be favorable to my soul; mortify my
corruptions, then shall I be able to serve thee with cheerfulness, and shall
have occasion to blese God that I was made a man, and not a worm.

Upon an heap of Ants or Pismires.
16. Med.
FInding in the garden a heap of ants or pismires, at the root of a tree, which
I looked upon as no friends but enemies to an orchard, I disturbed them with my
foot, and they soon took the allarm, whereupon I took notice how these painful
creatures behaved themselves when thus disturbed; they were all in a confusion,
some run this way, and some that, and no one knew where, or how to settle; and
yet I observed every one laying hold of something, and getting some burden upon
his back, though he knew not where to bear it, I thought this confusion
resembled a beseiged City, when taken by the enemy, or the Country when an
enemy makes an incursion, the inhabitants every one shifts for himself, one
runs this way, another that, to save himself, and if it may be to secure his
chiefest Jewels, or that which he most values; this minded me by the way, that
it was a Christians wisdom in all the incursions of satan, and the inroads and
assaults he makes upon us, to secure the soul our chiefest Jewel, and not leave
it unguarded at his mercy: this is our fort-royall, which if taken we are
undone, but if safe, though he take the outworks, it matters not much, if the
castle be secure: Let us store this therefore with provision, and ammunition,
against the assaults of this treacherous enemy. Again, this confused stir that
thus happened among these poor insects, represented to me the hurlyburly that
is abaoad in the world, wherein are millions of men; every one driving on some
particular design, and yet go various ways to work; some pursue after riches,
some honors and some pleasures, and yet agree not on the way, nor on the means
to attain their end: Those that aim at riches, all tread not in the same steps,
some go a more plain way then others do, and by labourious toiling, carking,
care and pains, seek to get it, and are no ones foes but their own, in spending
so much time upon it, that they neglect their greater concerns; others by more
subtle, but less honest shifts, cast their ground, and think to take their
prey before their neighbors; these by lying, cheating, swearing, forswearing,
cozening, and circumventing, make have to be rich, but cannot be innocent:
these ofttimes with the Eagle stealing meat from the altar, bring a coal with
it, which fires their own nests: ill-gotten goods seldom prosper, and the
third heir seldom enjoys them; some in the pursuit of honor take the way of
virtue, and hunt after it by desert; but these are but few, yet this is the
securest road: others endeavor to ascend the steps of promotion by fawning,
and flattery, and such indirect courses, but though these are the most by far,
yet ofttimes they break their necks ere they come to the top of the ladder, and
are always set in slippery places; the former way though least trodden, and
most painful, is the surest and safest; for honor follows virtue, as the
shadow does the substance: others that pursue pleasure differ also, some seek
after more innocent delights, others esteem none worth enjoying, but what is
the forbidden fruit, and desperately pursue such pleasures, that perish ere they
are budded, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. In a word, some are
building castles in the air, and never live to finish them, others are getting
goods, and know not who shall enjoy them; others are raking together by hook or
by crook, and others are scattering abroad what is thus scraped together, and
spend all, and know not who shall relieve them; some are promising themselves
content if they had a Lordship, others if they had a Dukedom, and some if they
had a Kingdcm, which if attained they are no nearer satisfaction, then before;
and they are scarce warm in their places, but death with a dash with his foot,
breaks the pitcher, and spoils the sport, and strips him of that in an hour,
that he has been projecting for all his life: and thus you see there is a
confused hurly-burly in the world, every man driving on his own designs, and
God all this while tacitly by this, is a carrying on his designs, perhaps
quite contrary to theirs. Or this tumultuous confusion amongst these little
creatures may resemble a crowd in a market or fair, some rush this way, some
that, that he that stands at a distance, and observes their motion, thinks it
is a confusion, yet every man is carrying on some design or other, and moves
accordingly. Oh my soul, lose not thy self, thy pains, thy precious time, as
many do, in seeking honey in a wasps nest, or that in the world which no man
was ever yet able to find there; content, satisfaction, and happiness; these
are not sown in the furrows of thy field, and therefore are not to be found in
full bags, and barns; content grows not in natures garden, and those that seek
happiness beneath the moon, are mistaken; the enjoyment of God in glory is our
complete happiness, and nothing else will give the soul content, let the world
say what it will to the contrary: carking cares, and fretting fears, and
Jealousies about earthly enjoyments, are so far from being the way to it, that
it choaks the word which is the means to attain it: the riches, honors and
pleasures the world affords, which are the worlds Deity, whereupon most men
dote, as much as the Ephesians did upon Diana's Temple, bear no more proportion
to true riches, true pleasures, and true honors, then painted fire on the wall
to true fire, or a King upon a Stage, to a King upon the throne, they only bear
an empty name, and notion; those that pursue them will find their mistake, and
that they were not worth their time and pains, and cark and care, especially
their souls, which are like to be lost into the bargain; but God and Christ,
and heaven and glory, are worth our labor; we cannot buy this gold to dear: Oh
my God, this has been my folly, to hunt after these butterflys, and neglect
the race, where a crown of glory was to be the prize, and my own soul lay at
the stake; I have laid out my money for that which is not bread, and my labor
for that which satisfyeth not: I have been one of these busy creatures, that
have made a great and confused bustle in the world, to little purpose: help me
now to devote my self to thy service, and give up not only my name, but my
heart to Christ, then may I expect a better reward, then the world has given
me, and better happiness then the creatures can afford.

Upon the Diligence of the ants.
17. Med.
UPon the former occasion, when I had (as before was noted) disturbed the ants,
and put them into a confusion, I observed what would be the issue, and saw when
the present fear, and amazement was a little over, which put them into that
disorder, they unanimously with a joint consent, applied themselves, with might
and main, to order what I had disordered with my foot, and to repair the
breaches I had made in their Castle or strong-hold, every one laying hold of
something, and carrying it to the common heap; methought, they did resemble a
well ordered, well governed commonwealth, where the whole community join heart
and hand for the common interest, and lay out their strength for the public
benefit; but alas! where is there such a government, such a society to be
found? what a happy thing were it to see the inhabitants of a Nation, of a
City, of a Town, or Village, to have public spirits, and every one to concern
himself in the concerns of the whole, and unanimously mind the public good,
as well as their own private concerns: but alas! it is far otherwise, both in
Nation, Town and Country, yea, public persons, that are in Authority, and to
whom the welfare of the rest is entrusted, too many of them have low base
private spirits, and will go no further then their own private interest, gain,
and advantage drives them; yea, if Christians that make more then ordinary
profession of religion, were of public spirits, and would sympathize with each
other, in weal or woe, and put to a helping-hand, and a willing-heart, and watch
over each other, and assist one the other, upon all occasions, and exigencies,
for soul and for body, what a growing, thriving, sweet communion would there
be? the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 133.1. behold, how good, and how pleasant it
is, for men to dwell together in unity? it is like the precious ointment upon
the head, that ran down to the beard, etc. yea, like the dew of hermon, and the
dew that descends upon the mountains of Zion, etc. but such unity is more to
be wished for, then hoped for, in our days, wherein Christians rather worry one
another, then help and assist. The diligence and industry of these poor
creatures also brought to my mind the counsel of Solomon to the sluggard, and
oh that I could speak it loud enough to my self and others that are guilty,
Pro. 6.6. go to the ant thou sluggard, consider her ways and be wise, which
has no guide, overseer, nor ruler, yet provideth her meat in the summer, and
gathers her food in the harvest. The Naturalists and others have written much
of the industry of these creatures, not only that they gather their store, but
also draw it forth (say some) in a sun-shine-day, to dry it, to keep it from
putrefaction: These insects are (as one calls them) very Laicorum libri, the
true Lay-mans books, wherein they may learn their duty: Oh man, how art thou
degenerated, that wast made but a little lower then the angels, and wast endued
with reason to rule these inferior Creatures, and not only, ad laborem natus,
sed and ratione ornatus; and yet now must be sent to learn wisdom, not only
from the ox and the ass, Isay. 1.3. not only from the stork, the turtle, the
crane, and the swallow, Jer. 8.1. but down to the lowest form, the poorest
insects, the most despicable of all others, and that to learn wisdom and
diligence; these by an instinct of nature gather their food in summer for
winter; and shall man that has reason to foresee the danger be careless? But
how many, oh too many, (as if they had forgot that God had said, In the sweat
of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, Genesis 3.19.) live idly and cannot give
account of one days work in a month; of this sort are many of our Gentry, that
eat and drink, and rise up to play; but God never gave them their parts, and
their Estates for this end, and an account will be required at the last, and
they will know that they were not the only proprietors of what they enjoy, but
the Stewards: But there are others no less faulty, perhaps more guilty, and
those are our idle drones, that make begging their calling, and follow no other
employment though they are able; those that content themselves, in diem vivere,
as the fowls of the air do; and some are not only idle, but prodigal also, and
spend and consume that wastefully, that might refresh their family handsomely;
but (as one says) care should be taken, ne promus sit fortior condo, that our
layings out be not more then our layings up: But the greatest slothfulness is
in reference to the soul, how strangely negligent are the most of men, though
God rain manna about their tents, yet will they not gather it, but suffer the
soul to starve; they are like the foolish Virgins, they seek not for oil, till
their lamps are out, and the bridegroom be come; or like the wicked servant,
bury their talents in a Napkin: Oh my soul, thou have a lesson for thy
instruction, or an example for thy imitation: these poor, yet diligent
creatures justly reprove thee for sloth and negligence; many of thy years are
past, and little of thy work is done, thou have been playing in the dust, and
though called, neglected to come home to thy fathers house; thou have trifled
out the morning, and now the shadows of the evening are stretched out, and the
day far spent: beware of idleness, this will leave thee short of heaven; double
thy diligence, and amend thy pace; give diligence to make thy calling and
election sure; be diligent in Gods work, that when the devil comes to tempt, he
may find thee well employed; when Christ comes to judge thee, he may not find
thee idle; when death comes to call, thou may be ready; when the bridegroom
comes, thou may have oil in thy vessel, and a lamp ready trimmed in thy hand,
and a wedding garment on thy back; improve thy talents well, that Christ may
say, well done, good and faithful servant, enter into thy Masters joy; when
others only wish for heaven, do thou work for it: Oh my God, I have been one of
these loitering truants, that am justly here reproved, and sent again to school
to the meanest of thy creatures, their diligence shames my negligence, they
have only an instinct of nature to guide them, I have reason, experience,
Scripture, and example to put me on; they labor only for the body, I for the
soul and body; they for the meat that perishes, I for that which endures to
eternal life, they for a winter, I for eternity, yet are they diligent, and I
negligent; Heaven and earth may stand amazed at my folly; Lord, pardon what is
past, and incline my heart for the time to come, to give diligence to make my
calling and election sure; Let me so run, that I may obtain; so fight, that I
may conquer; and be faithful to the death, that I may receive the crown of
life.

Upon the gorgeous dress of Flowers.
18. Med.
WHen I seriously considered the various dress, the curious colors of the
herbs and flowers which diapred the plot, I took some delight to consider the
power of God in them, and how far he condescended to please our fancies, and
delight our senses, when I saw how gorgeously they were attired, how beautiful
they appeared, it led me up to the fountainhead, even to God who is beauty and
comeliness it self; and the greatest beauty that the world can brag of, is but
a spark to this fire, a ray to this Sun, and a drop to this ocean; if the
creature can be so beautiful, what is the Creator, end if earth be so pleasant,
what is heaven? but when I considered also the transitory, fading nature of
these short-lived flowers, how soon, when they were in their prime, they
withered away and perished, this put me in mind of the vanity of man which is
compared to a flower, which comes up, and is cut down like a flower, and never
continues in one stay, and not only he but all earthly enjoyments are
short-lived, and soon perish: But when I considered their beauty with their
fading nature, it minded me of our Saviors words, Mat. 6.28. etc. Why take you
thought for raiment? consider the lillies of the field, how they grow, they
toil not, neither do they spin, and yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in
all his glory is not arrayed like one of these; wherefore if God so clothe the
grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall
he not much more clothe ye? O ye of little faith, etc. he sends us in the
former verses to the sparrows, which though they neither plough, nor sow, reap
nor mow, nor carry into barns, are yet fed by divine providence; so here he
sends to the grass and flowers, who though frail vanishing things, are
gorgeously attired by him, and all is to put us on to depend upon our fathers
providence; for the force of the argument is thus; If God feed these worthless
sparrows, and not one falls to the ground without his providence, and so clothe
the withering grass, in such a dress, doubtless he will not suffer his sons and
servants to want necessary food and raiment, which as they are better, so are a
thousand times dearer to him then the fowls or flowers: There is in every man
by nature a conceit of self-sufficiency, as if by our own diligenee we could
provide for our selves; and are ready to undertake Gods part of the work: Now
this self-confidence is the daughter of unbelief (as one says), is the mother
of carking care and carnal thoughtfullness: Our Savior here by many arguments
disswades us from these; there is a care of the head, not only lawful but
commendable, but there is a carking, distrustful, diffident care of the heart
here condemned; when a man has done his utmost endeavor in the use of lawful
means, yet vexes himself about the event; what if this or that follow? I fear
I shall die a beggar, etc. One day (says David) I shall perish by the hand of
Saul: What shall I eat, or what shall I drink? etc. because God will not let us
know how we shall be provided for, therefore we are ready with Israel to
question, Can God provide a table in the wilderness? Psa. 78.19. Oh my soul;
how justly art thou reproved, and sent to these poor creatures to school? have
thou not had distracting thoughts and distrustful fears? have thou not often
been questioning, What shall I eat, or what shall I drink, or wherewithal
shall I be clothed? what shall become of my wife and children when I am dead?
etc. even contrary to the express command of the great God; as if thou had
had no father to provide for thee, or no God to depend upon, or no promise to
uphold thee, and though God has ofttimes silenced thy fears, and hushed thy
cares by an unexpected providence, yet upon the apprehension of new danger, new
fears arise, like murmuring Israel, though they had seen Gods wonders in Egypt,
at the Red Sea, in feeding them with Manna, yet cry out, Can he furnish a table
for us in the wilderness? Psalm. 78.19. yea, though thou have never wanted food,
nor raiment nor any thing truly necessary, and have a promise, thou shall never
want any thing that is good, and though God has bid, leave your fatherless
children with me, and let thy widows trust in me, yet how hard is it to commit
wife and children to him, if there be no visible means for their subsistence,
or to trust him when means are out of sight, and the world does not pass for
payment; what if thy food be not so dainty, nor thy clothes so fine, if the
one nourish thee, and the other keep thee warm, it matters not: if thou do not
fare deliciously every day, nor go in purple and fine linen, thy betters have
fared harder, and gone more meanly clad, read Heb. 11.36. and be ashamed of
murmuring, others had trials of cruel mocking, and scourgings, yea, moreover of
bonds and imprisonments, they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were
tempted, were slain with the sword, they wandered about in sheeps-skins and
goats-skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented, of whom the world was
not worthy; they wandered in deserts and in mountains, and in dens, and in caves
of the earth: what if thou have no certain dwelling house, thy dear redeemer
had not where to lay his head, and those Worthys were worse bestead then ever
thou wast: Oh my God, charge not upon me those distrustful thoughts, but
strengthen my faith in thy promises: Lord I believe, help my unbelief; and let
not this sin have dominion over me: Enable me to say with Job, though he kill
me, yet will I trust in him, and with Ely, it is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good; and with Paul, I am ready not only to be bound, but to die
for Christ.

Upon a Garden spoiled through bad fence.
19. Med.
WHen through bad fence, carelessly heeded, my garden was much spoiled, and
wasted by swine, and other cattle, some cropping off the heads of tender buds
and plants, some rooting up both root and branch, and also by their treading of
it, much defaced the beauty of it, and that which even now seemed pleasant, and
amiable, suddenly seemed a rude indigested and deformed piece, so that not
without much labor, pains and care, I secured the fence, made up the breaches,
and all I could do, could not at present bring it to its former estate, and
pristine beauty; all which injury might have been prevented with a little
foresight, and pains-taking: how much better is it to prevent an injury, then
remedy it, to prevent a disease then repel it; to keep out an enemy then drive
him out? the cockatrice-egg is better broken while it is an egg, then destroyed
when it is a serpent: sin is better destroyed in the bud, then when it is ripe:
The injury sustained in my garden, was something requited by this following
Meditation: If a garden, a small plot of ground, cannot be preserved from
danger, without care, and pains-taking, without a good fence about it, and an
needful eye upon it, because it has so many enemies, how then can the soul, a
more curious garden, which is in a thousand times greater danger, be kept safe
without a fence, and watchful guard? here are more choice herbs and flowers
then the other has, of greater worth, beauty and virtue, more subject to
injury, spoil and rapine, and these have greater, subtiller, and more malicious
enemies that seek their destruction: the devil and his instruments, who goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 2 Pet. 5.8. if he find
the fence down, or the watch neglected, and the watchman either asleep or
careless, he will enter, destroy, and waste; he envies our condition, that we
should enjoy that paradise that he left, the comforts he once had; he has a
spite and hatred against God and goodness, and opposes his image wherever he
sees it; this is the wild boar out of the wood, and the wild beast out of the
forest that does devour it, Psalm. 80.30. The devil and the world besiege the
fort of our souls; and our own heart, that inbred traitor, watches to
surrender it into his hands; a thousand snares, and nets are spread for this
turtle, and she is in continual danger, in every calling, in every condition,
in every relation, in every creature we have to do with; in every duty; nay, in
every action, some snare or other is laid to entrap us in youth, and old age,
in sickness and health, in prosperity and adversity, in honor and disgrace,
all have their peculiar snares; our nearest relations, often times betray us into
his hands: thus Eve betrays Adam; thus Jobs wife would have betrayed him; thus
Lots daughters betrayed him; and Peter would have betrayed Christ himself; get
thee behind me satan, Mat. 26.23. he did his good will to hinder him in the
course of his calling; we may many times discry a devil in our nearest friends,
he speaks to us by them; we have enemies without, and enemies within, and many
snares are laid for our feet; how warily then have we need to walk; many are
the foxes that destroy these vines, Cant. 2.15. what care then need we to have
of our souls when they are in so continual danger, and so many snares laid for
our feet, temptation without, and corruption within, ofttimes prevail against
us, and we are snared by it: oh my soul, have thou so bloody, and
bloudy-thirsty an enemy to deal with, that is so malicious, so crafty, and
politic: have thou so strong and potent an enemy to deal with, that seeks thy
ruin, and makes it his business to undo thee; oh what need then have thou to
stand upon thy guard; if thou fall into his hands nothing but the everlasting
destruction of body and soul will satisfy him: quit thy self therefore like a
man, stand upon thy guard, resist the devil and he will fly from thee: there is
none but these throw down their weapon, and quit the field, that are vanquished
by him; though others may be foiled: look to the main fort, the heart, if that
be surprised thou art undone; lay in provision and ammunition there, for a
siege; watch the five cinque ports, the senses, for often times he sails in with
the tide; make a covenant with thy eyes; take heed to thy ears and other
senses; examine every passenger that comes in, lest he prove treacherous, and
every one that goes forth: to this end, set a watch over thy mouth, that thou
offend not with thy tongue; get on the whole armor of God, mentioned Ephesians.
6.11, 12, 13. the sword of the spirit, and the darts of prayer, are prevalent;
thou art to fight with principalities and powers, these contended with the
angel, for Moses his body, but with thee for thy precious soul; no peace can
be had with him, no truce can be obtained, but upon the condition of the
everlasting destruction of soul and body; whatever his promises are, hell will
be his wages, a thousand thousand have been deceived by him, that took his
word, look to thy affections, that they straggle not, lest like Dinah they be
ravished by him; stand fast, and thou will prevail, call in thy captain Christ
to thine assistance, so shall thou be the victor, and if thou overcome thou
shall reign with Christ: Oh my God, be thou my defender, I have no strength
against these potent enemies, neither know I what to do, only my eyes are up
unto thee, O let no cruel beast devour thy turtle that is true; do thou watch
over me or I shall wake in vain, teach me the use of the Christian armor,
rebuke the tempter, and chain him up, that he may not hurt me, keep me under
the shadow of thy wings, hide me in the hollow of thy hand, preserve me from
the rage of this bloodthirsty enemy, and keep me out of the snares that are
laid for my feet, then shall I praise thee with an upright heart, and tell what
God has done for my soul.

Upon a Mole spoiling the garden.
20. Med.
WHen I had thus fenced my garden, and secured it, as I thought, from the
injury of all enemies that were visible, and began to wax secure and careless,
as if out of the reach of danger; behold, an inbred traitor, an unseen and
unexpected enemy, did me no little injury; a dispicable creature, blind as is
reported, yet was the occasion to me of no small trouble; a poor contemptible
Mole, ere I was aware, dug, and rooted up my herbs, and flowers, disordered
my work, and spoiled the beauty of it; and proved such an enemy then, when she
was descried, I knew not which way to fence for her, and for a considerable
time knew not how to take her prisoner, nor make her pay for the trespass; this
unexpected accident made me consider, of the vanity of all humane felicity, how
soon the beauty of it may vanish and come to nothing, and by how small a means
God can blast all earthly enjoyments. All that the world affords is of the
nature of Jonahs gourd, that grew up in a night, and perished in a night: no
solidity to be found in any sublunary creatures; some worm or other breeds in
it, that eats out the very heart of it, and makes it wither and die, and when
we have the greatest expectations, we meet with the greatest disappointments;
and when we think we are most sure, many times we are in most danger; and when
we think to gripe it fastest, we are likeliest to lose it; I considered, how
foolish men were to promise themselves security in their enjoyments, when they
apprehend no danger in sight, for if our ways please God, he can make our
enemies, yea, the stones of the field at peace with us: but if we please not
God, he can raise us enemies enough to disturb our peace: David, a good man, yet
offending God had his own familiar friend Achitophel, nay, his own son Absalom,
that sought his ruin; yea, the poorest vermin are sometimes a scourge to the
proudest tirant; frogs, and lice, and flies, and locusts, make proud Pharaoh
stoop to God, that before had proudly said, who is the Lord, that I should obey
him? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go; Exodus 5.2. but God made
himself known to him by his judgments and compelled him to say, the Lord is
righteous, and I, and my people are wicked; yea, he has made caterpillars,
cankerworms, palmerworms, and such like, which God calls, his great army,
Joel. 1.2. etc. a scourge to potent princes, and can destroy the greatest
monarch on earth, by these poor insects; how little trust then should we put in
earthly comforts, when God can so easily imbitter them to us; and how dangerous
it is by our sins to provoke God, to leave us and to punish us, he can easily
do it, he need not raise many against us; no single creature, no fly, no flea,
nor grass-pile, nor hair, but if it have a Commission from God, will be our
bane: Instances of this may easily be given; nay, if he withhold our breath, we
return to our dust, and all our thoughts perish; and for our enjoyments, he can
make a worm breed in them, that shall eat out the very heart of them; and can
imbitter that which we esteem our sweetest comforts; If these earthly
enjoyments are vain, and perishing like their owners, what need have we to make
preparation of some thing that is more durable, and more certain, which may
bear some proportion to our immortal souls, we can have no abiding city here,
but affliction and vanity will attend us, in all places; for if sin go before,
affliction will follow after, as the effect follows the cause, or the shadow
the substance. Now if these our earthly enjoyments are in such continual
danger, and have enemies, without, within, above, beneath, and on every side,
the soul is in much more danger, having more potent, subtle, cruel, and
malicious enemies; how watchful then ought we to be, lest these chiefest
Jewels, our immortal souls should be bloudily butchered, or inhumanely treated:
what care, what providence should we use, that we be not made a prey to
infernal furies? and what need have we to invoke God to be our guardian, our
defender, and our watchman? Oh my soul, here is a check for thy folly, that
have overeagerly grasped after these vanities, and sought content where it was
not to be had; take heed to thy self, this will not serve thy turn; a few days,
and thou will be stripped of all: there are better pleasures, truer treasures to
be had; there is a worm in these will eat out their very heart, there is vanity
writ upon them; they are but Egyptian reeds, and will break in thy hand: cursed
is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart
departs from the living God; if thou love the world the love of the father is
not in thee, 1 John 2.15. Use it we may, as a traveller does his staff, which
he keeps or throws away, according as it helps, or hinders him in his journey;
these worldly things are transitory, and there is a vanity writ upon them; but
there are riches durable as the days of heaven, and run parallel with the life
of God, or the lines of eternity: these are worth scrambling for; they are laid
up now, and may be drawn forth a thousand years hence; these our enjoyments are
liable to vanity and violence; when we grasp them hardest, they prick us most;
and when we embrace them they vanish into smoke, which may wring tears from our
eyes but never sorrow from our hearts; when others therefore lay hold upon
riches, do thou lay hold upon eternal life, 1 Timoth. 6.12. lay hold upon that
pearl in the Gospel, though thou let all things else go; for nothing else is
worth having; this will make thee rich to God: the time is short, thy race is
long, stand not still to pick up sticks, and straws, nor leave thy way to catch
butter-flyes; up and be doing; let heaven be thy object, and the earth will be
thy abject: oh my God, pardon my former folly, that I have spent so much time
to so little purpose, and made no more haste to my journeys end, that I have
lost my way, mistaken my happiness, and labored so long in vain; draw up my
affections, O Lord, from earth to heaven, and let me be as zealous for heaven,
as ever I have been for earth, and take as much pains for my soul, as ever I
have done for my body.

Upon the springing up of the seed.
21. Med.
WHen I had dug the garden, and sowed the seed, in convenient time, I
observed the springing of them up, and after a while I observed how fresh and
fragrant that looked, that a little before seemed dead, and rotten, among the
clods; this minded me of the mighty power of God, that could of a small seed,
seemingly dead, and buried, and rotten in the earth, raise up so great, so
flourishing an herb or flower, indewed with such beauty, and excellent virtue,
yea so great, so mighty a tree: I considered how small a matter I did or could
confer to them; I only disposed them where I would have them grow, but no
skill, nor art, nor labor, nor industry of mine could make them grow; the
earth has a natural propensity to receive them, the heavens powered out their
influence upon them, which through Gods blessing cooperating became effectual,
it is God alone must do the work, or it will not be done, it is he that gives to
every seed his own body, and put life into that which has no life, all the
skill, industry, and pains which the husbandman can use, cannot make one seed
fructify, or one corn grow, if God succeed not their endeavor: oh the madness,
stupidity, and egregious folly of Athiests, that deny a diety, and yet cannot
make a fly or flea, or the leaf of a tree, without pre-existent matter, nor put
life into it when it is made, nor know how it is done; but many of them, their
lives are so debaucht, that to still and quiet their enraged conscience, they
would fain race out, and obliterate this principle imprinted in the soul by God
himself, viz. that there is a God, but that there is no God they rather wish
then believe; but to return, it is God that does this work, Mark. 4.26. The
Kingdom of heaven, is as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and should
sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring up, and grow up he
knows not how; for the earth brings forth fruit of her self, first the blade,
then the ear, afterward the full corn in the ear, etc. when we have done our
duties, we must rely upon God for the success, and depend upon Gods providence;
if we cannot do it, leave it to him that can; let us do our part of the work,
and leave his part to him to do; we cannot do his, and he will not do ours; it
is our part to plow, and sow, and manure, and till the ground out of which we
were taken, Genesis 2.15. but it is God that causes it to fructify and increase;
he gives us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with
food and gladness, Acts. 14.17. Diligence is our duty, as the blessing upon it
is his gift; God placed no man upon the earth, as he did Leviathan in the sea,
only to play therein, but we are to work, either with hand or head, the thing
that is good, and in the sweat of our brow or brain we should eat our bread:
but when we have done all we must look higher for a blessing, Deuteronomy. 28.12. the
Lord shall open to thee his good treasure, the heaven to give the rain unto the
land in his season, and to bless all the work of thy hand. The stars are Gods
storehouses, which he opens for our profit, and causes them to pour out their
influences upon the earth, and thereby he scatters his riches to the world: If
we will cark and care about the event of things, when we have done our
endeavor, no wonder if we faint under the burden; if we take his part of the
work upon us also, no wonder if we truckle under it. Now if his blessing be so
necessary in temporals, it is much more necessary in spirituals, for none can
make the soul fruitful but God: do we not often see the seed sown by the same
hand, and that it is watered by the same word; yet it thrives in one field, and
not in another; in one heart, and not another; why? God causes it to rain upon
one field, and not another; and the field it raineth not on, withered; Amos.
4.7. those that live under the same Ministry, sit in the same seat, and have
the same husbandry, one remains barren, the other fruitful, what is the cause?
but the north wind, and the south wind; the pleasant gales of the spirit blow
upon one garden, and not upon the other, Cant. 4.16. when Christ was the
preacher, that which workt upon Peter workt not upon Judas, not being made
effectual by God. The springing of the seed also put me in mind of the
resurrection; the Apostle we find illustrateth that point by this similitude,
1 Cor. 15.35, 36, 37. but some will say, how are the dead raised up? and with
what body do they come? thou fool, that which thou sowest, is not quickened,
except it die; and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall
be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain, but God
has given it a body as it has pleased him, to every seed his own body: the
rotting of the body, is but as the rotting of the seed in the ground, that it
may spring forth again with more vigor: if God can say to this dead seed, as
sometime to the dry bones, live, why can he not say so to our dead bodies? Is
any thing too hard for the Almighty? he that made them at the first of nothing,
can we imagine he cannot gather again together our scattered ashes, and make it
again into a body? shall we think that to be impossible to God, that seems hard
to us? if he say, it shall be done, shall we conclude it cannot be done; Oh my
soul, use diligence, both in thy general and particular calling, but when thou
have done thy endeavor, leave the success to God, and not carkingly care, nor
doubtingly trouble thy self about the event; and disquiet not thy self, at what
thou can not help, take not h^s work in hand, lest thou can not finish it:
leave not thy work undone, for he will not do it, diligence is thy duty, yet
promise not success to thy endeavors, but depend upon him for a blessing; if
he give it bless him for it, and let it more engage thy heart in his service:
if he deny it, murmr not, but wisely search out what was the cause, some sin
or other is pointed at in the suffering: if thou find it out, remove the
Achan, and bless God for the providence, it is better have a reformed heart,
then a full barn, and as for spiritualls use diligence in the duties required,
but rest not in the work done, if a blessing succeed, let the Lord have his
homage paid; if that thou stand at a stay it is a sign some obstruction is
between the head and heart that hinders the work, rest not till it be removed;
if thou meet God in his ordinance, bless his name for it; if he absent himself,
let no duty please thee; rest not till thou have recovered sight of him: as for
the resurrection, call not that to question, which is so clearly held forth in
his word, heaven and earth shall pass, but his word shall not pass, till it be
fulfilled: what is too hard for an omnipotent arm? he that made all things of
nothing, and he that every year raises a crop from dead seed, why should we
think it impossible for him to gather together our ashes, however scattered,
and raise again our dead bodies to life? it is thy great concern to live
holily, that thou may die happily, and live with God eternally. Oh my God,
enable me to commit all my concerns for soul and for body to thee; and let me
not murmr under any dark dispensation of providence; however thou deal with
me in reference to the body, or these worldly enjoyments, yet deal well with me
in reference to my soul, and in reference to eternity; let the seed of grace
grow and flourish, let the weeds of sin be rooted out, and let my soul, like
the good ground, bring forth an hundred fold, then shall I glorify thee when I
bring forth much fruit.

Upon a sudden Drought.
22. Med.
WHen I had dug, manured, sown and fenced my garden, and done what lay in me
to do, and began from the hopeful springing up of the seed, to have
comfortable hopes of a plentiful increase, and began to rejoice in the works
of my hands, behold an unexpected judgment fell upon it, for God withheld the
showers of rain and restrained the influence of heaven, and caused that it
should not rain upon the earth, and the clouds which were wont to drop fatness,
and by which God was used to open his treasure, and to give a blessing to his
people, Deuteronomy. 28.12. now proved empty clouds, promising much, but paying
nothing; hereupon the earth languished, and could not nourish what she had
brought forth; for though she had not a miscarrying womb, yet had she dry
breasts; so that herbs and flowers, yea, the grass of the field languished,
hanged down the head, withered and died, and their beauty faded away, as man's
will if he want food; as we may see, Lam. 4.7, 8. Her Nazarites were purer then
snow, they were whiter then milk, they were more ruddy in body then rubies,
their polishing was of sapphire, their visage is blacker then a coal, they are
not known in the street, their skin cleaves to their bones, it is withered,
and is become like a stick, etc. This providence made me consider, how vain and
fruitless all our endeavors are, either for this life or that to come, if God
succeed them not with his blessing; and that all the men that live upon the
face of the earth, had they joined with their united counsels, with policy and
power, they could not have removed this judgment, had they taken in all the
gods of the heathens to assist them: Can any of the vanities of the gentiles
give rain? Jer. 14.22. it is in vain to hope for salvation from the hills, or
from the mountains, in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel. When God
blows upon our creature comforts, they vanish, and prove unsatisfying, Haggai.
1.9. ye looked for much, and lo it came to little, and when ye brought it home,
I did blow upon it, etc. ye have sown much, and, bring in little, ye eat, but
ye have not enough; ye drink but you are not filled with drink; ye cloth you,
but there is none warm, and he that earneth wages puts it into a bag with
holes, ver. 6. the earth cannot bring forth without the influence of heaven and
these cannot be had without a commission from God, Jer. 14.22. Can the heavens
give showers? art not thou he O Lord our God? therefore we wait upon thee, for
thou have made all these things. It is he that cloatheth the heavens with
blackness, Isay. 50.3. Hose. 2.21.22. I will hear the heavens, and they shall
hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil,
and they shall hear Jezreel: but when God refuses to hear, all others cry in
vain, they may all say as the King of Israel to the woman that cried to him, 2
Kin. 6.26. if the Lord do not help thee whence shall I help thee, out of the
barn floors or out of the wine press? yet, how does vain man reckon without his
host? and promise himself a plentiful increase, and much happiness in the
enjoyment of it, like the fool in the Gospel, Luke 12.16. etc. when the event
ofttimes proves otherwise, if their design succeed as sometimes it does, for
all things fall alike to all, as to the good so to the bad, the sun shines upon
the just, and the unjust, they give not the glory to God, but sacrifice to
their own nets, and burn incense to their drags, Hab. 1.16. they think their
own arm saves them, and their own wisdom and endeavors enricheth them; they
are like the king of Assyria that said, Isai. 10.13. by the strength of my hand
I have done it, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent: but what had all my labor
profited me, or what good would theirs have done them, if God had not given
rain? I went yet further in my consideration of the great mercy and benefit of
water, without which it were impossible that man or beast, or fish, or foul, or
herb or plant, or any other creature sensitive or vegetable, should live or
prosper, and wondered at my own and others stupidity, that we took so little
notice of the mercy, and gave God so little thanks for it, but this mercy was
more prized by the ancient; by Israel in the wilderness, by Jacob, yea, by
Ahab, 1 Kin. 18.5. And Ahab said to Obadiah, go into the land unto all
fountains of water, and unto all brooks, peradventure we may find grass to
save the horses and the mules alive, and they divided the land between them,
etc. When I had a while considered of these things, I raised my Meditation a
little higher, and considered if rain were so refreshing to the thirsty earth,
and so necessary for the fruits thereof, what was the dew of heaven to the poor
soul? without it all the Ordinances would prove of little use, and all the
sowing, planting and manuring would signify little; the soul under those
enjoyments would be like the heath of the desert, that sees not when good
comes; what cause then have we to depend upon God for the one, and for the
other; oh my soul, are thy endeavors crossed, and thy labor lost? learn to
depend upon God for the time to come, concern not thy self overmuch in the
world; if it smile upon thee, let it not steal away thy affection; if it frown
on thee, trouble not at it; for these things are at the dispose of thy father,
and he minds thy good; use diligence and providence, because they are
commanded duties, but beware of murmuring, and repining because they are
forbidden sins; when thou have gone as far as thou can, leave the success to
God, and whatever the issue be, acquiesce in his will, if thy endeavors be
blasted, think it was best they should be so, because God thought thus; if he
succeed them, bless him; if he cross them, bless him also; The Lord has given,
and the Lord has taken away, says Job, blessed be the name of the Lord: seek
not great things in the world, expect no more then God has promised, lest if
they fall short of expectation thou be discouraged; have thou neither poverty
nor riches, but food convenient; this was Agars petition, have thou food and
raiment? the Apostle was therewith content, But for the soul, thou must not
take up with a small portion, labor after the highest pitch of godliness, and
content not thy self with a low frame of spirit, be as covetous for grace, as
others are for gold, use the means diligently, but trust not to the means,
though Paul and Apollo's may plant and water, it is God gives the increase, he
only can speak to the heart, and say to thy sins, die, and to thy soul, live;
oh my God, forgive I beseech thee my carnal confidence, trusting to the arm of
flesh, both in reference to my body, and soul; let me see the vanity of all
creature-confidences, how little they can avail without thy blessing; and
however thou crossest my designs for the world, Lord, succeed my designs for
heaven, with thy blessings; leave me not to the teaching of man, but teach me
thy self, water me with the dew of heaven, and let thy clouds drop fatness,
incline my heart to thy testimonies, and not to coveteousness.

Upon flowers seemingly dead in winter, yet flourishing in the spring.
23. Med.
WHen I observed some flowers in the garden, that all the winter long, when the
sun was remote in the Southern climate, hid their heads, withered, seemed to
die, and to be extinct: and buried themselves in their mother earth, yet at the
return of the year, when their beloved smiled upon them, when the sun came to
the aequinoctial, and began to court them, and shine upon them with a more
direct ray, and warmer gleam, they crept out of their grave, revived, sprang
again, and flourished, like a love sick woman, killed with a frown and
recovered with a smile; those that before go in their mourning-weeds, now put
on their best apparel; This consideration made me compare it to the state of a
poor soul in desertion, when God the Sun of righteousness her beloved, hides
his face, and stands at a remote distance, then it is winter with the soul,
then it droops, hangs down the head, and is ready to die, and cry out with the
spouse, stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, I am sick of love; but
there may be life in the root, when it appears not in the branches, when the
Sun of righteousness arises in the soul, with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2.
these dry bones will live; these dead branches will bud, these swouning,
fainting souls will revive, and these buried flowers will spring out again;
though they are in the shadow of death, light shall spring out to them: The
herb of grace will not die in a hard winter, when the spring comes it will bud
and break forth, the best of Saints often have had their fainting-fits: David
that man after Gods own heart, though well acquainted with the incomes of the
spirit, the smiles of God, and spiritual consolations, yet had many qualms,
and fainting-fits, upon the apprehension of Gods departure, but God though he
seem to be long absent, will not forsake those that are not willing to leave
him, Esaias. 4.14.15. but Zion said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has
forgotten me; can a woman forget her sucking-childe, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? yea they may forget, yet will not I forget
thee. A father sometimes hides himself behind the wall, to try the affections
of his little son, to see whether he will miss him, what moan he will make in
his absence, or whether he mind his play, and be content without him, when yet
he is so far from forsaking him, that every tear goes to his heart; so God in
his withdrawings from his people, is much concerned in the moan they make, and
his bowels yearn at their complaints: as he did at Ephraims, when he bemoaned
himself, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself,
etc. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against
him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for
him; I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord; who is among you, says
the prophet, that fears the Lord, and walks in darkness, and has no light?
let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God. Esaias.
5.10. Here we see a man may fear God, and yet be in darkness, sometimes the Sun
may he ecclipsed, sometimes clouded, but it will break forth again; those that
have their eyes enlightened, shall see it, though the blind discern not between
day and night, light and darkness; the greatest part of the world know not what
it is to have the Sun of righteousness to arise in their hemisphere; But it is
the greatest grief to a believer that ever befell him in his life, to have the
face of his beloved to be clouded from him, and his sun to set at noon; then he
goes with the spouse, seeking him, sorrowing, did ye see him whom my soul
loves? Cant. 3.3. when they seek him, and cannot find him, when they call
him, and he gives them no answer, Cant. 5.6. they seek from ordinance to
ordinance, from Minister to Minister, and enquire after him, every room in the
house may witness their moan, and their complaint, but when they find, they
rejoice with the Martyr, Oh Austin, he is come, he is come; oh my soul, how
stands the case with thee? art thou apprehensive of the approaches, and
departures of God from thy soul? do thou rejoice in his presence, as these
poor flowers in the presence of their beloved? do thou mourn at his absence
as they do, and hide thy head? do thou hunger and thirst after him, as the
thirsty man for drink, or the thirsty land for drops of rain? if thou make
little matter of him, it is a sign thou have little benefit by him, or little
love to him, or never knew what it was to have communion with him, he is the
chiefest of ten thousand, therefore the virgins love him; get as strong an
apprehension of his love to thee, and thine to him, as possibly thou can;
this will keep the soul from straggling; thou will never leave him whom thou
love, and he will never leave one that loves him: his withdrawings are but to
try thy affections, and he often loves dearly those he seems to loathe, if thou
forsake not him, he will never forsake thee; and an evidence of his love will
bear up the heart above trouble; the Psalmist when he was so troubled that he
could not speak, yet comforted himself in considering, the days of old, and the
years of ancient times, and calling to his remembrance his songs in the night,
Psalm. 77.4, 5, 6. when there is a calm and tranquillity in the soul, examine
thy self by Scripture-evidences, whether there be the truth of grace in thy
soul or no, and if thou find it, lay up these records against a stormy-day,
when the sun is clouded, and out of sight then when thou, can not read thy
own heart, or see grace in thy soul, yet may thou say, at such a time, in
such a place, I examined my self, by such and such marks, grounded upon such
and such Scriptures, and plainly, and impartially judged my graces were true;
now true grace cannot be lost, and therefore I know there is fire, though under
the ashes, and true grace though buried under corruption; and he that then
loved me, will love me to the end; yea, with an everlasting love: oh my God,
assist me in this work of examination, and not only give me grace, and write
thine image upon me, but also enable me to read it, that it may keep me alive,
in the winter, when thou seem to be at a distance from me.

Upon fine flowers foul-sented.
24. Med.
WHen I beheld some of the fairest flowers in the garden, and those that made
the most specious show, and were adorned with the most costly colors, and were
set forth in the most gorgeous dress, and were most sumptuously arrayed to
please the eye; I commended their form, and shape, and comely beauty, but when
I drew near, to handle them, to smell to them, and put them in my bosom, I
found my mistake, for they were of a stinking savor, good for nothing but to
gaze on at a distance; for though they pleased my eye, they offended my nose,
and were neither fit to be handled, nor smelt to. This made me to consider, it
is not always good to trust to our own eyes, in our choice, for the eye has
deceived many a man, and will do us, if we trust to it, and call every thing
good, that is beautiful, may we not see many a gallant in our times in a gayish
dress, where the bark is better then the body, like the cinnamon tree, that like
the butterfly paints her wings, to cover her deformed carcass; how often have I
seen a handsome, well-shap't, beautiful woman with foul conditions, and
misshapen qualities, when under a more rugged skin, and less beautiful
countenance, and more deformed body, there was a more beautiful soul, and
Christianlike behavior: The devil many times baits his hooks with a beautiful
woman, when he fishes for unwary youth, and seldom misses of his prey, but by
this means destroys them soul and body; how often do men that make their eye
their cook, and do more care to please their fancy, then to please their God,
in their choice, and looks after beauty more then grace, undo themselves, and
repent of their choice when it is too late Beauty is but skin-deep, and age or
fickness soon withers this flower, when grace and goodness are more durable,
and will not change color: It were better for many women, if they had fair
minds and soul faces, then might they have escaped those snares the devil has
laid for their feet, and ensnared their precious souls, grace and beauty is a
sweet conjunction where they meet, and sometimes though seldom we find them
together; thus it was with Sarah and Rebeckah both fair, both gracious; but
when they are separated, as too often we find, grace should be preferred by many
degrees. An humble gracious spirit is a jewel of great price in the eyes of God
and wise men, but beauty dazles a fools eyes, and makes him blind, and such
Dalilah's bring men with Sampson to grind at the mill, and makes their
neighbors sport; I need not prove this, experientia docet* From these
Meditations I ascended higher, and I resembled these fair, but stinking flowers
to an hypocrite, that shows much better, then he is, and looks best at a
distance, and like deceitful wares worst at hand: he is like a stage player, as
the word signifies, who often acts the part of a King, a Prince, an honest man,
when he is indeed a beggarly fellow, perhaps a worthless rascal; The hypocrite
is a saint abroad, a devil at home, and plays more parts then one; he is
zealous in the congregation, lukewarm in his family, and key-cold in his
closet; under the vizard of holiness he acts wickedness, and makes religion a
cloak to cover his knavery or a stalking horse to take his prey, and thus he
deceives men, and many times preys upon them, but can neither deceive God nor
the devil; God quickly smells the stinking savor of his rotten lungs, and the
devil knows him by his own brand upon him: Oh my soul, art not thou guilty of
this folly of judging by the appearance, and of being deceived by deceitful
shows? look more at the substance, then the shadow, at the inward virtue then
the form and feature, choose not the tree by the leaves, but the fruit, nor a
man by his words but his actions, nor a woman by her beauty, but by her good
conditions; choose not a horse by his trappings but by his mettle, nor a
professor by his discourse, but by his life and conversation; respect not a man
for a gold ring but for the Jem and jewels of grace that he wears, the fairest
face has not always the chastest heart, nor the nimblest tongue the most solid
wit; the greatest bragger is not always the wisest nor the richest man; the
emptiest barrel makes the greatest sound, and the deepest water makes least
noise: labor more to be good then to seem so; for God will not judge thee as
thou seem to be, but as thou art; If the heart be not right, God will wipe
off all the paint and plaster that is upon thy words and actions, and they
shall be esteemed as the fountain is from whence they proceed; be in secret
what thou seem in public, for the same eye is upon thee in the one as well
as in the other: hypocrites seem to distrust God lest he should deny the
service they do him, and therefore will do nothing but before witness; but a
true Christian dare take his word, and therefore fast, pray, and give alms in
secret; popular applause is the oil that makes the hypocrites chariot-wheels to
move, but it is the love of God that constrains a Christian: Oh my God, I
cannot excuse my self, or wash my hands from these filthy sins of pride and
hypocrisy; yet my hopes are, they are not in me in a prevailing degree: Lord,
curse and blast these bitter roots, that never more fruit may grow upon them;
quell and suppress every motion that arises in my soul of this nature; give me
in sincerity whatever else thou shall deny me: Make my heart upright in thy
statutes, let me rather be good then seem good, and work truth in my inward
parts.

Upon sweet smelling flowers.
25. Med.
WHen I considered what a sweet savor and odoriferous smell, a garden of
flowers and herbs sent forth when it was watered from heaven by a refreshing
shower, and cheared again with the sunbeams darted upon it, what a place of
pleasure, a paradise of delights it seemed to be, the sight, the smell and
savor delighted me, the melodious harmony and birds pleased me, so that my
affections began to grow warm, and my fancy to be tickled with it, and I began
with Peter to say, it is good being here; till upon consideration I checked my
self for my folly, for letting out my affection upon such poor objects, and
letting them grovel so low upon the ground, and to close with such poor
pitiful nothings; then began I to screw my thoughts a little higher, and to
say to my self, fool that thou art, is there so much beauty and sweetness in
the creature, yea, in these poor pitiful vanishing fading creatures, which to
day are (says Christ) and to morrow are cast into the oven, Mat. 6.30. what
sweetness then is in the creator, that breathed this sweetness into them; is
not he much more sweet, and delightful? and why do thou not place thy
affections upon him, that is altogether lovely? Cant. 5.16. wholly desirable;
Moses thought him so, when he preferred the reproach of Christ, the heaviest
piece of his cross, better then all the treasures in Egypt: all the
excellencies here below, are but the shadow, and he is the substance; they are
but a drop to this ocean, a ray to this sun, and a spark to this fire. Why will thou go to the puddle that may go to the fountainhead? and take up with a
handful of muck, that may have a handful of angels? taste and see how sweet
God is, he is sweetness it self, thou that so admirest these vanishing flowers,
whose beauty suddenly is changed for deformity, why will thou not be enamoured
upon perfect beauty? the sun, the moon, and stars are darksome spots in
comparison of the beauty that is in him, he is white and ruddy, the chief of
ten thousands; his head is as the most fine gold, etc. Cant. 5.10.11. red and
white shows a perfect symmetry, a sound and sure complexion, and constitution:
thou speak of pleasures, but at his right hand are pleasures for evermore;
all earthly enjoyments yield little content, small pleasure, and delight; there
is a pound of sorrow for an ounce of pleasure, and those also are but bitter
sweet pleasures, but with him are satisfying pleasures unmixed delights, yea,
the image of God in the hearts of his people, is a thousand times a more
perfect beauty then the world affords, and the graces of the spirit in the
garden of their souls, as they show a more perfect beauty, so they yield a more
fragrant savor and sweeter smell, then all the flowers in the world can do, to
a spiritual sense: here is an orchard of Pomegranats and all pleasant fruit,
camphire and spicknard, spicknard and saffron, Calamus and cynamon, and all
trees of frankincense, myrrh and aloes, and all chief spices, Cant. 4.14, 15.
see how precious God accounts the graces of his people, which here are likened
to these precious things here mentioned, they smell sweet in the nostrills of
God and man, yea, the word of God and his Ordinances, these were sweeter to
David then honey and the honeycomb, better then thousands of gold and silver,
Psalm. 19.10. and to Job, better then his appointed food; and are none of these
taking with thee? is there more true worth in a handful of flowers, that will
not please thee from morning till night, then in those never-ending
never-fading pleasures here presented to thee? heaven and earth may stand
amazed at thy folly; oh my soul, wallow not in the mire, delight not thy self
with the swine in swill, when thou may have better, and more dainty food;
feed not upon husks, when thou may have bread enough in thy fathers house:
grasp not after the shadow, when thou may have the substance; or with the dog
in the fable, lose not the substance to catch at the shadow; despise peebles,
that thou may have pearls; lay not out money for that which is not bread, nor
thy labor for that which profits not; when wine and milk are offered without
money and without price, Esaias. 55.12. fill not thy vessel with water that it
can hold no wine; these outward things may be of use to us, but must not be
abused by us; though they cannot make us happy yet they can point us out where
happiness may be had, and happy is that soul that can with the be, gather
honey from herbs and flowers: there is not the most contemptible creature that
breathes, nor the most despicable vegetable that lives, nor the poorest thing
that exists, nay nothing, in rerum natura, but has a finger to point us to
God; a fly, or flea, or leaf of a tree or grass-pile, or if any thing be more
contemptible, will tell us, whence they had their being; and any, or all of
these may teach us some lessons, for our instruction; yea, the devil which is
the grand enemy to mankind, yet by this heavenly alchymy of divine Meditation,
may be made nourishment to the soul, as of the vipers flesh, may be made a
sovereign antidote against the vipers sting; yea, it is possible to extract
heaven out of hell, and God out of the creature: and surely that must needs be
a fat soul, that feeds in so many fat pastures: oh my God, keep my affections
from closing with these earthly enjoyments, and teach me the heavenly art of
improving them, and drawing out the spirits of them; And as commonly they are
snares and nets, and hurtful to the soul: Lord, assist me, that they may prove
beneficial to it; let mine affections close with thee, and then I need not
fear falling into these snares.

Upon herbs withering in a dry season.
26. Med.
WHen I beheld the herbs and flowers, yea, the grass of the field also, in a
dry season, how they fainted and flag'd, and hanged the head, for lack of
moisture, the earth being not able to give them a supply without further
assistance; It brought to my mind how necessary a blessing from heaven was to
our enjoyments upon earth, and how vain these things would prove, if God did
but blow upon them, and how foolish those men were that depended upon their own
industry, and promised themselves great matters, like the fool in the Gospel,
Luke 12.16. when they often find such reckoning is without their host; he, we
find in the midst of his jolity like a Jay, was pruning himself in the boughs,
and came tumbling down with the arrow in his side, his glass was run (as one
says) when he thought it was but new turned; he was shot with the boult, when
he gazed on the bow, this was he that trusted in his riches and was not rich to
God: he had indeed abundance, but it signified little to him; but many men
promise themselves plenty, and never come to enjoy it; how necessary is our
dependence upon God for our daily bread, the greatest of us have no assurance
of it, neither is any exempted from seeking it daily at the hands of God, I saw
then that that promise was not in vain, which God had made, Hose. 2.21, 22. I
will hear the heavens, and the heavens shall hear the earth, and the earth
shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel;
for though the people should cry to the corn, and to the wine, for relief, and
the corn and wine should cry to the earth for nourishment, and the earth should
cry to the heavens for showers, and the heavens should cry to God for a
commission, if God should deny that petition, all the prayers of the other
would signify nothing; the creatures have no more then what God puts into them;
If God give not rain, the creatures must languish, and the earth fail, the
earth must be refresht either by the clouds immediately, or from the fountains
by man's industry, or it cannot bring forth; but if God deny provision, whence
shall man have it? they may say, as the king Ahab did, 2 King. 6.26. if the
Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee, out of the barn-floor, or out
of the wine press? he is the fountain that must supply the cistern; he it is
that makes the springs to run among the hills, and fills our fountains out of
his treasury; Can any of the vanities of the gentiles give rain? no they
cannot, and all the men on earth, and devils in hell, nay, all the angels of
heaven, cannot do it, if he deny it, let men say what they please to the
contrary: and without water neither man nor beast, fish nor foul, herb nor
plant, can long subsist; this raised my Meditation a little higher; I
considered as it was in naturals, so much more in spirituals; where neither
Paul nor Apollos can do the work, or make the soul fruitful, without God; we
have indeed many pipes, but they are all supplied by one common fountain; if
God withhold the water of consolation, we may suck long enough before we be
satisfied: This minded me of a twofold error in men, one in the excess, the
other in the defect, some, they suck at the pipe, and neglect the fountain,
these may suck long enough before they are satisfied; the other thinking to be
supplied immediately by the fountain, neglect the pipe; these fail on the other
hand, in not using the means God has appointed them; some trust in the
ordinances, and think them sufficient, and idolize the Ministers, these many
times suck at dry breasts; the pipe can give no more then it receives from the
fountain: the other think themselves above ordinances, and neglect them, the
ordinary way appointed by God for their supply; and these ofttimes argue
themselves out of their Religion: though the dug be not that which feeds the
child, yet the child must suck milk through the dug, from the breast, or
otherwise is not like to have it; though the pipe cannot supply, it is the
usual means of bringing the water: the Ministry of the word is usually
honored with the conversion of souls, though God can, and no doubt sometimes
does work conversion without them, yet it is rare; Cornelius you find was
directed by an Angel, to Peter, Act. 10.4, 5. though the angel certifyeth him,
that his alms and his prayers were accepted, yet he reads not to him the
doctrine of redemption, though no doubt he could better have done it then
Peter, had God given him a commission; but the office of preaching is given to
the Ministers not to angels; We find Paul, when he was stricken down in the
way, as he journeyed toward Damascus. Christ did not teach him himself, but
sends him to Ananias, Act. 9.6. etc. and hereby graceth his own ordinance: so
Philip by the spirit of God, was sent to instruct the Eunuch, Acts. 8.29. now
either Christ himself, immediately, or the angel, or the spirit, might have
done the work, had not God intended to have honored his Messengers with the
work of man's conversion, and also to leave it as a standing ordinance to the
world, for the bringing in, and building up those that shall be saved; and
therefore it is not safe to contemn it: Oh my soul, sall not out with the pipe,
for this is the appointed way to bring water from the fountain; fall not in
love with it, for of it self it can give no satisfaction; use it thou must, but
idolize it thou must not; trust not in men, nor means, food nor physic, though
thou must make use of them; Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes
flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the living God: all other are
physicians of no value; clouds without water, broken cisterns that can hold no
water: It was Asa's failing, (and no doubt a gross one) to seek to the
physicians in the neglect of God: think it not sufficient for the body to make
use of the ablest physician, nor for the soul to live under the ablest
Minister, for many bodies and souls perish under such; if God help thee not,
whence shall they help thee? the sun in a clear day may be seen in a pail of
water, but if it be clouded, all the water in the world cannot show it; the
ordinance is the usual place where God may be seen, but till God open men's
eyes, there is none can see him there, yet must not the ordinances be despised,
for usually God makes discoveries of himself there, he could have sed Elijah
himself, or by an Angel, yet sends him food by a raven, he could have taught
Paul as well as struck him down, as is before-noted, yet sends him to Ananias;
he seldom works otherwise where the means of grace is to be had; he could have
healed Hezekiah with a word, yet uses a bunch of figs; no matter what is the
disease, or what is the receipt, if God bless it: Oh my God, afford me the
means of grace, the Ministry of thy word, and leave me not up to a famine of
thy word, nor leave me not to the teaching of man, but follow home every truth,
and set it home by thy holy spirit: let me not suck an empty dug, then shall I
draw nothing but wind: let me not draw at an empty pipe, then shall I suck and
not be satisfied: supply the dug from a full breast, and the pipe from a full
fountain, then shall I be fat and flourishing.

Upon the difference between the various sorts of flowers and vegetables.
27. Med.
WHen I considered the various forms, features, shapes, colors and virtues of
the several sorts of herbs, flowers, and other vegetables, and though there are
perhaps many hundred several species in the world, yet every species has a
distinct color, shape, and virtue different from the rest, whereby they may be
perfectly known, found out, and distinguished one from another by a skillful
artist, and all these together adorn the creation, and make the earth lovely,
and every one has its peculiar use. While I spent some thoughts on these
things, and was admiring the creatures wisdom, in these works of his hands,
and his good to mankind to give a salve to every sore; for he has made
nothing in vain; it came to my mind how many thousand millions of faces are
upon the face of the earth, all alike and yet unlike, all resembling one
another, and yet scarce two persons to be found out in the whole world, so
like, but they may be differenced one from another; in one thing or another, by
a discerning eye; this also raised my meditation from the creature to the
Creator, to admire his wisdom and skill, that has, as before noted, thus
distinguished between the several sort of vegetables, though many hundreds, and
between so many hundred thousands of faces among rational creatures, that as he
gives to every seed his own body, so he gives to every peculiar species his own
proper color, shape, odor, and virtue, and to every individual of the
species, and to every rational creature his own proper face and feature, all
lovely, amiable and comely, and yet different one from another, all agreeing in
the main, and yet disagreeing in one thing or other: Oh the omnipotent power
and wisdom of the great God, how unsearchable are his counsels, and his ways
past finding out; And as they differ in bodily shape, so also in the endowments
of the mind; there is very great variety, and diversity amongst men, scarce
two can be found in an age alike qualified; very few of the same mind in all
things, quot homines tot sententiae, is a saying not more ancient then true; so
many men so many minds; for where shall we find a perfect agreement between
any two, how various also are the gifts of the same spirit to the sons of men?
God does not entrust any one man with all, neither is there any that have not
some talent, 1 Cor. 12.43. now there are diversity of gifts, but the same
spirit, etc. for to one is given by the spirit, the word of wisdom, to another
the word of knowledge, by the same spirit; to another faith by the same spirit,
to another the gift of healing by the same spirit; to another the working of
miracles, to another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to another
diverse kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues, but all
these works that one and the self same spirit, dividing to every man
severally as he will, etc. and to one is given ten talents, to another five,
and to another one, according to the place, and employment they are set in, and
the work God requires at their hands; as the diverse smells of flowers, comes
from the same influence, and the diverse sounds in the organ from the same
breath, so divers-operations from the same spirit; and all for the good of the
whole; he that is not fit to serve the body, is not fit to be of the body; God
gives to every man according to his place and station, and will require an
account of what he gives, some are deeply skilled in the original tongues, and
other languages, others excel in philosophical notions, some search natures
garden from end to end, and become excellent artists there; some excel in one
science, some in another, some in the law, some in physic, some in divinity,
some in geometry, some excel for deep inventions, others are good artists,
etc. and among Christians some excel in one grace, and some in another; some
are deep in humiliation, some have a great measure of self-denial, some excel
in faith, some in patience, etc. among Ministers each has his peculiar gift,
some are good Textuaries, and some critics; some are good in case-divinity,
some are skilled in controversies, and are excellent disputants; some are for
explication, and some are best at application; some for conviction, and others
for comforting afflicted consciences, and all for the common good, Ephe. 4.11,
12. and he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the ministry, for the edifying the body of Christ. Oh my soul, have thou any
one of these gifts, has God lent thee any talent, why have thou not improved
it? how comes it to pass in all this time, that thou have not increast it? God
will require it at thy hand ere long, and it is wonder it had not been taken
away ere now: had thou been diligent thou might (as others) with the good
servant, Luke 19.16. have said, Lord, thy one pound has gained ten pounds;
when alas it is to be feared, thou can not say, it has gained two: though
God will not blame thee that thou have received no more, yet will he blame thee
for improving that no better; the time is coming God will call his servants to
an account, as well as his enemies, and reckon with them; take heed of
receiving any grace in vain, nor envy those that have received more; perhaps
they received no more, but have better employed what they had; let this put
thee on to diligence, not to murmuring, covet grace rather then gifts, and to
to pray fervently, rather then rhetorically; stammering Moses shall be heard,
as soon as Eloquent Aaron: had idleness been a lawful calling, we should have
had many good husbands, as well as good fellows; but God disowns such, and it
is no hard matter to discern a wane and decay in such men's gifts and parts, and
that the Lord is taking away his talents from them, and giving them to some
other that will better improve them: and is laying them aside as broken
vessels, and ere long they shall be as dead men out of mind, when the diligent
shall be had in everlasting remembrance? oh my God, lay not to my charge my
former folly, my sloth and negligence; take not away thy talent from me, but
give me a heart better to improve it; let me double my diligence, and amend my
pace, that thou may never say to me, as to that unfaithful and unprofitable
servant, Mat. 25.26. take him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer
darkness.

Upon withering herbs and flowers.
28. Med.
UPon the sight of some withered herbs and flowers that a little before were
fresh and flourishing, and made a beautiful show in the hand, and bosom, but
now were fit for nothing but the dunghill, I began to consider, thus it is with
many of the professors of our age, many that have made a fair show, and held
out a large profession in the sight of the sun, are already dead and withered,
and many more begin to hang the head; and droop, and their death is daily
expected, and all for want of root; the sun of persecution shining upon them
has killed many; if it should arise indeed, many more would wither; feigned
conversion proves unfeigned apostasy; how much salt has already lost its
savor, and is now become good for nothing, no not for the dunghill: How many
glorious lamps have I seen in my days blown out or extinguished for lack of
oil? yea, went out in a snuff, and some of them stunk in the socket; they had a
name to live, but they were dead, Rev. 3.1. God knows his own sheep, and those
given to Christ he will not lose one; but these (says the Apostle) are gone
from among us because they were not of us; they with the Jews cry the temple
of the Lord, when they matter not the Lord of the temple; these are spots in
your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without
fear; clouds they are without water, carried about with winds; trees whose
fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots, raging
waves of the Sea foaming out their own shame, wandring-stars to whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever; Jud. 12.13. they were never better
then meteors and so they end in a snuff; they are constant in nothing but
inconstancy; and being dead are fitted for the fire; they like empty clouds
promise refreshing showers but yield none; and with the stony ground spring up,
and flourish for a season, and they fall away, wither and come to nothing; how
many Cedars of late have been blown down with the wind? and many more will
fall, if the wind rise: many great lights have been extinguished, and many
noted professors leave Christ, with the young man in the Gospel, rather then
their riches, Mar. 10.21. etc. such blabs are soon blown up, and such bubbles
are soon broken; with Demas these men choose the world before Christ; yea
perhaps with Judas they will betray him for money: and why is all this, but
because they received not the truth in the love of it, God gave them up to
strong delusions to believe a lie, etc. 2 These. 2.10, 11. when they turned
professors they took not Christ's Counsel, to sit down first and reckon the
charges, and therefore like the foolish builder began to lay the foundation,
and was not able to finish, they took up religion upon trust, and considered
not what it would cost them, or what God required at their hands, and when
reproaches, losses, or crosses come, they soon kick it up, and will not be of
such a chargable profession; some take it up for wrong ends, and intend to make
it but as a cloak to cover their designs, or as a stalking-horse to take their
prey, and when the prey is taken, or the design brought about, or they
disappointed, the cloak is cast aside, the vizard cast off, and the
stalking-horse laid by as useless; many drive on some carnal design under such
a disguise, and use religion as a workman does his tools; as long as one will
serve he uses it, and when it will not, he lays by that, and takes another: if
persecution will fit the design better then profession, he takes up that; it
is no strange thing to see men in our age persecute what they have professed:
those that follow Christ for loaves, not for love, will cry Hosannah to day,
and crucify to morrow; if the wind turn; for many are resolved rather to
wrong their consciences, then that their consciences should wrong them; Oh my
soul, do so many flowers fade, and so much corn wither for want of root? are so
m^^y Cedars blown down by the wind, and so many forward professors turned
apostates at the apprehension of danger? look to thy self, set strait steps to
thy feet, lest that which is halting be turned out of the way; take heed lest
if the sun of persecution arises, thou also be offended and wither, for want
of root; rest not therefore till thou can say with Job; the root of the
matter is in me, Job. 19.28. let thy ends and motives be sound, or otherwise
thy profession will prove rotten; expect sufferings and prepare to bear them,
or else never set up thy trade of Christianity: if heaven be not worth having
at the greatest rate, and Christ at the dearest price, never meddle wirh these
commodities; if they are, break not for price; the pearl in the Gospel is worth
all that thou have; if religion be not good, never profess it; if it be, never
forsake it; set down first and reckon the charges with the wise builder, and
whatsoever thou can find others have paid for it, thou may expect the
like may be required of thee; and if upon this rate the bargain will do thee no
good, meddle not with it; thou may find Jeremy in derision daily, every one
mocked him; David was the drunkards song, Job the very abjects derided him, the
Apostles were made the off-scow^i^g of all things; reckon therefore reproach^
^ay be thy portion, seeing also Christ himself was not free; omnis Christianus
est crucianus; thou may read, some for their religion sake were forsaken by
their friends, as Christ by his brethren; this may be thy condition: some have
lost their estates, and have been exposed to hardship, and so may thou; some
have been cast into prisons; thus Jeremy, Peter, Paul, and Silas, and many
more, this may be thy portion; some, yea, many thousands, have been brought to
this state, and sacrificed their lives in the flames, and who knows but it may
be required of thee? can thou break through these difficulties? else never
set a step further in profession; if heaven will not make thee amends for
earth, and God for the creature, and eternal life for the loss of a temporal:
Oh my God, without thy support I shall never be able to hold out, but through
thee I can do all things; I know there is more excellency in thee then the
world can afford, and if I lose my God, my soul, my heaven, and happiness, to
preserve my estate, my life or liberty, it will be a losing bargain; these
things I can want, Christ I cannot want; Lord, give me him, though upon the
hardest terms, let me have strong apprehensions of my love to thee, and thine
to me, then shall I never leave thee nor forsake thee, let not the glory of the
world dazzle my sight, that I cannot behold thee in glory.

Upon the springing of herbs in the spring time.
29. Med.
AFter a sharp winter when the spring approached and the Sun began to look more
cheerfully upon the earth, and to shine upon it with a more direct ray, I
beheld the herbs and flowers which before seemed dead and withered, began now
to bud and germinate, and to spring forth, and to look lively, lovely, and
amiable; the grass waxed green and the face of the earth was changed, from what
it was a few weeks ago; trees leaved, and all seemed to rejoice at the suns
approach, and to answer the springing showers which kindly fell upon them, and
those flowers that even now hid their heads, and were buried in the earth, now
crept out of their cells, and in their kind returned praise to their great
benefactour, and the winter which seemed to have killed them, did but prepare
them for their future increase; this made me consider, if it be thus with poor
vegetables, that are soon sensible of the approaching spring, and soon answer
the sun beams darting upon them, and the refreshing showers wherewith they are
watered, surely it should be so with the soul, when it comes from under the
clouds of affliction, and when the sun of righteousness arises with healing in
his wings; this made me consider mine own condition, whether I had answered the
pains and cost which God had bestowed upon me, whether my affliction which God
had laid upon me, the sharp winter, that I had undergone, and the sharp showers
I had felt, had wrought such an effect upon me, as the winter and the
influences of heaven, had done upon these poor vegetables, viz. made my graces
germinate, and break forth, bud and bloom, and bring forth fruit; for I saw
wherever life is in the root, it will show forth it self in the branches: oh
my soul, thou have had a long and sharp winter, what effect has in wrought in
thee? thou have lain in the furnace of affliction, is thy dross consumed; or is
it not? I have been under pining sickness, brought to the gates of death, yet
has God said to me, live: I have been threatened with pinching wants, yet more
frightened then hurt; and when stripped of all, God let me see, that he could make
provision, and was able to provide and furnish a table in the wilderness; the
barrel of meal wasted not, and the cruse of oil did not fail; God blessed a
little, and it suffices; when I was driven from friends and relations, he
raised me up friends more true, then many of my relations; and in due time he
said to me, as sometime to Jacob, Genesis ^2.9. return into thy own country, and
to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee: sometimes I have been under a
cloud, and then again the cloud has been scattered, and the sun has broke out
again; many have been the dispensations of providence, I have been under: oh
my soul, how do thou answer Gods expectations in these providence?
affliction springs not out of the dust, neither does trouble rise out of the
ground, is there evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? whoever is
the instrument God has a hand in the work, whoever be the rod, it is he that
lays it on; it has a voice and we should hear it? he has an end, and that is
thy reformation; do thou answer his end? if the rod be removed before the
child be reformed, either he intends to get a bigger rod, or leaves thee off
as incorrigible, which is the sorest judgment. The winter now is past, and the
singing of birds is come, the earth and all things therein look lovely; and
each vegetable where life is, discovers it: and is it only winter with thee?
and does no fruit appear? God justly may say to thee, as of the fruitless
fig tree, never fruit grow more on thee for ever; if all his labor be lost,
and all his expectations frustrated, and all his plowing, sowing, and manuring
vain, he will say of thee, as sometimes of his vineyard, what could I have done
more for him then I have done? wherefore then when I expected fruit does he
bring forth wild grapes? can imagine God will always bear with a barren
fruitless tree in his orchard, or an unprofitable, unfaithful servant in his
house, or a hard and stony heart that neither summers sun, nor winters frost
can work upon, neither judgments nor mercies mollify? many a year he has been
seeking fruit and finds none, and yet has been prevailed with to try thee
one year more, but his patience will not long bear with thee: if reformation
prevent not, the sentence will ere long be past, cut him down why cumbers he
the ground? many a time the sun has shone with a favorable aspect upon thee,
and many a time the dew of heaven has been showred down, many a faithful
skillful husbandman has been sent to dress thee, and manure thee, and must
Christ when he seeks fruit still meet with disapointments? art thou so hard and
rocky, that no furnace will melt thee, nor hammer break thee, or bring the into
form meet for his building? then must thou be thrown out amongst the rubbish:
Oh my God, this is my condition by nature, but thou can change my nature,
thou have a furnace will melt me, and bring me into any form, thou have a
hammer can break me, and fit me for thy work: thou can soften me, and make me
pliable, thou can take away the stony heart, and give me a heart of flesh:
Lord, is it not thy promise? make it good to me, blow upon my soul and the
graces of thy spirit will bud and break forth; speak the word and my soul shall
live; Lord, teach me thy self, and leave me not to the teaching of man, there
is no other can reach the heart, they speak only to the ear.

Upon a withering knot of herbs.
30. Med.
WHen I beheld a knot of herbs, mixed with flowers in the garden, in a decaying,
withering condition, some part dead, others languishing; and but a few alive
and flourishing, I left off weeding, dressing, cutting and manuring them, as
those that never were likely to answer my pains, or recompense my labor, but
considering there were some living which were likely to be choked with weeds
if let alone, and disregarded; I transplanted them into better soil, leaving
the dead ones to themselves for the fire, or any other use, I mattered them
not: I considered then how ghastly, and unseemly the place was, when the living
herbs were removed, what a confused heap, and worthless piece it was, of no
profit, pleasure, or benefit; the thoughts of this strait brought to my mind,
that as I had dealt with these withering herbs, and flowers, so God oftentimes
does by a withering Church, some of them he takes into his bosom, others he
transplants, and finds them a better place, and then roots up the rest, or
reserves them for the fire, or some other judgment; perhaps lets them alone a
while to bear a place, and perhaps the name of flowers, till at last they are
rotten-ripe, and fit for nothing but burning. Thus he preserved Noah for
another plot, which he was about to make, when he destroyed the old world,
which before was his garden, when the plants were most dead: He removed Lot
into another soil, when he rooted up his garden in Sodom, he would not fence a
place for so few living herbs, but laid it waste, and burnt it up; he
transplanted Abraham from the place of his nativity, and found room by his
providence for Isaac and Jacob, whose posterity he transplanted into Egypt,
where for a long time they did thrive and prosper; till in the end overrun with
weeds briars and thorns, he transplanted Israel into Canaan, and cast the
Egyptians, those dead and worthless plants, those weeds and thorns into the
Red Sea: and since that time has laid waste many a garden, which formerly did
flourish, when they withered and decayed; witness the seven famous Churches of
Asia, mentioned Rev. 2. and 3. chapters, and suffers briars and thorns to
overrun the places: I considered, that when God removes his own plants either
into his bosom, or elsewhere, it is time for the other to look about them,
Esaias. 57.1. the righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come. When Gods jewels are removed, his care of that place is
over; when his flowers are gone, he will pluck up his hedge, and throw down his
wall, and let it be eaten up and trodden down, he will lay it waste, it shall
not be pruned nor dug, and there shall come up briars and thorns, and he
will command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it, Esaias. 5.5, 6. and how
ghastly does that place look which is thus fore-let, and forsaken by God? This
consideration made me think, it is time for England to look about them, gray
hairs are here and there upon us, yet we consider it not, Hosea. 7.9. we may
see many a withering branch, and dying Christian amongst us, fetching the last
gasp, that formerly seemed flourishing, fat, and in good liking; when men
employ not their talents well, no wonder if God take from them that which they
seemed to have, this is verified in many that have had fresh and fragrant
parts, and gifts, and have formerly excelled others; but these parts are
withered for want of use, and the diligent Christian formerly below them, now
excels them, and the unprofitable servant is reserved for utter darkness, and
how ill favored do those look that are thus withered? nay, have we not great
cause to fear God is leaving his garden in England, seeing he has transplanted
so many of his choicest flowers into America, and of late has taken so many
into his own bosom, and there are so few left that really flourish, and so
many are on the dying hand, and real holiness and the power of godliness is so
scarce; oh my soul, art not thou one of these dead, or at least withering
plants? art thou fallen from thy first love? where are the love of thy
espousals, or these affections, and the zeal manifested in thy younger years?
has thy age increased thy wisdom? and is that seen in growing more strange
with thy God, and more lukewarm in his service? and in having less care of thy
soul, and in taking less pains for heaven? time was, thou wast more fresh and
flourishing, and like to a green bay tree, but now thou growest old and dry,
and little sap and vigor does appear; is this the fruit of all the pains God
has bestowed upon thee? is it to make thee more dry and barren? the trees of
righteousness planted by the rivers of water, should never want fruit nor leaf,
yea, should bring forth fruit to old age: yea, thy fruit in age may be expected
to be more, and mellower, ripened by age, and a more mature judgment; thou have
born the burden and heat of the day, and will thou now quit the vineyard, or
cease and slack thy work, when thou should come and receive thy wages? if
thou turn back, Gods soul will have no pleasure in thee; if thou put thy hand
to the plow, and look back, thou art not fit for the kingdom of heaven, neither
will thy righteousness be remembered: in thy sin thou shall dye, thou art ready
to go off the Stage of the world, and wilt act thy last scene worst, and be
hist at in the end: will thou lose all the pains that ever thou have taken in
heavens way, and at last remit thy zeal, when thou should double thy
diligence? is it not he that holds out to the end that shall be saved? did
thou ever yet repent of any pains thou did take for heaven? and do thou
think thou shall ever have cause to repent hereafter? art thou afraid thy
reward will be too great, or thy crown of glory too heavy? or that God will
love thee too well? or that thou shall make heaven too sure? if not, why do
thou slack thy pace? do thou expect a better master, or better work, or
better wages? if not, take heed by thy negligence, lest thou force God to put
thee out of his service: oh my God, keep my heart upright in thy service, and
direct my steps that I turn not aside; keep me from the rage of satan, that I
be not captivated by him, he seeks my soul to undo it, and fain would make me
lose my reward; Lord, make me faithful to the death, and then give me a crown
of life.

Upon the unknown virtues of many vegetables.
31. Med.
WHen upon the strictest search and scrutiny that I could possibly make, I
could not find out, the natures, properties, virtues, operations, ends, and
uses of several vegetables, and other simples, nor indeed the full use, virtue,
and benefit of any one of them; and I suppose I have cause to think, that the
greatest artist in natures garden, cannot do it; nay, if all pretenders to this
art should join heart and hand in the work, and combine themselves together,
and use their utmost diligence, yet would they fall short of making a perfect
discovery of it, though I know every age makes some further progress in it then
the preceding did, yet very many things lie hid from the choicest wits; this
made me admire the wisdom of the Creator, that has made nothing in vain, and
has put such admirable virtues into such despicable weeds, that did we know
their worth, we should prize them at a higher rate, that now we despise: and if
we cannot find out the virtues and operation of those things which we are
every day conversant with, no wonder if we are ignorant of God, of the Trinity,
of the Incarnation of Christ, and those more abstruce points of Religion, more
remote from our senses, and above our capacity: he that cannot attain to know
the nature of his own soul, no wonder if he be ignorant of the nature of
angels: my thoughts upon this account roved further, and I considered several
small seeds, so much resembling one another, that my eye could scarcely
difference them the one from the other, and yet I saw, when those were sown
together in the same plot, nourisht in the same mould, refreshed with the same
Sun, and watered with the same showers, they produced plants much differing in
nature, color, scent, quantity, quality, virtue, and operations; this made me
cry out, the finger of God, that has put such virtues in so small despicable
seeds; it minded me also of the Apostles words, God has given to every seed
his own body, 1 Cor. 15.38. wheresoever these vegetables are sown, planted, or
replanted, still the species are continued, neither do they degenerate into
another kind. When I considered that such efficacy and virtue should be
virtually included in so small a seed, I thought it matter of admiration, yea,
that so small a thing, as a nut, or acorn, or the kernel of an apple or pear,
should produce so great a tree, of so vast a bulk, as the Oak, the apple tree,
or the pear tree, this made me to admire the wisdom, power, and providence, of
the great God, which Christ himself seems to take notice of in the mustard
seed, which being so very small, produces a plant of such a bigness. that the
birds build their nests in the branches; this minded me also of the nature of
grace and sin, which from small beginnings come to great perfection, and
wherever they are they become fruitful; grace proceeds from a grain to a tree,
and as a little leaven leaveneth the lump, so grace increases till it makes a
universal change in the whole man; it makes a man semper idem, always the same:
Job upon the throne and upon the dunghill is holy Job still; it brings forth
the fruits of the spirit wherever it is planted, Gal, 5.22. but the fruit of
the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance, against such there is no law; but where sin is, it brings
forth the fruits of the flesh, it grows from one degree to another, from a
thought to a resolution, thence to action, and at length comes to a habit, and
hard it is to be left: Bray a fool (says Solomon) in a mortar, with a pestle
like wheat, yet will not his foolishness depart from him, Pro. 27.22. A wolf
will have a wolvish nature though his skin be stripped over his ears, and his
bones be broken, as every seed produces its own kind, and not another
species, so grace and sin, show themselves in their production: men gather not
grapes of thorns, not figs of thistles; a good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit, nor a corrupt tree good fruit; but every tree is known by his fruit: oh
my soul, are there secrets in nature that thou understandest not? yea, even in
those creatures that thou do daily converse with? admire the wisdom of the
Creator, and see how little beholding thou art to sin, which has drawn such a
vail of ignorance before thy eyes, and wonder not that there are mysteries in
spirituals, beyond thy conceiving; if thou can not understand temporalls,
much less spirituals that are spiritually discerned; the nature of God, of
Angels, and of thy self, lie far more remote from thy understanding. There is
many a man that can search natures garden from end to end, that never could
search his own heart; many can try their evidence for lands, that know not how
to try their title to heaven; they can find out the state of their bodies, but
know not the state of their souls; but when others study earth, do thou study
heaven; the things that are necessary, are attainable: study Christ, and him
crucified, this will do thee more good, then if thou could with Solomon
discourse of all the vegetables from the cedar in Lebanon to the hysop that
grows upon the way; and did men study God and themselves as much as they did
the creature, it would bring in more profit. The knowledge of these things is
excellent, but the knowledge of God, and our selves is necessary; all thy time
is little enough for this study; the other must be left to more curious heads,
and riper wits; oh my God, suffer me not to spend my time in any unnecessary
study that should be spent in seeking thee; let me not catch at the shadow, and
lose the substance, and hunt so long after curiosities, till I lose my self,
and know not which way to return: all my time is little enough to spend in my
general and particular calling; all the water is little enough to run in this
channel, and I have none to spare to turn any other mill: let my greatest care
be to know God, and my self, the duty I owe him, and the relation I stand in to
him; and what interest I have in Jesus Christ, Lord, let this be the work of
the remaining part of my life.

Upon some despicable weeds, yet useful.
32. Med.
WHen I saw some poor contemptible, despicable weeds, that usually grow in the
fields, without labor, pains or care of man, or are thrown out of the garden
with contempt, as not fit to have a being there, but to be trod upon and
despised, as not being, neither sweet for savor, nor beautiful to the eye;
and yet when I beheld these very weeds gathered, and successfully used, by the
greatest artists in physic and surgery, for the curing of great distempers,
when the more glorious, gorgeous, and more esteemed vegetables were
disregarded, this made me consider, how deceitful a thing it is to judge by
the outward appearance, and that beauty and virtue are not always linkt
together, neither go they hand in hand; many have been deceived when they have
pleased their eyes by beauty; the devil many times baits his hook with a fair
woman, and many have been undone by swallowing such a hook: many that have made
beauty their aim, have been matched with foul conditions: Samuel that man of
God, was deceived by his eye, when he thought Eliab, David's elder brother, had
been the Lords anointed, because he had a comely countenance, 1 Samuel 16.6. and
it came to pass after they were come, that he looked on Eliab, and said, surely
the Lords anointed is before him; but the Lord said to Samuel, look not on his
countenance, or on the height of his stature, because I have refused him; for
the Lord sees not as man sees, for man looks on the outward appearance, but
the Lord looks on the heart. Many a man under a russet coat carries more real
worth, more true gentillity, yea, nobillity, then others do under their silks
and sattins, velvets, and scarlets; many a worthless piece is dressed
puppet-like, with paint, and plaster, and ridiculous gewgaws, but could we but
see the soul through the gayish dress of the body, it would appear leprous and
deformed, nay, perhaps in the body it self there would appear visible marks of
deformity, as well as of infirmity; paint and plaster better become a
mud-wall, then a marble pillar; true beauty needs no varnish; nor a diamond
needs no painting; spotted faces often cover spotted souls; and their spot is
not the spot of Gods people: there are many that like the Cinamon-tree, have
the bark better then the body; but it is a fool that buys a horse by the
trappings, or chooses a wife by her gaudy dress; or that esteems the better of
himself, or imagines that any wise man esteems the better of him, for a fine
suit of clothes; yet there was a disease amongst Christians in the Apostles
time, and it is almost epidemical in our days, to respect the clothes or
outward ornaments of a man, more then his conditions and qualifications, Jam.
2.2, 3. if there come into your assemblies a man with a gold ring, in goodly
apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment, and ye have respect
to him that wears the gay clothing, and say unto him, fit thou here, in a
good place, and say to the poor man, stand thou here, or sit here under my
footstool; are you not then partial in your selves? etc. but however man may
disrespect them, God has chosen the poor, rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom: A poor man though wise, yea, though by his wisdom he save the city,
yet is not remembered, Eccl. 9.15. this is merces mundi, the worlds wages, many
deal by such as men do by a fruit-tree, to which they run in a storm, and when
it is done, beat him, and rob him of his fruit: many wise Ministers are heard
with scorn, or at least with disregard, till men lie upon their deathbed, and
then they are sent unto for counsel, or rather comfort. It is not always those
that can speak loudest, that speaks best, but he that speaks wisest; the empty
barrel makes the greatest sound: that Sermon (...) not always best that has
most gaudy notions, and rhetorical flourishes, but that which savours most of
Christ, and the divine Eloquence of his holy spirit: he is the best preacher
that woos for Christ, and not for himself, and would set the crown upon his
head, and not his own, it is not the best physician that speaks most latin,
greek, and hebrew, but he that gives the surest and safest directions to
recover health: it is not the tickling of the fancy, a preacher should so much
mind, as to speak convincingly to the conscience: oh my soul, judge not by the
outward but the inward qualification, neither cover hypocrisy by a mask of
seeming sincerity, for God will ere long pluck off such vizors; slight no man
merely upon the account of poverty, for God thinks never the worse of them;
admire no man merely for his riches, for God thinks never the better of him;
this is but to worship a golden calf: the time is coming, that the king must
leave his robes behind him, and the beggar his rags, and it is the inward
qualifications that must distinguish between the one and the other: Dives and
Lazarus when they come to stand on even ground, shall by these be tried, and so
must all, by what means or titles soever they have been dignifyed,
distinguished or called: it is our works and worth, not our wealth will follow
us; wherever t^ou see Christ in any, own him; for God will own him; esteem
grace in the soul more then money in the purse, and the robes of righteousness
above the most costly jewels, a dram of grace is worth thousands of gold and
silver; for thy counselors take the wisest not the wealthiest; for wisdom and
wealth many times dwell not together in the same house; esteem that preacher
best that speaks home to the heart, and conscience, not him that seeks to
tickle the ear and please the fancy, he that woos for Christ and not for
himself, and seeks to put the crown upon his head and not his own: esteem that
Sermon best where thou find most of Christ, and not that which is dressed with
gaudy notions, and rhetorical flourishes, which serve to darken and not
illustrate the matter, and are as king James was wont to say, like red and blew
flowers, fine to look upon, good for little, but pester the corn: a diseased
man had rather have medicum sanantem quam eloquentem, one that will rather do
well then speak well: oh my God, should I cover my prophanness or hypocrisy
with the vizor of seeming holiness, thou will soon discover it, and unmask me,
for thou searchest the heart, and triest the reins, and all things are open and
apparent to thee: Lord, give me sincerity, and truth in the inward part, for
this is thy gift; make me such as thy own soul delights in; let me not be
deceived by my own deceitful heart, nor think to deceive others, for I cannot
deceive thy all-seeing eye.

Upon the constant supply the vegetables need.
33. Med.
WHen I seriously considered that these beautiful creatures which now adorn the
earth with their flowers, and enamel it with their various shapes and colors,
and enrich it with their odours, virtues, and operations, yet without a
constant supply of man's labor, pains and diligence, and also of the influences
of the heavens, they would soon wither, die, and come to nothing; some of them
must be yearly set, or sown, or transplanted, others preserved, both from heat
and cold, and all need some manure, care, and pains, weeding, watering,
fencing, or other cares: this minded me of the condition of all earthy delights
or enjoyments, they must be renewed, or they will soon vanish; all things by
sin are become subject to decay; there is a vicissitude of earthly comforts,
and a constant change: Man's life cannot be preserved without food, and physic,
and other necessaries, the four Elements, fire, air, earth, and water, are so
necessary that if e^^her be denied, man's life is at an end: the houses we dwell
in must be repaired, or they will soon come to ruin, and fall about our ears.
The most famous fabrics that ever the Sun saw, are come to ruin. The
Piramides of Egypt, the walls of Carthage, the tomb of Mansolus; or if there
were any thing more famous or more durable, yet time has consumed, and brought
it to a ruinous heap; the most impregnable castle, the most invincible
strong-hold, if not repaired by labor and industry, time levels with the
ground: we cannot say now of our garments, as Moses of Isreal's clothes, Deuteronomy.
8.4. thy raiment waxed not old, neither did thy foot swell this forty years; it
was not the worse for the wearing; but as some imagine, probably it grew as
their bodies did, they needed not to trouble themselves with anxious thoughts,
what to eat, or what to drink, or wherewith to be clothed; God brought them
food to their tent-doors, and provided raiment without their care or pains, but
with us all such comforts must be renewed with care and diligence, with a care
of the head, though not of the heart, or they will quickly be gone: this
consideration made me think what a great deal of confusion sin had brought into
the world, and subjected all things to vanity, and vexation of spirit: every
thing (says Solomon) is full of labor, for as it brought death into the
world, so likewise all other miseries; had it not been for sin we had never had
aching head, or aching heart, or loss, or cross, or any thing to molest us; and
now every thing becomes a trouble; man is born to trouble (says Job) as the
sparks fly upwards; yet alas, how does the world bewitch men, that they had
rather be drudges, and savages here, and moil and toil, and cark and care, and
live as it were in a dungeon, and work as in the very fire, then die and come
to God; this they make their portion, this is their delight, and all that they
care for; they sell their ease, their pleasure, and their very souls: oh earth,
how do thou bewitch us! O satan, how do thou infatuate us! oh heart, how
do thou deceive us! what disappointments does foolish men meet with here, and
yet will take no warning? we never did find content, and yet we are always
promising our selves happiness here, where never any yet could find it:
alas, what proportion is there between a piece of gold, and an immortal soul?
Oh my soul, can thou love this sin which has brought all this misery and
confusion into the world? can thou hug this viper in thy bosom which will
sting thee to eternal death, if not killed and mortified? and can thou place
thy happiness in these vanishing perishing and withering vanities? will these
serve thy turn, or boot thy needs, or make thee happy? can they pay thy debts,
or save thy soul? alas, they cannot, they cannot procure thee one days respite
out of hell, or one days freedom from sickness, or from death; they cannot
give thee any satisfaction here, for content grows not in the worlds garden;
there are indeed joys worth having, pleasures worth minding, and riches worth
laboring for, happiness that shall never have an end, that are not subject to
changes, nor vicissitudes, as earthly enjoyments are, but they are to be sought
for above, in the enjoyment of God, in whose presence alone true happiness
dwells: The happiness the world promises are mere delusions, a little honey,
and many stings, a little bitter sweet pleasures, that perishes ere it bud; in
the midst of laughter, the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness; their joy is but like the crackling of thorns under a pot, soon in,
soon out; if thou will trade, let it be in a surer commodity, and not with the
merchant, have, fortunam rudentibus aptam, thy estate depending wind and
weather; if thou will be planting, let it be in a better soil, and not where
thorns and thistles are like to be thy reward; there is a treasure to be had, a
pearl of great price to be bought, Mat. 13.44, 45. whosoever deals in these
cannot lose by them; in comparison of which, pearls and diamonds and precious
rubies, are not to be named; these are they that make the soul rich, all other
riches does it no good, this makes it rich to God, and lovely, comely, amiable
in his sight; oh my God, give me this treasure, and it suffices, though I have
nothing else; all other things I can spare, Christ I cannot spare; he is the
breath of my life, and the life of my soul: let the world take their portion;
alas, it is a miserable portion, I envy them not; but Lord, put me not off
with such pitiful poor things; let me have an interest in Christ, and
communion with him, let me lie for ever in his bosom, and let the enjoyment of
him be my portion; let me be an inhabitant in the city of pearl, where no dirty
dog shall tread, upon the pavement, my heart pants after this, as the chased
heart after the waterbrooks, when Lord shall I come and appear before thee,
come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Upon the sudden withering of flowers.
34. Med.
WHen I beheld the beauty, splendor and glory of several herbs and flowers,
and other vegetables, when they were in their pride, and in their prime, and
invited all eyes to behold them, and to do them homage, and when I considered
withal, how short-lived they were, how soon they withered, vanished, and
perished, and their glory passed away, and came to nothing, I thought this was
a fit emblem to set forth humane frailty, and the worlds glory by; for both
are transitory and vain; for man himself who is Lord of these flowers, he soon
fades, and is withered, as a flower, yea, many times in the flower of his age;
how frequently does the Scripture compare man to the grass, and to the flower
of the field, which this day flourishes, and to morrow fades; their glorious
beauty is as a fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before the summer, etc.
Esaias. 28.1, 4. all flesh is grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of
grass, the grass withers, and the flower fades away, 1 Pet. 1.24. man that
is born of a woman, is of few days, and full of trouble; he comes forth like a
flower, and is cut down, he flees also as a shadow, and continues not, Job.
14.1, 2. Now they are fresh and flourishing, and sudenly they decline: now in
the height of youthful vanity, and sudenly they pass away, and the place that
knew them, shall know them no more: if they live, cares and fears, sickness and
old age succeed, of which they are forced to say, they have no pleasure in
them; death it self many times calls men off the stage, when they think they
have but begun to act their parts, and puts an exit to them, and their work is
done, and their part ended. But suppose life were more certain, yet our earthly
enjoyments and our happiness here are transitory and vain, and all the felicity
the world brags of, is but a mere fancy, and a very cheat, at the best: it is
but a mixture of sweet and sour, a little honey and a great deal of gall, and
the end of that mirth is heaviness; if the happiness be such what is the
misery? man himself is but a bubble, how great soever he may seem, and with
what titles soever he be dignified, and soon shall he be pricked by death, and
the wind let out, and then a great bubble, and a little one cannot be
distinguished, and all the pleasures which vain man takes in, all his youthful
follies, is but like a bush of thorns, and wisp of straw on fire, make a sudden
blaze, and is forthwith extinguished; they make a noise for a while, and then
vanish into smoke: youthful pleasures are soon over, and carking care treads
out their steps, and old age makes them forgotten; youth is like young lambs,
they leap and frisk awhile, while they have the dug to run to when they are
hungry, but when they are once weaned, and set to shift for themselves, the
sport is over; so youth under their parents providence, mind their sports, but
when once at their own provision, cares and pains, spoil the mirth, and make it
little minded: The world also frowns and smiles upon the same man, many times
the same day, and uses him as a tennisball, now lifts him up, and sudenly
casts him down, raises him to the top of honor, and then plungeth him into
the gulf of disgrace; Now it shows him abundance of riches, and then pincheth
him with extremity of poverty; now it mixeth him a cup with pleasure, and
presently fills it with gall and wormwood; that which the world calls pleasures
and for which so many sell their souls, are but like those of the drunkard,
that last but while he is swallowing the drink, and then succeeds belchings,
and vomitings, sickness and sorrow, wallowing in the mire, and such like; or
like that of the adulterer, which is often attended with pains, aches,
rottenness, filthy diseases, not fit to be named, and death it self, and indeed
these two beastly sins have much of that which the world calls pleasure, but
the effects show it is wrong named; sickness succeeds health, and deformity
beauty, sorrow treads upon the heels of pleasure, and adversity follows
prosperity, and there is a vicissitude and change in all humane affairs; he is
a stranger in the world, that knows not these things: David tells us, Psalm. 37
35. I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green
bay tree, yet he passed away, and lo he was not, yea, I sought him, but he
could not be found, whether he have reference to Saul and his family, I know
not, yet in the next generation, how was his family, and bloody house, (as God
calls it 2 Samuel 21.1.) strangely rooted out: oh my soul, are all these things
so vain and transitory, what is the reason then that thou lets out thy
affections so much upon them, and concernest thy self so much above them, and
spendest thy money for that which is not bread, and thy labor for that which
satisfies not, and moilest and toylest, and carkest, and carest for them, in
the neglect of more necessary concerns; why art thou so taken with them when
thy business succeeds, and when thy perishing goard prospers? and why art thou
so troubled when it withers? why art thou so affected with the worlds smiles,
and knows that Syren-like, when most she fawns, she most intends a wrack? why
art thou so troubled at a cross providence, as if thy happiness did consist in
these enjoyments, and in the mean while, when thou have crosses and losses in
thy spiritual state, and nothing there prospers, thou layest it not to heart?
when God withholds the rain from the ground thou art affected, when he
withholds the dew of heaven from thy soul thou regardest it not, why art thou
so good a husband for thy body, and so bad for thy soul? is not the soul of
greater concernment? Do these outward things really go to the making up of thy
happiness, or is not the maintaining of communion with God, of much greater
concernment? if thou losest a days work in the field thou art troubled, but
have thou not lost many a days work in the congregation, and heard many a
Sermon, and madst little use of it? and is this nothing to thee? oh my God,
this bewitching world, this crafty devil, and this deceitful heart of mine,
has conspired my ruin, and without thy assistance will accomplish it; oh my
folly! that I should so affect what I know to be vain, and transitory, and to
signify nothing to my eternal happiness: Lord, wean me from the world, and
engage my affections to thy self, give me an understanding heart, that I may
expect no more from the world then it can perform, nor spend no more time upon
it then it will recompense me for; and though the world must have my head, and
my hands, Lord, keep my heart disengaged, let me lodge none there but my
husband Christ.

Upon the sympathy and antipathy of vegetables.
35. Med.
WHen I considered the sympathy, and antipathy that is observed to be between
some vegetables which the Naturalists treat of, and the Philosophers call
occulta qualitatis, for which no reason can be given, when some had rather die
then live and grow together, and others never thrive well except they are
planted near one to the other: the like antipathy we may observe among
sensitive creatures, where one kind seeks the destruction of another, and
others love and delight each in other; nay, something of this may be seen where
is neither life nor sense, as in fire and water, and the strange simpathy
between the loadstone and the iron, between the jet and the straw, etc. This
consideration minded me of the strange antipathy between the seed of the
serpent and the seed of the woman, mentioned Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; I considered
also, of the sympathy between Gods own people, the former is lively expressed,
by the antipathy that Naturalists observe to be in the Panther to a man, that
bears such a perfect hatred to him, that he will race out his image, if he see
it upon a wall: In wicked men, there is so perfect a hatred to God, that they
will, if they can possibly, race out the very image of God, wherever they see
it: They hate every thing that God loves, love every thing that he hates; they
hate every thing that is like him, and that for this very reason because it is
like him; now no reason can be given of this, why they should hate this God,
who is goodness it self, who is also their creator, and their great benefactor,
from whom they have their life, and breath, and being, their food, and raiment,
their limbs, and senses, their health and strength, their peace and plenty,
without whom they cannot speak, nor stir, nor live a moment, and yet this is
the case of all wicked men on earth, however cross each to other, in their
principles, and contrary in their dispositions, if they agree in nothing else,
yet they agree in this, to oppose the power of godliness; Herod and Pilate can
both consent that innocent Christ shall be put to death; though wicked men like
snarling dogs, are worrying one another, yet join against the trembling hare;
so though they worry each other, yet all agree against an holy man; let a godly
man be of never so pleasing a disposition, and winning carriage, never so
open-hearted, and open-handed, yet this one ingredient holiness spoils all in
the worlds account, and renders him hateful and contemptible in their eyes,
and the grossest drunkard, swearer, and adulterer shall be preferred before
him; Christ himself, though never man spoke like him, and no guile was found in
his mouth, yet a seditious murderer, Barrabbas was preferred before him; oh the
degenerate estate of poor man, whither art thou fallen? is the chiefest good
become the object of thy chiefest hatred? and is holiness wherein thou wast
created, and which is Gods image, without which thou can never be saved,
become thy scorn, and more contemptible then the image of the devil? is the
devil become the better Master? and is his work the better work? and will also
his wages be the better wages? well, praise in the parting; the time is coming,
thy judgment will be altered, and thou will be glad to eat those words, that
now thou speak against the power of godliness: I know all men are not
actually persecutors, but no thanks to them; they have the same nature, and
have an aching tooth against holiness, but for the preservation of his people,
the Lord restrains them; thus he did Abimelech, Genesis 20.6. I withheld thee from
sinning against me, therefore suffered I not thee to touch her; and Laban, God
said unto him, take heed that thou speak not unto Jacob either good or bad,
Genesis 31.24. viz. neither by flattery, nor force, by allurement, or
affrightment, to bring him back; God spoke for him in the heart of his enemy.
The sympathy also that is amongst the children of God, was minded by me, they
are sons of the same father, and heirs of the same inheritance, and therefore
should be kindly affectioned one to another, Romans 12.10. arctior est copula
cordis quam corporis, they are brethren in Adam, according to the flesh, and
brethren in Christ according to the spirit; they rejoice with them that do
rejoice, and weep with them that weep, Romans 12.15. cum plangentibus plango,
says Cyprian, cum deflentibus defleo; this is that brotherly love which the
Apostle bids to continue, Heb. 13.1. the communion with God, and the communion
of Saints is heaven upon earth; believers are members of the mystical body of
Christ, and it is with believers as with members in the natural body, they have
the same care one for another; if one suffer, all suffer; and if one be
honored, all rejoice; 1 Cor. 12.25, 26. they are like lute-strings, if one be
stricken, all the rest sound; but more clear this sympathy would be, if it were
not for the remaining corruption that is in us; oh my soul, do thou meet with
hardship in the world, wonder not at it, thou art in an enemies Country, the
world will love her own, but never loved Christ, nor any of his: have thou
broke satan's prison, no wonder if there be hue and cry sent after thee, to
bring thee back; the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent did never
yet agree; Christ has told thee, in the world thou shall have tribulation, yet
be of good comfort, he has overcome the world: this world is the Saints
purgatory, not paradise; and why should thou expect pleasure, it is like the
straights of Magellan, where it is observed, which way soever a man bends his
course out, the wind will be against him; it is an own mother to the wicked,
but a step-mo-to the godly, and will starve them if their father looked not to
them; the godly and the wicked fight under two captains, the one under the
banner of Christ, the other under the devils standard, and therefore there is
no hopes of reconciliation; fire and water are not more contrary, then Christ
and Belial; oh my soul, manifest thy self the seed of the woman, not by making
peace, but by maintaining war with Christ's enemies, and by sympathizing with
his children; mourn with those that mourn, and rejoice with those that rejoice,
and be like affectioned one to another: like the members of the same body; when
one is distempered, the other suffers; when one stands in need, all the rest
yield their help and assistance. Oh my God, is there such an antipathy in the
hearts of wicked men against thine image in the hearts of thy people? what
cause have we to admire thy patience that suffer such enemies to live upon
the face of the earth, and feedest, and maintainest them at thy own cost and
charge, and what cause have I to admire that thou bear with me so long, when
I was in that relation, and what cause have we to admire thy wisdom, and power
in preserving a handful of thy people, like lambs, in the midst of numerous
wolves, that seek their destruction, when for ought we know there are hundreds
to one against them, that vow their destruction: Lord, let me manifest my self
to be thine, by my antipathy to sin, and the works of darkness, and my sympathy
with the godly those children of light.

Upon the Marigold and other flowers.
36. Med.
WHen I considered the marigold and sundry other flowers in the garden, that
closed in the evening and opened in the morning, and all the day turned their
heads according to the course of the sun, as if they scorned any other beauty,
and would admit of no other suitor, and as if no temptation could divert them
from their beloved, from whom they received their life and being, and in the
winter when the sun is remote, they bury themselves in the ground, and
disappear: I thought this much resembles a Christian, when he acts like a
Christian, and is a fit emblem of grace in the soul; for a gracious soul as he
scorns to make love to any other but God, so he scorns that proffered love that
others make to it, or to entertain any in competition with Christ, from whom he
receives life, and breath, and being: In all a gracious man does, Christ is in
his eye, and if he can please him, he matters not who is offended, his eye is
always upon Christ, as these flowers have their eye upon their beloved sun; his
heart runs out to him, and scorns to open to any other; when God is present,
the heart is expatiated; when absent, it is contracted, he retires himself then
into himself, and thinks there is no company worth having; he depends upon him
as a child does upon his fathers providence, and fears not want, so long as
there is bread enough in his fathers house: and as he draws out all from God,
so he draws out all for God, and for his service; heart, and hand, and tongue,
and all shall be employed for him; there is not a dram of love in the heart,
but it shall run in this channel, he shall have it; if he have a tongue to
speak, it shall speak for God; if a hand to act, it shall act for him; and all
he can do, seems too little for him; a gracious soul that is espoused to Christ
behaves her self like a chaste wife to her beloved husband. When suitors come to
woo for her affections, they shall have a peremptory denial; my affections
are set already, I cannot, I will not remove them; my vows are upon me, I
cannot yield; I have devoted my self to my husband, and will not prove false;
and it is her trouble she is forced to hear such solicitations, and
temptations: it is so with the soul, she repels with disdain the temptations
and allurements laid before her; the devil knocks by his temptations, she will
not answer, the world knocks, she will not open; riches, honors, friends and
favorites cannot prevail: such a spirit was in Jerome, though my father (says
he) lay upon his knees before me; and my mother hanged about my neck, and my
brethren and sisters lay in my way, to keep me from Christ, I would throw off
my father, tread upon my mother, run over my brethren and sisters, to come to
Christ, when he calls me: a believer is semper idem, always the same, whether
with David upon the throne, or with Job upon the dunghill, or with Jeremy in
the stocks, he will still keep his integrity, as these flowers do, wherever
planted, in field or garden; however honored, or despised, no other
benefactour shall be owned, but the sun: when the hypocrite is like the planet
Mercury, good in a good conjunction, and bad with a bad; a gracious heart is
like Lot, good in Sodom, temperate amidst the intemperate; or like Noah,
upright in a sinful world; or like Joseph, holy in a sinful Egypt, like the
needle in the compass, always pointing the same way, and never settles in a
wrong point, however disturbed by a jog of temptation, like clear water in a
glass, which remains clear after all the shaking, when the hypocrite has mud
in the bottom, which is discovered by the stirring; oh my soul, is it thus with
thee? art thou as faithful to this sun of righteousness as these poor flowers
are to their beloved, that will admit neither moon nor stars, nor any other
lover to have any room in their affections, nor any favor in their eye, nor
one pleasing look or cast of their head, do thou point right for heaven, and
can no jog of temptation divert thee, or make thee settle in a wrong point? If
so, how comes it to pass, that thou art so much taken with the worlds glory,
that not only thy eyes, but thy heart goes after it? why art thou so bewitched
with her smiles, and so cast down with her frowns? why have thou so few serious
thoughts of God, and so few glimps of him, even in the ordinances? were thy
heart in order, thou would always have Christ in thine eye, both in thy
heavenly and earthly employments, and would soon be sensible when the sun of
righteousness was either clouded, ecclypsed, or set upon thee; as these flowers
are in the like case; if thou art why do thou not mourn and hang the head in
his absence as they do in the like case? they will another day rise up against
thee and condemn thee, as being more faithful to their benefactour, then thou
art to thy husband; oh my God, I am sensible of my guilt, and the faithfulness
of these flowers shames me, for my unfaithfulness; they have but a natural
instinct to incline them to their benefactor, and own him, but I have reason
and Scripture, yea, my vows are upon me, and engage me to my husband Christ;
Lord, divert my affections from the world, which does but flatter me; to
deceive me, incline my heart to Christ that would save me and make me happy;
let neither life nor death, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature be able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus
my Lord, nor rend me out of his arms, nor draw my affections from him.

Upon a rose among thorns.
37. Med.
WHen I beheld and considered, how the rose grew and flourished, and came to
perfection amongst the thorns and prickles that surrounded it, and was not
hurt, but rather defended by them, and kept and preserved from their other
enemies, I thought it represented the Church here in the world; for as here,
there are a thousand prickles for one rose, and yet this rose is preserved; so
in the world, it may probably be conjectured, there are a thousand wicked men,
which are compared to thorns, for one that is godly; the Church in her militant
condition, while she is in the world, is compared to the lilly among the
thorns, Con. 2.2. as the lilly among the thorns (says Christ) so is my love
among the daughters: these are indeed as the Gibionits, pricks in their eyes,
and thorns in their sides: yet not altogether useless: wicked men are called
briars, Micah. 7.4. the best of them is a briar, and the most upright sharper
then a thorny hedge; and God threatens to fold them together as thorns, and
burn them as dry stubble, Nahum. 1.10. Isay. 27.4. but these briars are not
useless, he hedges us about with them, that he may keep us in compass; he
pricks us with these thorns, that he may let out ill humors; and happy thorns
to us, if they open a vein for sin to gush out: his house of correction is his
school of instruction, Psalm. 94.12. whether the rose in the creation, was thus
guarded and fenced, I know not; some think these thorns also are a fruit of the
curse, yet sure I am, before the fall the Church was not pestered with such
thorns as now it is: man before the fall had not the nature and property of
thorns; but as thorns by Gods providence are made serviceable for the defense
of better fruit, so the wicked often prove serviceable to the Church, and a
defense to better men; but no thank to them, but to the overruling providence
of God, God preserves his people from their rage, and makes them dwell safe by
them, as lambs among wolves, and not only so, but makes one wolf to defend them
from another, or sets one wolf to worry another; while the lambs escape: the
Gibionites though briars and thorns, were yet useful to Israel, and the earth
helped the woman, and swallowed up the floods which the dragon cast out of his
mouth after her, Rev. 12.16. As the Persians and others, drink up the flood,
which the Turk at this day threatens to overwhelm all Christendom with: The
Philistines though briars and thorns, are a defense to David, when he was
persecuted by Saul, and in a great strait, being compassed round about by Saul's
army; in that nick of time they invaded the land, and Saul and his army drew
back, 2 Samuel 23.27. wicked Pharaoh gave entertainment to Jacob, and his family,
and made provision for them in the seven years famine; and David and his
fellows were promoted by a wicked man: so was Mordicai and the Jews; and the
Barbarians showed Paul no little kindness, Acts. 28.2. and sometimes the sheep
find shelter under a thorny hedge, yet the nature of wicked men is not to do
good but to rent and tear; but God alters their nature, at least restrains
their rage, for his peoples sake. The Church of God is as a bush burning, but
not consumed; for when potent Princes have sought their destruction, God has
frustrated their designs; sometimes by setting the dogs to worry one another,
the poor hare escapes; so Geball and Ammon, and the inhabitants of Mount Seir,
destroy each other, when they had decreed to destroy Israel, 2 Chronicles. 20.23.
and the counsel could not agree against Paul, Act. 23.7. God maintains Noah
against a world of wicked men, and Lot in the midst of Sodom, and Israel in
Egypt, and Mordicai against Haman, and all his enemies; and often gives them
favor in the eyes of those, that were they not restrained, would become their
mortal enemies, and their bloody persecutors; God turning those thorns which
would devour them, into a defense for them, and into a hedge for his peoples
security: Oh my soul admire the providence and wisdom of God, that can bring
light out of darkness, order out of confusion, good out of evil, and can turn
a curse into a blessing, and make his Churches enemies to become their friends:
thou wast one of those thorns, and thy nature was as bad, and if God has taken
thee off the stock of nature, and planted thee in that choice vine, bless his
name, it was no thanks to thee; If now thou art a rose though encompassed by a
thousand thorns, he will defend thee; If thy ways please God, thy enemies
themselves shall be at peace with thee, Pro. 16.7. sin is the only makebate
between God, and the soul, and if God have a controversy with the sinner, all
the creatures are presently up in arms to bring in the rebel, and wait but for
a commission to take away his life; but if God be reconciled to thee, no enemy
can hurt thee; no weapon formed against his Church shall ever prosper, Esaias.
54.17. When Jacob had made his peace with God, neither Laban nor Esau could
quarrel with him, though it is thought both came forth with murderous
intentions; a godly man shall be in league with the stones of the field, and
the beast of the field shall be at peace with him, Job. 5.23. fear not little
flock, (says Christ) it is your fathers good pleasure to give you a kingdom,
and it is better be of the little number of roses, then the great number of
thorns: it is better be with Noah in the ark, then with the whole world in the
flood, and to go to heaven alone, then to hell with company; if thou art a
rose, ere long thou shall be put into Christ's bosom; if thou art a thorn, ere
long thou shall be cast into the fire; oh my God, I am wild by nature, if
grapes grow on thorns, or figs on thistles, it is thy doing to alter the stock,
and transplant it: if I be a thorn, Lord, change my nature: if I be a rose,
Lord preserve me in the midst of mine enemies, till I come to maturity, and
then lodge me in thy own bosom.

Upon a bed of Camomile trampled upon.
38. Med.
OBserving a bed of Camomile, that had been trod and trampled upon, and abused
by other violence, how it was yet fresh and flourishing, green, and fragrant,
and seemed to me to spread the more, and grow the better, and was fresh and
well-liking, I thought it much resembled the Church under affliction, which is
often trampled upon by the feet of pride, and often in the furnace of
affliction, under hard pressures, and great calamities, and yet is in a growing
condition, nay, never grows better then in affliction, and under a suffering
condition; and though lying among the pots, is yet black, but comely: In
persecuting times they grow best, and thrive most; In times of prosperity they
are apt to forget their maker, and with Jesurun, to wax fat and kick, and lift
up the heel against him; but in adversity they seek him early: in prosperity
they are like young mulets, when they have sucked matrem calcibus petivit, they
kick the dug that nourishes them, so they forget the God that feeds them;
fullness breeds forgetfulness, yea, wontonness: the most poisonous flies are
bred in the sweetest fruits: As Salvian in his time observes, prosperity was
the Churches bane; there are many with the full fed hawk, forget their Master,
and are like the moon at the full, furthest from the sun, and most like to
suffer an eclipse; when they are at ease, like wanton cattle, they push each
other; but when the dogs bark the sheep run together: Israel in Egypt under
their hard taskmasters did increase and multiply, and of seventy two, in a few
ages come to be six hundred thousand fighting men; but when they were freed
from this bondage, and were in the wilderness, they murmured against God, and
of all those in the space of forty years, but only two remained alive, and many
died by an untimely death: In the primitive times, never any people under the
sun met with more opposition, and all the means the devil and his instruments
could invent, were used to destroy them, as you may read at large in the
history of the ten bloody persecutions, and yet the blood of the Martyrs proved
the seed of the Church, and the more they were opposed the faster they
increased; as it is said of the Palm Tree, the more it is pressed down, the
more it arises, so may it truly be said of the Church, or as some say of the
walnut-tree, the more it is beaten, the more fruit it bears, so it is with many
Christians, It is good, (says David) that I was afflicted, before I was
afflicted I went astray, but now I learn to keep thy commandments. In
Athanasius time the Church was at a low ebb, the Arian heresy had overrun, and
overspred the face of Christendom, and the orthodox party were under a cruel
persecution, more cruel (say some) then any was under the heathen Emperors,
yet all the darkness of hell, could not put out the light that then remained,
but it still gathered strength till the clouds were scattered, and the sun
broke forth again in his strength: In Luthers days the Pope, and all the smoke
that ascends out of the bottomless pit, yea, all the powers of darkness, could
not put out the spark that was then kindled, nor all the floods the dragon
powered out of his mouth quench it: In Queen Marys days, fire and faggot could
not quench the light of the Gospel, and to this day the more it is opposed, the
more it prospers, yea, particular Christians may find persecuting times to be
the most growing seasons; however by this wind of persecution, much chaff is
blown away, and in the furnace much dross discovered, and reprobate silver,
yea, the good wheat is thereby cleansed, and the gold purified. It was good for
me (says David) that I was afflicted; it is good for a man (says the
lamenting Church) to bear the yoke in his youth, Lam. 3.27, oh my soul, thou
have been long in the furnace of affliction, what benefit do thou find? is
thy dross consumed, and thy corruption wasted? or is the bellows burnt, the
lead consumed? and has the founder melted in vain? (as God complains) Jer.
6.29. thou have been often fanned, what chaff is driven away? thou have been
trampled upon with the camomile, do thou grow and spread the better? pressed
down with the Palm Tree, do thou rise the higher? beaten with the
Walnut-tree, do thou bear the more? what account can thou give of all the
afflictions that God has laid upon thee? if none, why may not God give thee up
as incorrigible? like those, Jer. 2.30. in vain have I smitten your children,
they received no correction, Esaias. 1.5. why should you be stricken any more? ye
will revolt more and more: think it not strange if God lay on heavier strokes
where others will not serve, and give stronger physic where gentler will not
work; David must be banished, Job deprived of all, Joseph wrongfully cast into
prison, Jeremy in the dungeon, Paul and Silas in the stocks, and the Martyrs be
brought to the stake, these are the pills which our heavenly father prescribed
to them, for the purging out of gross humors, and restoring their health, and
what wonder if he prescribe any, or all of these to thee, who aboundest with
these humors more then they? many a pill thou have had, and little fruit
appears; well may thou fear, he will either punish thee seven times more, or
leave thee off as incorrigible: oh my God, with correction give instruction, or
it will not work; speak that to the heart, that thou speak to the ear, or
other senses; thou art the only physician of souls, and all others are
physicians of no value; thou know the disease, and how to cure it; thou
can prescribe the physic, and make it effectual; Lord, be my physician, and
leave me not over to any other; let me not murmr at any of thy prescriptions,
and let not any pill be in vain, nor any twig of thy rod useless.

Upon receiving in of the fruits.
39. Med.
AT the end of the year, when I received in the crop, the fruits of the earth,
for which I had labored, and for which I had long waited; I began to consider,
what a poor reward this is for all my labor, if I must expect no more; and
what a sad condition poor laboring men are in, that moil, and toil, and cark
and care, and have much ado for bread to eat, and clothes to put on; and this
is their all, yea, they run in arrears to God for this also, and are like to be
cast into prison for ever; and yet we may see the folly of the most, they take
no care for any other riches, but frame to themselves a poor pitiful
happiness, in these, and are never like to have any pleasure here, or
hereafter, but what they fancy to themselves in some sinful vanity: the
receiving in of these fruits of the earth as the reward of my labor, put me in
mind of the reward which believers shall receive at the last day, at the hand
of God, for all the labor, toil and trouble, they have had, which will be a
better recompense then the earth can give the husbandman for his pains: let us
not then be weary of well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint
not, Gal. 6.9. he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption,
but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting,
ver. 8. he that cares only to feather his nest, store up riches, fit the back,
and fill the belly, and lets the soul sink or swim, he is like to have a
miserable harvest, but they that sow in tears shall reap in joy; he that goes
forth weeping, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him, Psalm. 126.5, 6. Be patient therefore
brethren (says the Apostle) till the coming of the Lord, behold the husbandman
waits for the precious fruits of the earth, and has long patience for it,
till he receives the early and the latter rain; be you also patient, stablish
your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh, Jam. 5.7, 8. Now
believers sow the seed, and water it with their tears, but it is not long
before the reward comes; behold I come quickly (says Christ) and my reward is
with me, to give every man according as his work shall be, Rev. 22.12. hold out
faith and patience (says the Martyr) your work will presently be at an end;
hope holds up the husbandmans heart, and may much more the Christians: these
things also put me in mind of the great harvest, at the end of the world, when
the great husbandman shall send out his servants, the angels, to reap down his
field, and gather in his corn, Mat. 13.38. the field is the world, the good
seed are the children of the kingdom, the tares are the children of the wicked
one, the enemy that sows them is the devil, the harvest is the end of the
world, the reapers are the angels, as therefore the tares are gathered
together, and burnt in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this world: the
day is coming that all shall be brought to judgment, and the precious shall be
separated from the vile, the good corn shall be brought into the barn, but the
tares are reserved for the fire; the tares and the wheat may grow together in
one field, but shall never lodge together in the same barn, for as the tares
cannot well be weeded out, which in the blade (some say) much resemble the
wheat, and is hardly known, till the fruit appears, so though God can discern
the hypocrite from the sincere, yet hypocrisy may be spun with so fine a
thread, that the best discerning Christian can hardly do it; but the time is
coming, the angels shall know them, and they are not to go into the same
garner, they must be bundled up for the fire, when the wheat must be brought
into Gods barn: oh my soul, what seed have thou sown against that harvest? have
thou sown to the flesh, then of the flesh thou will reap corruption? if to the
spirit, thou will of the spirit reap life everlasting? what grain art thou? art
thou wheat, or tares? then may thou know whether thou art to go to the fire
or into the garner? rest not satisfied till thou know that thou art wheat, and
neither with the tares bring forth bad fruit, nor with the chaff fly away with
the wind; it is not enough to have a flourishing blade, so the stony ground
had, and yet came to nothing: it is not enough to make a profession of
religion, so the foolish virgins did, they had lamps, but no oil, a profession
but no grace; it is not enough to have talents, but thou must improve them, or
thou will be sentenced to outer darkness; it is not enough to grow in the same
field, be manured by the same hand, heated by the same sun, and watered with
the same showers; thus the tares were, but there must be good feed,
well-rooted, springing up, and bearing fruit in thy heart; thou may live
under the same Minister, enjoy the same ordinance with the wheat, and yet still
be but a tare; oh my God, discover my self to my self, and let me not be
deceived by a cunning devil, and a deceitful heart; if I be a tare, Lord, let
me know it ere it be too late, that I may sow better seed in my field, that I
may be gathered into thy barn, and not be bundled up with the tares for the
fire: let my heart bring forth good fruit fit for the basket, good wheat fit
for thy barn, solid wheat that may not be blown away with the wind, and much
fruit that I may glorify thy name: let me not sow to the flesh, but to the
spirit, that I may not reap corruption but life everlasting; let me not be
deceived in so great a business as the salvation of my soul.

Upon the beating out of the seed.
40. Med.
WHen I had gathered in the seed, and the fruits of the earth, my next work was
to make a separation, the good from the bad, for though some separation was
already made, and the weeds, and other trash, were cast out, and left behind,
yet still there were stalks, and husks, and chaff adhering to it; to this end I
threshed, rubbed, pounded or beat it out, according as I saw occasion; for I
saw it would not out without some violence, and that which was most stubborn,
and gave most resistance, received most blows, till at length my end was
obtained, and the separation made; this put me in mind of the necessity of
affliction, how needful it was for the soul, which is pestered more with chaff
and rubbish, then any corn can be; though now (says the Apostle) for a season,
if need be, ye are in heaviness, through manifold temptations, etc. 1 Pet. 1.6.
when the heart grows too light, God makes it heavy with manifold temptations,
physic sometimes is as necessary as food, and conduces more to our health,
the soul has as much need of threshing and winnowing as the corn; Solomon tells
us Pro. 22.15. foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child, but the rod of
correction will fetch it away: old Ely, for want of this brought up his sons,
to bring down his house; a lesson set on with whipping, is best remembered: now
this is true of men, as well as children, for corruption, and folly remains in
them also, till God fetch it out; sanctified affliction is the way to consume
it: It was good for me (says David) that I was afflicted, before I was
afflicted I went astray, but now I learn to keep thy Commandments: Gods rod as
well as his staff, comforted him, Psalm. 23.4. as corn must be threshed,
winnowed, ground, and baked, before it is fit for use, or good for food, so by
affliction men are fitted for Gods service here, and for glory hereafter, yet
as some corn requires not so much threshing as others does, yet all must have
some, so some men need not so much affliction as others, though some be
necessary, but he that gives man understanding in the one, best knows what is
necessary for the other, Isay. 28.24. does the plowman plow all day to sow?
does he open and break the clods of his ground, when he has made plain the
face thereof? does he not cast abroad the fetches, and scatter the cummin, and
the appointed barley and rye in their place? for his God does instruct him to
discretion, and does teach him, for the fetches are not threshed with a
threshing-instrument, neither is a cart-wheel turned about upon the cummin, but
the fetches are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod, bread-corn
is bruised, etc. he that gives man wisdom, shall not he understand? the great
husbandman that instructs others, will not lay on more strokes, or heavier,
then needs must; the goldsmith suffers not his gold to lie in the furnace one
hour longer then is requisite; God observes when his work is done upon
Mount-Zion, and then will punish the stout heart of the King of Assiria, Esaias.
10.12. we are apt to be playing in the dust, and mind not our fathers house,
and till we are frightened, or beaten, we shall not return home, but mind our
sport: the prodigal minds not his father, while he had any thing left to eat:
oh death how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at ease in
his possession, and has nothing to vex him, but has prosperity in all things,
Ecclus. 41.1. physic (as I said) is sometimes as necessary as food, and
sickness as health, and poverty as plenty, we are apt to surfeit on sweetmeats;
our heavenly father who is the best physician, knows best what is best for us;
were we to choose our food, and our physic, we should kill our selves;
sometimes he prepares a diet-drink for us, and mixeth it with our tears, Psalm.
42.3. my tears have been my meat day and night, Psalm. 80.4, 5. O Lord God of
hosts, how long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people, thou
feedest them with the bread of tears, and give them tears to drink in great
measure; he also seasoneth it with their groans, to many, he prescribes also a
spare diet, for every man cannot bear a prosperous estate, no more then every
man's head can bear much wine; oh my soul, matter not though thou be thresht,
and winnowed, and ground, and baked, so thou may be made bread for thy
Masters table; all Gods people have tasted of the cup of affliction, and can
thou expect to go free: Abel began the round, and drank a health to all his
followers, which hitherto they have all pledged, and some of them have drunk
very deep, and Christ himself drunk up the very dregs; If God preserve thee, no
matter whether it be in salt or sugar: If thou suffer for him, thou shall reign
with him, and these light afflictions which are but for a moment, works for
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. it is but
winking (said the Martyr) and we shall be in heaven presently; though thou
may lose something for Christ, thou will lose nothing by him, for every
handful of muck thou partest with for his sake, thou shall have a handful of
angels: afflictions when once past, are soon forgotten as a woman's pangs in
childe-bearing, when a man-child is born into the world, John 16.21. to which
a Christians sufferings are often resembled, Esaias. 26.17. Jer. 6.24. but many
Christians mourn, and overmourn for their losses, and become like Mary Magdalen
blear-eyed, and cannot see Christ for their tears, and think God cannot love
them, because he beats them; see how these are mistaken, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8. whom
the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son that he receives; if
you endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons, for what son is he
that the father chasteneth not; but if you be without chastizements, whereof
all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons; he has learned little in
Christianity that has not learnt to suffer, corrections are pledges of our
adoption, and badges of our sonship, one son God had without sin, but none
without sorrow; Luther thought the Pope was not Gods son, quod sine cruce
regnat; oh my God, whatever affliction lies upon me, never let me have a
revolting heart, and if I suffer let it be for thee, and not as an evil-doer,
if thou have appointed suffering times for me, Lord, fit me for them with
suffering graces, and a suffering spirit: fit the back before thou lay on the
burden; Lord, give me strength to bear it, and then lay on what thou will, and
while thou will.

Upon the winnowing of the seed.
41. Med.
WHen the seed was thus thresht, or beat out, the next work was winnowing it,
whereby the chaff and refuse and lightest emptiest part, was blown away with
the wind, but the solid substantial weighty grain was not hurt by it, but
benefitted; it was refined and purified: I saw, what the furnace was to mettle,
such is the fan to the corn, that which seperateth, purges, and purifyeth it;
this made me compare temporal with spirituals, and to consider, that God has
many ways to purge and try his people, sometimes he casts them into the furnace
of affliction, and trys them this way, others had trials of cruel mockings,
and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonments, etc. Heb. 11.36. and
sometimes he trys them with the fan, to see what solidity is in them, the
messenger of the Covenant shall come, but who may abide the day of his coming,
or who shall stand when he appears? for he is like a refiners fire and like
fullers soap, and he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, etc. then
many a gilded piece will be found counterfeit, and many a glittering professor
found to be but a cheat, and much seeming gold prove to be but dross and
rubbish, but true gold neither fears the furnace, nor the touchstone; here the
sincere Christian and the hypocrite will be differenced, which now are hardly
known asunder, and will no longer serve to make up one heap of money; in this
world they may grow in the same field, as did the wheat and the tares, they may
lie together in the same mow, as the corn and the straw, they may make up the
same heap, as the wheat and the chaff, but they shall never lie in the same
garner together, for this is reserved for the wheat alone: here they may
benefit one the other, as the straw bears up the wheat, and the chaff and piles
defend it from injury, and they are preserved, secured, and fed for the wheats
sake, but hereafter the godly will not need their protection, and the other
shall not have preservation: here the earth helps the woman, and the innocent
save the Island, Job. 22.30. and so both shall grow together till the harvest,
but then they shall be separated one from another; now there are several fans,
the devil has his fan, Luke 22.31. and the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold
satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat, but I have
prayed, that thy faith fail not; he challenged him Goliah-like, to a single
combat, but without leave he cannot do it; 1 Pet. 5.8. be sober, be vigilant,
because your adversary the devil like a roaring lion walks about, seeking
whom he may devour: his end in sifting is not to purify but to destroy; his
sieve holds nothing but refuse, the best runs through; but Gods sieve preserves
the best, and severs it from the chaff: there is a fan of scoffs, and scorns,
which is in the hands of wicked men, the devils instruments, and much of the
lighter chaff is blown away with the wind, and cannot stand before it, and
there is also a fan of persecution, and this though used by men, the devil
guides and directs their hands, and this stronger blast carries almost all
before it, the stony ground could not withstand it; we have seen in our days
very much of that which we accounted solid grain and principal wheat, has
proved chaff, and if this wind should blow loud, it is like much more would
fly; but there is another fan, and that is of errors, and heresies, and this
takes not away the chaff only, but some of the lighter sort of corn, yea, and
if possible, the very elect; this the Apostle warns professors of, that they be
not like children tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14.
and how many such giddy hearers are there, that are cast into what mould the
preacher pleases, and like glasses, are by the breath blown into any shape,
but ere long Christ himself will come, with his fan, Mat. 3.12. whose fan is in
his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather the wheat into his
garner, but the chaff will he burn with unquenchable fire; heaven spewed out
the angels for their apostasy, and no unclean thing shall ever enter there, nor
dirty dog shall tread upon that pavement, nor dross shall be mixed with that
gold, no water with that ware, nor no chaff with this wheat, but for the chaff,
it must to the fire, but not be consumed, vivere volunt, mori nesciunt, they
shall seek death but shall not find it, Rev. 6.9. they that once might have
had life, and would not, now they would have death, but cannot; oh my soul, are
there trying times to come? wherein grace will be known from its conterfeit,
and when the axe will be put to the root of the tree, and every one that brings
not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire? must the
dross be consumed, and the chaff driven away, of the wind? look about thee,
that thou be true gold, solid grain, and a tree of righteousness, that brings
forth good fruit, that thou exceedest all hypocrites in the world, and have
something they have not, and can do something they cannot do, that thou may
be able to abide the refiners fire, and the fullers soap; that the house of thy
profession be built upon the rock, that no wind nor weather, storms nor
tempests, floods nor waves of trouble, may molest thee; trouble will come,
there is no prevention; sometimes lighter afflictions, as smaller rain, and
sometime greater, as the overflowing of Jordan; amidst these waves, thy ship
had need be like the Ark, pitched within and without, yea, thou had need to
be shut in by God himself: A true Christan is like Mount Sion, that cannot be
moved, when he is founded upon this rock, nec flatu nec fluctu movetur, he need
fear neither wind nor weather, if he fall, Christ himself must fall, and it is
better fall with him, then stand without him: Christ lives in him, and while
Christ that is the life of his soul lives, he cannot die; but if thy house be
built upon the sand, when the winds and waves come, and come they will, it
will surely down, and great will be the fall thereof, because irresistible, and
irreparable: O my God, are trying times coming? and must I be sifted by satan?
winnowed by the world, and fanned by Christ? who can stand in these trials, and
bear up against these floods, and waves without divine assistance? Lord, give
me strength from above, for vain is the help of man; make me solid grain that
may abide the wind, true gold that may abide the fire, and build me upon that
rock that is high, that no storms nor tempests, may beat me down, nor all the
floods in the world may ever remove me.

Upon clean seed sown, yet brings forth chaff.
42. Med.
WHen I beheld how the seed that last year I had so carefully winnowed, purged,
fanned, and purified from all weeds, and seeds, chaff, and rubbish, which
adhered to it, and sown in my garden that which was clean, pure and good, yet
when it came to maturity it was not only cumbred with weeds and other
annoiances, which the ground naturally cast up, but had as much stalk, chaff,
and other rubbish as it had the year before, which grew up with it, and adhered
to it, and was naturally produced by the seed, and it had as much need of
weeding, threshing, winnowing, and purging, as it had the year before, to make
it fit for use, or market; this minded me, that thus it was with poor souls,
since the fall, for as the earth casts out weeds of its own accord, and a
fountain sends forth water, so does the heart bubble forth corruption of its
own accord; a gracious man that has taken a great deal of pains with his heart
to weed out corruption, and to mortify his sin, and has been thresht, and
fanned, and purged and purified, and it has been the work of many years to do
it, and has cost him much labor, pains, and diligence, and many a prayer and
tear, yet he cannot beget a godly child, but chaff and corruption adheres to
them also, nay inheres in them, and they have as much need of refining as ever
the father had; for though a sinful man beget a sinful child, yet cannot a
gracious man beget a gracious child, for he begets him as he is a man, and of
the sinful offspring of fallen Adam, and not as he is gracious; and though God
do more usually make choice of his people out of such families, the covenant
being with them and their seed, and he has respect to their prayers, and gives
a blessing to their education and exhortations, yet this is not always so,
neither are they born thus; for they are the children of wrath as well as
others; and though sin be hereditary, grace is not; Ah sin! what woeful work
have thou made in the world, the most of men perish eternally by thee, and
those that escape are saved, as by fire, with a very great deal of pains and
difficulty: holy David begat a lascivious Amnon and a rebellious Absalom, good
Ely begat bad sons, and holy Isaac a profane Esau; yea, faithful Abraham a
scoffing Ishmael: for as a learned man cannot beget a learned child, for
learning is not a birth-priviledge but an acquired qualification, so grace is
not born with, but freely given to them that God thinks fit to bestow it upon:
A rich man's child comes into the world as naked, destitute, and miserably
impotent and helpless as any other; This as it may mind us of our miserable
condition by the fall, so also of our duty to our children, that as we are
careful of their bodies, so should we be much more careful of their souls,
and as we are careful that they get learning, so should we be much more that
they get grace: an estate is not so needful as an interest in Christ: we
should endeavor by instruction, correction, and good education, to train them
up in the fear of God, and when we can do no more, to go to him that is able to
give it, to beg grace for them; for as we were instrumental in their ruin, so
we should endeavor their recovery. But too many train them up no otherwise
then they do their horses, teach them to drudge, and think they have done well,
especially if they can leave them an estate behind them, which oftentimes is
so badly gotten, that they entail also a curse upon them, and their posterity;
and God does in a visible manner punish their children to the third and fourth
generation. Oh my soul, how stands the case with thee? thou art a child of
wrath by nature, as well as others, is thy relation to thy God changed? of an
enemy art thou an adopted son? it is well: thou had dross, is that consumed,
and the soul refined? thou had chaff is that blown away? have thou the marks
of adoption now upon thee, that formerly had the marks of an enemy? do thou
resemble thy father? do bear his image? God has no children but what have
some resemblance to him, he never adopts any but he changes their nature, and
disposition, as well as their relation; he has no unnatural children: has he
made good that promise to thee, 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a father to them, and
they shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord almighty: has he performed
the duty of a father, in thy new birth, in maintaining thee, and giving the
heavenly allowance? in instructing and correcting thee? and have thou the
nature, disposition, and privilege of children? have thou communion with him?
does he feed thee with bread from heaven? cloth thee with the robes of
righteousness, and adorn thee with the jewels of his grace? is there a through
change wrought in thee, and a new nature put into thee? have thou given up thy
heart as well as thy name to Christ? if it be so, it is well: if thou have this
privilege for thy self, seek it for thy children also; as thou have dedicated
them to God, do thy endeavor to make them Gods, and that the work of grace may
be timely wrought in their souls; curb corruption while they are young, a green
twig, will easily be bended, but when old and dry the work is difficult: many
like the ape kill their young ones with embracing, and they come to break their
parents heart, who thought a rod too heavy for them; withhold not correction
nor instruction, and go to God for a blessing upon both; Oh my God, am I wild
by nature, and have thou planted me into the true olive? have thou taken me off
my own stock, and planted me into the true vine? Lord, what shall I render to
thee for this? Lord, help me to give up my heart, as well as my name to thee,
and live thanks as well as speak thanks: have thou made me a son? Lord, give me
a son-like disposition; and let me honor my God, by a holy life and
conversation: And O that my children might live before thee; Lord, purge out
the dross, blow away their chaff, make them thy sons and thy daughters.

Upon the pleasures of a garden.
43. Med.
BEing in a well contrived, well-furnished, well-ordered garden, where there
was what nature, or art could bestow upon it, various well-colored,
well-sented flowers, which chequered the knots, and delighted both the sight
and smell, with various sorts of herbs, and vegetables, as well physical as
otherwise, together with curious walks, and shady bowers, and other curious
contrivances, delightful delicacies and various curiosities, that it seemed to
me an earthly paradise, a place of pelights and pleasures, which when I had
viewed, and for a while solaced my self in it, I took much pleasure in it, and
could contentedly have spent my time there; my affections were much tickled
with it, and grew warm upon it, and for a while I delighted my self in it, but
at last I began to call my self to an account, and to check my self for it,
with such considerations as these; oh my soul, what art thou doing, or whether
art thou going? art thou in heaven, or upon the earth, that thou art taking up
thy station? art thou like Shimei in seeking a servant? do thou lose thy
self? will thou by admiring the gift, neglect the giver, or court the maid
before the mistress? and take up with a handful of muck, for a handful of
angels? is this a suitable portion for thee, or rather a suitable match for the
soul, that thou art espousing thy self to it, and letting out thy affections
upon it? will this serve thy turn, or make thee happy? or will it endure to
eternity? alas! it will not; when winter comes, where are then thy delights?
nay, when night comes, it deprives thee of thy pleasure, yea, every shower of
rain, puts thee on to seek another happiness, and a better shelter and
security: what then will become of thee at death or judgment, if thou have no
better a refuge? what good can these do thee in heaven or in hell? these things
are not lasting, thou see the flowers ripe at noon, and withered by night,
like Jonah's gourd, grow up in a night, and wither in a night, and have a worm
breed in them, which will eat out their heart; they are like the be, they have
honey in the mouth, and a sting in the tail; and not only vanity, but vexation
of spirit is writ upon them: will a handful of flowers revive a dying man, or
comfort a languishing soul? when the earth and all the works therein are burnt
up, where will be thy happiness then? why then will thou moil and toil, and
cark and care for such vanities that never will make thee satisfaction? why
will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? if thou will take pains, let
it be in a more fruitful soil, where thou may expect a better crop; spend not
thy money for that which is not bread, nor thy labor for that which satisfies
not; these cannot satisfy, and if they did, cannot last long, these are but
swallow-comforts, they hide their heads in the winter, the grass will soon
wither, the flowers will soon fade, and thy own life is no more certain, and
what good will these do the soul? some poor vanishing delights they yield, for
an hour or two, and then it is over, but there are more satisfying pleasures,
more durable delights to be had, then these, why are they then neglected?
these, like swallow-friends, forsake when winter comes, when there is most
need, or like Physicians leave a man when he is dying, or like the devil with
the witch, tempt a while, and then forsake her, when she is in the most danger;
If a small spot of earth seem so delightful, what is heaven, and those mansions
of glory provided for glorified Saints? if the creature be so glorious, what is
the Creator, who infused such a beauty and virtue in it? if a flower be so
sweet, what is the rose of sharon and the lilly of the valley? these things
delight us for a moment, but one day will make us weary of them, especially if
there be not the addition of meat, and drink, and sleep, and lodging, of
health, and strength, and other necessaries; but in heaven is nothing wanting
that is necessary, delightful or desirable; no creature comforts there are
needful, but God is better a thousand times then all the comforts the whole
earth affords; oh my soul, labor after the substance, not the shadow; after
Christ and a title to glory; there are real pleasures to be had, rivers of
pleasure at his right hand for evermore; scorn then to be put off with such
poor things, or to let out thy affections upon such vanities, or to let them
grovel upon the ground: will thou suffer thy eyes to be dazzled with a few
flowers when thou may behold the sun, the moon, and stars; those glorious
lamps and beauty-spots of heaven; these are greater beauties, those beautify
only the porch: how beautiful then is the palace, the throne, nay, the king
himself? These flowers thou now admirest may for ought thou know be cropped,
and made use of for thy funeral, for thy body is as fading, and thy life as
uncertain as they are; a few days will ^^ther make them incapable of pleasing
thee, or thee incapable of praising them: this use thou may make of this
pleasing object, be as careful of thy soul, as the gardener is of this plot of
ground, let neither thorn nor thistle, briar nor weed of sin, thrive there,
supply what is wanting, root out what is superfluous, order what is disordered,
and then it is a happy time thou made this Observation: oh my God, what a
poor pitiful foolish wretch am I, thus to dote upon vanities; Lord, wean my
affections from the world, and keep them close to thy self.

Upon an adder lurking in the grass.
44. Med.
WAlking in the garden, I had like to have trod upon an adder, lurking in the
grass, and so was in unexpected danger, where I least dreaded it; the
apprehensions of it at present put me into amaze, which when it was something
abated, it made me consider, what daily need we have of divine protection, and
how dangerous it is to be from under the protecting hand of God: It made me
also to consider, that thus it is in all our earthly enjoyments, there is no
security in any, much danger in all, anguis in herba latet, there is a little
honey, and many stings, a little pleasure and much pain: there is no age, no
calling, no condition of life, free; riches are held by many to be the greatest
happiness, and most men rather desire gold then grace, and to be great rather
then good, yet these are not without their snares, neither set men out of the
reach of danger; they are called deceitful riches, such as choke the word,
when it was sown, Mat. 22.13. and well they may be so called, for they promise
that they never pay; and always deceive those that trust them; they promise
content, satisfaction and happiness, when oftentimes (like strong drink in a
fever) they do but inrage the disease, he that loves silver, shall not be
satisfied with silver, Eccles. 5.10. a man may as soon fill a chest with grace,
an empty stomach with air, as a covetous heart with grace, pauperis est
numerare pecus (says the coveteous man) he had never enough cattle while they
might be numbered: a ship may sink under the burden, that is not half full, and
men may have riches enough to sink them, when not half enough to satisfy them;
non plus satiatur, cor auro, quam corpus aura: But this is not all their vanity
neither, for as they are unsatisfying, so they are uncertain, they take
themselves wings and fly away, Pro. 23.5. they are never true to those that
trust them, they are often as transitory as a headlong torrent; but this is not
all, they are golden fetters to chain the souls faster in the devils clutches,
and faster in his service; and many times the devil, buys men's souls, yea,
their very profession out of their hands for money; pleasures have honey in the
mouth but a sting in the tail; they often perish in the budding; in the midst of
laughter, the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness:
favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, Pro. 31.30. and those that trust to
them shall be deceived; favor will fail, and beauty will wither, and how will
they deceive men's expectation? some men marry (says one) by the eye, and some
by their fingers ends, viz. for money, dos non Deus makes such matches: Absalom
and his sister found there was danger, trusting to their beauty, and many more
besides them, to whom it has proved a temptation: honor is the emptiest of
all bubbles, courted by many, attained by few, and there is but a little
distance between the highest round of the ladder and the lowest step; let Haman
and Achitophel prove the point: Beauty many times is like a blazing star,
ominous to the beholders, and hurtful to those that enjoy it, and proves
ofttimes the devils lime-twigs to catch his fowls: meat and drink are
necessary, yet to many their table becomes their snare, and by a plentiful
table they come to be guilty of gluttony and drunkenness; wine is a mocker, and
strong drink is raging, and he that is overtaken with it, is not wise; I fed
them to the full (says God) and they were as fed horses, every one neighed
after his neighbors wife; learning and great parts are lovely endowments, and
many times it proves dangerous and deadly; the greatest scholars often prove the
greatest enemies to Christ, and the greatest adversaries to the power of
godliness; In a word, those that have most of the world, have frequently the
least of heaven: Son (says Abraham) remember that thou in thy life time
receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented, Luke 16.25. Wealth many times swells men
into a tympany, not easily cured, I know there are some that follow Christ's
counsel, and make to themselves friends of this Mammon of unrighteousness, but
most do but increase their account by them, and at the reckoning-day will prove
bankrupts, and owe ten thousand talents more then they are able to pay; earthly
enjoyments usually rock men in the cradle of security, and lull them asleep
that they never wake till hell fire flames about their ears; thus the rich man
Luke. 12.16. and that also Luke 16.19. etc. when the moon is at full, it is
furthest distance from the sun, and nearest to an ecclips, and the world many
times interposeth it self between the full soul and the sun of righteousness:
relations and carnal friends ofttimes prove snares, thus they were to Job, to
Spira, and to many more; the things that are in themselves lawful blessings,
yet abused, prove our licitis perimus omnes, immoderately used prove a sin and
a snare: oh my soul thou walk in the midst of dangers, snares are laid for
thee in every creature, in every corner, trust not therefore to any, the most
innocent will betray thee, if not heedfully observed, and wisely enjoyed, the
most harmless, nay, the most necessary enjoyments are not free from snares, a
serpent may lie under thy feet, poison may be in thy cup or dish, many
temptations are in poverty, more in plenty, pray therefore with Agar, not to
have poverty, nor riches, but to be fed with food convenient, Pro. 30.8. as a
shoe too big, or too little, suits not the foot, so an estate too big is
troublesome, and to little pinches; a staff may help the passenger in his
journey, but a burden of staves will be his hinderance: oh my God, are there so
many dangers that attend me, both in reference to my body, and my soul: oh what
need have I of divine protection: Lord be thou my defender, keep me under the
shadow of thy wings, O let not Satan, the world, or my own deceitful heart ever
betray me, but let me be kept by the mighty power of God unto salvation.

Upon a Toad.
45. Med.
OBserving as I walked in the garden, in an evening, a loathsome foul, and ugly
toad, crawling in my way, hasting from me as from a deadly enemy, to hide her
head in a hole, to save her life, and that from one that she had never wronged;
this sight occasioned me this Meditation; how nigh akin am I to this poor
creature, this dispicable, loathed, and abhorred wretch, there is but the
sheers between us, nothing but the makers will; she is my sister, and may claim
the right of primogeniture, as coming into the world before me; we have the
same original, the same father, and the same mother; we were made of the same
matter, by the hand of the same workman, but she has the precedence in nature,
and came of the elder brother; both of us were of the same clay, and fashioned
by the same potter; hewn out of the same rock, and dug out of the same hole
of the pit; and had it pleased the workman, I might have been the toad, and
this the man, no thanks to me that it was not so, and it had been no wrong to
me if it had been so; I might have been crawling into that hole to save my
life, from one that desired my death, and fed upon such loathsome meat, that she
feeds on, but my God has bestowed more upon me, and denied it to her, even so
Lord, because it has seemed good in thy eyes; oh my soul, what have thou done
more for thy God, then this poor creature has done? doubtless where more is
given, more will be required; thou have received ten talents for one, nay an
hundred for one, how have thou improved them? and God expects from man much
more service then from any other creature in the world, being only fitted for
communion with himself: But has not this despicable wretch, which thou
think is not worthy to live, served God in her place better then thy self?
and answered the end of her creation better then man? and never transgrest her
masters will, nor her makers law, as thou have done a thousand times? she
desires nothing more then life, and what is necessary to maintain it, and fears
nothing more then death, and what tends to it, and does no hurt, but it is
imagined good to mankind, unless hurt or provoked, and if she have a noxious
quality, it is questionable, whether the sin of man has not procured it: God
has given thee the use of reason, and made thee capable of communion with
himself, and enjoying him for ever, and laid upon her (far more innocent) this
punishment, of being hated and abhorred of all, and her life is put into thy
hands, and whosoever kills her, thinks he has not offended, thou can walk
free from fear, when every one that sees her desires her death, and plots her
ruin, and destruction; what cause then have I to bless God, that I was made a
man, and not a toad, and that I had the use of reason given to me, and not made
a bruit, but if I be not regenerate and born again, if I have not the image of
God renewed in me, which I lost by the fall, if I answer not the end of my
creation and redemption, if my sin be not mortified, and the power of my
corruptions abated, if grace be not implanted in my heart, by the spirit of
God; if I have not an interest in Christ, and a title to glory, if the mistical
marriage be not made between Christ and my soul, and my affections set upon
him; if any thing in the world lie nearer to my heart then he does, and be
beloved above him, the time will come, and it will not be long first, that I
shall wish, would God I had been made the toad, and this toad the man, for then
my misery would have ended with my life, when now it is like to begin at my
death, and eternity of torments will be little enough to pay the debt which I
owe; but her debts being nothing but death, will be soon discharged: oh my
soul, if God do not distinguish thee from wicked men by grace, as well as from
this toad by reason, thy misery will be far worse then hers, and thy condition
more forlorn: Oh poor man whither art thou fallen? thou wast in the creation
made the glory of this Universe, and all the creatures to be thy servants, yea,
the angels to be Ministering spirits for thy good, and now if God assist not in
a new creation, the meanest, and most despicable of the creatures is in a
better condition then thou art; Oh sin, what woeful work have thou made among
us, and of what a bewitched nature art thou, and how have thou infatuated us,
still to dote upon thee, and to think thee lovely? oh my God, how good have
thou been to me, and how evilly have I requited thee for thy good, and how
foolishly have I behaved my self to my own soul? thou createdst me after thine
own image, in knowledge, righteousness and true holiness, and gave me
dominion over thy creatures; thou made me little lower then the angels, and
crownedst me with honor and dignity, Psalm. 8.4, 5, 6. such I was when I past
out of thy hand, but I have lost this image, by the fall and this supremacy,
and now this poor creature is in a better condition then I am by nature, and
never transgress thy laws as I have done, but Lord, thou can renew thine
image in me, and bring me to my primitive happiness, Lord, do it, then shall I
praise thee with unfeigned lips, that thou have made me a man.

Upon the coursing of a hare.
46. Med.
BEing occasionally present at the coursing of a hare, and my affection being
tickled with the sport, to see what turnings, windings, shifts, and cunning
evasions she had to delude her enemy, and make an escape, but all too little;
for she after came to be their prey, that sought her life, and to suck her
blood: when I felt my affections thus to heat, and close with the sport, I
began to check my self for it, and to expostulate the case thus with mine own
heart; vain man, what art thou doing? whither art thou going? art thou in
heaven, or on the earth, that thy affections are so pleased? is it God or the
creature that gives thee this content? alas, what poor fading perishing joy is
this? and can thou find more delight in it, then in the service of God, or
in communion with Christ? Nay, but art thou sure, that these delights are
lawful, if not thou have cause to bewail it, the thing may be disputable; was
it not the sin of man that brought this enmity and antipathy between the
creatures, and made them thirst after one another blood? Reverend Mr Bolton
tells us, this is the judgment of the best Divines, that it was a fruit of our
rebellion against God: now, if this misery was laid upon them for our faults,
it should be rather matter of our grief then sport, and taking pleasure in
their blood, is a vexing of their very vexation, and we discover those weeds
and seeds of cruelty to be too rank and luxurious in the soul, and we
degenerate in this below the beast of the field, who (as it is observed) take
not content in hurting one another, but in case of hunger or anger, they
satisfy their appetite and rage, sometimes, with blood, but never their eye or
their fancy. Is the fruits of our sin become the matter of sport? this
consideration might work in us a contrary effect, and I think much better; but
grant (for no body will deny it) that we have liberty given us to make use of
this antipathy, for the destroying of hurtful creatures, and the enjoying of
those that are useful, (as these now under consideration) which no doubt are
given to us for food as well as others, and grant that they cannot be so well
taken any other way, and their flesh to be best when it is thus hunted and
chased, yet it still remains disputable whether their death were ever appointed
by God to be a matter of sport, or a lawful recreation to us; to kill them is
no doubt lawful, but to sport our selves in their death seems cruel and
bloody; to delight more in seeing the shifts, the poor creature has to save
her life, (an instinct given her by nature, and to see her in the mouths of her
bloodthirsty enemies, rending and tearing her in pieces, without mercy,) then
they do in the flesh it self, which should be (I think) the chiefest end in
this action, seems cruel and bloody recreation: suppose thou heardest such a
poor creature giving up the ghost to speak after this manner (for it is no
absurdity to fain such a speech): oh man, what have I done to thee? or what
evil is found in me, that like a cruel enemy thou sportest thy self at my
death? I have lived upon my fathers allowance, and never transgrest my masters
will, nor makers laws, as thou have done; If thou take away my life, what
needst thou make a sport at my death? If a sparrow fall not to the ground
without Gods providence, surely he takes notice of my death, and the manner of
it; and I am part of the goods thy master commends to thee as a steward, and
for which thou must give an account; I am thy fellow creature, made of the same
matter, by the same hand; it was not all the men on earth could have created
me, or given me life, my life was given me by God, and now it is taken away in
sport to please man; take heed (vain man) that thus do satiate thy self with
my blood, lest at last thy condition be worse then mine, and thy account
heavier; my debt is now paid by my death, and my own sufferings, but thine will
never be discharged by thy self to eternity: this pleasure thou have now taken
will be dearly bought, and this flesh of mi^e must be satisfied for hereafter,
if Christ be not thy surety: nay, O man, thou know not but there are some
enemies, if God restrained them not, that do as earnestly thirst after thy
blood as thou have done after mine, and would be glad to wash their hands in
it, however the devil is a more cruel blood thirsty enemy to thy soul, then
these dogs are to my body, and goes about day and night like a roaring lion,
seeking whom he may devour, and take heed lest those dogs which have now drunk
my blood, and are too often fed with the poors portion, and deserve death as
well as I, being every way as noxious, do not rise up against thee another day,
etc. Oh my soul, spend no more time in recreation then thou can afford, and
that is but a little, till thy main work be done, and then spend no more in
recreation then thy state will afford, and that will not be much; take heed
that the poors part be not devoured by unprofitable dogs, and besure the
recreation thou uses be lawful, what is cruel and bloody may be suspected;
let it be when true need is, and to fit thee for thy general or particular
calling: oh my God, give me wisdom that I may never delight in any thing that
offends thee; let me not make a mock of sin lest thou call me fool for my
labor, and laugh at my destruction, and mock when my fear comes; preserve me
from my blood thirsty enemies, especialy from satan that hunts after my soul.

Upon the labor and pains men take about worldly things.
47. Med.
WHen I had wearied, and almost spent my self in digging, delving, and moiling
in the garden, and had unfitted my self for better, and more necessary
employments, I began at last to check my self for it, and discourse with my
self after this manner; vain man, what have I been doing? or how have I spent
my time, and my strength? is it for heaven, or for the earth, for my soul, or
for my body? for this life or that to come? is there so much pains needful for
a little spot of earth, which will bring in little, if any advantage? what
pains then is necessary for heaven? have I been so prodigal of my time and
pains, and sweat, and labor, for this poor empty nothing, and yet negligent in
the main concern? when did I take so much pains for heaven and happiness, for
Christ and glory, as I have done for these trifles? when did I sweat thus in
Gods service, and spend my self thus in doing his work? am I working for a
better master? or is this a more delightful employment, or am I like to
receive, or can I expect better wages then he gives, that I work harder, and
sweat more then I would do in his work, and follow my business with more
diligence, care and industry? if the whole world be really worth so much
labor, pains, and industry, as I have bestowed upon this little angle, this
worthless plot of ground, what pains does heaven deserve? if to the obtaining
the whole world deserves one days hard work, sure heaven deserves all the rest;
good things are not had at easy rates, the more excellent the more difficult:
it is so in earthly enjoyments, riches cannot be had without sweat and pain,
without cark and care; nor learning without labor, and study; and will heaven
be had with a wet finger? cannot I provide for a few days without all this
ado, and can I provide for eternity with less labor? will an interest in
Christ, and a title to glory be had so easily? no, no, doubtless a slow pace
will fall short of heaven, and the sluggard is never like to come there; there
must be striving, running, contending, fighting, or we shall not obtain; the
kingdom of heavsn suffers violence, and the violent take it by force; those
only that are carried out with strength of affection, after Christ, shall enjoy
him; those are like to have the pearl, that will have it at the hardest rates;
though they sell all to purchase it; heaven is had by the violent, though the
earth be inherited by the meek, Mat. 5.6. those that content themselves with
the least mercies here, as not deserving any, cannot content themselves with
the greatest portion the world can make up for them, because they know there is
a better portion laid up for them by their father: there is nothing but
eternity that can make us absolutely happy, or perfectly miserable; eternity
added to happiness or misery, makes it complete, and can I attain the one, or
avoid the other so easily? toylsom days, and wearisom nights may make us
willing of a change, but what good will a change do if it be for the worse, and
not the better? or how can we expect better, and not make preparation for it?
can we expect an harvest that have sown no seed, or wages that have done no
work? can we expect the prize that never run the race, or the victory that
never entered into the field to fight? if we bury our selves and talents in the
earth, can we expect they will be there improved? nay, may we not expect a
reckoning day, when they will be taken from us, and given to those that are
diligent, and will improve them; a judging time is coming when our reward will
be according to our diligence, and our wages according to our work; if we sow
vanity, we shall reap folly, if we sow to the flesh, we shall of the flesh reap
corruption, if we sow to the spirit we shall of the spirit reap life
everlasting; if we trade only in earthly commodities, we cannot expect
rationally any other gain, but what they afford, which will never recompense
the pains and care, and loss we sustain upon that account; but if we serve a
better Master, we may expect better wages: oh my soul, how justly here may
thou be reproved for thy diligence in trifles, and neglect of the substance?
thou have not only let the world run away with thy time, thy hands and thy
head, but with thy heart also: use the world thou may, but abuse it thou must
not, but so thou do when thy affections close with it, and thou committest
spiritual adultery with it, and lodgest it in the room where Christ should
lodge; in thy earthly business thy heart should be in heaven, and thine eye
upon Christ; if thou be diligent, it should be because he commands it, and if
thou do all in obedience to his command, then do thou engage him to be thy
play master, and may expect a reward from him, even for doing thy own work:
learn to make some spiritual use of all thy earthly enjoyments, then by divine
meditation thou may enjoy heaven upon earth, yea, extract heaven out of the
earth, and God out of the creature; that must needs be a rich soul that can
with the be extract honey out of every weed and flower: oh my God, I must
confess, I have been grossly faulty, not only for spending my time and strength
upon vanities, but letting out my affections on them also: Lord suffer me no
longer to ramble from thee, gather in my scattered affections to thy self,
Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean, let me see more excellency in
thee then the world can show, this will engage my heart to thee for ever.

Upon the diligence of the spider.
48. Med.
OBserving the industry, diligence, and painful labor of the spider, a
contemptible creature, how busy she was in weaving her nets, how industriously
she plys her work, and though oftentimes she meet with disappointments, had her
work spoiled, and her self endangered, yet never a whit discouraged, or
disheartened, she begins again; this is one of these four things that Solomon
had observed in the earth, that were little but wise, etc. the spider that
takes hold with her hands, and is in Kings palaces, Pro. 30.24. etc. she does
her work painfully, and curiously spins (says one) a finer thread then a woman
can do, builds a finer house then a man can do, in manner and form like an
Emperors tent; she draws her web out of her own bowels: When I had a while
pleased my self with the curiosity of the work, and commended the diligence of
the workman, I began to consider what her end might be of all this pains, or
what benefit did accrue to her by this her diligence? I could guess at no
other, or at least no higher an end, then to make a net to catch flys, which I
saw became her prisoners, when otherwise she could not take them, and when they
were in her power, she proved their mortal enemy, few escaping her with life: I
perceived that when the Be labors to preserve life, her work was to
destroy; I thought when I had considered it, her work did much resemble the
devils, for he like the spider is ever busy and never well employed, he goes
about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. he envies
man the happiness that he lost, he is that venomous spider that poisons us, his
very breath is infectious; the nets and snares are his temptations, and poor
souls are the flys he hunts for, which fall faster into his nets, then flys do
into the spiders webs, and when they are at his mercy, nothing will serve, but
their death and utter destruction; he like a cunning Fisher, baits his hooks,
and like a fowler spreds his nets to catch unwary souls, and spares none; high
nor low, rich nor poor, young nor old, fair nor foul, but he has one bait or
other suited to their condition; he attemps all, Christ himself not excepted,
for whom he prepared one of his choicest, seldom failing baits; all this will I
give thee, but all in vain, his wilde-fire fell upon wet tinder; although a
thousand times ten thousand have been taken with it, yet like a great fly he
broke through, and spoiled the web, and by the strength of the Captain,
Christian soldiers also break his nets, repel his temptations, and become
more then conquerors; he yet infects a great part of the world with the poison
of this temptation; and it is a rare man that escapes; sometimes, yea, too
frequently he baits his hooks with a beautiful woman, and is too successful;
thus he fisht for a strong Sampson with a beautiful Dalilah; for a holy David,
with a Bathshebah; and wise Solomon was often deceived by this bate, and
swallowed this hook; sometimes he catches men with a golden hook; thus he did
Achan, Judas, Ananias and Saphira, with D^^as, and many others: sometimes he
baits with honors, and then ambitious Herod will soon bite, as also Haman,
Achitophel, and many more; sometimes with pleasures, and then the youth are in
danger: A poor withering gourd is a temptation to Jonah, and makes him quarrel
with God himself; friends and relations often prove sore temptations, and
dangerous snares to a man; a beloved husband, a dear wife, a cockered child, a
near and dear relation, ofttimes are made use of to undo those to whom the
greatest love is pretended; Jobs wife though she could not prevail to ruin
him, yet she proved a heavy burden to him; but Spira's relations undid him, in
making him to deny Christ: Peter that great Apostle was an offense to Christ
himself, in advising him to spare himself and not to suffer, no doubt by the
instigation of satan, but Christ answers him with indignation; get thee behind
me, satan, thou art an offense to me, for thou savourest not the things that be
of God, but those that be of men, Mat. 16.23. he easily saw the devil in a
beloved friend, and many times satan speaks to us by them; many times a
professed Christian, yea, one good man is a snare to another, leading them into
errors or factions; but of all the baits the devil uses, riches, honors, and
pleasures are the surest, and seldomest fail him; by this he often buys men's
souls, and has their profession out of their hands into the bargain; meat and
drink are necessaries, yet many men's tables becomes their snare: Clothes are
needful, but this also proves a temptation to pride; learning and parts also,
which are great ornaments to the mind, become dangerous snares; yea, what can
be named, but may be abused; and what enjoyment can we have, but the devil will
fly-blow it, grace it self is not free, nay, humility sometimes proves an
excitement to pride: O the subtilty of satan, that can thus cheat the soul and
fly-blow all our duties: and oh the mercy of a merciful Savior, that has
broke the nets of this cunning hunter, or otherwise none could ever have
escaped out of his hands; oh my soul, beware of those snares which are spread
for thy feet in every place, in every company, in every enjoyment, and in every
duty; walk as circumspectly as thou would do amidst snakes, and serpents, or
enemies that sought thy life; sleep not in the cradle of security, listen not
to the Syren-songs of the enchanting world, taste not, touch not, gaze not upon
any forbidden fruit; the devil will deceive thee by it, as he did Eve: though
it seem sweet in the mouth it will be gravel in the stomach: be moderate in the
use of lawful things, or they will prove unlawful: drink not poison in a
golden cup, set not thy affections upon any earthly enjoyment, they will prove
like Dalilahs; to betray thee into thy enemies hands: oh my God, I walk among
snares, and am apt to be taken in them, be thou my guide, and direct my steps,
preserve me from the snare of the fouler, he is too cunning for me, but thou
know how to deliver me, and to preserve my soul from sinning, and my feet
from falling.

Upon small flys caught in a spiders web.
49. Med.
WHen I had veiwed the spiders web, and seriously considered the end it was
made for, which (as I said) seemed to me to be principally, if not only to
catch flys, and to captivate those little creatures, which otherwise were too
quick for her; I then observed the event, and whether this little fowler could
this way be recompensed for all the pains she had taken: I saw upon diligent
observation, how small flys were taken, and made a prey to their poisonous
enemy, who paid their ransom with their lives, yet whether they were the food
she fed upon, or whether it were an innate antipathy in her to them, that thus
she sought their destruction, I was not well able to discern; but withal I
observed, that the great flys brake through the net, and sometimes bare away
both the weaver, and the web, as Sampson did the gates and posts of Gaza, and
so the workman and the work were like to perish together; this minded me of the
saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 9.15, 16. the wicked is snared in the work of his
own hands, the heathen are sunk down into the pit that they made, in the net
that they hid is their own foot taken; I considered that many times God by his
providence does thus dispose of the cruel enemies of his Church, and those that
thirst after the blood of his Saints, they have had blood, even their own blood
to drink, Rev. 16.6. so righteous is God in his judgments, and so true in his
word; thus it was with Pharaoh, that sought the destruction of Israel, he and
his army were overthrown in the Red Sea: Adonibezek that had caused threescore
and ten kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, to gather meat
under his table, was requited in like manner, by the men of Judah, Judge. 6.7.
thus it was with Haman, he procured a decree to cut off a^^ the Jews, and made
a gallows fifty cubits high to hang Mordecai upon, but he himself was hanged
upon it, and his own friends and relations were destroyed. Thus it was with
Daniels persecutors, he was delivered out of the Lions den, and they were cast
in; so the flames lickt up the men that threw the three Worthies into the fiery
furnace, but had no power upon them: Phaleris perished in his brazen Bull, the
work of his own hands, invented to torment others; thus Tomyris dealt by Cyrus,
and the Parthians by Crassus, and the Romans by those Jews that cried out, his
blood be upon us, and upon our children; and so God by his providence dealed
with our gunpowder conspirators, and so let thine implacable enemies perish,
oh God: this Observation also brought to my mind what I had somewhere read,
and often heard, by way of complaint, of our English laws, viz. that they were
like unto spiders webs, which hold the little flys, but the great ones break
through, or like fishers nets rather, where the little fishes creep through,
and the great ones break through; and I thought the comparison not unfit: the
laws themselves I know would hold the greatest malefactor, were not those that
should execute them partial, ofttimes fear or favor, makes them open the net,
and let go their prey; how often may we see partiality sit as judge in some
courts of Judicature; this is my friend, that is my kinsman, deal gently with
the young man for my sake: how often have I seen a poor man stockt for swearing
and drunkenness, and well they deserved it, but his worship, or his honor,
guilty of the same crimes, brake through the net, and escaped scot free, and
was neither punished in person nor purse, yea, though they offended in the
Magistrates presence: but whether worshipful titles will bear them out also
before the judgment seat of God, is worthy enquiry: there is no such exceptions
in Gods law, let him suffer except he be a Gentleman, nay, it is an aggravation
to the fault of such a one, who may well be presumed to have better knowledge,
and better breeding then others, or otherwise I know not what gentility
signifies; and he that knows his Masters will and does it not, should be beaten
with many stripes; I have read of a Gentleman being condemned to death, for a
flagitious crime, and pleading for a mittigation of his punishment because he
was a Gentleman, the Judge yielded him but this favor, that he should be
hanged upon a higher gallows then the other were; and I fear the Ecclesiastical
Courts are not much better, perhaps much worse, poor ones are a prey not worth
keeping, great ones are too big to be held, the middle sort of fish best suits
the net, and pleases the palate; oh my soul, think not to escape at the
judgment seat of God, by any external privilege, the soul that sins, it
shall dye, whether high or low, rich or poor; thou have a righteous Judge to be
tried by, that will not be corrupted by gold nor gain, who will hear over again
all the causes tried in our Courts of Judicatory, and parhaps pass another
sentence; if thy cause be good, he will not condemn thee; oh my God, absolve me
in thy Court, and no matter if man condemn me, but if thou condemn me, there is
none can acquit me.

Upon the worthlesness of a spiders web.
50. Med.
WHen I considered further the great diligence, and the unwearied pains of the
spider, yea, the fineness of the thread, and the curiosity of the work, and how
she drew it out of her own bowels, and yet notwithstanding how useless and
unprofitable it was, if a man should make a garment of it, it would neither
wear well, nor keep warm or dry, neither can it shelter from wind or storm; if
he make armor of it, it cannot defend him; if we lean upon it, it cannot
support us; if we fall upon it, it cannot bear us up, neither can it stand
before the besome, but it is soon rent and spoiled, and ofttimes the work and
the workman, the weaver and the web, are cast both together into the fire; I
thought it resembled the world, and the things of the world; for of this it is
the devil makes his net to catch souls, which are the flys he hunts after,
which in it self considered is vain and transitory, too poor a refuge to trust
to, either for temporal deliverance, or eternal happiness; yet many like the
spider spend themselves to weave their web, and even draw it out of their own
bowels, yea, their very hearts goes along with it, and if they meet with a
prosperous success, they like the rich man, Luke 12.16. etc. sing a requiem to
their souls, and promise themselves a great deal of happiness; when alas, Gods
besome of destruction sudenly comes, and sweeps away both the work and the
workman in a moment, and casts both into the fire, yet many spider-like put
their trust in these webs of their own making, and think they may eat, drink,
and be merry, etc. right Epicures, that make their gut their God, and eat that
on earth they must digest in hell: their glass is run, when they think it is
but new turned; then shall they find, though too late, that their money will
do nothing, and death will not be hired, but righteousness alone will deliver
from death. Solomon tells us Pro. 18.11. the rich man's wealth is his
strong-hold, and high walls in his own conceit, but wealth is never true to
those that trust it, and cannot help in the evil day, Zeph. 1.18. but if sin
lie at the foundation, though the walls be made never so high, they will tumble
down, Jer. 17.5. cursed is man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm,
and whose heart departs from the living God; and truly, of such refuges we
may say as Job of the spiders web, Job. 8.13, 14, 15. if a man lean upon his
house, it shall not stand, though he hold it fast it shall not endure: most men
like to a drowning man, lay hold upon something to stay them, and to bear up
their heads above water, but if it be not upon the Lord Jehovah, it will do
them no good, but prove like to Egiptian reeds, not only break, but run into
their hands; should we trust in Princes, or Parliaments, in armies, or
Garrisons, in men or money, in food or physic, in friends or relations, or in
any other earthly enjoyment, we shall find disappointments, for these are not
God, but webs of our own weaving, nets of our own making, which may help to
sink us, but never to save us: yet many men (as God complains) Esaias. 59.5, 6.
they hatch cockatrice eggs, and weave spiders webs, but their web shall not
become a garment, neither shall they cover themselves with their work, it is
too thin to shelter them from a shower of divine justice, and too short to
cover their nakedness, Psalm. 33.16, 17. there is no king delivered by the
multitude of an host, a mighty man is not delivered by much strength, a horse
is a vain thing for safety, neither shall he deliver any by his great strength:
what then is the result of all, but this, Jer. 3.23. truly in vain is salvation
hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains, truly in the
Lord our God is the salvation of Israel, Psalm. 121.2. my help comes from the
Lord which made heaven and earth: and as for temporals, so for spirituals: he
that trusts for salvation from any thing but God, will ere long find his
mistake, and yet how many build their hopes upon a sandy foundation, and trust
to a broken staff, some to Church Priviledges, because they are baptized, and
go to Church, they think they must needs go to heaven, and that God wrongs them
if he do not save them: they are like the Jews that though they did steal,
murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense to Baal, and
served other Gods, yet they cried out the temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord, Jer. 7.4, 6, 7. when they forgot the Lord of the temple, and disobeyed
him, yet they thought themselves secure; but what was Simon Magus the better
for his baptismal water, when he was still in the gall of bitterness, and bonds
of iniquity? Is the making of the covenant worth any thing, if it be not kept?
it does but increase the guilt, and add to their damnation: some trust for
salvation to a good nature, a good disposition, a good meaning, mere civility,
common honesty, and think it is sufficient, I am neither whore, nor thief
(says one) and what then, must thou needs be saved? do all go to heaven that
avoid these sins? this is good news for many heathens; others trust to humane
learning, external gifts and parts: but the greatest enemies that ever Christ
had in the world, were men of great learning, and profound natural parts, the
Philosophers of old, Scribes and Pharisees, yea, the Jesuits at this day,
others trust to a bare profession of religion, with the foolish virgins, but
all this is but to a spiders web; oh my soul, rest not upon these rotten props,
or deceitful webs, for temporal safety or eternal salvation, for they will
deceive thee; they are not the Lord Jehovah who is thy only refuge: lay thy
foundation upon that rock, that is higher then thee, so neither wind nor
weather, storms nor tempests can molest thee: all other foundations are sandy,
and will down, they are Egiptian reeds, and will break in thy hand if thou lean
upon them: trust Gods power and providence, and his other attributes, for thy
temporal preservation, and roll thy self upon the merits and righteousness of
Christ for thy eternal welfare, then will thou be happy here, and hereafter: oh
my God, pardon my sin and folly in expecting salvation from the hills, and from
the mountains, in trusting to this and that arm of flesh for temporal
salvation, and leaning upon this and that spiders web for eternal salvation:
Lord assist me for the time to come, to commit both soul and body to thy self,
who only can provide for me.

Upon the painful and laborious Be.
51. Med.
WHen I observed the busy and labourious be, how painful and diligent she was
in her employment, and how industriously she busied her self, and how
laboriously she toiled, and moiled from morning to night in gathering both
honey, and wax, which when she had gotten, she was as industrious in the
disposal of it; I observed how curious, how careful, how exquisite she was in
furnishing her little cell, with the provision she had got by her hard labor
in building her combs; placing her honey, disposing her young ones, and feeding
them, and was so exact in all her labors, that the art or wit of man cannot
reach her, nor erect so exact a fabric out of such materials, so uniform that
nothing redundant, nothing deficient does appear, and in all her little boxes
so exact a symetry does appear, as is admirable to behold, and beyond my skill
to declare; she is so painful and diligent, that from morning till night
whenever seasonable weather does permit, she is never idle, but either within
door or without, is busily employed, yea, the very first day she is placed in
her new habitation she rids and cleanses it, decks and adorns it, and makes it
fit to begin her work, and from that day they all join heart and hand, (as we
say) in the work, and jointly and severally, all study and endeavor the common
good; some order and government also there seems to be among those poor
insects, not only in their labor, where no one is to live idly, but also in
resisting the common enemy; as we may see, how unanimously they set against the
idle wasp, and at the time of the year against the sluggish drone: I observed
also in swarming times, how unanimously they agreed, and followed their
leaders, where they fled they followed; and where they knit or lodged, there
they abode also; and that no quarrelling nor jarring arise among them; yea,
when one was wronged, the other sought revenge: I observed also in their work,
how they gathered honey both from flowers and weeds, and (as I thought) made
little difference, but extracted the quintescence of them for their own use,
and that without any wrong to the owner, or damage (so far as I could
perceive) to the herb or flower; these and some such like considerations and
observations, made me to think, it did much resemble a well ordered
commonwealth, or a well-regulated City, Corporation, or Community of persons,
or a family wherein all the members study the common good, rather then their
own private interest, and lay out themselves one for the good of another, and
be all touched with the sense of others infirmitys, and when one suffers all
suffer; but alas, where are such a people to be found, that bear such a spirit
for the public good? for all seek their own, Phil. 2.21. yea, Christians
themselves that are united each to other in a stricter band then any other
community whatsoever, are much wanting here, and might learn hence a lesson of
brotherly love and unity, they should be like affectioned one to another, and
mourn with those that mourn, and rejoice with those that rejoice, Romans 12.15.
they should be like lute-strings when one is touched all the rest sound; like
to ingenious children when one is beaten, the rest all cry: the Apostle
advises, 1 Cor. 10, 24. let no man seek his own, but every man another
wealth, Phil. 2.4. look not every one on his own things, but every man also on
the things of others: the very heathens could say, we were not born for our
selves but for others good: but alas, this shows man as man is degenerate,
even below the beast, yea, insensible creatures, the sun, moon, stars, earth,
beasts, birds, fishes, who seem to be created for others use, and not their own
good: Paul himself could find no man like Timothy, to take care for the state
of the Church, for all (says he) seek their own things, and not the things of
Christ, Tit. 2.19.20, 21. These poor insects also resemble a diligent
Christian, that improves every thing for his Masters glory, and the enriching
of his own soul, and gathers honey from flowers and weeds, and here the
slothful Christian may be sent to school to the Be, as Solomon sends him to
the ant, to learn diligence, for both these provide in summer for winter, and
there are too many such dust-heaps in the world, such sluggards that are
degenerated below the beasts themselves: There is great reason why men should
be more diligent then these, their diligence is for the soul, the others for
the body, they are in greater danger if idle; the Be works for honey, the
other for heaven; if the one want, death ends her misery; if the other want,
death begins his torment: these poor creatures have nothing to excite them but
a natural instinct, but man has the use of reason, the directions of the
Scripture, and the assistance of the spirit, Ministry, conscience, etc. to
animate him: these have indeed flowers and herbs, trees and weeds, etc. to
gather honey from, man has a larger field to wander over, even the whole
creation will supply him: there is not a stock, or stone, or dead tree, or
withering branch, or falling leaf or decaying flower, but will yield him honey,
if he have the heavenly art of extracting it; they are feeble creatures: man is
indewed with more strength; we have a better prize before us, and have better
help: we can work by day, or by night, in winter and summer, in frost and snow,
when they are hindered, and yet to our shame be it spoken, they are more
diligent, and we more negligent: oh my soul, how may these poor insects rise up
in judgment against thee, and condemn thee: thou have past the spring, the
flower of thy age, and done little, winter is drawing on apace, what provision
have thou made? the night approaches, when no man can work; what honey have
thou gotten? thou have had as seasonable a summer as most in the world have
had, and a long harvest, and yet art thou unfurnished: what will be the issue
of it? will the season of grace always last? the bridegroom is coming, where is
thy oil? the marriage feast is near, where is thy wedding garment? oh my God,
pardon my former neglects, and mispence of precious time: Lord, keep me close
to my work, my little time that yet remains, and succeed me in it, that I may
gather honey against the winter comes, and may not be unprovided at death.

Upon the taste of honey.
52. Med.
WHen I had a little considered the workman, and the work, I desired to taste
of the fruits of her labors, but when I had tasted of the honey, and found the
sweetness of it, and cast mine eyes upon the little workman, a poor small
insect, a contemptible fly, that yet may challenge all the artists in the world
by their Chemistry to extract such excellent food out of stinking weeds, sinks,
dunghills, and other filthy places as she does, and that without the help of
fire, or any other instrument then what God has indewed her with: and when it
is extracted, to place and dispose of it in such an excellent order and comely
manner as she does; for she furnishes her house so exquisitly, so uniformly as
she does, that one little hole or cell cannot be found in the whole fabric in
a disorderly form, and all the materials being taken from such varieties of
flowers, herbs, and weeds, the quintescence being extracted, is so orderly
disposed, the wax to build the house, and the honey to furnish it, that it is
wonderful to behold, and yet the herbs and flowers thus robbed, to our
knowledge receive no detriment, nor their owners no damage, for when it is
gone it cannot be mist. When I considered also, the virtues and the operations
both of the honey, and wax, the work of these poor creatures, how useful and
beneficial it was, not only for food, but for physic, and surgery, and for
many other uses, it made me cry out, the finger of God, the finger of God, that
has instructed such a poor fly in such an excellent art as this is, and made
them so painful, so diligent, for the good of man, to help them to what they
could not otherwise have, nor well be without; but if God be the schoolmaster,
no matter who be the scholars, all the men on earth cannot do the like, much
less teach another fly this art, nay, we find God himself seems to glory in
this creature, how small soever, as well as in the great Leviathan, and
Unicorn, and Behemoth, Job. 41.1. etc. and 40.15. and 35.9. When he commends
Canaan, he frequently calls it, a land flowing with milk and honey, which is
the glory of all lands, Exodus 3.8, 17. and 33.3. Lev. 20.24. and many other
places. In other Scriptures also we may see it commended, Pro. 24.13. my son,
eat honey, because it is good, and the honeycomb which is sweet to thy taste:
thus Christ accepting the duties, and delighting in the graces of his people,
tells us, Cant. 5.1. He has eaten his honeycomb with his honey, and has
drunk his wine with his milk, and calls upon his friends to drink abundantly
also; I considered also, how good God was to us (as well as unto Canaan) in
England, that have such store of these blessings as well as them, and wondered
that our provoking sins had not forced him to deal by us, as he has dealt by
them, and to make our land spew us out also, yea, to lay a curse upon the land
also, as he did upon theirs, for it is conceived that Judea is at this day far
more barren, and sterile, then heretofore it was; so true is that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 107.33.34. He turns rivers into a wilderness, and the
water-springs into dry ground, a fruitful land into barrenness, for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein. I considered also, if there be so much
sweetness in the creature what is in the Creator? this being but a shadow and
resemblance of his infinite perfections, all the excellency that is in the
creature being but a drop to this ocean, a ray to this sun, and a spark to this
fire; the Word of God which is a manifestation of his will, is by David said to
be sweeter then honey and the honey comb, better then thousands of gold and
silver, Psalm. 19.10. and 119.72.103. Job. 23.12. I have not gone back from the
commandemonts of his lips, I have esteemed the words of his mouth more then my
necessary food: oh, how sweet then is God himself to an hungring soul? what are
the longings, pantings, faintings, yernings of a believer after his God, who is
the very life of his soul, yea, never did poor infant more longingly desire his
mothers breast, or thirsty earth covet the drops of rain, or thirsty man cry
out for drink, then a thirsting soul does after the word which is the sincere
milk to feed it, 1 Pet. 2.2, or at least wise after God in the word; see the
pantings of David, Psalm. 42.1. as the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so
pants my soul after thee, O God: my soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God, when shall I come and appear before God; and no wonder, where there
is life there must be food; and God is the food of the soul, and in the
Ordinances, the soul feeds upon him, here they have a foundation for their
faith, hope, and confidence, to build upon, the promises are their food in
their journey to heavenly Canaan, as Mannah was to Israel in the wilderness,
the word is their fathers legacy wherein are promises for this life, and that
to come; and yet alas, most men look upon it as if it did not concern them: oh
my soul, is the Word of God so sweet, and so precious to the Saints, how is it
to thee? how stands thy stomach affected to it? is it sweet to thy taste? if
not, surely it is a sign of a distemper: remember the days of old, when thou
did travail many miles to hear the word, it was precious in those days, and
thou fedst upon it greedily: is it not as sweet still? surely the fault is not
in it, but in thy self, take heed lest if thou play with thy meat, God take it
from thee; perhaps thou feed'st but upon the husk of duty, and not upon the
kernel, upon the bare outside performances, and not upon God in the duty, and
this makes thee like Israel to loath this dry Mannah: take heed for the time to
come, remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first work:
oh my God, discover thy self more unto me in thine ordinances; let me feed upon
thee in the duty, then will my appetite be renewed, and my soul shall long
after this bread of life, and my graces which now stand at a stay shall then
grow and flourish.

Upon the sting of a Be.
53. Med.
BEing stung by the Be when I went to taste of the honey, I began to think,
that thus it is with all earthly enjoyments, there is no pure unmixed pleasure
to be had in this world, there is in the best but a little pleasure, and much
pain, a little honey and many stings: the devil I know, many times hides the
sour, and presents the sweet; and makes sin look amiable and pleasant, and
represents the world in a beautiful dress, and promises pleasure but pays pain:
All this (says he) will I give thee, to Christ, when his intention was to
wrack and ruin both him, and us, and whosoever will swallow the bait, will be
taken with the hook: sin (like the Panther) hides its head being deformed, and
then allures by the paint and varnish, which the devil has put upon it, and so
takes many captives, who never remember the sting in the tail: we are apt
ofttimes to dream of golden days, and an earthly paradise when it proves but a
Bachin, a place of lamentation, a valley of tears; when the paint and varnish
is washed off, sin will appear in its own colors, and the cheat will appear;
though it seem sweet and pleasant in the mouth, it will be bitter in the belly;
and if we grasp the world too hard, it will like thorns run into the hands,
nay, pierce to the heart: prosperity is always attended with danger, and many
times succeeded with smart; honors end often in disgrace, riches are attended
with cares and fear and certain troubles: in the midst of laughter the heart is
sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness, Pro. 14.13. nulla est
sincera voluptas, of carnal pleasures (as one says) a man may break his neck,
before his fast, they all prove vanity and vexation of spirit: these pleasures
may wet the mouth, but not warm the heart, smooth the brow, but not fill the
breast; they are but from the teeth outward, they dance to the timbrel and
harp, but ere they are aware, they leap into hell, Job. 21.12, 13. now they are
so afraid of sadness, that they banish all seriousness, but the candle of the
wicked shall soon be put out: If the aching of the head, and the filthy
belchings and vomittings, should come before the drinking of the wine or ale,
many would not buy that filthy pleasure at so dear a rate, as they pay for it
afterward: if the rottenness of the bones, and the loathsome diseases not fit to
be named, which usually follow adultery, did precede it, many would not pay so
dear for that beastly pleasure: but alas, what is this to what follows, and
the reckoning that is yet behind? this is but as earnest to the bargain: the
gripes of an enraged conscience, as some have felt them, especially one hours
torment in hell, would spoil all their mirth: but what is an hour to eternity?
this would cure the adulterers lust, and assuage the drunkards thirst: But it
is not only sinful pleasures but all earthly enjoyments that have a sting in
the tail: Crowns and kingdoms are not free from troubles, from fears and
jealousies, so that by that time an account be given of them, they are scarce
worth gathering up in the street: great estates have great temptations, and
honor ofttimes is attended with envy; and bright shining lamps many times go
out in a snuff, Haman and Achitophel, kings favorites end their lives in a
halter, when meaner persons have gone to their graves in peace. The tallest
Ceders are most liable to wind and weather: Herod that this day was esteemed
as a God, the next day is not fit to have fellowship with men, Eecl. 5.12, 13.
the sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much, but the
abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep, etc. such riches are kept
for the owners thereof to their hurt: as the poor man's fare is not so high, so
his care is not so great: the care of getting, the fear of keeping and the
grief of losing, like the Vulture feed upon the griping rich man continually,
his abundance lies like a lump of lead upon his heart, and breaks his sleep,
and God sometimes throws handfuls of fire into his conscience: this dropsy of
coveteousness is as seldom cured, as the gout, phrensy, or jealosy; riches can
make no man happy, few men content; the more they have, the more they desire:
he that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, Eccl. 5.10. non plus
satiatur cor auro, qua^ corpus aura, a man may have enough to sink him, yet not
to satisfy him: see their danger, Jam. 5.1, 2, 3. go to now, ye rich men, weep
and howl, for your miseries that are come upon you, your riches are corrupted,
and your garments moth eaten, your gold and your silver is cankered, and the
rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it
were fire, etc. We may say of all these outward things, as the prophet does of
his axe, alas, master for it was borrowed; or as the wise man does of honey, we
may eat as much as is sufficient, but not too much, lest we vomit, Pro. 25.26.
be moderate in the use of all lawful comforts, and contentments, hang loose to
all earthly enjoyments, licitis perimus omnes; affect them not overmuch lest
thou surfeit of them: no earthly enjoyment but has a mixture of gall and
wormwood in them, more or less, no sweet but has some sour: marriage which
many affect for the comforts sake, and which doubtless is (if equally yoaked,)
the happiest relation, yet there is many that find in it more pain then
pleasure, more sour then sweet, and more cost and care then they expected: it
ofttimes brings a man into poverty, and leaves him at beggars-bush, and though
the rich escape some of these snares; they fall into worse: oh my soul, why art
thou seeking honey in a wasps nest, and ease and rest in a thorny hedge, and
true content where never man yet found it? would thou have a rose without
prickles, and honey without stings, and happiness beneath the moon? all earthly
enjoyments have a mixture of gall, and wormwood, but the blessing of the Lord
makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it, Pro. 10.22. where God will give
his people store without sore, wealth without woe, and gold without guilt, and
pleasure without pain: endless joy, everlasting pleasures are at his right hand
for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Oh my God give me my portion in those pleasures:
satisfy me with that bread and water of life, and let me not feed upon husks
and vanity: let me labor for that food which perishes not but endures to
eternal life: let me provide bags that wax not old, a treasure in the heavens
that fails not, where no thief approaches, no moth corrupts, Luke 12.33.

Upon bees killed for their honey.
54. Med.
WHen I considered how the poor harmless, innocent creatures, the Bees, when by
their continued labors, painful diligence, and unwearied travels, had gathered
their food in the Summer, and gathered their meat in the harvest, and stored
themselves, and furnished their little cells, and laid in provision for the
ensuing winter, and that without any trouble, wrong, or injury to any living
creature; (a course which many rational creatures come short of, who either
gather not at all, or if they do, it is by wrong and rapine) I say then when
they were in the height of their prosperity, and in the midst of their plenty,
yea, even at the fullest, suddenly they were surprised, stripped of all, and
cruelly butchered, and their lives taken away from them, and that for no other
fault or injury but that they were rich, and for the honey they had painfully
and honestly gathered; not unlike to the poor silly sheep, who when he has
gotten a great fleece, is soon shorn, and when he has gotten a fat back is
soon sent to the shambles; I thought this also resembled the unconstancy, and
uncertainty of earthly enjoyments, for it is with rational creatures, as it is
with bruits, and insects, those that have most, are most in danger, and riches
ofttimes are stored up for the hurt of the owners thereof; many poor innocent
persons in the world, have been made transgressors, not for a word, Esaias.
39.21. but for their wealth: This is usual under the tyrannical government of
the Turk, and other infidels, where the only crime (though others are objected)
is their being rich; when they are once fat, they are soon sent to the
shambles, they are like fed beasts, reserved for the day of slaughter, and they
are dealt with, as Naboath was for his vineyard, or Uriah for his wife; The one
killed for no other offense but that he had a vineyard, the other for that he
had a beautiful wife: oh world, how do thou deceive those thou flatterest,
and betrayest those that love thee best; is this thy dealing with thy friends,
and favorites, and are thy Syren-songs suited to this end? Solomon tells us,
the rich man's wealth is his strong-city, and as an high wall in his conceit,
Pro. 18.11. and 10.15. and this is the strength wherein he trusted, he that
says to the fine gold, thou art my confidence, Job 31.24. alas what a thin
spiders web do they lean upon? what an Egiptian reed do they trust to? but
cursed is that man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose
heart departs from the living God. Riches many times proves snares for the
feet, yea, ruin for the soul. Many have been barbarously robbed, yea killed and
murdered for their wealth, when no other cause can be objected or pretended:
some in their own house, some by the highways, yea, many by their near
relations, and all to enjoy their wealth: many by their riches, honors or
preferments procure envy, hatred, and malice, and stir up many enemies, who at
length find out a way to throw them down from the highest step of the ladder
to the foot. Cardinal Wolsey might be an instance of this, and many more of
latter days, where many have been brought from an high estate, to extreme
poverty, and well if they escaped with their lives. Wealthy Nations are a
shrewd temptation to their Neighboring Princes, and are a prey that often falls
into their laps, and the Usurpers sometimes are scarce warm in their seats, but
they are shaken out also: the wheel of fortune is very unconstant, the spoak
which now is uppermost, is soon brought under; what bloody war was the world
ever embroyled in, but upon the account of rule, and government, of welath and
riches, and the greatest storms fall often upon the tallest Cedars, when the poor
shrubs are hardly shaken: how frequent was it in Rome in former days, and it is
well if it be now bettered, to kill a Naboth merely for his vineyard, and a
rich man for his wealth; I wish some Courts of Judicature in our days do not
more consider the estate then the crime, and desire not more the delinquents
money, then their Reformation, Cantabit vacuus coram latron^ viator; poverty
sometimes, exempts real of fenders from punishment, when riches lays open the
innocent to sufferings, but it is not the law but the corruption of officer^
that is here to be faulted, however by thi^ we see, wealth is not always a sure
refuge here, and it will be a pitiful refuge hereafter. Oh my soul, if there be
such danger in riches, and that ofttimes they prove hindrances, and not helps,
snares, yea, hurtful snares, not only to the soul, but to the body also, and
tend to take away both life and liberty, what cause have thou to bless God that
he has given thee Agar's petition, neither poverty nor riches, but food
convenient, and do neither want nor abound: And though God has taught thee
like the poor birds in diem vivere, and so put thee in mind daily to beg for
thy daily bread, yet he has never failed to give it thee in due season: had
thou had more wealth, thou might have had more enemies, and consequently more
troubles; a little ship in a storm may thrust into any creek or harbor, where
a great one cannot ride; had thou held out a great sail, thou had been more
tossed in the tempest, and more like to have been split upon one rock or other:
it is not the greatness of the cage that makes the bird sing, nor the greatness
of the estate that brings inward joy, or cordial content: oh my God, rather
turn me in a bare pasture for store, then feed me for the shambles; feed my
soul, though my body pine, give me a portion in heavenly things, and it
suffices, for what good will the world do without thee?

Upon the sluggish drones.
55. Med.
WHen I considered the drones, those sloathfull sluggish creatures, how they
lived upon the labors of the industrious Be, and fed upon that which they had
carefully gathered together, and though they neither used pains nor diligence,
yet were more big, fat, and well liking then their painful Neighbors, upon
whose spoil they lived: I observed also how the bees like a well-ordered
commonwealth, before the approach of winter, jointly bandying themselves
against these their enemies, dragging them forth, and putting them to death, as
those that were enemies, and unfit to live, as if God and nature had taught
them what the Apostle teaches us, that those that will not labor should not
eat, 2 These. 3.10. This consideration made me think, I had seen many such
drones amongst us, whose whole life is to eat, and to drink, and to sleep, and
that s^^ and talk, and sport and laugh themselves fat, and of this kind there
are several sorts, some idle, lusty vagrants that make a trade of idleness, and
are the very plague-sores of a Nation, that as body-lice live upon other men's
sweat, and labor, and it is a sin to succor them except in case of urgent
necessity, these having little to do but spend their time idly, are usually
set on work by the devil; for idleness is the hour of temptation; these
standing pools are usually full of vermin, they are like rats and mice, good
for nothing but to devour the meat that others labor for; the very excrements
of humane society; but to let these pass, there are other sort of drones more
pernicious then these, if yet they may be distinguished, for they are
oftentimes of the same litter, and those are thieves; and many-times those that
are beggars by day, are thieves by night, those forcibly take away what the
other cannot beg, and wilfully break that command of God, thou shall not steal,
as the other do the other injunction, in the sweat of thy face thou shall eat
thy bread; and God many times gives them their reward on earth, however God
has reserved them their wages in hell, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. But there are other
drones besides these, which are the unprofitable burdens of the Commonwealth
and the plague sore to the Nation; these are many, yea, too many of the Gentry
of our Nation, of both sexes, which indeed were fit to have led the van, of
this sloathfull company, and perhaps will not take it well, that others were
preferred or named before them; those that are ashamed of nothing, except it be
honest labor, that only live to eat, to sport, and recreate themselves, and
because they go in a little more gaudy dress then others do, and providence
has allotted them a little larger portion of the worlds goods, then others
have, think themselves privileged to be idle, as if that servant that God has
given most wages to, should do him least work: They mind nothing else but back
and belly, sports and vanity, as if God had placed them in the world, as
Leviathan in the sea, to sport therein; but when their accounts are given up,
it will appear otherwise; they with Israel sit down to eat and to drink, and
rise up to play, but I remember not where great ones are exempted from that
punishment laid upon all mankind after the fall, in the sweat of thy brows
thou shall eat thy bread; but these seldom provoke sweat, except at a
tennis-court, or some worse exercise: The morning is much of it spent in
dressing them against dinner, and the afternoon is little enough for their
recreations, and thus are their days, and weeks, and years spent to no purpose;
and every day with them is a play-day, nay, the sabbath it self cannot be
exempted: they often also change the course of nature, and turn day into night,
and night into day; they sleep by day, and revel in the night, as indeed
fittest for their works of darkness: they have neither head, nor heart, nor
hand at work for the common good, neither are they any ways profitable, but
many ways hurtful in their generation, they live like drones on other men's
labors, racking their rents, undoing their tenants, to maintain their pride
and luxury, and cannot give an account of one day in a month, perhaps in a year
really spent, either for benefit of soul or body. It Is observed that by the
laws of Mahomet, there are none permitted to be idle, nay the great Turk
himself is to exercise some manual exercise, but many that bear the name of
Christians, are more licentious, yet let no one think, that I charge all the
Gentry thus, no, some of them, but oh too few, are diligent in their places,
and not tainted with this sloathfull negligence, neither that I expect manual
labor from them, yet I think, such might be found out, not unsuitable for a
Gentleman; but I think if they studied the Law, to be serviceable to the
Commonwealth, or physic for the help of the poor, or Divinity for the good of
themselves and Neighbors, it might ready their accounts more then the courses
they take. There are too many of this gang in the Clergy also, many in the
Universities, like Abbey-lubbers, live upon that given to better ends and uses,
many in the Ministry that have two or three fat Parsonages, that feed
themselves, but not the flock, but set them out to nurse, to some, whose
incomes will not maintain them to mind their studies; but these may tremble,
when they think upon their accounts: these are some, but not all the drones we
have amongst us; oh my soul, is idleness so detestable a vice? take heed of it,
employ every talent God has lent thee to thy Masters glory, lest thou meet
with the doom of the unprofitable servant; spend all the time allowed thee in
the world, either in thy general, or particular calling, and spend time on
nothing thou will be unwilling to hear of another day: let not Christ when he
calls for thee, nor the devil when he tempts thee, find thee idle, lest thou
be not ready to open to the one, or resist the other, lest Christ reject thee,
and the devil vanquish thee, and death usher thee into outer darkness: oh my
God, I have much work to do and but a little time to do it in, and it is work
of great concernment, and much time already has been wasted by me: Lord,
incline my heart to diligence, and convince me of the necessity of working
while it is called to day, because the night comes that no man can work.

Upon the gaudy Wasp.
56. Med.
OBserving the wasp in her gaudy dress, what an enemy she was to the pain^ul
and laborious Be, and was not content her self to be idle, but robs also the
Bees that do labor, and feeds upon that which this painful and industrious
creature has laid up against winter, and so ofttimes exposes them to want and
penury, yea, to death it self, and if the poor bees make resistance, kills
them, and spoils their habitation; I observed also that this pernicious insect,
more hurtful then the drones beforementioned, making no provision for winter
before it comes, puts her head into a hole and dies: the consideration of this
occasioned this following Meditation, I thought there were many such wasps
amongst us, that is, such as have the nature and disposition of wasps, that are
hurtful to many, helpful to none, that live an idle life, and live upon others
labors, and not their own, and making no provision for death or eternity, are
then utterly destitute of what is necessary here, with the rich man, Luke
16.19. etc. they are clothed in purple, and fine linen, and fare deliciously
every day, and at last would beg a drop of water to cool their tongues, but
cannot obtain it, but shall have punishment without pity, misery without
mercy, sorrow without succor, crying without compassion, mischief without
measure, torment without end, and past imagination. Among the rest of these
gaudy wasps, we may rank many griping Landlords; some Landlords are of a
better complexion, but they are too few; but too many are guilty of grinding
the faces of the poor, and the spoil of the poor is in their houses, Esaias.
3.14, 15. they make their tenants serve in the very fire, and weary themselves
for very vanity, Hab. 2.13. and are like unto the Egyptian taskmasters, force
the tale of their bricks, and not allow them straw, they pluck not only the
meat from their mouths, and the clothes from their backs, but the very flesh
from their bones: they drink not only their tears, but their very sweat and
blood, and all too little to satisfy their greedy humors, they squeese so many
tears from them in their life time, that they have none left to shed for them
at their death, they by racking their rents, and their cruel extortion draws
many tears from their eyes, and sobs from their hearts, but God will put those
tears into his bottle, and those sobs into his book, and will vindicate their
wrongs: how often may we see greedy Landlords force their tenants to feed their
dogs with what should feed their own children, a barbarous custom, which will
rise up in judgment against them another day: They deal with their tenants as
they do with their horses; when they have tired them or rid them out of breath,
they call for a fresh one, and show not so much mercy on them, as on their
dogs, whom they cherish if weak or weary, but when the poor tenant with all his
pains and diligence can no longer satisfy their greedy humors, they turn them
out of doors, seize upon their estates, perhaps cast them into prison, till
they have paid the utmost farthing, to the ruinating of their families, and
exposing them to beggary, and all this is to maintain their pride and luxury:
these men act as if they were the sole proprietors, and must never give an
account to any other Master, but let such remember the parable of the man that
owed ten thousand talents, and would not forgive his brother a hundred pence,
but cast him into prison, Mat. 18.23. he himself was cast in till he had paid
the utmost farthing, those shall have judgment without mercy, that have showed
no mercy, Jam. 2.13. those that will not forgive others, shall not be forgiven
themselves; let such remember the rich man, Luke 16.19. who it is conceived,
refusing to give a bit of bread to Lazarus, was himself denied a drop of water
by Abraham. But these are not all the gaudy wasps that trouble the laborious
bees, there are many rich men that undo their poor neighbors, with unjust and
vexatious Lawsuits, that oppress them with wrongs, injuries, and unjust
vexations, and make bold thus to do, because they are too great for them to
grapple with; these great flies break through the net, there being also too
many of these wasps in places of Judicatory, civil and Ecclesiastical; I accuse
not all, and I think no wise man will justify all: many Lawyers to maintain
their state and garb, knowingly undo their clients, some by taking bribes, to
prevent justice, some by unnecessary delays, some for favor and friendship,
they either break the neck of a good cause, or suck the clients dry before they
tell them their cause is bad: Ecclesiastical Courts are not much better, some
think far worse, many officers there do as greedily prey upon the poor as ever
a hungry fly did upon a galled horse back, and many times make sores where they
find none, and the greatest offenses are not always punished with the hardest
strokes, but preaching and praying is esteemed worse then swearing and cursing;
and that reformation of sin is not intended though pretended, is apparent, when
poor adulterers are let alone who are not able to pay the fees of the Court,
when the richer are made offenders for a word, Isa. 29.21. let not any that are
not guilty apply this to themselves: but there are also too many in the
Ministry that may read their character, Esaias 56.10. etc. but the time is
coming these causes will be called over again, and then it will evidently
appear, who are the troublers of Israel: oh my soul, is there such oppression,
such injustice in the world, take heed of having a heart or hand in any such
matter, come not into their secrets, and unto their assembly; the time is
coming that those that have been fed with sin, will vomit up what they so
greedily swallowed, and those also that rob the poor will be found to reproach
their maker, Pro. 14.31. God is the poor man's king, and he will defend him,
destroy his enemies, and will not suffer the injuries offered them to be
unpunished; winter will come when these wasps will dye: oh my God, suffer me
not now to feed upon those morfels, that I must chew for ever in hell; if I
have but little, let it not be with a curse.

Upon the painted Butterfly.
57. Med.
WHen I observed the curious gaudy dress of the painted butterfly, her various
colors, and her specious show, and took notice how she spent her time in paint
and plaster, and all to adorn her self and make her seem beautiful, when the
laborious Be improved her time to better ends and purposes, viz. to provide in
summer for winter, and to gather her food in the harvest: I considered also,
that notwithstanding all this paint, this proud creature was but a poor infect,
nay, an unprofitable creature doing hurt but no good; and when I caught her to
take a further view, she did but foul my fingers; I considered also what would
be the end of this so proud, so sluggish, and so useless a creature, and found
against winter she put her head into a hole and died, and there was the end of
all her bravery, when the painful Be, has her life preserved by her
diligence; this made me think, that this creature did much resemble many of
the Gallants of our times, especially of the female sex, though others may take
it ill if they be excluded, which are good for little but to paint, and dress,
and spend their time as vainly as ever the butterfly does, these content not
themselves with their own native beauty, or with the form and fashion God made
them in, but cast themselves into another mould, and take upon them another
shape then God made them; and it is to be feared God will never own them for
his, when they are thus transformed, or rather deformed themselves with their
own hands, and what is the reason of all this paint and plaster, but to make
traps to catch fools? their hair are snares to catch men, as the fisher of his
hairs makes lines to catch fish, or as the spiders web is to take flys, for if
there be no wine in the cellar, why hangs the bush? what does this gaudy dress
signify but a lascivious mind, and to let the world know in what ware they
deal, and how welcome such a motion that brings profit or pleasure with it
would be to them; and like the sign at the ale-house-door, promises
entertainment for money: what does this gaudy dress signify less then a
lascivious mind, when they spend great part of their time in attiring,
painting, dressing, and spotting themselves, this is their morning devotion;
and their afternoon service is not much unlike, for that is mostly spent in
sports and merryments, in plays and interludes, in idle visits, or perhaps
worse employments, the devil many times makes use of these gaudy flys to fish
for souls, wherewith he baits his hooks, and many unwary youths are caught with
these lime-twigs: Is it not a wonder that any of Adams sons, or Eves daughters
(and yet both sexes are guilty) should take more pains for hell, then others do
for heaven, yea, and be at more cost and care also; for pride is more costly
then humility, yea, is it not a wonder to see persons pride in that which is
the fruit of sin, and a cover to shame, viz. their clothes, which usually are
but the excrements of beasts or insects, or at least of as poor an original;
this is a sure sign of a worthless piece, to be like a bubbl^, or bladder,
blown up with a little wind: how many are there that are like the
Cinamon-tree, the bark is better then the body, yea, sometimes the clothes are
better then all the estate besides: Many that are ashamed of their deformity,
yet when their crooked ill-shap't bodies are covered, are proud of their
beauty: but what will become of those at death, that have spent their time in
paint and spot, and neglected to adorn the soul? it were well with them if with
the butterfly they could find a hole to dye in, that they might never more be
seen, but this will not be, they must be seen in their own colors, when all
the varnish will vanish; sincerity will abide the fire: I fear others also are
guilty of this paint and flourish, as some Ministers, who paint their Sermons
not to profit but to please, and preach not in that plain convincing way Christ
and his Apostles did, but woo more for themselves then for Christ, and fish not
for souls but for popular applause, and seek not to set the crown upon Christ's
head, but their own: oh my soul, beware of these three grand enemies to thy
salvation, pride, idleness, and hypocrisy; where these bear sway, the soul
never prospers: pride is the master-pock, if it strike to the heart it will
surely kill thee: pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a
fall; God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. Jam. 4.6. he
defies those that deify themselves, witness Herod and Lucifer: grace grows not
in high mountains, but in low valleys, the least degree of pride sets it self
against God, the highest degree sets it self above God, 2 These. 2.4. and as
pride, so idleness is a deadly sin, pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of
idleness were Sodoms sin, and doubtless they are Englands sins also, and make
many thousands fall short of heaven, and the time is coming hypocrisy also will
appear in its own colors, the paint will not abide the fire: oh my God, how
many poor souls split themselves upon these rocks and make shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience: Lord, keep me humble, make me sincere, and help me to be
diligent, so shall I be happy for ever.

Upon a gnat playing with the candle.
58. Med.
WHen I observed a gnat play so long with the candle, that at length she burnt
her wings, was taken prisoner, suffered for her folly, paid dear for pleasure,
and was exposed to a cruel death, even to end her life in the flames; I thought
this resembled poor man that so long dallies with sin, and plays with the
devils temptations, that at last he is snared in his limetwigs, and fettered in
his gins, and led captive by him at his pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26. those that he
thus takes in his snares he uses worse then Sampson was used by the
Philistines, he puts out their eyes, and then makes them grind in his mill:
poor man is like a fish nibling so long at the bait, till at last he swallows
the hook, or like the unwary bird, so eagerly falls upon the prey, that they
are taken in the net: the devil like a cunning fowler holds out the bait,
covers the hook, and hides himself behind the bush, so that they see not the
hand that holds it; he does not usually appear in his colors, he takes not the
drunkard and thrusts him into the Alehouse by the head and shoulders, this
were the way to fright him, and make him know his master, and leave his
service, but he hides himself, and shows the bait, and sets a companion to call
him, and so he swallows the hook, while he observes not the hand that holds it;
and the oftener he is taken, the bolder he grows, till at last he sits down in
the chair of the scorner, makes a mock of sin, grows incorrigible; and then let
all the men in the world, nay, let God himself say what he will to the
contrary, he does sin, and will sin, and so he has played so long with the
candle, that his wings are burnt, and he is taken prisoner, and which is worse,
like Ulysses men, when by Circes charms they were turned into swine, and were
content thus to be, and would not reassume their former shape, so these delight
so in husks and swill, that they know not, desire not any other happiness: Oh
how good had it been for many, if they had taken Solomon's counsel, Pro. 23.31.
look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it gives its color in the
cup, when it moves it self aright, at the last it biteth like a serpent, and
stingeth like an adder; many men die with the wound in the eye; it is not
unlawful to look, but by looking comes lusting, for sin is often let in at the
window of the eye, or by the door of the ear: Peter trusting too much to his
own strength, thrust himself upon the temptation of wicked company, till he was
snared* sinners by custom grow bold in sin, and come at last to dare God to
strike them, and God sometimes accepts of the challenge, and by his immediate
hand vindicates himself and shows them their folly; thus he dealt by the old
world, thus by Sodom and Gomorrah; thus by Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, by
Ananias and Saphira, Herod and many others; There are many that like the bird
gaze at the bough, till they are fetched down with the bolt; they give their
eyes leave to wander, and their hearts to contemplate wickedness, and so long
nibble at the bait of beauty, that they at last swallow the hook: they are like
the young man void of understanding taken in the strumpets snares, Pro. 7.7, 8.
etc. the devil feels which way their pulse beats, and suits his temptations
accordingly, provides them of Mates, and sets one Dalilah or other to bind
them, fit lettice for such lips, a fit helve for such a hatchet; how good is
Solomon's counsel, Pro. 6.25. lust not after her beauty in thy heart, neither
let her take thee with her eyelids, for by means of a whorish woman a man is
brought to a piece of bread, and the adulteress wlll hunt for the precious
life: yet many like Solomon's harlot beforementioned are grown audacious, and
even glory in their sin, and plead that adultery is but a trick of youth, but
let them know, it is such a trick that turned Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes,
and sent twenty four thousand Israelites at once to their graves, and many
thousands to hell, 1. Cor. 6.9.10. For heaven that spewed out the fallen
angels, will not lick up again the unrighteous: such therefore that play with
this candle, let them beware they be not burnt in the flame: if they do escape
a fire in their bones, they are like to meet with a fire in their consciences,
which (if not quenched with the tears of true repentance) will never out, nor
the worm never die: it is not long before we all shall dance after deaths pipe
down to the chambers of darkness, and we shall make our bed in the dust, and
then the sport will be over, and a reckoning time will come, when an account
will be required: But what Solomon observed in his time is true in ours, Eccl.
8.11. because sentence against an evil doer is not speedily executed, therefore
the hearts of the sons of men are wholely set in them to do wickedly: but such
will know, forbearance is no acquittance; when the meal is ended, the reckoning
will be required: the sleeping of vengeance causes the overflowing of sin, but
judgment will be awakned at length, Esaias. 3.12. woe to the wicked, it shall go
ill with him, the reward of his hands shall be given him: oh my soul, beware of
the devils temptations, how fair and specious soever they may seem, they are
indeed but bitter pills, gilded over, or rather poison offered in a golden cup;
if thou see the bait, look at the hook, and observe the hand that holds it;
make no peace with sin, this will certainly break thy peace with God, and thy
own conscience; the devil let him promise never so fair, never intends thy
good; take heed therefore of the occasions of sin, crush the cockatrice-egge
ere it break forth into a serpent; dash Babilons children while they are young;
give not entertainment to a sinful-thought, come not near the door of the
harlots house; foster not any of the devils brats, nor keep his counsel: oh my
God, except thou watch over me, I cannot be safe: Lord, be thou my protector,
and defend me from my spiritual enemies.

Upon many creatures seemingly dead in winter.
59. Med.
WHen I considered how diverse insects, some serpents and other animals which
in the heat of summer are active, quick and lively, but God not having given
them wisdom, nor any inclination to make any provision for the future, and yet
by the mighty power of God, they are preserved without meat; for either they
die, or sleep, or seem so to do, yet in the following spring, when the sun
returns in his strength, they recover, and the species is continued: This made
me admire the wonderful providence of the only wise God, that these creatures
should live the one half of the year without food, if at least they do live, or
if really dead, (as some of them seem to be) that they should be restored to
life again: for the production of the silkworm and some others is strange and
wonderful, first a small egg, then a worm, then a fly, which soon dies,
leaving some eggs behind for the next year, which of themselves produce the
species: this minded me of Gods question to the prophet, and of his answer;
Says God, can these dry bones, live? and he said, Lord, thou know: It Is not
in man's power to preserve them, nor beyond the power of God; with man it seems
impossible, but with God all things are possible, Mat. 9.26. men may want of
their will for want of power, nature her self may be interrupted in her course,
as it was when the fire burnt not up the three worthys, nor the water drown
Peter walking upon it: Satan may be crossed, and chained up, that he cannot hurt,
but who can hinder the Almighty, there is nothing can over-match an omnipotent
arm: This made me think also, God can preserve his childrens lives in despite
of his enemies: if they take away their meat (says the Martyr) God can take
away their hunger; why not as well as he does the life of other creatures? and
he will do it rather then his promise shall fail: Elijah goes in the strength
of one meal forty days, and had God pleased, it might have been forty years,
for he could have preserved the Israelites forty years in the wilderness
without food as well as with food, from heaven, and as well as he preserved
their garments from waxing old, Deuteronomy. 29.5. I have led you forty years in the
wilderness, your clothes are not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen
old upon thy foot; they needed not to care what they should eat, or what they
should drink, or wherewithal they should be clothed; for God made provision
of all this, they were maintained at Gods proper cost and charges; methoughts
also this cessation of action in these creatures in winter, did much resemble
sleep, which if God pleased might be as long in other animals; and were it not
common, would be thought wonderful, and little differing from death it self,
and yet experience shows us, that which seems to destroy nature, does restore
and refresh it, or it is like to a swoon when the symptoms of death are upon a
man, yea, in some distempers the symptoms of life for many hours together are
scarcely discerned; but above all, it resembles our lying in the grave, and our
rising again at the resurrection, for the body sleeps in the dust, till the
last day (as these creatures do in their holes till the winter is past, and the
spring approaches, and the silkworm never receives life till the Mulbery-trees
leaves, which is their food;) and then they shall be revived by the sun of
righteousness, and life put into them; then these dry bones shall live: This I
know some question, and some deny, possibly because they cannot fathom the
depth of this providence; and were they not convinced by yearly experience of
the other, they would deny that also, and would think it could not be, that
creatures should have their life preserved the one half of the year (at least)
without food, because they know not how it should be; But I think few articles
of our faith are more clearly proved in Scripture then this of the
resurrection; but many men I fear are wilfully blind, their lives and
conversations being so debaucht, they would believe, at least wish they could
believe, there were no resurrection of the body, yea, that the soul were mortal
as well as the body, and that the death of the one were the destruction of the
other also, but the time is coming, they shall find the contrary to their
sorrow: both scripture and reason speak plainly, that the soul is immortal, and
that the body partaking with it in holiness or sin, shall also partake with it
in weal or woe; and that there will be a day of retribution, when those that now
suffer for Christ shall then reign with him, and those that sin, shall suffer
for their sin; the contrary to this cannot stand with scripture-revelations,
the threatenings of the law, the promises of the Gospel, nor with divine justice
it self; and why should any think it impossible for God to gather our dust
together, and raise up our dead bodies at the last, who do believe that there
is a God, and that he has made not only man but the whole creation of nothing,
and that this God is just and will make good both his promises and threatenings,
and nothing is too hard for an omnipotent arm? oh my soul, distrust not Gods
word, question not his power, he that can make all things of nothing, can of
thy scattered ashes raise up thy dead body to life, and reunite it to thy
hold, and he that says, he will do it, will certainly perform it; heaven and
earth shall pass, but not one tittle of his word shall pass till all be
fulfilled; call not in question the power and providence of God, but labor to
have a part in the first resurrection, that the second death may have no power;
get fitted for death and judgment, get sin pardoned and subdued, which is the
sting of death; get grace implanted, and thy soul married unto Christ, then
needst thou not fear death, nor the resurrection: oh my God, strengthen my
faith, confirm my hope, and increase my love to thee, and let me long for the
time that I may enjoy thee in glory, and lie for ever in the arms of my beloved.

Upon beggars at the door.
60. Med.
WHen I saw some lusty able persons fit for service and other employment
begging at the door, I began to consider, how disagreeing this course of life
was to the word of God, who had commanded men, in the sweat of their brows they
should eat their bread; this is a law laid upon all sorts of men, to sweat out
a poor living, brow or brain must sweat for it, or our bread is eaten ere it be
earned; God would not have a beggar in Israel, and the Apostles will was, those
that would not labor should not eat, 2 These. 3.6, 10, 14. those that have
enough to live on, must not be idle, much less those that have nothing, yet
many live like rats and mice, only to devour what others labor for; paradise
that was man's storehouse was also his workhouse, God set him to dress the
garden; and there should be none, that like body-lice feed upon other men's
sweat; such idle persons often times are set on work by the devil; for idleness
is the hour of temptation, and standing-waters are usually full of vermin;
Nay, how disagreeing is this course of life with the laws of the land, which
making other provision for the poor, stigmatize these wanderers by the name of
rogues, and appoint them to be stockt and whipped, and sent back to the place of
their birth or last abode, and inflicts a penalty upon those that relieve them:
The great Turk, that grand Seignior is not excepted, for he has a trade, and
is daily to labor with his hands; yea, Divines in all ages, ancient, and
modern and of all persuasions, have exclaimed against this course of life, and
esteemed such persons to be the plague sore of the Nation, and not to be
tolerated in a well-ordered Commonwealth, they are a dishonor to the Church
they live in, and to the Country they inhabit, and the heathens as well as the
Christians have made laws to punish them: These and the like considerations
made me think correction to be the fittest alms, and their restraint might
hinder a great deal of sin acted by them, and be a means to reduce them under
government civil and Ecclesiastical, which now live like lawless persons under
none, and neither fear God, nor obey men, but are the unprofitable burdens of
the earth; But on the other side, when I considered how little provision
notwithstanding in the law was made for the poor in most places, and that some
Parishes were not able, others were not willing to give any tolerable
allowance to poor painful householders, overcharged with children, and
considering that many painful men by reason of the dearness of corn these two
last years, and the scarcity of work occasioned thereby, and the hardness that
does possess the hearts of many of their rich Neighbors, were reduced to very
great streights and necessities; many there are that cry out against the idle,
that will not set the diligent to work: and when I considered that supposing a
man had work, how long he would be earning 8. or 9. shillings, the price of a
measure of corn, and how short a time this would serve a numerous family, that
depends only upon his get, I admired Gods providence that kept poor people
alive in these hard times, and began to pity poor householders that were fain
to creep out of their cells to save their lives, and to blame hard-hearted
worldlings that force them so to do, and thrust them upon this illegal course,
when a much better may be taken: for doubtless it is better for England to keep
their poor working then playing, and for a parish to add something to their
supply then force them to seek all; but many can find Scripture against
begging, but no food against starving; but let those that think charity is not
their duty as well as diligence the duty of the poor, let them consult such
Scriptures as those that follow, and when rich men do what they are required,
let them exact diligence from the rest, and spare not, and not beat their
fellow servants till they cry, and then beat them for crying, Psalm, 41.1.
blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in the time
of trouble, Pro. 28.27. he that gives unto the poor, shall not lack, but he
that hides his eyes shall have many a curse; you see, not getting but giving
is the way to wealth; it is the bountiful man shall have the blessing, when the
covetous shall inherit the curse both from God and man, Pro. 19.17. he that
has pity upon the poor, lends to the Lord, and that which he has given,
shall he paid him again; it is not given but lent; given to man, lent to God,
nay, lent upon usury: foeneratur Domino, who binds himself to repay it, and
gives security for it under his own hand; Christ himself promised the young
man, Mark. 10.21. if he would sell what he had, and give to the poor, that then
he should have treasure in heaven; but how many are there like Cardinal Bembus,
that would not leave his part in Paris for his part in paradise; a man may
borrow ten pounds of many men upon his bare word, sooner then God can borrow
ten pence with all his promises; those that are poor may be so for them: oh, my
soul, bless God, this is not thy case; that thou wast never reduced to those
straights as many poor men have been; put on bowels of compassion to those
whose case it is, and what thou can, relieve those that are truly indigent,
and if thou can not, distinguish between the indigent and negligent; it is
better give ten alms to the unworthy, then turn away one truly hungry wanting
person empty; remember what answer thou will make to God at judgment, Mat.
25.41. oh my God, help me to improve my small talents to thy glory, and to have
charity in my heart though little in hand to bestow, thou requirest according
to what thou give.

Upon the singing of birds.
61. Med.
WHen I observed in a warm morning in the springtime how merrily the birds did
chirp and sing, in every tree and hedge and bush, and in their language did
chaunt out their makers praise and their benefactors glory, and what various
tunes and notes they sent forth, each one adding something to the melody, that
the music was not unpleasant, that these little choristers warbled forth; This
occasioned me this following Meditation, these poor birds that neither reap nor
sow, nor carry into barns, they neither cark, nor care, nor moil, nor toil, but
live upon their fathers providence, and when they have eat their breakfast,
know not where to have their dinner, but depend upon their makers allowance,
and yet how merry they are, and unconcerned they seem to be, void of care and
fretting fear; when their stomachs crave, they seek their meat where divine
providence does direct them, they take no care for the morrow, but in diem
vivunt, and God makes provision for them, Psalm. 145.15, 16. they all wait upon
thee, and thou give them meat in due season, thou openest thy hand, and thou
satisfyest the desire of every living thing; The consideration of this made me
reflect upon my own self, and to observe my own faults and failings: oh my
soul, art not thou justly reproved by these poor creatures, and have thou not
behaved thy self worse to thy God, then these have done? art not thou better
then many sparrows? why then do thou despond more then they, and distrust thy
fathers providence? have not thou more promises to depend upon, then ever they
had? and more experiences of divine providence both in former deliverances, and
continual protection and provision? thou have the use of reason which they
want, to assist thee, and some comfortable hopes of the truth of grace, and
that God has entertained thee, and received thee into his family, married thee
to his Son, and adopted thee for his child; thou have the word and Ordinances
to bear thee up, and many promises of divine protection and provision which
they have not, and the experience of many years wherein he did never leave thee
nor forsake thee, but made comfortable provision for thee, and many
encouragments from God himself; read Mat. 6.25. to the end, and Matt. 10.
throughout; and see whether there be any cause of desponding, it is thy duty in
nothing to be careful, but to make thy request known to God in prayer, 1 Cor.
7.32. Children make their needs known to their parents, whom if they can
please, they fear no want, they take little care where to have the next meals
meat, or the next suit of clothes, neither need they, their parents take care
for them, and these very birds if wisely observed, and dilligently heeded,
might weed those carking cares out of thy heart, and to cast all thy care upon
God, that cares for thee: But though thou have not wanted, thou art
questioning with Israel, Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? Psalm.
78.19. what if this cruise of oil fail, and this barrel of meal be wasted? what
shall I eat? what shall I drink then, or wherewithal shall I be clothed? if
these or these things happen, what will become of me or mine? what if famine
come, or what if I be put into prison, or that little I have be taken from me?
what if I be banished, sent into some remote wilderness, etc. how shall I be
fed? how shall I be clothed? what will become of my wife and children? etc. as
if when the pipe is cut, there were no water in the fountain; are not these
sometimes thy thoughts and fears? and though thou have had many silencing
providence, and God unexpectedly has removed thy doubts, and answered thy
objections, yet upon new apprehensions of danger, how hard do thou find it
to trust God, upon his bare word, when the world frowns, and will not pass for
payment? or to depend upon him when deliverance is out of sight? has not
Christ himself told thee, that if thou seek first the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, all other things shall be added to thee, Mat. 6.33.
grace is the way to glory, and holiness to happiness, if men be not gracious
there is no heaven to be had; if they are, they shall have heaven, and earth
also: for godliness has the promise of this life and that to come: all earthly
enjoyments that are good for thee, are entayled upon piety; but alas, the
strength of the ground is so spent in nourishing weeds and trash, that the good
corn is starved and choked: these thorns do choke the seed, and it becomes
unfruitful; temporal things are nec vera nec nostra, but there are certain and
durable riches, that nec prodi, nec eripi, nec surripi possunt; he that enjoys
them cannot lose them; has not God promised, he will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee? and is not this better then if all the Kings upon earth had said
so to thee, that thou shall want nothing that is good, and would thou have
that which is hurtful? was he ever known to be worse then his word? and can
thou imagine he will first fail thee? will he that feeds the fowls, and clothes
the grass, starve the children? oh my soul, make sure of the main, and use
diligence for the rest, cast thy care upon God, and make thy requests known to
God, and he can as well deny himself, as deny thee in any lawful suit; five
thousand years experience cannot produce an instance of any godly man that was
forsaken, make sure of the main bargain; and all other things will be given in
as paper and packthred: oh my God, I believe help thou my unbelief: pardon my
distracting and distrustful thoughts, increase my faith, silence my doubts and
fears, by clearing up my evidences for heaven.

Upon provision made for birds in a hard winter.
62. Med.
WHen (after a cold pinching frosty winter wherein the snow had long covered
the face of the earth, and hid it from man and beast, the trees and bushes for
many weeks together being loaded and burdened with it) I saw and considered
the numberless number of birds of all sorts and kinds, that escaped in that
hard season, when all sorts of provision seemed to be cut off, and survived
these troubles, which threatened them with death, when neither the rivers which
were frozen up nor the fields which were covered, nor the trees nor bushes
could give them relief, yet God provided them their meat, and they received it
at his hands, and were nourished by his providence, when in my apprehension
they were like to have been lost and starved, and famished for want of food,
especially some of the wilder sort, that neither frequent house nor barn, from
whom all sorts of provision seemed to be locked up, or cut off, but God fed them
out of his storehouse, Psalm. 147. he gives the beast his food, and the young
ravens when they cry; hence it is that our Savior Christ sends his querellous
and desponding servants to school to the fouls of heaven to learn to depend
upon their fathers providence, Mat. 6.26. consider the fouls of the air, they
sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, and yet your heavenly
father feeds them, are ye not much better then they? ask the beasts (says
Job) and they shall teach thee, and the fouls of the air, and they shall tell
thee; or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee, and the fishes of the sea
shall declare unto thee; who knows not in all these, that the hand of the
Lord has wrought this, in whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and
the breath of all mankind? Job. 12.7, 8, 9.10. as he made them all, so he it
is that maintains them, he takes care for the ostriches young ones, and feeds
the young ravens when they cry, Psalm. 147.9. they take no care nor have care
taken for them, yet are they provided for; did man but look up to the birds or
down to the lillies, he would not so dispond, and so distrust Gods providence:
shall the great housekeeper of the world water his flowers, prune his plants,
fodder his cattle, feed his birds, and yet starve his children? it cannot be:
is there not a sparrow can fall to the ground without his providence? nor a
hair from our head without his knowledge, and can we think he takes no care of
us? Mat. 10.29, 30. one pearl is more worth then many peebles, and the
righteous is more excellent then his neighbor: as one lark is worth many
kites, God will have a care of his jewels, they are as the apple of his eye;
thousand thousands of those fouls there are that man takes no care of, makes no
provision for, knows not upon what they feed, yea, seek their destruction, some
out of envy, as birds of prey, others to feed upon, yet God maintained them in
their feveral species, almost six thousand years at his own cost and charges:
Man by all his diligence cannot make provision for them, neither can he destroy
them by all his cunning: God hides them as well as feeds them, and they are not
beholding to man for their lives; The thoughts of this methinks may silence
those Athiestical conceits that are apt to arise in wicked men's hearts, that
there is no God, when they see his providence so plainly asserted, and may
silence those distrustful thoughts and fears which are too apt to creep in, and
to disturb the quiet and tranquillity of the hearts of Gods own people upon the
apprehension of approaching danger, and threatening wants, when they observe
those lesser creatures guided by an overruling providence; and if God preserve
every species of his creatures notwithstanding men combine their destruction,
no wonder if he preserve his own Church amidst their numerous enemies: oh my
soul, while there is life and breath in that body of thine, praise, bless, and
magnify God for his works of providence to his creatures, in making provision
for all the works of his hands, especially for his Church whom he feeds as a
few lambs in the midst of innumerable wolves, and they are not able to devour
them: and though many times he suffers some to be worried, yet it proves rather
the augmentation then the diminution of his flock, the blood of the Martyrs
proves the seed of his Church, yet let these convincing providence to thy self
never be forgotten, but let them breed in thee a thankful remembrance of his
benefits and some answerable returns to God for his mercies which thou have
had, beyond expectation: let his continued series of providence banish out of
thy heart all atheistical thoughts and conceits, and also all desponding,
despairing, distrustful thoughts, and carking care: keep in Gods way, and he
will never forsake thee: he that feeds the young ravens when they cry, will not
suffer thee to starve nor shut his ear to thy prayer; if thou leave him, he
will leave thee: oh my God, all my springs are in thee, all my mercies flow
from thee; though the pipe be cut, Lord, show me the way to the fountainhead.

Upon birds building their nests.
63. Med.
OBserving in the spring time, when the fouls of heaven build their nests, how
variously they did it, and every sort had a several way, fashion, mode, or
manner which all of that sort, kind or species did exactly observe, not by
imitation but by a natural instinct, those that had never seen nest built
before, were excellent artists, and needed no instruction: The several kinds
also build in several places, as well as use several forms and methods; some
build in houses in the chimneys thatch, and other places, others have places
provided for them, as pigeons, stares, and such like; these are defended from
wind, and weather, which others endure to their sorrow, but are less secure;
some build in high and craggy rocks, in inaccessible places to defend their
young; and some in lofty trees, as the oak, the ash, the Elm, the pine, and
the cedars, far out of danger and dread; others that aspire not so high, hide
their nests in rough hedges, bushes, brambles, and obscure places, where the
passengers eye shall not behold them, and generally all obscure them what they
can from sight; yet some build upon the ground, as the ostrich, which lays
her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust, and forgets that the
fool may crush them, or the wild beast may break them; she is hardened against
her young ones, as though they were not hers, her labor is in vain, without
fear, because God has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted to her
understanding, Job. 39.14. etc. every one acts according to the wisdom God
has given them, to some more, to some less: I observed also the materials with
which they built, and these were different also; some built with sticks, others
with straws, some with moss, some with wool, feathers, and many other things:
the fashion also was various, some bigger, some less, according as need
required; some built only a bottom, some raised up walls, some covered it over
head to secure the young, some daubed their castle, and made it weather-proof,
others not; various are the forms and fashions they use, and for ought I know
no two species or kinds make their nests in every point alike; and in the
working, both the male and the female, join heart and hand in the work, and use
diligence till it be effected, and in sitting on their eggs, both take their
share in the work, and relieve each other by courses, as the careful observers
testify, at least of some kinds, and undauntedly endure the frost and snow,
the wind and the weather: as also in feeding their young, they have a mutual
love and a mutual care, and take mutual pains; Methoughts this did much
resemble the love and amity, the care and industry between man and wife, and oh
that there were so much between them as there is between these silly birds;
they are faithful each to other, and loving and helpful, and that by a
natural instinct without the use of reason, or any other bond or obligation;
and thus it should be, and oh that it were so between man and wife, they have
more obligations each to other, God has given them the use of reason, the
Scriptures, and many other helps, yet many break all these bands asunder, yea,
the very marriage-knot by their adulteries, and neighing after other men's
wives, and other women's husbands, and many times return hatred for love, and
wish, if not practice the death one of another; they should lend mutual help to
build the nest, and feed the young, but sometimes both of them are wanting,
oftentimes the one: there are many foolish men as well as foolish women, that
pluck down their house with their hands, and turn off their children into the
wide world, destitute and neglected; many spend that rioteously, that their
yoak-fellows, or their parents have got painfully; and prove a hindrance and
not a help to their relations; and as for the body, so much more for the soul,
they prove ill husbands, and hindrances, and not helps in the way to heaven:
God might send these men and these women to school to these silly birds to
learn faithfulness, love and mutual friendship, and assistance, as he does the
sluggard to the ant, to learn diligence, and to the stork, the crane, and the
swallow, to observe their times, and to the ox and ass, to learn to know their
benefactour. These poor creatures minded me also of the wise providence of God
that has thus instructed these otherwise silly creatures, Job. 39.27. does the
eagle mount up at thy command, and make her nest on high? intimating, it is at
Gods command, it is he that gives goodly wings to the peacock, yea wings and
feathers to the ostrich, Job. 39.13. and it is he that takes care of these
birds, Deuteronomy. 22.6. oh my soul, learn those lessons from these poor creatures,
faithfulness, diligence, and care, learn those relative duties here hinted out
unto thee; fly idleness as the bane of virtue; let thy general and particular
calling take up all thy time, especially be a good husband for thy soul; oh my
God, implant every grace in my soul to this end, out with every corruption,
make me diligent for the world, but especially for heaven.

Upon a small bird feeding many young ones.
64. Med.
OBserving a little wren one of the smallest of birds that had a dozen young
ones lying upon her hands to maintain, to take care of, and make provision for;
I heedfully attended to see what the event would be; I observed with what
unwearied pains she labors for their sustenance, how cheerfully she employed
her little strength to that end, even to the neglect of her own belly, how self
denyingly she behaves her self, sparing that which she should have fed upon to
sustain them, and from morning till night busieth her self to feed them; but
that which most put me to a stand was this, in her returns with meat they all
stand with open mouth, to receive the new taken prey, which made me admire that
such a silly creature, void of reason, was able to distinguish between those
she had fed, and those she had not, which might in such a multitude have puzzled
a better head; I wondered that some of the most lively did not get all, and
starve the weaker, but that God has put such an instinct into them, thus to
cherish their young, has given them also so much knowledge as to fit them to
do it: Having spent some time in this Observation unobserved, I thought to try
her affections to her young ones a little further, I approached the nest as if
I intended to rob her of her young, where I observed that poor creature
naturally fearful and timorous, with what boldness, confidence, and undaunted
courage she opposed her self to her small power to have rescued her young ones
out of my hand, even to the hazard of her own life; this plainly discovered to
me the divine providence of the great householder that does not only provide
meat but also some one to give it in due season, and to help those that cannot
help themselves, and puts such an instinct into such poor despicable creatures,
that they deny themselves to help their young ones, and venture their lives for
their safety, and never leave them till they are able to help themselves, and
then forsake them as if they knew them not, and that he gives such a blessing
to the labors of these two poor wretches, that such a numerous brood should be
provided for, and no doubt brings the prey to them by his providence: this also
may silence our Atheists, and may make him lay his hand upon his mouth, for
what accidental concurring of atoms can occasion this, this made me also
consider how degenerate a piece poor man is, many of them having obliterated
what the most savage animals have retained, viz. this natural affection to
their young, so that we may take up that complaint against many in our times,
more deservedly then the Prophet does against Israel, Lam. 4.3. even the sea
monsters draw out their breasts, and give suck to their young ones, the
daughter of my people is become cruel like the Ostriches in the wilderness:
these forsake their children through the extremity of famine, or for want of
natural affection, Romans 1.31. there are many refuse to labor, to maintain
their charge, the fouls of the air will rise up in judgment against these, yea,
many waste and spend that riotously that is provided to their hands, when these
poor creatures pinch their own bellies to feed their little ones; how many men
and women endued with reason do so obliterate it, that they expose their
children wilfully to want and penury, yea, to plain beggary, yea, when the very
bruits seek what they can to preserve their young, and many venture their lives
in their quarrel, and set themselves between them and danger, yet too many that
bear the name of men and women, have so far obliterated those principles nature
has imprinted in them, that they often lay violent hands upon their own
children, and not only contrive their death, but also effect it; I would daily
experience did not speak out this truth too loud, what assizes is there almost
but some or other are tried for their lives upon this account? But though some
have a care of their childrens bodies, there are but a few that make any
provision for their souls, though that be their master piece, but suffer them
to be eternally ruined: Oh the stupendous folly of the most of men, they train
up their children as they do their horses, teach them to drudge, and then they
think they have given them sufficient education; many if they can leave them an
estate, though with a curse intailed upon it, have their desires; many are too
tender of the body, that have little care of the soul, let that sink or swim;
but the time will come, that the soul will be found the choicest jewel, and the
loss of that, the greatest loss: oh my soul be diligent in thy calling, make
provision for thy relations, to thy power: he that provides not for his family,
has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. be not without
natural affections; but that is not enough, be not without spiritual
affections: see that they have mentem sanam in corpore sano, though the body
must not be neglected, nor the things of the world slieghted, yet know, this is
not the main; a little grace is worth a great deal of gold: keep a mean in
earthly enjoyments, between coveteousness and prodigality: fear not an extreme
in spirituals: oh my God, help me to regulate my life both to externals and
internals, by the rule of thy word and spirit.

Upon the prating of a Parrat.
65. Med.
HEaring a Parrat talk and prate, and counterfeit man's voice, and utter words
which yet he understood not; when I had considered of it, I thought it was a
lively emblem of an hypocrite, for as this bird does imitate man, and
counterfeits his voice, so does an hypocrite imitate a true Christian, both in
words and gestures, speaks as he speaks, and acts as he acts, for what action
or what duty can a Christian perform, as to the external part of it, which an
hypocrite cannot, does not do? As there is no herb in the garden, but there is
some counterfeit of it in the field, which resembles it, so there is no grace
in the heart of a believer, but the devil has its counterfeit, and therefore
it is a cunning thing to be a Christian, and an easy thing to be deceived: for
what can a true Christian do for the bulk, and materiality of duty, but a
hypocrite can do also, yea, sometimes seems to exceed him? and as in duty, so
in conference and discourse, it is hard to discern the one from the other;
hypocrisy may be spun with a fine thread, and hardly discerned either in the
cloth or color from sincerity, but it is often found out in the wearing to be
but a cheat; in storms and tempests it is apt to change color, and will not
hold out, but shrinks in the wetting: there is indeed a difference now both in
garb and language, the one is truly beautiful, the other is but paint and
varnish, which time makes to fade: they speak (it is true) the same things, but
the one speaks what he knows, and the other by hearsay: both may discourse the
deep mysteries of Religion, as the parrat may mysteryes of state, if taught,
but understand not what they say: Can a true Christian discourse of redemption,
regeneration, conversion, adoption, sanctification, etc. so can the other also,
but the one speaks what he feels, the other not: the Christian finds the marks
and tokens of it in his own soul, the other not: can the one discourse of the
workings of the spirit in the heart, of a believer, the actings of grace, of
communion with God, etc. so can the other? can the one speak out his
experiences of the goodness of God, the vanity of the creature, the bitterness
of sin, the comforts and directions of the spirit, the beauty of holiness, etc.
the other can counterfeit this also? but all this while, the hypocrites heart
and tongue agree not: he disclaims against that sin which he loves, and pleads
for the holiness and integrity which he secretly hates, and abhors, and speaks
well of God and his laws, his ordinances and his people, which in his heart he
abhors: The knowledge of the one, and the other differ, like that of a
traveller, that has been at Rome or Venice, or Jerusalem, or Constantinople,
and has seen those places, and known those inhabitants, and dwelt among them,
and his who has only heard, or read of them, or spoke with those that have
seen them; the latter perhaps may speak as much, nay, more of the situation of
the place, the manners of the people, the government, customs, and laws they
are ruled by, then the others can; yet is not their knowledge alike: the one is
assured by ocular demonstration, of what he speaks, the other not; these eyes
saw it, (says one) these ears heard it, says the other; so it is here, one
speaks what he knows, the other what he hears: Or it is like the difference
between the knowledge of a diseased person, and that of a physician, the latter
can speak more of the causes, signs and symptoms of the disease, and more
learnedly describe it, but the other feels what he says, and knows the working
of the disease in another manner of way then the physician who has only read
of it, or heard of it from others: this is the difference of the knowledge
between the sincere Christian and the hypocrite, the one speaks knowingly,
experimentally, feelingly, truly, the other speaks by rote, like the parrat
only, what is taught him dissemblingly, hypocritically, and falsely, pretending
to experience that they do not: oh my soul take heed of contenting and
satisfying thy self with a bare notional knowledge, without experimental
heart-knowledge, it is not that which floats in the brain, but that which sinks
down and seasons the heart and life that will do thee good; the former a man
may carry along with him to hell, yea, the devils have it in a greater measure
then the most knowing man, though bad words may, yea, will condemn thee, if not
repented of, yet good words (if any such can be) without good actions, and good
hearts, cannot save thee; yea, thou will be guilty of self-condemnation in
justifying what thou do not labor after; if godliness and a holy life be
good, why do thou not live thus? if not, why do thou speak thus? why does
not thy heart and tongue agree? sincerity is the true philosophers stone, it
turns all into gold, and makes weak performances acceptable: hypocrisy turns
all into dross: oh my God, grant me heart-knowledge as well as brain knowledge,
lest I go to hell with a candle in my hand: such knowledge may serve to sink
me, not to save me; to talk of the way and not walk in it little profits; to
speak of heaven and not enjoy, will do me no good: Lord, let me be in substance
what I am in show; yea, Lord, make me such as I ought to be in truth.

Upon a Kite killed by a Fowler eating his prey.
66. Med.
WHen I observed a kite, that bird of prey, how fiercely he struck at a
trembling partrich, carrying her away in her griping talons, rending her in
pieces in an instant, when the poor innocent creature could make no resistance,
and none came to her rescue, and devouring her yet alive, all reaking in her
blood, and intombed her in his cruel devouring maw; Methought it was as bloody
a spectacle as ever I beheld, to see an innocent thus used, that had never
injured him; but while I considered of the act, behold, a fowler undiscerned,
shot him dead upon the place, in the height of his cruelty, with the meat in
his mouth, so that he had sour sauce to his sweet meat: When I had awhile
considered the matter, I thought I had seen some such dealing in the world,
yea, amongst men, where one makes a prey upon another, and like the fishes in
the sea, the great ones swallow up the lesser, and feeds upon them as these
birds of prey do upon those that cannot resist them: The great ones of the
world are like this kite, good for nothing, unprofitable burdens of the earth,
feeding upon the brains of their innocent neighbors: how many cruel griping
Landlords, wring so many tears from their Tenants eyes in their life time, that
at their death they have not one more to shed? how unreasonably do they rack
their rents, and extort unreasonable fines? how do they oppress them by
unreasonable impositions, service, and other covenants, force them to do their
work, keep their dogs, horses, and such like, when all this time they pay to
the utmost farthing for what they have, that were it not for their liberty, it
were as good for them live in Turkey as where they do? they cark and care, and
moil, and toil, and rise early and ly down late, and eat the bread of
carefulness: they fare hard, and work hard, and deny themselves even
necessaries, yea, can scarce get clothes for their backs, or meat for their
bellies, but moil like slaves or horses, and yet all too little to satisfy
their greedy Landlord, who at length strips them of all they have, seizes upon
their estates, turns them out of house and harbor, perhaps throws them into
prisons where they end their misery, while their families depend upon the
courtesy of the parish: In their poverty the Landlord deals with them, as men
do by their horses, when one is tired they call for another, and show them not
so much favor as they do their dogs, for when they be wearied in their
service, they feed them, and make provision for them; Now all this cruelty is
used to satisfy their insatiable avarice, or to maintain their hawks and
hounds, and whores, and other like debaucheries, and all too little: they suck
their brains, drink their tears, and suck their blood; and if their Tenants or
poor neighbors are wronged by them, they may expect no more justice, then the
fox and ass in the fable, that were to divide the prey with the lion, they must
give away their right for peace-sake, part with all, and think they speed well
if they meet with no further mischief; the laws themselves prove often like
cobwebs, they hold little flys but the great ones break through; But the time
is coming that the fowler death will strike these birds of prey to the heart,
and long it will not be before it be done, and an impartial judge will make
them vomit up the blood they have so greedily drunk, and pluck the prey from
between their teeth, and make them know, that they were the sole proprietors of
what they enjoyed, but that he lent it for other ends then they employed it in;
and now their condition will be worse then their poor Tenants, and their
accounts greater: remember the story of Dives and Lazarus, both in their life,
and in their death; oh how good is it for men to live so as not to be ashamed
to live, nor afraid to dye, and to keep a conscience void of guilt that it
cannot accuse them of any unjust or uncivil act, lest the sergeant death put
them into the devils hands, and they be cast into prison: th^se that will not
now abate their fellow servants a penny, shall themselves pay the utmost
farthing: he that will show no mercy, shall find none when they stand in need,
and those that now feed upon others, death shall ere long feed sweetly on them,
Job. 24.20. yea, the never-dying worm shall feed upon them, as it is fabled,
the vulture did upon Prometheus his liver: oh my soul, live so holily toward
God, and so uprightly toward man, that thy greatest enemies may have nothing
to object against thee but concerning the law of thy God: Improve those talents
God has lent thee to his glory, lest thou have the doom of the unfaithful
servant: consider, thou art but a steward of what thou enjoyest: and what is
under thy hands, thou have but the dispose of it, for thy masters use, and he
will require an account; take heed of getting any thing unjustly, keeping it
unlawfully, or parting with it sinfully; put not the poors part in any childs
portion, this will be a canker to consume the rest, and bring a curse upon thy
posterity: grind not the faces of the poor, for their redeemer is mighty, and
will not bear it; do as thou would be done by; show mercy or thou will miss
of it when thou standst in need; if thou will not forgive others, God will not
forgive thee: Oh my God, I have this sin of cruelty in my nature also, oh curse
and blast this bitter root, that it may not spring up in me: incline my heart
to lenity and mercy, yea, to forgive mine enemies, that I may resemble thee my
father, that do good both to the good and to the bad.

Upon a kite soaring aloft, yet minding her prey.
67. Med.
OBserving the Kite that bird of prey, soaring aloft, towering on high, as if he
meant to scale the clouds, and look into heaven, and with the Eagle to make his
nest among the stars, Obad. 4. And yet I observed he suddenly descended, fell
upon his prey, and devoured it; This observation satisfied me, that though he
aimed at heaven, and seemed to scorn these inferior things, yet his eye and
mind was fixed here below, and grovelled on the ground; though the bodv were
above, the heart was below, and his mounting aloft was but dissimulation, and
upon design, like the fox in the fable, that pretended himself dead, to take
his prey the better; so this kite to compass his ends, carry on his designs,
and to take his unwary prey, uses this stratagem: I thought this was a lively
Emblem of an hypocrite, who seems to be all for heaven, when he minds nothing
less; he is only minding his prey, driving on some carnal design, and when he
seems to be trading for heaven, and discoursing with God himself, yet his heart
and affections are glued to the world, and he is carrying on some
self-interest, or fleshly design; and is like a waterman, he looks one way,
and rows another: Thus the Pharisees those noted hypocrites did, for under
pretense of long prayers, they devoured widows houses, and fisht for popular
applause with their prayers, fastings and almsdeeds Mat. 6.1, 2, 3, etc.
their hearts were on earth, when their hands and eyes were lifted up to heaven:
A hypocrite is most devout, when preferment, profit or applause is in sight,
but key-cold when there is no temptation; they are burning hot in the public,
lukewarm in their familyes, and key-cold in their closets; they are like a
Cardinal I have read of, and doubtless there are many more of his mind, who
being a poor fishermans son, was for his humility and other qualifications
advanced to several degrees of honor, but always to mind him of his mean
extraction, and to keep him humble, as he said, he would have his Fathers Net
in his dining room, that he might not forget his descent, but at the last being
made Pope, the net was laid aside, being demanded the reason, he replied, when
the fish is caught what need is there of the net? This net and feigned humility
was but to take the fish: and there are many in our times fish with such a
bait; some that depend upon some godly great man, or some religious Landlord,
or great benefactor, counterfeit their colors, and pretend to wear their
livery, the better to ingratiate themselves into their favor and friendship,
but when they have caught the fish, the net is thrown aside; for when they have
attained their end, or are frustrated of their expectation, they soon cast off
the sheeps-skin, and appear in their own likeness, they make religion but a
stalking-horse to take their prey, and use it for no other end, and when that
work is done, they lay it afide; they have a piece of work to do, and when one
tool will not do it, they lay that aside and take another; if profession of
religion fail them, they will turn persecutors, and those that now cry, hail
master, will shortly cry, crucify him, they follow not Christ for love, but for
loaves, and will be his servants so long, and no longer then they gain by him:
they put their hands to the plow, and look back, and will have no more of
religion then will do them good; while it will stand with their credit, profit,
or worldly advantages they will be religious, when they must part with any
thing, they will not buy heaven at so dear a rate; but let such take heed of
mocking God, that will not be mocked, or of playing with this candle, lest they
burn their wings, or approach too near the sun of righteousness, lest like
Icarus they melt their waxen wings, and they deceive them: God can easily see
through this thin vail of dissimulation, and smell the filthy savor of an
hypocrites rotten lungs; this fire will soon discover this paint, and without
oil in the vessel, as well as a lamp in the hand, there is no entering into the
bridechamber: it is not then a Lord, Lord, open to us, will serve turn, yea,
often this rotten inside will rot the outside also, and those ulcers at the
heart will break forth in the life and conversation: oh my soul, beware of
hypocrysy, that damning sin, that ruins thousands, and sends them to hell, and
unfits a man for any office or employment in Church or state; this will make
thee hateful both to God and man; man will hate thee for thy profession, God
will hate thee for counterfeiting his colors, and serving the devil in his
livery: if religion be bad, why will thou profess it? if it be good, why will thou not practice it? Make the tree good, and his fruit good, or make the tree
evil, and his fruit evil: be as thou seem or seem as thou art, and do not
dishonor God by a great profession, and an evil conversation, there is no
deceiving God by a fained show, who tryes the heart and searches the reins; he
loves truth in the inward part, and the secretest thought of the heart cannot
pass by him undiscovered; sincerity is the true philosophers stone that turns
all things into gold, and makes weak performances acceptable, when hypocrysy
turns all into dross, glorious performances into gilded abomination: oh my
God, my heart is deceitful, and desperately wicked, a nest of unclean birds
roosts there, and this sin as well as others lurks in it; Lord, thou know my
condition, discover my self to my self, and let not my own heart deceive me:
create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me: what
good will a show do without a substance, or a profession without the practice;
whatever thou denyest me, deny me not sincerity: what shall I do at the wedding
without a wedding garment, or what good will a lamp do without oil, or a
talent, if not improved.

Upon a Bird in a cage.
68. Med.
UPon the observation of a bird in a cage, that was kept warm and secured from
danger, fed to the full, and that without her care or pains, so that in my
apprehension she wanted nothing that might give content, or minister delight;
she neither felt want nor woe; yet it seems she was not content, with this
supposed restraint or imprisonment, for in process of time she gets loose, fled
away and refused to return, she esteemed her liberty more then all her
enjoyments, and rather exposed her self to want and penury, yea, to danger and
trouble, then to return to her easy confinement, and trust her self rather to
the mercy of the merciless enemy, then to her greatest benefactor: The thoughts
of this raised my Meditation as high as our first parents Adam and Eve in
paradise, they were placed in a place of pleasure, provided for by God himself,
wanted nothing for necessity or delight, and had only one little restraint laid
upon them, to forbear the fruit of one tree, which happily had it not been
forbidden, had not been desired, but impatient of this restraint, they break
the cage, and got loose, and so were turned out into the wide world, and by
this means brought want and misery, danger and death upon all their posterity,
and exposed themselves and their offspring to be a prey to the devouring
vulture, satan: and this is the condition of their posterity, they like not
Gods cage, because the devil promises more liberty, but brings them really into
more slavery, they leave Gods service which is perfect freedom for the devils
drudgery, in hopes of more freedom, but really more slavery; they serve a worse
master, are set about worse work, and shall receive worse wages: loath they are
to be under any restraint, and yet the devil keeps them in the most servile
slavery: fain they would have their fill of sin, and this will bring them in
their fill of misery; for suffering will follow sin, as the shadow does the
substance; if sin go before, misery will follow after, and they will rue the
time that ever they left their cage, changed their Master, or left his work:
for when they come to receive their wages, they will be sensible of their
folly; eternal destruction is the best wages the devil gives, but eternal life
is Gods reward: But lets leave these doing their masters work, and expecting
his wages, and consider man in his temporal concerns; and here also you will
find him a discontented creature, and though you follow him from the womb to
the tomb, you will always find him in a restless condition, never satisfied,
never contented, in his infancy and childhood, never able to brook any cage, or
endure any restraint, any thing but go to school, and any book will please but
that he is to learn in, any profession but a scholar: in their youth any thing
but service or apprentiship, and any trade but what they are bound to, and any
Master but their own; after any estate but a single life, and when married they
are soon weary of that: Many a servant that lived void of cares, that sleeps
soundly, feeds heartily, and has all necessaries provided for him plentifully,
and nothing lies upon him but a little moderate labor, to do his work, and
receive his wages, when ofttimes the master works as hard as he all day, and
spends his spirits, and at night breaks his sleep with anxious cares and fears,
and turmoiling thoughts, how he shall pay his rents, discharge his debts,
provide for his family, meat, drink and clothes, and other necessaries, how he
shall pay scot and lot as they say, and bring both ends together, and all
proves too little many times, yea, a thousand things more run in his mind and
break his brain, yet this servant not content with this condition, dislikes his
cage, leaves it, he cannot away with any restraint, he must needs be his own
man, or rather his own Master, stand upon his own legs, be ruled by his own
will, leaves his service, alters his condition, marries and sets up for
himself, and now he thinks all will be well; but after awhile, when pincht with
want, and misery, and forced to maintain a wife and children, and much ado to
get them bread, he begins to wish, oh that I were in my cage again, I should
prize it better then I have done, and begins to think his service was better
then his freedom, and wishes when it is too late that he had better considered
it, and looked before he leapt: and thus it is with men in all callings,
estates and degrees, always discontent, if any restraint be laid upon their
insatiable minds. Oh my soul, choose not another Master till thou art sure of
a better, that will mend thy work, and better thy wages; this cannot be satan,
his wages is eternal destruction, when the gift of God is eternal life; break
not Gods prison for the worlds liberty, now thou art liberally provided for,
and remainest under the wings of the Almighty, and no devouring vulture can
molest thee, but if at the instigation of Satan thou break thy cage, and make
an escape, a thousand dangers will assault thee, and thy poor soul will be made
a prey to this roaring lion that seeks day and night to devour it, 1 Pet. 5.8.
the devil that bloodthirsty enemy will pursue thee to destruction, and nothing
will satisfy him but thy ruin; oh my God, my strength is in thee, and not in
my self, my enemies are many, politic and cunning, bloodthirsty and cruel,
treacherous and deceitful, and my own heart like an inbred traitor ready to
betray me into his hand; I have no strength against this enemy, only mine eyes
are up to thee: Lord, keep me under the shadow of thy wings, and let neither
the temptations of satan, nor the frowns or smiles of the world draw me thence.

Upon a bird with a clogg at her foot.
69. Med.
WHen I beheld a poor bird that was taken prisoner, and her Jailer the better
to secure his prisoner had hanged a little clog at her foot, I took notice how
when she endeavored to mount up, she was always hindered and plucked back again,
and all her endeavors proved vain, as prisoners that are in for flagitious
offenses, have fetters, shackles, and great store of irons clapped upon them to
prevent their escape, and hinder their flight, so it fared with this poor bird;
she had a weight that she could not lift, I perceived she had a will to be
gone, but power was wanting, she was not content with her slavery, ^ut how to
remedy it she knew not: endeavors were not wanting but a wished success
succeeded not: I thought this much resembled the state of the poor soul by
nature, who was taken prisoner by satan at the fall, and ever since kept under
restraint, and the devil leads her captive at his pleasure, and he has to
secure his prisoner, shackled and fettered her ever since, for fear of an
escape, from which she cannot free her self, but remains still under bondage;
nay, the unregenerate man is so fettered and clogged, and as it were locked to a
post, that he cannot stir, or so much as lift up his eyes or heart to heaven,
and so infatuated withal, that he cannot heartily desire his liberry, or pray
for it, Satan has put such a force upon him that he is content to have his ear
bored, and to serve him for ever, he is so acquainted with his service that he
thinks there is no better Master, nor no better work; he is like a bruit beast,
still grovelling upon the earth, and thinks there is no greater happiness; he
is like Ulisses his men, fabled, by Circes charms to be turned into swine, and
being put to their choice, were content so to remain, and not assume their
human shape again; so these are so bewitched by Satan, that they are unwilling
to be Gods free men, they know no other happiness then to have their swill, and
to wallow in the mire, and are angry with them that would help them out, they
find more pleasure in their drinking and drabbing, then ever they did in
praying and hearing; upon these we may write, the Lord have mercy upon them,
for they have a plague sore running upon them, they are sick to death, and yet
feel nothing ailing them; there is but one physician in the world can cure
them, and that must be with a plaster of his blood: but we pass by these as
yet wholly at the devils command, and in his power: But there are another sort
of men, that have this clog at the heel, and that is the regenerate, that have
the skales of ignorance in some measure wiped from their eyes, and have a
principle of life in them, yet are not free from this clog, though they are
weary, and fain would be free, but cannot, and though their clog be lightened,
and many of their shackles and bolts knocked off, yet cannot they mount up as
they desire, they cannot content themselves with their earthly enjoyments, fain
they would have a better portion, yet corruption hangs so fast on, they have
much ado to mount up to take a veiw of their heavenly mansion; they dare not
espouse their souls to any creature-comfort, and yet can maintain but little
communion with their husband, Christ; if they do mount upon the wings ^f
contemplation, and get a Pisgah-sight of heaven, and a veiw of those invisible
things at Gods right hand, yet how soon are they down again, and much ado to
get a glimps of Christ: they are like a man that is looking at a star through
an Optick-glass, held with a palsy hand, it is but now and then they can get a
sight, their corruption therefore, that remains unmortified makes them cry out
with the Apostle: Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death? Oh my soul? is not this thy condition? how comes it
otherwise to pass, that thou prayest so coldly, and hear so drowsily,
praisest God so faintly, and performest every duty so carelessly? is not heaven
worth the having, and all the pains thou can bestow about it? is not thy soul
worth the saving, and eternity worth minding? can thou be zealous about
trifles, and negligent in things of greatest concernment? sure there are heavy
clogs lie upon thy heels, that thou runnest no faster: why art thou such a
stranger to divine Meditation? thou can think of the world without weariness,
though it be from morning to night, why then are thy thoughts of heaven so few
and forced? why art thou so soon tired in duty? so soon weary of ordinances,
and so overly in them, that many times thou have scarce a glimps of Christ in a
duty, and but little communion with him at best; why do thou feed upon the
husks of duty, and content thy self with the bare performance, though thou meet
not with Christ in the duty? will this feed thee? will it make thee fat? how
comes it to pass so many vain thoughts, roving imaginations, impertinent
wanderings are mixed with thy holiest dutys, and most solemn services? do not
those evidence to thy face, that corruption remains strong in thee, and grace
weak? and why contentest thou thy self with these fetters, and strivest not,
prayest not more against them? Oh my God, when shall I be freed from these?
when will thou knock off these bolts, and free me from these fetters, and
enlarge my feet, that I may run the ways of thy commandments? then will my soul
mount up to thee with cheerfulness, then shall I serve God without weariness or
distraction; oh fit me for my change, and then, come Lord Jesus, come quickly:
give me oil in my vessel, grace in my heart, and the wedding garment of
sincerity for my soul, and then come at what hour thou please.

Upon birds observing their seasons of coming and returning.
70. Med.
WHen I observed the cuckoe, the swallow, and many other sorts of birds, how
exactly they observed their seasons, both in coming and returning, and all
other birds in their building and breeding, how exact they were, and lost not
the opportunity, nor neglected the season; It brought to my mind Gods
complaint against Israel his own people, and thought how justly it might be
charged against us, Jer. 8.7. The stork of the heaven knows her appointed time,
the turtle, the crane, and the swallow, know the time of their coming, but my
people know not the judgments of the Lord; as if he should say, these silly
birds by a natural instinct, without the use of reason, know the times and
seasons of their going and returning, but my people that have greater helps and
furtherances, yet take no notice of the seasons of grace, and of the times of
their visitation: he complains likewise, Esaias. 1.3. the ox knows his owner,
and the ass his masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people do not
consider; and is not this Englands case? few consider the time of their
visitation, or take notice of the footsteps of Gods departure: Christ also
complains of such, that could discern the face of the sky, but could not
discern the signs of the times, Mat. 16.2.3. as if he should say, are you so
weather-wise that you can foresee the rain, and are you so ignorant of
Scripture, that ye know not the time when the Messiah should come? Mat. 23.37.
oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered you as a hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not, Luke 19.41, 42. when he was come
near, he beheld the city, and wept over it, saying, if thou had known, even
thou at least, in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace, but now
they are hid from thy eyes, etc. they had lived under the Ministry long, but
no change was perceived: oh poor man, how art thou degenerated, even below the
fowls of heaven, or the beasts of the earth; thou wast made a prince over the
works of Gods hands, and all terrestrial creatures were subjected to thee, and
now art sent to the ox and ass to learn of them thy duty, and does their
understanding outreach thine? Most men are apt enough to take advantages for
the world, they will not neglect seed-time, nor harvest, neither will they omit
Fair or Market, that their occasions call them to, they suit their business to
the season of the year; the Mariner observes both the wind and tide, and yet
these very persons which the world calls good husbands, are very fools in
reference to the soul, and let slip spiritual advantages; they provide not in
summer for winter, in the day for the night, nor in this life for that which is
to come; Now the candle of the Lord shines upon our heads, and through his
light we walk through darkness, the secret of the Lord is upon our pavilion,
Job. 29 3. the season of grace is yet continued, the harvest is not quite over,
the market day is not past, and we may lay in provision for the soul, and the
means of grace is yet afforded us, but how soon winter may approach we know
not; how soon the sun of the Gospel may set, and night come, we cannot tell,
when no man can work; the shadows of the evening are stretched out, Jer. 6.4.
and the night seems to be approaching, and ere long our day will be over and
never dawn again: there are sad symptoms, that the glory is departed from
Israel, and that God is going from us, and woe to us if he depart; there are
gray hairs here and there upon us, and we perceive them not, Hos. 7.9. It Is
our wisdom to observe our season, and strike while the iron is hot, and make
hay while the sun shines, and work while we have the light, this is the season
of gathering honey with the be, and getting oil with the wise Virgins; the
bridegroom is at hand, and will come in an hour we know not of, and at a time
when we are not aware of, and only those that are prepared will enter with him,
and the door will be shut; then shall we wish, as Christ does for Jerusalem,
that we had known the day of our visitation, but it will be too late; The time
of our visitation is called, a day, for the shortness of it, and yet we are not
sure this day shall have twelve hours; many men's sun sets at noon, God may
remove his candlestick from us, as he did from the seven Asian Churches, or his
dwelling from us, as from Shiloe, Jer. 7.12. and where are we then? Go to my
place in Shiloh where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for
the wickedness of my people Israel: and may not he say thus of England? what
assurance have we more then they of Gods continued presence, if our sins equal
theirs? the abuse of mercies, the contempt of the Ordinance, the abuse of his
Ministers, and the making light of Christ himself, are crying sins, and I fear
we cannot wash our hands from them; Oh my soul, observe the seasons of grace
afforded to thee by God, for whether thou improve them or no, they must be upon
thine account: take the opportunityes put into thy hands, take time by the
fore-lock, or thou will find that it is bald behind: improve every talent God
has lent thee, and let none rust by thee; cherish every motion of the spirit,
and blow it up into a flame; this is thy seed-time, where thou must sow what
thou must reap in eternity, Gal. 6.7.8. whatsoever a man sows that shall he
reap, he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he
that sows to the spirit shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, and he
that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly: this also is thy harvest-time, lay
in for winter, it is thy market day, fetch in provision, it is thy now or
never, neglect it not: oh my God, rouse up my dull and drowsy soul by some
quickening considerations, and let me not sleep away my time in security; rather
spur me on by some affection, then suffer me to fall short of my journeys end,
let me live every day as if it were my last, and perform every duty as if I
were presently to give an account of it to God.

Upon a snail.
71. Med.
OBserving a snail that sluggish creature, how slow she was in her motion, how
sloathfull her pace, how much time was spent, how little ground she rid, and
observing also that all the instigations I could use, rather hindered then
furthered her journey, for when I pricked her forward, she plucks in her horns,
and stood still, and no means I could use could make her mend her pace, this
made me think this was a fit emblem of a sluggard, as he is lively set forth
by wise Solomon in his book of Proverbs, the slothful man (says he) says,
there is a lion in the way, I shall be slain in the street, Pro. 26.13, 14. he
forgets the roaring lion that prompts him to these silly excuses; but never any
came to hell that had not some excuse for their coming thither; corrupt nature
needs not be taught to tell her tail, sin and shifting came into the world
together; men hide their sins from themselves by false glosses, from others by
idle excuses, they would persuade the world they have some reason to be mad, as
the door (says Solomon) turns upon the hinges, so does the sluggard upon his
bed: abroad there is a lion, and at home there is a lusk that lives in the
world to no purpose; he hides his hand in his bosom, and it grieveth him to
bring it again to his mouth: and much more to this purpose, but of all other,
the snail resembles the spiritual sluggard, and the Lord knows there are many
of them in our days, yea, which of us is not tainted with this disease? for
hardly can we find any men so sluggish for the world, as most men are for
heaven, or so careless for the body as they are for the soul, the most of us
sleep in harvest, and are like to beg in winter; slug away the day, and make no
provision for night, when they cannot work, and lose the opportunity God
affords them, and have a price put into their hands, but have no heart to get
wisdom; they provide not against the winter night of death, nor the days of
darkness which will be many, Eccl. 11.8. for as sure as the night follows the
day, so sure a change will come, a storm will rise, and such a storm as will
never be blown away to wicked worldlings: There is too many professors go on in
heavens way, as the proverb has it, on a snails gallop, we can scarce see them
move; and many like the crab-fish rather go backward then forward, they are
like those silly women mentioned, 2 Timothy 3.7. ever learning and never come to
the knowledge of the truth; many have served an apprentiship in Christianity,
some two, some three, and some more, and never yet understood the mystery of
their profession, nay, not the grounds and fundamentals of Religion: those that
have been listed soldiers twenty or thirty years have not yet learned to
handle their arms, nor known the use of their weapons; those that have been as
long scholars in Christ's school yet have not learned the first lesson, of self
denial, they have the same corruption unmortifyed, the same grace weak or
wanting; the same doubts unresolved, and the same fears upon their spirits, as
they had long since, many years are past away, and their work stands at a stay,
no more fitter for death, no more assurance of heaven, no more communion with
God, no more knowledge of the state of their own souls, and all this
notwithstanding the means they have had, the Ministry they have enjoyed, and
the seasons of grace they have lived in; Now is not he a monster in nature,
that is as big at two years old as at twenty, and is it not a dullard indeed,
that goes to school twenty years, and cannot take out one lesson: Ancient
professors should grow with the oak, more firmly rooted, and with the apple
more ripe and mellow, these trees of righteousness should bring forth fruit
even to old age, and add every year to their experience; indeed there are some
that grow in opinions, and think this is growing in grace, and in few years run
the whole circle of errors, and at last end where they began at profaness if
not at athiesm, they grow most in the head, like children that have the
rickets, when the rest of the body pines; these errors, the brats of their own
brain are like suckers in a tree, they draw all the sap that should feed the
other branches to themselves, and run up into aspiring branches fruitless, yea,
hurtful; the strength and vigor of the soul, the life and heat of their zeal,
is spent upon these to maintain them, when the power of godliness languisheth,
but true grace grows uniformly, like a healthy body, though every member grows
not to the same bigness, yet every member grows in proportion to the rest, and
so the body is completed; but alas where is this growth of grace discerned?
the most professors are in a languishing condition, their pulse beats weakly,
and their natural heat abates, and they are inclining to a consumption, or a
lethargy: oh my soul, is not this thy condition that is here described? art not
thou fitly resembled to this sluggish creature? how long have thou been in
Christ's school, and never the better? how many apprentiships have thou served,
and yet art a very dullard; and little more grace appears then did many years
ago? well, double thy diligence, amend thy pace; set about thy work to purpose,
lest God turn thee out of his vineyard for a loiterer, and give thee thy
portion with the unfaithful, with the unprofitable servant, Mat. 25.26. had
idleness been a calling, doubtless thou had been a good husband, yet at last
up and be doing, thou can not serve a better Master, expect better work or
wages; O my God, what shall I say to thee, or how shall I answer thee? mine
iniquity has found me out, and my sin shows it self, it is I that resemble
this snail, and have sluggishly served thee all my days: Lord, rouse me up out
of my security, that I may make more haste, lest I fall short of my journeys
end.

Upon a snail carrying her house along with her.
72. Med.
WHen I observed a snail carrying her house upon her back, and in so doing
carried all she had with her in her removes, it brought to my mind how the
Israelites in the wilderness, when ever they journeyed, they removed their
tents, and carried them with them, and when ever they rested there, they picht
them, and carried all their substance for forty years space along with them,
and this might well put them in mind that they were strangers, and pilgrims,
and there rest was not here: I have read of heathen Stilpo, when the enemy had
seized upon all he had, burnt the town he lived in, and took his wife and
children prisoners, being asked by Demetrius, what he had lost? replied,
nothing, omnia mea mecum porto: I carry all-along with me, esteeming his
virtues his only riches, which none could take from him, but all loseable
riches he valued not; This made me further consider, if any heathen could say
thus, how much more a Christian, that has all his virtues adopted graces, and
has an interest in Christ, and a title to glory? for this is a Christians all,
and he can properly lay claim to no more; for as he has all from God, so he
has all in God, and having God, he has all, and a rich portion it is, beyond
all the gold in the Indies, and all the wealth in the world; it is a more
soul-satisfying portion then the world can afford, and such a portion, that is
durable, for the devil and all his instruments cannot deprive them of it; and
this they may take along with them to a prison, to a gibbet, yea, to the utmost
parts of the earth, if they are banished thither: The men of the world would
have their portion in the world and heaven, like paper and packthred into the
bargain, but it will not be; they would carry the world upon their backs to
heaven, but it is too great a burden to carry up the hill, and too big to
enter with at the strait gate: The only way to make the best advantage of the
world, is to take Christ's counsel, Luke 16.9. make your selves friends of the
unrighteouss mammon, that when they fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations: this is the way to send the world before us to heaven, or to
improve it to the best advantage; testify your faith (says the Apostle) by
your works; improve these talents well, and God will reward you for it, riches
are not properly ours, but Gods; but if we make sure the Jewel, we shall have
the box; if we buy the wine, we shall have the cask; and if we seek first the
kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, all other things shall be
added, Mat. 6.33. most men begin at the wrong end, they make sure the world,
and think then, all is safe, and heaven sure; but would they make heaven sure,
riches should not be wanting: but most men think that scraping and keeping
together is the way to be rich, but the holy Ghost teaches us, that it is
giving and laying out is the way: Solomon tells us, he that gives to the poor,
lends to the Lord, and he will repay him: Pro. 19.17. and he that gives to the
poor shall not lack, Pro. 28.27. so that not getting but giving is the way to
wealth; but he shall have judgment without mercy, that will show no mercy:
Jam. 2.13. rich men are Gods stewards, he trusts them with his storehouse, to
give their fellow servants their meat in due season, and blessed is that
servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing, Mat. 24.46. but if
instead of feeding them, they feed themselves, and eat and drink with the
drunken, and beat their fellow servants, their Lord shall come when they are
not aware, and shall give them their portion with hypocrites, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth: but all places are too full of such evil
servants, and so is hell too; such dust-heaps are found in every corner, but
those unmercifull men shall have their portion with the devil and the damned,
Mat. 25.34. when the charitable Christian shall have a portion in glory; we are
all Gods servants, and have some talents or other to improve in his service to
his glory, which if we do, we shall not be without our reward; there is none
(says God) shuts the door of my house for naught, or kindles a fire upon my
altar for naught, Mal. 1.10. he has lent us our riches, and yet if we improve
them and employ them as we ought, they will become our own, and we shall send
them to heaven before us, where they will be made up into a crown for us; this
is the only good they can do the soul, but whatsoever is not thus improved is
lost, yea, worse then lost; for it will be put upon our account, and required
of us when we give an account of our stewardship: It is a great mistake, and so
it will be found, when men think they have an absolute propriety in what they
enjoy, and may dispose of it at their pleasure: Christ bids the young man, sell
all that he had and give to the poor, and he should have treasure in heaven,
Mat. 19.21. and rich men are charged to be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to give, that they may lay up for themselves a good
foundation against the evil day, 1 Timothy 6.16. etc. had rich men but Moses eye,
to see the wealth of heaven, and the worth of it, it were not hard for them to
make such a choice as he did; worldlings if they could have heaven without
labor or cost, they would accept of it; if not, they will not buy it at so
dear a rate; but Christians say, as Mephibosheth, let Zibah take all, so I may
enjoy the king: oh my soul, here is riches worth laboring for, thou can not
buy this gold at too dear a rate, the world thou may, and many do with the
loss of the soul: here thou can not be disappointed, whatever rate thou setst
upon this treasure, it is ten thousand times better: lay hold upon this, make
heaven sure to thy self, improve the world to a spiritual advantage, then will
thy riches increase as the oil in the cruse, or like the bread in Christ's
hands, or the water in a spring; thy good works will follow thee to heaven,
when the world will leave her dearest minions: oh my God, let it be so, say
amen to my prayer, let me have thee, and I have all things necessary.

Upon men's misery, labor, and pains.
73. Med.
WHen I considered that man that was the chief of Gods workmanship, and next to
the angels the most glorious creature of the whole creation, yea, in his
creation was made little lower then the angels, and clothed with honor and
dignity, Psalm. 8.5. and was made Lord over the works of Gods hands, Genesis 1.26.
yea, God created him in his own image, all these inferior creatures were made
for his sake, and for his use and service; he was their little Lord, yea, the
angels themselves are ministering spirits, sent out for the good of those that
love God, Heb. 1.14. the saints are the Church, the spouse, the bride the
members of Christ, and so seem to be in nearer union to him then the angels
themselves; some think the devils envied this, and so fell from their own
station: thus you see, how man in the creation was exalted to honor: but on
the other side, I considered, how man above all the rest of the creatures was
more subjected to misery, labor, and slavery, yea, vexation of spirit, then
any other, and many of them even worn out with carking cares, and fretting
fears, with moiling, toyling, spending labor, which tires their bodies, breaks
their sleep in the night, when other creatures which were made for their use,
and are their servants, rest secure and free from daily cares and nightly
troubles, many kinds of them are preserved without their pain, all without
their care, or forecast; the masters care for some, and maintain them, and God
maintains the rest; but it is not so with man; he must eat his bread in the
sweat of his brows, how true is that of Joh, chap. 5.7. man is born to labor
as the sparks fly upwards, all things are full of labor (says Solomon) Eccl.
1.8. molestation and misery meet us at every turn, the world (says one) is a
sea of glass, for it is vanity, mingled with fire, (for it is vexation), Rev.
4.6. man is in a restless condition, tossed to and fro like a football, and
here he has no resting place; when I sought out the cause of this, why this
noble creature should be thus subjected to trouble, and sorrow, more then any
others; I quickly found out, it was Gods will and man's desert, for had man
continued in his primitive purity, he had never had an aching head or aching
heart, or loss or cross, or any thing to molest him; but when he had sinned, God
pronounced this sentence upon him, in the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy
bread; which law never yet was reversed: The beasts of the field never
transgrest their makers law, as man has done, and therefore never had such
punishment threatened as man had, though it is conceived they are sufferers for
man's sin, Romans 8.20. had not sin gone before, trouble and misery had never
followed; the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life; and
as sin, brought death, so also sorrow into the world, what cause then has poor
man to hugg such a viper in his bosom, that feels so much the sad effects of
it, which is the cause of all temporal, spiritual and eternal miseries, which
without repentance will cause not only a separation of the soul from the body,
but also of the body and soul from God: I considered also, that though man were
subjected to more care and trouble then other creatures were, yet if he did his
work well, he was promised a greater reward, and better wages then any other,
he shall be well paid for his pains, and who will not take pains for profit? it
is fit that man that is promised a kingdom for one days work, should work
harder then he that has but ordinary wages, yea, God has gracious ends in
these afflictions to his people, by this means he lets them know, their rest is
not here, and weans them from the love of the world which would undo them, who
otherwise would with Peter say, it is good being here: we are travelers, and
cannot expect rest in a journey or security in an enemies country; the
Samaritans would not entertain Christ, because his face was as though he would
go to Jerusalem, Luke 9.53. and the world will not entertain Gods people,
because they have their faces he^^enward: Christ tells us, in the world we
shall have tribulation, John. 16.33. this is not a paradise, but a purgatory to
the saints; we may say of this, as one does of the Straits of Megellan, when a
man is there, which way soever he bends his course the wind will be against
him; but Christ has overcome the world, and will subject this enemy to us: It
is a great mistake to take this for our rest, yet many do, and rest here, and
it is all the rest they are like to have, and a miserable portion it is to
those that have the most of it; there are none here live free from misery,
though some sinfully pass away their time idly; sorrow will follow sin, as the
shadow does the substance; and if any can patch up a miserable happiness here,
yet it is short-lived, and they know not whether it will be a day older; when
death comes eternal miseries will take date: oh my soul, art thou under
suffering, and have no free-day, do they come like waves of the sea, one in the
neck of another, thank thy self and thy sin for it; these are the fruits of thy
beloved lusts; when lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when it
is finished brings forth death, Jam. 1.15. never expect to be free from
suffering, till thou be free from sin; when thou smartest by affliction avenge
thy self on thy sins, and make thy heart smart for sin, if sin be not forsaken,
thy sufferings will be more; God will make thee bend or break under his hand,
but if thy sins be hated and repented, despair not at thy troubles; it is but
the portion of Gods own people: Abel began a health, and all the saints that
ever were, are, or shall be, have pledged it round, and some have drunk very
deep, and Christ himself drunk up the very dregs of it; but if thou suffer for
righteousness sake, thou shall be sufficiently rewarded, yea, thou may
rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great will be thy reward in heaven, Mat.
5.11.12. Oh my God, thou have afflicted me less then I deserve, help me to
patience under thy hand, with correction give instruction, and let no twig of
thy rod be in vain, fit my back for the burden, and then lay on what thou
please.

On the difference between a well manured, and neglected Orchard.
74. Med.
WHen I observed the difference between a well-manured, well-ordered, and
well-husbanded orchard, and one that was slieghted, neglected, and carelessly
heeded, I observed the difference between diligence and negligence in the one,
I beheld the trees orderly ranked, not too near, nor at too great a distance,
carefully pruned, and freed from superfluous branches, suckers cleansed from
moss, and other offensive enemies, manured, dung'd, fenced from the violence of
cattle, and in a word in a comely form, and handsome to behold, and the fruit
answered expectation, and made amends for the care and cost, but the other was
neither handsome to the eye, nor profitable to the owner, lying open to the
beasts of the field, out of order, and shape; some too thick, others too thin,
overgrown with moss, suckers, cankers, and unprofitable branches, the ground
overrun with briars, brambles, nettles, docks, and other unprofitable weeds,
and the fruit thus choked, and spoiled, proved accordingly; by this I saw the
difference between a good husband and a bad: Solomon tells us, the king himself
is served by the field, Eccl. 5.9. and so doubtless he is by the orchard, but
then it must be well husbanded: Uzziah loved husbandry, 2 Chr. 26.10. the
orchard yields both meat and drink, both food and physic, profit and delight
is here to be had, but not without labor and diligence: In all labor (says
Solomon) there is profit, Pro. 14.23. that is, all honest labor, we should
work with our hands the thing that is good; some labor diligently to do
mischief, and take pains to go to hell, there is small profit in this work; and
some (as one says) do magno conatu magnus nugas ^gere, they do take great
pains to small purpose; some take as much pains to spend their estate, as
others do to get it; and more pains in the way to hell, then others in the way
to heaven; but diligence even in earthly business is doubtless a commanded
duty, and negligence is a forbidden sin, the one brings profit and the other
loss; diligence in an orchard brings in more then ordinary profit; the Apostle
commands those that will not labor that they shall not eat, 2 These. 3.10.
paradise that was man's storehouse, was his work house also; those idle persons
that have little to do, are usually set on a work by the devil, for he takes up
and employs such wanderers; those that like body-lice, live upon other men's
sweat, are not fit to live in a well-ordered commonwealth: it is an
apostatical command, that we labor with our hands, that we may be able to give
to those that need, Ephesians. 4.28. he shall be poor (says Solomon) that deals
with a slack hand, but the hand of the diligent makes rich, Pro. 10.4. doing
there must be, or the beggar will catch us by the back; it follows, he that
gathers in summer is a wise son, but he that sleeps in harvest is a son
that causes shame; he that lets the offered opportunity slip, may happily never
recover the loss; diligence usually (though not constantly) is attended with
abundance; but the sluggard shall be covered with rags, we read Pro. 24.30.
that Solomon went by the field of the sluggard, and by the vineyard of the man
void of understanding, and it was grown over with thorns, thistles also had
covered the face thereof; the stone-wall thereof was broken down; then I stood
and considered it, I looked upon it and received instruction; yet a little
sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, so shall thy
poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man, viz.
unexpectedly, and irresistably; sloth and idleness is the nurse of beggary, the
mother of misery, and the forerunner of ruin; Solomon makes some use of his
observations, a be can suck honey out of every flower and weed, but a fly
cannot, and a spiritual mind can extract good out of every object, even out of
other men's faults and follies, he can gather grapes of thorns, and figs of
thistles, and extract good out of evil; This made me raise my meditations a
little higher: I considered, if idleness be so great an hindrance to worldly
advantages, what is it then to spiritual profits? if ground not manured brings
forth briars and thorns, weeds and thistles, what will the soul bring forth, if
it be neglected: this will soon abound with sins, and vices, lusts and
corruptions, and Solomon no doubt made this spiritual use of the miscarriages
of his foolish neighbor; a godly man (as I said) will gather honey with the
be; where the wasp will not, the fly cannot, and the spider gathers poison;
for a wicked man's example is often hurtful, but to none but the wise
profitable: a wise man, with Solomon, will gather some good by others
miscarriages, and happy is he that other men's harms do make to beware: the soul
is more subject to the weeds of sin, then any field or garden can be to briars
or thorns, or other noisome things, and more diligence is required to keep it
in order, and there is more danger in the neglect: briars and thorns are not
more natural to the ground since the curse, then sin and corruption to the soul
since the fall; and as in temporals so much more in spirituals; much diligence
is required to keep things in order, and great is the advantage when it is
done: oh my soul refuse no pains, neglect no labor, heaven will make amends
for all, stub up thy sins by the root, and content not thy self to lop off the
branches, regulate thy affection, subdue thy headstrong passions, bring under
thy will, and make it submit to Gods will; set a watch over thy heart, look
well to thy words and thoughts as well as to thy actions, set a guard over thy
senses, those cinqueports, otherwise the enemy will enter; take heed of thy
company, for seldom good is gotten by ill companions; beware of Satan's
temptations, and the worlds allurements, avoid all occasions to sin, nay, all
appearances of evil, and know that for all the pains thou can take, thou
shall be rewarded, heaven will make thee amends, but the sluggard is never like
to come there; Oh my God, I have been this spiritual sluggard, it is I have
neglected my field and vineyard, and hence are all those briars, and brambles
sprung up; Lord, help me to double my diligence, and amend my pace, and so run
that I may obtain, and so fight as to conquer.

Upon a great tree springing from a small kernel.
75. Med.
WHen I beheld some great fruit trees, grown to a large stature, the persons
being yet alive that set them, of small kernels, and that not, very many years
ago, and yet are come to be trees of very great bulk and bigness, the
consideration whereof made me to contemplate the mighty power of God, that from
such contemptible beginings could produce so large a body; and that of the
small seeds of the cypress tree, such a huge bulk should so soon proceed, and
that a slender akorn should bring forth so vast a tree as some oaks are,
carrying so many tun of timber, and load of wood, as some do, this brought to
my mind the parable of the mustard seed, Mat. 13.31. where Christ tells us,
though it be the least of seeds, that it grows up to a great tree, and that
suddenly, that the fowls of of heaven lodge in the branches of it; for though
in our northern climats, it arrive not to that bigness, yet travelers speak
much of the greatness of it in those hotter Countries; our Savior Christ's
intention in this parable is to teach us, that as from this small seed proceeds
a great tree, so is also the progress of the Gospel, which though at first it
seems contemptible, yet it proves very efficatious, it is quick and powerful;
and wonderful in operation, whither the fowls of heaven, the elect resort, in
prosperity for shadow, in adversity for defense: In the promulgation of the
Gospel, from small beginnings a few poor unlearned fishermen, the Gospel was
carried as on eagles wings to the end of the earth, and in a short time subdued
potent princes, that set themselves against it, to the admiration of all, those
angels came flying with the everlasting gospel; and in the reformation, how
strangely was it carried on: Wickliff, John Hus. and Jerome of Prague, these
paved a way and opened a door to Luther, who with a few more, withstood the
whole popish interest, and so prevailed against them, that those locusts that
came out of the bottomless pit, were never able by their smoke to darken the
light of the Gospel again, but it brake forth more and more to the perfect day,
even to all men's admiration: in many places it was carried on against their
princes consent, yea, contrary to his will; in Holland, France, Germany,
Scotland, and many more, so wonderfully did this little grain spread; and in
this Nation by what unexpected means was the Reformation carried on, by a
prince which writ against it, and set himself against it; and yet was
instrumental in Gods hand to carry on the work: God can make use of whom he
pleases to do his work: Heathen Cyrus must be his servant to carry on his
design: in Athanasius his time, how did God vindicate his truth by small means
against a world of Arians, and made him victorious against them all, the word
of God is powerful, as a two edged sword, to divide between the joints and the
marrow, Heb. 4.12. By the growth of this mustard seed, is signified, not only
the spreading abroad of the Gospel in the first promulgation of it, but also of
the growth of grace in a Christians heart, which though it have a small
beginning, yet it increases wonderfully, Job. 8.7. the later end does greatly
increase; when the new creature grace is formed in the soul by the finger of
God, it grows like the child in the womb, at the first it is an Embrio,
imperfect, and unshaped, but is perfected by the degrees, the heart, the brain,
the liver, and vital parts, and in process of time, the bones, sinews,
arteryes, nerves, and other parts, covered with flesh, and skin, till it come
to perfection, and when it is born an infant, it grows up to maturity, till it
comes to a perfect man; when God speaks a word secretly and suddenly to the
heart, it sticks close, and never leaves till the work be done, and the new
creature grace be formed, it makes a wonderful change in the man; it is like
Elijahs mantle when thrown upon Elisha, which made him leave his oxen and run
after him, and desired only to kiss his father and mother, and he would follow
him: the prophet said, go back again, what have I done to thee? 1 Kin. 19.19.
but he had done that which made him, that he would not forsake him, till he was
taken up to heaven, and remained a prophet to his dying day; when God speaks
home to the heart, the work is done, when Christ calls Peter and Andrew, James
and John, they leave all to follow him, Mat. 4.18. etc. with his word there
went forth a secret power, inclining them to follow; the woman of Samaria left
her pitcher, and Matthew his tole-book, and Zacheus his Sicamore tree, yea, half
of his goods at Christ's call, when God speaks to the heart, it sticks close,
and never leaves till a through reformation be wrought, it turns a man from a
lion to a lamb, and changes a persecuting Saul to a preaching Paul: The
smoking flax shall not be quenched, nor the bruised reed shall not be broken,
till he bring forth judgment into victory; Mat. 12.20. it is not the strong
oaks only but the bruised reeds Christ cherishes; he despises not the day of
small things; the lest spark of fire may be cherished into a flame, and the
least true grace will be growing, the very pantings after Christ, and
unsatisfaction without him, are highly accounted of by him; the earthquake made
such an heartquake in the Jailer, that he cries out, what shall I do to be
saved? and the preaching of Peter to those that put Christ to death, reached to
their heart, and nothing would serve till they knew how they should be saved:
so powerful is the word when set on by God upon the heart: oh my soul, though
the Church of God be brought low, despair not yet, it has been so in former
times, yet recovered, and Christ has told thee, the gates of hell shall never
prevail against it: God will yet say to these dry bones, live; and if thy
graces be at an under, despair not, if it be true, though but as a grain of
mustard seed, it will spring; if thou art but smoking flax thou shall not be
quenched; if a bruised seed, thou shall not be broken; oh my God, blow upon
that spark thou have given me, that it be not extinguished, remove the ashes of
corruption that it may appear.

Upon a crab-tree afterward grafted.
76. Med.
OBserving one tree in the orchard wild by nature, which though it had the
same husbandry with the rest, dressed, and pruned by the same hand, dug and
dunged as the others were, though it grew in as fat a soil, and was refresht
with the same sun, and watered with the same showers, yet still it brought
forth sour and unpleasant fruit; and neither art, nor labor could alter it,
till I caused it to be grafted, and so changed the nature of it, and then the
same means used made it answer our expectation; this made me to consider that
this was the very reason why there was so much difference between persons that
live under the same means of grace, under the same Ministry, enjoying the same
Ordinances, sit in the same sear, live in the same house; yea, he in the same
bed, yet some bare good fruits, some bad, some sweet and some sour, sure the
fault is not in the means but in the men; I have read of Melancthon, that when
he came to preach the gospel, he preached with such convincing arguments, and so
much Scripture light, that he was persuaded that he could have convinced any
man, but after long trial he found the contrary, and was fain to confess that
the old devil was too cunning for young Melancthon: I have often wondered how
drunkards, swearers, adulterers, or other debauched sinners could sit under the
powerful means of grace, and have hellfire flasht in their faces, and never
startle at it, when both the Scripture and verse has been quoted, where they
were excluded heaven, and yet they sit as unconcerned; but when I considered,
Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God that gives the increase, my
wonder ceast: man can but speak to the ear, but God speaks to the heart, the
same fun when it shines upon a garden of herbs, makes it smell more
oderiferously, but when it shines upon a dunghill it maks it smell more
fulsomly, the fault is not in the sun, but in the dunghill, the same sun
softens wax, and hardens clay; when the sun shines, and the rain falls upon a
fruitful pasture, it makes it more fruitful, but when upon the heath in the
desert, it is little the better; The reason why one bears good fruit, and
another bad, under the same enjoyment, is, the one is ingrafted into Christ
another not, but grows upon the stock of nature; all the watering, dunging, and
manuring in the world will not make a thorn bring forth grapes, or a thistle
figs, Mat. 7.16. A good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit, nor a bad tree good,
so that the tree is known by his fruit; I am the vine, (says Christ) and ye
are the branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, shall bring forth much
fruit; for without me ye can do nothing; John. 15.5. A Christian that is
grafted into Christ, is like the Egyptian fig tree, that is said to bear fruit
seven times in the year, or like the lemmon-tree, that ever and anon sends
forth new lemmons: When a man abides in the stock of nature, he can bring forth
no savoury fruit to God; if the fountain be polluted, the streams cannot be
clear; if the heart be bad, the life cannot be good; if the lungs be infected,
the breath will stink; of such as these, God says, their vine is the vine of
Sodom and of the field of Gomorrha, their grapes are grapes of gall and their
clusters are bitter, Deuteronomy. 32.32. vitis non vinifera (says one) sed vene
infera: the vine is the evil nature, and the grapes are the wicked works; they
hatch cockatrice-eggs, and weave spiders webs, Isa. 59.5. But when they are
ingrafted in the true vine, they have sap and nourishment from the root, then
the buds of good desires and the blossoms of good resolutions spring forth,
and after that the fruit of good works; other professors are but like the Ivy
that adheres to, and has some shelter and support from the oak, but they stand
upon their own root, and bear their own fruit; unregenerate men are hammering
out their own happiness, and like the spider, are climbing by a thread of their
own spinning; they live upon themselves, trade for themselves, and attribute
all to themselves, and have no higher end then themselves; for water can ascend
no higher then the fountain head, but all this will fail them, for it is not
Christ but a gracious soul, as it receives sap and vigor from Christ, so it
bears fruit to Christ, and as it receives all from Christ, so it will draw out
all for him, heart, and hand and tongue, and all shall be set a work for him;
whatever they do or whatever they suffer, they can say, propter te propter te
Domine, when others sacrifice to their own nets, and burn incense to their
drags, because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous, Hab.
1.16. a Christian cries out with the Church, not unto us Lord, not unto us, but
to thy name be the praise: oh my soul, what fruit do thou bear? is it good or
bad, sweet or sour, sound or rotten? have thou thy nourishment from Christ, or
from the stock of nature? by their fruits (says Christ) you shall know them;
and thus may thou know thy self, whether thou be in the true, or the wild
vine: are thy grapes sweet or sour? or art not thou barren after all this
manuring? if thou be barren expect the sentence, cut him down, why cumbers he
the ground? Luke 13.7. trees that are not for fruit are for fire; and if thy
fruit be not good, thou may expect the like doom, Mat. 3.10. it must be good,
quoad fontem, proceeding from the spirit of God, and quoad finem, as aiming at
the glory of God: see what God intends to do with his vineyard, that he had
hedged in, and manured, when it brought forth wild grapes, Isay. 5.2. etc. he
resolved to make it a desolation; if thou bring not forth good fruit to
maturity, it will not be long before he will lay down his basket, and take up
his axe, thou will be condemned as well for not using, as for abusing thy
talent; oh my God, am I implanted into Christ or no? I may well fear I am yet
upon the stock of nature, I bear so little fruit, and so bad: Lord, ingraft me
into Christ, if I be not; if I be, Lord, purge me that I may bring forth more
fruit.

Upon the pruning of a tree.
77. Med.
WHen I observed some suckers in a fruit-bearing tree, which were not only
fruitless themselves, but robbed the tree of her nourishment, and rendered it
the less fruitful, for what should have fed the rest of the branches fed those
luxuriant boughs, which shot up on high, and with an aspiring top, overlooked
their more fruitful brethren, methought these resembled a sort of professors in
our times that spend themselves in leaves and shows, and have proud aspiring
thoughts of themselves, and overtop, and overtalk their fruitful brethren, and
brow-beat them as if not fit for their society, and yet they are very barren of
fruit, but are best at words, and shows: upon this observation I caused these
boughs to be taken away, that the sap might return to its old course, and sound
afterward when the tree was cleansed, and pruned from these, and other
unprofitable boughs and branches flourish better, brought forth more and bigger
fruit, this put me in mind that the great husbandman deals thus by his trees,
Joh. 15, 1.2.3. etc. I am the vine, my father is the husbandman, every branch
in me that bears not fruit be takes away, and every branch that bears
fruit, he purges it that it may bring forth more fruit: some luxuriant
branches, rotten boughs, raw grapes, must feel the knife, and those that
overshadow the rest, and yield them less fruitful; some aspiring branches he
takes away, the gumm of pride, and the moss of formality (says one) but
dresses, supports, shelters, and secures those that bear fruit: hypocrites are
here said to be in Christ, by profession, or in their own judgment, or the
judgment of charity, when they rather adhere to him, then in here in him, for
those that are really in him shall never be cut off, of all those that his
father has given him, he will not lose one; my father (says he) is stronger
then all, and none can plack them out of my fathers hands; but there are some,
as I said before, that only adhere ^o Christ, as the Ivy to the oak, but stand
upon their own legs, grow upon their own root, and bear their own fruit, and
only seek support and shelter here, these shall be taken away, and they may
without deformity, they only adhere to him as a wooden leg cleaves to the body,
but is no part of it, receives neither life nor heat nor influence from the
head, or heart; they are like a pole fastened in the earth but is not rooted, or
like a wen or ulcer or other excression that may be taken away without loss,
but as in fruit-bearing trees there is need of clensing from moss, cankers and
other hindrances, and encumbrances, so the best Christians as well as the best
society, had need of the pruning-hook, yea of purging, bleeding, outting, that
they may bring forth more fruit; there are in the best many warts, or wens, or
deformed ulcers, that may be taken away without damage, and the causes
removed; Christ's vines must be trimmed, dressed, cleansed, and supported;
nothing requires more supporting, more cutting then a vine, that the sap
nourish not superfluous branches and leaves, and it is better bleed then burn,
and be cut then wither; God will have nothing shade or hinder his fruit: we see
by this the benefit of affliction, and that there is no cause to quarrel God,
if he do let us blood, or take away the cause of some excrescence; all his
pruning, dressing, cutting is little eenough, and sometimes all will not do:
see it in his own vineyard, Isay. 5.1, 2. etc. what could I have done more for
my vineyard that I have not done, yet when I looked for grapes behold wild
grapes, and thereupon he threatens to take away the fence, and lay them waste,
and break down the wall that it may be trodden down, and lay it waste that it
shall neither be pruned nor dug, but may bear briars and thorns, and that he
will command the clouds that they shall not rain any more upon it; now this
vineyard is there said to be the house of Israel, and Judah was his pleasant
plant: I wish England that God has so long watered and manured, ly not under
this severe threatening, God has done much for his vineyard, and many
vine-dressers he has sent amongst them, and many an unprofitable branch has
he cut off, and yet great need there is of pruning still, I know not that any
nation under heaven, has been better manured, nor any nation that has brought
forth worse fruit, yet has God at the intreatance of his vine-dressers,
forborne to out them down, and oh how happy are that people that have such to
intercede for them, but God will not always be entreated, his patience will be
outworn, they may provoke him so long till there will be no remedy, there is a
time when he will not hear, yea, that he will say, pray not for this people for
they are ripe for judgments, then will he lay down his basket, and take up his
axe and say, his spirit shall not always strive with man, Shiloe was his house,
but he forsook it, the temple of Jerusalem was his habitation but he left it,
Judah was his pleasant plant, but he has forsaken it; he did walk among the
seven golden candlesticks in the Churches of Asia, but he has removed those
candlesticks, and the Lord grant he may never give England a bill of divorce;
oh my soul, art thou a barren branch, then may thou fear the pruning hook, if
thou be a barren tree thou may fear the axe, and the fire is like to be thy
end; if thou bear but a little fruit, if God spare thee thou may expect
cutting and pruning by affliction; it is better bleed then burn, answer Gods
ends in his afflicting thee, bring forth more fruit, if he take any thing from
thee it is but what thou can well spare, yea what fed some excrescence, and
rendered thee more useless: oh my God, use me as thou will, only cut me not down
for the fire; our me and prune me at thy pleasure, but forsake me not, nor lay
me waste.

Upon suckers in a fruit-bearing tree.
78. Med.
FRom those suckers before observed in a fruit-bearing tree, I had also this
following meditation, for observing how they grew rank by the nourishment that
should have fed the tree, and loftily lift up the head above them, and sucked
that sap that should have made other branches to bear; and as they were
unprofitable themselves, so they rendered the rest almost useless; I thought
they much resembled some new upstart opinions which some unwary professors
espouse to themselves, and because they differ from others, they therefore
think themselves more holy then their neighbors, and hold their heads higher,
and verily believe growing in opinion, is growing in grace: In Arragon there
were some heretics who called themselves the illuminati, as if they only had
been in the light, and all the world besides had been in darkness, the
Gnostics would be the only knowing men, the Manichees thought whatsoever they
taught was food from heaven, and the Family of Love boast of their Evangelium
regni, and of late the Ranters and Quakers boast of the infallible conduct of
the spirit; Now those opinions are ofttimes the brats of their own brain, and
many times pernicious errors, or at least unprofitable things; or matters of
no great concernment, yet they being thus espoused they suffer these opinions
to suck all the sap that should maintain the vitalls of Religion, that the
whole tree is thereby rendered useless and unprofitable: How many are there in
our age that might have brought God much glory, and his Church much good, who
have set themselves with might and main, and spent their time, and their
strength, and laid out their zeal, and all for the promoting their own opinion,
perhaps an error, or at best but some lesser disputable truth; perhaps about
some circumstance of worship, when in the mean time the very fundamentals of
religion are neglected, and the very vitals languish for want of nourishment,
for seldom do you see a wrangling Christian eminent in the power of godliness;
Many men when they have espoused an opinion, make provision to maintain it,
they subject not their opinions to the rule, but bring the rule to them, and
make it truckle under them, for it is victory and not truth that many seek, and
therefore they spend their time and strength this way, yea, shut their eyes
against all that makes not for them; they are as zealous for their opinion, as
if the whole of religion consisted in it, and as if they could hardly be
Christians which were not of their mind, when perhaps for sixteen hundred
years they cannot find a man of their judgment, and all this while
forgetting, that the power of godliness, and an holy life is the main of
religion; for whatever is in the brain, if this be not in the heart, all is
worth nothing; these men's knowledge floating in the brain, makes them
top-heavy, but by reason of some obstructions, their knowledge sinks not down
into, nor seasons the heart, or the life: Many are like the two men in the
fable, that contended about the shadow of the ass they had found, who should go
in it in a hot day, till at last while they contended, the ass got loose, and
escaped; or like the dog in the fable, that catching at the shadow lost the
substance; so these contend about trifles, and neglect the main; they are like
children that have the rickets, the head grows too big for the body, the head
thrives but the whole body pines; they spend so much of their strength and zeal
for externals, that they neglect the internals; they have so much zeal for, or
against ceremonies, that they neglect the substance; yet mistake me not, my
design is not to make men careless in lesser points, but more careful in
greater: I would not have them think any sin small, or to neglect any known
duty, but I would have them proportion their zeal according to the weight of
the matter, and not spend it all upon lesser matters, and neglect the main
concerns: I would have no man neglect his little finger, yet would I have him
in the first place secure his head, and heart; he may be a man, if he want his
little finger, but not without his head and his heart; he may be a Christian
though he err about the modes and circumstances of worship, but he cannot
without holiness and sincerity: some Christians are like the Salamander always
in the fire of contention, but these men's graces rather then corruptions are
like to be burnt: I like not those men that moddle religion in their own brain,
and make their own conceptions the center of unity; and like Procrustes make
his own bed fit all comers; Let all things (says the Apostle) be done decently
and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. a necessary rule, but so extremely wrackt, that I
conceive through men's corruption, it has produced more indecency and disorder
then any one Scripture besides; the Papists and others making this the
foundation of all their needless ceremonies: but to return to the point in
hand, my desire and design is to persuade men to maintain the vitalls of
Religion, in the first place, and let the strength of their zeal be laid out
here, and for lesser points, if disputable, let every man be satisfied in his
own conscience, and grant some allowance to others that differ in their
judgments, till they themselves are infallibly sure that they hold no errors:
take Christ's counsel, Mat. 7.1. judge not that you be not judged, for with what
judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with what measure ye mete, it shall
be measured to you again: many men are quick-sighted abroad, but blind at
home; read also the Apostles counsel, Romans 14.1, 2, 3. etc. Oh my soul, spend
not thy time and strength in trifles, when thou have other work to do, let thy
greatest zeal be laid out on matters of greatest concernment, maintain the
vitalls of religion, and that will maintain thee; do not dote upon the brats of
thy own brain, neither censure those that differ from thee in cicumstantials;
love Christ wherever thou see him, though in one of another judgment; Lord,
make me upright in the main, and to employ and improve all my strength for thee.

Upon a fair but fruitless tree.
79. Med.
WHen I saw a fair and large spreading tree, that overtopt, and overlookt all
the rest, that had a flourishing head, and a promising show, and gave great
hopes of fruit to all the beholders, but drawing near, as Christ did to the
leavy fig tree, Mat. 21.19. expecting fruit, I found none; his whole strength
was spent in bringing forth leaves, when others that were less promising were
richly laden with fruit: so apt are we to mistake, if we judge at a distance;
When I had seriously considered it, I thought this tree did fitly resemble some
high-flown professor that makes a great show in the world, and seems like Saul
higher by the head then others are, and happily disdains them, as not fit for
their society; for oftentimes hypocrites do so by their poor brethren called
weak Christians: These you may frequently hear commending their own seize
and their own enjoyments, their knowledge gifts, and their communion with God,
and speaking of their holy raptures, their assurance, and such like; and think
they are not Christians that have not indubitable evidenee of their salvation,
when others ly under the hatches, under fears and doubts, complaining under the
sense of their sin, the hardness of their hearts, under their wants and other
spiritual distempers, the load of corruption that lies upon them, their want of
communion with God, and fellowship with Jesus Christ, the want of assurance,
and such like; having the sun of righteousness often clouded and hid from their
sight: but when I have come a little nearer to them, and more heedfully
observed their course of life, I saw that many of these great confidents, bear
little more then leaves, and that where there was so much of the tongue, there
seemed to be but little of the heart, and their religious duties, especially in
their family were cold enough, and answered not to their confident braggs; That
those doubting Christians were more constant and spiritual in their
performances; That their lives and conversations were more holy toward God,
and more righteous toward men, then the others were, who bare more leaves, but
less fruit: Upon this Observation, I thought these fitly resembled the Pharisee
and the Publican, Luke 18.9. etc. the one brags of his worth, the other is
ashamed of his duties; the one comes with confidence into Gods presence, but
the other with fear, but Christ tells us, that the Publican was the better man,
and better welcome; all is not gold that glisters; hypocrisy may lodge in a
self-confident breast, and sincerity under a threadbare coat, amidst many
doubtings; neither is it always safe to judge of a man's integrity by his
tongue, a confident bragger is not always to be believed, the emptiest barrel,
makes the greatest sound, and the worst spoak in the cart we say creaks first:
It is the aspiring ear of corn that is most like to be blasted, when those that
hang the head are usually most fruitful, it is the humble self-denying
Christian that bears most fruit to God, and is likeliest to be most useful in
his generation; God dwells in the high and holy heavens, with him also that is
of a contrite heart, to revive the spirit of the humble: A hypocrite holds
himself to be the whole piece, and all others but a remnant; he takes his poor
counter, and sets it down for a thousand pound; he prizeth himself above the
market, but he reckons without his host, and therefore must reckon twice; the
seed of grace seldom prospers upon mountain tops, and high-grounds, but in low
valleys, upon the stalk of self-denial: The more fruit is upon any tree, the
more it inclines to the earth; and the more upright and aspiring, the more
barren; it is the valley and not the tops of mountains that bring forth the
best corn and grass, and other fruits; The greatest braggers are not always the
richest, wisest, or the most learned men, many high flown professors are like
the nighingale (as one says) vox and praeterea nihil, and those that have
least, speak oftentimes loudest; but it is not the best man that has the best
lungs, but the best heart; the strongest Christian is most sensible of his own
wants and weaknesses, as the wisest Philosopher could say, I know nothing but
that I know nothing, but the bragadocia discovers his own ignorance; where the
river runs quietly, the ford is deepest; but where it makes most noise, it is
most shallow; I dare not then prefer an over-confident bragger before an humble
Christian; I had rather judge by their life then by their language; there are
many that talk like Christians, but I love to see men walk like Christians; a
parat may learn humane language, but not humane action; when the actions are so
dissonant to the words, I cannot think the heart and tongue agrees: oh my soul,
rather be good then seem so, rather bear fruit then leaves; for it is fruit and
not leaves, substance and not a shadow, thy Lord expects: it is good works as
well as good words, intentions as well as pretenses he requires; let another
praise thee and not thy own mouth; a stranger and not thy own lips, Pro. 27.2.
let a man do worthyly in Ephrata, and he will be famous in Bethelem; he need
not be his own trumpeter: honor follows virtue, as the shadow does the
substance; those that honor God, God will honor, but those that despise him,
shall be lightly esteemed: set the crown upon Gods head, and he will set the
garland upon thine; let thy own works, but not thy own words praise thee, Pro.
31.31. do well and thou needst not with Jehu proclaim thy own praises; if thy
conversation give light, doubtless it will not be hid: Oh my God, let me stand
approved in thy sight, and I matter not what man says of me: give me truth in
the inward parts, make me sound at the heart, give me sincerity, and I shall
then bear thee fruit.

Upon a great tree spoiling others under it.
80. Med.
WHen I considered the forementioned tree, that made such a pompous and
promising show, and was grown top-heavy, and yet fruitless and worthless, when
many smaller shrubs yielded a plentiful increase: I considered it further, and
observed this was not all, for I plainly saw that it was an enemy to all that
grew near it, and none prospered about it; for in overshaddowing them or
dropping upon them, it rendered all that were within the reach of it either
barren or at least not so fruitful, as those that grew at a greater distance:
This Observation helped me to the following Meditation: I thought this tree did
much resemble many great men, which make a pompous show, and make a great coil,
and keep a great stir, and bustle in the world, and yet bear little or no good
fruit, but it is bitter, sour or unsavory; they spread abroad their branches
far wide, fill a country, have many under them, that might bear much fruit,
but they drop such a poysonful influence upon them, that they neither bear no
fruit, or worse then none, bad fruit; for they can seldom prosper, or bring
any good fruit to maturity, neither is there any good tree or flower can live
near them; we may say of them, and commonly of those that live under them, as
God does of the like, Deu. 32.32. etc. their vine is the vine of Sodom, and of
the fields of Gomorrha; their grapes are grapes of gall, and their clusters are
bitter, their wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom of asps: for
what can you observe from many great ones, and those that depend upon them, but
swearing, drinking, gluttony, adultery, Sabbath-breaking, oppressing,
persecuting, and an enmity of the power of godliness, and there shall not a
godly man live under them, nor within their reach, if they can help it, and
they do so poison all about them, that the very earth it self is cursed for
their sakes, and by their means toads and serpents, brambles and briars, those
fruits of the curse, can only prosper near them, and harbor under their
shadow; and yet alas, still they are but men, though great men, and signify no
more then men, and like men they shall die, and death will level them with the
meanest of men: great men are indeed like capital Letters, they bear a great
bulk, and possess a great room, and have a more pompous dress, and people are
apt more to look upon them, and children to admire them, and yet in
signification they are but the same with the rest, and the other have the same
sound, though these commonly have the precedence and leading, yet they are but
letters, and so are the rest, and stripped out of their dress are called by the
same name; these are but letters, and great ones are but men, they are indeed
like the foreman on the Jury, they have liberty to speak first, but their vote
is but a vote, they make a great bustle in the world for a time, and act some
great man's part, but when the play is done, and they are disrobed, alas, it is
but poor man still, and when the Lord of the vineyard comes and finds them
barren, he never regards their bulk or beauty, but bids, cut them down, why
cumber they the ground? Luke 13.7.9: those that are not for fruit are for the
fire; the herb of grace cannot grow near them, nor within their reach, they
cast forth a poysonfull influence round about, a godly man cannot live by them,
but he is poisoned by them, or by persecution driven from them, but their
damnation sleeps not, 2 Pet. 2.3. I know some great trees are good trees,
trees of righteousness that bear abundantly, and these are to be prized, these
are a shelter, a shelter from the storm, and to these the godly fly for refuge;
such was David, Josiah, Hezekiah, and several others; Abraham, Job, and good
Obadiah, but these are like black swans, seldom seen, yet some such we have in
our days: the most of our great ones bear poisonous fruit, that infects those
that taste of it, some more moderate bear only leaves, and it is well they bear
no worse; a bare fruitless profession they make, but as they do no good, so
they do little hurt; some bear a little fruit, and a little makes a great show
in a great person, but the most bear none or worse then none, but prove like a
blazing star, and threaten ruin to the beholders: those that have most,
oftentimes do least, but it is pity Gods good gifts should be thus abused, an
account of those talents shall one day be required; as the Pharisees had their
learning hanged in their light, which of the Scribes and Pharisees have
believed on him? Joh, 7.48. sapientes sapienter in infernum descendunt: there
are none so deep in hell as knowing men; so rich men have too great a clog at
their heels to run the ways of Gods commandments; Christ tells us how hard a
thing it is to be great and good, for it is easier (says he) for a Camel to go
through a needles eye, then for a rich man to enter heaven, Mat. 19.24. Shimei
seeking his servant lost himself, and most men seeking riches, pleasures, and
honors which should be their servants, lose their souls: Let such read that
flaming text, James 5.1, 2. etc. go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for the
misery that shall come upon you, your riches are corrupted, and your garments
are moath-eaten; your gold and your silver is cankred, and the rust of them
shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: ye
have heaped treasure together for the last day: ye have lived in pleasure on
the earth, and been wanton, ye have nourished your hearts as in a day of
slaughter, ye have condemned and killed the just, and he could not resist you:
did men but consider the temptation that riches exposes them to, and the
dangerous events that often follow, they would not so eagerly pursue them, nor
so greedily gape after them, oh my soul, bless God thou art freed in a good
measure from those temptations that many others lie under, and think thy own
condition best; had thou enjoyed more, it might have been thy portion, had
thou had stronger temptation and more baits, thou might have swallowed the
hook as others have done, thou have less to answer for: oh my God, give me
neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient, give me food and
raiment, and let me be content, but let not these things be my portion.

Upon an old, yet fruitful tree.
81. Med.
WHen I saw an old tree that promised little yet was richly laden, and had not
only more fruit, then those that were younger, and made a greater show, but the
fruit was better also, it exceeded not only in quantity but also in quality,
the other trees; this Observation made me think this tree resembled much an old
Christian, an ancient professor, that usually bears more and better fruit then
the younger sort, their judgments being ripened and mellowed by their
experiences, and usually they are not so tart and sour, so sensorious and
self-wilde, as the younger are, who are apt to condemn all that are not just of
their judgments, though otherwise they hold forth as much of Christ and a
Gospel conversation as they do themselves; This Consideration brought to my
mind what the Psalmist says of such, 92. Psalm. 12, 13, 14. the righteous
shall flourish like a palm tree, he shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon, those
that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of our
God, they shall still bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and
flourishing: those that draw sap from Christ, and are grafted into him, must
need bud and bloom and bring forth fruit: these are the trees planted by the
rivers of water, that bring forth their fruit in their season, Psalm. 1.3. for
as ancient men, so especially ancient Christians have their judgment ripened
by their experience, and mellowed by time, others may be, and usually are more
heady, rash and sensorious, and have a more hot, and burning zeal, but it is
not according to knowledge; now zeal without knowledge (as one says) is like
mettle in a blind horse, which ofttimes serves but to break his own or the
riders neck, their zeal is like that of the Apostles, James and John, Luke
9.54. who would have called for fire from heaven to consume the inhospitable
Samaritans, as Elijah did, but this wild fire was never kindled on Gods
hearth, as Elijahs was; this became not a gospel frame of spirit; but this
younger fruit is not so pleasant to the taste; we may say of this, as Christ
speaks of wine, Luke 5.39. no man having drunk old wine, presently desires
new, for (says he) the old is better; Now as age clarifies wine and ripens it,
so does experience ripen men's judgments, young professors make a great noise,
and a great show in the world, they bud and bloom, and many of them bring forth
fruit, yet is not their fruit so pleasant till it be ripened by age, and
mellowed by experience; they are more heady (as I said) and sensorious, and apt
to condemn those that cannot see with their eyes, that differ from them, though
it be in circumstantials and things of small concerns; yea perhaps disrobe them
of their graces, as if their hearts liks Jehu's were the touchstone of
sincerity, and their judgment the touchstone of truth; but ancient Christians
have learnt Christ better, and studied their own hearts more, and will yield a
grain of allowance to others, as knowing they need it themselves, and where
they see the vitals of Religion preserved, they will reach out the right hand
of fellowship, though it be to men of a contrary persuasion in lesser matters;
yea, they will love those better, and value them more then they do those of
their own persuasion, where they cannot see such evident signs of grace, but
many times in young professors a little difference about circumstantialls casts
such a mist before their eyes, that they cannot see any grace at all in their
antagonists: a grown Christian owns Christ wherever he sees him, yea, though
it be in one that has wronged him, and he verily thinks hates him, or though
it be in one that stands in his light, or in his way to preferment; there is
honorable mention made of an old disciple, Acts. 21.16. a gray headed
experienced Christian, a father, 1 John 2.13. you are they (says Christ) that
have continued with me, and I appoint unto you a kingdom as my father has
appointed unto me, Luke 22.28.29. God will reward those that are ancient
servants especially: Age should speak (says Elihu) and multitude of years
should show wisdom, Job. 32.7. It was a duty commanded by God, and yet is
incumbent upon us, to rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the
old man, Lev. 19.32. but then much more an old Christian, the hoary head is a
crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness, Pro. 16.31.
Naturalists observe the herb Cudweed which the Herbalists call herbam impiam,
whose younger branches still yield flowers to overtop the elder, such weeds
grow too rise among us, but it is an ill soil that produces them: Rehoboam
neglecting the milder and safer counsel of his grave Senators, and following
the harsher counsel of green wits, ruined himself, and lost ten of the twelve
tribes, who revolted from him; we seldom find an ancient professor apostatize
or run into errors or heresy, but it is too frequently seen in younger men,
there are many take up Religion suddenly, and in a few weeks are above their
teachers, yea, above all the Ministers in the Country, and some of them get
above Ordinances, yea, run the whole circle of errors, till they end in Athiesm
or profaness, the place where they set out: the devil deals by them as Elisha
did by the Syrians, 2 King. 6.19. he brings them to Samaria when they thought
they had been going to Dothan: he leads them to hell, and persuades them it is
the nearest way to heaven: oh my soul, let not the devil thus deceive thee, but
ask advice of the wisest counselors; own Christ wherever thou see him, and
make not thy own judgment the test to try all other men's, nor with Jehu thine
own heart the touchstone to try others: judge the tree by the fruit, not by the
leaves, and professors not by their words, but by their works; grow in grace,
as thou growest in years, so may thou be an old disciple; oh my God, make me
fruitful, and let my fruit be pleasant to thy taste, and let the last be
bitterer then the first.

Upon a leavy yet barren tree.
82. Med.
FInding a tree that at a distance showed fair, but at hand produced nothing
but leaves, when I expected better fruit, it minded me of the fruitless
figtree, mentioned Mar. 11.12. etc. that deceived even Christ himself, for he
being hungry, and seeing a figtree a far off, having leaves he came, if happily
he might find any thing thereon, and when he came to it, he found nothing but
leaves, for the time of figs was not yet, probably the time of ripe figs was
not yet, but in his necessity he would have contented himself with those that
were green, and being thus disappointed, he said, never fruit grow more upon
thee, and the figtree withered and dyed, and his Disciples marvelled, and well
they might, for no conjurer with all his skill could have done the like; me
thinks this barren tree resembles many in our times, that have a form of
godliness, but deny the power of it, 2 Timothy 3.5. they have leaves but no fruit,
a shadow but no substance; those hollow professors are like an old tree, tall
but pithless, sapless, and unsound; these men do as players in a Comedy, in
voice and gesture act divine duties, but in heart deny them; formality (as one
says) is like a bull-rush, the color fresh, the skin smooth, but within
nothing but a spungeous substance; they have a name to live, but are dead, Rev.
3.1. they cry, the temple of the Lord, when they matter not the Lord of the
temple; they content themselves with a bare name without the nature of
Christians, they draw near to God with their mouths, and honor him with their
lips, when their heart is far from him; Mat. 15.8. all their holiness is in
externals, and nothing else but a brainless head, and soulless body; they have
leaves to show, but no fruit; words but no works; a show, but no substance;
their religion lies in the tongue and brain, but never reaches the heart, nor
seasons the life, they are most in externals, little in internals; they
regulate their words and actions, but the heart is not restrained or purified;
the heat of their zeal appears chiefly, if not only, in their words, but the
heart is cold enough; they take up the easy, cheap, and safest part of duty,
but the difficult, dangerous, or costly part they meddle not with; they make a
show of what they are not, and brag of what they have not, and then they laugh
in their sleeves to think, how they have couzened and put a cheat upon the
world, they worship that God in the Church, that they matter not in the closet,
they do no religious duty without witness, happily for fear God should deny what
he has received from them; they are like rotten wood, they shine in the night,
but look upon them in the day, and you will find the cheat; they are like the
red and blew flowers in the cornfield, fine to look upon, good for little, but
to pester the corn: they are like candles they usually go out in an offensive
snuff; they are Saints abroad, and devils at home, and usually more dangerous
when they appear like Saints, then when they show themselves in their colors,
and act the devils part barefaced, but doubtless these are not the men that God
will accept, nor this is not the service he requires, he is a spirit, and will
be worshipped in spirit and in truth, yea, the father seeks such to worship
him, John 4.23.24. he calls for the heart, my son (says he) give me thy heart,
not thy tongue, or hands, but the heart; for if he have that, the rest will
follow, Pro. 23.26. as the heart is by nature, God will have none of it, till
the heart be renewed and given to the Lord, he will accept of nothing that
comes from us; he calls for the heart, and says of it, as Joseph did of
Benjamin, Genesis 43.3. ye shall not see my face without it, or as David did of
Michal, 2 Samuel 3.13. thou shall not see my face except thou bring Michal,
Saul's daughter when thou come; These men would give the Lord any thing but
the heart, and he will own nothing without it; these professors are like men in
a boat, they look one way, and row another, or like the kite that soars aloft,
towrs on high, as if they were all for heaven, and made light of all
terrestrial things, when still her eye is upon her prey, and her heart glued
to the ground, and rooted in the earth; they are like unto the peacock, they
have fine feathers, but yet is but a dunghill-bird; but these shows will not
always serve turn, God sees through their thin masks, and will ere long pluck
off their vizour, be not deceived God is not mocked; there are none can steal
to heaven in a disguise, God will know him well that shall enter there; there
is a sure guard, and without this ticket of holiness none will be admitted;
this is Christ sheep-mark, and those, and those alone that have it, shall stand
upon his right hand, at judgment: when he comes to seek fruit and finds none,
he will take up his axe; he has long, and may for a while spare the tree for
the vine-dressers sake, but his patience will not always last; he will say,
pray not for this people, for they are ripe for destruction; when the sins of
the Amorites were full, their destruction drew near; when these borrowed robes
are plucked from the stageplayers backs (for so the word hypocrite signifies)
then those that acted the parts of Kings will be found but peasants, and those
that acted the parts of honest men, will be found but cheats; indeed God has
many fans, and much of this chaff is blown away in this life; we have seen many
that appeared to be something, proved just nothing; but when Christ comes with
refiners fire, and fullers soap, who can stand before this burning? the lamps
of profession may light a man to death, near to heaven; oh my soul, thou have
made profession of Religion a long time, what fruit do thou bring forth? if
thou have nothing but tears thou, may expect that Christ shall say to thee,
as to the fruitless figtree, never fruit grow more on thee for ever; or if thy
fruit be bad, it will not be long but thou will be cut down; what cause have
thou to fear that art so sensible of so much unsavory, and rotten fruit, and of
so little that is good? up then and be doing, that thy last days may be thy
best days, and thy best wine last; oh my good God, though hypocrisy lodge in
me, let it not reign in me; give me truth in the inward parts, keep my heart
sound in thy testimonies, and I shall be safe.

Upon a dead tree.
83. Med.
OBserving a dead tree in the orchard that had neither fruit nor leaves, and so
was neither for profit nor pleasure, for fruit nor ornament, but rather an
encumbrance to the ground, and a deformity to the place, I began upon this
Observation to consider, that this was the case of many a poor dead soul
amongst us, who though planted in Gods vineyard, hedged about by his
providence, and watered with the dew of heaven, and manured by the skilfullest
vine-dressers, yet remains dead, fruitless, and useless, and has done so many
years, and has done nothing all this while but cumber the ground, and keep a
room, and did but grow worse and worse, and every day more fitter for the fire
then other, this minded me of Gods mercy and man's wickedness, Gods mercy in
sparing such unprofitable wretches, some of them 50 or 60 years together, and
all that while sending his vine-dressers to dig and dung, and manure them from
year to year, that never yielded any good fruit in their lives, and man's
wickedness that will not be won upon by all these entreaties and continued
favors, that are so hard, that neither the sun nor the rain can soften,
neither fair means nor foul can work upon them, and to this day do yet remain a
reproach to the place they live in; for sin (says Solomon) is a reproach to
any people, Pro. 14.34. when righteousness exalts a Nation: True Religion and
the power of godliness is the beauty and bulwark of a Nation, but sin is a
deformity, and an evil disease, it is the snuff that dims our candle, yea,
threatens the removal of our candlestick; Capernaum that once was lifted up to
heaven, is threatened to be cast down to hell, if a dead tree deform a
well-regulated orchard, and is such an offense that it will not be endured by
the owner, nor be suffered to stand; or if a dead carcass be so loathsome a
thing, that in a little time the nearest and dearest relations, and the most
intimate friends are weary of it, how loathsome then is a dead soul to God,
though the unsavory smell of it be not perceived by natural men; for how can
one dead man smell another? you may as well expect good fruit from a dead tree,
as any good action from a dead man, perhaps something good for the matter may
be done by a natural man, as prayer, fasting, and almsdeeds from the
Pharisees, but the manner or ends spoil all, but he that can say to dry bones,
live, can say to a dead soul, live; and he that at the first brought light out
of darkness, can enlighten a darkened understanding: The soul can act nothing
truly good, or acceptable to God, till it be taken off the stock of nature, and
planted into that generous vine Christ, then will it bear good fruit: when it
is nourished with sap from this root, it must needs germinate and bring forth,
but without this there is neither bud nor blossom: the soul by nature brings
forth briars, and brambles, thorns and thistles, weeds, and baggage, for to
these it is not dead, but only to good works; these other are the fruits of the
curse, and these will choke the good seed, and render it unprofitable; the
heart is alive to those, but dead to grace and holiness: of natural men (God
says) their vine is the vine of Sodom and of the field of Gomorrha, their
grapes are grapes of gall, and their clusters are bitter; their wine is the
poison of dragons and the cruel venime of asps: their works, yea, their best
works are pernicious; the vine is their corrupt nature, and the grapes their
evil works, which proceed from this vine; their spot is not the spot of Gods
people, Deuteronomy. 32.5. the saints have their spots, but these are not like theirs,
they are not so deeply engraven, wicked men's spots are like the Leopards, not
only in the skin but in the flesh, yea, in the very heart, and therefore can be
cured by none, but Christ the great Physician; they cannot be cured by the art
of man, or washed away by any water; the sin of the saints is but like the viper
on Paul's hand, through Gods mercy they hurt him not: how many of these dead
trees may we observe among us, yea, how few that be alive, and few bear so much
as a leaf, they make no profession of Religion at all, but deform the place
where they are, and procure a curse upon it: I fear it may be said of England
in a spiritual sense, as once it was said of Egypt, there was not a family that
there was not some dead person in it, and I fear there are very few free
amongst us, nay, are not most familyes all thus spiritually dead? and it
appears they are dead, when after twenty years dressing, pruning, watering and
manuring, and that by the most skillful husbandmen, who have spent their time,
their strength, and their lives in the work, yet they do not bring forth one
leaf, much less any good fruit; and there is none can cure them, but he that
can put life into them, and say to a dead soul, live; and can transplant them
from the stock of nature into that noble vine Christ; that they are dead is
apparent, for their souls have all the symptoms of death upon them, they have
neither heat, nor breath nor sense nor motion; if God call they hear not; if
his hand be stretched out they observe it not; if a load of sin ly upon them as
heavy as a mountain of lead, they feel it not; nor the deep gashes sin makes in
the soul: present before a dead man the bloudiest spectacle that ever was
beheld, or the pleasantest sight that ever was seen, all is one, he sees
neither the one nor the other, the roaring cannon, and the sweetest music is
all one; the sweetest savor, and the fulsomest stink, he cannot difference;
the lightest feather, and the heaviest mountain, signify the same; the sweetest
meat, and the rankest poison: and why? because he is dead; no more can a dead
soul judge of spiritual things; promises and threatenings are all alike, he is
moved neither with the one or with the other: oh my soul, this has been thy
case, thou have been spiritually dead, dead in trespasses and sins, thou have
been spiritually deaf and dumb, and blind and lame, and if it be better with
thee, bless God for it, for it was he, and not thy self put life into thee:
bring forth now fruit suitable to a tree that has life, that is transplanted
into Christ, that has had such planting, dressing, and manuring, as thou have
had, that Gods labor be not lost upon thee: oh my God, remove those
obstructions that hinder me from bearing fruit, and purge me that I may bring
forth more fruit, put life into me, and I shall live.

Upon a tree seemingly dead in winter.
84. Med.
WHen I observed in the winter-season, those trees formerly green and
flourishing, and richly laden, not with leaves only, but good fruit, but now
were stripped of all, and had neither leaf nor fruit, but looked withered, dead,
and dry, and no difference appeared between the fruitful, and the barren, yea,
scarce any between the living and the dead; yet in the spring following, when
the sun shone upon them with a more direct ray, and warm beams, and the rain
from heaven watered them, and refresht them, they revived, sprung again,
budded, bloomed, and bare fruit; I thought this did lively resemble a poor
deserted souls condition, in her widowhood, when her husband has forsaken her,
and seems to give her a bill of divorce, when the sun of righteousness is
either set upon her, clouded, or ecclipst, or at least very remote from her
sight, then with the Marigold she droops, hangs the head, and is contracted
into her self, it is then winter with her, and little difference appears
between her and a dead soul, at least in her own apprehensions: when God hides
his face from the soul, or any thing interposes between them that she cannot
see him, then is she in a languishing condition, and cries out with the spouse,
did ye see him whom my soul loves? Cant. 3.3. she cannot hide this fire in her
bosom, or conceal this love, but it will break out; then she goes from one
Ordinance to another, from one Minister to another, enquiring after her husband
Christ, every corner of the house can witness her moan for his absence; nothing
will satisfy, nothing will content but him; give me Christ, or else I die,
never did hungry man more earnestly desire meat, nor thirsty man desire drink,
or Rachel desire children, then an hungry soul desires Christ; But when the sun
of righteousness does arise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. the soul that
before was cold and chill, now becomes lively and active; these cherishing rays
make her bud and bloom, and bring forth: what Job speaks of a tree, seemingly
dead and withered, yet (says he) through the scent of water it will bud and
bring forth boughs like a plant, Job. 14.7. etc. is really true of such a soul,
that when she is in a deserted, and as she imagines, a forsaken condition,
seems dead and withered, yet at the return of Gods pleased face seems fruitful
and flourishing; where there is life in the root it will spring; when it is
really dead, winter and summer, all is a case: but though the winter may be
long and sharp, yet the spring will come and show a difference between the
living trees and the dead: and though God hide his face for a season, and
absent himself for a time, to see how his spouse will bear his absence, and to
try her affections, yet this sun of righteousness will shine again, and then
where life is in the root, it will show it self in the branches; for God will
not forsake any really that are not dead utterly: for a little while (says
God) I hid my face, but with everlasting kindness will I remember her, Isay.
54.8. sometimes the poor soul verily thinks she is forsaken, when God does but
like a father hide himself for a while, to try the childs affection, and every
sigh and sob and sorrowful tear goes to the fathers heart, his bowels yearn,
and he cannot long conceal himself: that it is so between God and his children,
see that pregnant place, Isay. 49.14. etc. but Zion (said the Lord) has
forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me; can a woman forget her sucking
child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb, yea, they
may forget, yet will not I forget thee; behold I have graven thee upon the
palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me: never was tenderhearted
father, or indulgent mother, more careful of their only child then God is of
his children; he will never forsake those that do not forsake him, he will
never give a bill of divorce to any, that are not willing to leave him, so that
you see here, where there is life in the root, the spring will come when it
shall again germinate and bud, but if it be really dead, it can never recover,
but by the assistance of an omnipotent arm; no more can a dead soul, till it be
grafted into the living vine, then that which was dead before shall germinate
and spring; and when once thus transplanted, it shall never wither: though
sometimes it may be winter with it, and it make but a little show, yet the root
of the matter is in it, and when the spring returns it shall break forth, God
will never leave them nor forsake them; See the Apostles confidence, Romans 8.35,
38, 39. who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? nay, in
all these, we are more then conquerors through him that loves us: for I am
persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord: these men of all others have cause to live merrily, yea,
though it be but assurance of adherence; those that Christ loves, he loves to
the end: oh my soul, is it so, that grace may be hid in times of desertion, as
the sap in the root, in the winter season, or as fire under the ashes, or as
gold in the mine, or as a little Jewel in a great heap of ashes, despair not
then, neither be discouraged, though sometimes thy grace be out of sight, and
thy God hide his face, and the sun of righteousness be clouded, and thy
comforts ecclipsed, remember with David, the days of old, and the time when God
did smile upon thee; and though it be now winter, the spring will return: whom
God loves, he loves to the end, yea, with an everlasting love: oh my God,
clear up my evidences for heaven, and make out such discovery of thy love to my
soul, that I may never be willing to leave thee, and then that thou will never
forsake me.

Upon a great tree tossed with the wind.
85. Med.
WHen I observed some tall spreading trees, stretching forth their branches on
every side, and were grown top-heavy, how they were tossed and tumbled with the
wind and storms, when smaller shrubs and lesser trees were more free and
secure, because they lay under the wind, or had but a little inconsiderable
head: I saw and observed, that it often came to pass, that if these great
trees bare any fruit, it was blown down before it came to maturity, and seldom
came to good, nay, not only the fruit but the leaves also were forced off by
the violent gusts, and winds, and storms, and sometimes the boughs and
branches also, yea, the tree it self is often born down, by the tempest, when
those that were less and lower were more secure, and brought their fruit to
maturity with less danger and hazard: This Observation made me think that these
trees fittly resembled great men, that made some profession of religion, but
few of them bring their fruit to maturity, for these lie more open to
temptations, and are more liable to dangers then others are, and the devil has
a greater spite at them then at others, for they may do him more mischief, and
therefore he is more unwilling they should break prison then others, and hangs
more fetters and irons upon them: great Commanders are more narrowly watched if
they are prisoners, and more dearly ransomed then private soldiers: hence it
was, that Elymas the sorcerer, by the devils instigation, sought to turn away
Surgius Paulus the deputy from the faith; Act. 13.8. as knowing he was like to
be a leading man which way ever he took: If great men have but leaves, they are
invyed for the leaves sake, and few of them ever bring forth fruit to maturity,
yea, the leaves themselves, their very profession are often times born down by
the storm; I have seen some that I verily believed were well rooted and
grounded, who yet upon approaching storms have truckled under them, have hid
their religion, dissembled their profession, and stole away from their colors,
and all for fear of leaving, or losing any part of their estates; This has
given me occasion sometimes to bless God, that has freed me from some of those
temptations that others lie under, and has given me Agars petition, neither
poverty nor riches, but food convenient, and has kept me almost all ^hy days
in a suffering condition: I considered I have the same nature as other men
have, had I but the same temptations, I know not but I might have been as bad:
a great estate as it has many cares and cumbers so many temptations
accompanying it, and some men cannot bear it, no more then some men's heads can
much wine or strong drink: it is not the cage that makes the bird sing, nor it
is not abundance always that makes the heart light; a staff may help a
traveller, but a bundle of staves will be but a trouble; so may a great estate
to a godly man; I might have, like that young man mentioned, Mat. 19.20. etc.
parted with Christ for a trifle: had he had but a small estate, who knows but
he might have proved a true convert; he cheapens heaven, bids fair for it, but
they disagreed about the price: a great estate breaks the bargain, as in the
world it breaks many a marriage; the persons like and love, but the woman's
portion will not answer the man's estate: this occasioned Christ to tell us, how
hard a thing it was for a rich man to be saved, Mat. 19.24. it is easier for a
camel to go through the eye of a needle then for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God: most men's honors change their manners, and they are the worse
for their wealth; if heaven be to be had upon no other terms, many will refuse
it; they would be gainers by their religion, however they resolve to lose
nothing; many like Diana's Craftsmen, get their living by it; they will launch
no further into the deep, then they may return safe to the shore: many come to
Christ hastily, as this young man, but return heavily, when they hear the rate:
All men love Abraham's bosom but few men love Dives door; all men love the
jewel, but few will go to the price; all men would have the crown, but they
love not the cross that leads to it: Most men (especially great ones) will
meddle with no more religion then will do them good, or boot their needs or
serve their designs; they will lanch no further into the seas then they can
see the shore; pride breeds in wealth, as worms do in apples; and he is a rich
man indeed, that thinks himself never the greater, or never the better for his
wealth: oh world, how have thou deceived those that trust in thee, and how have
thou bought their profession out of their hands for a trifle, and have had
their souls into the bargain: how many write themselves happy when they are
laden with thick clay? alas! what will this do for them in their greatest
need? poor Spira was betrayed by thee, to the shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience; so were Judas, Demas, Ananias and Saphira, and a thosand more:
these knew not the worth of the soul, nor the vanity of the world, that let the
devil have so cheap a penyworth; they grasp so greedily after gold, that they
lost their God, and loved their sin more then their souls, but what good will
it do them when they want a drop of water to cool their tongues? Luke 16.24. oh
my soul, bless God that has freed thee from many temptations that others are
overcome by: Covet not overmuch a prosperous condition, lest God give it thee
for thy portion: scorn with the Eagle to stoop so low as to seek thy meat upon
a dunghill: undervalue not thy self so much as to entertain so poor a suitor as
the world is, when the sun of God makes love to thee, who alone can pay thy
debts and make thee happy: thou can not buy this gold too dear but the world
thou may, and most men do, when they purchase it with the blood of their
souls: thou can not overvalue this jewel, it is ten thousand times better
then thou can value it: oh my God, give me Christ and it suffices, I need no
other portion, I desire no other happiness, let me have him at any rate.

Upon trees green in summer, but stripped off all in winter.
86. Med.
OBserving further, that those trees so fair and specious, so green and
flourishing in the summer, yet when autumn came were stripped of all their
gallantry, and appeared bare, and ill favored, dead and dry, and looked not
like the same they were; It presently struck into my mind that this would
shortly be the condition of all wicked men, let their prosperity be never so
great, and their enjoyments in the world never so many, or large; the time is
coming, all these like leaves will fly away with the wind, the nipping frost
of death, and the wind of affliction will make them fall; some carry Lordships
on their backs, some Earldomes, some Dukedomes, and some few Kingdoms; among
the Clergy, some carry several steeples on their backs, yea, some Deanaries,
and some Bishoprics, all these are but leaves, and will fall when Autumn wind
blows, they cannot stand a winter-blast, death will level the great and the
small, the one with the other, and the Kings head shall then show no impression
of a crown: Many rich men are like sumpter-horses, richly laden with gold and
silver, and costly gems and Jewels all the day, but when night comes, and come
it will ere long, they are stripped of all, turned into a dirty stable and
nothing to bring off but their gal'd backs; so these at death have nothing left
but a gal'd conscience: a pregnant example of this we have in the rich man,
mentioned Luke 16.19. there was one clothed in purple and fine linen, and
fared deliciously every day, but it was but a little time before all those
leaves were stripped off, and he had not left him one drop of water to cool his
tongue: and he that a little before (as some imagine) denied a crumb of bread
to Lazarus, is now denied a drop of water: Another example we have, Luke 12.16.
of a rich man that had abundance, and began to sing a requiem to his soul, eat,
drink, and be merry, thou have goods laid up for many years; he was a right
Epicure that made his gut his God: another Sardanapalus, eating that in earth
(that Augustine says) he must digest in hell, little thinking his death was so
near, his glass was run, when he thought it was but new turned; thou fool
(says Christ) this night shall thy soul be required of thee, and then whose
are these? he was shot as a bird with the bolt, while he was staring at the
bow: of rich men the Psalmist says, their glory will not follow them, neither
shall they take any thing with them, Psalm. 49.17. then when death enters into
their lodging, and knocks at their doors, they may bid farewell to their well
contrived houses, sumptuous buildings, pleasant gardens, and delightful walks,
yea, to all their bags of gold, so painfully got, so carefully kept, and so
warily employed, even to the wounding of their consciences, the hardening of
their hearts, and the loss of their souls; then farewell all their pleasures,
their merry meetings, and their pot companions, with their drunken revels,
farewell then their cocks, their hawks, their hounds, and their whores, they
must never more delight and recreate themselves with these, for though
whoremasters, and whores, shall burn together in hell yet shall they not there
burn in lust one to the other, but their company shall be their torment, not
their recreation; all these are but leaves the wind of death will blow away:
Here are no may-games, nor morris-dances, or deluding shows to entertain our
youthful gallant, no stage plays, for their divertisement, no pleasant
Comedies acted but a dismal Tragedy, wherein they are like to be the miserable
Actors, but will never come off with applause; there is no modish garb for our
well-drest gallant, no headtire but a flaming periwig; here is no use for
looking-glass nor tiring woman, no use of patches, powders, paints or frisling
irons, all these are out of mode and fashion in those Territories: here are no
healths to pledge but that of damnation they so often drunk in the days of their
life, but never knew what it was till now, but now must pledge them to all
eternity: But this is not all, their loss will be greater, for they must lose
the beatifical vision of God blessed for ever, in whose presence there is joy,
and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore: then must they be
everlastingly separated from him, who is the chiefest good: Now they say to
him, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job. 21.14. and
then God will have none of their company, but will say, depart from me, etc.
Mat. 7.22. and 25.41. oh direful and dreadful sentence, such as may make
their heart strings crack, and their hearts break in pieces; it breaths out
nothing but fire and brimstone, stings and horrors, woe and alas, seas of
vengeance, the worm that never dies and the fire that never shall be quenched;
torments without end, and past imagination: in this life they cannot endure the
company of the godly, they are either the object of their scorn or malice, but
then they shall be eternally separated, as far as heaven is from hell, or Dives
from Lazarus, between whom there is a great gulf fixed. Luke 16.26. Then they
shall lose their souls which is incomparably their richest jewel, which they
sold for a trifle, and now it will be required, and they must stand to their
bargain, not that they shall be annihilated, that news is too good to be true;
neither shall they lose the faculties of them; these shall be enlarged to their
further torments, but they lose their God which is the life of their souls, and
put them into the devils hands to be eternally tormented, they shall lose their
bodies also for whose sake they sold their souls: in a word, all their
happiness, and all their hopes, and all they accounted dear shall then be
stripped away, all these like leaves shall fly before the wind of death, and in
the room of these, everlasting destruction of body and soul shall succeed: oh
death what a change will thou make at thy coming, and how unwelcome will thou
be to those that live at case in possession; oh my soul, remember the days of
darkness, for they are many, Eccl. 11.8. provide against this time, that this
may not be thy case, for ere long all these leaves will be blown down; provide
therefore treasures that neither man, nor devil can strip from thee; provide a
mansion in heaven before this earthly tabernacle be dissolved; Lord, assist me
in this work, without thee my endeavors are vain.

Upon a tree green all the winter.
87. Med.
WHen I observed how green some trees were all the winter, and how flourishing
even in the frost and snow, when others are stripped naked and left bare, and
seem dead and withered, and that neither the pinching frost, nor blustering
winds, neither storms nor tempests could disroab them or change their
summer-suit to winter colors, that neither summers sun, nor scorching heat
could make them wither, nor winter cold, nor storms could make them cast their
leaves, nor turn their lusty green to any other color: I began to think these
trees much resemble a Christian, that had the life of grace within him, and is
planted into that generous vine Christ, and sucks sap and nourishment from this
root; these also are green when others that stand upon their own root, wither
and decay: But these trees of righteousness are planted by the rivers of water,
and bring forth their fruit in due season, and their leaf also shall not
wither, but whatsoever they do, it shall prosper, Psalm. 1.3. etc. when others
are driven like chaff before the wind from the face of the earth, yet the
sunshine of prosperity cannot wither those, nor the wind of adversity blow
them down or their fruit, nor remove their leaves: Job was one of these trees
of righteousness, green at all times, winter and summer, in his prosperity his
leaf flourished; for God himself gives as ample a testimony of him, as ever he
did of mortal man, Job. 1.8. Have thou considered my servant Job? that there is
none like him in the earth, a perfect and upright man, one that feareteh God
and escheweth evil, and when he was in adversity he still retains his
integrity, Job. 27.5.6. till I die I will not remove my integrity from me, my
righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go, my heart shall not reproach
me so long as I live, and see what end God makes with him, he crowns him, and
chronicles him for his sincerity and patience, all his affliction could not
make him lose one leaf: Joseph when he was in prosperity fears God, and when in
adversity he fears him also; when he was a bondslave in Potiphars house, he
resists the temptations of his mistress, with this consideration, how shall I
commit this great wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39.11. Joseph remains
in Egypt like a pearl in a puddle, he had set God at his right hand, and would
not be moved, though Satan knock often at the door, there was none within to
answer, though the iron (as the Psalmist says) entered into Joseph's soul, yet
sin could not; when the devil could not prevail against him, by his hard
bondage he trys to do it by a Dalilahs temptation; he struck fire often but it
fell among wet tinder; Joseph was semper idem, when he was wrongfully cast into
prison, he keeps his integrity still, and God owns him, and gave him favor,
and after when he was advanced to honor, and made enter in Egypt, he did not
forget his God, nor God did not forget him: all the hot gleams of prosperity,
nor all the blustering storms of adversity could not shake down any of his
fruit, or stir any of his leaves; it is true, wicked men in their prosperity
are said to be spreading themselves like a green bay tree, but this denotes the
prosperity of the body, not of the soul; these leaves at death will drop as
well as others, and their prosperity and happiness will draw to an end, and all
their enjoyment will be but as a thin mist before the wind soon scattered; but
mark the upright, and behold the just, for the end of that man is peace, Psalm.
37.37. I shall be (says the Psalmist,) as a green olive tree in the house of
God, Psalm. 52.5. when those that trust not in the Lord, shall be destroyed* It
was not banishment that could separate David from the stock in which he was
planted, nor make his fruit to fall, or his leaves to fade; it was not
affliction could make him lose his integrity, nor a kingdom could make him
forget his God: The Martyrs in their greatest sufferings kept up their
profession green, and flourishing, the devil could not get one leaf down with
all his mighty gusts and Borean blasts; the fire it self could not scorch nor
wither them; The apprehension of danger could not shake a leaf from Daniel, or
either of his three associates; they held out a profession before the King, and
his Nobles in the sight of the fiery furnace, and the Lions Den; it was neither
force nor fraud, fear nor favor, riches nor honor, preferments nor
promotions, that could make them start aside from their God, by omitting any
known duty, or committing any known sin, but where there is no sap in the root,
the branches must needs wither, as we have had too sad experience in our days,
when the most have their fruit blown down, and their leaves withered: a true
Christian is always the same, lay him where you please, as a pearl whether in
the cabinet, or in the dunghill, retains its virtue still, so a Christian
whether on the throne with David, on the dunghill with Job, in the miry dungeon
with Jeremy, in the stocks with Paul and Silas, yet are still the same;
prosperity nor adversity, friend nor foe, man nor devil can separate him from
Christ; oh my soul, get life in the root, and thou will hold out in the winter,
suck sap from Christ, for nothing else will keep thee from withering, or
preserve thy leaves from falling, feed upon that bread of life, and the water
of life, and thou shall never dye; thy garments then will be always white, and
thy head want no ointment, Eccl. 9.8. neither wind nor weather can hurt thee
if thou be in this vine, but if thou be not, though thou make never so glorious
a summer show, in winter thou will be stripped of all: oh my God, let my heart be
sound in thy statutes, let the root of the matter be in me, take me off the
stock of nature, and plant me in the vine, Christ, so shall I never wither.

Upon trees decay for want of dressing.
88. Med.
OBserving some trees that had formerly been fruitful, but now began to
decline, I observed and searched out more narrowly what the cause was, and I
perceived it was not age that did it, but I perceived it was want of good
husbandry, they had been neglected and wanted pruning, cleansing, dunging,
watering, for they were pestered with weeds, and moss, and canker, and suckers,
and other hurtful annoyances, which diverted the nourishment which should ^^ve
fed and cherished them; and when I had observed the disease, I applied the
remedy accordingly; I caused the ground to be rid, and the trees pruned and
cleansed, dug, dunged, and manured, and in process of time the event
answered my expectation, and the trees recovered their pristine beauty, and
goodness; this accident produced this following meditation: I thought an
orchard resembled the Church of God, for so it is called, Canticles, 4.13. thy
plants are as an orchard of pomegranats: by plants are meant the several
members of the Church, which here are compared to pomegranats, which are
healthful and preservative, yea, to spicknard, and saffron, calamus, and
cinnamon, and other chief spices, costly and precious: now as it is in an
orchard, some are barren, some fruitful, some bring good fruit, some bad,
according to the nature of the tree, some are great trees, and some small, so
it is in the visible Church of God, the members thereof are of all sorts and
sizes, and bring forth several sorts of fruits; some bring forth only leaves,
and some are dead, and bring forth neither leaf nor fruit, some their fruit is
sour and unsavory, some bitter, and some bring forth good fruit to perfection
according to the nature of the tree, those transplanted usually bring forth the
best fruit; But as in an orchard it is not enough that it be planted, and
grafted, and that with the choicest fruit, but continual care is to be had of
ordering, manuring, dunging, watering, and fencing it, for the earth being an
own mother to briars, brambles, weeds, and thistles, but a stepmother to herbs
and flowers, and fruit-bearing trees, she will soon produce her own brats, and
feed them with her breasts, and starve the other, if not prevented; so it is in
the Church, Gods plantation will never thrive, if there are not laborers,
vine-dressers, to water and manure them; the devil will send some of his briars
and thorns to choke them, and suck the sap that should nourish them, the world
loves her own, and hates those that are Christ's: there must be some Paul's to
plant, and some Apollo's to water, some Ministers to manure, some laborers to
prune, or those plants degenerate and grow wild or be choked with weeds and
baggage, and God has sent plenty of those, that nothing be wanting on his
part; and oh how happy are those people that meet with laborers and not
loyterers, those that have both will and skill to do good, but God may complain
of many as he did of old, I sent them not, yet they run; I spoke not to them,
yet they prophesy, Jer. 23.2. there are too many that are not gifted nor
qualified for the place, too many that are idle and will not work, loiterers
rather then laborers, and many that mind the wages, more then the work, and
the fleece more then the flock; they would have the profit but be at neither
pains nor cost, but the vineyard will never prosper under such men's hands: many
honorable titles are given to the Ministers, all which denote diligence and
duty, as well as dignity, they are called watchmen, Eze. 3.17, but many of them
are blind, Isa. 1.56.10. or if they see the enemy coming they give no warning
to prepare: they are called shepherds, but they feed themselves, and not the
flock; they are called lights, but many of them walk in darkness, or hide their
light under a bushel, or in a dark lanthorn, or are but an ignis fatuus, that
leads men out of the way, not in it; they are called stars, but some of them
prove comets or blazing-stars, threatening ruin to the beholders; they are
called the Salt of the earth, yet many of them have lost their savor; and a
deal of such unsavory salt we have; they are called angels, but they resemble
evil angels in their conversations; they are called builders, but what they
build with the one hand, they pluck down with the other, nay, destroy what
others have built; they are called stewards, but live as if they should never
give account of their stewardship; they are called husbandmen, but neither care
to plant nor to sow, to water, nor to manure: they are called vine-dressers, but
take little pains in the vineyard: in a word, they are called Nurses, but prove
dry nurses, and suffer the children to starve for want of food; many of them
heap one steeple upon another as it is fabled the giants did Ossa upon Pelion,
and think that way to scale heaven, but they will hardly ascend with such a
load upon their backs; they have the greatest charge in the world and many take
least care; they will take the charge of hundreds, that perhaps they never saw;
but such lights as these often go out in a snuff, and such stars they are, to
whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, a description of such
Ministers you have Isay. 56.10, 11, 12. but Paul was not such a shepherd, for
three years space he ceased not, day nor night, but in public, and from house
to house he warned his hearers with tears, Act. 20.31. 2. Cor. 6.5. Act. 20.26.
and happy are those people that meet with such vine dressers, and sad is their
condition that meet with loiterers, and not laborers: Oh my soul, despise not
the ministry but honor them for their works sake, especially those that labor
in the word and doctrine, for those are worthy of double honor; and in thy
place and station mind the welfare of thy own soul, and those about thee; let
not the blood of souls be laid at thy door, these honorable titles belong to
laborers not loiterers, to painful preachers not to dumb dogs: oh my God,
forgive all my former neglects, and for the future though I be unprofitable let
me not be unfaithful.

Upon promising trees after blasted.
89. Med.
IN an early spring when there was great likelihood of much fruit, when the
trees were richly beautifyed with plenty of buds and blossoms, and there was
great expectation of a plentiful year of fruit, behold in a moment all our
hopes were dashed, and the trees were suddenly blasted with lightning, or an
evil wind, and so those that even now were in the height of their pride and
glory, were now made barren, and the very leaves as well as the blossoms were
scorched, and by this means our hopes were suddenly dashed, and the trees
rendered unfruitful; This sudden yet divine providence shows to us the power of
God in disposing these outward enjoyments, for as he does for his peoples sin
and abuse of his mercies, threaten, to take away his corn in the time thereof,
and his wine in the season thereof, and recover his wool and his flax, which
he had given her to cover her nakedness, Hose. 2.9. so has he power to take
away other fruits of the field, and to fustrate the hopes of the husbandman,
for the power to give and to take away he has reserved in his own hands, Job.
1.19. This providence how dark soever it seemed, yielded me some light, and
taught me this profitable lesson, not to put overmuch confidence in any earthly
enjoyment, how promising soever, nor to call any thing my own before I have it
in my possession, nor depend upon it too much then, for there is an
uncertainty, and a vanity writ upon all these outward things, they are like
unto Jonah's gourd that grew up in a night, and perished in a night, and have a
worm bred in them, that many times eats out their very hearts; when God blows
upon any earthly enjoyment, it often vanishes away, and comes to nothing; Hag.
1.6. ye have sown much and bring in little, ye eat but ye have not enough, ye
drink but ye are not filled with drink, ye cloth you but you are not warm, and
he that earneth wages puts it into a bag with holes, etc. ye looked for much,
and lo it came to little, and when ye brought it home I did blow upon it, etc.
and when he blows upon any earthly enjoyment, it withers and comes to nothing;
oh how much would it conduce to our happiness to set a light esteem upon those
so transitory, so fading enjoyments, and to resign up our wills to Gods will in
all things, then should we never be frustrated in our expectations, or
disappointed in our hopes, and what is best for us would surely come to pass,
but when we expect great matters and they fall short of our expectation, then
we are apt to be cast down, and our hearts despond; but if we expect little, we
shall not be much troubled if it prove but little; will thou set thy heart
(says Solomon) upon that which is not, riches take themselves wings and fly
away, Pro. 23.5. they will never pay us for our pains, or countervail our cost;
the fashion of this world passes away, and the glory thereof; riches were
never true to those that trusted in them, earthly enjoyments ofttimes prove as
transitory, as a hasty headlong torrent, they pass away as swift as a ship, a
bird, an arrow, a post that passes by, a weavers shuttle, of if you can name
any thing swifter in pace, or quicker in motions; The same day for ought we
know found Job the richest man in all the East, and left him poor, even to a
proverb, as poor as Job, Psalm. 37.35. I have seen the wicked in great power,
spreading himself like a green bay tree, yet he past away, and lo he was not; I
sought him, but I could not find him: our age does afford a thousand examples
of this nature, thousands in Ireland, many in England, have been rich ore
night, and stripped of all ere morning; yea, in Ireland it is imagined two
hundred thousand suddenly lost their lives, with their estates, and were
cruelly butchered by the bloodthirsty Papists: how often may we see in our
times, great families rooted out, God blows upon them, blasts them, and they
wither, and their great estates dwindle into nothing, and that by an insensible
hand of God, when no man can give an account or reason of it; many promising
young men that were like to thrive and grow rich in the world, God has blown
upon them, and they have come to nothing: Many that have had promising parts,
great naturals gifts, and endowments, and God had lent them many talents, but
they not improving them, God has called for them up, and given them to those
that better deserved them, and they have met with a sensible decay, though it
stole insensibly upon them, that they may say, as Zedechiah to Micaiah, which
way went the spirit of God from me to go to thee? it is no hard thing to
observe a wane and decay of Gods gifts in those that use them not, their
abilities fail amain when once they begin to fail, till at last God lays them
aside as broken vessels, and causes them to be forgotten as dead men out of
mind, Psalm. 31.21. and as useless, lazy, unprofitable, and unsaithful
servants, they shall be cast into outer darkness: as they buried their talents,
so their souls seem buried in their bodies for a while, till both be buried in
hell for ever; Many in our times also that have had seeming grace, and like the
glowworm made a great show in a dark night, yet have had their light
extinguished, and they have proved but like rotten shining wood; many that have
had lamps in their hands, have had them blown out for lack of oil; Many have
seemed like corn fresh, and flourishing, but proved like that on the stony
ground, or on the housetop, never came to maturity; when the wind turns they
soon kick up their profession, and steal away from their colors; or when the
sun of persecution is up, wither: oh my soul, promise not thy self great things
in the world, neither content thy self with small things for eternity; be as
serious for grace, as others are for gold, and make as sure for heaven, as
others do for the world; if thou will plant, let it be in a better soil, then
may thou expect a better increase, neither wind, nor sun, frost, nor snow,
thunder nor lightning, can blast or nip those flowers of paradise; Lord, take
off my affection from the world, and set them upon Christ, then shall I never
be disappointed of my hopes.

Upon leaves falling in Autumn.
90. Med.
WHen I observed in autumn after a nipping frost, seconded by a gust of wind,
how fast the leaves fell from the trees, that in a short time those that were
clothed in a lusty green, began to look withered, dead and dry, and to put on
their winter coat, methought this resembled much our mortality, when the autumn
of age comes upon us, these bodies of ours like leaves fall of themselves into
deaths lap, but seldom do they hang on so long, some casual accident or other
often bears them down before they wither; ofttimes some common calamity, as the
sword, or pestilence, or other contagious disease, like a violent tempest, does
bear all down before it: two hundred thousand together in Ireland, and very
many in England, death mowed down in a few days, where they fell as leaves
before the wind, or as corn before the reapers hook; it is noted, that in one
years space, a hundred thousand fell in our chief city, blown down by the blast
of death, and thus in all the world throughout, men are swept away, as with a
sweeping storm, some few are gathere in in a good old age, but the most of men
blown down while they are yet green: the falling of these leaves did also seem
to me to resemble the apostasy, and downfall of hypocrites, the house of whose
profession is built upon the sand, and cannot resist the wind and waves; this
is a foolish builder that neither sat down first to reckon the charges, neither
was at the cost to lay a firm foundation, neither considered, the rain would
fall, the winds blow, and the floods beat, and overthrow his buildings: they
follow Christ as a dog follows his master, ti^l he meets with carrion, and then
turns him up: as Orphah made a fair proffer of going along with Naomi, but
better considering, returned back: It is noted of the chesunt, if it be not
broken at the top when east into the fire, it leaps out again, so does a
hypocrite when he comes to be tried, he is like a false jade in a teem, which
being put to a stress, turns tail and tramples, but the godly hold on and
persist: In the summer when the sun of the gospel shines upon them, they hold
on, and look fresh and fragrant, and seem to be not only members, but pillars
of the Church, as the Apostles had a good opinion of Judas, so that they rather
mistrusted themselves then him, and cried out, Master, is it I; so true
believers rather mistrust themselves then those forward professors, yet in
persecuting times these fall as leaves before the wind, and wither as the corn
on the stony ground, or that which grows upon the hose top, and discover a
fruitless bulk, and withering root; the stony ground received the word with
joy, and endured for a while, but when the sun was up, they were quickly
offended: Herod may hear the word gladly, and endure for a time, but being not
sound at the heart, he falls off: a branch in a moist place though it have no
root, may for a while bud and leave, but when heat comes will certainly wither,
and the leaves fall: when Christianity is in credit, many will cry Hosanah to
the sun of David, and when in contempt they will cry, crucify; a hypocrite,
will be catching at comforts as children do at sweetmeats, ere they are
soundly humbled, and are stuffing themselves pillows with the promises, that
they may sin more securely: when the Jews were in savor, many turn Jews for
fear of the Jews; and when in danger, their seeming friends prove their sorest
enemies, they are professors upon design, and they will be religious while
religion suits their interest, and promotes their advantage, but when it
hinders them, they lay it aside, as the workman does the tool he needs not, or
will not serve his turn, and takes another; if profaness, yea persecution
serves his design better, he will make use of that; if a few prayers, or
outside duties, which are like to cost them little, they are content to go to
heaven this way, but if it come to sufferings or forsaking any thing for
Christ, vadet Christus cum suo Evangelio, let Christ go with his gospel, and
keep his heaven to himself, for he will have none of it; they will not buy
heaven at so dear a rate: The Gospel has many swallow-friends, which will be
gone at the approach of winter: when the corn is gone, the rats leave the barn,
and when no secular advantage is in sight, but rather storms appearing, many
professors will be no longer religious, but Christ tells us, he that loves
father or mother, son or daughter more then him, is not worthy of him, Mat.
10.37. because he holds any one worthy of more love then Christ: God will set
no lower a rate on his son and glory, he that will have this pearl must part
with all, Mat. 13.44.45. and he that does so, makes a good bargain; we cannot
buy this gold too dear, or give too much for heaven and happiness; he that
thinks to grasp and hold both heaven and earth in the same hand, and lodge them
in the same heart, may as well imagine he can reconcile fire and water, and
hide them together in the same bosom; when two men walk together, we know not
whose servant it is that follows them, but when they part the servant owns his
own Master: oh my soul, take heed of dissembling with God, that will not be
mocked; close with him, and he will close with thee; build upon the rock, so
shall not thou be shaken, and though at death thy body fall like a leaf, yet
thy root shall remain: oh my God, let me not deceive my self, let me lay a good
foundation, then shall I stand in all storms.

Upon a fruit-tree pelted with stones.
91. Med.
WHen I beheld a fruit-bearing-tree; that was richly laden with the choicest
fruit, and perceiving that this tree above all the rest was preyed upon by the
passengers, for almost every one had a stick or stone, a staff, or stake, to
throw at it, when those trees that were barren, and worthless, or brought forth
fruit sour or unsavory, were let alone, and none molested them, when their
better neighbors were rent and torn in pieces, for their fruit sake; this
Observation made me think these fruit-bearing trees did much resemble a
fruit-bearing Christian, for none in the world are more liable to sufferings
then they are, and that for their fruits sake: the more real fruit they bring
forth, and the more savoury fruit they bear, the more danger they are in, and
the more blows they bear, both from hand and tongue when others that are
Christians, graceless, fruitless, and worthless, escape scot-free, and not one
molesteth them: many a one that leads a lewd vicious and debaucht life, who
makes a trade of sin, and lives in the constant breach both of divine and
humane laws, yet escapes all Courts of Judicature, civil and Ecclesiastical,
and all other molestations, and persecutions, when an holy humble Christian is
often entangled in the briars, and fleeced by those to whom he flys for succor,
yet here lies the difference between a fruitful Christian, and a fruitful tree,
the tree is beaten for the fruits sake, but it is for love to it, and so is
robbed and pilled and beaten like a man that falls among thieves, and is stripped
of his substance, the other is beaten also for the fruit sake, but it is in
opposition to it, and hatred of it: in the one the passenger desires to enjoy
it, in the other to beat it down: The best of men have met with the greatest
opposition, and the more eminent Christians have usually the more eminent
opposers; the devil will not suffer them to be quiet: Jeremiah which was a
great prophet, and lived an upright and unblamable life, was not free, Jer.
20.7. I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me, I neither (says he) lend
upon usury neither do men lend to me upon usury, yet every one curses me, Jer.
15.10. and it was not only tongue-persecution, but that of the hand also which
he suffered, he was cast into a miry dungeon, put into the stocks, hated by the
Princes, and all his crime was, he spoke the word of the Lord, what he had
given him in charge to speak; it was for his fruits sake, that he was thus
beaten: The like we read of David a man after Gods own heart, he had more
fruit then others and therefore had more stones thrown at him for his fruit
sake, Psalm. 69.18. they that sit in the gate speak against me, and I was a song
to the drunkards, Psalm. 35.15. in mine adversity they rejoiced, they gathered
themselves together, yea the abjects gathered themselves together against me,
and I knew it not, they did tear me and ceased not, with hypocritical mockers
in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth: he met with hand persecution
also; for Saul sought his life, and hunted him as a partrich upon the
mountains: Holy Job the best man living in his age, by Gods own testimony, yet
he was not free, he was accused by the devil, robbed by the Chaldeans and
Sabeans, forsaken by his friends, disdained by his enemies, tempted by his
wife, and scorned by the abjects, Job. 30.1. but now they that are younger then
I, have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to have set with
the dogs of my stock, ver. 9. yet now I am their song, yea, I am their byword,
they ahhor me,, they flee from me, and spare not to spit in my face, etc.
Elijah, Elisha, Amos do not escape, Joseph, Daniel, and his fellows are hated
for their fruit; yea, all the Prophets: The Apostles also were made a gazing
stock, and suffered both reproaches, and affliction, Heb. 10.33. and those
Worthys of whom the world was not worthy, Heb. 11.35. etc. they had cruel
mockings and scourgings, bonds and imprisonments, they were stoned, sawn
asunder, tempted, etc. and it was for fruit that Stephen had stones cast upon
him, but the disciple is not above his Master: Christ himself though never man
spoke like him, and never man did such works as he did, yet never man did more
unjustly suffer then he, never man so abused with hand and tongue, even to the
taking away his precious life; he was hated by the world, and so shall all that
bear his image: As bats fly from the light, so the blind world cannot endure
this sun of righteousness; as it is said of some barbarous Nations under the
Meridian, they curse the sun when it arises for scorching them, so wicked men
cannot abide to have the sun shine too full in their faces, light is come into
the world, but men love darkness, because their works are evil; and though they
agree not among themselves, yet all join together against the power of
godliness, like Herod and Pilate against Christ: though dogs worry one another,
yet all set against the trembling hare, though Ephraim be against Manasseth,
and Manasseth against Ephraim, yet both are against Judah: oh my soul, if thou
bear any good fruit, expect some stick or stone, to be thrown at thee, and if
thou meet with none, expect there is little fruit to be seen or found, or that
it is not good nor savoury; if thou do suffer for well-doing rejoice that
thou art accounted worthy, and consider all thou can suffer for Christ, is
but a chip or splinter of that cross which he bore for thee; and leave not
heavens road for a scoff or scorn, lest in hell the devil deride thee for thy
folly; is thy good name more precious then his? he was reprocht for thee, and
he that will not suffer a mock for Christ will hardly suffer death; those that
are ashamed of him here, he will not own hereafter: oh my God, let me never
leave the way for fear of the cross, let me not think my blood too good to shed
for Christ, that thought not his too good to shed for me.

Upon fruit left on the trees after shaking.
92. Med.
IN the Autumn when fruit waxt ripe and the gathering time was come, when the
trees were shook, and the fruit gathered in, yet I beheld there was here and
there an apple, pear or plum, or other fruit still remaining on the trees,
which stuck fast notwithstanding the shaking, and all the force and violence
that had been used; but these were but a few, and those commonly the soundest,
and most durable: This brought to my mind the command of God in the time of
the law, Lev. 19.9, 10. and 23.22. Deuteronomy. 24.9. etc. where God commands the
Jews, when they reaped their fields, to leave some of the corners thereof
standing, and not to gather up the gleanings, but to leave them for the poor,
and when they shook their olives, and other fruit trees, to leave some
clusters remaining, and not to gather the fruit in clean, that so it might be
for the poor and needy of the land, and for the stranger for meat: we see how
the chief Landlord, the great husbandman, the Lord of the vineyard the chief
proprietor, how he lets out his farms, and what conditions he puts into his
leases, and how he takes care of the poor that they should be fed, for they
also are a part of his family, and at his finding, and he has appointed where
they shall have their meat, and has commanded his stewards to give it them in
due season: he would have the full cups of the rich to overflow into their
empty dishes, and those that dine the poor entertain Christ himself, at their
table as a guest: I observed also how little this command of God was observed
by hard-hearted man, in our days, how little they respect his will, and how few
make good this condition in the grant they have of all they enjoy, and how just
it is therefore for God to recall his estate into his own hands, and to take the
forfeiture; for though we receive all from God, and that with this proviso, and
upon this condition, that the poor shall have their part, and their share out
of it, yet he that gives all, and requires but a little, cannot have it, yea,
though he would borrow a little of his own, he is ofttimes denied it; though he
promises to repay it, yea, to repay it an hundredfold, yet cannot be heard:
where a man upon his bare word can borrow ten pounds, God cannot borrow ten
pence, yea, of that which is his own, though never man made larger promises,
and never man more faithfully fulfilled them; he has told them, he that gives
to the poor, shall not lack, Pro. 28.27. but he that hides his eyes shall have
many a curse; curses both from God, and man; yet few believe this is the way to
get wealth, they will hardly take Gods word for a groat, they will use their
wit to save their money, but will not use their eyes, to affect their hearts;
God shows them many an altar, but they have no sacrifice ready, but he that
shuts his ears at the poor man's cry, shall cry himself and not be heard, Pro.
21.13. this was fulfilled in Pharaoh, Haman and the rich glutton, It Is not
getting but giving is the true way to wealth, Eleemosyna ars omnium
quaestuosissima est, (says Chrysostom) alms is the most gainful art, he shall
have judgment without mercy that will show no mercy, Jam. 2.13. he that has
pity on the poor lends to the Lord, and he will repay him, Pro. 19.17. God
accepts it both as a gift and a love, nay, foenerator Domino, God takes it upon
usury, and gives security for it under his hand, but those that now will not
take Gods word, it is not long but God will not take theirs: but require up his
talents, and also an account of their stewardship, and give away their talents
to those that will better improve them, and give them a reward with the
unprofitable servant, Mat. 25.28, 30. yea, sentence them to everlasting fire,
together with the devil and his angels; for not feeding, clothing, visiting
his hungry, naked, poor members, Mat. 25.41. etc. and such worthless, useless,
sapless men, are not more missed (as one says) when they are gone then the
paring of the nails, as they live undesired, so they die unlamented; but at
judgment their sentence breaths out nothing but fire, and brimstone, stings
and horrors, woes and torments without end, or past imagination, here the worm
of grief gnaws as painfully as the fire burns; now they are sandblinde, and
cannot see Christ in his members, but then when too late, their eyes will be
opened, to see their folly: The consideration also of this little quantity of
fruit left upon the trees, after the shaking, made me think this resembled the
godly, that stand fast, and remain firm after all the shakings that they meet
with, when others frost bitten by affliction, or tossed by persecution fall as
leaves before the wind in autumn: many are the professors in a sunshine day,
but few can abide in a storm, though Israel be as the sand of the sea for
multitude, yet but a remnant shall be saved, Romans 9.27. all are not Israel that
are of Israel, these are compared to the gleaning of the grapes after the
vintage, Isay. 17.6. here and there one, few in comparison: or to the shaking
of the olive tree, where two or three berries are left in the top of the utmost
boughs, and four or five in the utmost branch, one of a tribe, and two of a
family, Jer. 13.14. many shakings we have already had, and much unripe fruit is
fallen, and when stronger winds arise we may imagine much more will down, but
in the last shaking when Christ shall come like refiners fire and fullers soap,
Mal. 3.3. all that is rotten at heart will be discovered, then the sinners in
Zion shall be afraid, fearfulness shall surprise the hearts of the hypocrites;
oh my soul, take heed of being blown down, nay, take heed of being rotten, for
then down thou will, it is better be alone then in such a company, and better
go to heaven alone, then to hell with company; to stand against the storm, then
to be blown down with the wind; improve thy talents to Gods glory, and he will
never let thee fall: oh my God, let no sun of persecution wither me, nor no
boisterous storm bear me down.

Upon the many enemies fruit trees have.
93. Med.
WHen I considered how many enemies fruit-bearing trees met withal, and the
encumbrances that ofttimes hindered, and spoiled their fruit, I wondered that any
brought forth fruit to maturity, for sometimes they are planted in a bad soil,
and then no wonder if they prosper not, sometimes in too dry a place, and how
then should they prosper? sometimes in too wet, and then are poisoned, and
rendered barren; sometimes too high, and sometimes too low, and both extremes
are offensive; sometimes in too fat a place, and then they grow too luxuriant;
often too lean and barren, when the earth cannot help them to bring forth their
burden, or yield them sap; sometimes for want of good husbandry, they are
troubled and pestered with suckers, that draw the sap to themselves, and rob
the tree, and run up into aspiring branches, which overtop and overshade their
fellows, and the whole tree by this means is rendered unfruitful: sometimes for
want of fence the bark is pil'd off by the beasts of the field, hares, rabbets,
and other vermin, which rends the bark from the the body, and endanger, yea,
sometimes procure the death, not only of the fruit, but the tree also: and
sometimes they are barkbound, which hinders their growth and thriving:
sometimes they are pestered with moss, canker and other obstructions, to their
no little damages; and sometimes molested by worms, moles, mice, ants, and
such like, whereby they are injured: sometimes the winter proves unseasonable,
and the spring unfavourable, that they never bloom, and sometimes when they are
blossomed, and give good ground of hopes; yet in a moment all our hopes are
dashed, and they are sudenly nipt with the frost, or blasted with lightning, or
the East-winds; sometimes they are rendered unfruitful by overmuch drought, and
sometimes by too much wet; for both may be injurious both to the tree and to
the fruit and too much wet also is offensive, and renders the fruit the worse:
if they pass these dangers and are laden with fruit, much of it is often
consumed by wasps, hornets, and another insects, yea, sometimes not only the
fruit, but also the leaves are eaten by locusts, caterpillars, and such like
flys, and many times with worms: sometimes for want of fence, they are
undermined by swine, or broken, bruised or fed upon by other cattle, and
oftentimes the unripe fruit is born down by a mighty rushing wind, and all our
hopes thus sudenly dashed which is no unusual accident: as it is said, Rev.
6.13. and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree casts
her untimely figs, when she is shaken by a mighty wind; that is, violently and
forcibly, and if they escape all these accidents, many prove barren, and many
bring forth fruit that is sour, bitter, or unsavory, and very little fruit
that is good appears, and if it do, all the danger is not over, many a blow
they endure, and many a staff, and many a stone is cast at them to unload,
unburthen, and deprive them of their fruit; and there is scarce a passenger but
has something or other to throw at them, and few go away empty-handed from
them; and no wonder then the owners part is little and a small pittance comes
to be gathered in: The consideration of this, made me to compare poor man to
these trees of the field, and to consider what is the reason so few bring forth
fruit to maturity; many an obstruction they meet with before the time of fruit
comes, which hinders the most of men from fructifying; many are planted in the
dry desert heath, where they see not when good comes, and that never heard of
a savior come into the world, or ever enjoyed one soul searching sermon, and
these are not like to bring forth good fruit; they are like to be barren, or
their fruit to be wild, yea many of those that live within the pale of the
Church are not much better, it is true, the seed is sown amongst them but much
of it falls by the wayside, and the fouls of the air pick it up, the devil
steals it out of their hearts; this is that troubler of Israel, that master of
misrule, he is one at Church whoever is the other, he has made a foot-path
over the heart, that the word takes no more impression then rain upon a rock;
these must needs be barren, yea, some of it, falls among stones, where it has
no root, which though received with joy, and it springs up sudenly, yet wanting
root, must needs wither, the root of the matter is not in them, Job. 19.28. and
some falls among thorns, and is choked; these (says Christ) are the cares of
the world, and the deceitfulness of riches; and it is much ado to handle those
thorns, and not prick their fingers, and but a little falls in good ground, and
that undergoes a thousand dangers ere it come to maturity; many are the
obstructions a Christian meets with, and many pul-backs the gracious soul has,
and the good seed sown has many enemies, sometimes it is parcht with the sun
of prosperity, and sometimes nipt with the frost of adversity; the devils
temptations, and the worlds allurements; often spoil the fruit; sometimes it
withers for want of the dew of heaven to refresh it, sometimes it is
overwhelmed with the floods of affliction, a thousand, and ten thousand are the
dangers this seed of grace does undergo before it comes to maturity; many trees
in the orchard are not transplanted, and ingrafted into Christ, and many
enemies those meet with that are, and the little fruit that is brought forth to
maturity, will have many a stick and many a stone cast at it; oh my soul, have
thou any stone cast at thee, any reproach cast upon thee, art thou persecuted
and hated for doing thy duty, despair not, it is a sign there is some fruit:
the traveller seldom throws at the barren tree, and the devil seldom throws
down his own fruit; have thou many enemies, Christ himself had not a few; live
uprightly toward man, holily toward God, that they may have no just occasion
against thee, but for serving God, and let them throw and spare not: bring
forth much fruit to God, and doubtless he will wall thee in, and defend thee: O
my God, mine enemies are many and subtle, powerful and malicious, be thou my
defender, and lot my fruit be pleasant to thy taste, and sweet to thy smell.

Upon a fair apple rotten at the core.
94. Med.
TAking notice of a beautiful apple, glorious to the eye, having a promising
aspect, a smoosh skin and a fair outside, yet when it was cut, it proved
deceitful, rotten at the heart, and corrupted within, and little good but a
painted skin, and the corruption within would soon have brake forth and
corrupted the outside also; this apple so deceitful, lively represented to my
thoughts an hypocrite, who in outward carriage and demeanor, and formalities,
makes a fair show, and in the external performance of duties represents a true
Christian when the heart is rotten, and the vitals of Religion are wanting, and
there is nothing but a sheepsskin drawn over a wolfs body; nothing but plaster
and paint, yet ofttimes so artificially done, that it is hard to discover it
from sincerity, in the external parts of Religion: many times he outstrips many
sincere Christians, and acts his part so cunningly, that many times he is taken
for the man he represents: he often makes a fair show to the world, and holds out
a more fairer profession in the sight of the sun, then the Saints themselves;
for they may afford to pay more for the color, for the cloth costs them
nothing; what others bestow in the lining, they lay it out on the outside; like
an old withered band, rotten within, and painted without; but the rottenness
that lies at the heart, many times breaks out, and rots the life and
conversation also; for corruption within will break out: our Savior Christ did
lively represent these men by painted sepulchers, and whited tombs, glorious to
the eye, but within full of filthiness, and putrefaction, Mat. 23.27. woe unto
you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for you are like unto whited Sepulchers,
that appear glorious to the eye, but within are full of dead men's bones and all
uncleaness; so do ye in the eye of the world appear righteous unto men, but
within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity: fair professors but foul sinners:
there are many with Pilate will wash their hands, but few will wash their
hearts, Mat. 27.24. this also the Pharisees did, but this is too weak an
element to wash off guilt, which is not purged but by the blood of Christ, or
the fire of hell; but God and nature begin at the heart, and so must a
Christian that would be cleansed; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, wash thy heart from
wickedness, how long shall vain thoughts lodge in thee? Jer. 4.14. cleanse your
hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double minded, Jam. 4.8. both
heart and life must be reformed, but reformation should begin at the heart, or
it will never rightly season the life: the most men begin reformation at the
wrong end, they lop off some of the bigger branches of sin, and it is well they
do so, many go not so far, when the root remains firm and untouched: and hence
it is it quickly springs again, at the next gale of opportunity or warm gleam
of temptation; they are seeking to cleanse the stream when the fountain that
feeds it is corrupt, they would make the fruit good when the tree is bad, but
this is but labor lost, the way is first to cleanse the fountain, and then the
stream will be clear; let the tree be grafted, and the fruit will be better;
the hypocrite like a glow worm makes a great show in a dark night, but if you
touch her, she yields neither fire nor heat; I have read of a Roman Senator,
that was giving audience to an Ambassador, but beholding his colored hair,
and painted face, said, what sincerity can we expect from these men, whose very
locks, and looks, and lips do lie? so these men's looks, and words, and actions
lie, and show that outwardly that is not inwardly there in the heart: hypocrisy
may be spun with a fine thread, that it can be hardly discerned in the stuff,
but usually it is seen in the wearing, for usually it is not durable, neither
will it endure a storm, but will shrink in the wetting; will the hypocrite pray
always? (says Job) intimating, he will not; they are like the short-winded
Bethulians, faint after a turn or two: fained conversion often proves unfeigned
apostasy; those that receive not the truth in the love of the truth, will
hardly dye for the maintenance of the truth; those that have not the root of
the matter in them, will soon wither, 1. John 2.19. they went out from us, but
they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us, but they went out that they might be made manifest, that
they were not all of us: hypocrites are in the Church as tares among the corn,
and chaff among the wheat, or as a wen or ulcer on the body, or a wooden leg;
when a separation is made, the corn is the better, and the body never the
worse; the foolish virgins had lamps in their hands as well as the wise, but
wanting oil in their vessels, and grace in their hearts, were shut out; those
that only pretend to holiness and the power of godliness, and not intend it,
are like unto Vriah; they carry their own condemnation about them, for if
Religion be not good, why do they profess it? if it be good, why do they not
practice it? if they would not have the tree of sin killed, why do they lop off
the branches? if they would, why do they not stock it up by the roots? if when
they pray that God would mortify their sin and heal them of their hypocrisy,
they would not have God hear them, why do they pray? if they would, why do they
not endeavor it as well as beg it? if hypocrisy be good, why do they pray
against it? if it be bad, why do they wittingly and willingly use it? if they
would not have the stream clean, why do they purge it? if they would, why do
they not cleanse the fountain that it may be clean? they should be as they seem,
or seem as they be; they should practice what they profess, or profess what
they practice; I would (says God) ye were either hot or cold; he likes not a
lukewarm temper; their profession is but a fantastic fire, kindled in their
own tinder-box: oh my soul, see thou be sound at the heart, that the life of
Religion be in thee, and not the dead image; if the heart be rotten, sooner or
later it will break out into the life; see that there be oil as well as a lamp,
and practice as well as a profession: oh my God, without thine assistance my
heart will deceive me: Lord, make my heart sound in thy statutes.

How little comfort the world can afford without food.
95. Med.
WHen I had for a considerable time recreated my self among the flowers in the
garden, and among the trees of the orchard, sometimes solacing my self in the
silent walks therein, sometimes under the shady trees, or in the green alleys,
delighting my self in the beautiful aspect, various forms, scent and savours of
the flowers, and herbs, and contemplating their virtues and operations, which
led me by the hand to admire the Creators wisdom and goodness, to make all
these for the use of poor man; and it made me consider, how ill God was
requited by man for all these mercies; and thus spending my time, sometimes in
reading, sometimes in meditating, and in these exercises I continued; sometimes
walking, sometimes sitting, sometimes lying, or in such postures as pleased my
mind, or suited my fancy; sometimes taking delight in hearing the sweet
singing birds, at other times in the cool refreshing gales of wind that gently
breathed upon me, and qualified the heat of the day: in a word, sometimes
taking delight in one thing, sometimes in another, till at last I began to be
an hungry, and my craving stomach spoiled much of the delight and satisfaction
that I had taken before in those enjoyments, the pleasant sights, the sweet
smells, the melodious harmony, which before so pleased me, now began to give me
no content or comfort, my craving stomach spoils all the sport, and all the
delight vanished; and although I purposely propounded several delightful
objects to my self to divert my thoughts, yet nothing would do it, no
meditation would fasten, no thoughts fix in my mind, but the thought of meat:
This put me in mind of the fable of Midas, that when he had gotten liberty of
the Gods, to wish what he would, with a promise that it should be granted,
wished that all he touched should be turned to gold; which was immediately done,
but when he came to eat and to drink, his meat and drink turned to gold also,
and so lost its nutritive virtue, and so in the midst of his riches he was
reduced to the greatest extremity, and ready to perish for want of food, and
became more miserable then the poorest beggar: I thought with my self if that
which is fabled of him were verifyed of me, that I were able my self with my
touch to turn all those herbs and flowers, grass, and trees into gold, yea, the
ground I trod upon, and all that I did either see, or feel, how little
satisfaction would this bring me without meat? one meals meat would bring me
more content in my need, then all this, for this would prove but a rich
famishment; oh vain man how apt art thou to thirst after that which can do thee
no good, for this life, nor that to come, and can not thou content thy self
without it, though thou have that which is far better? oh bewitching gold, with
what charms do thou infatuate the minds of men, to dote after thee; when thou
can never satisfy the mind or stomach? yet art thou become the price of
blood, yea, the price of souls, and many a man sells his soul to the devil for
thee, to live in endless, easeless, and remediless torments: I found by
experience that had I had all the wealth in the world, and all the gold in the
Indies in exchange for my meat, my condition would have been worse then it is,
yea, worse then the poorest beggar that goes from door to door, yea, then that
of the gally-slaves in Turkey, and one meals meat would do me more good then all
this: this minded me of Gods goodness, and man's unthankfulness, he gives us
what is necessary and satisfactory, we thirst after that which is neither
necessary nor satisfactory: From this Consideration my meditation arose a
little higher, and I began to think that food was as necessary sor the soul as
for the body, for where life is, there must be food to maintain it, and
spiritual life requires spiritual food: I began to consider whether ever I was
so sensible of the want of spiritual food as I was of temporal; and found by
experience how vain earthly delights were, and how unsatisfactory without food;
but oh how little, yea, too little sensible I am of the want of spiritual food;
how little appetite have I to that bread which came down from heaven, and that
sincere milk of the word, that heavenly mannah which is daily spread about our
tents: this made me also consider, how it is with a poor hungring, thirsting,
panting soul after Christ, that cries out, give me Christ or else I die, and it
is no wonder, that nothing but Christ can satisfy such a hunger-starved soul,
for if neither sweet smells, pleasant sights, delightful music, nor any earthly
enjoyment, nay, gold it self, the quintescence (as many imagine) of all earthly
happiness, can satisfy an hungry man without meat, or a thirsty man without
drink, surely then neither riches nor honors, pleasures, nor preferments can
satisfy an hungry soul without Christ; for though the devil still many that cry
for Christ, with the world, as a nurse does a child that cries for gold with a
counter, yet where there is a knowledge of the worth of Christ, and the want of
Christ, where there has been a taste of Christ, he cannot thus delude them: an
hungry man is not satisfied with a cake of clay, nor an hungry soul with a
painted bible: oh my soul, how is it with thee? did thou ever thus hunger,
thus thirst after Christ? and nothing will satisfy but Christ; doubtless God
will satisfy thy longing desire; but if thou art satisfied with any other
thing, thy hunger is not right: O my God, work in me this spiritual appetite to
this heavenly food, and then give me this bread of life.

Upon the worth of meat, to those that know the want of it.
96. Med.
WHen I had well refresht my self with meat, after I had been hungry and
fainty, I began to know the worth of it by the want of it, I found that hunger
was the best sauce, the full soul (says Solomon) loatheth the honeycomb, but
to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet, Pro. 27.7. this holds true in
spirituals also, that which David accounts sweeter then honey and the
honeycomb, is now trampled upon by stall-fed beasts, in whom fullness has
bred forgetfulness, and saturity security; the Pharisees found no sweetness in
Christ's own Sermons; no wonder then if in our times men begin to surfeit on the
bread of life, and loath the word, the honeycomb it self, but hunger, seasons
homely provision, course fare, doves dung, and asses heads, as in the seige of
Samaria: great Hunniades never fared better then in his hunger with a poor
Shepherd, with bread and water, and onions; I considered the providence of God,
how rich he was in his goodness, not only in giving life, but also in giving
food to maintain life, in giving a stomach to receive and digest this food,
otherwise the choicest food would be nauseous, and in giving a blessing to this
food, and a nutritive faculty, otherwise it would do no good; if any of all
these were wanting, man's life could not be preserved; I considered that bread
which is called the staff of life, and indeed the chiefest of all food for the
preservation of life, it springs out of the earth, as all other food does, and
there can be nothing but the blessing of God, that differenceth it from the
earth; now if we eat bread, we are satisfied, but if we eat earth we die; for
God never blessed the earth, or put such a virtue into it as to nourish us; now
it is only Gods blessing that differences the one from the other in its
operations; for had God blessed the earth to this end and purpose, it would have
sustained us as well as corn that springs out of it, but that blessing is
denied to the one, which is given to the other; the beasts of the field are fed
by the grass, this will not keep man alive, yea, the serpents food seems to be
the dust, Genesis 3.14. for what else they feed on I know not, and it might have
been ours, had God pleased, yea, every species of the creatures, has some
peculiar food appropriated to it, and what is suitable to one, is disagreeable
to another; now though there be bread provided, it is necessary there must be
life, for what good will food do in a dead man's mouth? yea, it is necessary
also, that there be a stomach rightly qualified, for if the stomach refuse it,
it cannot nourish, and all these are Gods gifts; some men we see are clothed
more richly, and fed more daintily, they eat the fat, and drink the sweet, yet
languish for want of health, when others are fat, and well-liking with meaner
food, as Daniel and his fellows looked better with pulse and water, then others
did with the Kings meat, Dan. 1.15. it is a mercy to have food, and it is a
mercy to have stomachs to eat it, and it is no less a mercy to have the
blessing of God upon it, that it may nourish us: for this is one of the
greatest outward mercies we enjoy, and tends as much to our external happiness:
this minded me of the Apostles injunction, 1 timothy 6.8. we brought nothing into
the world, and it is certain we shall carry nothing out, and having food and
raiment, let us be therewith content; for godliness with content is great gain;
true piety is true plenty, it is storied of the Chaliph of Babylon, that he was
shut up amidst the infinite treasures of gold, silver and precious stones,
which he had covetously heaped together, and there was starved to death, by the
great Cham of Cataia, who yet willed him to eat, and make no spare: and it is
no strange thing, for gold and silver were never appointed, or blessed by God for
man's sustentation; food and raiment not junkets, are necessary; meat and drink
(says Jerome) are a Christians riches, and well may we be content with this,
if we knew the want of it; many poor creatures, yea, able Christians, better
then our selves, have suffered much, in Germany, and of late years in Ireland,
so that dogs, horses, rats and mice, and such like vermin, were esteemed good
food: in the seige of Samaria, there was such a famine, that an asses head was
sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a cab of doves dung
for five pieces of silver, 2 Kin. 6.25. and in Samaria, and afterward in
Jerusalem, the hands of the pitiful women sod their own children and eat them,
these were their meat in their distress, 2 Kin. 6.28. Lam. 4.10. but blessed be
God, we know not want, nor feel not sorrow; but what good would all the wealth
in the world do us, if we wanted food; Jems and Jewels, would be little worth,
crowns and kingdoms would yield us no comfort, bread would be of more worth to
us then its weight in gold, yet without the blessing of God this would not
serve our turn, or preserve our lives: how then dare men provoke this God by
abusing these his blessings? man lives not by bread only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God, Mat. 4.4. that is, by every thing that
God blesses to that end: if we want bread therefore, let us depend upon him,
that can preserve us without bread, as one of the Martyrs said, when he was
threatened to be famished, if God take away my meat, he can take away my
hunger, Psalm. 37.3. trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall thou dwell in the
land, and verily thou shall be fed: one promise will do us more good then all
our gold, Hab. 3.17, 18. though the fig tree should not blossom, and there be
no fruit in the vine, though the labor of the olive should fail, and the field
should yield no meat, though the flock should be cut off from the fold, and
there be no herd in the stall, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in
the God of my salvation; though Hagars bottle be empty, God will show her the
well; though the ship be broken, God will prepare a plank: oh my soul, trust in
God for thy bodily food, he that feeds the ravens will not starve the children,
but rest not satisfied till thy soul be fed with the bread of life; oh my God,
on thee I depend for food, both for body and soul; Lord, feed both, and with
food give a blessing, that ^oth soul and body may be nourished by it.

The world is not a resting place.
97. Med.
WHen I had been recreating my self in the garden, tired with studyes, and
other employments, I found some divertisement for a while among the various
delights, that there offered themselves to my senses, and unbent the bow that
was beginning to grow weak, through over-intent studies, and other employments:
I passed the time for a season in the viewing and observing of Natures garden,
not without some delightful observations, but at last, night approached and my
pleasures began to vanish: The birds which before delighted my ears with their
melodious harmony, were now gone to rest, and those herbs and flowers, which
before delighted my senses now disappeared, and their various colors, forms
and shapes could not be distinguished, but were all died in one sable color,
for universal darkness had spread her sable mantle over all, and every thing
was stained in the same die-fat, and I was left alone, though in the midst of
company, deprived of the delights which before I had, the cold air began to
pierce me, and the croaking frogs and toads which all this while had hid
themselves from my sight, were now crept forth and were like to be my
bed-fellows, if I lodged there, and bats and owls, those birds of the night,
were my companions; this made me to consider, how unpleasant this place of
delights, the greatest recreation I had in the world for my body, would be to
me at this time, had I no other habitation, and how unpleasant the night would
be to me: here I lay open to wind and weather, liable to be wet with the dew
of heaven, and was like to have the air for my supper, and with Jacob a stone
for my pillow; I considered now, though I too often forget it, the great
goodness of God to the just and to the unjust, to cause his sun to shine upon
them, one sun makes a day, but the moon and all the stars make but a night, but
what a mercy is it then, when the sun of righteousness arises with healing in
his wings? The unpleasantness of the present season to me, made me pity many
poor creatures that are necessarily exposed to these, and worse then these
hardships, as soldiers lodging in the fields, yea, many wandering people that
in the winter-season suffer much, as for those that designedly endure this
life, rather then expose themselves to labor, are not to be pitied,
correction is a fitter salve for their sore: but there are many aged and
impotent, lame, and unable, that should be better cared for, and I fear God
has a controversy with the nation upon this account; this consideration driven
up to the head, made me bless God this was not my condition, and to fear lest
my sins and unthankfulness might provoke God to make it my condition: This
raised my meditation a little higher, and I thought with myself, if this
garden, this place of delights be no comfortable abiding-place for the body
when night comes, sure then the world is no resting place for the soul, for
death will come: here in the daytime of life man may take some delight, but
the night will come when no man can work, and when all these things shall
vanish, I must seek out for some better shelter, some better lodging, some
better resting place for my soul: when night comes, and the sun is set upon me,
all these delightful objects will be gone, will forsake me, and hide their
heads, and they will yield no delight, no comfort or refreshment; crowns and
kingdoms, dirt and dung, will then be valued alike, and a piece of lead will be
as good as a piece of gold, or an heap of diamonds; these outward things can
afford neither food nor physic, neither lodging nor entertainment, neither
pleasures nor profit, to the weary soul; these earthly tabernacles ere long
will be dissolved, and these houses of clay, will moulder into dust, 2 Cor.
5.1. and what shall we then do, if we are no better provided? the soul here
wears the body as a garment, which when it is worn out, the saints shall have a
better suit, they shall be choathed with the Lord Jesus Christ; death will not
spare the best, there is no coming to paradise but under the flaming sword of
this guardian that stands at the porch, no wiping all tears from our eyes, but
with our winding sheet; assurance of Gods love makes a man even willing to die,
but the cook on the dunghill knows not the worth of this jewel; oh the
blindness, madness, and stupidity of man, whose care is to lade himself with
thick clay, and to take care what he shall eat, or what he shall drink, or
wherewithal he shall be clothed, and makes no provision for the soul, but
depends upon that for comfort, that can do no good when most need is; they can
provide in the day for the night, in the summer for the winter, on the
market day for the whole week, and at a Fair for the whole year, and yet make
no provision in life for death, or in time for eternity: if a celestial
habitation be not provided against those houses of clay, our bodies, wherein
the soul lodges as a tenant at will, be dissolved, our lodging will be worse
then with toads and serpents, even with the devil and his angels, in endless,
easeless, and remediless torments: oh my soul how fares it with thee, or what
preparation have thou made? long it cannot be before night comes, where then
will be thy lodging? the earth then will be to thee as the waters to Noah's
dove, thou will find no rest here for the sole of thy foot; it is in heaven
that the weary be at rest, Job. 3.17. oh my God, enable me to clear up my
interest in Christ, who is the only sanctuary for a troubled soul.

Upon sickness spoiling all earthly delights.
98. Med.
WHen I had fitted things to my mind, and began to take delight in the works
of my hands, when I began to sing a requiem to my self, and my heart (with
Solomon's) rejoiced in all my labor, Eccl. 2.10. yea, when I had promised my
self content in what I had done, I was suddenly forced to say with wise
Solomon, Eccles. 14. behold all is vanity and vexation of spirit; nothing in
themselves, yet sufficient to vex and perplex us; sin has produced a confusion
in the world, and stamped vanity upon the creature, every man (says David) in
his best estate is altogether vanity; this is the impartial verdict brought in
by one that could best tell, and to this I was forced to subscribe, for God
immediately humbled me for setting my affection upon creature comforts, and let
me see the vanity of them, by visiting me with a fit of sickness, that I was
taken off from setting my delight, or taking satisfaction in or upon them, or
taking any pleasure in any thing that I had done, nay, I was troubled that I
had not spent my time better, and that I had not planted, set, or sown in a
more fertile soil, where I might have expected a more plentiful increase, and
had a better crop: this providence seemed to speak to me, as Christ did to the
rich man, Luke 12.16. etc. that set his heart on his riches, and was not rich
to God; thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee, and then
whose are these? this showed me more of the vanity of humane felicity, then I
had before observed; I plainly saw there was a double uncertainty in all
earthly felicity, and in sublunary enjoyments, for they themselves are very
uncertain, and many times short-lived, and may leave us, or we may by death be
arrested, and then we shall leave them; God sometimes takes them from us, they
take themselves wings and fly away, and shall we set our eyes upon things that
are not? Pro. 23.5. there is no solid substance in them, though the foolish
world call it by that name; they are as transitory as a hasty headlong torrent,
but if they remain we shall remove; for our life passes away as a shadow, or
post, or weavers shuttle, and continues not, and then those winged fouls that
now sit upon our trees, shall sit upon other men's, sometimes God blows upon
them, and blasts them, that though we do enjoy them, they prove but a vexation
to us: sometimes he disables us to use them, and sometimes imbitters them to
us, mixing them with gall and wormwood, that we can find no pleasure in them,
and assuredly they will do us little good, when we have most need; suppose a
man to have what the world can afford, yea, all the delights of the sons of
men, yea, all that his heart can wish, as Solomon had, Eccl. 2.27. yet one
hours sickness spoils all his mirth, and robs him of all the comfort he
promised to himself; one fit of the colic, gout, strangury, or other raging
pain, yea, the extreme pain of an aching tooth, puts a man besides all these his
enjoyments; yet how greedily do men grasp after the world, as if it included
the highest degree of happiness, and hug it in their bosom, and lodge it
nearest to the heart, which will prove no better, nay, much worse then a bush
of thorns, if graspt too hard; so this, the harder it is handled the worse it
hurts; oh folish man, cannot these earthly enjoyments give ease to an aching
head, or heart? can they not mitigate the pains of the gout, colic, stone, or
strangury, and can it be imagined they can ease the conscience, or cure a
sinsick soul? if not, what good can they do it? could Judas, Achitophel, Spira
and others, fetch any comfort here in their extremity, no, no, they are like
Jobs friends, miserable comforters at such a time; what good will gold do at
death, and judgment? this coin is not current in the other world, nay, in this
world it brings little content, if God frown: if one spark of hellfire flash
in the conscience, all these things cannot extinguish it; one drop of it will
mar a whole cup of earthly delights; that in the midst of laughter the heart
will be sorrowful, and the end of that mirth will be heaviness, Pro. 14.13.
nulla est sincera voluptas; wicked men may dance to the timbrel and harp, but
suddenly they turn into hell, Job. 21.12, 13. and their merry dance ends in a
miserable downfall; the candle of the wicked shall out in a snuff, and what
will all these outward enjoyments signify then? Jobs flower, Jonahs gourd, and
David's green bay tree, will soon wither, and their beauty will fade: all these
things will leave us at death, many times before: how much need then have we to
make preparation beforehand of something that will stand us instead? This
sickness of mine also taught me how unfit a time this was for repentance, and
yet how many post it off till then? oh, how unfit was I to examine my heart,
and call my sins to mind, to repent of them, when racking pains brought such a
confusion upon me, that my thoughts were distempered and distracted, and I
could not keep my heart intent upon any thing, when all I could do was little
enough to wrestle with my distemper; this made me resolve, and oh that I could
hold on my resolution, if ever I recovered, I would remember my Creator in the
days of my health: oh my soul, seeing these outward things can do thee little
good, but if overloved will do thee much hurt, set but a little value upon
them, there is a treasure to be had that will hold out, and pleasures that will
endure, which will keep up the head above water, under sickness, sorrow, and
death; labor for this, but to spend time on that which one hours sickness will
put us besides, it is but labor lost: oh my God, give me that for my portion,
that will bear up my head, and heart, not only in sickness, but in death it
self.

Upon a rainy day.
99. Med.
IN a rainy and very tempestuous day, being driven into the house by the
violence of the storm, and the tempest proving so violent and furious, that the
house it self could hardly secure me from the fury of it: This made me consider
what a mercy it was in such a season to have a retiring place for shelter, and
how uncomfortable it would have been to me, had I been forced to have born the
brunt of this raging storm, and yet how little do we value these mercyes when
we know not the want of them, and how few return praise to God that has given
us houses that we builded not, and vineyards that we planted not. Deu. 6.11.
saturity often breeds security, and fullness forgetfulness, the moon at the full
is furthest from the sun, and ofttimes suffers ecclips by the interposition of
the earth, and so we are ofttimes like Jesurun that waxed fat and kicked, or
like full-fed hawks, that will not know their master; neither do we pity those
that want houses, or whose houses at least are not able to secure them, or keep
them dry; this put me in mind to bless my God that had made such a comfortable
provision for me, that I seldom suffered upon this account, and to condole
those whose condition was otherwise, I considered how great a mercy rain and
waters were, that neither man, nor beast, nor tree, nor plant, that neither the
rational, the sensitive, nor vegetative creature, could subsist, or live
without it, and how dear and precious it was to the Patriarks of old, and in
many places of the world at this day; how scarce it was with the Israelites in
the wilderness, yea, was, and in many places is their constant, if not only
drink, and many thousands have perished for want of it, and how it would be
prized of us did we want it; yea, how often when the showers of heaven are
restrained, do our fields languish, and the fruits of the earth fail, and yet
who is it that is thankful, when God gives us the former and the latter rain in
its season? and yet how much are we engaged to God, in England above many other
places? we seldom are reduced to such straits as others are, for want of water,
but have abundance of fresh rivers, brooks, and torrents, yea, springs and
ponds in most parts of the land, that man nor beast seldom want it; how would
such a mercy be prized in many places of the world? and yet though water be
such a mercy, when it is abused God can turn it into a judgment: he drowned
the old world with it, and overwhelmed the Egyptians in the Red Sea, and many
times in those Northern climats, he punishes us with immoderate rain, and
showers, which ofttimes proves the cause of scarcity and want, thereby teaching
us, that the greatest outward blessings, if abused, may be turned into curses,
and a fruitful land made barren for the wickedness of those that dwell therein,
Psalm. 107.34. Having spent some time on these considerations, the storm
continuing, the present providence brought to my mind the words of Solomon,
Pro. 19.13. a foolish son is the calamity of his father, and the contentions of
a wife are a continual dropping, Pro. 27.15. a continual dropping in a very
rainy day, and a contentious woman are alike: etc. this is like a tempest in
the heaven, most troublesome, and most dangerous; when a man comes home tired,
with his labor and travail, and expects refreshing at his own house, and there
is entertained, either with the continual dropping of rain upon his head, or
with an unbridled scolding tongue of an unreasonable wife, both are
troublesome, both are uncomfortable, a cross grained contentious yoak-fellow,
whether man or woman, sowers all the comforts of life, and renders that
relation the most troublesome, and uncomfortable of any in the world, which
would otherwise be the sweetest and most delightful of all others: hence says
Solomon, it is better live in a corner on the housetop, then with a brawling
woman in a wide house, Pro. 21.19. a man had better abide abroad exposed to
wind and weather, or crib himself up in any little angle or corner, then live
with a contentious woman, that is ever brawling and brangling, for such turn
conjugium into conjurgium, marriage into mar-age, and instead of love and amity
they promote strife and emnity, and multiply curses instead of prayers; The
marriage-relation is the most desirable, or the most detestable, of all others;
none is more delightful where love and unity is, none is more hateful where
strife and contention, envy and hatred bears the sway; and as family-peace is a
desirable blessing, and family-jars an unsufferable torment, so peace among
neighbors is a mercy, and the contrary a sore judgment; but many like the
Salamander live in the fire, they love to foment jars and contentions, and are
never so well, as when they are sowing discord, or working mischief, Pro.
26.21. as coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire, so is a contentious man
to kindle strife; many men are like mad dogs, they snarl at all, and would if
they could bite all, and make them as mad as themselves, some contentious
Christians also there are that in this fire burn and consume their graces, not
their vices; these grow in opinions and flourish with these leaves, seldom in
grace, for their fruit is seldom seen, or it is bitter and unsavory; they are
ready to disroab all others of their graces that attain not to the same pitch
of opinion with themselves, but the Church is little beholding to them, whose
zeal sets all into a combustion; but above all peace, peace with God, and peace
with a man's conscience is most to be desired, yea, absolutely neecssary, which
cannot be had, till we break our peace with sin, and satan: oh my soul, study
peace with all men, and holiness, without which you shall never see God; study
peace with thy relations, but especially with thy God; and if thy ways please
him, thy enemy shall be at peace with thee: oh my God, let not the devil by his
wiles nor the world by her frowns or smiles make me break my peace with thee.

Upon cold winter-weather.
100. Med.
IN stormy cold and winter-weather, when the fields were unfit for action, and
the husbandman was retired into his cell, as the Soldier into his
winter-Garison, I considered how necessary, how desirable, how delightful, a
dry house, fire, food, clothing, lodging, and other necessaries were, to
cherish and nourish, and shelter us from the violence of the cold, and how
unpleasant it was for man or beast to be abroad in the fields, and how
unsuitable for action there this season was; then considered I the folly of
those that made not preparation for such a season, that those sluggishly pass
away the Summer-season that is fit for action in the field, and made no
preparation in the harvest, and so are destitute of food, of fuel, and other
necessaries, to make their lives comfortable in the winter; for those the holy
Ghost sends to school to the ant or pismire, Pro. 6.6. go to the ant thou
sluggard, consider her ways and be wise, which having no guide, overseer or
ruler, provideth her meat in the summer, and gathers her food in the harvest:
poor man that was once captain in Gods school is now turned down into the
lowest form, and to be taught by the meanest creatures; sometimes to the birds,
and to the lillies of the field, that depend upon divine providence, sometimes
to the ox and to the ass, to learn dependence, and here to the ant, to learn
diligence: these poor creatures may be called laymens books, for in them they
may learn their duty, and not as many do in diem vivere, as the fouls of the
air do: we should learn dependence of them, but a provident care must be had,
as one says, no promus sit fortior condo, that our layings out be not more
then our layings up; there is a care of the head lawful, but it is the care of
the heart that is forbidden; a care of diligence there may be, a care of
diffidence there must not be; but some fail on the one hand, some on the other,
and it is hard to walk in the direct road: I also pitied those that wanted the
necessaries I enjoyed, and could not tell how to prepare them, when all their
diligence and industry fell short of necessaries; as there are too many poor
families amongst us, which should be looked after, and I fear God will look
after those stewards he has entrusted to feed them, and they neglect it; see
Mat. 24.48. Mat. 25.41. I then called to mind the estate of poor Christians in
Ireland, in the beginning of the rebellion, that were suddenly stripped of all,
turned out naked and hungry, exposed to wind and weather, to hunger and cold,
to frost and snow, to the loss of many thousands of their lives, and to very
much hardship to those that escaped; this example on the one side, discovered
to me what injuries and wrongs, what hardship and miseries poor creatures may
be exposed to; how uncertain these transitory enjoyments are, and how soon they
may be lost, and for ought I know this may be my own condition, how soon I know
not, and what would I then give to be in such a condition that I now am,
although it be not altogether free from some troubles and hardship? it minded
me also on the other side, of the cruelty of bloodthirsty enemies, and what we
may expect from them, if ever we fall into their hands, or lie at their mercy;
and this made me admire Gods goodness to this nation in general, and to my self
in particular, that it is so well with us as it is, yea this consideration made
me more contented with my condition then before, and to bless God that he had
made such plentiful provision for me, that had deserved so little at his hands;
when he suffered those Worthys of whom the world was not worthy, to have trial
of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonments,
they were stoned, sawn in sunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword, they
wandered about in sheepskins, and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, and
tormented, of whom the world was not worthy, they wandered in deserts, and in
mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth, Heb. 11.36. I considered that
though the enjoyment of these things be no certain sign of the love of God, yet
are they great engagements to engage the heart to God; and they are much too
blame, yea, shall give a severe account, that wilfully waste or abuse them in
drunkenness, idleness, pride; prodigality, gaming, whoring, or any other
vicious courses, yea, they are too blame that withhold good from the owners
thereof, or detain the poors portion from them, to whom it is due; These
considerations had, I raised my Meditations a little higher, and considered,
that if an earthly habitation be so necessary in winter for the body, to
shelter it from the violence of the weather, how necessary then will an
habitation for the soul be, against these houses of clay be disolved, to keep
off the storms of divine vengeance? for what will become of those then that
have nothing to shelter them, or as good as nothing, the garments of their own
righteousness, which are too short to cover them, and too thin to defend them,
and cannot shelter the soul from divine vengeance, no better then a spiders web
can the body from a cannon-bullet, these doubtless are bad husbands for the
soul, though they may have care enough of the body: oh my soul, what condition
do thou stand in, in reference to eternity? thou have been often summoned by
death, and sometimes made to look it in the face, and yet thy days, with
Hezekiahs are lengthened out, and God has given thee more time to do thy work
in; what preparation have thou made for it? have thou provided an habitation
against thou shall be turned out of this house of clay? have thou cleared up
thy evidence for heaven and thy title to glory? if not, give thy self no rest
till thy work be done, for then, and not till then, thou will be fit do dye: it
is not a bare profession that will serve thy turn, the root of the matter must
be in thee, Job. 19.28. a profession without practice will do thee no good; oh
my God without thy divine assistance I shall miscarry, and without a lamp
lighted by thy holy spirit, I shall never find out the deceits that are in my
own heart; Lord, grant that these my Meditations may be beneficial to my self
and others, that they may never rise up in judgment against me another day,

Amen.
FINIS.

