A True Narrative Of the Late DESIGN Of the PAPISTS to charge their Horrid PLOT
UPON THE PROTESTANTS.

By endeavoring to corrupt Capt. BURY and Mr. BROOKS of Dublin; and to take
off the Evidence of Mr. OATS and Mr. BEDLOW, etc.

As appears by the Depositions taken before the Right Honorable Sir Joseph
Williamson, Knight, one of His Majesty's late Principal Secretaries of State;
And the several Examinations before Sir William Waller, Knight, One of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace.

Published for General Information.

Reprinted at DUBLIN, 1679.

THIS Narrative of the late Design of the Papists, etc. Published for general
Information, does exactly agree with the Examinations taken by Sir Joseph
Williamson and myself.

WILLIAM WALLER.
March the 29th. -- 79.
The DEPOSITIONS of CAPTAIN BURY.
ON the 11th of this Instant January, I received the annexed Note from Mr.
James Nettervile, on the 13th I went to him; as soon as I came, he told me, he
had something to impart to me in private; We went into a Room alone, and he
asked me If I did not here that there were persons making inquiry to find out
some that would amuse those that had impeached the Lords, and those concerned
about the Plot. I told him I heard nothing of it. He told me there were such,
and that I should find the Game would turn another way; and that I might do my
self a kindness, if I pleased. I told him my affairs called me for Ireland,
that I must be gone on the Thursday following. He told me it would be worth my
while to stays and asked me if I could nor prove that one Mr. Digby had
meetings With Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow. I told him no, for he knew there had
been no great friendship of late betwixt us (this I looked upon as an
introduction to the design); but he came close to me, and told me, a person had
been with him concerning this matter, and that indeed they had a jealousy of
Mr. Blood; and if I would discover any thing of that nature against him, I
should have 4 or 500 l. for my pains. To this I seemed to hearken (but was much
surprised at this unexpected discourse) and did plainly see their design was to
turn the Game another way, as he said before. I did not discourage him, but
told him I would consider of it; and if I did not go on Thursday, I would see
him again; and that he knew well I was very hard to believe this plot; and then
he told me that he could bring a prisoner in that place to drink a pot of Ale
with me, that could give me an account what a Rogue Mr. Bedlow was; but I being
in haste, took my leave of him, he injoyning me to secrecy. At my return I
could not meet with Mr. Blood, but having some business with Sir Ralph
Dalaval, and the Lady Elizabeth his Daughter, and being full with this devilish
design, I told the story to them, and said, when I was in Ireland, I should
hear, and they should find that this was the Game they intended to play, To
turn the plot from themselves, and doubted not they would find some to carry it
on.

On the 14th (in the morning) I went to Mr. Bloods house, and acquainted him
with it; he desired me to meet him in the evening, because he desired to
consider of it; but told me then, he had no reason to flight it, because the
morning before, a Knight [Sir Thomas Longvile] had been with him, and told him
there was a design against him of the same kind, and desired him to inquire
after it.

In the evening I met with Mr. Blood, who desired me to keep my correspondence
with the said Nettervile, and to know or him how I should be secured my
payments, and what it was they would have me do.

On the 16th. I went accordingly to him, and told him I had considered of what
we had discoursed before, and had stopped my Journey as to that day; he was very
glad to see me, and told me, that the party [Russel] had been with him again
about the business, and I might get 500 l without any prejudice to my self, I
told him that Money would do me a great kindness at this time (for he knew I
had waited a long time here, and that it was very hard with me), therefore
desired to know what they would have me to do, and how I should be sure of the
500 l, for I expected it should be a person of good credit that would lay down
the 500 l. He told me I should not need to question that, for they were of
credit enough. But he that came to him [Russel], was only employed to pay the
Money; and if I shall tell him that you will do the business, you shall be sure
of the money; not so, said I, First let me know what it is distinctly, and how
I shall be sure of the 500 l. or I will not stir a foot in it, but begone on
Monday. Says he, Would you have the money beforehand? then it may be you will
not do it. No, said I, that I do not desire. But will you deposite it in a
third hand? Truly, said he, that is very fair, and I doubt not but they will do
it (for I told him none was betten able to carry it on than you; for Mr.
Blood's man was formerly your Servant, and preferred by you to him) and told
me, that on Saturday by two or three of the Clock, his friend would be with him
again; but that he would be shy of discoursing with me; and desired that I
would come to him [Russel] on Monday, and then I should understand more. Upon
my return I acquainted Mr. Blood with the whole discourse, and that I was to
leave the town on Monday, having stayed my utmost time, because I had a Suit
depending in Chancery, at Dublin; and that if I were not there the beginning of
the Term, it would be great damage to me, because my absence would be looked
upon as a contempt; but Mr. Blood requested me to stay until he had acquainted
His Majesty, or one of his Secretaries with it, to know his pleasure as to my
going or stay.

John Bury.
Sworn before me the 17 of Jan. 1678. J. Williamson.

SAturday the 18th of January, I was with James Nettervile in the Evening; he
told me his Friend [Russel] had left him about half an hour before I came, and
that he acquainted him with what I propounded (to wit) that 500 l. should be
deposited in a third persons hand; and he told me his friend was contented it
should be so, and thought it but reasonable, and therefore was willing to put
it into a Goldsmiths hand I asked him if they had considered the method we
should carry this on? and whether they had drawn up the heads of what I was to
swear? He told me, no; but his Friend would be with him again upon Wednesday,
and that all things should be prepared and ready for me by Thursday Morning. I
asked him if it would be convenient for me to meet his Friend? He told me not
as yet, for he was very wary, shy, and fearful of being betrayed. I told him I
thought my meeting with him was not material; only, said I, let him be sure to
secure the money, and he needs not doubt of effecting the business. But, said
I, 500 l. is not all that I expect from him for this service, that is but a
melting Cash, and I have a great Charge, and a Wife and six Children, and you
know I have lain a long time waiting here, almost to my utter ruin, and have
been very hardly dealt with. Now, if I accomplish this, I shall lose my
interest in all other parties, and therefore expect he should make me a very
good interest with that party. Never fear that, said he, you shall have
interest enough with them; and if we can but turn off this Plot, there is no
danger of effecting our business; for, says he, the King will believe nothing
of it. Well said I, I must trust to you to make my interest; but I partly see
how things are like to go, and think it wisdom to come in with the beginning of
the Game. Says he (swearing by his Maker) Never fear, if we turn off this
Plot, we do our business, and you will be made for ever. But, said I, Why will
you defer this while Wednesday? That is a great while, and delays are not
good. Said he, I did not expect you till Sunday: But if I hear any thing in the
mean time, I will write to you, and it shall be left at Mr. Brooke's Lodging. I
hear, said I, the Parliament is Prorogued; and that is true enough, said he;
and till they meet again, we can receive no great damage (...) hear the
Apprentices are ready to rise and pull down Newgate. Said I, then I suppose
that is, because the men [Jesuits] are not executed. What else, said he? and
that is our great danger; that the people should run into a Rebellion before we
accomplish our business. I asked him if he had taken an abstract, as he said he
would, of what that man in the prison could swear, to take off Mr. Bedlow's
Evidence. I have not yet, said he, but we are sure enough of him, and shall
make Bedlow Rogue enough. Pray, said I, what will he swear? That the very
morning the Proclamation came forth concerning Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, Mr.
Bedlow came to his chamber, and asked him if he had ever seen Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey: For, said he, if I knew what a like man he was, I could easily get 500
l. and however, I am resolved to hazard my Neck, but I will have it; and that
he would have had this man go with him to Somersethouse to see the Rooms, and
promised to get him money, if he would go with him. But, said I, Mr.
Nettervile, it is said Mr. Bedlow was out of Town before the Proclamation came
out; that is not so, says he, for this man's Wife went into the Country with
him. A great deal of discourse more we had, all tending to the encouraging of
me to carry on this business, to turn this plot to be a Protestant Plot for the
destruction of the Papists, and then I should be made for ever. When I paid the
Reckoning, and was coming away, said he, you will always come to your charge,
but I hope the end will pay for all.

On Wednesday the 22d, at Night, I went to Mr. Nettervile. expecting to have
the model how they would have me Swear, and in what Goldsmiths hand they would
put the 500 l. But as soon as ever I came to him, he told me that he had been
put into such a fright, that he was never in all his life before; for, said he,
Mr. Oats, Mr, Bedlow, Sir William Waller, and another Justice have been with
me; they called for Irons, one would have fifty pound weight, another would
have an hundred pound weight put upon me. At length Sir William Waller began to
examine me, and told me, he knew I could discover a great deal; so I desired
the rest might be put out of the Room, and I confessed all to him and the other
Justice, they both prom^sing me my pardon. Have you confessed all, said I? how
could I help it, said he? I was never in such a fright in all my life; and they
promised me my pardon. What have you confessed, said I? I have told them, said
he, that 500 l. was to be deposited in a Goldsmiths hand, and that I had sent
for a Gentleman, and treated with him about it. Have you told them my Name,
said I? he paused at that; no, said he; but I must tell them, but I thought
first to acquaint you with it. Then said I, it seems you have left me in the
lurch, and have made no provision for me; therefore since it is so, you will
give me leave to play my own Game; and seeing you have confessed, let us now play
our Game as well as we can on the other side, and be sure to be ingenuous, and
confess what ever we know. I will immediately to Sir Joseph Williamson, and
declare the whole Story. Pray do so, says he, neglect no time, but go this
night. And so we parted.

John Bury.

The Deposition of Alderman BROOKS.
THat on^^ about the 23d. of December, 1678. I was at the Marshalseys in
Southwark, where was one James Nettervile, a prisoner there for debt; who
desired me to do so much for him, as to carry a Note for a friend of his that
was a prisoner also, unto one Pierce Butler, that lived in Germanstreet, near
my Lodging; and said, if I would procure any of his friends to come to his
friend there, he would have money enough, whereof he should have a share; and
also it would be a great kindness to him; whereupon I told him I would,
provided he would write it quickly. Whereupon he called forth his friend, and
they two consulted together, and he wrote two or three lines, and gave them me
for the said Butler. But when I came to the place where I was directed they
told me he was gone out of Town in obedience to the Kings Proclamation. And so
I troubled my self no further, but put the Note in my pocket: The next morning
he sent a messenger to me, to know what I had done in it; I desired him to tell
the said Mr. Nettervile, that the said Mr. Butler was gone out of Town in
obedience to his Majesty's Proclamation.

About ten days after, I had occasion for some waste paper; and putting my hand
in my pocket, I sit on this Note that I should have delivered to Butler, and
opened it, and read it, and found in it these words written, or to this effect.

Sir, I am here committed by the name of Daniel Edmonds, by a Justice of the
Peace in the Country, as being a Recusant. And therefore I desire of you, that
you will come unto me here, that I may advise with you; and in so doing, you
will oblige your friend,

Dominick Kelly.


This run in my mind, till about the 5th. instant at night; and then being at
Mr. Proctor's Coffee-house at Charingcross, I there met with a paper,
entitled, Mr. Praunces Discovery of the Plot, and of Sir Edmondbury Godfreys
murderers; wherein (amongst other things) there was mentioned two Irish
Priests to be guilty, the one named Gerrald, and the other Kelly; whereupon it
came into my mind, that the man that I carried the Note for into Germanstreet,
must be the same Kelly, because by that Note he was committed by the name of
Edmonds, and his name was Kelly.

The next morning being the 16th of this instant January (thinking to have
found the same Kelly there), I came there; and coming to the aforesaid
Nettervile, and after some secret discourse, I asked him how his friend did
that I carried the Note for? he told me he procured Bail. Then I asked him what
he was? he told me that he was a Priest, and one of those that Oats (that
Rogue) had impeached. I asked him how he could get Bail, being a Priest; he
told me, they did not know that he was a Priest; and those that were his Bail,
would be Bail for any for money; and he gave them ten shilling a piece, and the
fellow that procured them, five shillings; and he got them the copy of his
Commitment for them to move by; and the Priest promised him, the said
Nettervile, seven pounds. But he had not left it him as yet; and so we left
this discourse, and came to other.

That he having sent by me a Letter, and a petition to Mrs. Eleanor Wall, a
Gentlewoman that belongs to the Duchess of Portsmouth (whom he calls Cozen),
whereby to get him some money for his present supply: but I having no
opportunity to meet with her, could give him no account of that matter;
whereupon he said that he was in such want, that if he had not help speedily,
he should be turned into the Common-side: I told him that money was so scarce
with me, that I could not lend him any; but if I could, I would. Whereupon he
called me aside into the corner of the Yard, by the Gate, and told me That if I
would be ruled by him: he would put me into a way whereby we should have money
enough. I asked him how? he told me, if I would but join and assist to vilify
the Evidence of Oats and Bedlow, those two Rogues; whereupon I laughed at him,
and said, it is impossible; their Evidence was grounded upon too good a
foundation: he told me I was mistaken, and I should hear otherwise in a little
while.

Upon the 17th. of January I went again to him, thinking to have gained
something of him, what was become of this Priest, but could not; and was taking
my leave of him, saying, I must go home, for I had some business to write for
Ireland, to send by Captain Bury, who was to go on Monday; he told me, he
believed he should stop Captain Bury's journey; I told him, I hoped not so; he
answered, it should not be to his prejudice. To which I answered, why then with
all my heart, for I would not be against any thing that should be for his good.
And so there came in one Russel an Irish man, that had some business with him.
And so we parted.

William Brooks.

The second information of Mr. Brooks.
I Being with Mr. Nettervile at the Marshalsey in Southwark, Mr. Nettervile
desired me I would do him the kindness as to carry another Letter for his
Friend to one Captain Kelly, who had three or four Employments in the Tower of
London; I told him I would if it was any kindness to him. So Nettervile with
Dominick Kelly went together, and wrote a Letter to this Capt Kelly of the
Tower; the Contents were much the same with that I carried to Pierce Butler. I
carried it to the Tower, and Capt. Kelly was not at home; so I delivered it to
his Wife. As soon as she read it, the tears were in her eye; she struck her
hand on her breast, saying, Alas poor man, is he taken? I was in hopes he had
been safe, of all the rest. She thankt me very kindly, and told me, as soon as
her Husband came home, she would give it him. When I went to Mr. Nettervile
again, he thankt me for carrying the Letter for his Friend Dominick Kelly to
the Tower, and told me Capt. Kelly had been with them, and treated them very
civilly with wine and meat, and had spent five shillings upon them. I asked
Nettervile what Capt. Kelly was? He told me he was a true Irish man. I asked
him if he was a Papist? He has taken the Oaths, said he; but he is a
well-wisher to us. On Thursday the 18th. of January, Nettervile desired me to
carry a Letter from himself to Capt. Kelly, which Letter signified to him that
his Friend Dominick Kelly was gone, and how that he had promised him 7 l. to
discharge himself out of the Prison, but had not yet been so good as his word;
therefore desired that he would take some speedy course that he may have the 7
l. to d^scharge himself out of Prison: This Letter I delivered to Capt. Kelly's
own hand in the Tower. He read it, and told me he was very glad his Friend was
out; but that he had never seen him since; pray, says he, remember me kindly to
Mr. Nettervile, and tell him, For his kindness to my Friend, I will do him all
the service I can.

Upon the 28th. of January I was desired by Sir Joseph Williamson, to go to Mr.
Nettervile, to try what more I could get out of him. On the 30th. I went to
him, and told him, that I had met with Sir Joseph Williamson; and he seemed to
be angry, and thought we had not discovered all we knew. And I told Nettervile,
that although he had promise of his pardon, yet it was expected he should do
more for it than he had done: As for my part, said I, you know I could discover
nothing, but what discourse passed betwixt you and I, and that I have done to
the full. Therefore, if you know any more, I would advise you to discover it;
for since you have gone thus far, I think you ought not to conceal any thing of
what you know more. The Grand thing I perceive they desire of you, and that
which I think is all they can expect from you, is, That you would declare from
whom the 500 l. was to come. He thankt me for my advice, and told me, that he
believed Sir Joseph Williamson had not perused all his Examinations, for he had
Answered all the Questions they had asked him. And if they had any thing more
to ask him, he would Answer them.

Upon Friday the 31th of January, I acquainted Sir Joseph Williamson with what
he said; he ordered him to (...) brought to the Council on Saturday morning,
where I met him at the door, before he was called; I told him, I supposed the
chief Question that would be put to him, would be, Whose this 500 l. was? and
begged of him that he would discover what he knew of it. Upon his coming out
from the Council, I asked him if that was not the question they put to him? he
told me it was: I asked him what account he had given them, he told me he
thought they were satisfied, for they were very kind to him, and promised him,
that so long as they lived, he should have the protection of that Board.

On Tuesday, the 4th. of February following, Sir Joseph Williamson seeing me at
the Counc^^ door, called me in, and asked me if I thought I could get any more
out of Nettervile? I told him I thought he had given him satisfaction when he
was before them, concerning whose the Money was. I told Sir Joseph the
discourse I had with Nettervile, at his going into the house, and at his coming
back; then he told me, that he had not been ingenious with them, for he would
confess nothing at first; but after some questions being asked in general
terms, he told them that it was to come from some of the Lords in the Tower;
and desired me that I would go once more to see if I could get any thing from
him

The next morning the Earl of Essex desired to speak with me; I waited upon him
at the Council Chamger; and he desired me also, that I would go to Mr.
Nettervile to see what I could get farther from him.

So on Thursday the 6^h of February, I did go to Mr. Nettervile, and told him I
was not come on a bare visit, but I was commanded by the Earl of Essex, and Sir
Joseph Williamson (whom he knew had both been very kind to him) to advise him,
that he would be ingenious, and discover what further he knew in this business.
Truly, said I, I suppose all they do expect from you, is, that you would make
some clear discovery unto them whose money this 500 l. was; says he (Swearing
by his Soul) I did tell them all I knew, I thought they had been satisfied;
no,, said I, they are not; and Sir Joseph Williamson says, you were not
ingenious; for you only in general terms told them it was some of the Lords
money in the Tower. Now if you can remember which of the Lords money it was, it
may satisfy them; for they judge, and so do I, and every one else, that Russel
would as easily tell you whose it was, as to tell you it was some of the Lords
in the Tower. I could get no more from him a great while; but after we had sat
and discoursed sometime, he told me that Brewer was to be before the Council
the next day, and he believed he should be sent for to^; I suppose not, said I,
unless I have some better account to give them from you: so just upon my coming
away I told him; Mr. Nettervile, I am sorry I can give no better account of my
Journey to you; therefore pray, if you have any thing more to say, let me know
it before I go. After he had paused a wile. By my Soul, said he, I cannot
remember the particular name of any Lord but one. Who is that, said I? my Lord
Stafford, says he; but all the rest were to contribute to it; for Russel told
me he was to go immediately to the Tower, to get the Money raised; and that it
was a difficult thing to get all the Lords together; and if he should go to
them apart, they might make scruples, and so delay the business; and therefore
he should make all the haste he could to get the Money ready.

A Relation of other Material Circumstances and Discourses, in reference to the
before mentioned design.
LEst the Jesuitical party should say of the following Proceedings, that they
are false and ^eigned, as their Impudence affirms in all other inventions of
theirs, when detected; It Is necessary the World should understand the
occasional circumstances, introducing this hellish attaque to be made upom this
honest. Gentleman, Captain Bury, who for his worth and reputation is known to
several persons of Honor and good Quality in this Nation.

The affairs that brought him into England, from his habitation in the Kingdom
of Ireland, was to Petition His Majesty, and the Honorable Privy Council,
touching a debt due to his Father, Sir William Bury of Grantham in
Lincolnshire, deceased for his service in being one of His Majesty's Lords
Commissioners for managing the Government of Ireland; and in prosecution
thereof, being several times in company with Mr. Netervile, who was formerly a
Clerk in the Court of Claims, in Dublin, and who pretend^d to inform the
Captain of several concealed Lands and houses in Ireland, which he might place
his debt upon; And upon the Captains receipt of his said Letter of the 11th of
January, 1678, desiring a speedy conference with the Captain, touching matters
which may redound to his advaintage, which the Captain readily embraced
(supposing it referred to the said concealed Houses and Lands); and according
to Netterviles request by his Note, on the said 13th of January last, the
Captain visited the said Nettervile in the Marshalsey in Southwark; when in
stead of a communication as to the aforesaid concerns (the said Nettervile
being no stranger to the Captains long abode here, and the expense he had been
at in his solicitation) took the opportunity to feel the Captains pulse, as to
the horrid fact beforementioned.

Prima facie. It astonished the honest Captain to think that Netterviles had
discovered a matter of that nature to him; and considering if he should reveal
it to any one, there would be but his asserting it, and Netterviles denial,
besides the censure the World would pass on the Captains Reputation, from the
apprehension in Netterviles breast, that the Captain would be, or was fit to be
profligated in such a concern, which with the danger and hazard he might expose
his life to by such discovery, and the urgency of his particular affairs
requiring his personal and speedy attendance in Dublin (having two Conditional
Decrees awarded against him, which would have been made absolute this last
Hillary-term for want of his appearance there). All these Considerations made
him sometimes resolve within himself, to stifle the wicked proposals of
Nettervile.

But weighing the direful effects of such a contrivance, which if prosecuted by
some other Instruments, when he was departed this Kingdom, would not only have
been the destruction of his intimate friend, and old acquaintance, Mr. Blood
but prejudicial to his Majesty, and the whole Kingdom, in taking off the
evidence of Mr, Oats and Mr. Bedlow, and thereby the Papists might still carry
on their devilish design and Plot, when they had washed their own hands, and
made such an alteration; when the innocent would have been ruined, and the true
Bloodsuckers acquitted.

This Consideration so affected the Captain, that he resolved to leave the
event o^ his particular concerns to Providence; and as you read by his
Deposition, he repaired to Mr. Blood, and gave him intelligence thereof. And
having so imparted the same to him, the goodnes^ of God appeared much to the
Captains satisfaction, touching his troublesome thoughts about his particular
concerns, by his Majesty's Gracious pleasure, in ordering Sir Joseph Williamson
to write to the Lord Chancellor of Ireland, that the Captain might sustain no
damage in his concerns, by his nonappearance there, being commanded by his
Majesty to attend his Service here, which Letter was sent accordingly.

Upon the 17th. of January last, as the Captain was going to attend Sir Joseph
Williamson, to give in his Deposition, meeting with Alderman Brooks, and
discoursing with him of Nettervile, he told the Captain he had been at the
Marshalseys the day before with Nettervile, and feared he had done a very ill
thing; which upon the Captains enquiry what it was, the said Mr. Brooks was
somewhat unwilling to acknowledge, until he had searched further into it. But
before their departure, Mr. Brooks told the Captain, that Nettervile had
procured Bail for one Dominick Kelly, who was one of the Murderers of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey; which Relation of the Alderman gave a confirmation to the
Captain of the wickedness of Nettervile, and Gods Goodness in animating the
Captain to what he was then going about, touching his own Information.

Which when he had signified to Sir Joseph Williamson, he was much affected
with it, and told the Captain of what great concernment it was, to have the
said Dominick Kelly in custody; and desired the Captain to bring the said
Alderman Brooks to him; which the Captain desired respite in, that Mr. Brooks
might make some further inquiry, as he said he would, into the concern; and
also least the Information given by the said Captain should be discovered,
before there was a further progress made for the obtaining a full discovery of
the design, and persons acting therein.

Upon the [19 January] Sunday morning, Mr. Brooks came to the Captains Lodging,
to know whether his Journey held for Ireland the next day; and then told the
Captain he had been the day before with Nettervile; and upon the Captains
demanding whether he had learnt any thing more touchig Dominick Kelly, the said
Mr. Brooks gave the Captain the full account, which the Captain caused to be
put in writing, and carried him to Sir Joseph Williamson, to make Oath of the
same, which he did, which appears by his foregoing information. And the Captain
could not but take notice of a Series of Providence all along in this business;
for by what Alderman Brooks attested, Dominick Kelly was so infatuated, as to
send the Letter unsealed to Pierce Butler by the Alderman, although he was in
such dangerous Circumstances.

Upon Mr. Brooks his free acknowledgment of these passages, the Captain
(desireing his secresi^) acquainted the said Mr. Brooks of Netterviles prank
with him; which on the Monday following, Mr. Brooks (being to meet Mr. Lowman
and Mr. Glover, the Keeper and Clerk of the Marshalsey, to consider some way
for the discovery of those who were Bail for Dominick Kelly) happend to give
some hints of the Captains informatiom to the said Mr. Lowman, and Mr. Glover;
whereby Mr Oats coming to have some understanding thereof, with Mr Bedlow, and
by an untimely process therein, going to Nettervile with Sir William Waller,
spoiled the proceedings, which otherwise might in a little time have produced
the 500 l. deposited in the Goldsmiths hand, and full intelligence of the
parties concerned in the project, and of the Depositions which the Captain was
to have Sworn, when he received the 500 l. from Russel, and the seizure of the
said Russel, etc.

Upon Thursday the 23d, of January, Mr. B^ooks met with the Captain, and told
him what Nettervile had related to him of the business of Captain Kelly in the
Tower; He told him the story, as you find in his information. And further told
the Captain, that he had another Letter, which he was going to carry to Captain
Kelly in the Tower; and Nettervile told him the said Mr. Brooks, that if
Captain Kelly did not send him the 7 l. he the said Nettervile did know enough
to turn him out of the Tower. I have, says Brooks, taken a Copy of this
Letter; and the Captain desired he might see it, which he did; and the contents
were to signify to Captain Kelly, what a fright the said Nettervile had been
put into by Mr. Oat^s and Mr. Bedlow, having been with him. And therefore
Nettervile desired Captain Kelly to send him the 7 l. to discharge him out of
that Prison, lest worse should come on it; and upon the Captains reading the
Copy of the said Letter, be desired Mr. Brooks not to be too hasty in
delivering that Letter to Capain Kelly; but that he would draw up by way of
information what he had told him, and go along with the said Captain to Sir
Joseph Williamson, and give in the information, and take his advice.

So that on Friday the 24th of January, the Captain and Mr. Brooks went to Sir
Joseph Williamson, and gave him the information, and the said Letter wi^h the
Copy the^rof; Then Sir Joseph told the Captain and Mr. Brooks, that the
Committee of Lords was going to sit, and that they should attend at the
Council-door, and he would call them in, that they might know their Lordships
pleasure, as to the delivery of the Letter to Captain Kelly, After debate,
their Lordships were of opinion. That the Letter should not be delivered, but
thought they had sufficient ground to Seize Captain Kelly, and to search his
house for Dominick Kelly, and for papers; in order to which, Sir Joseph
Williamson was sent for his Grace the Duke of Monmouth, who immediately came to
the Council; where the Lords accquained his Grace with the business, and
desired he would give Mr. Brooks a Warrant to fetch Capt. Kelly. His Grace was
pleased to send for his Secretary, and ordered him immediately to draw a
Warrant directed to Sir John Robinson, to assist them with a G^ard, for
executing the Warrant, and Nettervile was ordered to be brought to the Council
that afternoon.

And so the Captain and Mr. Brooks accompanied with Sir William Waller, went to
the Tower; and being Guarded by Sir John Robinson, came to Captain Kellys
house, and there his Footboy came to the door; and upon inquiry for his Master,
the boy replied, he was not within; they ask't him if he knew where he was; the
Boy told them no, for he dined abroad: They went into the House, and in the
Room where the Lord Stafford Lodges, they found Captain Kelly, and brought him
to the Council with what Papers they could find; but Nettervile had been
examined; and was gone away before, and had confessed the sending the Letters,
and Captain Kellys being with them in the Marshalseys, etc.

The Captain thereupon was put into the Messengers hands, and ordered to be
brought before their Lordships next morning, and Nettervile also (who were face
to face at the Council Table).

Capt. Kelly denied that he knew this Dominick Kelly, Nettervile told him he
would not deny surely that he was with them at the Marshalseys, which Capt.
Kelly then confessed; some of their Lordships asked what he did at the
Marshalseys? Captain Kelly said, he went to visit Mr. Nettervile, truly said
Nettervile 'twas kindly done of you, Sir, for I never saw or heard of you
before, until your Cozen Dominick Kelly told me of you and desired me to send a
Letter from him to you.

Capt. Kelly after Examination, was committed to a Messenger again; but soon
after he put in bail, and I have heard there was an Order of Council to turn
him o^t of his employment. But whether it be so, or no, I know not.

That Russel (upon the Thursday after Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow had been with
Nettervile, at the prison) came again to Nettervile and instead of being
apprehended, as Nettervile promised Lowman he should, Nettervile gave him
notice of the discovery, and he went out immediately and escaped. And after he
was gone, Nettervile then told Lowman he had been there; they pursued him, and
saw him take Boat, but could not overtake him. But Mr. Brooks had a warrant
from Sir Joseph Williamson to search for him at his hoose; but his wife told
them, that he was at the French Ambassadors house, and had not lain at home in
ten or twelve Nights; which the Council being informed of, were very diligent
to apprehend him, and offered 20l, to those that could discover him:

This Russel, mentioned in the deposition, is a Rank Papist, and an Irishman,
who married Madam Rowse, the Duchess of Portsmouths Gentlewoman: Netterevile
and Brewer are of the same Faction, and are now Prisoners in the Marshalseys.
The deponents, Capt Bury and Alderman Brooks, are both honest Gentlemen, and
good Protestants; and such. who^e principles detested either to engage in, or
conceal such abominable Villainy: however Nettervile was so infatuated, as to
conceive them fit to be profligated.

Now Reader, thou have seen the whole contrivance, etc. and may easily
discern what intentions of the Romanists were; what the natural consequence
thereof would have been, I leave to thy own conjuncture, and shall only add
this true circumstance, as a farther confirmation of their wicked design in
this matter, viz.

That several persons (by them appointed) were a little before this discovery
at the houses of some Persbyterians, well known in the City of London, to pray
their charitable contribution toward the maintenance of Mr. Oats and Mr.
Bedlow, upon this specious, though false suggestion, That His Majesty's
allowance was not sufficient for their encouragement; but the parties to whom
they applied themselves (supposing their intentions were to abuse their King
and Country, and to procure Coin for themselves), rejected them with checks;
and it was well they did; for otherwise, who knows what advantage they might
have made thereof, in order to the effecting their wicked enterprise?

And thus I have done, trusting to the Readers candor, which if a Protestant, I
do not doubt of; if a Papist, neither expect or care for it; I being one of
quite different principles, and one whose prayers, as well as endeavors, shall
be constantly engaged, for the frustration of their hellish Attempts.

Concerning my intentions in the publication of these Depositions, they were
only for the public good, and to expose to view the wicked subtilties of these
men, that the Nation (and all true Protestants) may be made sensible of their
devices; that if ever they use the same, or the like again, they may be with
the more ease detected, and rendered abortive. And also that all sincere
Christians, may ascribe the praise of all their deliverances (as well of this
as others) to that God who has so visibly and constantly appeared for the
vindication of his people, and for infatuating the persons, as well as rendering
unsuccessful the Attempts of his and their implacable Enemies.

FINIS.

