AN ARGUMENT FOR Infants Baptism, Deduced from the ANALOGY of FAITH, A (...)
Harmony of (...) ^^^iptures. In Which, In a Method wholly new, and upon Grounds
not commonly observed, (...) Doctrine (of Infants Baptism) is fully Asserted,
and the Objections against it, are obviated

By Richard Burthogge, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Greenwood, at the Crown in the Poultry, 1684.

TO THE Excellent Lady, THE Lady ANNE DRAKE, OF Place in Buckland Monachorum,
in the County of Devon.
Madam,
WHat is done in the following Letters in Defense of Infants Baptism, is so
justly Your Ladyships upon so many Titles, that to disown it by Dedicating of
Them to any Other, or not to own it by not Dedicating of Them to Your Ladyship,
would be as great Injustice, as, but for your Interest in Them, to do the last,
a Presumption.

The First of Them is a Second Edition of a Former sent my Adversary; in which
(as I thought the Return he gave, obliged me to do) I made such Alterations,
Additions, and Emendations, as might illuminate my Principal Argument; without
engaging me in Matters Foreign to it. And to his Rejoinder unto This as so
Enlarged, the Second is a Reply: and those that follow, are Defenses to Both.

My Argument is founded on that Covenant of Grace it pleased God to make with
Abraham, and with his Seed: In which, as he gave Himself, and all he has to
Abraham, and to his Seed; so he requires (what is most highly reasonable he
should) that Abraham, and all he owned, and that Abraham's Seed, and all they
own, should be His: And that in Token of being so, both Abraham himself should
keep the Covenant, by wearing the Initiating Sign thereof himself, and putting
it on all His, (that was capable of it) and also, that his Seed should keep it
in like manner. Certain it is, the Seed of Abraham is as much obliged to keep
the Covenant as Abraham himself; [Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, Thou
and thy Seed after thee in their Generations.] And I have proved the Believing
Gentiles to be That Seed; so that, though the Gentiles must believe, to become
the Seed of Abraham; yet, on becoming his Seed, they come also under the
Obligation to observe the Covenant, as much as Abraham himself.

I have also proved, That the Covenant of Abraham, is the first Solemn Formal
Covenant of Grace, for Eternal Life and Salvation, through our Lord Christ,
that, in Account and Reckoning of the Scriptures, it pleased God to make with
Man; and consequently, that the First Separate and Instituted Church, was then
appointed in the Family of Abraham: So that, from the very Beginning that it
pleased God to Establish and Ratify his Covenant, and to Constitute and Frame
a Church, as did Or^^^n the Signing of the A^^^^; so he did the Singing of
Infants: Therein laying the Foundations of the Commonwealth of Israel in the
Membership of Children, as well as in that of the Parents. God never
Constituted any Formal Church, until he had made a Formal Covenant; and the
Sign of the Covenant, is the Rite of Initiation into the Church: None comes
into the Latter, but by the Former; and Baptism is such a Sign.

I do not say, That Baptism is come in the Place of Circumcision; I know too
well the use is made of that Expression, though in it self, and as meant, it be
most Innocent and Inoffensive: But I say, It cannot be denied, that as
Circumcision was the Initiating Rite and Sign before the Coming of Christ; so
(that) Baptism is after it: And that, Now, to dedicate and give a Person to God
visibly and solemnly, is, by that Sign and Rite to Matriculate him; that is, to
Enter and Initiate him into the Church.

And now, Madam, Is not the Baptism of Infants, in the Notion I have of it, a
thing of High and Spiritual Nature, and of great Significancy? When it is not
merely Baby-sprinkling, and Sealing to a Blank, as some do phrase it: But done
in token of our Dedicating of Them unto God, and in Evidence and Token that
they are His. All Delivery and Surrender must pass with some Formality, some
Rite; and Baptism is that Formality, that Rite, by which we Christians do pass
over, and assign our selves, and all our Children to God.

The fair Stating and Illustrating the mentioned Points, in which I beat a Path
but little trodden, is mainly the Business of the Letters, of which I make a
Humble Offering to Your Ladyship: In writing which, next to the Zeal and
Deference that I owed to Truth, I propounded to my self no greater
Satisfaction, than the Occasion they would give me, of gratifying an Ambition I
have ever had to Publish my self,

Madam, Your Ladyship's most Humble and Devoted Servant, Richard Burthogge.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THE Concurrence of Events, that, at last, prevailed upon me to engage in the
Controversy of Infants Baptism, (managed on my part in the following Letters)
was so little ordinary; that, if any be enough to make a Providence, This,
Reader, were it proper to acquaint thee with it, would, I am confident, even in
thy Judgment, be thy Persuasion otherwise what it will, appear a great One.

The Letters themselves do intimate on what Occasion originally they came to be
Written, and also how to be Published, and that too without my Adversaries; and
therefore, I need not give my self the trouble of Writing, or thee the trouble
of Reading more, in reference to these Points. Only, it may not be improper to
do my self this piece of Justice, to add, That though I do not Publish my
Adversaries Letters, (for that I leave to him, as most proper): Yet I have not
been wanting in mine Own, to Publish all his Arguments that concern me, both in
all the Strength he gives them, and with all the further Inforcement my self
could possibly add to them. This, a Judicious Reader will easily perceive me to
have done; and this I did, as well for that Respect and Care I owe to my own
Reputation, as for that I owe and pay to Truth. I am of Alexander's Mind; I
would not steal a Victory; and Truth need not: It is stronger than all things.
I acknowledge, I have received a Letter from him, since my Last; but that
Letter (as Others) so little to the Purpose, unless Reflections and
Extravagancies be so, that I do not find my self obliged to any other Answer,
than what in my Last is added and marked thus [*,] and that is but little: And
an understanding Reader will plainly see, there was not much need of that: It
is but one Paragraph, and two or three Words, by way of Illustration.

Some happily may admire, that in a Rich and Fruitful Subject, as this is, I am
so barren in Citations; but they may please to know, that (seeing a Doctrine is
not true because a Multitude avouch it, any more than a Custom good because a
Multitude follow it) I do not value Authorities in the Search and Investigation
of Truth, further than as they are Evidences to Matters of Fact. Indeed, on
this Account I might have Cited properly enough, many hundred Authors, as
Witnesses, to confirm Baptism to have been of old a Jewish Ceremony, used in
Initiation of Proselytes, both Male and Female, Adult and Infant; but that was
done abundantly before, by the Learned Dr. Hammond, (as I remember) in a set
Discourse of Baptism, and incidentally by Mr. Ainsworth, in his Annotations on
Genesis 17th; and by many others: and Repetition is a dull thing. The Argument
I go upon, as I do manage it, is not common; and has little Authority to make
it good, beside that of sound Reason, and good Sense, and that better of the
Harmony of the Holy Scripture; into which, rightly understood, it does already
open no small Lights, and may do more, if well improved.

To the Question, How I came to hit upon it? I say, I was concerned to see an
Article of that Importance, which Infants Baptism by most is taken to be of,
and indeed is of, to hang on Wyres only, and (as some phrase it) by Geometry:
It must, I thought, have sure and solid Foundations, and such I could not see
it to be Owner of, unless it were inlay'd (as I find it is) in the very
Constitution of an Instituted Church, and in the Harmony of Scripture. Analogy
of Scripture, is the surest Basis of Truth, in matters of Revealed Religion; as
Analogy of Nature is of Truth, in Points of Philosophy.

This Argument I have so much spoken to in the following Letters, that I think
there needs no more to make it perfect, and fully convincing, but to add these
few following Considerations.

First, That Baptism or Washing was at first a Jewish Ceremony, and that Aaron,
and his Sons were Baptized or Washed with Water at the Door of the Tabernacle
of the Congregation: That the Baptizing of Proselytes, very probably was done
in imitation of That, and the other Washings among the Jews; and to signify
the Cleansing of Them from the Defilement of Gentilism: And that the Christian
Baptism in the Institution of it, had Aspect to both These, is also probable;
we Gentiles being by Baptism sanctified unto God, and made his Priests; which
seems very clearly to be employed by the Apostle, when he calls Baptism, (...),
a Laver, ( Washing our Translators render) of Regeneration, in Allusion
certainly to the Laver under the Law, which was set between the Tent of the
Congregation, and the Altar. Compare Exodus 40. 6, 12. with Tit. 3. 5.

Again, Let it be considered, that as no Alteration in the least, in reference
to the Subject of Circumcision, was made by Moses, from the Rule in the First
Institution under Abraham; so that under Moses it is evident, First, That if a
Proselyte were Master of a Family, the giving of Himself to God by
Circumcision, would not suffice to qualify him for the Passover; except he
gave his Family too, and that all his Males were Circumcized. God looked not on
him as a Convert, if he gave not all His, as well as Himself, Exodus 13. 48, 49.
And this is the more remarkable, for that the Proselytes were (as) the
First Fruits of the Gentiles. Secondly, That those Strangers in the Family of a
Jew, who were the Masters Own, or his Property, were on his Account admitted to
participate the Passover; for he was to give them unto God, as having Right and
Dominion in them; and therefore might dispose of them: For This only is the
Reason, why the Servant of the Jew, who was Bought with his Money, might eat
the Passover; and the Hired Servant not; namely, that the Former as being
bought with his Master's Money, was his Property, his own; and therefore given
with himself to God, and so received God's Mark of Circumcision, and
consequently became capable of the Passover: But the Hired Servant being not
his Master's, but his own Man, consequently could not, without his own Consent
and free Act, be given and disposed of by his Master. But if he would*
Voluntarily be Circumcized, and so become Partaker of the Passover, nothing
let him though he were an Hired Servant, no more than any other Forreigner.
See for this Exodus 12. 43, 44, 45.

The next main Consideration I would wish to be reminded seriously, is, That in
the New Testament no New Rule is given either by Jesus Christ Himself, or by
his Apostles and Followers, about the Subjects of the Sign of the Covenant;
which Sign now is Baptism: And therefore, certainly, it leaves us to the
Grounds and Reasons of the Old Testament, [and to conformable and constant
Practice in the Jewish Use of Baptism in the Admission of Proselytes;]
especially seeing the Seed (which Seed Believers are in Christ) are under the
same General Obligation to keep the Covenant in the Sign, and by the very
self-same Rule and Direction which Abraham had himself. And then it is Rational
to think, That as Abraham was made to understand it in Circumcision, so we must
understand it in Baptism; namely, to take in Infants as well as the Adult. This
is the more probable, because in the Gospel-Institution we find that Baptism
went by Families and Houses, as Circumcision did both before the Law, and under
it; as also, that in Baptizing of Proselytes, not only Male and Female, but (as
I said) Adult and Infants were admitted.

In the last Place; It would be considered, that in the first Sign of the
Covenant, which was Circumcision, though all Infants were not taken in directly
and actually, yet none of them were excluded from it as Infants; but only as
Females: For the Nature of that Sign was such, that, in the Actual
Administration of it, no Female was a Competent Subject: So that, in the first
Signing by Virtue of the Covenant; as much as any Adult Persons were taken in,
so much those that were not Adult; even Infants were taken in also: And if
then, the Females were not Actually signed; so neither in the Letter, and by
express Denomination of them, were they then taken into the Covenant. For as
the Sign was directly given only to the Males, so the Promise also, in terms,
was only to the Males, [Abraham and Isaac.] But then, as the Females were
included in the Males, in the Covenant and Promise,(which, I think, no Body
will deny;) so, by like Reason, they were included also in the Sign. If any ask
the Reason, why the Females are not taken notice of in the Old Testament, as
much as the Males? and why, at first, they were not, as it were, by name taken
into Covenant, and so signed with the Sign of it; but included only in Men, and
accounted as signed in them? there may be many Reasons; but among them, two
especially. The First is, That God is Uniform in his Works; and that as in the
First Creation he made Adam first, who was then the whole Kind, and
comprehended the Woman in his Rib; and then afterward took the Woman out of
Adam: So in the Restoration, or New Creation, he would first by Name begin with
the Man, and take him into Covenant, and Sign him; and take the Woman in but
Inclusively, as comprehended in Man, and as an Appendix to him; which he did in
the Dispensation, under Abraham and Moses. But then, afterward, as he took the
Woman in the Creation out of Man; so under Christ, in the
New-Testament-Dispensation, he took the Woman in her own Name, and put his Sign
on her too: Both Men and Women are Baptized. A Second, and perhaps no less
effectual Reason, is, That the Woman had been first (as the Apostle observes)
in the Transgression; she had spoiled the First Creation, and the Work of God
in it; [ What Is this that thou have done? says God to the Woman:] Therefore,
as a Mark of his Divine Displeasure, God would not in the Institution of his
Covenant of Grace, take her in her Own Name and Person, or otherwise than by
Inclusion in the Man, into the Participation of it; until by bringing forth the
Lord Christ, the great Foundation of the New and Better Creation, she had made
him, as it were, some Reparation; and therefore, Christ is emphatically said to
be Made of a Woman. Methinks the Apostle has an Aspect toward both these
Reasons, in 1 Timothy 2. 13, 14, 15. But howsoever that is, sure I am, it is out of
question, that before Christ, there was no little difference between Male and
Female, in the Account of Scripture: for if a Woman bore a Man-Child, she was
to be unclean but Seven days, and to continue in the Blood of her Purifying but
Thirty-three days: But if she brought forth a Maid-Child, then she was to be
unclean Two weeks* and to continue in the Blood of her Purifying Sixty-six
days: So much Difference, Then, there was between Male and Female; for so we
read in Exodus 12. 2, 4, 5, 6. But, Now, the Case is altered* For under Jesus
Christ there is no Difference; no more Now between the Male and Female, than
between the Jew and Greek; for so the Apostle Gal. 3. 28. There is neither Jew
nor Greek, there is neither Bond nor Free, there is neither Male nor Female;
for You are all one in Christ Jesus. A plain Text; wherein the Apostle as well
implies there Was a Distinction and Difference before, as he affirms that there
Is none now.

As for mine Adversary; though I do not take him to be the Greatest Clark in
the World, or as Learned in the Learned Languages, and Human Authors, as many
others; and though I take it to have been a piece of Vanity in him, to tell me,
as he does, [ That as he remembered, one of the Schoolmen said, etc.] because I
have Reason to believe, he understands the Schoolmen, as little Hebrew or
Greek: Yet I do not apprehend it any Disgrace (as some would have it,) to have
been engaged with him; both for that he is a careful, painful, and industrious
searching Person, much conversant in the present Controversy; and, I believe,
can say as much for his Persuasion, as any other what ever: as also, for that
the Point in Controversy between us, is not a Point of Human Learning: Here
(for the main) is no need of Greek or Hebrew, or of the Subtilties of
Schoolmen, or of Exactness of Criticisme: It must be decided plainly by good
Sense, and by the Harmony of the Scripture; and an English Bible(to which he
does appeal) suffices for that.

I do confess, I believe that some of the Grounds which I have said, will have
no little Influence toward an Alteration in many received Schemes: But whether
I have laid them right or not, I am no competent Judge. For though I am much
confirmed in the Verity of Them by their undergoing of One kind of Test,
without any Loss; yet before I do advance them from being Points of mere
Opinion, to be Points of some Degree of Faith, I am willing they should undergo
all Others. And therefore, Reader, they are put into thy Hands, (for I have
done with them) to weigh and judge them.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 4. add be. p. 12. l. 20. read by. p. 16. l. 20. dele it. p. 49.
l. 27. read to. p. 53. l. 23. dele capable of it. p. 54. l. 14. dele (). p. 99.
l. 21. read in way of Covenant through Christ for Grace. p. 102. l. 17. read of
all the Faithful. p. 103. l. 11. dele now. p. 105. l. 18. read of Genesis. p.
110. l. 5. add). p. 115. l. 27. dele: p. 128. l. 30. read be understood of that
only. p. 129. l. 5. read same. p. 150. l. 20. read is meant.

AN ARGUMENT FOR Infants Baptism, etc.
The First Letter.
Dear Sir,
I Cannot believe my self obliged by the Occasional Discourse (which I held
almost a Year and three Quarters ago) about Infants Baptism, to engage any
further in that Controversy, much less deliberately and solemnly; yet, having
received so large, and so elaborate an Endeavor for my Satisfaction, and so
importunate and iterated Requests, to give you the Result of my most cool and
serious Considerations of what you have done in It* I may not be so much
wanting in Civility to your Desires, and in Obedience to the Call I believe in
them, as to decline the Incumbence and Obligation under which They put me to
answer: And so, either to receive my self a further Illumination in the Point,
or (which is better, and which I hope) to give it.

Only, let me have leave to tell you, (That) I am sensible enough how difficult
a Task it is, in it self, to Eradicate an Opinion grown inveterate by length of
Time, and perhaps confirmed by frequent Spoils and Trophies over weak Opposers
of It; and that it is more difficult for one in my Circumstances, subject to a
thousand Avocations and Diversions; and who, at the Arrival of your Letter,
thought of nothing less in all the World, than of being engaged in this manner
against Anabaptism; and with a Person, a great part of whose time has been
employed in Thoughts and Study about it.

And yet, under Disadvantages so great against so great Advantages, believing
my self in the right; in that Confidence, I have made a Resolution to let you
know my Sentiments; and the rather, because I take you (and I wish, I may not
be mistaken in it) to be so unfeigned a Lover of Truth, and so Candid a one,
that you will make Allowance for any Bias in your Mind, in favor of your
Opinion, which a long Prescription may give it; and that you will not Refuse
any Light that may be offered, if you have no other Reasons for doing So, than
either that It is New unto you, or that you have not struck It your self.

As for my Sentiments on this Subject, that you may conceive Them with the
greater Clearness, as also for Order sake, I will reduce them unto Two Heads.
First, I will let you see the Mistakes under which you are, as to your
Apprehensions of the Grounds of my Arguments for Infants Baptism, as deduced
from the Covenant of Abraham. And Then, I will display the Argument it self in
all its Evidence and Force, as it is bottomed on that Basis: And this, without
concerning of my self in Other Arguments insisted on by others, and also
touched and reflected on by you.

The Mistakes you are under in your Apprehensions of the Grounds of my
Argument, are Two, and very great ones: The First, That you conceive me to
raise my Superstructure of Infants Baptism on this Foundation, [ That the
believing Gentiles, and their Posterity, are in All respects to be blessed, as
believing Abraham was;] which, say you, is Absurd.

And well you may (say so;) for indeed, Abraham had peculiar Blessings
appropriated to his Person; as to be the Father of all the Faithful, and
particularly, of believing Gentiles,(the Father of many Nations;) and
therefore, instead of Abram, he was called Abraham. But though All the
Blessings believing Abraham had, did not descend on his Spiritual Children, or
his Seed, the believing Gentiles; yet, if Any Blessing of believing Abraham's
did descend, as That of the Promise did, it must be understood, (that) the
Obligations and Duties arising from the Nature of the Blessing, (which did
descend) or that are annexed to it, (if there be any Such) must descend too:
And so, that the Seed, in that respect in which it is equally blessed with
believing Abraham, must be equally obliged with him, to all the Duties and
Incumbencies, that are the Consequents and Results of that Blessing.

Your Second Mistake is, That you apprehend me to conceive, [ That every Child
of a believing Parent, by virtue of his Birth, Privilege, and as he is a
Natural Descendant of such a Father or Mother, is a true Child of Abraham, or a
Believer, (for that I mean) or, in your own words, That the Natural Posterity
of Believing Gentiles, barely as such, are all of them the Spiritual Seed of
Abraham, (or Believers) and consequently such as are entitled(on the Account of
being his Spiritual Seed, or Believers) unto Abraham 's Covenant and Blessing.]
And in Opposition unto This, you much enlarge; showing the many great
Absurdities, and ill Consequences of it, even to Fifteen: Arguments, which
truly as to any other who has Sense I think, and I am sure as to my self, are
all needless, and might all have been spared.

Certainly, I demand not half so much to enforce the Argument I used; I think
not every Child of a Believer to be a Believer himself in any Sense; much less,
that Saving Grace is as Original as Sin* or that it comes by Traduction. All I
postulate to build my Argument, is, That the (true) believing Gentile does not
forfeit, by believing, his natural Right to his Child; but that the Children of
True Believers now, under the Gospel, are as much theirs* and in the same
Right, as the Natural Children of Abraham were his. This is all the Question
that I beg, and this sure you will not deny me.

Only, by the way, I pray you to make no more of my Concession, than I intend
it for; for when some Pious and very Learned Men have argued for Infants
Baptism, from the Children of Believers their being Abraham's Spiritual Seed,
they mean not, I suppose, by calling them Abraham's Spiritual Seed, as I do,
and as you do; that they are Actual Believers, and consequently Children of the
Faith of Abraham; but only, that they are Persons of a Religious Consideration,
and (in some sense) Holy, and related to God. And meaning but So; though I
acknowledge Children not to be Abraham's Seed in the Sense I mentioned, as
Abraham's Seed is taken for Actual Believers, and you have proved by Fifteen
Arguments that they are not, nor can be Abraham's Seed in this Sense; my
Concession gives you no advantage, nor do your Arguments signify any thing
against Them; who, using the Expression in Another Sense, are nothing
concerned; for if They take Spiritual Seed in One Sense, and You in your
Arguments take it in Another, you do not really oppose them, though you may
think you do; nor are your Arguments pertinent; and the Dispute between you, as
to that, is indeed but Strife about Words.

Thus I have, with all the Clearness and Fairness imaginable, let you see your
Two Mistakes about the Argument I urged; and therefore, seeing you do not
apprehend aright the Grounds on which I go (in it,) I am only obliged to you
for your charitable Endeavors toward my Satisfaction; but not (in the least)
for any Effect of those Endeavors.

It now remains, that I perform what I promised in the Second Place; which
is, To lay out the Argument for Pedobaptism, as it is founded on the Covenant,
or Blessing of Abraham, in all its Force and Evidence; which, to do to some
purpose, I will demonstrate.

First, That the Covenant of Abraham, which is called the Blessing of Abraham,
or the Promise of the Spirit, is still in being; and is that Covenant of Grace
the true believing Gentiles are under.

Secondly, That in respect of that Covenant of Promise, which is called the
Blessing of Abraham, and the Promise of the Spirit, or the Spiritual Promise,
all the Seed that has the Benefit of it, are under equal Obligations to the
Duty and Incumbence arising from it, with Abraham himself.

Thirdly, I will show, That the Duty and Incumbence to which Abraham was
obliged, arising from the Covenant, or Blessing given to him, was, by way of
Restipulation, to dedicate and give himself, and all his to God; and, in token
of that Dedication of himself, and of all that was his, to wear himself the
Sign of the Covenant, and put it as a Cognizance, and Badge, and Mark of God
upon all his that was capable of it.

Fourthly, I will also show, That from Abraham's Dedication of himself, and of
all his to God, there arises a Distinction of Holiness into Internal and
External, Absolute and Relative; and that this Distinction (of Holiness) is
Evangelical.

And having evidenced these Four things, I will then proceed, in short, to form
my Argument.

In order to the evidencing of the First Particular, which is, That the
Covenant of Promise made to Abraham, which is called the Blessing of Abraham,
and the Promise of the Spirit, or the Spiritual and Evangelical Promise, (that
this) is still in being, and is the Covenant of Grace, into a Participation of
which, the (true) believing Gentiles are taken: I only Premise, That That is
the Covenant of Grace the believing Gentiles are under, Which is the true
Ground and Foundation of all their Hopes, and of all their Comforts; and Which,
by having a Title to it, and Interest in it, does give them a Title to, and
Interest in the Celestial Inheritance, the Heavenly Country, the Everlasting
Mansions in the Father's House; and, in a word, to Salvation. And This the
mentioned Covenant, the Blessing of Abraham, and the Promise of the Spirit is,
and does: This is the true Ground and Foundation of all the Hopes of
Gentile-Believers, and of all their Comforts; and a Title in This, is the only
Title they have to the Heavenly Blessedness and Salvation, or (as the Apostle
is pleased to style it) ot the Inheritance. For thus in the Third of
Gallatians, the Apostle carries it; when Verse the 16th, he affirms, That to
Abraham, and to his Seed, were the Promises made, and Verse the 18th adds, That
if the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of the Promise; but God gave it
(namely the Inheritance) to Abraham by Promise: And by What Promise, but that
ratified Covenant of Promise, I will be a God to thee, and to thy Seed? As
appears by comparing it with Verse the 16th. But he asserteth This more clearly
afterward, in Verse the 20th; where he shows, both that the only Title to
the Inheritance is Heirship, according to the Promise; and that the only way of
Becoming Heirs according to the Promise, and so of being interested in it, and
entitled to it, is by becoming the Seed of Abraham to become the Children of
God; and the only way of Becoming the Seed of Abraham (for the Gentiles,) is by
Putting on of Christ through believing: For, says he, if you be Christ's, or
the Members of Christ; what then? Then you are Abraham's Seed; and what if
Abraham's Seed? what then? Then you are Heirs according to the Promise. In
short, this is the Clymax; if Believers, then Christ's; if Christ's, then
Abraham's Seed; if Abraham's Seed, than Heirs according to the Promise: for the
Promise is, I will be a God to Thee, and thy Seed, and I will give to Thee, and
thy Seed, etc.

Nor does it make any Alteration in the Case, that Faith is now the requisite
Condition of Salvation, or that we must believe to be saved: This but evidences
the more clearly, that the Gospel is but a Renovation of the Covenant of
Abraham; for as it is through Faith, that we Gentiles do become Christ's, and
by being Christ's, that we become the Seed of Abraham, and consequently Heirs
of Salvation according to the Promise; So it was through Faith, the
Righteousness of Faith, that Abraham (the Father of the Faithful) had the
Promise himself: For so the Apostle, Romans 4. 13. for the Promise, That he
should be the Heir of the World, was not to Abraham, or to his Seed through the
Law, but through the Righteousness of Faith. Abraham believed God, and We
Christ; it was through Faith, that Abraham had the Promise; and through Faith
also, that we the believing Gentiles have it; as being Children not of
Abraham's Body, but of Abraham's Faith, Romans 4. 12, 13, 16.

And if the Promise made to Abraham, be the Ground and Foundation of all our
Hopes, and all our Expectations, as we are Christians, and it be the True
Covenant of Grace; to be sure, it is still in being, or we do but beat the Air,
and are at a loss; our Hope is in vain, and our Rejoicing in vain; which God
forbid: And in being it is; for the Law that came four hundred and thirty Years
after, did not, could not Disanul the Promise that went before; and if the Law
did not, if the Law could not, nothing else did, nothing else can disanul it:
This the Apostle evidences, Gal. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. And surely, the Promise
to Abraham, I will be a God to thee, and to thy Seed etc. is a Covenant, a
ratified Covenant, and confirmed by two immutable things, by Word and Oath, In
which it is impossible for God to Lie; and therefore, cannot be disanulled; and
if it be not disanulled, it is still in being.

Here I thought to have dismissed the First Particular, and so (to) proceed to
the Second: But it strikes into my Mind, that you may think I have not clearly
enough expressed what I mean by the Covenant, the Blessing and the Promise of
Abraham, which did descend on the Gentiles; which if so, would be Matter of a
fresh Dispute: And therefore, though I think the Scriptures I have insisted on
already, do sufficiently instruct us in what the Promise is; yet, to leave no
room for any further Mistakes, I shall be more express in it.

By the Promise, the Blessing, the Covenant of Abraham, (for under all these
three Terms it is represented by the Apostle) I mean that Covenant of Promise
made to Abraham, Genesis 17. 7, 8. consisting of Two Parts; a more Spiritual Part,
in the 7th, I will be a God to thee, and thy Seed; and a more Temporal one in
the 8th, And I will give, etc. And I take in Both, because I find the Apostle
saying, That to Abraham, and to his Seed, were the Promises made: the Promises;
not a Promise, (which had left it doubtful;) but the Promises, as speaking not
of the One only, I will be a God to thee, and thy Seed, which is the Spiritual
Part; but of the Other also, which is the Temporal, I will give to thee, and
thy Seed, etc. Thus the Covenant of Promise involveth and includes in it Two
Promises; the One of which indeed is Principal, the Other but Additional; but
Both are in the Covenant, in the Blessing, and consequently Both are ratified
and established: The Promises were made to Abraham, and to his Seed; the
Covenant in both respects descends.

I know you take it for a very strong Argument, That the Covanant of Abraham,
Genesis 17. 7, 8. cannot be the Evangelical and Gospel Covenant; because it is a
Mixed one, and composed of a Temporal (as well as of an Eternal) Bequest: But
for that Reason, I the Rather take it to be Evangelical; For this is Gospel,
that Godliness is profitable unto all things; that is, in all respects, in
respect of this World, and in respect of the Other: And why so? Why, it has
the Promise; Having (the) Promise of the Life that now is, as well as of that
to come: And what is this but a Finger, to point you to the Covenant of
Promise; as the Evangelical Covenant, the Promise, the Blessing that did
descend on the Gentiles? 1 Timothy 4. 8.

And indeed, the Inheritance promised to Abraham, and which in, by, and under
him, is descended on the Gentiles, is not only a Celestial, but a Terrestrial
one also: For by that Promise, Abraham was not only the Heir of Heaven, but
also Heir of the World; and so the Apostle styles him: And the same Apostle
tells Us, All is Ours; and Abraham being constituted by the Promise, Heir of
the World, He and his Descendants, according to the Flesh, were to take
Possession of it, and to have Livery of Seisin given in Canaan; a Livery of
Seisin, which was given indeed, and taken but in Part of the World, (as Livery
of Scisin usually is) but in the Name of the Whole.

It is true, Canaan only was promised in the Letter, and was Inherited only by
the Carnal Seed and Descendants of Abraham: But then it must be considered,
that in the Covenant there is more employed, than is expressed in the Letter;
and that as in the Letter it speaks of the Seed which is Natural, namely
Isaac; yet, in the Mystery, it means Christ, and that Principally: So, though
in the Letter it speaks but of Canaan, as given for a Possession, and enjoyed
so by the Carnal Seed; yet in the Mystery, it means the whole World, of which
Canaan was a Part: in which indeed he took Possession, or had Livery and Seisin
given him; but, as I said, in the Name of the Whole. Abraham was Heir of the
World; and so are all Believers, as Abraham's Seed; for All is Ours: But how?
For We are Christ's, and Christ is God's: And it is, I will be a God to Thee,
and thy Seed; which Seed is Christ. This is the Believer's Title, and this his
Deed; his Charter, by which he holds All.

And having evidenced the First Particular, That the Covenant made with
Abraham, or the Blessing of Abraham, the Promise of the Spirit is still in
force, and is that Covenant of Grace by which believing Gentiles, the true
Seed, now both have and hold their Title to Heaven, and to Earth too. It will
not, I suppose, require either much Time, or much Argument, to secure the
Second; which is, That the true Spiritual Seed of Abraham, the believing
Gentiles, who have the Benefit and Advantage of that Spiritual Promise and:
Blesing, and to whom it is made as well as to Abraham, are under equal
Obligation to the Duty and Incombence arising from it, or annexed to it, with
Abraham himself. For it is a common Notion, a Sentiment approved by the Light
of Nature, That he that reapeth any Profit and Advantage by a Grant* ought to
bear the Burden, and answer the Duty and Incumbence that accompanies It. And
indeed, to hope for Salvation, and other Benefits conveyed in the Covenant and
Charter of Abraham, without submitting to the Duties and Obligations that do
arise therefrom, or are annexed thereto; were for a Person to claim an
Inheritance by a Deed of Conveyance, without holding himself obliged to the
Covenants and Provisions with which It is granted Therein. Certain it is, as I
have shown already, that the believing Gentile claims, has, holds nothing,
but in, by, and under Abraham: He is Christ's, and so Abraham's Seed; and so
Heir according to the Promise: And he that claims, has, holds nothing but
in, by, and under Abraham, must claim, have, hold, as Abraham did, according to
the Tenor and Obligation of the Deed of Gift, the Charter, the Covenant of
Promise, which it pleased God to convey it by, and with the same Incumbence and
Duty.

And this remindeth me of the Third Particular, which I promised to
demonstrate; namely, That the Duty and Incumbence to which Abraham was obliged,
arising from the Covenant or Blessing given to him, was, in way of
Restipulation, to dedicate and give himself, and all his, to God; and in token
of that Dedication of himself, and all his, to put the Sign of the Covenant, as
the Cognizance, and Mark, and Badge of God on all his that was capable of it,
as well as to wear it himself.

I know it cannot be difficult to You, (if it can to any Other) to conceive
that in Restipulation unto God, who had made over unto Abraham, not Himself
only, but All he has, (that) Abraham Correspondently should give Himself, and
All he had to God: And indeed, this Mutual Stipulation between God and Abraham,
[That God and all His should be Abraham's, and Abraham and all his should be
God's] is the very Essence and Substance of the Covenant: I will be Theirs, and
They shall be Mine; I will be a God to Thee and thy Seed, and Thou and thy Seed
stall keep my Covenant.

It is true, the Covenant does run in Absolute and Promissory Terms, and
therefore is called the Covenant of Promise; but yet to be a Covenant, as there
must be Parties, so there must be a Mutual Stipulation between them: And here,
the Stipulation on the Part of Abraham, though it be not so express and
literal, is plainly implied in the Duty and Incumbence God imposes on him, in
relation to the Covenant, as an Obligation and Consequence arising from the
Nature and Merits of It: Which Duty and Incumbence, and the Consequentialness
of it from the Covenant, is, Genesis 17. Ver. 9. Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore, thou and thy Seed after thee in their Generations. Or, more
consonantly to the Letter of the Original, but to the same Sense, (and in
Covenant-form,) I will be a God to thee and thy Seed, and I will give to thee
and thy Seed, etc. and, Thou and thy Seed shall keep my Covenant. In the
Former, is the Stipulation or Promise God is pleased to make to Abraham, and to
his Seed: And, in the Latter, the Obligation and Consequence it lies upon them;
and which, therefore, God expects too, as importing Their Stipulation, and that
Acknowledgment they owe for His. Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore:
Therefore, wherefore? Therefore, because I have Established my Covenant, to
give my Self and all I have to thee; to give my Self, and give Canaan, and in
Canaan the World: Therefore, thou shall give thy self, and all thine to Me: And
in token of it, (that thy self and all thine is Mine) thou shall observe my
Covenant in the sign of it; and that so, both as to wear the sign thy self, and
to put it upon all thine that is capable of it. This is evident, Genesis 17. 9,
10, 11, 12, 13. Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, etc. This is my
Covenant, namely, the sign Circumcision, etc.

You may here, perhaps, not a little wonder, that I use so General and
comprehensive Terms; and that I say, the Obligation which lay on Abraham from
the Covenant, was to dedicate and give Himself, and All His, to God; and in
token of it, not only himself to wear the Sign and Token of the Covenant, which
then was Circumcision; but to put it on all His that were capable of it: I say,
Happily you may not a little wonder, why I said not all his Seed; but all His:
Which, if you do, you will no longer have no cause to continue it, than till I
tell you, It is to signify, that the Obligation on Abraham arising from the
Covenant, was Solemnly to dedic^te and give to God, together with himself, All
that he had Property in, and Title to, and was Owner of; not his Natural Seed
only, the Offspring of his own Body, but even his Servants or Slaves.

And here observe; if Abraham by virtue of the Incumbence and Obligation which
the Covenant of Promise did lay upon him, [Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore] was Not only to circumcize his Natural Offspring, But his Slaves
and Servants, (as he was, Genesis 17. 10, 12.) It must needs follow, that the
putting of the Sign and Token of the Covenant upon Children (even then) arose
Not from their being comprehended in the Seed, and as God was a God to
Abraham's Seed, and from God's requiring the Seed to keep the Covenant: For His
Infant Slaves and Servants, whom Yet he was obliged by the Covenant to
Circumcize, were Not of his Offspring and Seed.

But How, then, did the Obligation to Circumcize his Infant Servants and
Slaves, arise from the Covenant; in which no mention, in the least, of Slaves
and Servants; but only of Seed? Certainly, no otherwise than in the Way I have
mentioned, (and this Consideration makes it clear) namely, that Abraham in
Restipulation and Answer unto God, was obliged to dedicate and give himself,
and All he had to him, as God did give, and convey, and make himself and all he
has to Abraham; and consequently, in Sign and Token of this, [That as God has
given and made Himself, and all He has to Abraham; so that Abraham must not
only dedicate and give himself, but, which is the Consequence of it, all is his
to God,] the Sign and Token of the Covenant between them, called God's
Covenant, and consequently God's Sign and Mark, must be both on Abraham
himself, and On all that is his: That is, It is not only to be worn by Abraham,
to show that he himself is God's, and that he has given himself; or by his
Children, to show that they are God's, and that he has given them: but even by
his Servants and Slaves, to show that he has given Them too, and consequently
All that he has. And indeed, he that gives himself, gives All that he has,
with himself: He owns nothing, that is not His own. It Is as they were Abraham's
Property, that his Infant Servants and Slaves were Circumcized; and, doubtless,
All that was Abraham's, capable of Circumcision, had it on the same Account
that Any had: And therefore, as the Infant Slaves were Circumcized as His
Property, and by virtue of what is said to Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore; so were His Children also: And Consider it, [All Infants were
Circumcized by virtue of the Same Incumbence.]

As to your Wonder, why I do express the Obligation and Incumbence arising upon
Abraham from the Covenant, in these terms, that He was to dedicate and assign
himself, and all his; and, in token of it, to put the Covenant in the Sign of
it, as the Mark and Cognizance of God upon himself, and on all his that was
capable of it. You admire how Capable comes in; but you might with more Justice
have admired, if it had been left out: For Implied it must be; It could not be
his Duty to put the Sign upon Incapable Persons. But your Admiration is More
the Object of Mine, after you have Granted, that God commanded Abraham, (Thou
shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed) in General terms; wherein,
you say, both Sexes may seem to be comprehended, (and indeed say I, are so) for
if he did command in General Terms, that Abraham, and all His (Seed you say)
should keep the Covenant in the Sign and Token of it; and yet afterward did
Institute Circumcision to be that Sign and Token, which was not competent to
all: How can the Generality of the Precept, (Thou shall put the Sign on all
thine; when Circumcision, that is Not competible to all, is that Sign) be
understood Accommodously and Conveniently, as it must be, but Thus; Thou shall
put the Sign on All thine that are capable of it; and the wearing of it by
These, shall be Interpreted the putting of it on All.

By this time, I believe, you will be inclinable enough to grant, that I have
proved sufficiently, that Abraham was obliged as to dedicate and give Himself,
so to dedicate and give All his, his Children, and his Servants to God,
Possessor of Heaven and Earth; and, in Token of it, to put the Covenant upon
Them (as far as they were capable thereof,) in the Sign of it, namely,
Circumcision. But you will say; It Seems not to be, (but give me that
Expression again, for You will be more Positive) it Was not done (you will say)
with any Relation unto us believing Gentiles, who are not Circumcized: And that
seeing there is a Change and Alteration made in the Sign, the former Obligation
ceases; for if Circumcision it self is past, and done away, no Duty and
Obligation that but commenced with it, can now abide and remain.

But I pray consider, that not only Abraham was under Obligation to keep the
Covenant in the Sign of it, but the Seed of Abraham also; that is, All those to
whom the Covenant is made, are equally obliged to the Observation thereof, in
the Sign of it: (And therefore) not only Abraham was obliged, but his Seed too.
For, as God is pleased to say, I will be a God to thee, and to thy Seed; and I
will give to thee, and to thy Seed: So, he says, Thou and thy Seed shall keep
my Covenant. Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, (and not only Thou, but)
Thou, and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations: Thou; thou and thy Seed.

So that, if the Believing Gentiles be (as indeed they be) the True Seed, and
Principally intended in the Promise; for it is Seed, not Seeds: Seed; speaking
but of one, and that One is Christ; and Christ not Personal only, but Mystical,
or Christ with his Members; for it is of Many in One: For the Seed, which is to
keep the Covenant, is to do it in their Generations; not in his Generation, but
in their Generations, and that is Plural. I say, if the Believing Gentiles do
become the Seed of Abraham, (as they do) they come also under Equal Obligation
to observe the Covenant, with Abraham himself: For it is, Thou shall keep the
Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed. And to keep the Covenant, (as I have
evinced already) is for him that is in it, in token of his Dedication and
Assignment of himself, and of all his to God, not only to wear the sign of the
Covenant himself in his own Person, but to put it upon all his that is capable
of it; so to manifest, that he owns not any Interest or Property at all in any
thing, or Title to any, but what he returns to God; and that both himself, and
all his, are the Lord's. And think, Are not the believing Gentiles as much
obliged to assign, and dedicate, and give all, as Abraham? Yes, doubtless, and
are as much bound to Show, and Own, and Declare they do so, as He.

But whereas it may be objected, That Circumcision was the Sign and Token of
the Covenant then, [ This is my Covenant which you shall keep between Me and
You, and thy Seed after thee; Every Man-Child among you shall be Circumcized:]
And that Circumcision, as being a Legal and Carnal Ceremony, is abolished under
the Gospel; and therefore, as all Engagement and Obligation unto That, so all
Engagement and Obligation unto any Sign and Token by virtue of the Command of
That, is ceased.

I answer, Though Circumcision, that at First was the Sign and Token of the
Covenant, be taken away; yet it will not follow, that the Obligation to observe
and keep the Covenant in any Other Sign or Token, does cease with it. And to
demonstrate this; it must be minded, that as the Equity and Reason of the
Command does hold in Baptism, as well as in Circumcision; and for any other
Sign* and Token as well as for This; and to the Seed, as well as to Abraham;
God being as much a God to the One, as to the Other: So also that in the Form
of the Words, the Obligation imposed upon Abraham, and his Seed, is in the
First place, to keep the Sign and Token of the Covenant, or to keep the
Covenant in the Sign of it: And but in the Second (place,) to observe
Circumcision; namely, but as it is that Sign. So that a plain Distinction is
mad^ between the Obligation to observe the Sign and Token of the Covenant, (or
to keep the Covenant in the Sign and Token of it) and to keep it in
Circumcision, as that Sign and Token; the Former arising from the very Nature
of the Covenant, ( Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore) and therefore of as
perpetual Obligation and Existence, as the Covenant it self: But the Latter is
more positive, and Secondary. Wherefore, though there be an Alteration in the
Second, it will not follow that there must be one in the First; or that the
Covenant ought not to be observed in the Sign and Token of it, if, for certain
Reasons, Circumcision be no longer; but something else be that Sign and Token:
The taking away the Second, does not destroy the First; for being before it, it
may be without it. Thou shall keep the Sing of the Covenant, that is First;
Circumcision is that Sign, that is Second: And why One in the first Place, and
the Other but in the Second, but to show, the Covenant must be kept in the Sign
of it, even when no longer Circumcision, but some other thing is in the Counsel
of God ordained to be that Sign? And indeed, it is much, that the taking, and
the putting of the Sign of the Covenant, should (as it is) be called keeping of
the Covenant? Must not we Now keep God's Covenant?

And to the end you may see the Harmony of the Scripture, and (with it) the
Cogency of that Illation, which I make from the Form of the Words here; see the
like (Form of Words) in the Fourth Commandment, in relation to the Sabbath,
bottoming the like Illation; Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy; that is
first; and, as it is first, so it is primarily Moral, and Eternal and
unchangeable: But the Seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord; that is in the second
place, and is but secondary and positive. What? Does the Obligation to the
First, and that which is Primary in the Command, cease, because there is an
Alteration in the Second; and that not the Seventh, but the First Day of the
Week is now the Sabbath of the Lord? Who will say it?

So, though Circumcision be no longer the Sign and Token of the Covenant, but
another thing be It; 'twill not follow, the Covenant is no longer to be
observed in the Sign and Token of it, because not Circumcision; but that other
Thing is now (become) that Sign and Token: Which you will conceive the better,
if you bethink that Circumcision was not abolished in the Gospel, as it was of
the Fathers, but as it was of Moses, (a Distinction Christ himself makes;) or
not as it had relation to the Covenant of Promise, as the Sign of it, as if in
that respect it were a weak and carnal thing; but as it was Adopted by the
Legal Mediator, and made a Sign of that Administration and Covenant, in which
He had to do; for afterward, who so was Circumcised, did become a Debtor to
the whole Law; and therefore, if the Law did cease, Circumcision could not
continue.

But remember, it was on an Evangelical and Gracious Consideration, that
Circumcision did become the Sign of the Legal Covenant or Administration: For
why was it? Were there not other Matters enough to make Signs of, but that
Circumcision, which was a Sign of the Promise, must be Impropriated to be the
Token of the Mosaic Covenant? Why was it then? Not truly (as you may think) to
make an Alteration in the Promise, in respect of the Subjects, to which the
Sign Thereof was to be given, or of any Privileges, or first and immediate
Duties and Obligations of It; but to establish and confirm the Promise. For
Circumcision, the Sign and Token of the Promise, was, in Divine Wisdom, annexed
to the Legal Covenant, (as the Sign and Token of That,) for the same Reason
that Jesus Christ himself, (who was the Capital Seed, to whom the Promise was
made) was made the Minister of the Legal Circumcision: (He was the Angel that
spoke with Moses in the Wilderness, or that gave the Law; and He, in the Days
of his Flesh, but preached to the Jews.) It was for the Truth of God, to
Confirm the Promises to the Fathers; for so says the Apostle, Romans 15. 8. Now
I say, that Jesus Christ was the Minister of the Circumcision, for the Truth of
God, to confirm the Promises unto the Fathers. I say, for This Reason, as also
(which is an Amplification of it) perhaps to show, that there was no Salvation
and Inheritance by the Works of the Law, Circumcision, which had been the Sign
and Token of the Promise made to Abraham, was taken and applied to be the Sign
and Token of the Legal Covenant, which came by Moses; to Become which indeed by
the (capable) Ceremoniality of it in some respects, [not as it was a Sign of
the Covenant; for there is nothing like a Ceremony in being but that, but as it
was confined to one Sex, and (in the Execution and Performance of it) to a
certain Day] it was very Proper and Fit. The Reason, I say, it was applied to
the Legal Covenant, besides the Fitness of it, was for the Truth of God, to
Confirm; and not either to Destroy or Alter the Promise made unto the Fathers;
God taking the Token of the Covenant of Promise, and putting it upon the Legal
Covenant, to be a Sign of it, to show he had his Covenant of Promise still in
Remembrance: For Doing so, He could never look on, or so much as think on the
Law, but He must also remember the Promise; the Sign and Memorial of the
Promise being thus annexed, and put to the Law.

[Thus Circumcision, the first Sign and Token of Abraham's Covenant, though it
were Adopted into the Law of Moses, and made a Sign and Token of that Covenant
in which he Mediated; it was So but for the same Reason, that Jesus Christ
himself was made the Minister of it: That is, not in Derogation of the Promises
made to Abraham, and his Seed, or of any Privileges, and Duties and
Incumbencies arising from Them, but in Confirmation (of them.) It was for the
Faith of God, to confirm the Promises to the Fathers. And therefore, though as
Adopted into the Law of Moses, and made a Part and Member thereof, it must
consequently be annulled, and cease therewith; yet, seeing that Adoption of it
into the Law was in Confirmation of the Promise, the Abrogation and Cessation
of Circumcision with the Law, as now become a Part of it, cannot be understood
to be in any Diminution of the Promise; It not ceasing as it was a Sign and
Token of the Promise, but as it was become a Member and Part of the Law.]

And so much in Demonstration of the Third Particular, (viz.) That the Duty and
Incumbence to which Abraham (and the same is said of his Seed) was obliged, as
being in Covenant, was, by way of Restipulation, to dedicate and give Himself,
and all His to God; and, in token of that Dedication of himself, and of all
his, to put the Sign and Token of the Covenant, as the Cognizance, and Mark,
and Badge of God upon all his, as well as to wear it himself.

It now remains, that I manifest what I promised to do in the Last place,
(viz.) That from Abraham's Gift and Dedication of Himself and His to God, there
arises a Distinction of Holiness into Internal and External; the Former
positive and absolute, the Latter relative: And that this Distinction is
Evangelical, and as applicable unto our Times since the Law, as to the Times
before it, and under it.

That from the Double Dedication the Covenant of Promise obliges to, and which
Abraham practiced, there arises such a Distinction of Holiness, is evident; for
to be Holy, being to be Separated or Dedicated to God, as He is a God in
Covenant: [For whether it be a Person, or it be a People, that is Holy, still
to be Holy is to be Dedicated, to be Separated, it is to Be to the Lord their
God; Deuteronomy. 14. 21. Thou art an Holy People unto the Lord thy God: For a People
to be Unto the Lord their God, is to be Holy; for as to be Blessed or Happy,
the Lord must be a People's; so to be Holy, they must be the Lord's.] And
Seeing also, that a Person may be Separated and Dedicated to the Lord, and so
become His as He is a God in Covenant, either by a Separation and Dedication,
which is the Persons Own Act; as when Abraham or any other does devote and give
himself unfeignedly and cordially to God; or else he may be so By a Dedication
and Separation proceeding from Another's Act, and not his own; he being
another's, and consequently capable of being given and devoted by him.

This being so, What can be clearer than that there are Two Kinds of Holiness;
of which, the Former (wherein the Person himself is Active, and does dedicate
and give himself) is Positive: Internal, and Saving: the Latter, (in which he
is Passive, and is but dedicated, assigned, and given by another, whose he is)
is External and Relative; not a Holiness in the Person, but a Holiness upon
him. With the Former kind of Holiness, Abraham himself was Holy; but with the
Latter, his Infant Children and Servants: Who, to show that they were Gods, had
the Mark of God upon them; as ours, to show that they are So, have his Name.

And that this Distinction of Holiness into External and Internal, Positive and
Relative, a Holiness that is saving, and a Holiness that is not, has Place in
Gospel Times, is as evident as that it had One under the Law, and before the
Law: To manifest which, I will remind you of a Text that has been much in
discourse, and on which, for obvious Reasons, I will a little insist: It is 1
Cor. 7. 14. For the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by or in the Wife, and
the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by or in the Husband. Where note, One Person
being Sanctified, but not being Saved by the relation which it has to another,
it can only be So Externally: The Believer is a Saint, and so Internally holy;
but the Unbeliever is but Sanctified or Sacred, (and that not as a Person, a
Man or a Woman, but as a Person in such a Relation, as a Husband or Wife) by
the relation which he has to that: So Athanasius makes, or rather notes the
Distinction.

The Design and Scope of the Apostle in the Text, is to satisfy a Case of
Conscience, which, it seems, had been proposed to him; and was, Whether the
Bond of Marriage contracted between Persons, both at the Time of that
Contraction, in a state of Infidelity, were obliging afterward, if one of them
became a Convert? Or, Whether the believing Husband were not obliged to put
away the unbelieving Wife, and the believing Wife to leave her Husband that
believed not; seeing the Apostle (for this likely was the Occasion) had advised
them in a former Epistle, not to keep company with Idolaters and profane
Persons; and they comprehended not how Then a Believer, a Holy Person, could
hold Communion in the Matrimonial State with an Unbeliever, who is an Idolater
and unholy.

This was the Case; and to this the Apostle gives a plain and positive
Resolution, Verse. 12, 13. But to the rest speak I, not the Lord; If any Brother
has a Wife that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him
not put her away; and the Woman which has an Husband that believes not, if he
be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him. Then he seconds the
Resolution and Decision which he had made, with a Reason that does expressly
obviate the Ground and Foundation of their Scruple, and that in the former Part
of the 14th Verse. For the unbelieving Husband is sanctified in or by the Wife,
and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified in or by the Husband. In fine, he
Fortifies that Reason by a further Consideration, taken from the Inconvenience
and Absurdity that else would follow, if it should not be as he affirmed; and
that in the latter Part of the 14th Verse. Else your Children are (or would be)
unclean; but now (or whereas) they are holy.

The Sense You give of the Apostles Reason, (for of his Resolution and Decision
I know no Controversy) is;

That the Bond of Matrimony still remains: Religion makes no Alteration in
Civil Bonds and Contracts. The unbelieving Husband is as much clean or lawful,
that is (say you) sanctified to the Use of the believing Wife; so that she may
now as freely admit his Conversation in a Conjugal way, as ever before: And the
like of the unbelieving Wife to the believing Husband. For were it otherwise,
your Children must be Illegitimate, and Bastards; whereas they are not so, but
Lawfully Begotten, and of clean Blood.

For this Sense, you argue from diverse Considerations: One is, That the
Holiness of the unbelieving Parents must be of the same Kind with that of the
Children, and that of the Children the same with that of the unbelieving
Parents; and therefore, can be only Civil. Another; That the Apostle, when he
says, The unbelieving Husband is sanctified, does not say by the Believing
Wife, but only by the Wife; and when the unbelieving Wife is sanctified, he
says not by the Believing Husband, but only by the Husband: Which shows,
that the Holiness is only by the Conjugal Relation, as one is a Husband, the
other a Wife; not as a believing Husband, or believing Wife. And the Third is,
That in Mal. 2. 15. the word Holy is taken for Legitimate and Lawful.

But for all this, the Sense you give of the Apostle's Reason, can never be
His, as being altogether incongruous, and improper ^o the words he uses: For
whereas the Apostle says, The unbelieving Husband is sanctified in or by the
Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified in or by the Husband; instead of
sanctified In or By, you render it sanctified To; both Against the common use
of the Particle, and Without Example. For Gal. 1. 16. the Text you cite as
Parallel, must be rendered (as it is in our Translation) In me: It had been a
Solaecisme, to have said there, (...) for To me; it must have been (...),
answerably to that Matthew 16. 17. Flesh and Blood has not revealed it to thee,
(...), not (...). And for Acts 4. 12. the other (non Parel) Parallel you cite,
(...) there, is not To Men, but Among Men; No other Name is given among Men: No
other Name, no other Person among the Sons of Men; No Name among all their
Names; not Moses, not Herod, etc. is the Name or Person given of God, in and by
which they can be saved; and yet if (...) were used in construction with Any
other word for To, (as indeed I find it with (...), 2 Pet. 1. 5. of which see
Beza ad Loc.) it would not follow, that it might be used in that Sense with
(...), if you do not bring (as you do not) an Example of it. In the Sense you
carry it, (...) in the Text, should have been construed with either (...) or
(...) (not (...)) as it is Heb. 9. 13.

Again, How is the Unbeliever Legitimated in or by the Believer? Both are equal
in respect of Conjugal Relation; one does not legitimate another, but the Law
of Nature or Nations legitimates them both to one another. But here, the
Apostle says, The unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the Wife, and the
unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the Husband; and therefore, to be Sanctified,
is not to be Legitimated. And observe, It is the Unbeliever is sanctified by
the Believer: He says not, The Believer is sanctified by the Unbeliever;
whereas, if to be Sanctified be to be Legitimated, both are equally Sanctified
by, or rather to one another.

But say you; It is not said by the Apostle, That the unbelieving Husband is
sanctified by the Believing Wife, nor that the unbelieving Wife is so by the
Believing Husband: He says, barely, By the Wife, and by the Husband; not by
the believing Wife, and by the believing Husband. As if it were not plainly
understood, when he says of a Husband and Wife, of which it is supposed one is
a Christian, a Believer; the other not: That the unbelieving Husband is
sanctified by the Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the Husband.
Certainly, it is the Unbeliever is sanctified by the Believer; especially
seeing this Wife, and this Husband, Verse. 15. is called the one a Sister, the
other a Brother: And also, that in some Copies, particularly that of Claremont,
Believing is added, as Beza assures; and so Tertullian also, and Athanasius,
read it.

Again, in all the Scripture, the term Sanctified is never put for Civilly
Legitimated; and you might as well have said, it signifies Nothing, as that it
signifies but That: For as for Mal. 2. 15. the term Holy is not in the Text;
for it is not there a Holy Seed* but a Seed of God, and that according to the
Usage of the Hebrews, who put the Name of God to what excels; as a Mountain of
God for a High Mountain, an Army of God for a Great Army, a Lion of God for a
Lion that excels in Strength or Stature; and so a Seed of God for an honorable
excellent Seed; a Seed not basely, promiscuously or adulterously begotten; but
according to the Law and Institution of God, in lawful and orderly Matrimony:
And if the Seed of God be an Honorable, Excellent, and Legitimate Seed, will
it therefore follow, that the word Holy (a word the Prophet uses not) does
signify Lawful or Legitimate?

And whereas you say, [ The Seed of God can be understood in no other Sense,
but that of a Lawful Seed, in opposition to That born in Poligamy; and so
conclude against Poligamy from that Text:) I cannot but observe, that you will
take for sufficient Evidence, in some Points, That which is not current even
with you in others. For is not this an Old Testament Text, as well as Genesis 17?
and yet suffices to conclude against Poligamy, Though the latter must not for
Baptism. And though more is to be said against the Illation you make from the
One, than can against That I make from the Other. For the Seed of God, in the
Text, is not literally and directly opposed to the Issue born in Any Poligamy,
but in Adulterous Poligamy; for words must be interpreted according to the
Scope and Subject Matter: and the Design and Scope of the Prophet, is not to
argue against Poligamy as such, in which there may be no Treachery; but against
Adulterous Poligamy, in which there always Is; it being founded in Treacherous
putting away: Which is evident, in that the Prophet concludes not against the
Former, but the Latter; Therefore, take heed to your Spirit; let none deal
treacherously against the Wife of his Youth. Deal treacherously! Wherein* In
Poligamy as such? No; but in the Divorce, then, commonly in Practice; which
was, to put away one Wife to take another: or in (as I called it) Adulterous
Poligamy, Poligamy founded on unjust Divorce: For says he, The Lord the God of
Israel, he hates putting away. Plainly, the Treachery lay not barely in
Poligamy, or the having many Wives* for to say it did, is great Impiety against
the Father of the Faithful, and against the Generation of the Just: For did
Abraham deal treacherously? or did Jacob? or did David, but in the Matter of
Vriah? etc. Was the Church, the true Offspring of God, founded in an Ungodly
Seed? Were not the Patriarchs the Issue of Poligamy? Or can it be imagined,
that the Father of the Faithful, the Man after God's own Heart, and the Father
of the Twelve Patriarchs, should live and die in Treachery, Perjury, Adultery?
And yet they did in Poligamy: No, the Treachery lay not simply in Poligamy, or
having many Wives; but, as I said, in Adulterous Poligamy, or the Divorce then
in Practice, which was, the Cruel putting away of one Wife, to take another:
For this, as Christ explains it, is Adultery; and consequently, Treachery
against the Divorced.

And if the Conclusion be against Divorce, that Divorce which was in Practice
in that time, the Medium or Argument by which he does deduce it, must be
understood Accordingly: And what is the Medium? God made One, when the
Remainder of the Spirit was with Him, and He could have made more: And why then
but One, but that He might have an Excellent Seed; which, in direct and literal
Correspondence to the Conclusion, [Therefore deal not treacherously, in putting
away,] must be Thus Interpreted: He made One; but One, that He might have an
excellent Seed; not a base, dishonorable Seed, the Issue of Adultery and
treacherous Divorce; but an honorable, orderly Seed, according to his own
Ordinance and Institution of Marriage: And therefore, He made One; but One,
that there being but One (All,) Adam might have no Choice of more, and
consequently might be incapable of committing Treachery against That One he
had, in putting her away to take Another.

This is plainly the Reasoning of the Prophet. But though from this Medium he
but argues, and so does Jesus Christ too, against Adulterous Divorce; yet
seeing the same Medium may be used to more than one Conclusion, I do not lay
any Imputation on your Argument against Poligamy, from the Prophet's, That God
made but One; and consequently, Adam could not have more than One: No, though
it may be said, That the Argument would hold as well against Successive, as
Contemporal Poligamy* For there being but one Woman (all) made, Adam could no
more have one after another, than two at once: And though the Holy Patriarchs
understood it not to be against Poligamy, which they practiced; but against
Adulterous Divorce, which they never practiced.

I hope, you will not understand me here beside my Intentions, to offer what I
Have in favor of Poligamy: I know that from the Beginning it was not so; it
could not be so; and that the Churches of Christ have no such Custom: I only
offer it, to let you see, how Just you are to the Old Testament, and to
Consequences and Deductions in Matters in which you have no Prejudice; and
again, how Hard in things in which you have Any: Seeing a Well-laid Consequence
and Deduction, from an Old Testament Text, shall render you Impregnable in One
Case, against the Battery of many not unworthy Considerations; But shall not
signify a Button in Another, though the Considerations against It are in no
Degree so numerous, or so weighty: As if For you, any Probability and
Appearance must be Demonstration; but Against you, even Demonstrations as good
as the Nature of the thing will bear, must not have the Reputation of being
bare Probabilities. But This by the way. To return.

The Sense I have of the Apostle's Resolution, and of the Reason with which he
enforces it, is, That notwithstanding the Infidelity and Unbelief of one of the
Conjugal Pair; (yet) the other might still cohabit, and Conjugally converse
with him, or with her: For though the Person of the Unbeliever be not
sanctified; yet the Relation is, and the Matrimonial use is, and that in and by
the Faith of the Believer; who, by a Dedication of himself, or of her self, and
of all he does, and all he uses, in receiving all, and doing all with giving
of Thanks, and with a Superior Reference, does thereby sanctify, make different
and holy, (namely, Relatively and Externally) what without that Dedication and
Superior Reference, was in it self but Common, Indifferent, and Unclean: As 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4, 5. where mark the Limitation; To him that Believes: and also the
Manner how sanctified; By the Word and Prayer.

And the Apostle enforces this Reason; namely, the Sanctification of the
Unbeliever in and by the Believer, as to Conjugal Acts and Uses, by a further
Consideration, viz. That (there being the same Reason for the Unbelieving
Parent, as for the Children that do not Actually believe) if it were not So,
[If the Unbelieving Husband, as a Husband, were not sanctified by the believing
Wife, but remained Common, etc.] then their Children (which they would not
easily grant) must be also common, and unclean, and as unholy as the Children
of the mere Heathen; who, being Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel,
Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, and so without God as in Covenant, Can do
no Act in reference to him; that is, no Holy Action; and consequently, though
they might Lawfully (both by the Law of Nature, and the Law of Nations) beget
Children, which therefore would be Legitimate; yet they could not do it Holily,
and therefore their Children could, not be Holy. A Heathen may do a thing
Lawfully; but only a Christian can do a thing Holily: That is Lawfully done,
which is done according to Law, Civil or Divine, Natural or Positive; but that
only is Holily done, which being Lawful, is done with Reference to God in
Covenant, and for his Glory. And as Children are called Legitimate, as they are
lawfully begotten; so they are called Holy, as being Holily begotten. Thus it
is, as if the Apostle had said, If the Unbelieving Husband be not Sanctified by
the Believing Wife, and the Unbelieving Wife by the Husband that believes;
then are your Children still Unholy, still Unsanctified, and but as the
Children of mere Heathens: For if your Children are Holy and Sanctified, (as
you do acknowledge them) they be So but by the Dedication of the believing
Parent by Word and Prayer, with a Relative and External Sanctity. And Thus the
unbelieving Wife May be sanctified, and Is by the Husband that believes; and
Thus the unbelieving Husband is Sanctified by the believing Wife, as well as
your Children: every Believer Sanctifying, Dedicating, and Consecrating all he
has Concern in or with, by Prayer applying the Word: Else were your Children
common and unclean; whereas now they are Holy. Designati Sanctitatis, says
Tertullian, the Candidates of Holiness. And thus the unbelieving Husband and
Wife (as Husband and Wife) are holy, as the Children are holy, with a Relative
and External Holiness, one and the same sort of Holiness.

And whereas you think, That in the Gospel-Administration there is no such
thing as a Relative and External Holiness;] I on the contrary am apt to think,
there was never More; and that the Ceremonial Holiness under the Law, did in a
great degree but signify the Latitude of This in the Gospel: For what is the
Holiness of our Actions, Natural or Civil, and of the Members of our Bodies,
and That which is on Creatures by craving a Blessing on them, Other than a
Reference (in the doing of the Former, and in the using of the Latter) to the
Glory of God? In this (...), this Reference to God in Actions* in the use of
Creatures, and the use of our Members, consists the Sanctification of Them, to
Which in all things a Believer is obliged: For Whether we do eat, or do drink,
or whatever we do, all must be done (with this Reference to God,] for the
Glory of God. Thus a Christian is a Person that is Entirely to God; that in all
he Is, and Has, and Does, is To, and For God: He is a Priest, and he is an
Offering, and he is a Temple too: So that, now, Holiness is on the Bells of the
Horses, and the Pots (Vessels of common Use) are as the Bowls before the Altar;
all Holy and Consecrated. No Action of a Believer, much less his Marrying, and
giving in Marriage, and the consequent Actions of that State, must be common,
but holy; and every Action of an Unbeliever, is common and unholy: To the Pure
all things are Pure, but to the Unbeliever nothing so: Even the Lawful Actions
of the Unbeliever, who is without God in the World, are unholy. Holy Christian
Matrimony, and holy Christian Use of one another, differs much from Unholy and
Unchristian. Infidels do Lawfully come together; but they do not Holily: They
never think on God in Covenant in it.

Now, in your second Thoughts, I pray consider, which of the given Senses is
the most probable, either That which agrees not to the Text, so much as in the
Grammar; but is far fetched, violent, and forced: or That which is not only
Natural and Genuine, without Constraint and Violence to the words; but also
agrees both to the Analogy of Faith, and to the Design of the Apostle: As
which not only resolves the Case proposed; but, by obviating the Ground of the
Scruple, does fully satisfy the Conscience: A Sense not mean and low, as that
is which makes the Holiness to be but Civil, (to be) a mere Lawfulness; but a
High, Lofty, Spiritual, Evangelical Sense: a Sense truly worthy of our great
Apostle, who breaths nothing but Sanctity, nothing but Holiness.

Thus having fortified my Premises, I should immediately proceed to deduce my
Conclusion; but (that) before I do so, it may not be amiss to consider one
Question; which is: [Why, Seeing the Sign and Token of the Covenant of Promise,
was the Sign and Token of it not only on Abraham's Part, to whom it was made;
but on God's, who made it: Why, since it signified, that God did convey, and
make Himself and all His to Abraham, as well as that Abraham ought to
restipulate, and surrender, and make himself, and all his again to God: That
all along I do mention but This, and not the Other?]

To This I answer, That I insist not on the Latter, to exclude the Former. I
well know the Sign and Token of the Covenant, to be a Sign and Token between
God and Abraham; and ^o as much signify what God has promised to Abraham, as
what Abraham was obliged to answer. But the Reason I insist mainly on the
Latter, is, That It seems mostly (to be) imported in Putting of the Sign upon
Abraham: For any other Sign that God had pleased to have given him, either in
the Heavens above, or in the Earth below, might have been (as the Bow in the
Clouds) a Confirmation of the Truth of God, as Covenanting: But it Would not,
with so much Clearness and Significancy, have represented Abraham's
Stipulation, and his assigning and giving of himself and his again to God, as
Now it does; seeing (that) That in common Sense is God's, which has his Sign
upon it, and wears his Mark. And it is as observable, that as Circumcision was
upon Abraham, and on all his, in token of his Answer and Restipulation to God,
(That he did dedicate and assign himself, and all he had, to him); so Baptism
[the Evangelical, initiating Token] is on the Person too to whom God is a God,
and signifies the same Restipulation and Answer, which Circumcision did: The
Which many Learned (not improbably) conceive the Apostle means, when he says, 1
Pet. 3. 21. That Baptism is Not the putting away of the Filthiness of the
Flesh, but the Answer or Restipulation of a good Conscience toward God: And so
Beza (ad loc.) on second Thoughts does render it; and Tertullian happily does
allude to it too, when l. de Resur. Car. he tells us, Anima non Lavatione, sed
Responsione sancitur. Besides, (...) is a Juridical word, as may be seen in the
Glossary: And though (in Classick Authors) It primarily, and in the First
place, do signify Interrogation; yet even thence, it came in the Second to
signify Stipulation, (the Sense the Jurists take it in:) And the Reason is
evident; for in Spigelius, Stipulatio est firma verborum conceptio, qua quis
Aliquid se facturum daturumve promittit Alteri super hoc Ipsum Interroganti;
utpote, promittis mihi te daturum xx Philippeos? Alter Respondebat, promitto.
And Thus also Surrenders and Deditions were anciently made, as is to be seen
(in Livy, l. 1. c. 36. and in Calepine, ad voc. ded. out of him) in the
Dedition of the Collatines to the Romans. But yet my Argument does not stand
and fall with the Sense of this Text, no more than with that in the 1 Cor. 7.

Well then, I have evinced, That the Covenant of Promise, which is the Blessing
of Abraham, is the Covenant of Grace, and That it does descend upon the (true)
Believing Gentiles, I have also evinced. That all who have the Benefit and
Advantage of the Blessing of Abraham, and are the Seed on whom it does descend,
are equally obliged to the Duty, Office, and Incumbence arising from the Nature
of that Blessing, or annexed to it, as Abraham himself: And I have evinced,
That the Duty, Office, and Incumbence arising from the Blessing of Abraham, in
the Covenant of Promise, was, in Restipulation and Answer to God, to dedicate,
assign, and give himself, and all he owned, to Him; and, in token of that
Dedication, Gift, and Assignment, to put the Sign and Token of the Covenant
[the Mark and Cognizance of God] both on himself, and on them.

And now take my Argument, which is this: That Seeing the Believing Gentiles
are the Seed of Abraham, and consequently are Partakers of his Blessing in that
Covenant of Promise confirmed before in Christ; as is evident in the first
Particular: And Seeing the Seed of Abraham, who are Partakers of his Blessing,
are under equal Obligation to the Duty, Office, and Incumbence of that
Blessing, as Abraham himself was; which is the Second Particular: And Seeing
also, That the Duty, Office, and Incumbence lying on Abraham, as he had the
Blessing, was, that he should both dedicate, and assign, and give himself, and
all his to God; and, in token of it, take himself, and put on them the Sign of
the Covenant, (which is called to keep the Covenant, viz. in the Sign of it;)
which is the Third. It Follows, That the true Believing Gentiles, who are the
Seed of Abraham, and as much Partakers of the Blessing in the Covenant of
Promise, as Abraham himself, are as much obliged to observe and keep that
Covenant of Promise, in the Sign and Token of it, (be it what it will) as he
himself, and his Natural Seed: That is, in plain words, Seeing God is as much a
God to the Believing Gentiles, as he was to Abraham, and does as much give and
make himself, and all he has to them, as he did to him; It follows, That they
are as much obliged, by way of Answer, to dedicate and give themselves, and all
they have, to him; and, in token of it, to take the Sign of the Covenant
between God and Them, or the Cognizance and Token of being God's, (which Now is
Baptism) upon Themselves, and to put it upon all Theirs, (...) (...), (and to
be sure, their Children are Theirs) as Abraham was Himself to take
Circumcision, (the Sign and Token of the Covenant Then) and to put it also on
His. The same Reason for both: The Seed is as well to keep the Covenant (in the
Sign,) as Abraham.

If it could be denied, that Baptism is now the Sign and Token of the Covenant
of Grace, as Circumcision was heretofore; I should think it easy to be
evinced: But I assume it as granted, and that both Because Baptism is the
Restipulation and Answer of a good Conscience to God; and Because it has the
same Use now, that Circumcision had before, (viz.) To be the Rite of
Matriculation, and of Assignation: And Because else (which is hard to think)
there is now no such Sign and Token at all of the Covenant: Whereas if in
Circumcision, ( God's Sign); in Baptism, the Name of God is put upon us, to
mark us for His. And taking it for granted, and allowing the Grounds that I
have laid, you may see the Reason, why in the Primitive Times, Whole Houses
were Baptized: It is on the same Account, and for the same Reason, that
Abraham's Whole House was Circumcized. Thus it is said, Act. 11. 14. That Peter
should tell Cornelius words, by which he and all his House should be saved: And
Act. 16. 15. it is said but of Lydia, that she believed; but of Her, and of her
Household, that they were Baptized: And in Act. 16. 31. it is promised to the
Jailer, that on his Faith not only himself, but his Household should be saved:
Believe thou on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy House.
And 1 Cor. 1. 16. Paul Baptized the Household of Stephanas: And Christ himself
tells Zacheus, on his believing, That Salvation is come not to his Person only,
but his House. I say not, this is Demonstration; but it seems something, that
(ordinarily) when the Master, on his believing, has a Blessing given him, his
House or Family should be joined with him. Certainly, the Families of the Seed
have the same Relation to them, that the Family and Household of Abraham had to
him; and the Incumbence on the Seed, is the same as on Abraham; and the
Privilege the same.

And it seems to me, to answer exactly to the Sentiments of Some, concerning
the Promise given to the Church under the Messiah, that Magnificent One; for so
Jer. 30. 21. should be rendered, and not in the Plural, as we do read it: To the
Letter, it is not their Nobles, as in our Translation; but their Magnificent
One, or their Noble One shall be of themselves, and their Governor shall
proceed from the midst of them.

Now say They, the Promise is, That when this Noble and Magnificent One, the
Shiloe should come out of the Loins of Juda, and take the Sovereign Government
and Power, and have the chief Administration of things in his own Hand; Then,
in that Glorious and Evangelical Dispensation, their Children should be as
afore-time; or to the Letter, As of Old: Their Children should be solemnly
dedicated, and given up to God, and put into his Protection and Care; and, in
token of it, be Baptized, as of old, in afore-time, they were Circumcized:
Which, though it be not the proper Sense of that Text, (for of Old may look but
to the Time of David and Solomon, as I am apt to think it does, because the
same word is Neh. 12. 46. used in Reference to It;) yet it is consonant enough
to the Analogy of Faith.

For indeed, well may Children in the Gospel Dispensation be said, in this
Sense, to be as afore-time, and as of old; since though the Jews are cut off,
the Gentiles (which believe) are grafted in upon the same Stock; not indeed
upon the Legal Branch, but upon the Root Olive; which affords all the
Nourishment that either the Jews had, or the Gentiles have: Which Root-Olive is
the Covenant of Promise; that Covenant, that Promise, that was above Four
hundred Years before the Law. Now, into that State of things, as the Covenant
of Promise Then held it so long before the Law, we believing Gentiles, the true
Seed, are put: Christ himself affirming, That Many shall come from the East,
and from the West, the North, and the South, [and those are the believing
Gentiles from all Quarters,] and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:
He says not with Moses, and with Elias, by whom the Law came, and was
explained; but with the Fathers, who received the Promise: They shall sit with
these in the Kingdom of Heaven, or Gospel Church, And in That State of things,
when not the Law, but the Gospel preached unto Abraham, did obtain; God was a
God not only to the Father, but in and through the Father, and for his Sake to
the Children, yea, to all the Family; and the Father of the Family did not only
dedicate and give himself, but all His, his Children, and even his Servants,
all his to God. And so it is Now: Our Children are Thus, as they were
afore-time, or of old; else indeed our Children were unclean, but now are they
Holy; they are God's. The great Mistake of Antipedo-baptists, is, That they
look not back but to the Law, when they should (look back) a little further,
even to the Time of the Promise, before the Law; a State of things for the long
space of four hundred and thirty Years: For observe, in Jer. 31. from Verse. 31
to 34. when God is pleased to promise to make a New Covenant, and consequently
to abolish and abrogate the Old, he makes old not that Covenant made with
Abraham four hundred and thirty Years before the Law; but that which was made
with their Fathers, In the Day he took them by the Hand to bring them out of
the Land of Egypt; which was the Legal Covenant made on Mount Sinai Certainly,
the New Covenant, as stated in Jeremy, is a Renovation of Abraham's, or of the
Promise of the Spirit; I will he their God, they shall be my People; I will be
thy God, and the God of thy Seed; and Thou and thy Seed shall keep my Covenant:
To keep God's Covenant, is to be God's.

As for Ishmael and Isaac, those two Figures, taking them as Figures, and as in
the Allegory, so they represent not primarily and immediately, (as you
apprehend them) the State of single Persons; as if the Latter should represent
the Persons that truly, and to all intents and purposes, are Spiritual Heirs of
the Promise; and the Former, those that are only so Externally, and as they did
descend (according to the Flesh) from Abraham: For, if you mind it, this
Distinction of Seeds did take no place, in the Antitype and Truth, before the
Law, for all that long space of above four hundred Years that did precede it.
So that firstly, they do not signify single Persons, but Peoples: I say,
Ishmael and Isaac are not primarily and immediately the Elect and Reprobate,
(as Elect and Reprobate are commonly taken) but are Jew and Gentile: The Seed
which is of the Law, and the Seed which is of the Faith of Abraham: According
to Romans 4. 16. there are Elect and Reprobate among both Seeds.

Yes, Ishmael and Isaac do signify but Peoples; (namely,) Ishmael signifies
the Jews; who, being Descendants of Abraham according to the Flesh, were under
the Bondage of the Law; and so, in the Mystery, were Children of Hagar the
Bondwoman, as Ishmael was in the Letter: For Hagar answers unto Sinai, where
the Law was given: And Isaac represents the believing Gentiles; who are no
longer under the Bondage of the Law, but under the Grace of the Promise; and
so, in the Mystery, are the Children of Sarah or of the Free Woman; as being
the Children of the Faith of Abraham, as Others were of his Body. Hagar and
Sarah are the Two Covenants and Dispensations, [Sinai and Sion;] and the Jews
under the Law, and Gentiles under the Gospel, are the Children of Them, or
Ishmael and Isaac. So that before the Law, no Distinction in the Antitype or
Mystery of those Two; for the Children could not be, before the Mothers were:
And therefore, what is this to the State of the Promise four hundred and thirty
Years before? Now, in the Gospel being freed from the Law, we are put again
into the State of the Promise, which was before; Christ the Seed, the Principal
Object of the Promise, being now come. I Will be a God to Thee, and thy Seed.

Thus I have finished my Argument: But happily, in Evasion of it, (for it
cannot be in Solution of, or Satisfaction to it) you will persist to say, as
you have already; That the External Administration of the Covenant now being
vastly different from what it was in Abraham's Time; therefore the Incumbence
is so also: And that therefore, though believing Gentiles, who have the Benefit
of Abraham's Covenant, and to whom it is made, are under equal Obligation to
that Proper Duty and Service, which is Now required of them, as Abraham was to
His; yet it follows not, that their Infant Seed are under the same Obligation,
according to the Gospel-Institution, till put into the same Capacity (by
believing) with themselves.

But how pertinently this is said, I do not see: For to what Proposition in my
Argument can this your Answer be adjusted and applied? Besides, it goes upon a
Mistake much vaster than the Difference between the External Administration of
the Covenant in Abraham's Time, and that in Ours: For I know no other
Difference in respect of the Sign of it, but that Circumcision then Was that
Sign, and that Baptism Is now. Nor will any Difference in the External
Administration, if it should be much greater, make Any as to the Argument, from
the Duty and Incumbence which I insisted upon, (which is, To keep the Covenant
in the Sign of it, as Abraham did) for this Incumbence and Duty is not bottomed
and grounded on the Administration of the Covenant, which is mutable, and does
differ; but on the Substance and Nature of it, which is immutable and
everlastingly the same; [I will be a God to Thee, and to thy Seed:] And God
being as much a God to the Seed of Abraham, as he was to Abraham himself; the
Seed are as much obliged to the Duty, Office, and Incumbence arising and
resulting from his being so* as ever Abraham was.

Ay, you will say; The believing Gentiles, on whom the Blessing and Covenant of
Abraham does descend, are as much obliged to that Proper Duty and Service,
which is Now required of them, as Abraham was to His Then; Yet it follows not,
(I use your own words) that [Their Infant Seed are under the same Obligation,
according to the Gospel-Institution, till put into the same Capacity (by be
ieving) with themselves.] And indeed, it follows not, that the Infant-Children
are under the same Obligation; for They are under None: The Obligation is not
on the Children, which are but passive: But it follows well enough for the
Parents that believe, that the same Obligation lies on Them, they being the
true Seed, to keep the Covenant in the Sign of it, both by taking of it upon
themselves, and by putting of it on their Children, that did of old upon
Abraham for himself and his. And This is the Proper Duty and Service required
of them, as they are Partakers of the Blessing of Abraham. Nor are we to expect
any New Commands in the Gospel Dispensation, for Duties settled of Old on
lasting and immutable Reasons: The Obligation abides, if the Reason of the
Precept abides; a Principle that is the Ground of the Apostle's Reasoning, 1
Cor. 9. 8, 9, 10. And shall the Promise indeed abide, and not the Duty which
arises from it? The Covenant abide, and not the Restipulation, without which it
is not a Covenant? This you dare not say.

Ay, but you will tell me again; Though you do acknowledge, that the Proper Duty
and Incumbence arising from the Covenant, has an Eternal Obligation upon all
the true Heirs of Promise; and in particular, That such are bound by way of
Restipulation, not only to assign, dedicate, and give themselves to God; but
also, all that is Theirs: Yet that you do mean, that it Must only be in the way
that he himself has appointed, (and who, I pray, ever meant otherwise?) and
that is (say you) but by Prayer and Supplication for them, and by Educating of
them (as far as they are capable) in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord;
and Not by the Parent's putting on them any Sign of the Covenant, as a Badge,
and Cognizance of God, in Recognition and Testimony of his Right and Title to
them.

But all this is but to deny the Conclusion, after Concession of the Premises;
for I have evinced, that the Proper Obligation of the Covenant, and in the way
that God himself has appointed, is, That those with whom it is immediately
made, and who are first Partakers of the Benefits of it, to whom God is firstly
and immediately a God, are not only to dedicate and give themselves, and all
they have to Him; but to do it in this Particular way and manner, by keeping of
the Covenant in the Sign of it; [I will be a God to Thee, and thy Seed; Thou
shall keep my Covenant therefore, Thou and thy Seed:] So that, to dedicate and
give our Infant-Children to God by Prayer and Supplication, and to educate and
bring them up in the Fear and Admonition of the Lord, (which also must be done,
and which Abraham also did) is not to answer the Obligation and Incumbence of
the Covenant, if we do not do it also Solemnly, by keeping of the Covenant in
the Sign thereof our selves, and by putting of it also on Them. God loves
Solemnity; it makes for his External Glory: He will be Owned to be our Lord and
Owner, and the Lord and Owner of our Children, by our taking of his Name upon
us our selves, and by putting of it on them.

And whereas you have said, with a Modesty as great as the Truth of what you
say; That, if my Argument be truly stated, and as (without wresting) it ought,
the proper Language of it will be this; That Abraham being in Covenant, was to
be Circumcized both himself and Half his Family; the same Covenant descends on
believing Gentiles: Therefore, they are to be signed, and the Whole of theirs.
But whether such an Argument as this, (This being, you say, the True State of
the Case) be convincing or no, you refer to my Second Thoughts.]

I answer: That I have Reason to be at the utmost Degree of Despair, of ever
receiving of any good Answers from You, as long as (from what Cause I now
enquire not) you understand an Argument no better: For Mine (even in Your Terms
of Half and Whole) would run thus: If Abraham, and all his Seed, must keep the
Covenant in the Sign of it, by taking it themselves, and putting it on all
theirs that are capable of it; Then, though Abraham, and but Half his Family,
(for so you compute it) did keep it in the Sign thereof, as long as
Circumcision was that Sign; yet the Seed of Abraham, the true Believing
Gentile, and the Whole of theirs, must keep it now. Now, that Baptism is the
Sign, the Sequel is evident: For as but Half of Abraham's Family was capable of
Circumcision, the Sign of the Covenant Then; All the Offspring of the
Believing Seed of Abraham, are Capable of Baptism, which is the Sign of it Now.
And observe it; I argue not from Circumcision, as it is Circumcision, to
Baptism; but I argue, that because the Children of Abraham, by virtue of the
Covenant, were signed with the Sign of it; which then was Circumcision:
Therefore, the Children of the Seed, by virtue of the same Covenant, must be
signed with the Sign of it too; which now is Baptism: For the Immediate
Obligation is not to keep the Covenant either in Baptism, or in Circumcision;
but in the Sign of it: Now the Sign of Old was Circumcision, and the Sign Now
is Baptism. It is true, had it pleased God to have abolished Circumcision, the
Sign before, and not to have instituted Baptism, which is the Sign now; it
would have been a high Presumption in any Person, to go about to make One: But
when the Covenant remains, and the Proper Obligation of the Covenant, is to
keep it in the Sign thereof; and God, though he has taken away One Sign, yet
has pleased to Institute Another; What can be plainer, than that as to be in
Covenant is our Privilege, so that to observe and keep it in the present Sign
thereof is our Duty? Thus you have my Second Thoughts, and make the most of
them.

So much by way of Obviation to what you do object to my Argument. I am now to
reply to Yours; and it is ad Hominem: (viz.) Either the Children of Believers
are in Covenant with their Parents, or they are not: If they are in Covenant,
as you say I affirm they are, because I said the Children of Believers are
Holy, not without God in Covenant, but given to God in Covenant; then say you,
They are the Spiritual Seed, and as such entitled to the Covenant and Blessing
of Abraham, which I formerly denied, and which cannot be for fifteen Reasons.
But on the contrary, if I say the Children of Believers are not the Spiritual
Seed of Abraham, and consequently such as are not (You should have added, On
that Account,) any wise entitled unto Abraham's Covenant and Blessing; then
neither can they justly pretend to any Covenant Holiness by Virtue of their
Birth Privilege; which yet [You say, but Mistakingly] I make the Ground of
their Admission to Baptism, when I say, That God becomes not related unto any;
nor is any related unto God in Scripture, so as to be styled Holy, but in and
through the Covenant.] Thus I am in a Dilemma, and driven from Corner to
Corner; but safe in none.

But pray consider, that I never said, either directly or in consequence, That
the Children of Believers are Immediately and firstly in the Covenant of
Promise, and as their Parents (are:) I only said, and still do, that they are
dedicated and given by their Parents to God, (who is) in Covenant (with those
Parents:) And yet for all this, even in my Opinion, They may pretend [if that
must be the word] to Some Holiness by virtue of the Covenant of Promise; and
This too, though they be not Abraham's Spiritual Seed: For though they be not
themselves the Spiritual Seed of Abraham; yet being the Children of those that
are, they become, thereby, entitled to the Privilege of being Dedicated and
Sacred to God, by virtue of the Covenant; in the Same Right, and all, as much
as the Slaves and Natural Children of Abraham were. Abraham's Natural Children
and Slaves were entitled on His Account; and the Children of Believers are
entitled on Theirs. The true Spiritual Seed of Abraham are obliged to dedicate
their Children, not as His, but as Theirs; they give Theirs, as he gave His. I
pray, were not the Natural Seed of Abraham, and his Slaves also, some way Holy
in and through the Covenant, by virtue of the Dedication and Signing which That
obliged to? And as His Children and Slaves were some way Holy, so are Ours also.

And in this Sense of Federal Holiness, as it is a Relative and External
Holiness, do I ascribe it to our Children, in and through the Covenant; namely,
as This obliges the Parent to assign and dedicate them, and they accordingly
are dedicated: And to be Federally Holy in this Sense, they need not sure be
the true Spiritual Seed of Abraham, seeing All, even the Natural Children of
Abraham, [though so Holy] were not all accounted for Seed. In fine; Observe,
that if by virtue of the Dedication required of Abraham by the Covenant made
with him, his Children were Members of the Church Then, [Old-Testament-Church,
you call it] it will follow, that by virtue of the same Covenant, making the
same Obligation and Incumbence of Dedication, (if It be still in force, as I
have evinced it to be) the Children of the Seed continue Members still, even in
the New-Testament-Church: And well they may, not only for that the Church is
One, and the same, though the Testaments be not; but for that Children were not
only Members of the Jewish or Legal Church, but of the Gospel Church, for above
four hundred Years before the Law: For it was Gospel that was Preached to
Abraham, Gal. 3. 8. And therefore Circumcision was, at first, a Gospel-Sign.
And remember, I make not the Childrens being in Covenant, the Ground of their
Baptism; but the Parents being in Covenant, the Ground of Their Holiness. To be
Baptized is the Children's Privilege; but it is the Parent's Duty to Baptize
them, and to put the Name of God upon them, in token that by their Assignment
they are His.

Well; But you find not any Mention of Infants Baptism in the Apostolical and
Primitive Times; nor any positive and literal Precept for it.] But do you find
any mention, that the Apostles themselves, All of them were Baptized with Any,
or Any of them with the Baptism of Christ? Or that Women were admitted to the
Supper of the Lord? Or any positive literal Precept for either? And yet, I
hope, you believe, both that the Apostles were Baptized, and that Women were
not excluded from the Holy Communion. And if you do not find in so many literal
Expressions, that Infants were then Baptized, you may find it in sufficient
Implication; for you may find Whole Houses (of which Ordinarily Infants are
Constituent Parts) affirmed to be so, and that frequently, and without any
Exception of Infants; which yet ought to have been made, if it had been but for
Caution, on supposal that it were so dangerous a thing as you would have it be
thought, to understand them included. Besides, the Churches of Christ
universally have had such a Custom, and for ought appears, Perpetually: Sure we
are from Immemorial Time, which is enough to prescribe from; and you cannot but
know what Austin says in the Case.

Now, Sir, upon the whole I pray consider, that in all the Scripture, as there
is no express and positive Text, that Children must be Baptized; so there is no
express and positive Text, that does forbid their Baptizing: And therefore, it
can be only consequence to Evidence, either that they ought to be Baptized, or
that they ought not. And let be weighed, That Antipedo-baptism makes the Church
of Christ but a Church Vnius Aetatis: That it robs the Parent of a sensible
Ground of Hope for his Child, in case of Decease in Infancy; which is, That he
has solemnly given him to God, and made him his Care: And It deprives the
Child of a solemn and powerful Motive, when he is of Age, to dedicate and give
himself: For this is a great One, [and this it deprives him of:] I am already
solemnly given to God in Baptism by my Parents, who had Right to give me: I am
His by their Dedication, and that publicly made and attested; and therefore, I
have Reason to become so by my Own. I am not mine Own; the Name of God is upon
me; I am marked for His; and I must rob God of what is His own Already by many
Rights, and particularly by a Solemn Act of my Parents, if I now refuse my
Consent, and do not also assign, and dedicate, and give my self to Him.

And let it also be weighed, That Children are no more incapable of Baptism,
than they were of Circumcision: For if Baptism be the Sign and Seal of the
Righteousness by Faith; so was Circumcision: If Then all were not Israel, that
were of Israel; so it is Now, all in Christ are not Christ: If Then
Circumcision, which was of the Fathers, or a Sign and Token of the Promise made
to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were taken and put unto the Law; Baptism, which
was of John, the last Prophet, and in use before John, as a Rite of Initiating
Proselytes, and administered both to Male and Female, Is taken by Christ, and
put to the Gospel: And if Faith be made in the Gospel, the Ground and
Foundation of Baptism, Believe and be Baptized; It was at first the Ground and
Foundation of Circumcision: For Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to
him for Righteousness; and he received the Sign of Circumcision, the Seal of
the Righteousness by Faith; which he had, being yet Uncircumcised. And if the
Children of Abraham were Holy, Ours are not Unclean.

In a word: As heretofore there were Jews outwardly, and but visibly, as well
as inwardly and really; so now there are Christians outwardly, and but visibly,
as well as inwardly and really. And is not Baptism it self, as external and
visible a Thing as Circumcision? Yes, there is a Baptism and Regeneration of
Water, which is external and visible, to make Christians visibly and
externally, as well as one of the Spirit, which is Internal and Invisible, to
make real and true Christians: The Former, that initiates into the External and
Visible Church: The Latter, into the true Assembly of the First Born: And the
Subjects of the Two Baptisms are no more to be confounded, than the Baptisms
themselves.

Thus I have given you all the Satisfaction, that under a great variety of
distractive and surprising Accidents, I was capable of giving; and I have done
it with the Temper and Moderation that becomes a Seeker of Truth; without the
Common Pomp of Figures, Insolence, and Triumph: a Thing searce pardonable in
the Heat and Fervency of a Dispute; but which does very ill become a Writer.
And yet, if I had used any Warmness in the Argument, seeing it is in the Case
of Infants, that cannot speak for themselves, it had been somewhat Excusable;
and the rather, for that our Savior was so Zealous for them Himself, that when
some (it may be of your Persuasion) would not have had them brought unto Him to
be Blessed, it is said, He was much Displeased with Them. But I am not so with
You, for that Occasion you have given of searching out the Truth to,

Bowdon, September. 19. 81. Ian. 27. 81. Dear Sir, Your Affectionate Friend and
Servant, R. B.

The Second Letter.
Dear Sir,
YOurs of March 16th, came to hand the 20th; in which the Declaration you begin
with, That notwithstanding all that I have said, your Apprehensions concerning
the Matter in dispute between us, are the same they were, and That rather you
are the more confirmed; does no whit surprise me. I assure you, I never had the
vanity to hope, to convince a Man of your Persuasion. I was not the first
Aggressor: I well knew the Confidence, that goes along with Conceits of higher
Administrations; and I also knew, that some Dies and Tinctures of Mind, (of
which I took, and do take That of Yours to be One) are as incapable of being
washed out, as Those in the Skins of Leopards and Blackamoors.

After a Smoothing Preface, you proceed to (as you call them) Sober, and (you
hope) Inoffensive Reflections; which yet, to deserve the Epithetes you give
them, must have been composed of Ethics, as well as of Logic; must have been
Reflections on Arguments only, without any squinting on Persons; and must have
consisted of something else, than of Ambuscadoes of words, of bold Assertions
without Proof, of Evasions in stead of direct Answers, of Partial Repetitions,
and of Triumphs before the Victory. These are the Arts and Methods of
Imposture, used to deceive the Vulgar; but very improper in Inquiries after
Truth; and of no Influence, no Operation, in the least, on prudent and more
Judicious Discerners.

Your First Reflection is on the Caution which I gave you, about mis-improving
my Concession: And here, after all the Evasion, Circumlocution, and Wood of
Words, in which you think to hide; it is certain still, that either those Pious
and Learned Men, who prove the Baptism of Infants from their being the Seed of
Abraham, do by the Seed of Abraham mean as you and I do, or they do not; and if
they do not, as you do not, you dare not say but they do not; especially your
Presbyterian Opponents, (of which I would be principally understood;) Then
should you raise a thousand times more Cloud and Dust than you have; yet still
it would be visible, that all your Fifteen Arguments against Infants being the
Spiritual Seed of Abraham in your Sense, and my Concession that they are not so
in that Sense, do in no degree affect those Excellent and Worthy Persons: For
They taking Spiritual Seed in one Sense, and You and I in another; They for
Persons of a Religious Consideration, and some way Holy, and You and I for
Actual Believers; though you may think you do oppose them, and also that I do;
yet indeed you do not; nor I neither: for Opposition must be Secundum Idem. Ay!
But (say you) the Sense in which They call Infants the Spiritual Seed of
Abraham, is a Sense the Scripture knows nothing of. But, say I, Whether that be
so or no, is still in question between You; and were it out of question, as you
would have it, what were that to me, who neither did, nor do insist on that
Argument? But in question it is, and like to be so for all that You, or any of
Yours have hitherto said; nor are They without Scriptural Grounds. For are not
the Children of Believing Parents some ways Christ's? And can they be so, and
no ways Abraham's Seed? Can they be Relatively Holy, and Persons of a Religious
Consideration, or Church Members in the Gospel Dispensation, (as the Reverend,
most Acute, Learned, and Pious Mr. Baxter has abundantly proved them,) can
they be so, and no ways Christ's? Are not the Children of Christians, as much
Christians Externally; as the Children of the Jews, were Jews Externally? And
are there not in Christ, Branches that do not bring forth Fruit? That is, Are
there not Reputed Christians, which are so but by External Profession, and not
by Actual Faith, and Internal, True, Spiritual Regeneration? Surely, all are
not Israel, that are of Israel; All are not Christ, that are in Christ. I say
not This, as willing to insist on that Argument; but to evidence, with how much
Justice, as well as with how great Civility, you speak by occasion of It, of my
Darkning Counsel without Knowledge: And, with a Candor truly yours, and much
to the purpose, add; That a Man may make a Shift, it is true, by means of such a
Distinction, to avoid the Dint of his Adversaries Argument, in his own Conceit
at least; but unless the Distinction be a well-grounded Distinction he cannot
pretend so much to subserve the Truth, as his own Credit thereby. A Very Sober
and Inoffensive Reflection!

In your next, instead of Admiration how Capable comes in, you are greatly
concerned that it should be thought you said, It must not be in in the Major;
and therefore tell me, with some Emotion; That you shall only need to say, and
which I my self do know to be true, That you did not at all Admire how Capable
came into my Major Proposition, etc. but how into the Conclusion.] As if, had
it been so indeed, it had been a Prodigy in Logic, to have a Term in the
Conclusion, that had been in one of the Premises. But to answer in your own
Figure of speaking: You cannot but know, that in the Place you Animadvert upon,
and where I used the term Capable, I made no Syllogism at all; and so
distinguished not the Major, the Minor, and the Conclusion; but only
interpreted a Text, Genesis 17. 9, 10. Nor is the Argument I make, to be disposed
into but One; it does consist of Many Syllogisms: and what is a Conclusion in
one Syllogism, may (I hope) be a Major Proposition in another.

But you proceed: Whereas you tell me, (say you) That my Admiration is more the
Object of Yours; after I have granted, that God commanded Abraham, Thou shall
keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed, in General Terms, wherein Both
Sexes may seem to be comprehended; you should have added, to have done well,
[As if I had not] that which follows also, That yet it is evident, that the
Males only were to be Actually signed: And therefore to say, That the Females
were Vertually and Reputatively signed, in the Circumcision of the Males, is
not to the purpose; for according to that Rule, the Females should be only
Virtually and Reputatively, not Actually Baptized. And in this Respect
therefore, to say as you now do, That the putting of the Sign on all those in
Abraham's Family, that were capable of it; and the wearing of it by those, may
be [I said, must be] interpreted the putting of it on all; can be of no
Advantage at all, in the present Dispute.

In this Paragraph, I have again an ordinary Instance of your great Candor,
and Sincerity, which will be very Manifest, when I have told you, That
notwithstanding a Sly Insinuation to the contrary, I did add, and that in Terms
sufficiently expressive, more than once, that the Males only were Actually
signed, with Circumcision; or else, how could I argue as I did, and you grant I
did, That the Females must be understood to be so Reputatively; For if the
Females were signed but in Reputation, and Interpretation, the Males only could
be Actually signed. And to confirm all I have now said, I need but Repeat the
Argument I made before, which was as follows. [But your Admiration is more the
Object of mine: After you have granted, that God commanded Abraham, (Thou shall
keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed) in General Terms; wherein, say
you, Both Sexes may seem to be comprehended, (and indeed, I say, are so:) For
if he did command in General Terms, that Abraham and All his (Seed, you say)
should keep the Covenant, in the Sign and Token of it; and yet, afterward, did
Institute Circumcision to be that Sign and Token, which [Mark this] was not
competent to All. How can the Generality of the Precept, (Thou shall put the
Sign on All Thine, when Circumcision, that is not competible to All, [Mark that
again] is that Sign) be understood Accommodously and conveniently, as it must
be, but thus; Thou shall put the Sign on All thine that are Capable of it; and
the wearing of it by These, shall be interpreted and understood the putting of
it on All.] Thus, as Now, the Gentiles are Counted for Seed; so Then, the
Females were Counted for signed. This was the Sense I gave, and This the
Argument with which I urged it: If you approved not the Sense, why did you not
reply to the Argument, and give a Sense more congruous? But if you do approve
It, why, in your Answer, do you cloud and darken it with words, and make as if
you disowned it as a False One? But a true Sense it is, you do not, you dare
not deny it. Ay, but if true, you say, It is not to the Purpose. That, I grant,
may be; not to Your Purpose, but sufficiently to Mine. No, (say you) not to
That neither; for then the Females should only be reputatively Baptized,
because they were only reputatively Circumcized.] As if Females were not
Actually to wear a Sign they are equally capable of with the Males, because
they were but Interpretatively to wear a Sign they were not capable of but so.

Thus far I have followed you step by step, and written in a Fashion not mine
own, but yours; both to make you sensible of the great Provokativeness, and of
the as great Unfitness and Undecency of it. But I am weary of this Drudgery;
and therefore, in what remains, resolve to content my self with summing up the
Substance of what you offer; and that as well without improper Reflections, as
with all the Clearness and Fullness I can; and so return my Answers.

The first thing offered by you of any moment, is to This Sense; That the
Immediate Obligation which was laid upon Abraham, and his Seed after him in
their Generations, was not to keep the Covenant in the Sign of It in General
Terms, as I would have it; but only to keep the Covenant in that Particular
Sign of Circumcision; there being (say you) no other Sign mentioned or implied,
but that Genesis 17. 9, 10, in which the latter words are only Exegetical of the
former, Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, etc. in the 9th. Verse; and how
the 10th. explains, namely in Circumcision.

And seeing this Objection has something in it very pertinent, (for I will do
you all the Right imaginable) I hold my self obliged in order to the removing
of it, and consequently to the further illustrating and clearing of my
Argument, to show; First, That the Immediate Obligation and Incumbence
mentioned in the 9th Verse, cannot be to keep the Covenant in, but
Circumcision; and consequently, that what is said Verse the 10th, is not merely
Exegetical of the Obligation in the 9th. Secondly, That the Immediate
Obligation and Incumbence in the 9th. Verse, is to keep the Covenant in the
Sign of it: this is Primary: And then, that that which is added in the 10th.
Verse, is but a Secondary Institution of a Particular Sign, for that time. And,
Thirdly, I will show, That there is a plain Intimation, and consequently more
than a mere hint, that some other Sign must be observed by the Seed, than that
of Circumcision.

As for the First; That the Immediate, Primary Obligation and Incumbence,
mentioned in the 9th. Verse, cannot be to keep the Covenant in Circumcision
only; and consequently, that the 10th. is not merely Exegetical of the 9th. is
evident: For if the Primary and Immediate Obligation in the 9th. Verse, were to
keep the Covenant in Circumcision, then the believing Gentile should be as much
obliged to keep the Covenant so, as the Carnal Seed and Descendants of Abraham;
seeing Those are equally at least, if not more principally comprehended in the
Seed, than These. This is evident; for the Subject of the Obligation is, in all
respects, the same with That of the Promise. [In the Promise it is, I will
establish my Covenant between Me and Thee, and thy Seed after Thee, in their
Generations: and in the Obligation it is; Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore, Thou and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations: The same Subject
in all respects in Both.] And therefore, seeing the Subject of the Promise is,
at least, as Comprehensive of the Spiritual, as of the Carnal Seed, of the
Gentile that believes, as well as of the Hebrews; the One is no more to be
exempted and discharged from the Duty and Obligation, than the Other: and if
Circumcision be that Duty and Obligation, Both are equally bound to submit to
That. All the Seed is in the Obligation, as much as in the Promise, the same
words to express it; and, I hope, you will not distinguish, nor limit, where
the Scripture does not.

And if the Primary and Immediate Obligation of the Covenant cannot be (as you
may see it cannot) to keep it in, but Circumcision; it follows, that It is to
keep the Covenant in the Sign of it, in general Terms; and then, afterward, in
Circumcision, to begin with, as the first Sign: So that, This must be the Sense
of the Text: I will Establish my Covenant between Me and Thee, and thy Seed;
and therefore, Thou and thy Seed shall keep my Covenant, in the Sign of it: and
that Sign at first, and for the time being, the present Dispensation among
Those that shall descend from Th^^ according to the Flesh, or be adjoined to
them shall be Circumcision. This is a fair, a plain, and easy, and natural
Sense; a Sense, which no Exception from the Words themselves can lie against:
and therefore, a Sense as much to be preferred before Yours, as that which is
Convenient, ought to be before that which is Not. And This I evidenced in my
former Letter, from the very Grammar of the Text.

But besides what I have said in my former Letter, in demonstration of the
Sense given; that which does abundantly confirm it to be the True, is, That the
Limitation of the Subjects in the Particular Obligation to Circumcision, ver.
10, 11. is very different from That in the General Obligation, ver. 9. For
whereas it was said Verse. the 9th; Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, Thou
and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations; when he comes in the 10th. to
institute Circumcision, he says not, This is my Covenant, which thou shall
keep, Thou and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations: But, This is my
Covenant, which you (You) shall keep between Me and You, and thy Seed after
thee: And the being of it a Sign and Token, is restrained also; And it shall be
a Token or Sign of the Covenant between Me and You: A Sign for this Time, and
People, and Administration. He says not, for You, and for thy Seed after thee.
If you say, I am too Critical; I say, This is a Text that must be understood
Critically: The Apostle was as Critical upon it as I, or any Man can be, when
he observed, it is said Seed, as speaking of one, and not Seeds: and what he
says, is the proper Key to unlock the Text.

And yet, in regard the Text has been Interpreted by very few in this manner,
to add some more Illumination to the Sense I make of It, I propose to be
considered, that not only other Scriptures, but even this Scripture does make
Distinction between the Family of Abraham that then was which in the Mystery
represented all his Carnal Descendants, (between that) and the Children of the
Promise, which were afterward to be; which were signified by the Seed, and
afterward were typed in Isaac the Son of the Promise; it being said, In Isaac
(not in Ishmael, who then was) shall thy Seed be called. Now, though God had
said in the 9th. Verse, Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore; that is, thou
shall keep the Sign of my Covenant; Thou and thy Seed after thee, in their
Generations; to signify, that the Children of the Promise were obliged to that
Duty and Incumbence arising from the Covenant, as well as the Children of the
Flesh: Yet, when he comes to institute Circumcision in Particular, he says of
it indeed, This is my Covenant: or, This is the Sign of my Covenant: But he
says not, This is my Covenant, which Thou, Thou and Thy Seed after thee, in
their Generations, shall keep; but which You (You) shall keep: You to whom I
speak. Thou Abraham, and thy Natural Household and Family Here; it is You, (You)
and not the Seed, the Spiritual Seed: for Isaac, in whom the Seed is called,
was not there, he was yet unborn. It is You, (He speaks to those present;) Thou
Abraham, and thy Natural Household and Family; this is the Sign of my Covenant,
which You (You) shall keep, as a Sign of that Covenant which I have made
between Me and You, and thy Seed after thee. Me and You; thee Abraham, and thy
Natural Household and Family here, between Me and You, and thy Seed after thee;
that Seed, which shall be called in Isaac, thy Spiritual Household and Seed. And
what was the Covenant, or Sign of the Covenant, which They (and not the Seed)
were to keep then? What? No other Covenant or Sign, than that of Circumcision?
This is my Covenant, which you shall keep, Every Man-Child among you (not among
the Seed, but among You) shall be Circumcized; and you shall Circumcize the
Flesh of your Foreskin: [You still, not the Seed.] And what was Circumcision
for? It was for a Sign and Token of the Covenant; and to Whom it was to be so,
is clearly implied in the Limitation: It shall be a Token, a Sign of the
Covenant between Me and You. Not Me and You, and thy Seed after thee. It shall
be a Sign and Token of the Covenant, in the Dispensation of it, which now is
between Me and You; not in the Dispensation of it, which shall be between Me
and thy Seed: It shall be a Token of my Covenant, as it is between Me and You;
thee Abraham, and thy Natural Household and Family: But not as it is to be
transacted between Me, and thy Spiritual Seed.

If you say, (for I will say for you all I can imagine possible to be said,
with any Color) That the Sense should rather be this; This is my Covenant,
which you shall keep: That is, which Thou Abraham, and thy Seed after thee, in
their Generations, shall keep: And this shall be a Sign-and Token between Me
and You; that is, between Me and Thee, and Thy Seed after Thee, in their
Generations.] If you say, This is the Sense of the Text, I must be plain to
tell you, It cannot be so; and that because he does so plainly distinguish in
It, between You and the Seed: This is the Covenant, which you shall keep
between Me and You, and thy Seed after thee. So that You, which is so plainly
Contradistinguished and opposed to the Seed, cannot possibly be understood to
comprehend It. And it is also considerable, that he says, This is my Covenant,
which you shall keep between Me and You, thy Seed; not Between Me and Thee, and
thy Seed: And yet it does refer to Verse the 9th. where it is said, Thou shall
keep my Covenant, Thou and thy Seed. But here, You is put instead of Thou, to
signify that Thou in the 9th. Verse, must be understood of Abraham not
Personally only, but Collectively; Abraham standing there for Himself, and his
Natural Family: Thou, and thy Seed, is Abraham and Christ; Both in the Mystery.

This last Consideration minds me of the Third Particular to be demonstrated;
which is, That Another Sign besides that of Circumcision, is clearly intimated
in the Text we discourse on, as a thing that should be afterward. And this is
manifest; for whereas he had said, That the Seed, as well as Abraham, (and
under Abraham I have proved the Natural Offspring and Family of Abraham
comprehended,) was to keep the Covenant in the Sign, or to keep the Sign of the
Covenant, in the 9th. Verse; and he instituted Circumcision, but to be a Sign
between Him and Abraham, and Abraham's Natural Offspring and Family; and to be
kept but by Them, and not by the Spiritual Seed: [This is the Sign of the
Covenant, which you (not which Thou and thy Seed) shall keep; and it shall be a
Token of my Covenant, [as] between Me and You; not [as] between Me and Thee,
and thy Seed after thee.] What remains, I say, seeing the Seed is equally
obliged as well as Abraham, to keep the Covenant in some Sign, as was proved
before; and that it was not to keep it in the Sign of Circumcision, as is
evident Now; what remains, but that there is some other Sign, in which It was
to keep it, that should be a Token of the Covenant in that Administration of
it, which should be afterward between God and the Seed; as Circumcision was of
the same Covenant, but in the Dispensation and Transaction of it, then, between
God and Abraham's Person, and Natural Household? Circumcision was the Token of
the Covenant, as administered between God and Abraham; and Baptism the Token of
the same Covenant, as administered between God and the Seed: If Abraham was
Circumcized, Christ was Baptized.

Upon the whole; Let us now review the Text, and see it in the entire Sense:
And thus I Paraphrase it. I will Establish my Covenant between Me and Thee, and
thy Seed after thee, in their Generations, for an Everlasting Covenant, etc.
And therefore Thou, Thou and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations, shall
keep the Sign of my Covenant: And This is the Sign of my Covenant, [That my
Covenant, which is between Me, on the One Part, and YOU, thou Abraham, and thy
Natural Family and Household, on the Other Part; and thy Seed after thee, on the
Third Part.] I say, This is the Sign that YOU, for your part, shall keep as a
Sign of this Covenant, which is between Me and YOU, and thy Seed after thee;
Every Man-Child among You shall be Circumcized; and You shall Circumcize the
Flesh of Your Foreskin. And this Circumcision shall be a Special and
Particular Sign and Token of the Covenant, as it is between Me and YOU; between
Me and Thee, Abraham, and thy Natural Household. But as for the Seed, no mention
of It, when he says, This shall be a Sign of the Covenant, etc. which
sufficiently implies another Administration to be with That afterward.

And I pray you mark, that where he calls Circumcision the Covenant, Verse.
10. he says, You shall keep it between Me and You, and thy Seed; because the
Covenant (of which Circumcision was a Sign) was a Covenant between God, and the
Seed too, as well as between God and Abraham, and his Natural Family. But when
he says expressly, It shall be a Sign and Token, then he restrains it; It shall
be a Sign of the Covenant between Me and You: Implying, that though the
Covenant be also with the Seed, and Circumcision was a Sign of that Covenant;
yet it was specially and particularly a Sign of it, as transacted between God
and Abraham's Natural Person and Family; and so a special and particular Sign
of that Economy in the Natural Household. It shall be a Sign between Me and
You; [and not between Me and You, and thy Seed.] And so much for the First
Objection.

What you next offer in Objection to my Argument, is; That it follows not, that
because the Substance of the Covenant on God's Part, is Immutably and
Unchangeably the same, (that) therefore the Duty and Incumbence is also so on
ours: For seeing God has Absolute Sovereignty in and over all his Creatures,
and has unlimited and boundless Right, as to command, so to suspend and alter
the Instances and Duties of their Obedience, both as and when he pleases; that
may be the Duty of his People at one time, [You should have added, to make it
pertinent; By virtue of the same Covenant and Edict, and in the same Respect,]
which is not so at another. This you Confirm; because else, you see not how it
should come to pass, that for at least two thousand Years before the Time of
Abraham, no such Duty or Incumbence did lie on the Patriarchs; particularly,
not on Adam, on Abel, on Enoch, on Noah, or on the other Antediluvian Fathers;
of whom we do not read, that any of them were Signed, or that they were obliged
to any Sign; though you say, It cannot be denied, that they were in the
Covenant of Grace, and saved by It as much as Abraham himself, or any of His.
So that here is an Objection, and an Enforcement and Confirmation of that
Objection.

As to the Objection, (viz.) That it will not follow, (that) because the
Substance of the Covenant, on God 's Part, is immutably and everlastingly the
same; therefore the Duty and Incumbence on ours, is also such: I answer. It
will follow well enough, if the Duty and Incumbence on our Part, be founded on
the Substance of the Covenant, which is on God's (Part,) as the Duty and
Incumbence in dispute between us is: It being, I will Establish my Covenant
between Me and Thee, and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations, for an
Everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee, and to thy Seed after thee, etc. And
God said unto Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed
after thee, in their Generations. For though Almighty God be absolute Sovereign
over all our Persons, and also over all his own Transactions and Methods, so as
he may make at one time to be our Duty, that which he does not another; and may
transact and deal in way of Covenant with some, when yet he has not pleased to
do so with others: Yet if at any time, or with any Persons, he pleases to
transact in way of Covenant, and to confirm that Transaction by his Word and
Oath, the two immutable things in which it is impossible that he should Lie,
and also to bottom the Duty and Incumbence to which he does oblige by virtue of
that Covenant, on that which is unchangably and immutably confirmed in it; We
can no more, without a Blasphemous Imputation to him of Inconstancy and
Weakness, introduce him making an Alteration in the Duty, than in the Promise
it self, seeing the Obligation to the Duty, is a necessary result and emanation
of the Reason of it, and consequently, is incapable of being changed without a
change of the Covenant, the unchangable Promise of God to Abraham, and to his
Seed, is the Foundation of the Duty lying on Abraham and on his Seed; and the
same Covenant as the same, must always have the same effects, and make the
same Duties.

Ay? but then how came it to pass that Adam, Abel, Enoch, and others the most
Ancient Fathers, who were under the Covenant of Grace as well as Abraham and
his descendants, God being a God to them as well as to him, did not keep the
Covenant in the sign thereof, if the Duty to keep the Covenant in the sign
thereof be Everlastingly the same, and of an unchangable nature? This is your
Confirmation.

But to manifest the Invalidity of all is said by way of Confirmation, I need
but to demonstrate, First; That though all the Fathers were saved on the
account of Jesus Christ, and by virtue of the Eternal Compact and Agreement
between God and him, he being the Everlasting Father; yet (contrary to what you
do suppose) it did not please God, at least not in the Account of the
Scripture, to Transact with all, or any of them, in way of Covenant for Grace,
Eternal Life and Salvation, before he did so with Abraham. Secondly, That if he
had been pleased to transact, with all or any of them in way of Covenant for
those ends; yet that Transaction could not be the Covenant of Abraham; and
therefore seeing the believing Gentiles do not claim the Inheritance, Eternal
Life and Salvation from by and under Adam, Abel, Enoch, Noah, or any other
Covenanted Person or Persons before Abraham (if there were any such) but only
from, by, and under Abraham, nor by virtue of any other Covenant whatever, made
with all or any of them, but only by virtue of Abraham's; It is certain that the
Terms, which it pleased God to go upon with them in any transaction he had
with them (be they what they will) are, in account of Scripture, as Little to
us, as those he went upon with Abraham are much. And Thirdly, That the
Obligation to keep the Covenant, Genesis 17. in the sign thereof, though it were
not, and indeed could not be observed by all or any of the Ancients before
Abraham, yet notwithstanding, that it is in a Scriptural sense, and
consequently, properly enough, called a Duty and Obligation of immutable and
unchangable nature, and Everlastingly the same.

The first Proposition, (viz.) That though all that ever were saved, were saved
by virtue of the Atonement and Propitiation made by the Blessed Jesus, He being
in the efficacy and virtue of his Merits and Passion, the Lamb slain even from
the Foundation of the World; yet, that, at least in the Account of Holy
Scripture, it did not please God to transact with all, or any of the ancient,
either the Antediluvian or Postdiluvian Fathers, in way of Covenant for Grace,
Eternal Life and Salvation before Abraham, is a manifest Verity. For though all
the Fathers that were saved, were so by some degree and kind of Faith; and were
so by Jesus Christ, and through the Eternal Covenant (as Divines call it) of
Redemption between God and him; and though they all did worship and honor God
in way of Sacrifices, in all which the Blessed Jesus, the true Lamb of God, was
figured and represented; and though Jesus Christ himself says, before Abraham
was, I am, yet, that it pleased God to transact with all, or any, or either of
them, before Abraham in way of Covenant or Promise for Eternal Life, and
Salvation, or, that Jesus Christ was Preached to them, or otherwise exhibited
then in Types and Figures, (which we are not told they understood) is no where
said or recorded, or so much as hinted in the whole Scripture. Our Savior
says indeed, that Abraham did see his day, but he says not, nor do the
Scriptures say that Adam, Abel, Enoch, Noah, etc. saw it. What might be
Preached by the Spirit, further then the Scriptures tell us, and then the Holy
Ghost is pleased in them to Reveal to us, is no proper subject for our now
Inquiry; We are now to mind but what is Preached by the Scriptures, and
Recorded in them; Remembering, that the very silence of the Scriptures is
Mystical, as is evident in the case of Melchizedeck, who though (whatever
Learned Cunaeus thought) he were a Man, and consequently was not, really,
without Father, without Mother, without Genealogy, without beginning of days
or end of Life; yet for great ends, (he) is taken and expressly said to be so;
and that, because nothing, in the Least, is written and recorded in the Holy
Scriptures touching him, as to these particulars. And show me any Scripture
that but hints a Covenant made with Adam, Abel, Enoch, with all, or any of the
Ancient Fathers before Abraham, or Promise made to them, or any of them, of
Grace, Eternal Life and Salvation, wherein Almighty God did pass his word to be
a God to them, or either of them, and their, or either of their Seed after
them. I do not doubt but God was a God to them all, as I doubt not that
Melchisedeck had a Father, Mother, Genealogy, beginning of days, and end of
Life, but as the Holy Scriptures do no where mention any of these in Relation
to Melchisedeck, so they no where intimate that God before Abraham, was a God
to any of the Ancient Fathers, in a way of Covenant or promise for Grace,
Eternal Life or Salvation, and therefore, the least that can be said, if we
should be prevailed to acknowledge any such transaction, must be (seeing the
Scripture is so deeply silent in it) that as there is a mystery in the silence
of the Scripture touching Melchisedeck, so there is a Mystery in the silence of
it touching any such Covenant or Promise (if any such were) to the Fathers; and
that as Melchisedeck, to be a figure of the Eternal Priest, must be brought in
in Scripture as a man dropped out of the Clouds, without any mention of Father,
Mother, etc. So likewise, to the end that Abraham might be according to the
Scriptures, what in the Divine Council he was appointed and set up to be,
namely, the Father of all the faithful, or express Believers in Christ, there
must be no record in the Sacred Scriptures of any Promise of Christ before, as
made to any other; or of any Explicit belief and Faith in him before for had
there been either, how could Abraham possibly be understood, in the account of
the Scriptures, to have been the Father, and so the first of all the faithful,
of all Believers in Christ? He only is first before whom no other is. Christ (I
deny not) may have been Preached before Abraham, and also promised by the
Spirit, but he is not Revealed in the Scriptures so to have been either
Preached, or Promised: The Scripture is entirely silent as to any such
Transaction; If any such Covenant or Promise were of Christ before, certainly
in the account of Scripture it is as none, and so must be looked on of us as
none; not the least impression or footstep of any such concern appearing. I
acknowledge the old Fathers to be said to have had faith in God, but they are
not said to have had any in Christ, and these Faiths are so distinguished, that
they may be Actually divided; you believe in God, says Christ, believe also in
me; The Old Fathers did believe in God, they believed both that God was, and
that he was a Rewarder, but Abraham did not only believe (as they did) in God,
but he also believed in Christ. If you ask me, but is not God (...) a Rewarder
in and through Christ, and not otherwise? I answer yes, and yet it is possible,
they might believe in God, and not believe in Christ; They might believe God to
be a Rewarder (as some Heathen do) though they did not know him, and therefore
could not believe him to be so but in Christ: That God is, and is a Rewarder,
are Points of Natural Religion; But that Christ is, and God a Rewarder in Him,
are Points of Revelation.

I acknowledge that what you say is commonly taken for granted, (viz.) That the
Promise of Christ the Seed of the Woman, was made to Adam;] And so much is
true, that Jesus Christ is introduced by the Psalmist, as speaking of himself,
and saying, that in the Volume of the Book, or (as some do render it) in the
Head of the book it is written of him, and so (though happily the Psalmist may
have Aspect upon something else) I grant it is, Genesis 3. 15. for when it is
there said, that the Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, etc. It
must I confess be understood of Christ, at least in the Mystery, thus it is
written of him, but that Christ was promised to Adam, is not written; For what
is written in the Volume, or in the head of the Book concerning Christ, is not
written there, as spoken by way of Promise to Adam, but by way of denunciation
to the Serpent, and is part of the Sentence pronounced on him; which if indeed
it were within the hearing of Adam, yet the Scripture does not say it was so;
So little does the Scripture concern Adam in that Transaction, how great
concern soever, in reality, he was to have in it. So the Text, Genesis 3. 14, 15.
And the Lord God said to the Serpent, etc. What he says to Adam is verse 17.
18, 19. and of a very different nature. Adeclaration, I acknowledge, there is
of Christ, from the beginning; but in the Record of the Scripture, that
declaration is not noted as a transaction between God and Adam, by way of
Covenant or Promise; All is said concerning it, is in what did pass between God
and the Serpent, and some ad loc choose to call it a Prophecy, not a Promise of
Christ.

And it adds no little confirmation to the truth of what I have now discoursed,
that after the Revelation of Jesus Christ in what passed between God and the
Serpent; we have not for the long space of above Two Thousand Years the least
Intimation in all the Scriptures, that any of the Fathers of that time had
heard of that Revelation; (I do not say they had not heard, but I say the
Scriptures do not so much as hint they had;) and though the Scriptures tell us,
that in that time Righteousness was preached by the Spirit, yet they do not in
the least tell us, that Christ was preached by it. And surely, had the
declaration made concerning Christ in the Third Gene^^^ been, in the Account of
the Scriptures, a Covenant or Promise of him to Adam, etc. I should much admire
that the Apostle would insist so highly (as he does) on the being of the
Promise of Salvation by Christ for but some hundreds of years before the Law,
when had this been so, he might have insisted on thousands; and the Apostle
Peter dates the Covenant of Grace from Abraham, Act. 2. 25, 26. and before him,
the Psalmist, Psalm 105. 8, 9, 42.

But secondly, on supposal that it had pleased God to transact with Adam, or
any of the old Fathers before Abraham, in way of Covenant and Promise for
grace, Eternal Life and Salvation; yet that Covenant and Promise could not be
the Covenant of Abraham, in which it pleased God to Promise to be a God to him
particularly, and to his Seed after him; For the Covenant of Abraham could not
be before Abraham himself existed: And therefore, seeing the believing Gentiles
do not claim Eternal Life and Salvation from, by, and under Adam, or any other
of the Ancient Fathers before Abraham; nor by virtue of any Covenant
Transaction that has passed between God and them, or any of them, but only
from, by, and under Abraham, by virtue of the Covenant of Promise made with
him; It is as clear that the Terms, Conditions and Methods on and in which it
pleased God to transact with all, or any of those old Fathers, (be those terms
and methods any whatever) (they) are nothing to us, as that the Terms,
Conditions and Methods he is pleased to transact upon with Abraham in the
Covenant of Promise, are all in all to us. That is, in plain English, That it
is nothing in the least to us believing Gentiles, whether the Fathers before
the Flood, or after the Flood before Abraham, were in Covenant or not in
Covenant, were signed or not signed, seeing we claim not from, by, and under
them, as Heirs to them, but it is much to us, on what Terms it pleased God to
transact and deal with Abraham, and under what Conditions, and with what duties
Abraham did receive the Covenant and Promise, whether himself and his must be
signed or not signed; seeing it is from, by, and under him, and by virtue of
the Covenant of Promise made with him, that we do claim, and hold. And surely,
if we do claim, and hold in, by and under Abraham, by the Deed and Charter made
to him, we must also claim and hold as he did, under the Duties and Conditions
in that Deed and Charter, and now, is it not to deny the Conclusion after
Concession of the Premises, for you to deny Believers and their Children must
be signed, when yet you do acknowledge they are under Abraham's Covenant, which
(as I have proved) requires such signing.

Ay! but you will say, the Patriarchs were in the Covenant of Grace before
Abraham, all as much as we, and yet signing had no use among them; and
therefore the Incumbence and Obligation to sign and to be signed by virtue of
the Covenant, being founded not on the substance of it, but on the
Administration, cannot be Immutably and everlastingly the same.] And, indeed,
it must be acknowledged (that) signing was not in use among the Fathers before
Abraham, at least not in the Account of the Scriptures, the Scriptures being
deeply silent touching any such thing; but then the Scripture is as silent
touching any Covenant; transaction made with those Fathers, as it is touching
signing by virtue of such a Covenant; So that, you are too positive Sir, and
without Book, to affirm them as much in Covenant as we, and their Children as
Holy by virtue of a Covenant transaction as ours. But supposing though not
granting a Covenant transaction to have passed between God and the Fathers
before Abraham, for Grace, Eternal Life and Salvation through the Messiah, and
supposing also, no signing by virtue of that Covenant, for all that space of
time, (which however, on supposal there was such a Covenant is a hardness to
think;) yet, (in regard that Covenant could not be the Covenant of Abraham)
though there was no signing then, the Obligation to sign and to be signed by
virtue of the Covenant of Abraham, (which as I have showed does indispensibly
and necessarily require it,) is as Immutably and Everlastingly the same, and in
the same Scriptural Sense, as the very Covenant it self is so; It is for
Everasting, though not from Everlasting* it is Everlasting a Part Post, though
not a Part ante; I will Establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy
Seed after thee, in their Generations for an Everlasting Covenant, etc.
Everlasting, not a part ante, as from Everlasting, for before Abraham was,
this Covenant could not be between God and Abraham, to be a God to him, and to
his Seed after him, and therefore it must be understood a part post, as a
Covenant to Everlasting; And in this sense, the Obligation and Duty of the
Covenant is as capable of being Everlasting as the Covenant it self; which was
the third particular to be demonstrated.

What I have discoursed already, might justly supersede any further answer to
what you offer in the following Paragraph, about the Church Membership of
Infants, on occasion of my saying [that the Church is one, though the
Testaments be not, and that Children were Members not only of the Legal, but of
the Gospel Church, and that, for above Four Hundred Years before the Law; It
being Gospel that was Preached to Abraham:] for you say on that occasion, that
the Gospel was Preached too to Adam, at the time that he was told that the Seed
of the woman should break the head of the Serpent. But I have proved that it
was not told (as you express it) to Adam, but to the Serpent, as being spoken
not by way of Promise to the one, but of denunciation of a Sentence on the
other; nor, in the Account of the Scriptures, was the Gospel Preached to Abel,
Enoch, Noah, etc. nor were they, in the Account of the Scriptures, in and under
any Covenant of Grace for Eternal Life and Salvation, much less in and under
the same Covenant, with believing Abraham, and his true Seed; The Covenant of
Grace, in the Promise of the Messiah for Salvation and Eternal Life, being in
the Account of the Scriptures, first transacted with believing Abraham, and no
otherwise.

And here, by the way, observe as a matter of no small moment, that Almighty
God did no sooner, in the Account of the Scriptures, transact with man in way
of Covenant for Eternal Life and Salvation, through the Messiah, but he obliged
those in that Covenant, to keep it in the sign, and that from the beginning, as
soon as he did institute any sign of the Covenant of Grace for Parents (which,
in the Account of the Scriptures, was as soon as he Established the Covenant,)
he did ordain it should be put on the Children also, and as much commanded the
wearing of it by Infants, as by the Adult. So that from the very beginning of a
Covenant transaction for Eternal Life and Salvation, or in the first making of
the Covenant of Grace according to the Scriptures, (and we are to begin our
accounts where they do,) the Obligation to keep the sign of the Covenant, or to
keep the Covenant in the sign of it, was laid on Abraham for Children and
Infants, as well as for himself and others in Age; and that, by special
direction. And now, consider once again if there be no connection between the
substance of the Covenant and the Obligation ( viz. to be signed;) Is not the
substance of the Covenant on Gods part, the Promise to Abraham to be a God to
him, and to his Seed after him in their Generations? And has not God said,
[because] I will be a God to thee and to thy Seed, therefore thou shall keep my
Covenant, thou and thy Seed? So plainly God has put together the Promise,
which is on his part, and the Duty and Obligation that lies on ours: and when
God has joined them, and put them together, what man, or men shall dare to
separate, and put them asunder?

Again, whereas you say, it is one and the same Church for substance, that the
Old Patriarchs before Abraham, and that we the Believing Gentiles as well as
believing Abraham himself, did and do belong unto.] I answer, it is one and the
same Invisible Church; But if we take a Church visibly and Formally, (as now we
are to take it, when we do speak of Church Membership:) Namely, for a
Corporation or visible Society of Holy Men, framed, and formed under certain
special, external and distinguishing Laws and Institutions, for Spiritual ends;
Then I say, so taking it, we do not read in Holy Scriptures of any Church, any
formal Church, any more than of a formal Covenant before Abraham; It being in
his Family that it pleased God to lay the first Foundation of the Commonwealth
and Polity of Israel, and to form to himself a special Corporation and Society
of Men, under visible and distinguishing Tokens, and this is properly called a
Church. For indeed a Church is nothing but a Company of called ones, visibly
Associated; (...) is ab (...), A Church is termed so from calling; Now as in
the Account of Holy Scripture, Abraham and his Family were the First that God
transacted with in way of Covenant, for Grace and Salvation through the
Messiah; So in the same account of Holy Scriptures, the first visible gathered
Church, was in Abraham's Family, Abraham being the first that God in the Holy
Scriptures is affirmed to have called out from his own Kindred, and his own
Country to another that he knew not, which calling of him from his own
Country to another that he knew not, was a figure (and by our Apostle is
interpreted to be so Heb. 11.) of the true Spiritual calling of a Christian,
which is a calling out of, and from the present evil World unto the Heavenly
Country, the New Jerusalem that is above. Not but that before Abraham there
were Righteous and good men, who in their Lives and Conversations, divided from
the Communion of the World; Men that lived justly and Righteously, and so were
truly called out of the World, but yet they did not (at least the Scripture
does not Intimate they did) actually divide and separate from others into
distinct Societies, under any external and distinguishing Rites before Abraham;
yes there were Righteous and good men before Abraham, divided from the Common
in the Piety, Sobriety, and Justice of their lives, there were Sons of God,
distinguished by their Piety and Righteousness from the Sons of men before; The
Sons of God took unto them the Daughters of Men; The Sons of good Men Married
the Daughters of bad: But they were not Actually divided into distinct
Societies and Corporations, under distinguishing Rites and Ceremonies before,
and therefore there was not a visible Organical Church before.

And if what I now assert be true (as true it is, for the Holy Scripture no
where intimates not in the least any such Formalization, Incorporation, or
Distinguishing Association of Righteous good men for Spiritual and Holy ends
before Abraham;) then certainly no reasonable man has any cause to admire that
before Abraham there should be no signing; I mean, no use of any Initiating
Rite, and Rite of Matriculation, or of entering into the Spiritual Corporation
and Society of the Church; for no Matriculation, no Initiation into any
Corporation or Society is to be conceived before the Corporation and Society it
self be Constituted and Formed; Nor can any Rite and Ceremony of Matriculation
or Initiation be conceived extant before Matriculation and Initiation it self
be so. No wonder then if no signing before Abraham, seeing no Formal Church
before Abraham; But yet as soon as it pleased God in Infinite Wisdom to ordain
the Incorporating of Holy Men into a visible Society for Holy and Spiritual
ends, by making a Formal Covenant with them, and so distinguishing and dividing
of them from others, he was then pleased to assume into that Society, as
members of it, Children as well as Parents, Infants as well as Adult ones; And
to ordain, that the Sign of the Covenant, as the Rite and Ceremony of their
Initiation and Admission (visibly and externally) into the Society of the
Righteous, or into the Church, should be put upon them; and this in deep
Council, the better to perpetuate his Church; So that from the beginning of the
constitution of a Church, Infants were admitted unto Membership in it; and this
is the Nursery of the Church.

What you next tell me, (viz.) that there are other signs of the Covenant
besides Baptism; for instance, as Circumcision of old (I believe you meant the
Passover of old;) so the Lords Supper now, of which Infants are not by virtue
of the Covenant, or any Administration of it, taken to be proper Subjects]
This, after what is said already, is altogether impertinent; ^ for the Sign we
dispute about, is that Initiating Sign only, which is the Rite of admitting
persons into the visible Organized Society of the faithful (a Society
afterward called the Commonwealth of Israel,) It being of this only that Genesis
17. 9, 10. (from which I argued) can be understood: and this Baptism is, as
Circumcision was. Nor was the Passover ever such a Sign, nor is the Lords
Supper one now.

Ay! but if Infants are capable of being Initiated into the Church of Christ by
Baptism, then say you, they cannot justly be denied the Proper means of
nourishment and growth by being admitted to the Supper also.] But this is a
gross non sequitur, For what can be more evident than that the Subjects of the
Ordinance of Baptism and of that of the Lords Supper are very different, as
different as those of the Ordinance of Circumcision, and that of the Pascal
Lamb (were;) For as the Institution of the Ordinance of Circumcision was above
400 years before that of the Passover, so even Jesus Christ himself; to
intimate the same difference, did institute the Ordinance of Baptism (for his
Disciples Baptized) long before his Death, whereas that of the Holy Supper
(being but a Commemoration of it) was not Instituted but just before his
Passion.

And these considerations lead me to the last thing of any moment which you
offer, a thing on which your whole Party do much insist, and is, that as
Infants are incapable of self Examination, of preparation for the Lords Supper,
and of discerning of the Lords Body, which are necessary requisites to a due
participation of that Holy Ordinance, and therefore are denied it; So they are
equally incapable of Faith and of Repentance which are the requisite conditions
of Admission to Baptism, and consequently, on equal reason are to be refused
both the one, and the other.]

But here you should have proved Faith and Repentance necessary Conditions of
all admission to Baptism, or Initiation into the Gospel Church; I grant them to
be so to that of the Adult Heathen; and so they were before, in some degree, to
those of them that would Associate with the Family of Abraham; And so they were
to Abraham himself, for Abraham himself received the Sign of Circumcision, or
Circumcision a sign of the Covenant between God and him, as a Seal and full
Confirmation of that Righteousness by Faith, which he had while Uncircumcised;
But then, as Abraham was admitted for his own Faith, but his Family in, by and
under him, as Dedicated by Him; So now the Adult Heathen if they be admitted,
it must be in a way of Faith and Repentance for themselves; but for their
Families; Those in them that are not yet Adult and come to Age, and in a
Capacity of consenting or refusing for themselves; They must be admitted as
such were in Abraham's Family, viz. in, by and under their Parents and Heads,
who Dedicate them.

But as to this so much is said by so many others, and so much is hinted also
by my self in my Former Letter, that I do not think it worth the while to stay
longer upon it; Only I find in Mr. Cradock in his Harmony of the Evangelists, a
Passage so full in this particular, and so convincing, that I should do you
some wrong, and my discourse more, to omit it: First, says he he gives them a
Command and Commission to go and Disciple all Nations, Baptizing them in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, beginning at Jerusalem, [Isa.
2. 3. and 40. 9. Psalm. 110. 2.] and declares that, he that believes and is
Baptized shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned. For whereas
before he confined them to Preach only to Israel, now they must Preach to every
Creature (namely, that is fit to be Preached to) that is, to all Nations. And
such as were converted by their Ministry from Heathenism to Christianity, they
were to Baptize. So that this is not the first Institution of Baptism, but an
enlarging of their former Commission. Neither are these words any Direction as
to that other matter or receiving or admitting Infants, or those that were not
Infants* to Baptism: That, we may suppose was sufficiently notified to them
before, both by the common practice of their Ancestors in the Jewish Religion,
and by the vulgar notion of Baptism, whilst it was familiarly used among the
Jews, both to their own and their Proselite Children, and possibly by Christ's
special direction also, though not mentioned by any of the Evangelists, who set
not down all the words of the First Institution of Baptism, which long preceded
this time, as appears plainly from those words, Joh. 4. 1, 2. When therefore
the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and Baptized more
Disciples then John, though Jesus himself Baptized not but his Disciples.
Certainly, Christ Instituted Baptism, and gave his Apostles Commission before
they took upon them to Baptize any, which we find they did in great Numbers;
yet the Gospel does not express the words of this First Institution, nor the
certain time of it, in the course of Christ's Ministry among them; but certainly
it was sometime before that passage of story related in that forementioned
place, Joh. 4. etc.]

To that assertion of mine, [ That the Churches of Christ universally have had
a custom of Baptizing Infants, and for ought appears, perpetually;] you tell
me with a presumption too big for a greater Antiquary, (so much more easy it
is to tell then to do,) that you could easily give sufficient evidence that the
Churches of Christ universally have not had such a custom:] And I pray you, if
it be so easy, oblige the World, and me particularly, by giving it; for still I
think that in the time (at least) of St. Austin, the Custom was Universal, and
that then, it was taken also, to have been perpetually so; and this, by an
Apostolical Tradition.

But that is more Extravagant which you add immediately after, and which may
serve for a Specimen of your Ability to perform the boast you made before, that
we do not find any footsteps of Infants Baptism in the World till some Hundreds
of years after Christ, not till the conceit grew and took place of giving Gods
Grace by it in Cyprians time.] But how learnedly and knowingly this is spoken
may be seen in Tertullian, who if you know any thing in Antiquity, must be
acknowledged to have been, in time before Cyprian, as being the most Ancient of
the Latin Fathers, and born in the year Two Hundred; and yet he in his Book de
Bapt. c. 18. where for certain Reasons (but I pray you mark, the Novelty of the
practice is not one of them,) he does Dehort the Baptizing of Infants (as he
did also advise the deferring of Baptism to the Adult, and in both was
singular,) does by that very dehortation, plainly intimate the common practice
of it. Itaque says he, pro cujusque personae condition ac dispositione, etiam
Aetate, Baptismi Cunctatio Vtilior est: praesertim tamen circa Parvulos, quid
enim necesse est, si non tam necesse, sponsores etiam periculo ingeri, etc. So
Tertullian; but again, what can you say to Irenaeus who was before Tertullian,
and near the times of the Apostles, when he tells us adversus haeres. l. 2. 39.
Christus venit omnes per seipsum salvare, omnes Inquam, qui per seipsum
Renascuntur in Deum; Infantes and parvulos and pueros; and by Renascentia is
understood Baptism, as is universally agreed by all learned in the Fathers.

And whereas I affirmed [ Antipedobaptisme to make the Church of Christ a
Church unius aetatis;] you mistook my meaning when you took it to have been
that your Opinion was but a Novelty, (though that be true too;) and that seeing
the Church of Christ cannot be without a true Baptism, and true Baptism, in
your sense of Anabaptism, has been not much above an Age or Century,
particularly since the time of Muncer (whom Munster calls Monetarius, least he
should be thought of Kin to him;) and since John of Leyden and Knipperdolling;
That therefore before the arising of these new lights, the true Church for many
hundred years, had no existence and being.] For to do my self right, and you no
wrong, I meant it not in using that expression; I alluded in it to L. Florus,
who speaking of the Romans in their Civil Original under Romulus, while yet
they had no Women, and so no hope of Posterity; says, Res erat Unius Aetatis,
populus virorum: and I intimated by it, that Antipedobaptisme by grubbing up of
Infants, and throwing them out of the Church, does indeed destroy the Nursery
of the Church, and so, in one Age, after the Extinction of the old stocks, does
put it in no small hazard of being utterly extirped; And now having this
occasion, I dare, in demonstration of the Justice of the hint, almost appeal
unto your own Experience, if of the Children of Persons of your persuasion,
within the compass of your own knowledge, that are Adult, and come to years of
Discretion, and were not Baptized in their Infancy by some Relation or Friend,
one almost in ten is any wise Baptized, and so entered into any Church (either
yours or ours;) for growing up, dislike of your Opinion for the most part does
keep them from you; And Shame of being Baptized in Age, (a thing disused, and
as things of that nature commonly are, a thing that makes talk and gazing,)
keeps them from us; And thus being in no Church, are visibly in the state of
Heathens.

In your next remark, [when I make the denial of Infants Baptism a robbing
Parents of a sensible ground of hope for their Children in case of the decease
of any of them in Infancy,] you do me manifest Injustice to Insinuate a meaning
of Opus operatum, a thing as far from my intentions as words. But I have
sufficiently expressed my Sentiments in that particular in the Paragraph
reflected on, to those that are considerate and candid, and therefore, there
remains no more to be said of it now.

But as to what you offer in the last place, [concerning the Powerful Motive to
dedicate himself to God, which, I said, Antipedobaptisme depriveth a Child of;]
namely, that for your part, you are of opinion that nothing can be a greater
hinderance to him than Baptism, since he is hereby induced to reckon himself
already a good Christian, and in a state of Salvation, as having had the Sign
of the Covenant already applied to him in his Infant State, without looking
after the new birth, and being acquainted with the Mystery of Spiritual
Regeneration, etc.] I profess I was astonished to read it, both for the Scandal
and offense it cannot but administer to those of a contrary persuasion; as also
for the ill reflection which, with too much Color, it may be interpreted to
imply upon the Wisdom and Counsel of God, who, both before the Law, and under
the Law, was pleased to Institute the Signing of Children with the Sign of the
Covenant; which doubtless, had it been an impediment and hinderance to their
Regeneration, and to Salvation, much more if a most powerful one, he, in his
infinite goodness and clemency, as well as wisdom and conduct, would never have
done. And do you indeed think that the Circumcision of Children, instead of
being a furtherance to the work of Regeneration in them, was truly a hinderance
to it, and that that which God intended for a means of Conservation and
Perpetuation of his Church, was really and in effect, a way to destroy it:
Where was the Wisdom of Almighty God, if he knew not what means were proper
toward the Salvation of his Creatures? And where his Goodness, if he ordained
what he knew improper? It is certain, if Baptism by being put on Children in
their Infancy, in token of their being given to God in Covenant, be in it self
a hinderance to their Regeneration; Circumcision which was put on Children in
Infancy, and in token of their being given to God in Covenant, could be no
furtherance, and consequently was a means of all others most improper to
continue the Church, and so, a means equally unworthy both of Divine Prudence
and Wisdom, and of his Goodness and Mercy.

Thus I have finished my defense of the Argument for Infants Baptism from Genesis
17, and I think, have answered all is capable of being opposed against it, and
yet seeing I know not but you may have more, I now offer, that if you have any
thing else of any Moment to object either against the Argument it self, or
against what is offered now in the defense of it; If you propose it, so it be
without unnecessary digressions into common places, and without popular
trappings, and it be with the Candor and Sincerity, and with the modesty and
temper that becomes a lover and seeker of Truth, I shall answer it cheerfully,
and therein give another Instance how much I am.

Bowdon April 1st. 1682. Dear Sir, Your True Friend R. B.

The Third Letter.
Dear Sir,
YOur Letter of the 29th. of September in Answer to that I sent you the 21st.
of April, though put into so good and safe a hand, came not to mine before this
14th. of October, and then open. Happily it had occasion to call in on Friends;
and many times, the farthest way about is nearest home.

However, though late come, I do assure you it is Welcome; for I learn by it
that the Controversy long depending, and which I feared would be Eternal, is
not likely to continue much longer. And that after all the Exclamations of
Evident and most Evident, of Plain and most Plain, of Scriptural, of Solid, of
Substantial and Cogent which you make on what You say; and of Chimera's, of
Repugnant to Scripture, of doubtful Consequencies and ambiguous Uncertainties,
of violence to the Text, of Corruption of Scripture, and of Addition to it on
what I prove. The whole now is to determine on two Issues, the one Relating to
the Duty enjoined Genesis 17. 9. the other to the Subject of that duty; [what is
meant by the Seed, and what by keeping the Covenant:]

As to the First Issue which concerns the Subject of the Duty (for I will begin
with that,) I have abundantly evinced in my last Letter (and yet you take no
notice of it) that by Seed in the 9th. verse, must be understood the Spiritual,
as well as the Carnal Seed, and that, because the same Seed is meant in the
9th. verse that is in the 7th. and 8th. verses, the same subject in the general
obligation verse the 9th. in all respects, that is in the promise, verses 7th.
and 8th. and the same subject in the temporal promise verse the 8th. that is in
the Spiritual verse the 7th: and the subject in the 7th. (you grant) does take
in all the Seed, the Spiritual as well as the Carnal, and therefore, so it must
be in the 8th. and the 9th. I and in the 10th. also.

Ay! but say you, the 8th. verse is to be understood only of the Carnal Seed,
and why only (say I) unless the 7th. be also to be understood, of that only
does the Holy Ghost distinguish? or if he do not, how dare you? the Subjects
are the same in both; The Connection carries it for the same Subsects; and in
both the Verses there are the ^ame words to express the subject, and why not
then the same subjects meant by the same words? Especially in regard the whole
is but a continuation of one Speech of God to Abraham; I will Establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed, verse the 7th. And I will give to
thee, and thy Seed, verse the 8th.

It it true (as you suggest) in the Letter, Canaan is Promised too, and was
Possessed by the Carnal Seed, but the Litteral is not the only sense, and
therefore the Litteral are not the only subjects: The Mystical and Spiritual is
the principal sense, and therefore the Mystical and Spiritual are the principal
subjects: Thus Argues the Apostle, Seed (says he) not Seeds: Seed, and that
Seed was Isaac in the Letter, for the promise even of Canaan (mark it) was not
made to Ishmael, though he were Abraham's Seed too, and then alive, and with
him, nor to the Seed of Abraham that should derive from him by Ishmael, but it
was made to Isaac, in Isaac shall thy Seed be called: and Isaac in the Letter,
in the Mystery is Christ. He says not Seeds (says he) as comprehending
Ishmael and Isaac, but he says Seed, as speaking but of one, of Isaac only,
which Isaac in the Truth is Christ Mystical. Further, consider though Canaan
only was promised in the Letter, verse the 8th, the World is intended in the
Mystery, and therefore, though it be said in the Text, The Land in which thou
art a Stranger, even all the Land of Canaan, yet the Apostle amplifyeth the
expression, Heb. 11. 13. and says, They were Pilgrims and Strangers upon the
Earth, not in Canaan only, but in the Earth. And if in the Promise which is
made of Canaan the World be intended, well may believing Gentiles be intended
in the Seed to whom it is made: For how else as they are Abraham's Seed is all
theirs, if all were not some where given to Abraham and to his Seed, and where
is all given to Abraham and to his Seed, and so to believing Gentiles, but
here? Read I pray advisedly, what our Apostle argues, Gal. 3. And in your next
take also what I argued in my last, Paragraph by Paragraph, and so reply to it;
Then happily you will see a consequence and Cogency that yet you do not, or
that you dissemble if you do. Remember also that when it is said in verse the
10th, This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and ye, and thy Seed
after thee, there is no such Implication as you conceive there is in this
expression [between me and thee and thy Seed] of the subjects of the Duty [of
keeping that Covenant,] but of the Parties in the Covenant; which (as I told
you formerly) are three, and (mark it) God is one of them: Between me, namely,
God on the one part, and ye, thou Abraham and thy natural Family here present
on the other part, and thy Seed, Isaac in the Letter in whom the Seed was
called, and Christ (typified in Isaac, and in him the believing Gentiles,
Children of the Promise) in the mystery on the third part. It is unadvised to
infer that the Seed here is obliged to keep the Covenant of Circumcision by
virtue of that expression, the subjects that are bound to keep it are ye, ye
shall keep this my Covenant, and the [Ye] are distinguished from the Seed,
[between me and ye, and thy Seed:] you may as well say, all the parties are
obliged to keep it, and God is one of them, as that, by force of that
expression, any one is: those that are to keep it are represented under the
term [ye;] and they were to keep it between God and themselves, and the Seed,
as a sign of the Tripartite,] Covenant between them. And to be clear, I
understand the same Seed in the 7th. 8th. 9th. and 10th. verses; Isaac in the
Letter, Christ Mystical in the Spirit and Mystery. This for the first Issue.

As for the other which relates to the Duty, what can almost be plainer, than
that by keeping of the Covenant in the 9th. verse, is meant keeping of it in
the sign, or keeping the sign of the Covenant, for it is, Thou shall keep my
Covenant, therefore thou and thy Seed in the 9th verse, and then immediately is
added in the 10th. in one continued Speech, This is my Covenant which ye shall
keep, etc. So that the sense and meaning of the Phrase [of keeping the
Covenant] in either verse, is clearly the meaning of it in both; And therefore
to keep the Covenant in the 9th. verse, is to keep the sign of the Covenant,
seeing to keep the Covenant in the 10th. is to keep it so, [in the sign.]

That to keep the Covernant in the 10th. verse is to keep it in the sign is
manifest, seeing their being Circumcised could not be a keeping of the Covenant
(as it is plainly intimated in verse the 10th. to be) but so, (viz.) as it was
the observation of the sign of the Covenant, and thus [in the sign] the
Covenant of God was kept in Circumcision, as the Passover is said to be kept
when the Lamb was eaten in Memory of it; So Scriptural a way of speaking this
is. I say, as the Feast of the Paschal Lamb was not the Passover it self, but a
sign only of the passing over, and yet the Passover is said to have been kept,
when that Feast was kept (in sign of it,) as by comparing Number. 9. 2. etc. with
Exodus 12. 3, 4, 12, 13. etc. manifestly appears. So likewise Circumcision,
though it were not in it self the very Covenant of God, but only the sign of
that Covenant; [Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, Romans 4. and in Genesis
17. ^^. It shall be a token of the Covenant between me and you.] Yet the
Covenant of God (according to the way of Scriptural Expression) might well be
said to be kept, when Circumcision the sign of it, was observed. The Covenant
in Scripture Language is said to be kept, when the sign of it is kept, Thou
shall keep my Covenant, is, thou shall keep the sign of my Covenant. This is my
Covenant which ye shall keep, is, this is the sign of my Covenant which ye
shall keep. And if keeping Circumcision then were keeping of the Covenant*
because Circumcision was the then sign of it; then keeping Baptism, now is
keeping the Covenant, because Baptism is now the sign of it. To keep the
Covenant ^here, is as I have proved to keep the sign.

And now consider seriously, how plain and easy a sense this is I have of the
words, I will Establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after
thee, between me the Lord, and thee Abraham, and thy Seed Isaac in the Letter
and Spirit, to be a God to thee Abraham, and to thy Seed after thee, Isaac in
the Letter and Spirit And I will give to thee Abraham, and to thy Seed Isaac in
the Letter and Spirit, all the Land in which thou art a Stranger. Even the Land
of Canaan in the Letter to Isaac, in the Letter, and the World the whole World
in the Spirit and Mystery, to Isaac in the Mystery, and therefore thou Abraham
and thy Seed [ Isaac in the Letter and Spirit] shall keep [the sign of] my
Covenant. (But) this is [the sign of] my Covenant which ye which are now here,
thou Abraham and Ishmael thy Son according to the Flesh, and the rest of thy
Household here which stand for all the Seed according to the Flesh as so, This
is [the sign of] my Covenant which ye, for your part, shall keep [as a sign of
the Covenant I have made between me and ye, and thy Seed Isaac the Seed of the
Promise, and not of the Flesh] every Man-child among you [ye the Natural Family
and Carnal Seed] shall be Circumcised. Among you, he does not say among the
Seed; The Seed is to keep the Covenant in a sign verse the 9th. but the Natural
Family only are to keep it in this sign, in Circumcision; Thou shall keep my
Covenant therefore [in the sign of it] thou and thy Seed; (But) this is my
Covenant which ye shall keep, etc. Every Man-child shall be Circumcised.

Ay, say you, but in the sign of it is your Addition only. Not so say I, it is
but my Explication according to the Scripture, Ay, but when God did tell
Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore thou and thy Seed, had no more
(say you) been added, Abraham could never have understood that God intended
hereby, this Covenant was to be observed in any external sign; true, say I, had
not God explained his meaning, Abraham might well have doubted of it; but why
doubt you? Since more is added, and in what is added, God explains himself, and
shows that, by keeping the Covenant, he meant keeping the sign of it. Ay, but a
sign is a common separable accident to a Covenant (in general,) well, but it is
not so to this (in special;) Other Covenants have been (you say) without a
sign* but to be sure, in this a sign is made necessary; For to keep the
Covenant is to keep the sign. Ay, say you, but let go this 7th. of Genesis
which is no more to purpose then the first, and then I will answer what else
you have to say. Yes, very likely, as you have what is already said, and if I
will throw away my weapons you will fight me. In fine, what (say you) so
important an ordinance to depend on consequence from an Old Testament Text! Yes
(say I) and on the consequence of this Old Testament Text depends all the New
Testament Doctrine of our Inheritance and Heirship; See Gal. 3.

And now, Dear Sir, is there not a word, not a syllable (as you express it) in
the 17th. of Genesis, that the Spiritual Seed of Abraham are to keep the
Covenant in the sign of it? Have not I proved the Seed here is Isaac in the
Spirit Principally? does not God distinguish between ye and thy Seed? is not
Circumcision enjoined only on the natural Carnal Family of Abraham in the term
ye as it is distinguished from the Seed? is not the same the subject in the
Obligation in the 9th* verse, that is in the Promise Spiritual in the 7th. and
temporal in the 8th. you cannot deny it, if you read the Text. If you design me
any satisfaction, it must not be by blending and confounding things that
differ, nor by common placing and keeping off in generals, but you must come up
close to the matter, and show why the subject in the general Obligation verse
the 9th. is, in all respects the same with that in the Promise, both the
Temporal and the Spiritual, but the subjects of the Obligation to Circumcision
in particular, which is in the 10th. is altered. It is not there thou and thy
Seed as all along before, but [ye] and [ye] is in the Letter Abraham, and those
then with him there: But Isaac was not there, he was the Promised Seed. Again,
why does God distinguish [ye] from the Seed; between me and ye, and thy Seed.
In fine, why all along in the 10th. and 11th. verses, both in the imposition of
Circumcision, and in the intimation of the end and use of it, the Holy Ghost
does use a restrictive term, and never mentions the Seed but ye, ye shall keep
etc. and it shall be a token between me and ye; He says not thy Seed shall
keep it etc. nor that it shall be a token to the Seed; He says thy Seed shall
keep the Covenant in a sign, but does not say that they shall keep the Covenant
in this sign; They must keep a sign but not this sign. Clear up these questions
and you do something, and without it all is nothing.

Thus I have briefly stated the issues on which the thing in Controversy
between us now depends, and I have answered your objections, and am bold to say
again that I have done it with the candor and fairness that becomes a seeker
of truth. I mince not what you say; I raise no dust to hide your strength, or
blind the eyes of a Party. I do not frighten you with the threatenings on
diminutions of Scripture; as you do me with those on Additions; such common
placing here is out of place, and is fooling. I love not Tragical Declamations
instead of Argumentation. Nor yet am I by noise and clamor and harangues of
words which take with the people, but not with the wise, to be diverted from
pursuing advantages. I know where I pinch you; and yet I hate to cry Victoria
while the field is disputing. I am a lover of plainness, as well as a seeker of
all truth, and therefore use as little Artifice in arguing, as I do in
Professing my self,

October 14. 1682. Dear Sir Your Real Friend R. B.

The Fourth and Last Letter.
Dear Sir,
IN your former Letter of September the 29th. you told me, that the words in
the 17th. of Genesis ^9th. [ Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore thou and thy
Seed, etc.] do neither express nor give any the least intimation of any sign at
all that God intended should be Annexed unto the Covenant, etc. for there God
commands Abraham to keep the Covenant in General Terms only, and does not say
thou shall keep my Covenant in the sign of it, that being (say you) my Addition
only, etc. But in this of December the 15th. which I Received the 20th. you
tell me, that as far as you can discern, God speaks but of one sign in both
verses, [viz. 9. 10] Now, how I pray you can he speak of one sign in both
verses, if (as you copiously affirmed) he speaks nothing in the least of any
sign at all in one of them? who is it now (to use your own Expressions) that is
Dazzled? that sees or saw one for two, and two for one? and yet, all you say is
Demonstration, it is Solid, Scriptural, Substantial, and all I say is Chymera's,
Contradictions, unproved Dictates, etc. Really Dear Sir, some grains of Modesty
would do no hurt; It would at least serve to make your Alterations more
excusable.

But the former, is not the only Point (though mind, it be one of the two
Issues on which the whole between us must determine,) in which you are so
slippery; you are as much so in another, and that the second Issue; for in your
former Letters, all a long, you understand by the Spiritual Seed as I do, and
as you ought, (viz.) Christ and Believing Gentiles (to whom happily, you add
Believing Jews,) or Christ Mystical represented in Isaac, and indeed, without a
softer place in ones head than I am willing to believe you have, it is
impossible, seriously, to take it otherwise; for it is [in Isaac thy Seed shall
be called;] not [thy Seed shall be called Isaac.] And yet, in your Letter now
you take the Spiritual Seed for Isaac's Person; A sense of the Spiritual Seed
against sense; For it is Isaac in the Spirit only that is the Spiritual Seed,
and Isaac in the Spirit, is Christ Mystical; For so the Apostle [and to thy
Seed which is Christ.] It is true, Isaac was a Mystical Person as he was a Type
and Figure; but if you mean but that by his being the Spiritual Seed, [that he
was the Seed of Abraham, and was a Mystical Person,] then Isaac was no more the
Spiritual Seed then Ishmael; Ishmael being as much the Seed of Abraham, and as
much a Mystical and Typical person as Isaac; Ishmael a Type and Figure of the
Legal Carnal Seed, as Isaac of the Believing Evangelical Seed; The former
representing the Jews, the latter Christ and Believing Gentiles. Only, as
Ishmael to be a Type and Figure of the Carnal Legal Seed, was to be born after
the Flesh, according to the Rule and Law of Generation in Nature; So Isaac to
be a Type and Figure of the Spiritual Evangelical Seed [who were to be born not
of bloods, nor of the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of God]
was to be born after the Spirit, (viz.) by the power of God according to and in
performance of his Promise (made) to Abraham. And to be born after the Spirit,
with respect to Isaac, is not (as happily, you may conceive it) to be
Regenerated and new born Spiritually, but to be born as to his natural Person
not as Ishmael was, in the ordinary course of Nature by mere Carnal Coition;
but by Promise, in a supernatural way, above the Rules and Laws and Powers of
Nature, by Almighty Power Assisting; even when it had ceased (as the Scripture
tells us) to be with Sarah after the manner of Women, and when Abraham Himself
also was old. See Gal. 4. 23, 29. what is to be by Promise in the one verse, is
to be born after the Spirit in the other. To start then a sense of the
Spiritual Seed which was not thought of before, and which were not to the
Purpose if a good one, is doubling; and a Hare is used to double, when near run
down.

Had I been engaged in this controversy with a man unprejudiced, and not with
one who, in adherence to an opinion long ago Conceived and Riveted, is obliged
to do all things to maintain it, with one susceptible of Light, and not with
one that wriggles, and winds, and turns, and all to avoid it; with one that
admits of plain sense, and not with one that will not see, that thrice one
makes three; or, that a Covenant between God and you, and thy Seed after thee,
is a Covenant between three parties. I say, had I had the happiness of debating
and trying of it with a Person indifferent; and not the misfortune of being
engaged with one so hugely prepossessed, and one not very consistent to
Himself, or to his Principles, the business long ago had been ended; but who
can draw the Picture of Proteus, or catch a Capering Will with the Wisp? [Ignis
fatuus]

As to your groundless, severe, Provocative Reflections (the which you call
Reproofs dressed up (by all means!) in studied, clean, mild, decent, and
Christian Language,) I say once for all, that it were easy for me, if I durst
allow my self the liberty you take in that kind, and that it were not both
undecent and unchristian to sharpen my Pen too: But I am resolved not to
gratify your design by any such intemperance. I can better bear then deserve
your Reprehensions, and I have (I believe) too great Advantage in the cause,
and in my Argument, to mar it by so bad Example. I always thought it very
improper in Debates and Controversies instead of Arguing, to be (as you Phrase
it,) Cutting. He is rather a Butcher then a good Chyrurgion, that delights in
cutting, and tearing, and slashing, when there is no need of it. Surely, softer
words and harder Arguments would more become you.

But among all your Groundless Provocations, none is more absurd, nor more
unhandsome then the outcry, the Tragical Outcry which you raise upon a Mistake
of the Transcriber, and that too but in a word, but in a letter, and without
marring the Sense; [in Isaac shall the Seed be called] viz. [the Seed] instead
of [thy Seed] for so in truth, it was in the Exemplar, but likely, on a hasty
cursory review of the Transcript not altered, because it stood with the sense.
But though it were not in the First Exemplar [the Seed] but [thy Seed,] and
[the] indeed were only a mistake of him that Copyed it; yet had you repeated
the whole Period in which it was inserted, (but that must be cleanly, meekly,
decently, Dissembled for the cause, and that you might have matter to work on;)
it would appear that in that place, and in that manner in which the passage was
brought in; [the] was not improper; no, no more improper then [thy.] For thus
it stands in the Letter was sent -- The Promise even of Canaan (mark it) was
not made to Ishmael, though he were Abraham's Seed too, and then alive, and with
him; nor to the Seed of Abraham that should derive from him by Ishmael, but it
was made to Isaac, for in Isaac shall the Seed be called, and Isaac in the
Letter, in the Mystery is Christ.] And who but Argus, if even He with all his
Hundred Eyes can spy a fault here? I, but if it cannot be spied, (happily) it
may be felt, for (say you) it is a Palpable abuse of Scripture in misrendring
it.] And is it so? but what then, if both [the] and [thy] too had been omitted,
and [His] put in? Sure the sense had still been good, and the Argument good
still, and the Scripture not abused. For Allegation and Application of
Scripture, even by Christ Himself, and by his Apostles, who I believe, would
not abuse it by misrendring, is not (as might be manifested in a hundred
Instances) always (as you would have it) to a syllable, and in terms; but to
the sense, and present purpose: and sure I am, that the Seed [of Abraham]
should be called in Isaac, is to my purpose, and is the sense of Genesis 21.
12. * as much as Gal. 4. 30. is to the sense of Genesis 21. 10. and to the
Apostles Purpose. Thus over subtle you be; without Discretion, without
Judgment, and without Candor, and this it is to be Learned in Schoolmen, and to
have subtle John Duns (Scotus) for a Master. But to our business.

Whereas I had said I have abundantly evinced that by Seed in the 9th. verse,
must be understood the Spiritual as well as the Carnal Seed; you reply, that
that may be easily evinced which was never controverted:] As if it had not been
in the Controversy all along, and been the main of it, and acknowledged to be
so in your former Letter [whether the Spiritual Seed were meant in the 7. 8. 9.
and 10th. verses as well as the Carnal?] and is not this the first Issue, in
which you have joined? Well, but whatever it was before, my business now, as
you assign it, is to prove (in your terms) that Isaac quatenus Spiritual Seed,
or (which I think you mean, or mean nothing to purpose) that Isaac as he
represented the Spiritual Seed or Christ Mystical, is meant in verse the 9th.
And this I think I have sufficiently evinced already, and that (after your
Concession) it needs no more Eviction; It being indeed a Figure of speaking,
called in English a Bull, to say the Spiritual Seed is meant as well as the
Carnal (as you say, and say it was never controverted,) and yet, that the
Spiritual Seed as Spiritual is not meant, for if the Spiritual Seed, be not
meant as Spiritual, then the Carnal Seed only, and not the Spiritual as well as
the Carnal is meant. This should suffice by way of Rejoinder; But, because (as
you affirm) this is a Foundation stone (such as it is) in that structure I have
raised, and you are so over confident (for nature will have its course,) that I
cannot prove by Scripture, that the Spiritual Seed as Spiritual, is meant in
the 9th. verse; besides, what I have done already in my former Letters, which
stands altogether on this foot, and which you have not in the least replied to;
and besides, that I cannot conceive if the Spiritual Seed be meant at all (as
you grant it is) but that it must be meant as Spiritual (for it is you must
tell me, how else, it can be meant;) I say, besides all this, you shall have a
Text, a plain Text for it. But before I Cite the Text, I will assume as certain
and agreed between us, to make it come home, what you have asserted very fully
in a former Letter, and also I have proved; (viz.) that the same subject in all
respects is meant in the 9th. verse, that is in the 8th.; And taking this for
granted, I affirm that the Apostle says all as much as you would have me to
prove, when Romans 4. 13, 16, 17. He argues in these terms, For the Promise that
he (viz. Abraham) should be the heir of the World, was not to Abraham, or to
his Seed by the Law, but through the Righteousness of Faith; therefore it is of
Faith, that it might be by grace, to the end that the Promise might be sure to
All the Seed; not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is
of the faith of Abraham, [clearly implying, the Promise would not have been
sure to all the Seed, if it had not been so to both Seeds.] who is the Father
of Us all. But to apply the Text. Either the Promise made to Isaac (for in
Isaac Abraham's Seed is called,) was made to him, and so the Obligation lay upon
him quatenus, as he represented the Seed of the Faith of Abraham; or it was
made to him, and so the Obligation lay upon him as not representing that Seed:
If you say the Promise was made to him, and so the Obligation lay upon him
quatenus, as he represented the Seed of the Faith of Abraham, then it was made
to him, and the Obligation lay upon him quatenus, as he represented the
Spiritual Seed; for the seed of the Faith of Abraham is the Spiritual Seed; but
if you say the Promise was made to Isaac, and so the Obligation lay upon him as
in his own Person only, or only as the Legal either mere Carnal or believing
seed descended from him, then the Promise is not sure to all the seed, not to
the Seed of the Faith of Abraham under the Gospel, because this seed then, is
not Entitled to it as seed, for it is in Isaac that Abraham's seed is called,
according to Genesis 21. and so the Apostle (who makes good their Title as
Abraham's seed, and consequently as they were in Isaac,) was really out of the
right, if you be in it.

But I have mentioned a Concession of yours in a Former Letter, and make use of
it; least therefore you either should forget it, or should by some Evasion
which I cannot think of Elevate the force of it, and so Create me new trouble
hereafter, I will cite the passage now, but with this precaution, that I do not
say you understand precisely the same persons as I do, to be intended in the
8th. and 9th. and 10th. verses, but I say you grant there, and there make much
of it, that the same persons or subjects (be they what they will,) are to be
understood as meant in the 9th. and 10th, verses, which are so in the 8th. For
say you [ God having promised in the 8th. verse to give unto Abraham, and to
his Seed after him the Land wherein he was then a stranger, even all the Land
of Canaan for an Everlasting Possession, and to be their God. In the very next
verse he is pleased to proceed to declare the Incumbence now to be fastened on
them upon the forementioned account, etc.] So that you grant, the same persons
are under the Incumbence and Obligation that are under the Promise, and are so
in the same respect, as being in the Obligation upon account of their being in
the Promise, and the Apostle is plain, that the Promise is to Abraham and to
all his Seed, the Seed which is of the Faith of Abraham, or the believing
Gentile, as well as the Seed which is of the Law, or the Natural Jew; And I
should think the Apostles Authority as good as any. And now, it is a proper time
to answer your question, and to tell what Authors I follow, why, you see, they
are Scriptural ones, such as Paul etc. the same Authors the first Reformers
followed, and the same your Predecessors pretended to follow.

This is the proof I have that Isaac in the Spirit, or Isaac as he Represented
Christ Mystical, and so the believing Gentiles, meant in Genesis 17. 9. Against
which, you offer me again what in effect, I have baffled over and over. But
because it may afford me a rise of more express declaring what I have said
formerly, and also of adding something which I had not such occasion to produce
before, I shall consider it again.

You say then, that Isaac in the Spirit, or the believing Gentiles cannot be
understood by the Seed in the 9th. verse, because the Seed there mentioned, is
expressly commanded in the 10th. to be Circumcised.] Which (say I) is, In
effect* to say it is so, because it is so. To conceive the force of which
Reply, as well as of your Reason, I must have leave to enter into the State of
Matters, as at present they do stand between us.

The 9th. verse is the parting point. You argue that the Seed in the 9th.
verse, [ Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore Thou and thy Seed] cannot be
understood of the Spiritual Seed, [believing Gentiles,] because that Seed which
is in the 9th. verse, is (say you) expressly commanded in the 10th. to be
Circumcised; and that that is the meaning of keeping the Covenant in verse the
9th. I on the contrary, argue that the Obligation in the 9th. verse, cannot be
understood Determinately, and particularly of Circumcision, because the subject
of it is the same Seed to whom the Promise is made; namely, All the Seed, and
Circumcision was not competent to all; and that therefore [ye.] in the 10th.
verse, on which the Obligation to be Circumcised is laid, cannot possibly
include the Seed as in the 9th. verse, this is the true State.

For you therefore to take for granted that the Seed mentioned in the 9th.
verse, is included in [ye] in the 10th. is as thing so mean and pitiful, that
in English, it is called Begging, Begging the question, for this is one of the
Points in question between us: But to affirm that the Seed in the 9th. verse,
is expressly commanded in the 10th. to be Circumcised, is worse, for in express
terms, it is not [this is the Covenant which thou and thy Seed shall keep] but
[this is the Covenant which ye shall keep,] and what is meant by [ye] whether
Abraham and the Seed mentioned before in verse the 9th. or only He and Ishmael,
and the other persons then present at the Institution of Circumcision, which
God should speak to, is the question.

I do confess, the Grammar of the Text would have carried it well enough for
your sense, and it would have run smoothly, [Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore, thou and thy Seed; This is the Covenant which ye shall keep] if it
had not pleased God to add [between me and you, and thy Seed after thee:] But
yet even then I could not easily have understood how Any of the Seed could be
excused from Circumcision. But that then, had been the only difficulty; but now
there is another, and no small one; for God himself Distinguishing in the 10th.
verse, between you and thy Seed after thee, [This is the Covenant which you
shall keep between me and you, and thy Seed after thee;] and thy Seed after
thee in the 10th. verse, being in all respects the same expression, without any
the least alteration, with that in the 9th, and that also in one continued
Speech, and consequently signifying the same subjects in all respects, what is
plainer then that this distinction must be a Key to the whole Text, and that to
open the Text in any ways without this, will not be to unlock, but force it.

And this Distinction indeed is that which pinches and amazes you, and makes
you so confused that you scarce know what you say, for in one place you say it
resolutely, that there is no such Distinction but of my making; but in another,
with greater modesty, you say, that as appears to you, God does not distinguish
the [ye] from the Seed in the beginning of the 10th. verse, except as one was
present, the other Future.] And what is all this? but that he does distinguish
and that he does not, and that he does not distinguish except as he does
distinguish, and that as much as can (...) distinguished, (viz.) as one from
many, and present persons from future, ah! Dear Sir you seem a little
unsettled; and therefore it is time to give over.

But happily, I go too fast, and you will tell me that as you said, that no
such distinction is but of my making, so you gave a reason for saying it, (viz)
That the terms of every distinction must be opposite, else it is no
distinction;] And there is Logic for me: And sweet Sir for this I thank you
[that there is no distinction but where opposition,] It is new, a new Light in
Logic; Former Logicians (poor dark men, they) never saw it, one of them, and
he no small one neither, Dully tells us, that Diversity is either Distinction
or Opposition; and not one of them (so blind they be) but would tell, that
Disparates are distinct, and are not opposites; And indeed Dear Sir your Heart,
and Tongue, and Hand, are things distinct, but (I hope) not Opposites; Either
other Logicians (all of them) are out of their Element; or you, yet, Good Sir
not come into it.

Well, but however you express it, your meaning may be good, ye, and thy Seed
may be conjoined in one party in the Obligation, as you say they are, though by
the way, to be conjoined, they, in themselves, must be distinct. But what you
add, is neither good nor true; (viz.) That the Seed which I would make a Member
of the Distinction, is a self Created term] so you say, but mean (I think) a
Creature of mine. But I assure you it is not so; I am no Creator; I added not
these terms [between me and you, and thy Seed;] they are the Holy Spirits, and
not mine, and seem even at first sight, to imply a distinction of parties, as
well as of persons, and to sound as if the Covenant were Tripartite, but yet,
as I love not skirmishing for words only, call them two parties, or three
parties, or four parties if you will, provided you distinguish between God and
you, and thy Seed, and do not make you and thy Seed all one thing, as well as
all one party; I assure you it shall break no squares.

But by occasion of your directing me unto the second and fourth verses of the
17th. of Genesis to prove the Covenant Bipartite; give me leave to observe to you,
(and in the Observation to imply an Answer,) that Abraham, as he is the subject
in the Promises in the whole transaction between God and him, does in diverse
places, undergo a diverse consideration, he is considered two waves; First, he
is considered singly by himself, and in his own Person, and so he is transacted
with, and Promises are made to him, verses 2. 4, 5, 6. [I will make my Covenant
between me and thee, my Covenant is with thee; Thy Name shall be no more Abram,
but Abraham, I will make thee many Nations.] In all these a Covenant is made
with Abraham, as he is considered singly, and in his own Person; without any
mention of his Seed, or any concernment of them. But then secondly, he is
considered jointly, as concerned with his Seed, and so, he is transacted with,
and promises are made and ratified to him in the 7th. and 8th. verses; [and I
will Establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, etc.
and I will give unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee, the Land in which thou
art a Stranger] Now the Covenant as made with Abraham singly, is Bipartite; but
as made with Abraham as he is joined with his Seed, it is Tripartite; for there
a new party, or (which is as much as I said I would contend for, or be
understood to mean) a new, another Person is taken in. Again, as Abraham had
undergone a double consideration in the Covenant or Promise, and was transacted
with both singly in his own Person, and also jointly with his Seed; So
answerably, in the general Obligation verse the 9th, he is expressly and in
terms made the subject of it, both singly by himself, and also as joined with
the Seed; [Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore,] there he is singly; [Thou
and thy Seed after thee in their Generations,] there he is joined: So exact it
pleases God to be, even in terms, in adjusting of the subjects in the Promise
and Obligation, and in making of them Answering; All to show, that those that
are included in the one, are equally employed in the other, and that by the same
account and consideration, by which any lay their claim to the former, by the
very same consideration, and on the same account they come under the ties of
the Latter. On the whole, it is not so absurd if duly weighed, to say (which
yet I do not peremptorily say) that in that part of the Covenant in which
Abraham is joined with the Seed, he should stand for his natural posterity, as
there the Seed does for Christ Mystical: And so much the Text you Cite, namely,
Genesis 9. 9, 11, 12. Implies, (viz.) that the Parents represent and stand for
their Children; though in other Respects, that Text is no ways Parallel to
this, Genesis 17. 10. nor serves your purpose; For there it is [between me and
you, and your Seed] but here [between me and you, and thy Seed, not your Seed,]
and you have told me, that on every point of the Law, Mountains of sense do
hang.

I have proved the Distinction [between God and you, and thy Seed] to be Real:
and in prospect that I might be able to do so, you have provided me an
Explication; which is, that when God says, [This is my Covenant which ye shall
keep between me and you] in your Opinion, it can be understood no otherwise
then thus, [between me and you] that is, between me and thou Abraham, together
with thy Son Ishmael, and the rest of the Family now present with thee; And not
only between me and you now present, but between me and you, and thy Seed after
thee before expressed.] But oh! sweet Sir recollect a little here, for I fear
you do mistake your self, These are the very words of the Paraphrase, the
Mizmaze Paraphrase; However, it makes me hope we shall agree at last, your
off's and on's, and on's and off's are good signs of it. No say you, stop
there; For thy Seed after thee in the 9th. verse, is included in the first [ye]
of the 10th. verse,] But how (say I) can that be, if it be excluded the second;
from which in the 10th. it is distinguished? But to press you the more, I ask
you, does not in your opinion, [thy Seed in the 9th. verse.] Include the
Present as well as Future Seed? You tell me it does, else how came Ishmael
under the Duty! I ask again, does not the first ye (or you) in the 10th. verse,
in your Opinion include the Seed in the 9th.? you tell me it does. I ask
further, does not the second [you] in the 10th. verse signify the same with
the first [ye or you?] here you must be at a stand, for if the first you [or
ye] include the Seed Present and Future, and the second [you] do signify the
same as the first, then the second [you] must include the Future Seed as well
as the Present, and so the addition to it [of thy Seed after thee] must be
superfluous, and where then, will be the Mountains of sense hanging on that
word* But on the other hand, if you say the second [you] does signify the
present Family only, and the first you [or ye] the Family both Present and
Future, you make the Scripture unintelligible, and God not only to speak
ambiguously, but against all the Rules of Grammar and common speaking, and
against good sense, to make a Pronoune Demonstrative not to Demonstrate, and
though standing in Coherence and Relation, yet not to Cohere, not to Relate.
This is my Covenant which you [or ye] shall keep between me and you; What you I
pray now but the First? You that are to keep the Covenant, are to keep it
between me and you. To take the first you [or ye] for some Persons, and the
second for others, is non-sensical: Both standing plainly for the same, and
therefore if [between me and you] be as you say, [between me and thee Abraham,
and Ishmael, and the rest of the Family here present] the first you [or ye]
must be understood of them too; and that is the whole of the Paraphrase.

However, I am glad you have found the present Family spoken to any where in
the Text, for that granted, I think my sense above exception, and that it will
lie even with all that goes before, and all that follows after; Taking [ thy
Seed after thee] for Isaac in the Letter and Spirit in all the verses: I will
Establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed; I will give to thee
and thy Seed; Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed. This is
the Covenant which you shall keep [speaking to the present Family, Abraham
being there] between me and you, and thy Seed after thee, [casting his Eye on
Abraham.]

Before I leave this point, I am to mind you of a bold Abuse you put upon me
when you intimate as my Opinion, that Baptism is immediately intended in the
9th. verse, whereas (you know) I have told you ten times over, that I
understand the keeping of the Covenant there generally, for keeping of it in
the sign of it (whatever the sign at any time be,) and not particularly and
determinately, for keeping of it immediately either in Circumcision, or in
Baptism; Indeed in that moment, when the general Obligation was imposed of
keeping the sign, neither Baptism nor Circumcision in particular was yet
Instituted; Though Circumcision was, in the very next Moment. I confess, had
the keeping of the Covenant in the sign of it, which is the duty enjoined in
the 9th. verse, been a keeping of it particularly and Determinately, in either
Baptism or Circumcision; Then (as you object,) either Abraham must have been
Baptized, if Baptism had been intended particularly; or else, Isaac in the
Spirit [the believing Gentiles, the true Spiritual Seed] must have been
Circumcised if Circumcision had immediately and particularly been meant: But
that term being understood but generally and indeterminately; Abraham and his
Seed are only obliged by it to keep the Covenant in some sign; In that sign
Respectively, which should be the sign of their Respective times: And thus
Abraham did keep it in Circumcision, the sign in his time; And so did Isaac in
the Letter, as the Natural Offspring of Abraham, in the sign that then was:
But Spiritual Isaac (or the believing Gentiles) could not keep it in the sign
then; They not having being then, and so no particular sign was ordained for
them then; but when ever they should be, They (being the Seed of Abraham) are
tied by the Obligation [verse the 9th] to keep the Covenant in the sign of it,
viz. in that sign which then should be (the sign,) when they became Seed.

And on this occasion it may not be omitted to be noted, that though Isaac in
his own person, as a Natural Descendant of Abraham, was Circumcised, as in that
Capacity he ought to be; yet (being to sustain the Person of Abraham's Spiritual
Seed, and in the Mystery to stand for and be a Type of that Seed, which is of
the says of Abraham) he was not as Ishmael (who was the Type and Figure of the
Seed which was of the Law,) present at the Institution of the Ordinance of
Circumcision, designed to be the sign of the Legal Seed; Ishmael was one of
those that God did speak to [every Man-Child among you shall be Circumcised]
but Isaac was not there; He was unborn: This Timing of the Institution should
be of some significancy.

To this I add, for greater Illumination of the Holy Mystery, that even the
calling of the Natural Seed in Isaac, and the appropriating of the Promises in
the Letter, to the Seed of Abraham as it did derive by Isaac, was Mystical; And
showed, that as all the Promises of God are yea, and Amen in Christ, so that
Christians and true Believers are in him* the true Inheritors of the Promise,
in the Spiritual meaning of it, and indeed, why else, should the Seed be called
in Isaac, Genesis 21. 12. were it not for a Mystery? For if by Seed, there is
meant (as in the Letter it is) only the Carnal Seed, one would think, it should
have been more proper to have called it in Ishmael, the Type and Figure of that
Seed, than in Isaac who represented Another, and so indeed it would have been,
if but the Carnal Seed had been called in Isaac, without any Relation, any
Aspect at all unto the Spiritual. Here also it may not be improper to observe
the difference in the several Blessings which it pleased God to conferr on
Ishmael and Isaac, Genesis 17. 19, 20, 21. no mention in the least of any Seed in
the Blessing of Ishmael, though in the fruitfulness is promised to him, there
be an implication of Children, but in that of Isaac, there is mention of Seed;
The Covenant is Established with him, and with his Seed after him: As if the
term Seed was Mystical and Spiritual, and did not only signify Natural
Children, but Spiritual also. Judge now, whether Isaac be not, both in the
Promise, and in the Obligation too, to be considered as he represents the
believing Gentiles, the true Spiritual Seed.

All that I have offered hitherto, is on occasion of your first Reason to
evince, that Isaac in the Spirit, or Isaac as he represented the Spiritual
Seed, is not intended in the general Obligation verse the 9th. and that was
taken from Isaac himself: I will now proceed to the second, (for so I do reduce
to order what you in some confusion have written without any,) and this is from
Ishmael; For say you* it was not under that precise notion that the present
Obligation verse the 9th. was fastened on him, (viz. Isaac) there being nothing
of this nature mentioned throughout the whole Context, but rather as he was
Descended from Abraham according to the Flesh, for otherwise Ishmael had been
excluded from the Duty there mentioned, who could pretend nothing of any
Spiritual Relation to Abraham, as Isaac did, and yet it cannot be denied but
Ishmael was included therein, as well as Isaac.]

But this requires little Answer, as running altogether upon Mistakes; For
Isaac in the Letter is meant indeed, but Isaac in the Spirit principally.
Again, there is as little in the whole Con-Text mentioned of Christ, (and yet I
hope you will not exclude him too from being meant,) as there is of the
Obligations being fastened on Isaac, as he represented the Spiritual Seed. And
as for Ishmael, it was Abraham's Duty to Circumcise him, and he Circumcised him
as he did his Slaves, under the Notion of his own, his Property, and not
precisely as his Seed. And if Ishmael himself was under any Obligation to
Circumcise his (as I conceive he was,) it was as he was comprehended in the
you, to whom expressly the command of Circumcision was given, he was also
obliged in Abraham. *But that he was obliged to do it, as being Abraham's Seed,
by virtue of the general injunction, Genesis 17. 9. I positively deny. For that
Seed only, and no other is obliged by virtue of the general injunction there,
which is the Object of the Promise before; That Seed only which is in the
Promise in verse the 8th. is the Seed put under the duty in verse the 9th. now
Ishmael was far enough from being the Object of the Promise in verse the 8th.
so far, that He is expressly and in Terms excluded from it; The Scripture not
only saying, In Isaac shall thy Seed be called, but also, cast out the Bond
Woman and her Son for the Son of this Bond Woman shall not be Heir with my Son,
with Isaac, Genesis 21. 10. And now bethink also, how can the Spiritual Seed as
well as the Carnal in your sense, that is, Isaac as well as Ishmael be in the
Promise and the Obligation too, as you say they be* if Ishmael were not Heir of
the Promise, nor at all in it.

And here I had dismissed this point, but that it comes into my mind, that
against Abraham's standing (*with Ishmael etc.) in the business of Circumcision
for his Natural Posterity, (which yet is usual in the Scriptures for the
Fathers to do, and is so (as I noted before) in the very Covenant of Noah which
you mentioned;) You object, How then did he receive Circumcision as a seal of
the Righteousness by Faith.] To which I answer very well; for the sign of
Circumcision is Annexed to the Covenant and Promise, as now Established; I will
Establish my Covenant, etc. The Promise of Canaan, it was made to Abraham, and
to his Seed before, Genesis 15. 7, 8. etc. 18. but now is Ratified and Confirmed,
and in token of its being so, a sign is put to it; So that the signing of the
Covenant with Circumcision, being in token of its ratification, was a sealing,
(*the sign was a seal) a Confirming of the Righteousness by faith; that is, of
the Reward of Righteousness, or of that Inheritance which God, for Abraham's
believing of his Promise to him, (so improbable, so unlikely, and in Nature so
impossible, (viz.) that he should have Seed as the Stars) conferred upon him:
For so it must be understood, as will appear most evidently from a view of the
whole passage, Genesis 15. 5, 6, 7. for there we have a Relation; First, of Gods
Promise to Abraham, which was of Seed as Stars, in the 5th verse; And then
Secondly, of Abraham's belief, and Faith in that improbable Promise, in the
beginning of the 6th. verse, Abraham believed the Lord; And Thirdly, of the
Reward the Lord gave him for that his great Faith; and this, First, more
generally, in the latter part of the 6th. verse, and he accounted it unto him
for Righteousness; That is, the Lord Rewarded him, for so, in the Language of
the Holy Scriptures, to account for Righteousness is; It is graciously to give
a Person the Reward of Righteousness, for a thing which in it self, is not
complete Righteousness; And then Secondly, more Particularly, how he Rewarded
him, and that is verse the 7th. by giving him the Promise of the Land of
Canaan. And indeed our Faith is accounted unto us for Righteousness, as
Abraham's was to Him; We have by Divine Grace, the Heavenly Inheritance for
believing in Christ, as He the Promise of the Temporal, * (though not that
only) for Believing Jehovah. And now, why might not all this be, and yet
Abraham * in the business of Circumcision represent his own Posterity; (*
though I do not positively say he did;) and the rather, because the Reward (*
in the Letter) was Canaan, which now was Sealed and Confirmed to him in the
sign of Circumcision, put to the ratification of that Covenant and Promise, in
which God had before conveyed, and passed it.

Thus I have proved Isaac as he represented Christ Mystical, or the Spiritual
Seed, to be intended in the Obligation, verse the 9th. but it seems I might
have saved so much Ink and Paper, for at last you tell me plainly, that Abraham
and all his, Present or Future, Carnal or Spiritual, were concerned in the
Obligation as well as in the Promise, some way or other. [That is well,] in the
Promises Temporal, the Carnal Seed were concerned, in the Blessings Temporal
and Spiritual, the Believing Seed of Abraham were concerned, and both the one
and the other [ and what are they,(say I) but the Natural and Believing Seed of
Abraham,] were also concerned in the Obligation, verse the 9th. [so far you are
just, I, but you must not be mistaken, you add,] (i. e.) to be Circumcised, for
Isaac, and all the believing Jews, were Circumcised as well as Ishmael.] And
what, Dear Sir, was Isaac and the believing Jews, the only believing Seed of
Abraham? And does Isaac stand but for believing Jews, and not for believing
Gentiles? I pray, reconcile your self unto the Apostle, Gal. 3. 14, 15, 16.
etc. and 4. 22. etc. to 31. and Romans 4. 18, 16. And remember, I have clearly
proved, in the Correct Copy of my first Letter, that Ishmael and Isaac are, the
former the Seed under the Law, the latter, Believers under the Gospel.

Ay! but what if Isaac stand in the Obligation, verse the 9th. for the
Spiritual Seed or believing Gentiles, what then? What is this to the Baptism of
Infants,] I answer, I referr you for a further answer to the Corrected Copy of
my first Letter; There you may plainly see, what it is to Infants Baptism; I
repeat it not, because it would be endless to go round, and say over again the
same things: A Circle is infinite; There is another word for you to whet on,
but I hope you will not mistake it for [God,] as you did the word Eternal in my
last for [in Eternity,] against common use,

Aeterno sed erunt tibi magna Volumina versu. Tibul l. 2. The like in Cicera,
and in Seneca, etc.

Upon the whole, I hope I have most fully Asserted the Paraphrase I made upon
the Text in Controversy; The Paraphrase do I say, or dare I mention that
again! why that,that is, to you, the most involved, tortious, intricate that
ever you heard of, except Origens Allegorical and Mystical Commentaries] And I
believe you; but then, how well the Apostle, who is my Author, will escape your
censure, I know not, but it is well for him, and for me too, that the
Paraphrase is all this but unto you; The sizes of Humane understanding are very
different, and yours is not the Measure and Standard of good sense, or of
Judgment; others more unbyassed, and as judicious persons will not think the
worse of the Paraphrase, nor the better of you for your calling it names.

Only, as to the great ado you make upon the disjunctive Particle [but]
inserted in my Paraphrase, I must tell you, that but a grain of either the
Candor of which you make profession, or of true soundness of Judgment, would
have prevented it. For that [but,] I did not add it unto the Text; I never
insisted on it; I only put it in a Pa^renthesis to show that a Particle (as
small as that was) if understood and supplied (as the like is done many times
in other Scriptures, and must be done to make the sense entire, see Job. 16.
5.) would have put my sense of the Text out of question. I but put it in to
make you sensible of my meaning; which conceived, you might leave it out again,
for my sense is good without it; and the connexive particle [now] would do as
well to my purpose, and one of them, to make the sense complete, must be
understood, if by [you,] you mean restrictively, those there present only: in
the one [you] you do, and therefore must in both, the reason is the same for
both, as for one.

Let it be granted (as by you it is) that God does speak to any in the term
[you] as present, I may make good my Paraphrase against the World, for the
supposal of an Apostrophe, is all that seems Harsh and Difficult in it;
Suppose him to mean but them there present in the first [you;] that is, to mean
that in the first, which you your self do grant he means in the second, and the
business is ended. But as for your Paraphrase, it is too general and loose, and
off from the Text, and not a Paraphrase upon it.

What you add in answer to my several questions, is but Retailing of what I had
before, and have again considered now in gross; only where you say, that the
reason why in the 10th. verse, and afterward etc. the Holy Ghost uses a
restrictive term, ye shall keep etc. is because it would have been improper to
have repeated the word Seed, (according to the usual forms of Speech generally
in custom among men) it being enough when Abraham and his Seed had been once or
twice mentioned to say [you] as there was further occasion to make mention of
them.]

I answer, that it is not once or twice, but four times, and that is always
all along [thee and thy Seed] before he came to institute Circumcision, which
was not competent to all the Seed: And why I pray, not Humane forms of Speech
observed before, by the using of [you], after once or twice mentioning, instead
of [thee and thy Seed:]

Again, show me, among all the forms of Speech generally in custom among men,
one such as this is in your sense, where two you's, in the same Coherence and
Relation, shall be understood diversely; The first of them for one subject, the
second for another: This is the Covenant which you shall keep between me and
you, which you shall keep, meaning some persons; between me and you, meaning
other Persons. If this be your Grammar, it is new too, and all as new as your
Logic.

In fine, in your sense it would have run smooth, and more according to the
forms of Speech generally in custom among men, in these terms; Thou shall
keep my Covenant, therefore thou and thy Seed; This is the Covenant which you
shall keep between me and you[omitting thy Seed after thee.] every man child
among you shall be Circumcised: But [thy Seed] being put in with the
second[you], and so distinguished from it, clearly implies that it was not
intended to be Comprehended in the first.

But the Controversy must, and shall have end; (and the sooner, because (as
you do manage it) it is become a wordy brabling business; as also, for that you
treat me in it but (as Aesop did his Masters Guests) with Tongue, Tongue still,
nothing but Tongue in several dishes.) And that it may have end as fairly as it
took beginning, seeing we have joined Issue, and have made our Arguments; I
propose that you elect some (two or three) of your Friends, and at any time, in
any House at Totness within a Month at your appointment, meet me with the like
number of mine, to hear the whole matter, and Judge upon it: Else the World
must, You may do with your Papers as you list, I will Publish mine, in
vindication of.

December. 26. 1682. Your Affectionate Friend. R. B.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Jonathan Greenwood at the Crown in the Poultry.
INstuctions about Heart-work, what is to be done on Gods part, and ours, for
the Cure and keeping of the heart, that we may live in the exercise and growth
of Grace here, and have a comfortable Assurance of Glory to Eternity, by that
Eminent Gospel Minister, Mr. Richard Allein, Author of Vindiciae Pietatis; with
a Preface, by Dr. Annesley.

Compassionate Counsel to all Young Men, especially, 1. London Apprentices, 2.
Students of Divinity, Physic and Law, 3. The Sons of Magistrates and Rich Men;
By Richard Baxter. Price bound 1. s. 6. d.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Right Honorable Anne Baroness Holles,
of Ifield in Sussex, with a short account of her Holy Life, and Patience under
all Afflictions, from Heb. 13. 14. By James Waters, Domestic Chaplain to the
Right Honorable Francis Lord Holles, Barron Holles of Ifield, her late Husband.

The Future State, or a Learned and Judicious Discourse, attempting some
Display of the Souls Happiness, in regard to that Eternally Progressive
Knowledge, o^ Eternal Increase of Knowledge, and the Consequences of it, which is
amongst the Blessed in Heaven; Highly Approved (...) by the Learned; By a
Country Gentleman, a Worshipper of God in the way o^ the Church of England.

Price Bound One Shilling.

FINIS.

