THE HISTORY OF Eriander.

Composed by JOHN BVRTON.

The First Part.

LONDON, Printed by R. Davenport for John Williams at the Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1661.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY OF CHARLES THE SECOND, By the Grace of God KING
Of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
SIR,
AT the Return of a long absent Prince, when many thousands flow together as to
a common stream of joy; some eminent Persons only fall under a particular
remark, and are dignified with the special observation of the Princes eye.
While the inferior sort, that make up the crowd, think it sufficient for them,
that they carry on the common joy, and be observed in gross, with a general
approbation and acceptance of their well-meaning. It fares so with Books
Presented to great Persons, the most eminent are taken notice of: the trivial
sort (such as this) peradventure scarce seen or heard of by those Patrons,
whose names they carry in their Epistles Dedicatory. And because I delight to
dwell on so beloved a similitude, presented to my thoughts by the last years
most happy occurrences: I may further observe, that as a prease of people is
rather troublesome, than advantageous to a triumph; so the excessive multitude
of Books has been thought rather a means to hinder than advance learning: yet
both are tolerated because commonly presumed to flow, the one from a loyal
affection to the Prince, and the other from a well-wishing to learning. And so
I have this to excuse me for troubling the world, already pestered with Books,
that I do my good will; and that in such a subject as has not been much
studied by the learned: and may receive some advancement from a mean pen that
has been seriously employed in it. To present to your most sacred Majesty a
thing of so mean worth, is an act (I confess) of great presumption: yet in
regard, that books which but pretend usefulness no the subjects, have
ordinarily addressed themselves to the patronage of Princes; I want not
precedents for such a boldness, and being conscious to my self of no worse aim
in the publishing of this work, than the good of my Country: I have this
presumption besides my other, that I shall not incur your Majesty's displeasure.

Your Maiesty's most humbly Devoted Subject and Servant BURTON.

Mistakes in Printing.
Page 2 Lin. 6 Read. following History. Page 5 Lin. 4 Read. ennoble. Page 9
Lin. 12 Read. severely punished. Page 10 Lin. 19 Read. persons. Page 12 Lin. 1
Read. although arrived. Page 18 Lin. 20 Read. at his meaning. Page 33 Lin. 1
Read. not free, and put out the word certainly. Page 34 Lin. 4 Read. incite.
Page 50 Lin. 26 Read. happy wit. Page 53 Lin. 14 Read. Painters Copy. Page 54
Lin. 6 Read. Reteiners. Page 58 Lin. 5 Read. whole pith. Page 61 Lin. 29 Read.
struggling. Page 62 Lin. 18 Read. conformation. Page 68 Lin. 15 Read. acme.
Page 69 Lin. 21 Read. contiguous air. Page 80 Lin. 9 Read. cannot reflect. Page
91 Lin. 20 Read. calefit. Page 101 Lin. 28 Read. entertained. Page 109 Lin. 17
Read. defects. Page 109 Lin. 28 Read. pleases children. Page 119 Lin. 7 Read.
transactions. Page 152 Lin. 6 Read. uninterrupted. Page 156 Lin. 29 Read. fame
of powerful. Page 183 Lin. 8 Read. faltering. Page 183 Lin. 25 Read.
faltering. Page 192 Lin. 25 Read. such men are. Page 203 Lin. 1 Read. a ray.


The Reader is desired to correct these Errata's with his pen, or at least mark
them before he peruse the Book, because they offer some injury to the intended
sense. The less material ones, as consent for concent, ingenuous for ingenious,
and for as, etc. and the misplacing, adding, or omission of a letter, need not
any advertisement.

THE HISTORY OF Eriander.
In the first part of ERIANDER is presented his Country, Parentage, Birth, and
Education, with an Introduction to the Trial of his Genius, which is the
principal design of this Work.

GEographers tell us that Alycia was once part of the Continent, and annexed to
Ampelona by an Isthmus, or narrow neck of land, which the Waves by little and
little have worn asunder, and rent it into an Island. Whether this be true or
not, I will not enquire, nor take any further notice of that famous Country
than may contribute some Ornament to this famous History of Eriander.

The Soil is mixed and various, but generally fruitful, abundantly stored with
goodly Pastures, Meadows and Cornfields, diverse parts adorned with several
sorts of Trees, especially Oak, and Forests of a large compass; here and there
you may behold wast and far-extended Plains, which although to a transient
observer they seem to import barrenness and poverty, yet they yield no small
benefit to the industrious Inhabitants, by maintaining numerous flocks of
Sheep, (the greatest riches of the Nation;) and some of them afford Mines, as
of Iron, Tin, and Coal, so that Nature makes amends for the seeming barrenness
by these Treasures which are locked up in the inner rooms of the earth. The air
is mixed, and unconstant (as in all Islands,) but for the most part mild and
temperate, not exceeding hot in Summer, nor immoderately cold in Winter.

The Inhabitants are generally well limbed, of a proportionable stature, and of
a comely visage, most of them gray eyed, cheerful in deportment, free and true
hearted in their Treatments, not treacherous in their entertainments, Courteous
above other people to Strangers, respective to old men, and obsequious to their
Prince, wherein I hope I have not misrepresented them, the people in general
being ever Renowned for it; nor can the mischievous disloyalty of a few justly
disparage a whole Nation. Islanders (say some,) have usually such variable
humors, occasioned by the changablenesse of the Air, that no condition will
please them long, but repining at the present, they are ever listening after
some new constitution of affairs. I will not take upon me to confute this
Observation, because I believe there is much of truth in it; nor were the
Alycians altogether free from such a kind of unsettledness, who had sometimes
been earnest to destroy themselves, by subverting their Government: but being
made sensible of their error by many encroaching mischeifs, (the only means to
make the people either more wise, or at least less foolish,) they were at
length happily reduced under the Government of Alcidruinus, who by a prudent
and dexterous managing of his affairs very much corrected their instability.

Alcidruinus was a Prince so complete and absolute, as there wanted nothing to
make him a valiant Commander in War, and a wise Governor in peace: The times he
lived in put him to the trial in both; the Wars he had occasion to be involved
in were upon just and honorable grounds, the rescuing his Dominions from a
seditious and turbulent party, which had for many years enthralled them, and
dispossessed him of his Right, forcing him to seek for refuge in Foreign parts,
a sad and dismal fate to the Nation, and as dismal to him; could his enemies
have inherited their wishes as they did his Revenues; but God, who miraculously
preserves whom he intends to bless, raised up the dying hopes of the Nations,
and by the conduct of Pisistratus, a valiant and expert Commander in the War,
brought Alcidruinus to the Throne: who by this occasion had one advantage to
enable him above other Princes, that besides the bountiful endowments of
Nature, a stately body, majesticall, Countenance, powerful Eloquence, and
Heroic spirit, which he enjoyed in so high a degree, that whosoever was able
truly to observe him, would judge him worthy of an Empire; besides his Princely
Education, which he enjoyed in his Fathers Court, a pious and judicious (but
unhappy) Prince: His prime years were exercised in adversity and hard
encounters, without which men seldom arrive at any eminent degree of virtue, no
man's abilities are put to the trial, or fully discovered, till he has been
proved in the occasions of good and evil: the way to honor lies through the
confines of danger, and none is so happy as he that has survived his miseries.

To give a true character of him is beyond my skill, and no part of my
intention, yet meeting in my passage with so illustrious a person, good manners
obliges me to afford him this respect. When this noble Prince was invested with
his Regal Dignities, when War with many struglings and hard labor had brought
forth peace, ( A cursed mother has sometimes a quiet child) his care was to
procure Alliance and friendship with neighboring Nations, and Enact Laws for
the safety of his own, in order to the establishing of these, he had the
happiness to enjoy a loyal and true hearted Council, consisting of men of able
parts and liberal education, the Nation had learned, by sad experience, that
illiterate and inferior persons were nimble and skillful enough in
demolishing, but very bunglers in erecting or supporting a Government.

I shall not recite either the Laws he made, or the acts he performed, which
cannot be comprised in such a compass as my thoughts have limited out for this
whole story. Only his prudent care and provision for the Education of Children
must not be past over in silence, being a thing so remarkable in a Prince. For
whereas great persons usually take the least care for this, (though reason
obliges them to take the greatest) he vouchsafed to suffer his care to
condescend even to those, who though at present but useless, are yet the future
hopes of a Nation, and his Successors Subjects in reversion, being assured that
Education prudently established by Laws would by degrees make them so
accustomed to virtuous deportments, that there should not need many Laws to
restrain them from Vice: their own inclination would be so efficacious, as to
conduct them to goodness. It Is true, so long as there are men in the World
there will be Vices, but where good Laws are established for habituating every
one from his Cradle to industry and good manners before they know how to he
lazy, or vicious, this is the certainest way to prevent (at least many)
mischiefs, which neglected Education inevitably produces.

As for Schools (the Country being sufficiently stored in most places) he did
not much increase their number, only he was pleased to commit the Government of
them to prudent and virtuous persons, whom he dignified with peculiar favors
and privileges, to encourage them in that most useful, but tedious)
profession; which in other Nations is usually thrust upon the most trivial and
despicable part of men, and these commonly take it only for a shift, to be laid
aside when better preferment falls; while those whom a liberal fortune raises
to a good opinion of themselves, pass it by in scorn, and aspire at those
higher professions, which are attended with more splendor and wealth. First,
he provided that every man should bring up his Children to a Profession (only
with some exception of Nobles and Gentlemen of ample Estates) so as he might
serve his Country either as a Scholar, if he were found fit for any of the
Liberal Sciences, or in some other profession useful to the Nation, and
suitable to his extraction and abilities. By this he nipt Idleness in the very
bud, which wherever it prevails is the ringleader of all Vices, and the ruin
of Families and Countries, being a great error in the politics of some
Nations, that by not securing and providing for the Education of their Youth,
nor appointing every man to some service and employment, they make them
Thieves, or Vagabonds, and then are forced to hang them for being so.

2. Besides, such as were active and industrious (if depressed by poverty) were
encouraged and assisted; and on the contrary, such as were able and skillful,
and yet refused to employ themselves, were as surely punished.

3. And certain days were appointed for Sports and Recreations, a piece of
prudent and cautelous policy. It Is easy for any man to observe, (who has not
made his observation already) that sedentary and melancholic persons, who are
either by nature or custom averse from merriments and recreations, are inclined
to malice, peevishness, discontent and envy; fit to devise villainy and
mischief; and that sportive Recreations, with convenient motion, clear his
spirits, dissipate his dumpish and sullen humors, make him brisk and sociable,
adaptate him to love and kind heartedness, and therefore Alcidruinus prudently
appointed such meetings, as a means to promote peace, procure hospitality and
good Neighborhood, beget friendship and alliance among the people, and prevent
many mutinous discontents which retired and sullen thoughts might hatch in
their working brains.

Fourthly, but every man was not permitted to breed his son to Learning, only
such as were tolerated and approved of by Magistrates appointed for that
purpose: As to other Professions there was no such restriction, but in this, it
was thought necessary to prevent some inconveniences which the unwariness of
former times had procured; as the pestering the Nation with insufficient
Parsons, and the excessive number of Scholars, which had been found injurious
to the public. For when there is a greater number than can be conveniently
disposed of, some must of necessity miss of their aims, whereby they are
oftentimes inclined to forge mischief, promote Factions, and undermine one
another in the way to preferment. Every man, he is parts never ^o mean, after
much time and cost ^pent in a course of study, will grieve ^o be deprived of
some competent ^eward of his labors, wherein if the ^tate cannot satisfy his
expectation, ^s it happens where the number is too ^reat, he may run into some
extra^agant course to the hurt of his Coun^ry, but where a timely restraint is
^ut upon men before they be far ^ngaged in such a course, there is no great
distaste given; if any be taken, ^t is better that the humors of a few ^e
crossed, than an inconvenience should arise to a Nation: Men of this
profession, when they keep within ^he bounds of moderation, being a great
Ornament in a Commonwealth, ^ut the most dangerous incendiaries, if upon any
emergent occasion or di^tast they conspire against it.

5. All manner of laborious persons, whose employment was remarkably
advantageous, and conducible to the public good, as Husbandmen, Smiths,
Clothworkers, Carpenters, and such necessary Tradesmen, were especially
encouraged by peculiar immunities and privileges.

6. Inferior men, although not arrived at a considerable height of wealth,
should not aspire to the title and dignity of Nobles or Gentlemen without
special license.

7. Certain Magistrates much resembling the Censors among the ancient Romans,
if they observe any man out of employment, who had not an estate sufficient to
maintain him after the rate and degree of a Gentleman, had power to cause him
either to betake himself to an agreeable profession, or distribute him to some
public service, as in the exercise of War either by Sea or Land, or the
management of business in foreign plantations, yet so as it should be an
advantage and credit to him, if he were not wanting to himself; not a
punishment, as had been used by some cruel Usurpers formerly.

These and diverse other Laws were Enacted by Alcidruinus, and not Enacted only,
but effectually and impartially put in execution by a regular and prudent
discipline, without which Laws are as ineffectuall as the fond wishes of idle
persons, who wish themselves at such a place, but through ^aziness never
advance a step forward ^o come thither. Certain it is, that the Country
flourished in this Prince his ^ime, in plenty, peace, and strength of
^ffection; and so neither had, nor needed the use of such torturing Laws, ^s
in divided States are altogether in ^ashion, procured by some peevish,
prevailing Faction, out of mere revenge against their concurrents.

Eriander was born at Entaphia, an ancient City of the Caloturians in the
Eastern part of Alycia; this City is seated in a very pure and delicate air,
^ut the ground thereabout somewhat ^nclining to barrenness; It was anciently
beautified with a very stately Monastery, erected in honor of a Prince of that
Province, who had suf^ered Martyrdom for the vindication of his Country and
Religion. Nothing now remains of that but some ruinous walls, two lofty
Gate-houses, ^eading each of them into a spacious square Plat, in one of which
there ^tand two fair Churches, and of a competent bigness; from thence the City
^limbs up a small Hill, with an easy ascent toward the West, whereby it gives
a commodious prospect to such as travel over the Champion on the East Side: and
here stood the Mansion house of Charinus, Father to Eriander, a House of a
considerable bigness and fair, but built rather for use and decency than pomp
and ostentation. The Furniture competently rich and suitable to the quality of
his person; the Rules of Expense agreeable to his Estate, the Economy grave
and prudent; all things managed with order and decency.

His Mother was Timoclea, a Lady of an ancient and religious Family not far
distant, who being dignified with a brave clear spirit, allayed with a
convenient Modesty, a sound Judgment, sublime Virtue, and incomparable grace in
her expressions, was highly valued by all that knew her. Nor did she want those
exterior Ornaments which might partly commend her to Charinus's choice: a rare
beauty and becoming presence; her complexion was exactly and equally composed
of White and Red; her Visage round, a light brown hair, with a clear Eye, but
fixed and steady. Although in this important affair of Marriage, (wherein he
knew there was no redress to be procured by second thoughts; nor can a man err
twice as to the same adventure) I presume he used much circumspection, and
prudently made virtue and Wisdom his principal aim, as being assured these
would highly conduce to his own particular content, the repute of his Family,
the support of his Estate, and (as far as humane prudence can secure men in
such a matter) entail Wisdom and Virtue upon his Posterity; yet to say beauty
had no share in his desires, were to represent him either better or worse than
Man: especially if we consider the time when he was affianced to Timoclea,
which was about thirty years of age, Timoclea not much less than eighteen.

Charinus (to give a brief, but true Character of him) was a person truly
Religious, constant and resolute in the defense of the substantial principles
of Religion, wherein all men (at least the wisest) were observed to agree; but
lived altogether unconcerned in those vain and nice controversies, toyish and
Phanatick Opinions, which were now and then devised by some busy and
pragmatical brains, and recommended to the giddy multitude; whose custom is to
stare and admire at any thing that is new, soon love and soon dislike: their
indiscretion (as ill as it is, yet) herein proves lucky; their beloved
novelties, like Childrens Rattles, never please long; that Opinion which at one
time is so fiercely asserted, that some would (only not) suffer Martyrdom,
rather than disavow it, perhaps continues not in credit one man's age, and
Posterity will scarce vouchsafe to enquire after it. In the mean time a pious
and truly-zealous man bestows himself in believing in, and serving God, lives
peaceably and deals justly with all men, wherein the sum of true Religion is
comprised, while unquiet spirits are miserably entangled in such endless
controversies, as are of no importance to premote Religion, but very
destructive to the peace and charitable conversation of men. It is not
impossible, but that the most pious and wise may, even in matters of Religion,
have some fond erroneous and impertinent thoughts, such as are usually produced
in a scattered and uncollected mind; but they are so far Masters of themselves
as to restrain them; they permit them not to arrive at any considerable growth:
whereas men of small knowledge, but great confidence, not only give way to
absurd Opinions, but (as men in some pestilent distempers are observed to do)
eagerly attempt to propagate their contagion to the great disturbance of
Mankind.

Charinus in his gesture and deportment observed a becoming gravity, his garb
decent, his countenance settled and serious, not over sad and lowering, nor
petulant and effeminate; the one usually passes for a token of self-conceit,
the other of small wisdom. His addresses as free from affected Complements, as
rude bluntness; neither sneakingly mealy-mouthed, nor over-bold: his discourse
was ever profitable and to the purpose, yet modest, and without any affectation
of applause. A wise man's discourse is always adorned with three
remark-properties, Truth, Conciseness, and perspicuity. Lies and slanders are
Vices incident to ignorant, peevish, and cowardly persons, who like querulous
Curs make a noise at a distance, insult over the absent, and at hand pretend to
lick them whole by some faint commendation, or show of pity, meaning worst when
they speak fairest. Multitude of words was ever suspected as an instance of
small wisdom; some that have but a scant stock of knowledge endeavor to
dilate themselves by multiplicity of words, as those that have shrimpish bodies
and yet would fain appear proper men, eke them out by some advantageous dress.
He that puts men to the trouble of guessing and his meaning, because he speaks
as if he meant not to be understood, or intended to be mistaken, is not in this
particular a wise man, but either a fool, or as ill.

However his actions and designs were Heroic and Noble, they were managed
without any glorious pretentions, and his demeanor in the mean time humble: he
never spread his sails to receive the gales of popular air, which swell some
men into a strain of pride, and make them as big in their own conceits as they
are in the eyes of the Vulgar. His beloved design was to acquire Virtue, which
is sufficient of its self to ennoble a man among the wisest and most
intelligent part of men. Glory is a shadow that follows him who declines it,
flees from him that pursues it, and a wise man's mind carries the same relation
to it that the body does to the shadow, retains its dimension; is not extended
into a greater, or cramped into a lesser compass, according to the various
alteration of the shadow.

That he was generally well-beloved you will presently guess, when I have told
you that he was free from pride and envy: an humble and courteous man is the
World's Darling, whiles a proud man, one merely enamoured of himself, has
commonly the luck to be troubled with few Rivals: and that he was free from
these appeared by his liberal bearing witness to other men's merits; they that
have this piece of Ingenuity you may be sure they are furnished with true worth
of their own. Some choice and peculiar Friends and Privadoes he had, whose
conversation and counsel he found useful in many emergencies, especially in
matters of counsel and advice, when one has occasion to adventure upon some
design not usual and ordinary to him, in such cases a man's understanding is
wonderfully enlightened, and his Resolutions quietly stated by the concurrence
of other men's counsel: for, though every intelligent man is best able to take
the dimension of himself, and no wise man will make himself a Slave to the
dictates of others; yet because the Rules which our own thoughts suggest to us
in sudden encounters are commonly troubled, it is not amiss to make the lives
of other men our Looking-glass, the results of whose adventures in matters of
like nature may much enlighten us, and their counsels guide us; two eyes see
more that one, and he that will always be his own Tutor has a fool to his
Scholar.

Whatsoever was commendable in his friends or occasional Companions, he was
studious to imitate: what was amiss, (provided it were not impious) he was
willing to bear with for quiets sake; if he discovered any impiety, or
pernicious error, he forbear not to admonish them of it, avoiding always
reproachful language, the usual ingredient of some men's reprehensions, who
endeavor not so much to amend others, as by vexing them to gratify their own
humor. His friendship was therefore permanent, because well grounded; for in
the choice of friends he principally set his thoughts on men that were of known
integrity, and his equals. True Friends should resemble the fixed stars,
always at a like distance; Inferiors with Superiors are upon terms of
disadvantage, one is loath to stoop, the other cannot rise.

If frailty or inadvertency had betrayed him into an error, he thought it no
shame to acknowledge it; it is a piece of humane frailty to err, but very
unmanly to persist in an error. If slanders and close cavillations (wherewith
cowardly and degenerate persons usually endeavor to undermine the reputation
of the bravest men) were at any time raised against him, he neither troubled
the quiet state of his mind by a childish impatience, nor betrayed his innocence
by a cowardly silence. He always labored to secure his Reputation with men of
approved worth and integrity; for others, by a prudent neglect he permited them
to weary themselves with an imaginary conceit of subverting his fame, till
seeing their error (which they would soon do, when they found their Adversary
careless) they learned at length to be wise and silent.

As for pleasures, if consistent with reason, they were sometimes admited into
his Entertainment as things that give an agreeable relish to virtuous actions:
there is no man to be found of so warrented a constancy, that can purely for the
love of Virtue persist in well-doing; the pleasure and content that results
from thence has a great energy to secure our perseverance. Virtuous actions,
though in the managing of them they be attended with some harshness, yet they
end in a most sincere and indisturbed content: but the most exact pleasures
without this have a loathing and fastidious nauseating immediately subsequent.
Those Objects that have most sharp and forcible impulsions upon our senses at
the first, which arrest, and violently captivate our reason, and make us so
pertinaciously intent upon the enjoyment of them, terminate in disdain: their
satiety begets an hatred in us. The most glorious colors and pleasant pictures
recommend themselves to us under the notion of novelty, we cannot endure to be
constant spectators of them. The most ravishing Notes of Music at last prove
tedious. The Taste, the most voluptuous of all the Senses, is affected with
sweet things, and these soonest offend it. Indolency and freedom from pain is
the greatest pleasure men ordinarily acquire; that active impulsion wherewith
they find themselves affected in some sensual pleasures, is a kind of
restlesness, a pain which they endeavor to expel or allay, that so they may be
at ease. So that a wise man receives more content by not desiring, than any can
do in the fruition of them, and placing his happiness in that which is
permanent, piety and wisdom; he is sure to avoid that grand infelicity, which
is to have been happy.

If we look upon Charinus in relation to his Diet, we find him a constant
Observer of temperance, a sure Pillar to preserve and support the Fabric of
the body; but he never inslaved and confined himself to any precise and
fantastical Diet, which some men affecting more out of ostentation than reason,
make their bodies unapt for such mutations and digressions, as one must of
necessity encounter withal. He never used to eat till his stomach craved,
consulting rather to relieve the necessities of Nature, than indulge
voluptuousness. At his meals although he was not a nice Observer of order, yet
usually he eat moist and laxative meats in the first place, more firm and solid
afterward: nourishments extreme hot and of a biting quality (which without
great caution devour the spirits) he usually avoided. At great banquets which
are frequent among the people of that country, and those set forth with great
variety of dishes; he usually considered what was agreeable to his
constitution, and the rules of temperance, which invites a man to deny his own
desires, and fortify himself against the importunity of affections, rather
than complied with the custom of the people, who being generally Lovers of good
cheer, think themselves at their meetings obliged to some kind of excess, upon
pain of being accounted uncivil. Hereupon he so ordered the matter, that by
pleasant discourse, and seasonable table-talk, his company was ever acceptable,
and redeemed him both from Intemperance, and the imputation of incivility or
singularity.

He used moderate Exercise, which very much conduced to the clearing of his
spirits, and maintaining the healthful constitution of his body, by discussing
such noughty humors as sedentariness causes to reside in unactive bodies.
Those wherein he principally delighted were walking, riding, leaping, and
shooting with the long-bow, in which the Alycians were generally expert. If
happily he sometimes deviated from these good Rules of health, and contracted
any distemper, he used abstinence and rest in the first assault of it; Reason
instructed him, that Nature had then enough to do to wrestle with the
encroaching disease, and could neither so vigorously labor about concoction,
nor assist him in accustomed exercises, which at such a time would exhaust the
spirits and enfeeble the body.

He was looked upon as a thriving man, one that increased his Estate; but still
by honest sincere and generous courses; he knew well enough that Goods ill
gotten soon decay; Iron breeds its own Consumption, rust; Brass ingenders its
Canker, and Wood corroding Worms, which without any outward violence, or
impression, cause them to decay: and Goods scraped up by sacrilege, robbery,
and oppression, though some endeavor not to believe it, consume away no body
knows how, notwithstanding all the provident care, industry, and penurious
sparing of the pretended professors. In all times, and among all Nations
honesty has been attended with a Blessing, either of prosperous adventure, or
some countervailing content. Villainy and Injustice have been made exemplary by
some remarkable vengeance, and sooner or later come to ruin.

His estate though plentiful did not transport him beyond the bounds of
aequanimity; ordinary calamities he always entertained with a generous and
sedate spirit, prosperous adventures with a grateful recognition of divine
providence; nor did it raise him to so fond a conceit as to esteem himself
above the cognizance of Laws and Justice; if therefore he had occasioned or
procured any injury and trespass to his neighbors, (which at one time or other
will happen among such as have any dealings in the World) he willingly afforded
them such recompense as was equivalent to the wrong sustained, and the same
dealings he accepted of from others if occasion were offered. By this means he
avoided all peevish quarrels and tedious Lawsuits, whereunto the people of
those parts were exceedingly addicted, insomuch that many times for a very
small matter they would eagerly pursue these contentions, till one or both of
them were reduced to beggary.

Charinus, though derived from a noble stock, whose many branches for a long
tract of time had been renowned for valor and wisdom, was never observed to
boast of his Pedigree, as some will do with a supercilious oftentation; he
esteemed that only to be true Nobility which proceeded from a man's own worthy
actions. It seemed to him a matter of small commendation (as he was often heard
to say) for one to boast of a fair Coat of Arms, and to relate how his great
Grandfather acquitted himself valiantly in such a battle, when himself is of a
cowardly and ignoble spirit, not adventuring upon any brave act for the renown
and protection of his Country. No less folly he esteemed it for another to
relate how his Progenitors were wise Statesmen, served their Prince and
Country with much honor and sincerity, who has nothing to distinguish him
from the ordinary sort of men, but an imperious dialect and fantastical garb,
or some skill in hawking and hunting, things very commendable nevertheless when
they are not the All of a man: with as little credit does another boast of
great Manors, and ample Possessions which his Ancestors purchased, if he
consume them in pleasures and riot: such men, like Ciphers in books of account,
are nothing of themselves, but derive their value from some figure going before.

To speak what is right concerning these exterior appendages; Nobility, Wealth,
Honor, ancient Families, great Relations, they are like rich Drapery in a
Picture, which is an Ornament to an handsome Countenance, an ugly visage deforms
it: they add Confidence and Resolution to a man, whereas Poverty duls the
courage, frustrates many a noble design, and proves a clog to ingenious minds.
They acquire observance, authority, and respect, while Poverty renders men
contemptible. The Vulgar pay respect to a man, not for his Wisdom, (which they
cannot judge of) but according to the rate of his outward Luster and
Magnificence. These, or the like considerations so inflamed the generous mind
of Charinus, that he thought himself peculiarly obliged so to acquit himself,
that his Family and his Estate should not be so great Ornaments to him, as he
to them.

He never was ambitious in seeking after great places, to say the truth he did
not affect them; wisely considering, that men of high aims, mounting to the top
of honor are like such as stand upon a Precipice with the Sun in their faces,
the dangerousness of their station and splendour of their greatness conspire
together to overthrow them. Yet his known wisdom and Integrity had so
deservedly recommended him to Alcidruinus, that he always had a special
respect to him, and used him in the managing of many considerable affairs. So
that he did not like that austere and sullen Roman, Cato apud Mart. lib. 1.
Epig. 3. Senec. Ep. 97.
only come into the Theater and so go out again, pass away his time without any
remarkable exploits, his whole life was a series and reiteration of famous and
worthy Actions, (too many to be related here, and too good to be defaced by an
imperfect and overbrief recital, therefore wholly omitted) which made him
generally beloved in his life, and honorable after his death.

But as the most exquisite beauty may have a mole, and the most exact piece of
limning an overdeep shadow, whereof one may seem to disparage Nature, and the
other Art; both serve but as a foil to set off the other parts with the greater
luster: so the most absolute and exact man is not without his passions and
distempers. It Is possible to frame an Idea of an absolute happy Commonwealth,
managed with such decency, such an even distribution, that every man shall
receive full content, and none be ever annoyed with the least grievance: To set
forth the pattern of a complete Prince, such a one as should give full content
and satisfaction to all his Subjects; to contrive the model of an exact man, of
a golden temper, an unwearied champion in the lists of Virtue and honor: Art
will prescribe a platform for all these, give punctual rules how they may be
achieved, because it considers the design its self apart from all remora's,
but he that attempts to put these in practice, shall find his endeavors
checked and controlled by variety of passions and distempers, diverse
intervening circumstances of persons, times, and places, the strange obliquity
of men's manners, the unobserved contingency of humane things commonly called
Fortune, (which is ever observed to raise some countermine against the best
endeavors) these all, or some of them interposing in his way, cannot but
interrupt his proceeding, and disinherit him of his expectation. It is honor
enough for a wise man that he never loses all, but courageously opposing
himself against these Adversaries, arrives at so much perfection as is
attainable by humane industry. While I have briefly recorded the virtues of
renowned Charinus, nothing has been said concerning his passions, and vicious
inclinations: I mean not to abuse the Reader into a belief that he was free
from these; certainly he was free from these, certainly he was not unconcerned
in the ordinary failings and miscariages of men, but having omitted the
particular recitation of his best actions, it were unhandsome to go about to
gratify you with a relation of his worst: I shall therefore omit them; and, as
a more lovely and useful advertisement, tell you by what means he rescued
himself from the tyranny of disordered passions, and though I cannot say they
were so forcible as totally to subdue them, yet they preserved him from being
subdued by them.

It will be easily granted that the certainest preservative against vice is not
to be acquainted with it, not so much as know the very name of it too soon, to
have the mind habituated to piety in the youth, which Charinus's was; and
besides, being of a brave and courageous spirit (and such are generally most
free from base vices) he considered the dignity and prerogative of his soul,
which he scorned to debase by putting it under the wardship of usurping vices.
Without doubt a serious and solid consideration of our selves, as it would
elevate our thoughts to a due contemplation of our Maker, the main end of our
being, so would it entice the mind to much resolution i^ virtuous actions, and
retract our desires from pursuing such trivial delights, as result from things
inferior to our natures; but this must not be an idle and careless meditation,
such as men ordinarily entertain, when receiving some sublime dictates of
reason, suggested to them by their own thoughts, or the writings or discourses
of learned men, they write them in the sand; give them a short applause in
their thoughts: whereas if they were entertained with serious resolutions to
act according to them, they might leave a deep impression upon their judgment
and will, and by practice become as it were natural to them, were the mind so
industrious as to improve them to their utmost extent and latitude. Besides
this, a serious converse with our selves would contribute no small assistance
to the discovery of real and solid truth, refined from the superfluities of so
many distinctions, formalities, and nice criticismes, as rather obscure than
illustrate it. We need not suffer our thoughts to range into such
extravagancies as usually we do, especially in such sciences as may be digested
into axioms and aphorisms, a few clear principles naturally deduced from
reason, would state our minds in the handling and managing of them; without
that multitude of curious questions and vain niceties, which like to brambles,
intricately perplex us, but afford no fruit. Admired Critic! whose laborious
quill. Juven. Sat. 11.

Takes the dimensions of the Armenian Hill;
Surveyes the Lybian deserts, to inquire
Whether mount Atlas or those hills be higher.
Return fond Pilgrim, know thy self; and rest
In the close confines of thy native breast.
In the next place we must take notice that he was not indulgent to (or
inamored of) his own passions, but desired and resolved to subdue them; without
a prejudice against them all faint endeavors are ineffectual. He avoided the
company of such men as were subject to those passions: he attempted to subdue,
and abstracted himself from the interview of provoking objects. Objects that
tempt and incite our affections resemble an echo, the further one draws
himself from them, the less repercussion they make. If we expose them to our
view, and behold them with content, the reflection which the present object
darts, as it were, upon us insnares our mind presently, but vanishes and
loses its self by a little absence, and though at first to absent our selves
from a beloved object, be a perplexing torment, if we have but patience and
resolve to endure, the time will come when it will be a pleasure.

To prevent anger, he was always cautelous lest he should by any means make
other men his enemies, he would not willingly disoblige the meanest person lest
he should provoke them to offer indignities, and so he might be provoked to
revenge: he also avoided much earnest business, and excessive study, wherein
if one be interrupted, that usually procures some vexation; curiosity also and
costly things, the one as it may now and then find out somewhat that pleases,
so it often encounters with discontents, the loss of the other ordinarily
procures vexation. If he were at any time surprised by this churlish passion,
he did not undertake of a sudden totally to suppress it, but by degrees
averted his thoughts from that which displeased him, till time gently allaid
the commotion which was raised in the blood and spirits.

Drunkenness (the bane of many a man of great parts and prodigious wits) which
as they have an advantage for the attainment of virtue, so are they inclined to
the greatest vices, he avoided by sometimes changing his seat, binding himself
by a solemn vow and resolution for a short time at first, and afterward for a
longer, setting himself to perform some task, and till that were finished,
resolved upon a retired course: by these honest cheats he defrauded his
appetite of that bewitching thing called company-keeping, and for his pains
found a most sincere pleasure in abstinence, to the utter disparagement of
voluptuousness.

There is a restless and lingering passion called love, I never heard he was
surprised (at least not baffled) by it, but to such as were, he principally
dissuaded them from solitude and reclusenesse, which cause ones thoughts to be
pertinaciously fixed upon that he loves; advised them to frequent and visit
their friends, and be sure to impart their thoughts, and open their distemper
to some prudent and discreet person, whose counsel and persuasion they should
find marvellously efficatious in such an occasion.

Sadness, Melencholy, and dejection of spirit are very incident to virtuous
and ingenious men, who at the emergency of cross accidents more earnestly
ruminate upon their sorrows, use a kind of skill in tormenting themselves, and
though company, employment and such divertisments may somewhat allay the
distemper for a time, yet their minds are very acute in retriving their
grievances, and amplifying their sorrows by a tedious and irksome remembrance.
To such men he recommended (what he had with good success experimented,) such
directions as these, to avoid solitariness, vigorously to snatch their
thoughts from that which troubled them, and fix them upon some other thing,
never to let their thoughts be too closly confined, but as it were scattered
and at liberty, by which means they would not receive so considerable
annoyance: if their calamity were the product of their own error or
wickedness, no remedy (he told them) but repentance, and a wary resolution
against the like miscarriage for the future; if it proceeded from poverty,
exile, loss of freedom, and the like, whereunto they were not conscious that
any remarkable miscarriage of their own contributed occasion; he conceived it
expedient for them to put off their present grievances, with the hope of better
adventures, though hope it self be but a kind of pain, yet it is more gentle
than despair. It is not impossible for a man so to model and order his will,
that it shall buckle and comply with any condition, the will can of its self
act either way, will, or refuse; choose, or reject; without the impulsion of
exterior objects. A man (if he will labor about it) may curb his appetite with
a repetition of past delights, or antedate and forestal future pleasures and
what felicity his condition denies, frame it for himself. It Is confessed, this
may seem but a pitiful shift, to be put off with an immaginary delight, a
feigned and supposed contentment, yet it may serve to avocate the mind at the
present from worse meditations, and prevent despair. He that will take the
pains to observe, may find that the mind is sometimes willing to deceive its
self, by framing a false and fantastical subject, though against its own
conceit, rather than not be busy at all. The Architect contrives an house, the
Lutanist tunes his Instrument, and orders the notes in his brain, when the one
is not building, nor the other playing on a Lute: Some talk and discourse about
matters of importance, travel into strange countries, go to war, and return
victorious: marry rich and beautiful Wives, dispose of lands and great
revenues, manage estates which they never had, nor do they themselves ever
think to have them, they build stately houses, make pleasant Gardens, and
entertain their friends at delicious banquets, a thousand such fancies and
wakeing dreams will accompany men even against their wills; and if so, what
hurt is it if the mind and will it self makes some use thereof, by catching an
opportunity of present content? and since such thoughts will be stirring to
solace themselves with the pleasantness of them. I foresee the Reader will
smile at this narrative of Charinus's imaginary and conceited happiness, I
have told him it is so; but in good earnest joy and sorrow are but artificial
devices, and atcheivable by industry, they are the products of our will; it is
not prosperity alone can make men joyful, and happy; but a confidence to
believe that they are so. Nor can adversity alone make a man miserable; misery
its self is no misery, but a man imagins it to be so. There Is neither
infelicity no felicity in things, but only as we entertain them with a
misguided or rectified opinion. But besides this Stoical resolutenesse, let a
man in adversity, assure himself of the undoubted good success which will at
last result from honest endeavors, and further consider that adversity tries
him as the furnace tries metals, not to consune but refine and clear. It makes
men look into themselves, puts them upon action, unfolds many clandestine
distempers, which in a firm and settled condition lurked and were not noted,
like tempestuous weather it clears and purges the air, and as the Sun is most
welcome, after it has broke through the clouds and mists that smothered his
beauty from the world, so is that joy most welcome, which succeeds a tedious
infelicity. And the recollection of sorrows amplifies the present joy; nothing
is here permanent, not only particular men, but families, Cities and Countries
have their vicissitudes and returns of prosperity and adversity, sickness and
health, peace and war. Some turbu^ent fellow after a long peace, being designed
for the scourge and plague of the age he lives in, puts all into a combustion
for a time, kindles a whole Nation into a flame; offers up the lives and
estates of many thousands to the Idol of his own ambition; in which grand
commotions the several humors and tempers of men reveal themselves with much
perspicuity, some vex and torment themselves for the miseries they see ready to
befall themselves and the country: some wast and pine away through a tedious
consideration of their loss, some storm and rage like bedlams, others run along
with the crowd, and right or wrong side with the prevailing party: some curse
and execrate their enemies; others cry up every hasty and madbrain design as a
pure zealous and religious work; others flout and jeer at them for their
egredious mistakes. In the mean time a wise man is greived indeed for the
miseries of his country and friends, but waits with patience till these mad
disturbances be sedated, gathers useful notions and observations to improve
his wisdom, assures himself that peace when it comes will be most welcome after
the miseries of War.

Joy is that which every one seeks and aims at, and thinks he can never have
too much of it, yet at some times there is need of more prudence in the
managing of it than men conjecture; for, if it be excessive and sudden, it
transports a man beyond himself; a man is rather oppressed than relieved by a
sudden encounter of felicity, as the fire is often extinguished for want of
fuel, so is it stifled and choked by too much; the heart is not only
oppressed by grief when the blood and spirits are chill and stagnant, and flow
not freely to it, but also by the impetuous agitations of joy, when they flow
with such violence, that the heart is not able to transmit them so fast into
the Arteries, so that they choke and damp its natural heat, which they would
preserve if they flowed in a convenient quantity. In such a case as this, he
found it conducible to meditate on the inconstancy of humane felicity, and that
Adversity may suddenly happen; to skirmish and exercise himself with a
veli^ation with sorrow, with lusory and rebated hardship.

He easily removed that restless self-tormenting passion, Envy; by considering
how many thousands were inferior to him: Poor men, Slaves, Vagabonds, Exiles,
Prisoners, despicable creatures; and not suffering the Potentates, Grandees,
and Nobles to stand in his light. There is hardly a man to be found so
wretched, but his condition may administer some matter of content: and that of
his superiors is not so absolute, as to be excused from all inconveniences;
the scale of Providence stands at a more even counter-poise than the querulous
World would set it; we cannot be all Great, Honor is distributed to one,
Riches to another, Wisdom to another: to some all these, and to others none at
all; who yet in respect of their secure sedate, and peaceable condition, may be
happier than the greatest; the skill is to know their own good, and not other
men's so inquisitively.

Fear, a treacherous passion, which betraies a man to danger, assists his
enemies, and deprives him of those succors Reason would afford: Jelousie, a
kind of inquisitive envy, Sap. 17.12.
which is ever busy in searching what it is loath to find; with all the
rabble of commotions of Pride, Pusillanimity, Disdain; he cleared himself of
them all, by a prudent disregarding idle Reports, popular Rumors and Stories;
good Counsel and Employment: without doubt, Business, Example, Discourse, good
Counsel, Music, good Company, Books of Divines and Philosophers, contrived on
purpose for the regulating of men's Minds, are of excellent use to moderate and
allay any passion or perturbation of mind whatsoever; provided men be (as
Charinus was) willing, and come to them pre-disposed to be cured: but when one
is pievish and froward, cold, dull, and negligent, delighted with his foolery,
and in love with his captivity; no wonder if they prove weak Obstacles, infirm
Diversions, suspending or mittigating the Paroxisme for a time, not curing the
Disease. The most brave and generous way to curb them all, is a noble
resolution not to yield to them: but for a man to conquer himself, deny his own
desires in despite of contrary inclinations, to fortify his mind against all
the importunity of Pleasure, Profit, Honor, Self-conceit, that would almost
force his consent, and extort a compliance. If this seem too difficult to be
done on a sudden, all at once; a man may accomplish it by degrees, bind
himself by a resolution to avoid all occasions for a short time at first, and
afterward for a longer space. By custom bruit beasts are many times taught to
forget their natural inclinations; by custom the hardest things become easy: A
Spaniel by nature is carried on with an eager and furious pursuit after a
Partridge, and quests at the springing of it; yet is ordinarily taught to
disobey this forcible command of nature, and to couch quietly down at the
finding of it. What a tedious thing is it for a Child at first to frame a
Letter? to manage the curious Flourishes, cursory and intricate knots in
writing? or for a man to bring his tough and stiff fingers to bend and reach
the Stops or Frets in a Lute? which by practice close in with them of their own
accord: the repetition of the action produces a facility in working, renders it
familiar to the Organs, imprints an habit, a kind of remembrance (as some call
it) in the hand, without our perception or designation. It Is true, we have a
design for the principal Action, writing, or playing on the Instrument; the
various strokes and touches are managed oft-times, we not adverting them, yet
regularly and with certainty, because the imagination readily moves and directs
the Organs. Nor is it otherwise in the exercises of the Mind, in the actions
of Virtue; the entrance presents some difficulty, use will make them easy: It
will be worth our pains to persevere in them, for where endeavors bring
advantage, it is a brave refreshment to have been wearied.

Looking upon Charinus as a Scholar, (for he was not a stranger to the Muses)
we might find him often in his Study conversing with the dead, and frequently
in company, conversing with learned men living, but with ^uch caution, that his
Studies inter^upted not his Employments; such ^ue proportion of time he
allotted ^or both, that he intermitted neither ^bruptly; his Studies and
Employments by natural returns advanced ^ne another; his reading was chiefly ^n
History and Philosophy, wherein ^e read not all Authors promiscuous^y, as if he
should have no other aim ^ut to be able to relate what such an Authors opinion
is; but the most approved and exact: and whatsoever ^e read, he would be sure
to offer as ^he subject of his discourse, when he had the hap to meet with
other learned men; and with such he often conversed, being persuaded that
Know^edge is not attained only by plodding Studdy, musing and trafficking with
a man's own Thoughts; but that Conference adds much to a man, clears and
satisfies the Mind in any dubious matter, and while every one contributes his
proportion (as it were) to the common stock of Learning: somewhat may be learned
from a mean Scholar.

Charinus as he was improved by, (and did himself improve) others in matter of
Learning; so was he very serviceable to his Country through his Dexterity, in
managing those Employments in which he was conversant. Some very knowing and
able men for want of Employment, sink into themselves, converse merely with
their own Thoughts, either their disharmony with the humor of the Times they
live in, multitudes of men of the same profession; Poverty, (the usual clog to
brave Actions) or their overmuch modesty, (the usual property of a wise man)
retard their proceedings, and afford them not any Stage to act upon. But no
such Obstacles were offered to Charinus's Proceedings, for besides that he
lived in peaceable Times, the civil Dissentions being sedated; and under a
religious and prudent Prince: he also wanted not Wealth, Opportunities,
Materials, wherewith to maintain his Enterprises: and without which, no man
(though of an unhappy Wit and Ingenuity) can raise himself up to any
considerable esteem.

In his old Age he was not morose and untractable, but commonly quiet and
cheerful; his care was to transmit to future Ages a Pattern worthy of
imitation: he was pious himself. and earnestly invited others to be so. Piety
resembles the fire, which not only has heat in itsself, but a power and
inclination also to communicate heat to other Bodies: the efficacy of his
Piety, and pious Instructions, were evidently seen in Eriander, as shall be
showed, who lived Charinus's life over again, and made the World to see that
his Virtues were not dead, but transplanted: good Counsel operates on a
resolved Mind, as the Light on a close compacted Body, which by uniting and
reflecting the visive Rays becomes luminous; whereas slight and thin bodies
(wherein the rays are absorpt and lose themselves) scatter, or transmit them,
so as they evade the eye, or become obscure.

He died in the sixty third year of his Age, which is the great Climacterical
year, resulting from the multiplication of Seven, and Nine; for whereas every
seventh and nineth year, men sustain some remarkable alteration in their
bodies, either through the commotion and agitation of Humors, which in such a
period of time gain a considerable augmentation; or from the peculiar influence
of the Planets, especially Saturn, which every seventh year is said to exercise
dominion over men's bodies: So especially when these Climacterical years concur,
the effects do more powerfully discover themselves, that he died in much
tranquillity and quietness of mind, is without all dispute: having secured
himself of that only content and peace of mind which this world affords, that
is, the content which flows from doing good; and also by his Piety forestalled
Eternity, and gained such an assurance (as is here attainable) of that
Happiness which is complete hereafter. That his death was lamented, and his
Name renowned after death; though I should not relate it, every man may therein
be his own Intelligencer: for it is very well known, that he who lives piously,
cannot but die honorably: whilst a man lives, Flattery may overmuch enhaunce,
or Envy may debate the rate of his Worth, but after death these are silent; and
Posterity (which is least concerned in men's actions) is willing to do right to
Illustrious Persons, whose Virtues are ever most resplendent after their
Funerals.

The Estate descended to Eriander according to the Laws of the Nation, but a
plentiful provision was made for a Daughter which he left, as also for
Timoclea, of whom I cannot present so large and exact a Character, as her
Merits call for, but am forced to transcribe the Painters way, who being to
draw a vast Giant in a small Table, presented only one of his fingers, whereby
the Spectators might guess at the proportion of his body. This may not be
omitted, That she was a Lady sincere in her Devotions, charitable in her
Actions, peaceable in her Carriage, and temperate in her Diet; a loving and
loyal Wife, a serviceable Neighbor, and a prudent Governess in her Family. It
was observed that while Charinus and she lived together in a Conjugal state,
prudent and moderate Gravity has such influence upon all that were related to
them, as domestic Servants; that they were sufficiently instructed as in the
discreet and frugal ordering of business, so in piety and sober demeanure. They
always made choice of such Retirements as were free from remarkable Vices,
especially Riot, Dissension, and Idleness, the disgrace and ruin of a Family:
of such as were honest and sparing; such as took delight in Frugallity, not to
say penurious; presuming that these would be provident and careful in their
trust. If happily they had entertained such as were otherwise, they labored to
make them so; to which purpose they treated them so indifferently with
mildeness and severity, and the one should not make them desperate, nor the
other remiss: above all, their example has such powerful influence upon them,
as they accounted it a shame not to be good, having such precedents. Neither
did Charinus or Timoclea so look upon their condition of Servitude, as to
forget their condition of Nature; the consideration of the first caused them to
keep them strictly to convenient Employment, and the latter to be tender of
their Welfare, and afford them such respect and accommodations, as are due to
people of their condition.

And now it is time to come to Eriander, the subject of this History; from
which a great part of the former Narrative may seem to have been a digression,
which yet I conceive has not been impertinent, considering of what importance
it is to the complete institution of a man, that he be born in a Country where
commendable Education is observed, under the Government of a noble Prince, and
of pious and worthy Parents. And that I may here prepare an Apology for somewhat
that shall immediately ensue, I hope the Laws of Method will allow me to proceed
as near as I can from the instant of his Conception, which was about the Month
of May, (for he was born in February) which Season Nature seems to design more
peculiarly for the production of Creatures. To the evidencing of this, we are
to understand, that as the perpetual duration and continuance of things depends
upon (and is guided by the motion of the Sun from East to West; so Generation
and Corruption are promoted by the oblique courses of the Sun and other
heavenly bodies, through the Zodiac, which alter the affections and qualities
of inferior things, according to their situation and Aspects, the access or
recess of their Rays: when the Sun draws near its vertical Point, and the
Rays are received by the Earth in more direct and right Angles, it dilates and
rarifies the Air, recludes the pores of the Earth, draws out the Seeds of
things into a greater latitude, summons forth the lurking Spirits and excites
the prolifical Virtue. The contrary is seen when the Earth admits its Sunbeams
in oblique Angles, for then the Air becomes cold, the superficies and body of
the Earth close compacted; bodies are shrunk into a closer consistency, and all
active Faculties are more benumbed: That heat does agitate the parts, rarifie
and dilate bodies that are capable of relaxion, appears by the Seeds of Plants
cast into the Earth, as into their proper Womb, where having convenient
moisture, (for moisture makes a body apt to receive the vigorous impression of
heat, and yield it self obedient to that design Nature is about to work upon
it) Tumefy, break the outward Rind, and disclose with an Orifice; whereby the
seminal Neb, or Bud, shoots its self upward, and being by little and little
dilated, it branched at length into a perfect Vegetable; and the heat still
sublimes up moisture through certain fibrous strings, for the nourishing of
every part. In that artificial device of making Malt, we see that Barley
macerated with water to make it more capable of relaxation, and laid into a
Couch, the superfluity of water that would choke it, being removed, Nature
presently advances her self to Generation, the parts by their contiguity gather
heat, this heat dilates every several Grain, excites and puts in action the
generative spirit, and labors after a production of more individuals: But the
Artist, (who has no further intention than only to excite and advance the
spirits of his Malt) deludes Nature all this while, and to frustrate her
intentions, turns and tumbles about the Barley, lest having a fixed situation,
and being enclosed in a Congeries, (which might serve instead of a womb for
Nature to work in) the whole pitch should branch forth into a Plant, and at
last by help of fire, he removes the moisture that might help to promote the
generation. In the production of Minerals, a concrete or coagulated juice
(which as a Seed of the metal is wrapped up in the womb of the earth) rarefied
and extended by a certain heat (either inbred, or peradventure derived from the
Sun, and darted through the Earths pores into the Mine) and when it is
augmented by superaddition of new matter, this heat concocts and converts it
into the substance of such a Mineral, whose form and essence it is apt to
receive; and thus it is brought from its loose principles, into a perfect
consistency.

In the generation of living Creatures of all sorts, Nature proceeds in such a
kind of method, though with much more curiosity and stateliness: but as there,
so here; she requires three principal things: A Matter qualified with
convenient moisture, a due degree of heat, and a womb to work in: As in man,
Vterus humanus sperma (quod a testibus nixu quodam and palpitatione, quasi jam
tum vivendi primordia exercens penis ejaculatur) imbibit, imbibitum in sinu
recondit, and occluso orificio arcte amplexatur; Ipsum vero semen in utero non
diu adeo mor as ducit: quin quam primum effluviis quibusdam subtilissimis
plasticam ei virtutem indiderit, contagio seu fermentatione impraegnaverit;
illico vel evanescit, vel in vas a uteri seminalia abripitur, unde brevi spatio
vel ipsum semen, vel humor quidam albugineus in uterum transudat, and in massam
quandam liquidam coagulatur; in cujus ipsissimo centro, punctum quoddam
sanguineum sen bullula saliens conspicitur, quod calore nativo sensim anctum
and dilatatum, Juxta CI. V. Guil. Harvaeum.
instar vermiculi seu pusillae teredinis se motitat. Diverse small Filaments or
Strings, which are appointed for the Veins, stream from that red spot, and at
the end of some of them a knot of liquid matter, being the rude or original
draught of the head: and out of that again three distinct Orbicular parts
bubble forth, designed to be the Brain and Eyes: all these by the power of heat
are still rarefied and dilated; afterward the main Trunk, or Fabric of the
Body, in which the Ribs and other Bones appear at first, but as small white
lines; next to these the Inward parts, the Heart, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, and
Bowels: these at first appear but as small Protuberancies or Excrescencies of
the Veins, and, as it were, hang out of the Body not yet covered with skin; but
at last are drawn into (and rest in) their particular Regions or Receptacles,
appointed for them by Nature: The last which appear, are such parts as serve
only for Ornament or Defense; as Skin, Nails, Hair, and the rest. The gross and
less useful part of that liquid matter is thrust outward by the plastic
Virtue, and constitutes the Membranes, wherein the Embroy is inwrapped: within
these Membranes is contained a certain humor (transmitted into them by the
umbilical Arteries of the Mother) not excrementitious, but nutritive; for the
Umbilical, or Navil-veins of the Infant, convey it into the hollow vein, by the
branches whereof it is distributed into every part of the body. Now when the
Infant is exactly shaped, there is produced a lump of glandulous flesh, which
serves to prepare and concoct Nutriment for him; which in all probability he
sucks in at his mouth, as may be conjectured by his being so exact at sucking
as soon as he is born.

When the Members and Parts of the Infant become somewhat stiff and solid, when
the Brain, Nerves, and Organs of the Senses are finished, he begins to move and
tumble with some perceptible strength (and then Women say they are quickened)
whereas before he enjoyed only a trepidation or little frisking, not
discernable, and waxing by degrees great and strong, advances himself to seek a
larger Room. Cujus gratia, mira divini numinis providentia ossium commissurae,
nempe coxendicis and ossis sacri synchondrosis, item coccygis synneurosis, ad
recludendum ampliandumque uteri orificium relaxantur. The Infant by
calcitration and strangling, many times pulls asunder the Membranes which
infetter him: but Eriander was found involved in them firm and entire; which I
record not as a Foundation whereon to build any superstitious prediction of his
future Fortune; but as an Argument of vivacity, conceiving that such a kind of
Birth is most mature and agreeable to Natures Intention, which having given
maturity to her Works, causes them (not to be torn away, but) to drop off with
ease from their Stem or Mother; as we see in the Fruits of Trees, but is often
defeated by the weakness of the Mother, not correspondent to the strength of
the Child, the confirmation of the parts, or the like reasons: and not seldom
by the overmuch expedition of busy Midwives, who to accelerate (as they
pretend) the Birth, and put an end to the Torments they perceive the Mother to
endure, use some indecent violence that proves noxious to both; the ordinary
period to perfect the formation of the Infant, is about forty days, the usual
time of bringing forth is about forty weeks, or ten months, notwithstanding the
strength or weakness of the Mother or Child, may either accelerate or prolong
the birth, and fix an exception to this general Rule.

And now let the Reader allow himself a little leisure to consider upon how
slender a foundation the wonderful Fabric of this little World is erected;
from how pitiful (yet admirable) Original, the greatest Grandees of the World,
(that swell so big in their own, and other men's estimation) are extracted the
wonderfulness of it, rebates the sharpness of all Eloquence, and puts it beyond
the ability of expression: and this may partly be the cause of that vain
carelessness whereof we all have a spice; we seldom take the pains to look into
our selves, nothing earnestly affects us, but what comes under the notion of
Novelty, Custom and Familiarity with things blunts the edge of our Admiration:
The intricate and curious contrivance of our own Bodies, is a work surpassing
all the Mechanical Inventions in the world; yet either because we are lazy and
dull in our speculations, or because they are not offered to us under the
notion of Novelty, we take no great notice of them, but are more affected with
a pretty piece of Clock-work, Carving, Painting, or the like; we are
transported with wonder at the sight of a strange Beast, and are the greatest
strangers to our selves.

The scope of this story (as I have designed it,) obliges me to say somewhat
concerning this subject, before I proceed any further; because many things
which are to follow cannot otherwise be well understood by Vulgar Readers, to
the Learned I shall not need to write any thing concerning Man, who are
ordinarily no such strangers to themselves.

Man consists of a Body and a Soul, an Invisible part, and a Visible; by the
purity and energy of the Soul he is enabled to discern and know himself, and
things different from himself: the gross composure of the body renders him an
object of Sense; and both together make him sociable. So he falls under a
threefold consideration, viz. that of the body alone, the Soul alone, and both
together. The first is managed by Philosophers and Physicians; the second by
Divines and Philosophers; and the third by Moralists, Divines, Historyans, and
Writers of policy; in whose elaborate writings may be found ample discoveryes
of what I shall only glance at.

The body consists of parts, either contained, which being tenuious and fluid,
are therefore bounded and kept in by such as are more tough and compacted, such
are all the humors of the body, Blood, Choler, Melancholy and Phlegm with the
spirits, which are nothing else but the purer part of the blood, as the other
humors are the gross and sedimentary part of it; so as the various humors in
the body are no more but blood diversifyed; or somewhat percolated from the
blood as Urine, Sweat, Choler, Melancholy, and all serose humors. The parts
containing, which limit and confine others, are either similar, of like nature
and composure, as flesh, veins, nerves, arteries, and bones: or dissimilar,
made up of other particles of a different nature, such are the Brain, Heart,
Liver, Lungs, Kidneys, Spleen, etc. and all Muscles: for in these there is a
mixture of flesh, Veins, Arteries, Blood, and spirits, (or thin agile
particles) according as the office of every member requires.

The Soul as it resides in the body, (for in that state alone it shall be
considered here,) exercises diverse faculties, as Vegetation, whereby the body
lives, is nourished and augmented, and the species propagated by generation; to
accomplish which, the meat and drink we receive, being masticated and reduced
into small parts in the mouth, is conveyed down into the stomach, where a
certain sharp and hot humor piercing into it, reduces it into smaller parts,
and makes it slippery; so that it may easily slide into the small whitish
veins, (called from their color Lacteal,) these lacteal veins intercepting
the purest and juicyest part of it, convey it into the hollow vein, in which
passage it receives much transmutation; the excrementitious and less useful
parts (by virtue of certain glandulous substances which make an attrition upon
it, and sever the purest part from the less pure,) are conveyed to their
proper receptacles; For that which we call Choler is conveyed into a little bag
called the Gall, hanging at the Liver; Urine is conveyed by the Kidneyes to the
Bladder, the grosser excremements slip through the entrals or Guts; That which
passes through the veins stays not till it arrive at the heart; where it
receives a more perfect concoction and purifying; and from the heart part of it
is carried from the right Ventricle of the heart, (through a vein called the
arterial vain,) to the Lungs; whence it returns through the venal Artery into
the left Ventricle of the heart, thence with the rest of the blood, (for so it
is by this time) it flows into a great Artery called by Anatomists Aorta. This
Artery spreading it self into many branches, distributs it to every part of the
body, that it may nourish, enliven and move every member. Testiculi interim
(nesi omissi, and quasi castrati, e nostra microcrosmi historiola exulent)
partem dicti alimenti allicientes, in spumosum semen digerunt, and in usum
peculiarem recondunt. The blood by its motion through the Arteries is rarefied,
made more hot, subtle, and vivid; for it does not rest or stagnate in the
arteries; but emptyed out of the utmost twigs of the Arteries into the veins,
returns by a circular motion to the heart in its passage communicating
influence, vigor, activity and nourishment to every member: and augmentation
too, so long as there is need; but that bears date no longer than till such
time as the body arrives at its Aim, and consistence, which is when the bones
(the main supporters of and rules of dimension for it) are grown so hard that
they are not capable of any further extention; for then the rest of the parts
refuse the superaddition of new matter, more than what serves to repair that
that decays by continual motion, and is requisite to assist them in their
motions and operations.

As all parts of our body participate of this kind and active influence of the
blood, so the Brain seems to ingrosse the purest portion of it, the thicker
part cannot arrive there by reason of the narrow passages through which it is
percolated; the Brain digests it into a thin substance called animal spirits,
which are dispersed in the nerves, contributing sense and motion to the whole
body. The most remarkable motion, and of most absolute necessity, is
respiration, and is thus accomplished; The animal spirits which take their way
to the Muscles of the Breast through the nerves that are branched thither, move
and dilate the great Muscle called Diaphragma, which by consequence extends the
parts of the Breast, whereupon the Lungs (which accomodate themselves to the
motion of the breast) are also dilated, as a pair of bellows; so is also the
sharp Artery, and the contagious air (which is ready to fill any concave or
fistular body that has nothing else to fill it) is protruded, one part
rejecting the other, till that next to the mouth and Nose enters; but after a
little pause the Lungs contracting themselves, when the Diaphragma is erected
in a unequal figure and presses upon them, send it forth and instantly receive a
new supply. This alternate motion is of manifold use, for the intromission of
cool and fresh air, and it serves to refresh the heart, Lungs, and Stomach, in
case they be too hot: so especially it contributes to the production of vital
spirits, which participate of an aerie nature, and may probaly somewhat assist
the heart in that motion whereby it conveyes the blood into the Arteries, and
in this respect is of absolute necessity of preserve life.

The emission of it serves, as to express our several passions, so likewise to
frame our speech, when we sigh thereby giving a hint of some close grief, we
emit our breath through the artery being open, not resisting or g^ving any
collision to it, with a deep and laborious breathing. When we would cry loud,
we cause it to break forth with a smart violence and vociferation: when we
laugh, the ^^^od j^rking nimbly from the H^a^^ to the lungs, huffe them up
(...) ^nly and by turns, so as they (...) the air to go forth at the sharp
artery with a kind of trepidation, or interrupted motion, and with all twitch
the Muscles of the Diaphragma, Breast, and Face, which causes a quavering
motion discernible in the countenance, and a warbling inarticulate sound. But
in speaking there are more little engines set on work, the sharp Artery
alternately dilates and contracts its self, the larynx or upper part or lid of
it intercepts, or gives free passage to the air, the parts that constitute the
orb of the mouth, the Tongue, Teeth, Palate, and Lips make various stops, dashes
and callisions upon it, the various extention of the sharp Artery contributes
to the diversifying of our voice into shrill or low, acute or flat: for if the
artery be much straightened and compressed, the voice becomes flat; if freely
dilated, it proves accute; the larynx by its motion serves to make the stops or
distances between our words, the organs of the mouth make it articulate and
significative. For as in a Pipe, the sound extending its self in a right line,
would be uniform and of one tone, did not the artist intercept it, so would our
breath cause an uniform and useless noise, if it should freely convey its self
in a direct progress, but encountering the Mouths cavity it is obliged to
assume various figures, and conform its self to the configuration of the mouth.
The five vowels a, e, i, o, u seem to be made only by the different emission of
the breath; and require not any observeable action of the parts of the mouth,
but seem to be accomplished by the different extentions of the sharp Artery;
for as in a pipe so in our artery, the same proportion of air may yield a
various sound, according as the passage is either widened or compressed, still,
or quavering; But the Consonants are formed with more extant and discernably
motion, when the Lips endeavor to stop and intercept the air in its passage,
b and p are formed; when the basis of the tongue strikes at the palate, c and g
are pronounced, when the point of the tongue strikes at the teeth, and dashes
the emergent air against them, you may hear the sound of t and d; If the Lips
be shut and the breath mount upward toward the nose, the letter m is framed;
when the tongue stops the breath by clapping it self to the Palate, this
motion gives being to the letter n; If the breath so stopped makes an escape by
the side of the Cheeks, then it appears in the sound of l; sometimes the breath
is as it were pressed, either through the teeth alone, and s is squeezed out,
or between the tongue or Palate, and thence r comes snarling forth: or between
the tongue and fore-teeth, and so we pronounce z and jod. When a soft puff is
emitted between the fore-teeth and lips almost compressed, if we be troubled
with a deafness, yet we may see f and vau pronounced. Such variety of motions
ars requisite to speech, but they are managed with so much nimblenesse and
dexterity as they evade our observation.

In spontaneous or progressive motion, the animal spirits in the Brain being
excited, shake and dash forward the next, which are in the nerves; and by
consequence the very nerves themselves, the nerves dilate the muscles, into
which the branches of them are inserted, the muscles expanded in breadth, become
shorter, and draw in the tendinesse, (instruments of motion made up of the
coalescence of small nerves, Ligaments, and Fibers) being contracted in breath,
and so extended in length, they relaxe the tendiness; which while they are
contracted draw the joints as it were upward toward the brain, the fountain of
motion; and whilst they are relaxed remit them: and thus the members drawn up
and extended by turns, execute the motions and gestures which we require.

The sensitive faculty, whereby we apprehend exterior objects, acts by the
help of the animal spirits too; which being resident in the very outmost parts
of our bodies, in the small or capillary nerves, are capable of the least
percussion or jog that is made at them, and instantly communicate it to the
Brain; For there be in all or most bodies minute effluvia's, or exhalations,
which (like little emissaries and intelligences) are continually frisking up
and down between those bodies and our senses, dash at the organs of our senses,
when we have first put our selves into a fit posture, and ^ause an agitation
and vibration upon ^hese tender and tenuious spirits which speedily traject it
to the Brain. The Nerves which assist our sense of feeling when they receive a
light percussion from any palpable object, such a pression or percussion is
also made upon the Brain, one part of the nerve pressing on the other till the
motion arrives there, as if one move a Lute-string at one end, the motion in an
imperceptable moment is conveyed to the other end. A visible object instantly
conveyes a representation of its self through the clear or Chrystallike humor
in the very center of the eye, to the retina, or utmost branches of the optic
nerve, and so upward.

When we hear a sound, the air is beaten by a continued motion, one part
rejects that which is contiguous to it, this the next; till it arrive at the
anfractuous windings of the ear, the auditory nerve, and so onward. In the Nose
there are found nerves which terminate in the top of the thrils, and these
suffer a light impression from warm and moist emanations, which steame from
odoriferous bodies, and are exhalted through the Nostrils, and by those
processes or branches of the nerves are sublimed up to the Brain. In tasting,
our meat, as it slides over the tongue and parts adjoining, conveyes a thin
exhalation to the nerves, which give notice of it to the fountain of sense.

The next faculty whereby we judge of objects, and entertain them under the
notion of pleasing or displeasing, nigh or remote, great or small, usual or
unusual, we may call estimation. That whereby we retein and preserve these
impressions, is the Memory. But the Fantasy excites, variously orders, and
marshals them, joins or severs, compounds or divides them, and frames several
conceptions or apprehensions of them.

When the spirits in the brain are agitated by (and receive impressions from
either) outward objects, as in sensation, or from the body its self, as in
hunger, thirst, the apetites of excretion, and the like, (which have always ^
stimulation or acrimony accompa^ying them, by which they agitate ^he nerves,
and consequently the brain, ^^ the concourse of these impressions ^etermine the
spirits in the brain to va^ious motions, even when the objects ^re absent, and
many times when the ^enses are obstructed too, as in sleep: Now the Phantasy
setting these notions before us, and the estimative faculty presenting them to
us, as pleasant or distasteful, although the things themselves that caused such
impressions in us be absent, yet we have often times as quick and lively
apprehensions of them, as vigorous and active motions toward them, as if they
were not absent, but present; and such motions are the operations of that
faculty which we call the will; and may be divided into apetite and aversion,
for I omit those other acts of the will, suspense, doubting, hope, fear, joy,
sorrow, and the rest; partly for brevities sake, because I relate these things
cursorily; and partly because they are easily reduced to these. In appetition
the spirits dilate and axpand themselves to welcome a pleasing object object,
which if present, produces Joy; if absent, Hope. In aversion they contract and
retire themselves, and lurk in a kind of fixation, upon the apprehension of a
displeasing Object, which, if it be present, causes Grief; if absent, Fear.

But I am not yet arrived at that supreme faculty, whereby Man is distinguished
from Bruit beasts; those which have been hitherto recited, are most of them as
eminent (some more exact) in them, than in Man: that they have life, motion,
and sense, the most ignorant are able to observe; that they have estimation of
things appears by their choice of Meats, seeking of subterfuges, and cautelous
avoiding of dangers. That they have a natural Dialect, or way of communicating
and imparting their Designs, or Thoughts, one to another sufficient for them,
and proportionable to their necessities, is discovered by their various tones,
actions, and gestures, which they use according to the several occasions they
encounter with, their nutations and caresses wherewith they salute one another
at their meeting. Their Memory is discovered by their certain and ready finding
out their usual haunts, their starting and shrinking from any thing wherein
they have found inconvenience, and their impetuous pursuing of that wherein
they have found content. Their Fantasy appears by their quick and lively
apprehensions, their docility, their presaging of future events; their speedy
recourse many times to such remedies as have power to ease their distempers.
How admirably is their Will guided, their appetite and aversion, by an
ingenuous foresight, in managing their designs, their sleights and subtilties,
their regular choice of means to avoid that which they fear? Though the story
of the Dog seems to have too much of the Fable in it, which to get the drink
out of a deep pot cast stones into it, till it advanced to the top: yet the
stratagems of a Fox, which he uses to surprise his prey, or contrive his
escape, are unquestionable. Historyes and Experience afford variety of
Instances. To say that these acute contrivances and subtilties proceed from a
natural Instinct, or an apish imitation of Reason, is to multiply words, which
upon the matter signify nothing. When the actions are of like nature, and the
organs by which they are performed not at all different, the faculties surely
are the same. But herein Beasts do fall short of Man, in that they cannot but
reflect upon their own knowledge; they know not that they know a thing, they
understand not the particular reasons of things, so as from thence to deduce an
universal conclusion. They have single conceptions of things, as appears by
their prompt and ready taking notice of them; they modifie, compound, and
divide single apprehensions, judge of them as pleasant or distastful, which
appears by their inclinations to, and aversions from diverse objects, and that
in the absence of the objects, and when their senses are obstructed, as is
evident by their dreams, in which they will by their alacrity express their
content; and their fear, by shivering and trembling. Thus far they proceed in
the contexture of Discourse; but they give us no Instance of their skill in the
last action, which is to draw consequences from antecedents, to argue from
Causes to Effects, to proceed from signs to things signified. Although a Dog,
in quest of his game, or pursuit of his Master, seems to use a Logical trick, a
kind of arguing, (and other beasts seem to do the like upon several occasions;)
for, having scented first one way, then another, he seems to make two Negative
Propositions concerning two Paths, because he finds not the Tract; and
earnestly pursues the third: which has passed for a piece of Cynical Logic
among some superficial Wits; yet if we advert it well, in this Action, the Dog
draws not any conclusion by regular discourse, but pursues the third Tract,
only because some habituous steam (familiar to him) strikes upon the olfactive
Nerve, which in the other Tracts did not.

For the operations of the rational Faculty, they are these: First, Simply and
barely to apprehend an Object. Secondly, To frame in our minds a notion of it,
distinct from the notion we have of other things, to compound, or sever. And
thirdly, To derive a Consequence or conclusion from what the first Actions
suggested to us. Let the instance be a Tree: First, We apprehend in our minds
a real thing. Secondly, We frame in our minds an Idea, or notion of a Tree,
different from the notion we have of other things; we frame in our minds a
notion of a Tree, different from that notion we have of a Bird, and by a
succession, or orderly introduction of Thoughts, we compound or sever our
Notions, wherein consists truth or falsity; for Truth is a connection of things
whose nature and essence agrees, or a severing of things which differ: Falsehood
a connection of things inconsistent, or a severing of things inseparable; there
being no falsity in things themselves, nor in our notions of them singly: when
I consider these notions singly and apart in my mind; A Bird, a Tree, to fly
in the Air, to bear Fruit: here is no error, nor falsity. But when I join two
agreeing notions together, and think, or say thus; A Tree bears Fruit, or a
Bird flies in the Air: there is truth in this Composition and Connection of
the terms: but if I say, a Tree flies in the Air, I join things inconsistent,
and frame a false Proposition. Upon this second Act of the Understanding, the
imposition of Names seems to have been grounded; for a Name is nothing else but
a note of distinction, an arbitrary sign whereby we intend no more, than only
to impart to another man a notion which we have of a thing named, different
from the notions we have of other things. Proceeding on another step, we arrive
at the third Operation of the rational Faculty: we find that something will
follow from what we gathered before; as thus: If a Tree bears Fruit then it
grows, and this we call discursion.

Some assistance may be afforded us in searching out the nature of the
Understanding, or rational Faculty, if we reflect upon the notions we had of
things when we were Children, and by what steps and assistances our knowledge
advanced its self. A Child when he hears of a Tree, he understands the word,
because it has been (as we take it for granted) often inculcated to him, the
thing signified by it pointed at, and showed to him; and because it is a
generally received word, whereby all men (so far as he knows) mean such a
thing. But he cannot frame in his mind any Philosophical conception of it,
only he fancies some particular Tree which he has seen and remembers. But
after a competent observing of several Trees, which he observes all of them to
be erected with a full and strong stem, to be stretched and severed into diverse
branches, to bear Leaves and Fruit in their season; he lets slip the notion of
a particular Tree, and frames an universal notion of it in such like thoughts:
A solid body growing out of the earth, with boughs and branches stretched out,
and bearing Fruit. So after he has viewed diverse particular men, perceives
them all to be of an erect body, and to talk one with another, he abstracts (or
considers not) their individual properties, or appurtenances, their complexion,
temper, clothing, height of body, or the like; and when he thinks of a man, he
frames in his mind such a description of him, a living Creature of an erect
body, and that can tell others what he means. So this reiteration of Sense,
called by some the speculation of Phantasms, is one step whereby we creep on to
knowledge.

But for incorporeal things, which we observe not to make any vibration, or
pression upon the Organs of Sense; or (as some expess it) have no Species
wasted over from their utmost Orb to our Senses, in these it is a great while
before we can advance our thoughts any further, than the bare importance of the
words by which they are expressed. God, Angels, Spirits, and our souls, we have
very unsatisfying notions of them, the effects and remarkable operations which
all men necessarily attribute to them, satisfy us that they are; but when we
go about to conceive what they are, we are lost, and content our selves to say
they are incorporeal, immortal, invisible; as much as to say, we know what they
are not, we know not what they are.

Generally received Axioms, and clear fundamental Propositions, contrived
already to our hand, commonly find easy admission into our Understandings,
yet with some difference; for that truth which to one man seems very clear,
another cannot persuade himself to believe it: and to the same man some
propositions seem credible, others not. Many times he suspends his consent, and
then he is said to doubt; if he consents warily and weakly, he is said to have
an opinion: or firmly, and then he is said to believe. If this belief be
procured by the evidence of the thing its self, then it is called
demonstration; if by rational arguing, conviction; if by humane testimonies, we
may term it persuasion: if by infallible and divine authority, Faith. Which
degrees of Knowledge (if we consider rightly) proceed not from any difference
in the things, but from our Understandings, which look upon them with a
different aspect. And so much concerning a second step or help to our
Understandings, which is a borrowing of assistance from others.

When any thing is offered to a man's disquisition, a single Notion, a
Proposition, or dubious Question, what does he then do? but (as the usual
phrase is) cast about in his mind, rally his Thoughts, and put his
Understanding into such a posture that it may find it, and irradiate it: for
the Understanding is of the nature of Light, the more or less it illuminates a
thing, the clearer or obscurer is the reflection and representation of it to
us. Then if the Truth be of such a nature, that it correspond with that inbred
Light, those innate Notions which Nature (by which I mean, the power and
working of God in his Creatures) has imprinted in his mind, which in several
men are very various, of different degrees and qualities; how soon does he own
it? he cannot persuade himself but that he had some laboring apprehensions of
it before, and wonders he should be so long before he should find it out: and
so here seems to be discovered a third means of procuring and advancing our
Knowledge, which (to avoid new fangled terms) may be called the light of
Reason. That there is such a thing as this, will be easily granted; if we
consider, how that the first Inventer of any Science, ^^^eived not instructions
from others, b^t wrought out all by the mere a^^^^e force of his Understanding,
and that he which learns a Science, is usually prae-possest with some general
Notions of what he addresses himself to learn: and therefore the fundamental
Axioms or Principles of Arts are not undertaken to be proved, because they are
supposed to be evident to men's Understandings, which complies with them as soon
as they are delivered. Education and Institution infuse not any new quality
into the Soul, but only excite and draw forth the latent Notions; as the Sun by
its influence draws forth the Earth to its utmost fertility. There is in our
Souls a natural harmony or consent to the Principles of Sciences, but yet with
a difference; for one man is more inclinable to this, or that Science, than
another; not from any real difference in the nature and substance of the Soul
its self; but from the various aspects it carries with things; and the several
postures men put themselves into to pursue their ends.

By these admirable faculties and opperations through which we have traced the
soul, it will appear, that it is. To apprehend exactly what it is, and where it
peculiarly resides, is a matter of great obscurity; yet to procure some
satisfaction to our cucuriosity, let us suppose that there is in every living
creature a pure and agile substance, composed of (or at least resembling) air
and fire; such a substance as this will be capable of projecting, and expanding
its self, will have an active quick motion, and easy penetrability, especially
through the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, into every part of the body: and
withal be capable of perceiving any vibration or pression made upon the parts
of the body to which it is expanded; and such a substance is the soul of a
beast: Again, suppose such a substance dignified with a superaddition of power
from God, and a command to exercise such faculties as have been recited, and so
we have a tolerable and convenient account of the soul of man.

But to reassume my method, Timoclea (as always so especially) during the time
she was with child, observed good order in her diet, which was of meats of good
nourishment, but sparing and moderate, and in exercise, without which no body
can enjoy a convenient state of health, no not that of Infants unborn;
sedentariness in the Mother begets a dull unactivenesse in the Babe, moderate
walking prevents it: Nor was she less sedulous to avoid all disordered
passions, and perturbations of the mind; which, as they excite some unbecoming
symptoms in the Mother, so they operate upon the Child; of so great
importnance is it to the framing of a well shaped and well tempered babe, to
prevent annoyances before he be born; many perturbations of mind and indecent
gestures of the body may probably owe their original to some indiligences of
their Mothers before they were born.

Being born they administered unto him a small quantity of refined Sugar, to
clear the bowels of such slimy humors as usually reside there, and creeping
into the veins might produce convulsions, or other dangerous symptoms; they
washed him in clear fountain water with a small quantity of salt, thereby to
dry and consolidate the flesh, and strengthen the sinews. After they had first
carefully cut the umbilical vein, lest the parts thereabout should prove ill
proportioned and irregular. Vracus enim (ut perhibent) nimis coarctatus, and
constrictus, genitalia membra comprimit et sterilitatem plenumque inducit, idem
praeter justum laxatus, and distentus, vesicam ei annexam quasi poudere quodam
iisdem partibus incumbere sinit; unde penis in masculo, uterusve in foemina
supra modum augetur and cafesit, non sine priapismi and immodicae salacitatis
periculo. Nor were they less sedulous in wrapping and swathing his little body
to fortify it against the cold, and keep the parts from wringing and swerving
aside, and retain the hot exhalations from breaking out of the body.

But neither did they swath him too straight, nor immure him up too warm; the
first by crushing in the breast and ribs (which are then but cartilagineous and
flexible) hinders the free passage of humors, and may beget dangerous
obstructions: the other may contract a weak and effeminate temper, unfit to
encounter with variety of air and weather, to which he must afterward of
necessity be exposed. But as they cherished him by convenient heat, so as his
condition might by degrees, and not on a sudden, decline from that he enjoyed
in the womb; so by degrees they prudently inured him to the several qualities
of the air, when no excess prohibited it.

Timoclea her self was his Nurse, this she accounted her duty; and besides,
more conducing to the good of the child, that she should receive nutriment from
her whose temper was familiar to him, than from a stranger, which cannot but
alter the childs temper more or less: although in some cases it be prudence
to admit of a stranger, as if the mother be of an infirm or depraved
constitution; provided that such an one be chosen, as is of a good temperature,
and a vigorous elocution, which is of great efficacy to make the child lively,
and be preparative to his good pronunciation. Timoclea accustomed him to eat
often, but sparingly, because too much nourishment makes little ones gross and
thick, the stomach full stuffed, must needs thrust forth the parts adjacent, as
every one will easily imagine, but it hinders their growth in height. The
meats she gave him at first, were moist, and of easy digestion, agreeable to
his present constitution, and such as were usually given to children; more firm
and solid meats afterward, as he grew in strength. All these diligences used
about him, I have not collected as things remarkable and extraordinary; but
only to show that nothing considerable was omitted. But in this she observed
some singularly, that she did not (as it is usual with Nurses to do) terrify
him with bugbares, Chimera's, and such seemingly innocent fooleries, which they
will often inculcate to them, and please themselves with the starting and
aversion the little ones express at the sight or hearing of such things as
they usually scare them with; for indeed every motion, action, or gesture of a
Child carries a becomingnesse with it, and is pleasing to the beholders. This
lusory astonishment of Infants seems to carry no great appearance of harm, yet
may insensibly leave such an impression upon the fancy, that after reason and
discression obtain force, they find some trouble to correct and undeceive
themselves: some indecent tripidation and commotion invades them at their
incountring with such objects: and hence may proceed that secret aversion men
find in themselves from some things, (commonly called antipathy) a distaste they
took against it in their infancy, though no body observed how, or at what time;
terror and sadness acquired in infancy, cause one ever after to be pensive and
low spirited, and the same may be understood of any other passion of the mind:
So true is the observation of a grave and wise author, that we own the well and
evil being of our lives, to the discreet or ill managing of our infant years;
Crying is a thing which in infants cannot be avoided, and (if moderate) wants
not its benefit, it vents forth drowsy humors, which would make them unactive,
purges the brain, dilates the passages about the breast, stirs up the natural
heat, and makes them lively; but if excessive, exhausts the moisture and
spirits too much, makes them disposed to peevishness, and lays the foundation
of a choleric and froward disposition.

When he began to walk about and prattle, he was entertained with such toys as
not only pleased his mind, but somewhat busied the memory and fancy, by
numbering, ordering, and regular contriving: Although his Parents love and
indulgence was very great, yet they were so discreet as not to discover it to
be so; they would not have him treated as a little Prince, or exercise a petty
Monarchy in the family; but taught him to be obedient betimes, and courteous to
all though never so mean, assuring themselves, he would be so much the more fit
to govern with discression when time should be, he was not accustomed to too
much pleasure and liberty, to have his mind fulfilled in all things, but a
restraint sometimes put upon him, to teach him contentedness, and the skill of
willingly wanting something; all inimical affectation of gestures, and pomp of
words was abandoned; commendations and encouragements when he did well,
correction and rebuke for doing amiss, were not forgotten: the latter are as
useful as the former, where there is need; but for him they were not of much
necessity, his Parents example and mild instructions were sufficient to keep
him in good order; and I have formerly told the Reader, how prudently the
family was governed, and what manner of servants retained; a thing very
considerable, for there are no such pernicious enemies to good education, as
rude and uncivil servants who condescending to the humors of children more than
the Parents and Masters ought to do, cause them to affect and learn their
gestures and discourses, how rude soever; and many times they will endeavor to
vilify and bring into dislike him that instructs them otherwise. Many Parents
busying their thoughts about the limiting of their Fortunes and future Estates,
take no notice of these Mischiefs. But in a Family where no remarkable Vice is
tolerated, nothing but good actions seen, not an uncivil expression heard, (as
it was in Charinus's house) where shall a Child learn evil? if at any time his
Parents were undecent in their passions and expressions, (as some forcible
occasion might urge them) they would not (if it might be avoided) let him
observe it; much reverence and grave respect is due to an old man, Juven. Sat.
14.
but more to a Child: for the first, the fear is only lest he should see any
evil in us; the other lest he should learn any by us: but whatsoever was
exemplary and good, he was always admitted a Spectator at it, as their
devotions, though in private; where, though very young, the frequent
reiteration of the thing begat some kind of earnest observation, and cast into
his mind the early seeds of Piety, which revealed themselves in mature fruits
afterward, as I intend to show, if God permit. Certainly, this ocular way of
teaching is the certainest, where it may be had; one may sooner learn to steer
a ship in the Sea by seeing it often done, than by a great many tedious
Precepts and Rules; not only Children, but Men are led more by Examples than
Precepts; those elaborate Discourses and earnest Exhortations to Piety and
Goodness, wherewith some think to work wonders in reforming the World, have not
so forcible an operation upon men, as the example of one eminent Person. The
People are as much instructed by the eye as by the ear; and therefore he that
has the intention to make them irreligious, need but only astonish them with
some strange sublime notions, take away their Ceremonies and religious
Services, which have something of visible in them, and the work is done.

Eriander was rather of a round than long visage, his eyes of a Hazle or
Chestnut color, equally fixed, ready and vigorous in motion, neither promnient,
nor sinking in their orbits, his hair a bright yellowish color, but inclining
by degrees to brown: his forehead somewhat high and smooth, and of a convenient
breadth: his complexion florid and ruddy, mixed with a convenient blushing: his
exterior lineaments of an exact symetry, his stasture ever keeping a
correspondency with his years, so that it was conjectured he would prove of a
convenient middle stature: his skin betwixt smooth and rugged; his veins of a
fit dimension, and his pulse moderate. His lovely countenance and sweet
disposition caused him to be beloved of all Children; such as were of equal age
and bigness would strive to ingratiate themselves into his favor, to keep him
company, to study to imitate him, to please him, to be pleased and delighted
with him. Comeliness is of its self attractive; how much more when it is joined
with good conditions? it wins the love of people that are not rude and
barbarous, diffuses a kind of hilarity to all that behold it. Indeed all the
Characterisms and Idea's of the Countenance are contagious, (the word may be
taken in a good as well as in a bad sense) they fascinate, and at a distance
infect the Beholders; whether it be by certain rays, steams, or emanations
emergent from them, which make a pression or light motion upon the nerves;
especially of such persons as are of a delicate and tender complexion: or
whether it be by some other occult means; but so it is, that one cheerful man
in a Company, one of a free dilated spirit, more or less irradiates the whole
company with his presence into a serenity of countenance; one sad person
infects a whole company with some contagion of sadness.

Before Eriander was put abroad to School, they taught him to read and write at
home, as it were by way of recreation, they had a smooth and square plate of
brass, and of convenient bigness for a child to handle and carry about; in this
Plate, or Table, the draughts and effigies's of all the letters in the Alphabet
were engraven exactly; they acquainted him with the true shape and distinct
names of them, and caused him to follow the draughts of them with a little
Style, or Pensil provided for that purpose; by this running as it were in the
Channels, and following the stream of every letter, while the hollow strokes
restrained his hand from going awry, he gained a dexterity in it, and was not a
little assisted to write with pen and ink, because his hand was habituated by
this lusory way of writing; but in spelling, or forming of syllables, (to which
the eye contributes no advantage) they took the opportunity of all vacant hours
to inculcate them by often repetition, endeavoring above all things to procure
a clear and distinct pronunciation, to which no more was required but practice;
for nature had so framed all the Organs serving to speech, that none of them
was mutilated, or irregular. They still prae-possess'd him with a love of
Learning, and a desire of his Book and the School; contrary to the indiscreet
practice of many people, who please themselves in terrifying children with the
Rod and Ferula, whereby they bring them into a dislike of Learning, before they
have discretion to know what it is. His Father obtained a good assurance of his
proficiency, not only from his comely lineaments of body, ingenuous aspect,
vigorous elocution, and the like exterior characters of a towardly nature, but
from those more immediate and signal tokens which are less obvious, but afford
more certain and infallible presages. 1. A ready Wit, which appeared by his
pertinent answers to any question within the bounds of a child's capacity. 2. A
faithful Memory, which discovered its self, by giving an ingenuous account of
any remarkable passage he had heard of. 3. He was patient and industrious, not
like those hasty and volatile wits, who having a nimble apprehension, and
confidence withal, perform all they go about with little pains, and in a short
space raise great expectations concerning themselves; but soon spend their
stock, become Bankrupts, and, like a nine-dayes wonder, are soon forgotten. 4.
He had an earnest affection and desire to Learning; a thing so considerable
that without a kind of love and earnest desire men seldom thrive in any
profession. 5. He was attentive, and would express a kind of exultation and
admiration at the recital of any remarkable and ingenuous passage. 6. He was
inquisitive, even to importunity; which in a child is commendable; and although
it may seem to proceed from overmuch boldness, yet if it arise not to downright
sauciness, it is not to be blamed; such a one will grow sedate as he proceeds
in years. 7. He was very ready in imitating (not the Fantastical gestures and
expressions of vain but) the decent speeches and addresses of discreet and
well-bred persons. 8. He modestly affected commendations, a powerful incentive
to goodness, if it meet with an ingenuous nature; and a touchstone to try ones
temper, whether he incline to Pride or Humility. Commendations for well-doing,
and rebukes for an offense prevail more with a good nature, than blows; which
also to one of a bad nature oft-times do more hurt than good; for obdurate
spirits are so far from being cudgelled into goodness, that thereby they gather
strength in naughtiness. These eight tokens meeting together in any child,
promise good success, and (if due culture and instruction be adjoined) silence
all doubt of his proficiency in learning; but he that is not in some tolerable
sort thus qualified, (though we ought not rashly and hastily to despair of any,
what is now latent Time may reveal) is not fit to be a Student in the Liberal
Arts.

At the age of seven years Eriander was admitted into the famous School of
Entaphia, where we must now leave him at his book in earnest; that lusory and
recreative way of teaching (which served as a preparative to make Learning seem
delightful) must bear date no longer; it will not suit with the discipline of
a School. Now because the orders and manner of government observed in this
little Commonwealth, were somewhat different from such as are usually observed
in other Schools, it will not be amiss to set them down. It was governed by a
President or Provost, whose charge was to take Inspection of the Masters and
inferior Officers, to instruct the Scholars in the principles of Religion and
Manners, at certain times appointed for their instruction and examination; and
especially to give order and direction, that every one should be fitted for
that professiand employment, to which, after due examination, he found him most
inclined: the first or lowest Master (for every one was absolve Master over
those that belonged to him) taught them to read and understand the language of
the Country; the next taught them to write and cast up accounts, that so such
as were not found fit to proceed to the nobler Sciences, might in due time be
qualified for some other Profession, according as their peculiar Genius and
their Parents desires invited them. The third taught the Latin; and the fourth
the Greek tongue. Besides they had a Steward or Purveyer, which provided diet
and other accomodations for such as were remote from their Parents, and gave up
his account to the President at the end of every three months.

The President and Masters had their convenient lodgings private and apart, as
also a room to teach their Scholars in, but in the public Chapel they all
met together twice in a day; and in the Refectory or Dining Room: which being
very capacious, served the Scholars as a Cloister to walk or recreate
themselves in rainy or tempestious weather: In fair and clear days they were
enjoined to disport themselves abroad in the open air, in a large Court
provided for that purpose, and so situated that the President might easily see
from his Chamber and observe their carriage. The number of Scholars under the
first Master (by the statutes of the house) was not to exceed 30, and the same
number was alloted to the second; but the third and fourth might entertain 50,
because such as they dealt with could be conveniently digested into forms, and
so be taught together: but with the consent of the President, any of them*
might somewhat exceed that number.

After that Eriander had been resident there about a year, it was thought fit
by the President, (having also consulted with his Father about it,) that he
should be committed to the tuition of Amalthaeus, who was then Master of the
Latin School; not as if the learning of a language were such a choice piece of
breeding, (as some imagine, who derive all their hopes concerning their
Children only from their nimblenesse in learning the Latin or Greek tongue,
and despair of such as prove dull at them; whereas many become excellent at
other Sciences, who for want of a good memory and patience can never conquer
the difficulties of Grammar:) but they know that the Latin tongue and Greek
(which he also learned,) being the receptacles of all Arts and Sciences, would
be an incomparable advantage to him, whatsoever faculty he should apply himself
to. They intended not he should be a plodding Student in the tongus, but having
once made some Art his aim, should timely quit himself of the sollicitous
search and critical inquiring into words. Though some drowsy brains can; (yet
noble and ingenious minds cannot) perpetually confine themselves to such
studies, but having gained the principles of that Art which they intend to
profess, and being fit to appear with some credit; make use of their
knowledge: which they every day increase and refine by conversation, discourse,
and practice: whereas they that please them selves merely in speculation, and
reduce not their knowledge to practice, applauding themselves with a brave
conceit that they are learned men, the World puts them off with the homely
title of meer-Schollars: and steems them as things of small use.

This Amalthaeus was a learned man and studious; but so discreet in the
ordering of his studies, that they hindered not his employments, nor disposed
him to a Cynical morosnesse, whereby one becomes unfit for society. He made
profession only of Grammar, but was not a stranger in other Arts, by help
whereof he was the better able to illustrate what he read to his Scholars;
there is a league between Arts, and they mutually contribute help one to
another. He was of a moderate temper and winning carriage, could condescend to
the capacities and dispositions of Children, and so gain their love and
attention, a dexterity which every learned man cannot attain to; Teaching is a
skill by its self, in which a man of mean parts and no great learning, many
times out-does the greatest Scholars. The most acute and ingenious men are
usually fierce and impatient in teaching, they vex and torment themselves when
they find that so hardly perceptible by another, which to them seem so easy;
and in such a case (if discretion be wanting) they tyrannize over the wretched
Children, and correct them not so much for their benefit, as to expiate their
own fury. But Amalthaeus would not be angry except it were upon an urgent
occasion; nor then without discretion: he never corrected any for dullness,
forgetfulness, and the like effects in nature, and was so diligent in
admonishing, and exacting a strict account of their studies at set and known
hours, and so constant with them, as they seldom gave him occasion to correct
them for negligence: but for palpable and stubborn carelessness, vicious and
lewd behavior, he corrected them with severity.

It is a great question whether mild or severe discipline be best; the first
place Children gratify indulgent Parents, and acquire the reputation of a kind
nature to him that used it; but the latter obtains success with more
certainty; procures obedience and diligence, best curbs and restrains petulant
and stubborn natures, as mildness without caution degenerates into remissness,
and begets carlesnesse in those that are under government; so strictness
without discretion, advances it self into a furious tyranny, and begets a
loathing; but where severity has prejudiced one, it may truly be said that
remissness has undone a hundred. Those times, and those Nations wherein
indulgence has been in fashion, have produced men of spruce and spritely
parts, commonly called wits: but they who have used strict discipline have ever
bred the bravest men, witness the Spartans, ancient Romans, and some societies
in our time; the sum of all is this, prudence accommodating its self to the
particular tempers of Children, observes a middle way betwixt both extremes,
and deals with every one so as is convenient. This prudent observing of every
Child's temper and capacity, is a thing especially to be commended to such as
have the tuition of youth; but it cannot be brought within the compass of any
rules, being the result of many reiterated experiences, and much practice.

But to proceed, he invited and allured modest Children with commendations,
good words, and sometimes with gifts: the bold and stubborn he terrifyed with a
stern look, and sharp correction. Such as were over-talkative were kept from
company, they still invited to it; frolic dispositions allayed with a grave
and serious look, the sad and pensive treated with a cheerful aspect. The
industrious had their supernumerary hours of liberty freely allowed them; for
he knew that sedentariness produces ill humors, which make them unactive, and
hinder their growth; which convenient exercise disperses, and causes them to
return to their books with the greater alacrety and vigor: The careless and
slothful were kept strictly to their tasks, over nimble wits (for some such
there are) were stopped in their careere, yet with a special care that they might
not be discouraged; He found that a merry sharp conceit, or handsome rebuke
prevailed with some, diverse might be laughed or shamed out of their
naughtiness, others afrighted out of it; and accordingly he treated them.
Sullen and Melancholic natures are of all others the most hard to be won; to
humor and bemone them, makes themselves conceited and pleased with their folly:
severity makes them desperate; his way was to let them alone, and seem to take
no notice of them for the present, till such time as the humor had consumed its
self and was vanished; this done, he found seasonable rebuks and advice as
effectual unto these, as unto any other: in this he imitated the prudent
Physician, who first prepares and concocts ill humors, then attempts to remove
them.

As to his exteriors, he was of a becoming stature and personage, a stout
spirit, and manly elocution: these contributed something toward the gaining of
respect, and keeping in awe the little people, who are ready to disesteem one
of a low spirit, childish behavior, or unhandsome lineaments of body, though
otherwise of abilities to teach them.

He had the happy vein of making his instructions pleasing, by couching and
intermingling them with pertinent fables and ingenious comparisons and
examples; which insinuate into the minds of Children sooner, than serious
discourses, that are not so quickly adverted by them. And that they might
perfectly understand what he read or dictated to them, such order was observed,
as that which went before induced that which followed by a natural consequence;
and too great speed (which confounds tender wits) carefully avoided: yet with
an uninterrupted constancy. For, as in filling narrow-mouthed vessels, if we
power a full stream upon them, more slips beside than runs in: So in tumultuous
and precipitated teaching, many instructions are lost, because the intention of
the hearer cannot comprehend them all: If any exercise were to be performed,
which they had not used before, he would first do it himself, causing them to
look on and observe; so guiding their hands, and as it were directing their
steps, that they might afterward make trial of themselves.

The method which he observed in teaching the Latin tougue, was not any
newfangled device of a private man, but such as was generally approved of and
allowed by learned men, and enjoined by statutes to be used in that place. It
proceeded by these steps. 1. They taught them to pronounce the Letters
distinctly, and to know the difference. Then 2. They acquainted them with the
nature of syllables: And 3. with the several kinds of words, and their manner
of declining; omitting the scrupulous and lesse-necessary exceptions, till they
had learned all the Grammatical Rules. Then 4. They proceeded to the usual and
ordinary rules of construction; reading withal some easy Latine-book. And to
imprint the rules of Grammar more firmly in their memory, they were obliged to
call them to account by examinations once in three days at least. Proceeding
on to Authors, they 5. taught them the nature and differences of accents, and
the points of distinction in sentences, that in reading they might know when to
suspend and stop their voice, when to raise or depresse it; and besides that,
They 6. caused them to parse every sentence, giving an account of words and
points of construction, according to the rules they had learned. It was 7.
their office to show the Scholars the order observable in construing; as if in
the sentence there were a Vocative case, that to be taken first. If a question
were asked, the interrogative is first to be construed; If these be not in the
sentence, (or if they be; then next to them) the nominative case, and
whatsoever agrees with it; the Verb, and whatsoever is governed of that, as an
Infinitive mood, or casual word; but because practice and observation are the
best guides in these things; therefore 8. they caused them to make frequent
trial; 9. So soon as they had thoroughly learned the ordinary Rules of Syntax;
they spoke Latin not only in the School, but in the Refectory and at their
play. 10. They used double translations 2 or 3 days in a week; turned a
sentence or two in some Latin Author into the vulgar tongue, and laying aside
their books, into Latin again: which was a means to make them exact in the
Orthography of both tongues, and prepared them for making Epistles, Themes,
Verses and such School-exercises by way of Imitation, and such Exercises they
made twice in a week.

This method (though disliked by some newfangled persons, which cavil at every
thing themselves devise not, because it was an old way of teaching, and thought
too tedious by such as loved their ease) was so handsomely managed by the
dexterity of Amalthaeus, that the School very much flourished in his time, and
bred up many excellent Wits; for, deliberate proceedings, and sedate
advancements, accompanied with certainty, produce better effects in teaching,
than overhasty and precipitate courses: which make a great splendour for a
while, but conspire with time to betray their own vanity. Some have adventured
to comprize the whole Latin tongue into a portable Enchiridion, which being
thoroughly learned, they conceive the children thereby sufficiently initiated,
and able to manage their studies of themselves, without any further expatiating
in Authors; a design very plausible; and pity it is, it answers not
expectation: for if it did, it would free the Teachers and Scholars of much
trouble incident to the known way of learning a language by reading of Authors.
It is probable that they who first recommended it to use, had formerly learned
the Latin tongue by reading of diverse Authors, and at last meeting with, or
contriving such an abridgement, as comprised the most remarkable words and
phrases, found a marvelous assistance afforded to their memory; which in small
space retrived what they had so long quested after in many volumes: whereupon
they fancyed that it might produce a quick dispatch in teaching of young
Scholars. Indeed to a man that has spent some compentent time in the study of
any Art, or language, a Compendium is a singular help to his memory: but one
that comes raw and unfurnished, will never prove absolute Master of it, if he
trades only in abridgements. To ingratiate this compendious method, they
allege by way of comparison, that a man may soon take a view of diverse
creatures enclosed in a room, such as Noah's Ark; whereas it would be a long and
weary labor to travel into several parts to take a view of them: So to peruse
variety of words and phrases in an Enchiridion, contrived on purpose to exhibit
them, is a work of small labor and short time: True; but as he that views those
creatures so enclosed, cannot take a particular view, or make so distinct
observation of their natures as by traveling abroad and taking notice of their
haunts, feedings, actions, and the like; because the very crowd obstructs his
animadversion, and deprives him of a leisurable observation, very necessary in
the exercises of memory. So he that attemps to gain a language crampt into a
Compendium, whereby the sense becomes forced and obscure, shall never attain to
it with so much certainty, as he that will take the pains to travel over the
choicest Authors, where he may find his pains requited with a knowledge of the
natural and sincere meaning of words; the genuine use and extent of phrases:
besides the knowledge of many excellent things on the by, which ever leave some
impression upon the most perfunctory and careless Reader, and will be useful in
the ordinary translations of his life. Our progress in learning resembles the
motion of the shadow of a Dial, the shooting forth of grass, or (to take a
comparison nearer,) the advancement of the mind in knowledge resembles the
growth of the body in stature; the most scrutinous eye is not able to discover
each minute degree of augmentation: but it may easily be observed at convenient
distances of time. In which particular there is nevertheless a great
diversity; some after a small continuance at their books are able on a sudden
to utter all they know, and make show of more. Others are unready upon sudden
encounters, who yet after a convenient research, can deliver (a less specious,
but) a more solid account of such things as seemed to be latent in them. And
the same is observable in men who lay claim to wisdom or Religion, about which
many will discourse with taking expressions, and great ornament of words:
whilst others cannot give a sudden account of them, yet upon any occasion when
they come to practice, clearly discover that they are guided by such rules that
occur not at present to their remembrance. This is so well known to the wise,
that whereas men of vulgar understandings admire the first sort, they justly
prefer the latter: and if such quick dilated wits sometimes deceive wise men,
it is but as glosed wares or counterfeit jewels impose upon men at the first
view, which when exactly looked into lose their grace; or, as many Romances and
Poetical stories, which the oftener they are read, the less we are affected
with them; whereas men of sedate and profound minds so thriftily manage their
discourse, that the oftener we converse with them, the more we may learn of
them. Besides what has been said concerning those compendious ways of
teaching, it is very well known to the learned that such abridgments are
usually made up of the Radical and chief words of a language loosly tackt
together. But the learned know very well that an exact understanding of the
particles and small words is exceeding necessary, because in the use of these
the idiom and propriety of languages is chiefly seen: In which thing such
abridgements being defective, cannot but fall short of what they promise.

Their method for the Greek, because it was not different from this for the
Latin Tongue, I shall not need to describe: So it was, that Eriander proved a
good Proficient in both languages; insomuch that at the age of seventeen years,
he was judged fit for the University; neither was he ever removed from that
School, but kept close to the same method: a great advantage doubtless to his
proficiency, for young Wits, like young Trees, by being often transplanted are
robbed of their strength, and become unfruitful. The reason is evident, for to
omit that seldom any two Masters observe the same method punctually in every
respect; so that by changing the minds of children are distracted, and the
former notions disturbed: It is a great while ere a perfect alliance and
correspondence betwixt the Genius of the Master and Scholar can be acquired;
which, though it seem a nicety, a kind of mysterious conceit; yet indeed is a
principal matter to advance his proceeding. This consideration is worthy to be
recommended to those newfangled and unconstant Parents, who upon any small
occasion of dislike, post their Children from one Master to another, seldom for
their good, though they change for the better. It is a bold assertion, and yet
very true, and grounded upon sufficient observation; that a Master, or Tutor,
of mean and ordinary parts, may teach a Scholar well enough, if he be
diligent, and the Scholar capable: (presuming the Scholar shall not be
admitted under the tuition of one more ignorant than himself) for, by a
continued diligence both will do themselves good, there being no such way for a
man to improve his skill, as by communicating it and teaching others.

And now that Eriander was to lanch forth into the world, and appear more
publicly at the University, and such places of concourse and frequency; care
was taken to put him under the tuition of a grave and learned man, and withal
to procure him the acquaintance of such young Students, as, besides their
conference and discourse, which contributed much to him in relation to
learning, might also by their civility of manners induce him to courses of
Honesty and Manliness. There are not wanting in such places many that take
occasion from their unripe years, goodnature, and unwary judgments, to make a
prey of young Gallants; to whom (as they say of Harlots) they wish all good
things except Discretion. It is certain that from seventeen to seven and twenty
is the most fickle and dangerous part of a man's life; Before that time the
Parents or Masters Authority, fear, or the want of occasions prevent or keep
under many disorders, which then, if ever, will begin to appear; and are not so
easily remedied, because they are become more sturdy and inflexible, like stiff
and tough bodies, which may by violence be compressed and drawn into such a
Figure as their nature abhors; but so soon as the mastering violence leaves
them at liberty, they return with a nimble jerk unto their natural state.

One thing I had almost forgot; his Father would never let him know what estate
he intended to settle upon him, till he should arrive at such a pitch of
discretion as to set no more than a due estimation upon it; he had observed,
that the mention of riches to children often made them remiss in their studies,
insolent in their behavior, and not so tractable and obedient as those which
are under discipline ought to be; especially if some Flatterer be ready at hand
to tickle their ears with a pleasing conceit, that they are born to an estate
which will maintain them and their retinue bravely, without labor; a long
worshipful title, which it is pity to blemish with the name of a Scholar:
these will supply all defects, cause the people to magnify them, and shadow
over all the stains of their nature and manners. But Charinus still told his
Son, he must endeavor to apply himself to so me Science for his ornament and
accommodation, though not merely for his support, though his estate should be
never so plentiful, yet to be brought up to an Employment would be neither
burden nor dispargement, but an advanage many ways. If an Estate fails,
Industry may support a man; If his complexion incline him to any particular
vice, the wit of man never devised a better remedy against it than Employment;
the thoughts of vain pleasures and the pensive remembrance of calamities
privily steal away from an Artist or Student, whose mind is immerst in the
contemplation of his Art: whilst he that for want of Employment knows not how
to give his thoughts entertainment, or keep company with time, is almost
necessitated to some vain or degenerate course, and having nothing to do,
learnes to do ill.

For the choice of his study, or particular faculty to which he should be
designed, it was now thought fit to consider of it; and provide that he should
apply himself to such a course as was most agreeable to his disposition; not
forced upon that from which he might seem averse. It is true; a man of good
parts and rare ingenuity, may by diligence attain a competent insight into any
Science, so far at least as concerns the Theory; and to give a rational account
of most Sciences is expected in a Scholar: yet there is a peculiar Genius, or
propensity of mind in every man, whereby he is more vigorously inclined to one
Science than to another, and an infinite variety there is in men's wits, and
natural faculties; the principal causes whereof are these.

1. The appointment and designation of God, who having placed men in a world
adorned with variety of objects, distributes to them diversity of notions and
conceits to apprehend; different humors and affections to desire, some one
thing, some another: thereby to maintain a general intercourse among them. But
in regard that God works by second and subordinate causes, which fall more
evidently under our observation, and many of them are manageable by us: We must
secondly, consider the positions and aspects of the Stars; For experience (the
only rule in these matters) seem to make it appear, that at the instant of a
child's birth, (or rather more powerful at his conception,) he receives an
influence from the Planets, or other Celestial bodies, which at that juncture
of time have dominion over the place where the conception or birth is made.
Such then as have Jupiter for the Lord of their genitures, shall be
quick-witted, merry and of a gentle nature. Where Mercury is Lord of the
horoscope, his influence produces (they say,) a quick wit, but versatile and
unconstant. Mars causes fierceness and temerity. Saturn makes men slow, but
commonly sure. The Sun and Moon, according to their various aspects, produce
several alterations in our bodies, in our sensitive faculties, (and
accidentally in the understanding, which often conforms its self to the
sensitive part,) is clear by daily experience, and it is probable that the
other Celestial bodies may in their degree produce diverse admirable effects,
though they be not so obvious and apparent, 3. The temper of the body has a
remarkable influence upon the operations of the mind; for, as water sliding
through a Mine grates off some part of the matter through which it slides,
dissolves it into its self, and so admits a tincture and taste of the Mineral;
or as rainwater which is of its self of an uniform taste and savor, is
diversified when sucked into plants of a different temper; in Rue it is bitter,
in Sorrel sour, and sweet in Glycyrrize: so the Soul necessitated to move and
act in a body full of several humors, although it receives no substantial
alteration; yet by its operations it clearly discovers an alliance contracted
with those humors, especially the arterial blood and spirit which are the Souls
chief instruments; so that men of a hot temper (agreeable to the nature of that
quality) are active, spritely, of a ready conceit, quick dispatch, and (if the
heat exceed) peevish, or frantic. The cold are slow, reserved, tenatious, and
(if the quality exceed) disposed to Melancholy, sadness and despair. Moisture
(if conveniently tempered) causes a good remembrance; if otherwise, it makes
men dull, heavy and sottish. A clear dryness makes men discreet, of a clear
wit, to discern or illuminate things. Next to this 4. the different habitude
and proporiton of the body may be of some force, for such as are of an immence
stature, through the diffusion of the spirits, are observed to be (for the most
part) dull and heavy in the exercises of the mind: the little (through the
combining and close uniting of the natuarl heat,) peevish, fierce and froward,
and the middle stature is most commendable. But 5. a more remarkable and
immediate cause may be derived from the various faculties of the soul, of which
all men have not an equal share; some enjoy a good memory, and those are
fittest to deal with such Arts wherein are many names, words, and rules. Such
as have strong fancies, quick imaginations, are fittest for such Professions in
which there is required quaintness of discourse, handsome contrivances,
symmetry or proportion. They who excel in depth of understanding, are best able
to search out the nature and causes of things, to determine doubts and decide
controversies, to make choice, and judge of things, to make subtle and deep
inquiries, and are therefore best qualified for such Sciences as are guided by
these exercises of the mind. Jo. Huartes and Anton. Zara.
And to this Triplicity I find all variety of wits reduced, by those that have
formerly written concerning them; and not inconveniently; because these three
faculties are of such remarkable effecacy in the gaining of learning. But in
these faculties there is much variety, which deserves our remark: for if we
look upon the judgment or understanding-faculty, we find this man quick, the
other slow in the exercises of it; one man reserved and close, another free,
open, and communicative: And the like differences appear in such as excel in
the faculty of imagination, some are nimble, others deliberate, some of a
recluse, others of a dilated genius. And as for the memory, some are readiest
in remembering of words; some soonest remember places, others the names of men,
but most men's memories soonest retain sentences orderly placed, few has such
vast memories as to recollect a multitude of indigested unconnexed words,
neither would it be a thing of any great use, but words duly ordered and
comprised, contribute a great advantage to the memory; this variety which is
discovered in these three faculties shall be taken notice of in due place. 6.
The different passions and several ends, to which men's appetites lead them are
to be considered, a covetous man usually applies himself to some lucrative Art;
an ambitious man to such as is most in esteem, and may further his promotion,
and is content to be a stranger in the rest, which are not subservient to his
design. 7. And lastly, Education, for the mind as it receives an impression
from those objects it has been most acquainted with in youth retains them very
firmly, by degrees falls in love with them, and by consequence with such Arts
as have relation to them.

These are the principal reasons of that variety which is found in men in
relation to the gaining of Arts; there are diverse other, which because they
have power to alter their complexion, humor and inclination, may occasionally
dispose them to such Sciences as be most agreeable to the temper they have
contracted: As 1. the Laws, and 2. the Customs of Nations, which if good and
wholesome, dispose people to industry and honesty; if corrupt, deprave their
minds, blind the eyes of many men, silence the voice of nature, and raze the
dictates of reason out of their affections, so as the most pernicious vice
being tolerated by custom, will soon be approved and beloved by men, and gain
the reputation of a kind of Virtue; Wantonness will be accounted
Good-breeding, and Licentiousness a generous Liberty, Intemperance Liberality,
Impudence Courage, and valor; Drunkeness will usurp the less-distastful name
of Good-fellowship, Adultery lose its lesse-pleasing name under the title of
Courtship; nay, Incest its self, and other unnatural vices, have through the
prevalency of a corrupt custom passed without control among some whole Nations.
On the contrary, Virtue is often traduced, and good qualities defamed by odious
names; Modesty is accounted silliness, or want of wit and breeding: Temperance
called covetousness, gravity and thrift clownishnesse. 3. Something may be
attributed to the different forms of government men live under; in an
Aristocracie, we may observe the fervor, arrogance, and ambition of the
Grandees; their engines and intricate contrivances to raise monyes, to advance
their families, to purchase great Titles, to live in splendour, to subvert their
equals, and keep under their inferiors; the public concernments always
pretended, but never regarded; public Revenues horded up in private Coffers;
Virtue is discountenanced, discipline neglected; wealthy men in great power,
the inferior people slavish and beggarly: hence proceed factions and
animosities, treacherous attempts against great men, and the like. In a popular
government the rich slavishly court the people, in order to the acquiring of
power, the people grow insolent and conceited: True and cordial Honesty is
condemned, airy and frothy opinions of knowledge altogether in fashion, with a
vaunting bravery concerning their own, and contempt of former times: a general
licentiousness and toleration of all enormities prevails; youth is given over
to all voluptuousness, and debauchery; which they miscal a free and generous
liberty: and this the great men many times smoothly and closly connive at,
because thereby an advantage is offered them of engrossing the Estates of young
Prodigals. (Such mischeifes may and do happen in the best government, but in
this they seem more naturally to grow up;) Through this general toleration and
liberty every man begins to have a good conceit of himself, esteems himself
not inferior to any, but as good as the best: Inferior persons arise by degrees
to such a height of insolence, that they contemn their superiors; servants
prove disrespective to their Masters, and children to their Parents; youth
grows imperious and stubborn; factions and disorders prevail among the people,
who wanting means to secure their own quiet, and lay these disorders which they
have conjured up; some cunning popular Grandee peradventure offers himself, or
is made choice of to be their Guardian and Protector, who (to carry on his
design with less suspicion) salutes and courts the silly multitude; is their
servant, and will sacrifice his Interest, his life and all, to promote theirs:
but once advanced beyond their reach, makes a prey of them, keeps them poor,
that so if they have the will, yet they may not have the power to resist him:
To all men who are eminent either for Wealth, Wisdom, or Courage, he is in a
manner necessitated to be an Enemy; and it shall go hard but he will charge
them with some crime, that he may have some color to destroy them: but none
sooner taste of his fury, than such as have been instrumental to his advancment,
if (as it commonly happens) they once begin to grumble at his greatness. And
this is the original and nature of a Tyranny, which (if we believe Plato) ever
arises out of a Democracy. De repub. Dialog. 8.
But in a well settled Monarchy, the forementioned disorders and corruptions of
manners are not so often occasioned; Arts are more encouraged and esteemed,
obedience and order punctually observed; men better restrained from
naughtynesse, and not so much inclined to pernicious Arts. Among other causes
we may 4. reckon Company, and 5. Example, especially of great men, whose
practice is thought a sufficient warrant for inferiors to do the like; vulgar
persons readily comply with the humors of great men, as little Wheels are
regulated by the motion of the greater. Besides 6. men incur manifest
alterations by Age, not only in body, but in mind too: young men are generally
frolic and kind hearted, old men morose and tenacious, a covetous young man
(they say) is a Monster in nature; and as these humors prevail in men, so do
they accordingly bend their studies to such things as suit best with their
humors. 7. Diet is of no small importance, whether we respect the quantity, or
the quallity of it: for although our Stomach macerate the meat and turns it
into the very substance of our body, yet does it not so subvert the qualities
of it, but that of cold meats ( viz meats of a cold quality) cold blood and
humors are generated; so that our blood and spirits (by help of which we
exercise all the operations of life, sense, and understanding) are varied
according to the diversity of meats we feed upon; light and tenuious meats
sparingly feed upon, cannot but convey some perspicuity to the Brain, and a
full and gross diet cloud and dull the Spirits. 8. The Country administers
much alteration, and produces manifest differences in this particular,
Northerly people through the density of their blood and spirits are stern,
stout, and fierce. The Southern having more thin evanid spirits become hereby
more active. Islanders, because of that influence a mixed and unconstant Air
has upon their humors, are observed to be more unsettled in matters of Religion
and government, than such as inhabit the Continent. 9. Also particular
scituations in the same Country are to be noted, For people that live by the
Seaside are more generally disposed to traffic, than they of the
Inland-countrey; such as border upon ill neighbors give their minds to
quarreling, either in Suits of Law or open War. And 10. the nature of the Soil,
or rather the Air altered by the Soil; as we see, that people who live in
Mountanous and dry places, with a pure and clear Air, are for the most part,
not always, (some powerful cause may intervene) more acute, and pregnant than
such as live in Fenny and Morish places, where they suck in a gross and
concrete Air. 11. The Genius of the Age is not to be omitted, for sometimes
seem peculiarly bent to feats of Arms; in another age learning flourishes; and
of the parts of learning, sometimes one kind seems to be in fashion, and in the
next Age another. 12. And lastly, the success and event of things, much alters
the minds and affections of men, especially the common sort, who are easily
cheated into a belief that whatsoever has obtained success is lawful, and to
be practiced: So that if any wicked design (for example Rebellion) obtains
success in a Country, it will soon acquire reputation among the vulgar; a
vein of rebellion will diffuse it self into servants and all sorts of inferior
people, encouraging them to shake off the yoke of Authority: On the contrary,
many men are restrained from wickedness, more by observing the ill event that
attends it, than out of any inclination to goodness; many encouraged to virtue
and wisdom, Arts and Sciences only by the reputation and esteem they carry in
the World; the good success and profit that attends them. To these causes I
should have annexed our Parents, and Nurses, the four Elements, and some other;
but their efficacy is discernable by what has be said concerning the rest. As
for the four humors and Complexions (to which all men are usually reduced) it
is sufficient to say that the Sanguin are spritely and active in the exercises
of the mind; except there be a superfluity of blood, for that makes men dull and
heavy. The Choleric are prompt and hasty. The Phlegmatic lazy and unready. The
Melancholic reserved, and commonly understand more than they can readily utter.

To put every one upon that employment he most affects, and to which his
particular Genius inclines him, (which was designed and much promoted by
Euphorbus the President of Entaphia) is a work very beneficial; for it cannot
be convenient for a Nation, either that persons unfit should be designed to
serve their Country as Scholars, or that one man should engrosse diverse
employments, and undertake the practick part of several Arts, which perhaps
have no alliance with (or dependence upon) one another. Common observation
discovers what mischeifes arise in a state, what disgrace accrues to learning,
when diverse empty shallow fellows drive a trade in the most noble Sciences;
which might have been more serviceable to their Country in inferior Trades, all
which are useful in their degree, and accordingly to be respected; but because
they fall within the reach of every ordinary capacity, and fittest for such as
aim only at mean and contemptible designs, the purchasing of wealth and their
private content, that care not for the improving the faculties of the soul, and
raising it above the pitch of sense.

For Mechanical Professions and Manufactures, he commonly advised that the Son
should be brought up to his Fathers profession, if nothing had occasioned him
to dislike it. But if Parents had resolved before hand upon a profession for
their Child, (wherein all Parents think themselves wise enough to be their own
guides) then he gave order that occasion should be taken to acquaint him with
some passages tending that way, so as the frequent meditation of them might
beget a liking and prepare him by degrees for it. The exterior visage afforded
but small help to this discovery of Childrens wits, being oftentimes no
sufficient surety to warrant the ingenuity of the mind; it is confessed that the
perturbations and affections of our minds are discovered with some probability
by certain extant motions, and obvious representations which they make in the
Veins and Muscles of the countenance; so that it is easy to discern when one
is angry by the sudden commotion of the blood, and distortion of the
countenance; when he is merry, by the pleasant diffusion of the blood, and
erection of the countenance; when sad, by the reduction and retyring of the
blood and spirits and dejection of the face: unless a man deeply dissemble the
inner motions, (as some can do) so as no remakable type of them shall appear
outwardly. Further some by comparing the various Figures and Postures of men's
countenances with those of Beasts, thence conclude an alliance in their natures
and dispositions: thus a broad Breast, great Shoulders, Stern look, hair curled
toward the end, and glaring eyes, argue a man fierce and hardy as a Lion: and
it is usual to say of such a one, he looks like a Lion: he that has a demiss
countenance, Jo. Bapt. Portae Phisiognom: human: lib. 1.
and fixed eyes, with the ball of the eye somewhat broad, we call him a
Sheeps-head, as being of a tame and humble nature. One that reins in his neck,
going with an erect and lofty head, we probably conclude him to be proud,
stately and contemptuous as the horse; a prying sharp countenance argues one
wily and subtle as a Fox, especially if there be also a resemblance in the
Eyes, which give the surest judgment concerning the affections of the mind,
and are chiefly to be regarded in these conjectures. But to discover by the
countenance men's manners, is a thing that cannot be done with any certainty,
much less their aptness or ineptitude to learning, least of all their
particular propensities to this or that Art; because many belly their
Phisiognomy, cancel those promises to which nature has set her hand in their
countenances, so that (as the proverb says) their good faces were ill bestowed
on them; others whose rude and ill favored lineaments of body might presage
some obliquity in manners, or dullness of capacity; by education, study and
conversing with wise men, wash away the spots and stains naturally incident to
their temper. For whereas three things conduce to the making of a man complete,
Nature, Instruction, and Example: where the first is deficient, the other may
fix deep impressions of virtue upon the mind, to which if practice be added it
produces a real habit, and custom becomes a second nature. But from the
manners and behavior of Children pregnant conjectures may be raised concerning
their wits, therefore he earnestly observed whether a Boy were courteous or
morose, honest or given to cheating, just or partial, which may be discovered
by putting him into an Office, though but Monitor in a School: in these
particulars notwithstanding, he cautelously discerned, whether they proceeded
from nature, or were acquired: especially he observed how one behaved himself
when angry, nature irritated will bewray it self in the most recluse minds. In
their studies he observed whether they were vigorous or remiss, cheerful or
drowsy, speedy or slow; In their carriage whether they were bold or modest, in
their apparel whether spruce or careless: and lastly, in their play whether
they expressed a dexterity and ingenuity in it, or were blunt and unready: from
all which put together, many useful motions may be collected; though many men
cannot obtain of themselves so much humility as to condescend to the
observation of such mean things.

To learn a Language in a short space, to remember Stories and Tales, to be
ready in answering questions, which one has been formerly acquainted with, are
arguments of a good memory.

They which excel in the faculty of Imagination, soon learn to write fairly, no
draw intricate flourishes and Pictures: are cunning in childish Architectures,
and Carving: play readily at any game, delight in sprucenesse, love to be
praised, and are soon surprised with admiration.

But to resolve a strange and new question, to render a pertinent reason, to
delight in serious matters, to love Meditation, Solitude and Retiredness, are
probable instances of a solid judgment. Such are likewise modest, careless in
wearing their apparel, (at least not fantastical in it) and commonly appear
very unready at play and Toys.

But two things he chiefly used whereby to assist his discovery.

1. When a Child was advanced to some competent discretion, he demanded of him
what Calling he chiefly desired, and upon what grounds? If he observed his
affection to any Art proceeded not so much from appetite as reason, not because
he observed such a man of that Calling to live in splendour and wealth; but that
he was moved to it by the peculiar bent and inclination of his mind; then he
esteemed his answer as prophetical, assuredly concluding, that an earnest
affection, and impetuous inclination to any Art seldom proves unsuccessful. If
he judged him fit for any learned Profession, then 2. he propounded some
material questions in several Sciences, in such plain and familiar terms as
fitted a Child's capacity, observing wherein he gave the best account: or else
he represented the nature of them in short axioms and propositions, to which if
he gave a ready assent, seemed to be taken with them, and could out of his own
notions somewhat enlarge upon them, It was not to be doubted but that he might
attain that Science which he could so readily apprehend. Truth is of a
mavelous winning nature, and invites one to correspond with it though he
never heard it before, and therefore the fundamental principles of Arts win
belief with most men; but now when a very youth not only grants such a thing to
be true, (which is not much to be regarded in this matter) but is marvellously
affected and taken with it, supplies and makes up more than the words import,
by his own ingenuity, and gives some reason of his so doing; this turns our
conjecture into a certainty, at least such a certainty as can be attained
concerning future things. And because this is a material point to know the
grounds upon which the chief Sciences (at least) depend, before we can arrive
at a perfect discovery how and by what faculty of the soul they are attainable:
See a very breef account of some of them; and first concerning the knowledge of
God.

If we attentively and with deliberation consult our own thoughts, we shall meet
with this primary and original truth, that 1. There is a God; a proposition
naturally imprinted in the minds of men, as it appears even by the universal
consent of all Nations, not excepting those who are remote from the civilized
part of the world; If we recollect the thoughts that attended us in our
Infancy, when our minds were not tincted with any corrupt opinion, we may
remember that the bended Knees, and earnest invocations we observed others to
use, suggested some apprehensions of a Divine power, some invisible Agent whose
help w^ stood in need of; and if one should go about to raze out this thought,
to bribe and corrupt his mind into a contrary persuasion, he would find his
conscience very tenacious and resolute in bearing witness to the truth.

I ever thought that the testimony of men's consciences was the most substantial
argument to evince the truth of this first maxim, Ren. Des Carts medit. 3. de
prima Philosoph.
and am since confirmed in this opinion, because I find it to be the only
argument used by a most acute Philosopher of this Age, though obscurely (as one
may say) illustrated by him with Metaphysical terms; the sum of whose discourse
amounts to thus much; that reflecting earnestly upon his own mind, he finds an
idea or notion of a being intirely-perfect: now of whatsoever we have such a
notion it is necessarily consequent, that the same must exist, not that our
Idea or notion causes its existence; but its existence is the foundation of our
notion of it, and that not in posibility but reality: To exist in posibility
only agrees not with the nature of that which is most perfect, because to such
an existence there is somewhat wanting, viz. real existence: so that in the very
notion and Idea of a nature wholy-perfect a rea existence is necessarily
included.

If this proposition seems latent in some men's minds, (as it happens to such as
seldom or never converse with their own thoughts) it may be excited in them and
confirmed in others: 1. By observing the wonderful frame and Fabric of the
World in general, and the curious contrivance of every particular body: It Is
granted by all men that lay any claim to reason, that the particular bodies of
the universe (considering them in the state they do enjoy) were made of some
prae-existent matter, which certainly could not digest its self into the shape
of a Plant, Mineral, or living creature, no more than a heap of stones and
mortar can erect themselves into the shape of an House, or a multitude of
Letters by any fortuitous concussion digest themselves into a complete
Sentence; therefore we must acknowledge that this first matter was regula^^d
and put into motion by a supreme and primary Agent. 2. Some again are confirmed
in this truth by considering the erection and conservation of Empires: and on
the other side, the strange methods of subverting them in despite of all the
counter-contrivances of men.

The fierce Assyrian once did keep in awe
Claudian in land. Stiliconis paneg. 3.
The vanquished Nations with his glittering law;
But the stout Mede (when he began to fall)
Erects his Banner on the Earth's vast Ball.
Then acts the Persian with majestic strength
On the World's Theater, but stoops at length
To that brave Macedonian Youth, whose mind
In one poor World disdains to be confined.
Next did the Roman Eagle snatch away
The Diadem, and made the World his prey.
Now Mahomet rules, whose turn the next shall be
Mortals may guess, but God alone decree.
Or 3. by a retrogradation and tracing of succession to some first consistency,
and the revolution of causes, wherein the dependence of one cause upon another
will lead us to some first cause, whereon to rest. 4. By observing that natural
bodies being restrained and limited to uniformity in their motions and actions,
sometimes make an excursion beyond their ordinary bounds, and act beyond
themselves, whereby it appears that they are subdued to yield obedience to a
supreme Agent.

If the Opinion that there is no God has committed a Rape upon some men's
judgments, those persons are so few, that it is no prejudice to this first
proposition. 1. Some perverse men, out of a bravery of spirit, or a fond desire
to become the talk of the World after their deaths, have wrangled about it, and
made it a disputable point. 2. Others, to acquire a full complacency and
freedom in their beloved pleasures, or the resolute satisfying of their minds
in some violent passion, have peradventure attempted to deceive themselves as
much as they could, and to imagine there was no God; lest the fear of him
should abate the eagerness of their desires which they labored to sharpen, to
the end they might securely attempt that to which their affections prompted
them. 3. An interrupted fruition of all things desired may choke the natural
notions concerning God in some men, and superinduce a forgetfulness of him. 4.
Perpetual and sordid Poverty without any vicissitude and return of competency
and content, starves the thoughts of God in many abject and low spirits, which
crave the taste of indulgent goodness. 5. Many stumble and perplex themselves
with doubts by observing the meanness of pious men, and success of wickedness,
and the like inequalities of Providence; for, though it be a certain truth,
that Piety is successful, and Wickedness unhappy; yet common experience and
observation objects, that pious men (at least so reputed) are oft-times
miserable and unhappy, prodigiously wicked men, Murderers, Tyrants, and
irriligious persons live in splendour and wealth, to a competent age, and
sometimes die in their beds of a natural death in great quietness of mind. To
undeceive our selves, and rescue us from the injury these Observations do to the
truth, It may be safely affirmed that the infelicity of pious men is laid upon
them either as a means to render their patience, and other Virtues more
conspicuous, or else as a punishment for some crime, which though men have not
observed, yet God, who pursues sin through paths not adverted by us, will be
sure to chastise men for evil doing. But then the prosperity of wicked men
puzzles us far more; to say that God raises them up on purpose to expose them
to a more remarkable ruin, does not fully take away the doubt; for, besides
that it seems to argue a kind of envy and fury in the course of Divine
Providence; the event of things does not always favor this assertion: The
safest way to resolve it is this, that God who made all men obliges himself to
maintain all indifferently; to the best he affords the best blessings, Virtue,
Wisdom, a competency of all things with contentedness, a good name in their
life and after death: If to vicious men he allows honor and wealth, victory
and prosperity, it may be for some good which he observes in them, and which he
will bless wherever he finds it: or else to bring about some remarkable work,
as the punishing and plaguing of a Nation, for which the worst of men are the
fittest Instruments; or the accomplishing some other design, to which this
seeming irregularity in providence may conduce, although it be not easy for
men to discover it. 6. And lastly, the absurd and dishonorable abuses which
many that lay a great claim to Religion put upon God, may cause some unsettled
spirits to reject Religion its self, and become Atheists. The World is often
pestred with such Vermin, as being about to commit some huge piece of impiety,
some horrid Villainy, which in its proper colors would affright the people,
disguise it very sprucely with a Vizard of Holiness, and recommend it to the
unwary multitude under the notion of a pure religious work, tending to the
interest of Religion, and advancement of Godliness; by which means Religion its
self, the most illustrious ornament of mankind (when rightly used,) is
sometimes made an Instrument to undo them.

The second Maxim in natural Theology is, That there is one God; nor has this
met with so much contradiction in the World as some may imagine; for although
the magnifying of benefits received from Creatures, the inordinate love to some
things, or fear of others, may have caused men to entertain reverend thoughts
of (and pay a kind of adoration to) them; insomuch as not only renowned men,
but several sorts of Beasts, Birds, and Fishes have been worshipped: and a
numerous generation of Deities obtruded upon the faith of a credulous World,
yet the wisest part of men have in all Ages acknowledged only one God.

Thirdly, Nature informs us that God manages all these inferior things by his
Providence: and 4. That he is to be worshipped, every Nation being studious to
prescribe Rules, and institute some such significant and powerful Ceremonies,
as might heighten their affections in their religious services. Thus far Nature
guides men in this Science concerning God; these Propositions a man may make
out by retiring into himself, and entering into a right posture of Meditation.
What propositions are over and beside these, are either consequences drawn from
these, or the dictates of Faith.

Such as take upon them to assert and maintain points of Divinity, and to
confute Opposers; that search into the grounds and causes of things, infer,
distinguish, and draw conclusions, have need of a sollid judgment and much
discursive learning. But to unfold and deliver precepts to the people is a work
accomplished by the memory and imagination, so that many who have no great
depth of judgment taking such assertions upon trust as they find delivered by
others, order and contrive them into a method, according to their fancy, offer
them to the people with fluent persuasive expressions, a pleasing elocution,
and winning gestures: whereby they erect to themselves the same powerful
Orators, because the common people (who are the greatest part of men) are more
affected with the speech and exterior presence of a man, than with his reasons:
a confident affirming of any thing prevails more with them than a
demonstration. The dictates of Faith find admission soonest into the minds of
such men as are of a tractable, Modest, and Obedient temper, free from
curiosity, prejudice, self-conceit and pride.

The Principles by which Moral actions are guided, are not to be found so
sincere among the spruce and polite Nations, whose judgments through custom,
self-love, or some other incentive, are easily persuaded to call that a dictate
of reason, which makes for their own pleasure or advantage, as among the poor
naked Barbarians, among which we may suppose one, neither illuminated by an
extraordinary indulgence of Divine Grace, nor depraved by persuing of any base
ends. Such a one limits his actions according to these few Rules. 1. I must
endeavor to preserve my self, and because I cannot do this, unless I be in a
league and hold community with other men (every particular man's preservation
being wrapped up and included in the general concernments of mankind) Therefore
2. I must negotiate a free commerce, and traffic with others indifferently;
and in the managing thereof, 3. Deal with others as I desire they should deal
with me. To extend the Rule of self-preservation so far, as that by virtue
thereof every man should claim whatsoever might make for his emolument, and
seek to cut others short, would be as erroneous as dangerous; for if I assume
such a Latitude of power to my self, and deny it to others, I am not only
unjust, but by arming my self against all men, arm all men against me. If I
allow it to all men indifferently, I go about to destroy humane society, and
therein my self, by instructing men to prey upon one another, and me among the
rest: so that instead of ratifying, this would disannul the first and grand law
of self-preservation. 4. I must maintain peace with all men. 5. Be courteous to
all men. 6. Accomodate others as far as may stand with convenience. 7. Perform
Covenants. 8. Gratify others for curtisies received. 9. Pardon any man that
has injured me, upon his submission and sufficient caution for the future. 10.
Preserve my self in such a state of mind and body, by curbing my passions and
intemperances, that I may not be deprived of the use of reason. These Rules (by
what has been said) will easily appear to be not only consistent with the Law
of self-interest and preservation, but so interwoven with it, that without
these that cannot be in force: and though these Rules be general, yet from them
may be derived punctual directions to guide men in the carrying on of all
particular affairs; for, if the Understanding be rightly seasoned with these,
the Inclinations and Motions of the Will presently become tractable and
obedient.

The knowledge of right and wrong is natural to all men, it is as regent over
all our actions. I grant it is very often usurped upon by factious passions, by
corrupt opinions which men unwarily admit, and suffer themselves to be governed
by them. Yet I believe, that he that is professedly wicked, if he allows
himself any leisure to consider what he does, cannot commit an evil action
without some dissatisfaction and reluctance; but his unhappiness is, that being
transported and prepossest with a corrupt passion, or opinion, he furiously
pursues that which his appetite desires, and admits not any leisurable arguing
or deliberation, as the virtuous man does; who when any thing reducible to
practice holds his mind in suspense, and incumbers it with difficulty, frames
in his thoughts the contradictory to it, making two practical propositions;
this is lawful. It is not lawful: which being contradictory, cannot both be
true; he examines them judiciously and warily, distinguishes which is to be
asserted, which rejected. Or (as some observe) there is a Syllogism contrived
in men's thoughts. All vice is to be avoided; This is a vice, Then it is to be
avoided. A virtuous man concedes the whole Argument. An incontinent, or
wavering man, grants the major; but being placed in a middle state between
virtue and vice, is unresolved in the minor. A desperately wicked man regards
neither, his furious appetite prevents all the conclusions his reason would
collect from the premises.

Although I made a supposition, that the principles of morality were to be
found most sincere among the simple and illiterate, yet relating the
qualifications of an exact moral man; one shall be, that he be of good parts,
well bred, and have a solid judgment: for such a one will manage his actons
according to the rules of Reason, more dexterously and judiciously, and improve
them with more advantage and splendour. 2. Then it is required that he have a
command over himself, be able to subdue his passions, and make them stoop to
his Lure. Freedom from all passions is a state of mind not attainable, and (if
it could be attained) useless and unserviceable. Passions are of themselves
things indifferent, unrestrained they disturb the operations of the mind, and
put men out of course, by representing various objects under the notion of good
or bad, pleasant or unpleasant; the soul upon the apprehension thereof is ready
to move the blood and spirits rashly and disorderly: insomuch as the light of
Reason is obstructed and disturbed, and the Actions of the Understanding become
irregular. As Vapors in a full stomach fume into the head, disorder the visive
spirits, and produce error in the sight: but prudently managed, they become
serviceable and advantageous. Anger may make a man heroic, valiant and hardy.
Joy adds speed and resolution, and inforces a man oft-times to go beyond
himself in dispatch of business. Fear and grief (though they seem to be
sluggish and unactive) may sometimes do a Courtesy by making men circumspect
and wary: Sometimes a kind of fear arises from an insuperable necessity, or
huge danger, that wings the Resolution, and begets courage; necessity of action
quickens the sluggish spirits, enforces a man to volour and eloquence, and
makes him ready to attempt any enterprise. Mere necessity makes some men
active, and Despair its self begets Hope. Love widens and inlarges the mind,
inclines men to do favors and kindnesses, from which flows the greatest
pleasure that can be. Ambition and love of honor, (though often extravagant in
compassing its ends) inclines men to gallantry of spirit, to hate baseness, to
be merciful to Suppliants.

The Law of Nature is a Rule resulting from the light of Reason, and directs
men in the managing of their actions, especially as they are Members of a
Commonwealth; and being written with indelible characters in their minds,
invites them to correspond with such positive humane constitutions as are
agreeable to it. Politic and municipial Laws are but as a Commentary upon this
original Law, and the more conformable they are to that, the more free
reception they meet with among men.

It commands 1. Self-conservation; and 2. Multiplication of the kind. 3.
Equality to be allowed among men. 4. That God is to be worshipped. 5. Good to
be chosen, evil to be avoided. 6. A greater good to be chosen before a less. 7.
Parents to be honored. 8. That we ought to deal by others as we desire to be
dealt by. 9. That we restore things committed to our trust. And 10. Desire
peace and rest. 11. That we usurp not the privilege of being our own Judges.
12. That we be ready to pardon And diverse other Rules which a man may collect
by Meditation. There is in the minds of all men, not brutish, a Rule of
Reason, which avouches what is good, what bad: what is right and wrong; for
Humane Laws do not define or decree that; neither can they. A Tyrant may
constrain men by perverse Laws, to do that which is unjust; but he cannot
constrain them to judge and esteem that which is unjust to be just, that
freedom they will have in dispite of him.

Could this law of nature be universally received and observed, it might
sufficiently secure the Peace and welfare of men; but in regard that passion
and error oversway reason, and wrest the dictates of natures Law, forcing them
to serve base ends; and so long as men are what they are, men; these
corruptions and exorbitances cannot but obtain: Lest some men under a pretense
of the law of Nature should incroach upon too great a power to the prejudice of
others who could be content with a calmnesse and moderation to be ruled by
reason: Therefore to secure the general quiet, men put themselves under the
protection of humane Laws, which as occasion serves, abridge and restrain the
law of Nature. For Example, whereas Nature teaches and commands
self-preservation, and propagation of the kind: If one man goes about (under a
color of sufficiency and provision for himself) to defraud and destroy others;
it is thought fit to consult for the good of the whole body politic, by
cutting off such a dangerous member: Nature teaches us to do no less in the
natural body. Nature allows equality among men, but they have found it
convenient and necessary to decline from this rule, and for their more
commodious cohabitation and government, to be content that one man should be
invested with a greater share of Sovereignty than the rest. It is agreeable to
the law of Nature, that a thing committed to my charge should be restored upon
demand; But if I receive a Sword from a man, who afterward in a fury or rage
should demand it; and (I strongly persume) with an intent to kill an other;
should I deliver it, pretending to gratify Nature by observing her law, I
should become accessory to the breach of another law, and commit a greater
injury. So that it is necessary sometimes to restrain the generality and
latitude of the law of Nature, by humane Laws; which being of infinite variety
and number according to several Countries and constitutions of government, it
will not be required that I should speak any more concerning them upon this
occasion.

Those that deal in the Laws, are Lawmakers, Judges, Pleaders, Advocates,
Solliciters, and the like, in a Lawmakers; (leaving all controversies
concerning the power of enacting Laws, the extent of them when enacted, the
concerment of the people in their enacting, or the repealing of them, and the
like to wiser men:) I think it sufficient to say, that he be judicious, and
impartial: Humane Laws should be fitted to the constitution and temper of the
people, with a regard had to the circumstances of times and places, to
penetrate into which requires a reaching judgment: nor ought there to be any
gratifying of particular men, Parties, or Factions in the making of Laws: the
punishing of men for averseness in opinion, or disaffection to such a party,
which has been owned among some divided States, has more of peevish cruelty
than prudent caution in it. A Judge should enjoy a good memory and
understanding, for he must not only know the particular Laws, but be able to
interpret them, and know which particular law will decide and determine every
Case that is brought before him; that he ought to be of competent age and
gravity, free from partiality, covetousness, and passion, every one will
imagine young men fall short of that experience and maturity of judgment,
which are the products of age, therefore they who bring the election of Judges
and other Magistrates, within the compass of Rules, admit not of any to
Offices of such high concernment until above 30 years of age. Such elegant
persons as talk finely, complement fluently, and delight altogether in
sprucenesse, (usually called pretty men) are of all other most unfit for
Government and Magistracy; where gravity is so requisite. Nor should he suffer
himself to be carried aside by friends and relations, peculiar inclination to
such a Person or faction, and Sympathy of affection: nor ought he on the other
side to fear a prevailing party, or suffer any spiteful humor insensibly to
slip into his mind, whereby he may be induced to strain his judgment, palliate
or aggravate a crime, and sway the balance of justice beyond its course, for
he ought to be impartial. And though in criminal causes it be said, that
without anger a Judge can never punish home; yet to be peevish and froward, to
have returns of mansuetude or severity, as a humor may be predominant, to doom
a poor wretch to death in his thoughts before trial, becomes not a person of so
high an Office, a Pleader is not permitted to fix an interpretation upon the
Law, but it is requisite that he be well read in the particular Laws, and know
whence an argument may be drawn, pertinent to his Clients cause, and therefore
should be dignified with a good memory.

Government I find adjudged to the imagination, Jo. Huar. exam. ingen. cap. 11.
because it ought to be ordered with a kind of harmony and consent; every thing
in due time and place, Ant. Zara. anatom. ingen. sec. 2. mem. 16.
which are works appertaining to that faculty; besides, it is requisite that he
be a good Speaker, Stately, Majestical in Port, Active, industrious, of quick
dispatch, and high Aims, all which properties are usually incident to men
endued with a good imagination: yet in regard that those Ornaments which are
most plausible, are also soonest displeasing if not allayed with a mixture of
prudence, spruce persons and men of ready expressions though their addresses be
pleasing, yet they gain not authority without a temperature of gravity; and
because the frequency of the most splendid object blunts the eyes, and begets a
less esteem in such as behold them, therefore some caution is used by prudent
Magistrates in this particular; though they be never so humble and courteous,
yet they will sometimes take state upon them, and be at a convenient distance,
when they please to appear abroad, they carry it out with a becoming
magnificence, but are not lavish of their presence; they are quick in dispatch
when the matter is ready for action, but cautelous and circumspect, yielding to
occasions and emergent obstacles; and therefore to a complete Magistrate a good
judgment is required.

In War two things are considerable, but seldom concur in one man, Valor
and Policy: Such as are of an high implacable spirit, stout in maintaining
their reputation, blunt in discourse, careless in their garb, and (if a
negative may be admitted) of no deep understanding, (a thing impertinent in the
heat of a battle) are fittest for combat, and downright valor. But they that
are subtle in forecasting and contriving, peculiarly cuning in mischief, close
in concealing their designs, speedy in execution, and provident to foresee and
prevent what may happen; are best for stratagems. Men endued with such a kind
of wit, are by the common people called lucky: because they diserne not the
means and ways by which they bring their designs about, and therefore when
they succeed, ascribe all to Fortune: Whereas wise men admit of no other
fortune, besides Gods providence, and men's endeavors.

History waits and attends upon Government, and the affairs of Nations: they
that deal with it, are either such as read and relate without any further aim,
or such as write; to the first a great memory is all that is required; but the
other should enjoy a penetrating judgment, by virtue whereof they may be able
to discover the Motives, Occasions, and Grounds of every design, by what Agents
and means it was managed, the event and success of it, with an impartial
vindication of the truth, nor should a dexterous imagination be wanting, to
adorn the matter with a good style, a great grace to History.

Logic is an Art which inquires into, (and judges of) Truth; the first step to
this inquisition is a right understanding of single notions and names; and
therefore Logicians bound and confine things under certain general heads,
called by them Praedicables and Praedicaments; to the end that no aequivocation
may draw the mind to a double meaning, and bring men into an error; our
thoughts are subject to waver, and frame loose apprehensions of things: but the
reducing of things to a right series and rank, fixes and restraines them.
Next, the mind joins single notions, and thereof frames propositions, which
are either true or false; true, when such things are composed whose nature
admits of a composition, such things severed whose natures disagree: false,
when the contrary is done. To discover when a proposition is true or false; 1.
Let a man take the contradictory to it, so he shall have two propositions;
whereof one must be true the other false: after a serious and leisurable
comparing of them together, (if he be not void of that which they call natural
Logic) reason will instruct him to reject one, and admit the other. Or 2. Let
him turn the proposition into a question: for example; Whether Intemperance be
hurtful? This question has two parts; first the Subject, or thing it self
concerning which the question is made, that is intemperance: and secondly the
Praedicate, or that which is attributed to it, namely to be hurtful: Then to
assist his discovery he must assume a third or middle term; which may be this,
to impair the health, and join it first with the Praedicate; thus, Whatsoever
impareth the health is hurtful; next with the Subject; Intemperance impareth
the health: So finding the Subject and Praedicate to agree in a third or middle
term, in imparing the health; the conclusion offers its self; Therefore
Intemperance is hurtful. The reason of the consecution is this, Whatsoever
things agree in one third, agree also in themselves. Whatsoever parts of a
Proposition agree in the middle term, agree also in the conclusion: Whatsoever
may be affirmed concerning an universal, may be affirmed concerning all
particulars that are contained and comprehended under it. Intemperance and
Hurtful agree in a third, in impairing the health; therefore they agree in
themselves; they may be combined together in the premises, therefore they may
be joined in the conclusion. If I may say in general whatsoever impayreth the
health is hurtful, I may truly affirm so much of Intemperance in particular,
because it is comprehended in the number of those things which impair the
health. If one would inquire the truth of this proposition, whether Pleasure be
man's chief felicity? let him (to promote his inquiry) select a convenient
middle term, let it be permanent; and the discursion may run thus; all true
felicity is permanent; Pleasure is not permanent; Pleasure then is not true
felicity: Pleasure and felicity agree not in being permanent, therefore the
conclusion severs them; the reason of the consecution here is, that whatsoever
things disagree in the third, or middle term, disagree in themselves. Or, 3. A
Proposition may be put into a disjunctive form, wherein two things being laid
down, to which a third cannot be added, if an Affirmation, or Negation pass
upon one of them, the other is exempted: or, if more than two, they being fully
enumerated, an Affirmation or Negation attributed to one exempts the rest: as
he that precisely affirms a thing to have been done in the day, exempts the
night. He that of the four parts of the year exempts Spring, Summer, and
Harvest, must needs mean Winter.

This is all that I conceive needful for discovering the nature of Logic, in
order to this design: for I take not upon me to give an exact account of any
Art. The works that a Logician has to do, are, 1. to reduce every thing to its
due series: 2. to define, or comprise the nature of a thing in apt and
pertinent terms. 3. To compose things which admit of composition, and sever
such as disagree; whence Truth or Falsity result, according as this operation
is well or ill performed. 4. From some propositions probable or granted, to
deduce something that is disputable. To the two first a quick and clear fancy
is requisite; to the second and third a good judgment, and a mind settled,
which is ever most advantagiously prae-disposed to this art: and he that proves
a close Student at it, if it find him not so, it will help to make him so. The
study of Arts is the culture of the mind, and serves to correct the errors of
our natures. The Opponent should enjoy a quick invention, that he may
excogitate Arguments against his Adversaries tenets. The Respondent should have
a solid reaching judgment, to know when an Argument concludes, when not: and
frame his Answer as occasion requires. In the Sophistical part he carries the
credit that can lay on tongue and wrangle, which moves the Students in
celestial Sciences (as they call them) to say, that in the geniture of a
Logician, Mars must be Lord of the Horoscope, and view Mercury in a Trine.

Oratory endeavors to excite the Appetite and Will, by recommending some
florid and plausible notions to the Fancy; therefore an Orator in the first
place attempts to illaqueate the fancy to win the affections of his Auditory by
an insinuating Preface, pleasing gesture, and enchanting language. Then he
perspicuously states the matter, and so proceeds to prove what he intends by
popular Arguments (for concise and subtle disputations are ineffectual with the
people) and that which might make against him, if it be not too manifest he
conceals it: like that Painter who being to draw the picture of a man who had
but one eye, concealed that blemish by representing only the perfect side of
the countenance, as the posture is in such as they call half-faces.

If he go about to demonstrate the goodness or vileness of a person, or thing,
thereby to procure liking or disliking; he deduces Arguments from such
qualities, or circumstances which have contributed some share of commendation
or discredit: the rest he conceals by a handsome praeterition. The Country,
Parents, Family, Birth, Actions, Honors, Virtues, Temperature, Death, and Fame
after death, are the usual Ingredients into the Encomium of a Person. The
nature, quality, antiquity, pleasantness, usefulness, and goodness of things
make them commendable. Exploits, or actions of men derive their glory from
their lawfulness, utility, the occasion of undertaking them, the manner of
managing them, the time when, the place where, and motives by whose instigation
they were attempted: and the contrary qualities are urged in vituperation. In
which kind of Panegyricall discourses, devised for the most part to procure
delight, it is easy to observe of what force their cunning transitions,
handsome digressions, and intermixing of acute sentences, and pertinent
stories, have with the people. As the fore-shadowing in Pictures causes the
utmost Verges to fall round upon themselves, and so knit up in the end, that
they promise more than we see; and cause us to discern some part to be included
and folded under that shadowing, which by not being discovered is discovered
the more: So in an Oration, when we are told, that there are many things, which
for want of time cannot be recited; or, that the superlative excellency (of I
know not what) puts the Orator to a loss of expression; this detains our minds
in suspense, and many times causes us to believe the matter greater than it is,
or than he could otherwise persuade us to believe it to be. On the contrary,
when he would procure a loathing and hatred in the minds of the Auditory, he
cunningly fore-shadows the matter at which he darts the weapons of his
Rhetoric, and tells them it is so horrible, so odious, so enormous, he cannot,
will not, dares not utter it. By this trick he leaves somewhat for their
thoughts to supply, and raises their indignation to a higher pitch, than a
tedious discourse would do. You may imagine, that the Painter who drew
Agamemnon at the sacrifice of his lovely Daughter, with a vail over his face,
did not thereby conceal, but rather more clearly represent such a posture of
inexpressible sorrow.

In swasive and disswasive discourses or deliberations, the Arguments must
arise to a higher strain of Reason, and decline from the popular mode to a more
serious composure; always provided, that they be accommodated to the persons
whose affections are to be raised or abated. If an Orator go about to persuade
men to the undertaking of any exploit, he tells them that it is possible to be
achieved, honest, pleasant, and profitable: and the contrary in dissuading;
not omitting examples and testimonies of learned men: For, though in natural
Philosophy and Mathematics (where the exquisite truth of things is searched
out) Arguments from Testimony, Tradition, and Example are of small account: yet
in Civil and humane Transactions they are of great weight; but with a regard
had to the quality and condition of the person whose authority or example is
alleged. Love is stirred up by an high exaltation of some goodly person, or
thing. Hatred by aggravating the indignity of some person, or action. Pity, by
opening the misery of some person well esteemed of by the Hearers, whose
condition they will resent as if it were their own; and (as occasion serves)
the Orator tacks about, and lies at try, to observe which way men's humors,
tempers, and inclinations move, and accordingly spreads the sails of his
Rhetoric to meet them.

In Judicial proceedings, whose aim is to gain favor or severity of justice,
by examining matters of fact; the chief person of the auditory is the Judge,
who being a person invested with Authority, and presumed to be a Master of
Reason, much acuteness, and solidity must appear in them: If the Orator assumes
the person of the Accuser, he sums up the impulsive causes which might probably
move the party accused to the commission of the fact; as anger, malice,
forethought, and formerly evidenced, occasion, opportunity, hope of gain,
avoiding of some apparent Evil; easy concealment, Consternation, and the like,
the Defendent argues from contrary Topics, and endeavoring to refute his
adversaries Arguments, if any thing be so obvious, that it cannot be omitted by
a handsome praeterition; he endeavors to diminish the validity of it. Unless
he peremptorily stands upon his vindication, and then he argues the fact to be
Lawful from the Law of Nature, Equity, Covenant, Custom, Example; or craves
pardon, because it was done involuntarily, upon necessity, forcible impulsion,
perturbation, and commotion of mind; which extenuating circumstances have a
great influence upon men's minds, where free disceptations find place: but yet
in ordinary legal trials (where the bare matter of fact is considered) they do
not often procure favor. Above all it is very material that in all addresses
the Orator should bring into public view a Carriage, Elocution, and Action
suitable to his intended discourse; and such as may contribute a lively
representation of what he endeavers to imprint in the minds of his Auditory. In
instructing he ought to be earnest, grave, and serious, with a voice and
pronuntiation suitable; A quick, lively, and pleasant style soonest moves men
to joy. Sorrow is caused by a low passionate style, the voice flattering and
interrupted; In ample matters the discourse should be lofty, bold, and manly;
the voice undisturbed, and without artificial interruptions: In mean occasions
concise, acute and elegant: In Panegyricks stately, flourishing, and full of
ornament. In narrations clear, and perspicuous; in asking or excusing, modest
and submissive; In commendations officious, and full of respect: In mirth and
prosperous encounters luxuriant and pleasing, and not to nicely crampt into a
method. In sorrow and fearfulness, a grave, compendious, and leisurable style
is most pertinent; the voice low, flattering, and arteficially interrupted.
Anger and Indignation requires a rough, trouble, and uneven style, suitable to
the nature of such impetuous passions. So that an Orator ought to tune and
modify his voice, as a Lutanist does his strings, that it may express all the
several motions and passions of the mind; provided that he order the matter so
dexterously as to redeem himself from the suspicion of affectation: For it is
the part of an Artist to conceal his Art. The various modifications of words
and sentences, Figures, and Tropes, whereby they are drawn from their proper
meaning to a pleasing and more emphatical signification, add much ornament to
an Oration, tickle the ears, and recreate the minds of the hearers, through
the handsome contrivance of words, and pleasant cadences in the periods of
sentences; But if there appear a manifest affectation in them, they prove like
women's paint when discovered; they deface and discredit while they seem to
beautify.

By this time it appears that Oratory derives its perfection from invention,
Elocution and action or gesture. The first is advanced by help of a well stored
memory, the other come by practice, but are chiefly promoted by a bold and
selfe-pleasing fancy. In one designed for an Orator, a luxuriant and rank wit
is not to be rejected, a superabundance is better then deficiency; trees that
have some superfluous branches are sooner corrected, than those that are dry
and withered can be advanced to fruitfulness. 2. His voice must be strong, but
so as he have a command over it, to raise or depresse it, tune it to a gentle
or harsh strain, a sweet or severe accent, as occasion requires. 3. He must be
industrious. And 4. desirous of praise, (not to say ambitious.) 5. Of a good
presence and personage. 6. Of a strong constitution, and habitude of body. 7.
Active. 8. Bold, for many times the confidence of an Advocate helps out the
evidence, and always adds effecacy to his arguments. 9. He must be practiced
and trained up in company, for we see, that such as affect solitude, and addict
themselves wholely to study; though they may perchance have their minds
furnished with sublime notions, and refined contemplations, wherewith they
pleasantly entertain their thoughts, and fix a period to their content,
tacitly applauding their own felicity: yet when they come abroad, they are
like people long accustomed to a close and obscure room, whose eyes are dazzled
at the light: A frequency of people astonishes them, overmuch study has made
them low spirited, and unfit for society; they have been so long lovesick with
the Muses, that they are emasculated; become sneaking and meal-mouthed, not
courageous enough to bare the Checks and Affronts wherewith men that adventure
upon manly employments must sometimes expect to encounter. 10. It will be a
great ornamant to him if he be facetious, of a jocular fancy, to contrive witty
Jests, elegant resemblances, apt comparisons, Superlative expressions, and
sometimes Satyricall lashes. 11. Which is as necessary as any thing else, let
him be graced with a good memory, the storehouse of words and matter. Last of
all (but above all) he must be conversant (though not critical) in all (or
most) Arts, and material pieces of learning, whereby he may be furnished with
plenty of matter, without which his Rhetorick-pipe will make but dull Music,
and his volubility of expressions signify nothing; but thus accomplished (as
has been set down,) expressions cannot be wanting, but will flow in
spontaneously.

By Speech, we transmit our conceptions, and communicate our thoughts one to
another. And this is a privilege pecular to men alone: For as much as those
gestures and various accents used by Beasts, which are inteligible among
themselves, and serve to manage the negotiations wherewith they have to do,
arrive not at the Nature and dignity of a language, because they serve to
communicate only some few notions, or to express some passions without any
regard had to circumstances; the present found affects them, (but so far as we
can observe) leaves no lasting impression, when we attempt to advance their
language to a further improvement, as to imitate some of our vulgar words, that
design arrives at no further parfection than only to make a little sport, as in
Poppinjayes taught to warble out some word, the sense whereof they never
comprehend, much less any distinct notice of the things named: When we teach a
Dog to come or go at our call, or practice some trick at the repeating of
certain words, we may observe, it is the brisknesse of the pronuntiation that
excites him, not the world it self; for if it be never so often repeated in a
calm and still discourse, he seldom or never adverts it.

It is probable that in the Primative or first language that ever was, the
words had some congruity with the things named; this observation will appear to
have some probability, from this supposition: A man brought up from his infancy
in an obscure place, sequestered from all society, and afterward brought into
company, would use some industry to acquaint men with his notions and
conceptions of such things as were presented to his view, either by signs, or
speech; if by signs, he would (for example) express somewhat that is high by
erecting his eyes and hands; somewhat that is low by rasing his hand a little
from the Earth; and such like congruous signs. If by Speech, then would he use
such sounds and accents as have some congruity with the things named: In
expressing small things, the letters e and i should be most heard; which men
even at this day strive to do in some languages, Plat. in Cratyl.
(and I believe in other,) as (...), brevis tenuis, minimus, little, leettle;
sad matters would be represented with the frequent ingemination of the letter
m, as me miserum! (...), hei mihi; in expressing slippery things the sound of
the letter l should be of most force, as (...), laevis lubricus; the letters b
and r in loud and violent things, as Bellowing, Brauling, Roaring, Rumbling,
Tumbling, (...), bombus, fragor, and the like. It is probable that (at least)
many primative words were divised upon this occasion, and diverse radical names
in the first language were fictitious, coined from the sound, or some such
quality: but in deriving and compounding of words, men have studied so much
either for finenesse or loftynesse of pronuntiation that they have sometimes
added letters, and sometimes taken them away, as best pleased their fancy;
whereby it is become a matter of imposibility to trace down words to their
Original, now in this multiplicity and confusion of languages, which though
they be dialects one of another, yet (as it happens in families) a long tract
of time has quite extinguished all marks of their alliance, so as we cannot
tell whence they are descended. However he that would inquire out the primative
and ancient Idiom of any language now in use, he shall be sure to have the best
account from the plain Country People and women, which being commonly confined
to their homes preserve their language more sincere and unmixt, than the spruce
and Stirring part of men do.

Words (considering the present state of languages) signify not naturally, but
arbitrarily: for besides the considerable alteration that languages undergo
with in the compass of one man's obsevation) we see that things of a very
different nature are often expressed by the same name: so that the minds of
children being unacquainted with their double meaning, catch at that
interpretation which is most familiar, though wrong: for instance, the word
Church leads their thoughts to an Edifice so called: Hearing a Discourse of
Wars, Soldiers and Arms, they fancy such Arms as belong to the body. If one
speak of the Acts of Alexander, their thoughts are presently fixed upon some one
of that name whom they know, or have heard of: and if they never heard the word
before, then their Fancy suggests to them some word of like sound: whence it
may be inferred, that a certain and complete understanding of a language is not
attainable, till such time as custom, conversation, and going abroad has
procured a competent knowledge of the nature and difference of things.

He that desires to learn a language only for commerce and traffic, may
soonest accomplish his desire by imitation and practice, by ingratiating
himself with persons of all sorts, by frequenting the company of such as
traffic abroad and manage business: by this means (if he enjoy a good memory)
he shall learn the language by degrees, and as it were unawares: and be more
tenacious of what he thus gains occasionally, than if he attempted to conquer
it by plodding study. But he that would thoroughly understand and be Master of a
language, must lay a sure foundation in Grammar-rules that he may thoroughly
understand the nature and differences of words, whereof some express permanent
things, some denote transient actions and relations, some serve only to connect
and join others together. This study of Grammar requires a good memory and
patient industery; but to the commendable use of language a good imagination is
requisite, which united with a strong memory will enable to discourse fluently,
suddenly, and confidently concerning any subject: But yet such men as are
seldom notable for any great depth of understanding; but for him that would
write an accurate and well compacted style, solidity of judgment is requisite,
to the end that his expressions and style may be judiciously suited to the
matter in hand, in as much as every subject is not capable of the same style of
writing, Philosophical matters require one kind, Historical another; the style
of an Epistle must be different from that of an Oration.

Voice is twofold, either 1. continued without any artificial intervals, which
we call speaking, Or 2. Segregated by migrations, extentions and abatings, with
convenient distances, and this is vocal Music or singing. The intent of Music
is to improve the sound or quality of words by some sweet notes of voice or
instrument, with a due regard had to measure, time, and prolation. Sound
proceeds from motion, therefore according to the celerity or tardity of the
motion, it is either sharp or flat, according to the concord or discord of the
Notes it is harmonious, or disharmonious; according to the speedy returns or
distances of time, (which prepare and dispose the ear to receive the
subsequent notes) it is said to consist of short or long time. We may observe,
that men to express several passions emit their breath by various degrees,
making diverse manners of eruption, and tune their voice to several keys: in
imitation whereof Music may seem to have been invented, and the kinds of it in
old time distinguished according to men's several passions, and as a silent
eloquence was used to raise or allay them in the hearers. Anciently the Dorick
Music (which had a grave and solemn strain) was thought to excite men to
prudent and Heroic actions, and to restrain them from loosnesse and effeminate
wantonness; the Jonick measures were contrived to promote mirth and jollity:
and the Lydean accommodated to sadness and mourning, for we must know, the Air
smitten and modulated by voice or instrument, moves and affects the contiguous
Air, this the next; till by a continued succession it arrives at the organ of
hearing; insinuates and mingles its self with the spirits of the Nerves, and so
is trajected to the heart, where entering calmly and gently it sedates and
allaies the stirring Spirits; or briskly and with vehemence it exsuscitates
them.

There are some (not only men but) Children which express a particular kind of
acuteness in imitating the speeches and gestures of others. These (whosoever
will take the pains to observe it) will be found generally apt to learn
Music, for that being (as was said) but a kind of imitation, carries an
alliance with their Genius.

Poetry illustrates the matter about which it is conversant, by words duly
measured, and aptly joined together: the original of it was only the casting of
a company of words into a kind of form and proportion; as indeed all Arts at
first were but mean trivial things; Painting no more at the first, but the
circumscribing the exterior limits of a body with single lines, as the shadow
thereof was projected on a Wall: The skill of illustrating one part or making it
more clear by the thinness of the lines, another more dark by casting a deep
shadow on it; the dexterity of causing some parts to appear at a distance, by
depressing and extenuating the lines; others at hand above the ground of the
table, by making the lines eminent and bearing out; these knacks were added
aftewards. And its probable, Poetry at its nativity only pratled out some harsh
incomposed verses, in a rude method and plain measure, with some kind of
consonancy to please the ear. And we see that many illiterate persons and
ordinary country clowns by studying of consonancies and cadencies of words
accomplish thus much: you may imagine some jolly poetical swain in the
springtime dedicating this morning Carol to his Amaryllis:

Now that the sable curtains of the night
Are drawn aside, and Titan's welcome Light
Renewes the day: come Amaryllis, see
The Queen of Earth in all her Bravery.
Flora with chaplets and rich garlands crowned,
The bounteous Offspring of the fruitful ground
Adornes her waving tresses, viewes her face
At Titan's bright and radiant Looking-glass.
Whiles every Wood and Landscape opes his store
To deck their Queen and make her glory more.
The crystal streams in yonder valley seen,
Each flowery, laune and far-extended green,
Those rising Mounts, where Tityrus does sing
His Past'r all sonnets at the bubling spring,
All pay their tribute to her: every bower
Offers at least the homage of a flower.
Such radiant beauty Sol himself admires,
And jealous of those lesser Puny fires;
Dispells his rival Phosphorus, and all
Those twinkling lights below the spacious ball.
The spring is come and winter for a time
Must suffer exile in a foreign clime
From watery Pisces Titan lately came,
To take his lodging at the golden Ram.
By whose indulgent heat the flowers do creep
With the chill Dormouse from their winter sleep.
The chirping Choristers, Heavens quire do sing,
In their green chappells, anthems to the spring.
The Hyblean chemists ranging from their bowers,
Extract pure Nectar from the newborn flowers
The nimble Hindes do play, the frisking lambs
With grateful gestures court their tender dams.
A Poem (they say) is a vocal picture, the mere design of it is to represent
to the Readers fancy a lively Idea or picture of the thing in clear
expressions, flowrishing elegancies, a copious and luxuriant style, adventurous
and lofty language: to present every person in his proper colors; with such
speeches, passions, humors and carriages as becomes his age, state, condition
and temper.

The Art of Poetry so far depends upon the strength of a quick natural wit;
that (according to the true maxim) a Poet is born, not made: he that is born a
Poet, may be much mended and improved by study; he that is not born with a
genius fitted for it, will never be made one. To deliver in few words a peculiar
and distinguishing character of a poetical wit: He must enjoy a quick and
ranging fancy which contrives antique fictions, imaginary Chimera's, perplexed
fables, unexpected encounters; leads the reader into enchanted groves and
gardens, builds imaginary castles, palaces, and a thousand such devices; he is
usually sublimed up with a confident selfe-admiring imagination. A Poet is
first highly inamored of his own ingenious conceits, and that gives him the
confidence to publish them: presuming that others will be as much taken with
them as himself; which if it happen (as in all probability some that are of the
same humor and Genius will extol and applaud them) then he thinks himself a
happy man, and this applause, if it be not the only reward he aims at; yet it
is commonly the richest he can catch.

The axioms which are generally admitted in natural Philosophy, are chiefly
these. 1. That all bodies, substances and motions are produced by some
efficient cause, or primary agent: whereupon the common people (who have more
truth in their notions than every one observes, but want skill to discover it)
compendiously resolve themselves concerning all the effects in nature, by
saying that such a thing happens according to the providence and appointment of
God; which is true, and as much as need be expected from them, and a kind of
arguing more allowable, than if they should attribute things to fortune,
chance, or such kind of nothings: but a Philosopher who thinks himself obliged
to give a more immediate reason of things, grants this to be right, as being
assured that he which lays not such a foundation in his method of Philosophy,
will find himself miserably puzzled about many apparances. Yet makes not this a
subterfuge for ignorance or laziness, but proceeds further: that 2. All natural
bodies (as to the state they now enjoy) were formed of some prae-existent
matter, which to discover plainly has posed all, both ancient and modern
enquiries, and produced various Opinions: and no marvel; for the first
production of things being a matter so far out of our discovery; all the
knowledge we can arrive at concerning it is but conjectural, and various too
according to the several methods which men have used to search it out. It has
passed a long time as a certain truth, that Earth, Water, Fire and Air were
first formed and contrived out of a confused shapeless lump, and of these being
variously tempered together, all mixed bodies resulted. Others diving more
scrutinously and curiously into the original of things, tell us, that the
first matter consisted of minute parts and several configurations, which
fortuitously meeting together, produced all solid bodies; their tenuity making
them fit for mixtion, whereas crassitude hinders their coalescence. Latter
times have still contrived more refined notions, and persuade us that the first
and original matter consisted of particles, some very subtle, fluid, and
capable of penetrability: some spherical, or globulous; which by their various
motions, mutual collision, and attrition, dashed themselves into several
Schematismes. For they take it for granted, that the original and prae-existent
matter, being by the Creator made up of small parts, and those of various
shapes, and put into motion: these parts must necessarily wear off their
extancies and corners; that which was so worn off would become a subtle
tenuious and agile matter; the rest minute globes or spherical particles, the
smaltenuious and subtle particles being somwhere environed and pressed
together, assumed such figures, as the next or contiguous bodies were apt to
imprint upon them. So that figures seem not to have been wrought in bodies by
any foreconceived design, or intelligent aim; but only by the concurrence of
accidental causes, and are nothing else but the bodies themselves, limited by
the circum-obsession of other bodies from being extended beyond those
dimensions they enjoy. For example, A Cube seems to receive its figure by being
equally environed on all sides. A Lamine or thin plate by being dashed
powerfully on two sides only, and enjoying the liberty of extention on the
edges. A Spherical body either by rolling every way, by which motion all the
extencies or little corners are grated off: (as it will happen in process of
time, although it move in an Orb or Sphere, where every contigious body seems
to be less hard) or else by winding of many filaments into such a form, as in
a botome of yarn, and the like. It is certain 3. Earth, Water, and Air are the
Wombes and receptacles to comprehend, nourish and preserve mixed bodies. And
that 4. all bodies have effluvia's or atoms darted from them, whereby they act
at a distance; and make a pression upon any other body that is within their Orb
of emanation, and fit to imbibe them: and so the atoms or minute particles
which are wafted over to us from hot bodies, heat us; those of cold bodies
benum us; the Nervous parts of our bodies being capable of receiving a pression
by them. 5. That all, or most bodies, are Radious more or less; and that array
expands its self in the form of a Pyramid whose base is in the object, and its
vertical point in the eye. It is generally granted, that 6. there is so strict
a connection and combination in the Fabric of the World, that no vacuity or
divulsion can be in the continuity of Nature; And yet 7. every compounded body
has many Cavities or pores, apt to rereceive small and subtle particles which
are trajected through them; mixion is but a composure or juxtaposition of
parts, whose superficies's, though they touch one another, yet their
coalescence is not so close, but that these Atoms or subtle parts of matter
find convenient pores through which they pass, and by virtue of these it is
that, 8. All bodies rescue themselves into their native dimension and figure,
if they be by any overmastering violence compressed out of, or distracted
beyond it; As it is seen in a Bow, wherein if the pores be (for example) round
before the bending; by the tensure they are crampt and pressed into a conical
figure: but when the bow is again unbent, these active particles enlarge the
diameter of their pores, restore them to their former round figure; and by
pressing the adjacent parts reduce the bow to its wonted figure.

9. All Natural bodies are subject to dissolution and corruption, yet so as
that bodies of a different nature arise from them: Insomuch that if we respect
the whole frame of nature, dissolution and corruption of bodies imports no more
than the assuming of a new shape: no annihilation succeeds, but a kind of
circulation in the works of Nature. For after many changes and revolutions a
body may reassume the same figure and Nature it had before: as appears by
that common instance of an Ox; that feeds upon grass, which is converted into
flesh; this flesh after it has undergone some changes turns to the Earth; and
in process of time is sublimed up into grass again.

To find out the qualifications requisite to a Natural Philosopher, we may
observe that for him that aims at no more, but only to understand what
reasons other men give of things, how they state the matter concerning natural
effects; and so gives up himself to be guided by their dictates: there is no
more required but a good memory. But he that will in good earnest examine the
truth of other men's reasons; or search out reasons of himself, should enjoy a
peircing judgment.

In health there is an exact composure of all the exterior and inward parts of
the body; but in every disease some disorder or dislocation (not of the
exterior and superficial always, but) of some inward part, as Spirits, Blood,
or humors: as appears by that struggling which men use to rescue themselves
into a posture of rest, which if they cannot accomplish by that agitation, then
they have recourse to such means as by experience have been found conducible:
For although reason in general instructs men, that a healthful body must have
nourishments agreeable to its Nature; and that a diseased body ought to be
reduced to its natural and healthful temper by medicaments that enjoy a
contrary nature and quality to the prae-dominant humor, thereby to qualify and
moderate it, that nature may expel it with more ease: yet the distinct
knowledge of what things are agreeable, and what noxious, (wherein the
speculative part of Physic chiefly consists) and to assign peculiar remedies
to every particular disease, about which the practical part is conversant,
these are but the products of experience; so that practical Physic took its
first rise from a bold adventuring upon remedies, which as they were observed
to be successful or unlucky, were accordingly either recommended to posterity
or rejected.

Now it is very certain that to gain the rules and method of curing, as they
are already collected and delivered by Authors; the history of Plants,
Minerals, and other particulars used in Physic; and the history of parts, or
Anatomy of man's body are accomplished by the memory. But the practical part,
whereby one is obliged to judge of signs and Symptoms, and thence to judge or
prognosticate of danger or safty, continuance or speedy recovery, and from the
indications of a disease to know what remedies are suitable is a work of a
ready imagination.

There is a vast difference between the Theory of any Art, and the practice of
it; the first belongs either to memory or judgment, the last commonly to the
imagination. And it is observed that the learnedest men in any faculty, who are
immerst in contemplation, and busy themselves to be very knowing in all the
intricacies of their Art, seldom prove so plausible in the practice, as those
who contenting themselves with the common and ordinary rules, (which are easy
and soon learnt) apply themselves wholely to the professory and lucrative part.
This is seen in nothing so evidently as in the practice of Physic; (although
it be true in other Arts) wherein many adventurous empiricks, and prating
Mountebancks, by help of a few astonishing words and some experimented remedies
soon raise themselves a great fame: especially if assisted by the credulity of
the vulgar and less intelligent sort of people. But one usual engine whereby
they screw up their fame among these, is their cheapnesse; the surest device to
catch the common people who are generally hidebound, and sordidly parcimonious.
Sometimes (I confess) it falls out, that a man whom Nature meant and intended
for a Physician; by the iniquity of fortune, unskilfulnesse of Parents and
Tutors, or some other ill luck is thrust upon a meaner profession: which being
irksome and unpleasant to him (as it commonly happens when the natural bent and
inclination of the mind is thwarted) afterward following the conduct of his
Genius, applies himself to the Study of Physic, and proves more lucky at it,
than many which by a tedious and chargeable education have been trained up to
it.

In the second part is intended a continuation of the former discourse, and an
account of the life Acts and Death of ERIANDER.
FINIS.

