THE Printer to the Rcader.
THe Title alone, and the Authors name who composed this Discourse, cannot but
be a sufficient inducement to the reading thereof; and whosoever reads, cannot
but infinitely ^steem it; and had I been persuaded by some very intelligent
persons who had perused the Copy, I had ushered ^t with no other Preface; Yet
having heard them say, That this most excellent Author never composed a Piece
more exact, more regular, or more eloquent; And a Gentleman, a ^insman of his,
from whom I had ^his Copy, who had it also from himself, assuring me that of
all the Pieces of his Cabinet he looked upon none with more affection, and
commonly called his Masterpiece: Neither did I think I ought to have concealed
t^^ knowledge hereof from the Reader, for our mutual benefit. All his Friends
and Kindred indeed know, that having composed it in the fairest flower of his
Youth, he persuaded himself that beyond all his other Pieces, it ought to
establish his Reputation; And they all witness that he (...) published it more
then Twenty ye^^ since, but only that he took that (...) to bring it to the
highest perfection (...) was capable of.

There is another Piece former^ mis-printed with his Entertainment now more
fitly joined to his A^ristippus, as treating of the sam^ subject, which the
Reader may (...) equally glad to see polished and reviewed by the Authors last
Touche^

THE PREFACE.
IN the year 1618. the former Landgrave of Hessen, Grandfather to him who now
is, went by order of his Physicians to the Spaw-waters; upon his return passing
the Frontiers of France, and hearing that the Duke of Espernon was in his
Government of Metz, he had a great desire to see the man whose history he had
so often heard, whereby he understood him to be a man whom Virtue had raised,
and who could not be cast down by Fortune; whose disgraces had been more
glorious and more sparkling then his more favorable condition who had the
courage to oppose a party which was like to have subverted the State, who had
merited the favors of a King, to whom he was war^ing in nothing but to have
been bor^ in a better age.

The Landgrave moved with admiration by so long and lasting a virtue, judged
this illustrious old man worthy of hi^ euriosity, and did him the honor to
visit him at Mentz; by mishap the gout seized on him the next day after his
arrival, which although it used to treat him gently, it being rather indeed a
forced repose then a true grief, yet was he obliged to receive it like a sick
person, and to keep his bed so long as it lasted. This Fit retained him longer
then he intended, in a place where he could not otherwise have been tired;
which gave us also the means the better to consider him.

Being a Prince who loved learning, he employed his spare hours, and the
intervals of his grief, either in reading good Books, or conversing with such
learned men who best understood them. There was then one with his Highness whom
he particularly esteemed, and who in effect was no ordinary person, whom he
usually called HIS ARISTIPPUS, and sometimes his LEARNED WISEMAN, to explicate
that name of Aristippus, which he had given him.

He was a Gentleman of an exquisite Judgment and of a consummate Experience of
the Catholic Religion, a French man by birth, and originally from Germany, of
Fity five years of age or thereabouts: He had the gift to please, and was
learned in the Art of persuading. Besides he knew both the old and the new
Court; and having observed in diverse Journeys which he had made, the manners
and natural inclination of Princes and of their Ministers, there was to be
found hoarded up in him a treasure of the things of our time, beside other
knowledges, which he had drawn from Antiquity, and aquired by Meditation.

I was so happy as at first sight to contract a friendship with him; he
presented me to the Landgrave, and gave a good Character of me to his whole
Court, he gained also his Highness good liking that I should assist at those
Entertainments which they had after their repasts. At his coming out of Germany
they had chosen Corn. Tacitus to be the Companion of their travels, nor were
they ill accompanied; he had diverted them at the Spaw, and on the way, and
when they were arrived at Metz they were at the beginning of Vespasians Reign*
Aristippus was Reader, and Interpreter; after having read, he made reflections
on the things read sometimes in few words, and with light touches on them, and
sometimes making stops and discourses at length, as either the matter required,
or as the Landgrave exacted it from him. It was a pleasure to hear a
Philosopher discourse of the Court; and if that Sophister who rendered himself
ridiculous before Hannibal, had not spoken worse concerning War, I cannot fancy
that Hannibal would ever have scorned him.

Public Affairs are often foul and full of ordure, whereby with the least
touch a man contaminates himself, but the speculation is more honest then the
management of them; that is performed with innocence and purity: the Pictures of
Dragons and Crocodiles having no venom which offends the sight, may have
colors which rejoice the eyes. And I must confess, the world which in it self
so much disgusts me, would in the conversation of Aristippus seem to be
delightful and full of divertisement.

In this rich and learned conversation, as in a Tower neighboring Heaven, and
built on the shore, we securely regarded the agitations and tempests of the
world. We were spectators of all the parts which were acted through Europe:
Aristippus formed arguments of those which were yet to be acted, and his
acquired as well as natural prudence, which knew all both the past and present,
taught us also some new things for the future. He had chained me to his tongue
from the beginning to the end of his Entertainment, and I heard him with an
attention so little diverted, that not the least word of his escaped me; but to
make way for what he was to speak the next day, retiring my self into my
Chamber, in the evening I wrote down the Discourses of the afternoon, and
discharged my self on the paper of a burden of Pearls and Diamonds, as honest
Monsieur de Coeffeteau, to whom I the next morning used to communicate them,
was wont to call them.

At that time I had as much reason to commend the fidelity of my Memory as I
have now cause to complain of the treacheries wherewith it now afflicts me.
Senecae the Father tells us of the wonders of his, in the Preface to his
Controversies; I dare not go so far as he, nor will I prefer any thing of mine,
which sents of the Mounteback. But its very true that the same year these
conversations of Aristippus were enjoyed, having heard a Sermon of two hours
long, after my return from Church I wrote it entirely out, without indeed
subjecting my self scrupulously to the words, neither did I lose the least part
of the substance of the things.

There are witnesses still alive of what I say. I can name some of eminent
quality, who are full of life. Nor need any man think it strange, that after
such an effort of Memory, which was then thought no small matter, I should
remember seven Discourses of a mean size which Aristippus made in seven days
one after another. One line of Vespatians History served him for a Text to
begin, and the Landgraves entreaties obliged him not to leave off in haste.

To speak of the merit of the Discourses I think it nothing necessary; Nor will
I allege the approbation they have had both on this and on that side of the
Mountains. It will suffice to say that they have been read by those who correct
Edicts and Ordinances. and that the Cardinal Richelieu, having carried them
with him into Italy, returned them to me at Paris as he came from that fatal
voyage of Lions; nor was this performed only with very civil words, but with
most obliging notes; wherewith he had marked the Margent of the Manuscript:
This pleases me; Nothing could have been said more prettily. This may be
called excellent. I know whom he means, etc.

These kind of marks which he usually made on the compositions of other men,
were well known to those who saw him in his privacies, and who are admitted
into his Cabinet, during his hours of leisure and divertisement. So that his
Eminency had so much goodness as not to take to himself any thing that's to be
read in these seven Discourses. He distinguished times and places, and did me
the favor to consider, That when Aristippus spoke at Metz, himself at that time
was but Bishop of Lucon, and that Monsieur Luynes was not as yet Constable of
France.

BUt it is not a time to relate the adventures of Discourses, since they are not
yet finished, and that they are yet to make another voyage to the furthest
parts of the North. Nor ought their Elogy to be drawn from the Testimonies
rendered them in France and Italy. They must expect the judgment of the QUEEN
in Sweden to whom I send them; Being enlightened to the height she is, she will
better know them by their appearance then by the relation of others, and
presupposing that she desires them, it is more fit at first to content her
curiosity, then to tire her patience with a long Preface.

Let Us not use so much artifice in presenting this Present of ours, and let us
bring Aristippus to appear before her as soon as possible: Let Us not offend our
selves with the uselessness of Dialogues, which most commonly embrasseth what is
necessary. It spends too much time in Civilities and Complements, in Good
Morrows and Good Evenings. I thought it fit therefore to cut off all
superfluities, and present things pure and simple, as I have preserved them
with care amongst my papers, after having collected them with pleasure from the
mouth of Aristippus.

But before I proceed, It will not be improper to do even as Aristippus would
do if he were still in the world, and were himself his own Historian; having
begun with a name which will afford felicity to the Book, without delay let us
render it those homages which are due unto it.

The virtue of CHRISTINA deserves somewhat extraordinary; but the present time
is too poor for such an acknowledgment. We must seek honors for her in old
Rome, and in the Country of Triumphs; and why should we not in this place renew
the ancient custom of acclamations, which were the triumphs of every day? These
require no pomp, as others do, and their expense may be made even by Poverty it
self.

Let us therefore praise, let us bless the Daughter of the Great Gustavus, the
Great, the Incomperable Christina, for the good examples which she gives to so
wicked an Age, for having made an end of War, and for having made a Peace, for
knowing how to reign, and for her not being ignorant of any thing which
deserved to be known. It Is Christina who has opposed Barbarism, who returned,
who has retained the Muses who were flying away. It Is she who Sovereignly
understands the Sciences and the Arts. She sets a price on the operations of
the Mind. As she receives the applause of all People, she returns Oracles in
all Languages; From whose opinions there is no Appeal, not even for Posterity.

If this be so, and that she approve my Book, either it will be sure of public
approbation, or it will not stand in need of it. But we must not do that wrong
to the public to think that it is capable of a contrary thought to that of
CHRISTINA. The World would never displease a person which does it that honor
and embellisheth it so much, by contradicting a person so sound in judgment,
and so well grounded in Opinion.

ARISTIPPVS: A DISCOURSE Concerning the COURT; Divided into Seven Parts.
The First Discourse.
It Is a singular opinion of some Philosophers, That a Wise man stands not in
need of any body; and whatsoever is separate from him, is to him of no use.
Whereby they take away Friendship from the number of necessary things, placing
it simply amongst those which are delightful. Yet others more civil then they,
I mean the Philosophers of Plato's family, and those of Aristotle's, did
believe, that without Friendship Felicity were imperfect and deficient, Virtue
weak and impotent. They said, Friends were the most profitable and the most
desirable of all outward goods: They considered them not as the sports and
musings of a Wise man in picture, but as the helps and props of a man of this
world.

There is none but God only who can be fully content in himself, of whom we
ought to speak in such high and magnifick terms. It Is he alone, who being rich
in his own essence, enjoys a most happy solitude, which abounds in all kind of
good: He only who can operate without instruments, as he can act without labor:
He who draws forth all from within his nature; for as much as things are thence
in such a manner produced, that yet they forbear not to continue therein. Men
on the contrary can neither live, nor live well; neither be Men, nor be happy
without one another: They are linked together by a common necessity of Commerce.

It Is not sufficient for every Particular to be but One, unless he endeavor
some way or other to multiply himself by the help of others. And to consider us
all in general, it seems that we are rather so many divided Parts which Society
reunites, then so many several entire Bodies.

Those who are offended, demand justice; the weak stand in need of help; and
the afflicted, of consolation: But all men universally want Counsel; it is the
great Element of a Civil life; it is hardly less necessary then fire and water.
And those two means wherewith Nature has furnished us for action, relate to
this end; REASON and SPEECH, which were principally given us for COUNSEL.
Beasts are carried away by the swift impetuosity of their natures, and by the
presence of the first object: Men have the conduct of themselves by
Deliberation and by Discourse: Having the gift to seek and to choose, they may
instantly pass from the present to the future, and from the first to the
second, and stop there if they so find it fit.

Pirates make use of Counsel, nor do the Savages live without it. With far more
reason is it therefore entertained amongst Civilized people. But everywhere
wise men must borrow it from others, because their own wisdom is to be
suspected to them in things which respect themselves. Man is so near himself,
that he can find no place betwixt both, no free space for to debate the counsel
he would give himself: He cannot hinder those two Reasons which deliberate in
him, from confounding themselves in communication; That which proposes, being
too much mixed with that which concludes.

He who counsels therefore, must be another person distinct from him who is
counseled. There must be a proportionable distance betwixt the objects, and
those faculties which judge of them: And as the most quick-sighted can never
see themselves, so the most piercing Judgments want perspicuity when it
concerns their own interests. What natural knowledge soever we have, and what
light soever comes down on us from above, yet ought we not to reject humane
means, nor to despise this advantage of reason, and this great illustration of
the truth which is gained by Conference.

Let us acknowledge the imperfection of Man severed from Man, and the
prevalencie of Society above Solitude. Since the Friend of God, and the
Conductor of his people, although a miraculous cloud marched before him by day,
although a Pillar of fire did the same by night, placing themselves in the
place where they were to encamp, did not forbear to take a Guide, to serve him
in other difficulties which during the journey might occur; should any man
after this not ask for a Guide, nor seek assistance? Who is it that can trust
so much to the advantages of his birth? who is it that can so negligently sleep
on those favors which he expects from heaven, as to imagine that the assistance
of others is useless? as to believe that his fortune alone and his only wisdom
are sufficient for a good Government and a good Conduct?

Those who are raised far above the common condition of men, have raised
themselves by some degrees. It is not Chance which cast them above others; nor
is it their own Virtue which has done all: They often meet with the services
of some one person, amongst the wonders of their lives. And it is visible
through the course of all Ages, that those Princes who have gotten most, are
those who have been the best seconded. Of so many Examples, a crowd of which
are to be found in History, I shall only make choice of that on which we
yesterday discoursed, and which obliged his Highness for this day to make me
speak.

VEspasian had lived under the Tyranny of Nero, and had saved himself from his
hands by miracle: But he contented not himself with his own safety, after that
Monster was dead; He took heart and undertook greater matters for the public
good. Observing that there were other Nero's which threatened the World, and
that new Monsters unchain'd themselves, he hazarded himself to preserve the
World, by seizing on the Empire: He embraced the Protection of the people of
Rome, the glory whereof was almost all fallen, either by the sword, or by
poison, and the remnant which was left was daily exhausted to fill Islands and
Dungeons. He had stopped there, at his good will and good intentions; He had
seen all the last Lights of the Senate extinguished, and the Commonwealth
perish before his face, but for the powerful solicitations, and the vigorous
pursuits of Mutius, who as it were by force placed the Crow on his head, and
in despite of him made him Emperor.

He at first staggered the mind of Vespasiar. which was then fixed on present
occurrents, although he approved them not; nor durst he be the Author of that
Change which he desired. And after having cast him into an irresolution, he
urged him with so many reasons, and persuaded him with so much eloquence, that
he at last constrained him to make an end of the design, and to engage himself
in the Public cause by an open Declaration.

Now it is fit you should know, that Mutius was not a man who engaged in a Party
with fair words only and good wishes; but presently he fortifies Vespasian with
men and with money; He acquired him Provinces and brought him Legions: He
spared not his own person; when he thought it fit, he laid his life at stake,
and would needs be the Executor of most of those things which he counseled.

Princes which are to be made, cannot be without such persons; and Princes
already made, have great use of them. There never was any One so strong, who by
his own strength could bear the burden of the whole Government: Never was
there any so jealous of his Authority, as to be able to reign alone, and to be
indeed a Monarch, to take the word in the rigor of its meaning. Neither is it
other then a pastime and invention of the Platonians, to slatter Royalty and
place it above humane condition, to say, That God endowed Kings with two
spirits, that they might govern well. Plato often sports himself after this
manner; He philosophiseth poetically, and mixeth Fable with his Theology. This
double spirit is of his concession: And it were better to explicate it of the
Kings spirit, and of that of his Counselor, then to have recourse to Miracles,
which must never be made use of but in case of necessity, not even for the
honor and for the glory of Kings.

It is certain, they have a burden so disproportionable to the weakness of One,
that did they not trust to the support of many, they would from the very first
step which they took catch but a most certain fall. Did they not call their
friends to their succor, and did they not divide the Globe of the Earth, they
would soon be punished for the temerity of their Ambition, and sink under the
weight of their own Fortune. That multitude of Cares which from all parts
assaults them, would not afford them a free respiration; The crowd of Affairs
would stifle them at the very first Audience they gave.

There are several degrees of Servants, which all have a place in the
Administration of a State. There are Spirits of a mean capacity, which
untangle, which prepare and dispose affairs: These are fit to begin the work;
they make way, and take away the difficulties which embroil things. These
Spirits are employed by the Prince for every day, and he discharges himself on
them only of the grosser functions of his Royalty.

There are other Spirits of a higher elevation, which he may trust in more
important employments, and afford a more noble share in his designs. These
govern under him and with him; nor are they evil Pilots in the sweet seasons,
nor on those seas which suffer but little agitation.

But how happy is that Prince, and how is he loved by Heaven, if in his time he
meets with spirits of the first rank, souls equal with Intelligences in light,
in force, in sublimeness! Men whom God creates expressly, and whom he
extraordinarily sends to prevent or force the evils of their Ages, to divertor
to calm the storms of their Countries!

They are the Tutelar Angels of Kingdoms, and the Familiar spirits of Kings:
They are the Seconds to the Alexanders and to the Caesar's; They ease the Prince
in all his toils; They with him partake saving Disquiets, without which there
would be no Tranquillity in the World. If in the States wherein we live there
are such persons, let us bless their Watchings, which are so necessary to the
Public Repose, under whose protection we sleep securely and at ease. These
excellent Watches, are they not the cause (my Lord) for which the Grecian Poe^s
gave the Night the name of Wise and Counselor? For so I fancy it; and the
Grammarians do sometimes give the Poets furtherfetch'd explications.

The Poets, Your Highness knows it better then I, were the first ancient
Preceptors of Humane kind; they taught them the first Principles of Policy and
of Morality. Here then, as elsewhere, they have discovered and pointed out the
Truth unto us. The Philosophers have since displaid it, and brought it to its
full light. Having acknowledged this necessity of Society, and the defects
which accompany Solitude; besides their Jupiter the Counselor, and their
Minerva the Counselor, besides the Gods and Demons who always went in company
of their Hero's, they have yet besides that given them Men to assist them in
their enterprises, or other Hero's to undertake and act with them. Whilst
Hercules cuts off the heads of the Hydra, Iolas applies fire to it, to hinder
them from springing up again. Diomedes does nothing without Ulysses.
Agamemnon's actions arise from the counsels of Nestor: And this Prince being to
make a wish which might comprehend all others, desires neither more powerful
forces then his own, nor that wealth he had not, nor the destruction of the
Empire of Asia, nor the greatening of that of Greece, but only Ten men which
were like unto Nestor, Agamemnon showing us thereby, That the fear he was in to
lose Nestor, in respect of his extreme age, made him apprehend he should want
men to substitute in his place. And Homer makes it appear, That one Nestor may
sometimes be found in an Age; but that ten Nestors are only to be wished.

This wish did nothing wrong the memory of Agamemnon; Greece never reproached
him for having suffered himself to be governed by Nestor; Nor was the King of
Kings esteemed for that less wise or less worthy of the Sovereign authority. On
the contrary, it is an Axiom in the Politics, which passes for the
Proposition of an eternal truth, and is as old as Policy it self; THAT AN
UNABLE PRINCE CAN NEITHER BE WELL COUNSELED NOR WELL SERVED.

If to receive Counsel, presupposes some advantage to him who gives it; the
inferiority (on the other side) of him that receives it, forbears not to have
its merit: He in his turn is the Superior; He retakes the first place, when he
sets his hand to the work, and when by the execution of deliberated things he
changes Rules into Examples, and fair words into good effects. For although it
has been sometimes said in Rome, That Lelius was the Poet, and that Seipio was
the Actor; And that it should be true, That he who composeth Verses, act more
nobly then he who recites them; yet is it not therefore true, That that person
who executes glorious undertakings, produces a less relevated operation then
he who only counsels them. The Counselor preserves his advantage but during
the beginning of things, but loses it in their event; and even in the
commencement of them he has it not entirely: Nor does he who is counseled
remain useless and without motion, during that time the Counselors action
lasts.

Nature seems to prove what we say, and has formed I know not what lineaments
in the soul of man: where the Intellect, which we call the Patient, which is
the seat of Learning, although it be enlightened by the light of the
Intellect-Agent, yet suffers not in that manner, but that it acts also of it
self. It judges of the Knowledge which it has received; it revolves, it
removes, it displays, it disperseth in it self this Knowledge: After having
compared it with others, it from thence recollects consequences and
conclusions. And so we may say, it works in company; and if it suffer, it is
with the fairest kind of passion, which neither spoils nor corrupts, as that of
a Wound or Burn; but finisheth and perfects, as that of Illumination in the
Air, and of the Reception of Images in the Eyes.

Let us speak less subtly, and in a more popular phrase; Let us conclude,
that it is necessary to have hands, that one may profitably make use of tools;
and to have Prudence, to use as one ought that of another man's. Wisdom it self
is irresolute and but little assured, when she wants approbation, and is
reduced to her own testimony. A concerted Reasoning despoils us not at all of
the first apprehension we have of the truth of things. And our Aristotle
hereupon tells us, That Salt does not at all harm Seafish; and that Oil seasons
Olives. A stupid and interessed Courtier puts affairs in disorder, and ruins
in stead of building up. But a wise and faithful Minister, who equally divides
his affection between the King and the State, renders the greatest services to
both of them, and with reason according to my opinion may call himself The
Temperament of the power of One, and the Common good of the Republic. But my
particular opinion were slight, nor would it have force sufficient to form and
conclude this Discourse, did I not confirm it by the acknowledgments of the
Public toward persons so useful to the general good of the world, and by
those resplendent proofs of affection and esteem which Princes themselves have
rendered to the wisdom and fidelity of their Ministers.

I omit Greece, where they have reigned with their Kings: I forbear Persia,
where their Kings ruled by them, and where they were called The Kings eyes;
That is to say, as an excellent person explicates it, The Kings eyes which are
always open and always watching for the Kingdoms safety, which at one and the
same time look forwards, backwards, to the right and to the left.

I shall only insist on Rome; where the Emperors, to correct that bitterness
which is to be found in the words of Servitude and Subjection, have honored
such like Servants with the title of Friends; They have called them their
Companions; sometimes, the Companions of their cares, the Companions of their
wars and of their victories. And even thought fit that the People should call
them so.

They have caused Statues to be erected to them near their own; They have made
them depositories of their swords, with permission to use them against
themselves, if the good of the State required it, and if they rendered
themselves unworthy of the power they had. They have caused Money to be coined,
whereon was the Image of one of the Generals of their Armies with these words
about it; BELLISARIVS THE GLORY OF THE ROMANS. And there is to this day to be
seen a Silver-Medal, on the one side whereof is represented the Figure of
Valentia, and on the other that of one of his Subjects seated in a Consular
chair, holding papers in his right hand, and a truncheon in his left, with an
Eagle perching on it. In the History of the Caesar's there is also to be seen
that proud Monument consecrated to the memory of a great Minister; TO MILITHEVS
THE FATHER OF PRINCES, AND TUTOR OF THE REPUBLIC.

The Inscription is singular, and the quality of the Princes Father nothing
common, at that time when the seat of the Empire had not yet been transferred
from Rome to Constantinople: For after that, this quality was conferred as a
Title of Office; and vulgarly, those who had the principal direction of
affairs, were called THE FATHERS OF THE EMPIRE, AND OF THE EMPEROR.

The History written since Constantine, speaks nothing else but of the Dignity
of the Patriciate. Poetry it self could not be silent; and there are yet some
jeering Verses which the Poet Claudian made against Eutropius the Eunuch,
Consul and Patriciate of the Empire. His fall is celebrated in the books of
that Age; and S. John Chrysost^m has made almost an entire Homily thereof.
Those jeering Verses particularly touch at the confiscation of his goods; And
this is near upon the sense, if my memory fail me not. Why do thou weep at
the loss of thy wealth, which will fall into the hands of thy Son? The Emperor
will be thy Heir; and it so became thee to be the Emperors Father. I have
recovered my memory, and the French has reminded me of the Latin.

Direptas quid plangis opes, quas Natus habebit?
Non aliter poteras Principis esse Pater.
Whereupon remembering my self, That the Cross of Jesus Christ had possessed it
self of the place of the Roman Eagles, and that then the Emperors were become
domestics of the Faith, and members of the Church, of strangers and of
persecutors which they were before; I thought they might have borrowed that
term from the Holy Writ, and from the discourse of the Patriarch Joseph.

That great Minister glorifies himself in Genesis; THAT GOD HAD GIVEN HIM FOR A
FATHER TO PHARAOH, (although perhaps he was younger than he) THAT HE WAS
ESTABLISHED PRINCE OVER ALL THE ROYAL FAMILY, AND LORD OF ALL THE COUNTRY OF
EGYPT. And the same sacred History tells us a little before, That Pharaoh took
off his ring from his finger, and put it on Joseph's; That he caused him to
ride in a Triumphal chariot; That he commanded by a public cry, That all the
world should fall down before him; That he told him in a full and general
Assembly, THOU ART NOR MORE NOR LESS THEN PHARAOH; NEITHER HAVE I ANY THING
MORE THEN THOU HAVE, BUT MY NAME AND MY THRONE.

Nothing can be added to so illustrious a testimony of so well counseled a
Princes resentment: And pray what can be said or imagined beyond it? You see
that the highest Idea which I could possibly conceive of the dignity of the
Ministry, is authorized by the most ancient of all the examples of that nature:
It Is impossible to go further in History; and I must confess (my Lord) I am
sensible of some temptation of vainglory, for that a great Prophet explains me
by the mouth of a great King.

THE SECOND DISCOURSE.
THis truth being established, That Kings cannot reign without Ministers; it is
almost as true, That they cannot live without Favorites. Good stays not in the
place of its source; it will run and spread it self abroad: And it is but a
commenced good, unless it be increased by communication, and unless it finish
by dilating it self. But let us add something which is more strange, and yet
is as certain: It has been long since assured us by Reason, That were a man
alone in Heaven, and that it were not in his power to participate it with
another, he would be weary of his own felicity, and would descend from Heaven
to Earth.

Upon which ground I say, That the wisest Princes in the world, That the
Augustans and the Antonines, if they returned again, That the Constantines and
Theodosiusses, may have legitimate affections, and reasonably love this man
more then that.

LET YOUR PEOPLE BE YOUR FAVORITE, was Advice formerly given to a great Prince,
but by a Philosopher somewhat too severe. To deny Kings the sweetest use of
their Wills, and to despoil them of the most humane of the Passions, were to be
the Tyrant of Kings, and not suffer them to be Men: It were to tie them to the
greatness of their condition, and to nail them to their Thrones. What a
severity were it, that we would never have them appear in a shape like ours?
that they should never divest themselves of that gravity which incommodates
them? Is it a crime to have a Confident, in whose company a man may after labor
seek repose, and divertisement after business?

Virtue is not so austere, nor so savage: she destroys not Nature, she only
corrects its imperfection: she knows how to render Justice, but she also knows
how to do an act of Grace. In Charity she affords a place to whomsoever; the
Stranger is received there as a Guest, and the Barbarian as well as a Grecian:
But she reserves Friendship for a small number; she espouseth not all she
embraces.

In Heaven, where the Idea's and the first forms of things are to be found, are
there not beneficent Aspects and favorable Inclinations rather toward these,
then those* whence there are born on Earth the Predestinate and the Elect? Was
there not a chosen People which was preferred before all other Nations; which
was called The portion and the inheritance of the Lord? The Lord told them, I
WILL BE THY GOD, AND THOU SHALL BE MY PEOPLE. In the family of the Patriarchs,
this preference was ever found on one side, whilst all the rest were excluded?
The Cadets carried away the right of Elder brothers; and the Advantage of
Nature gave place to the Decrees of God.

And when the Son of God himself came into the world, besides the Seventy two
Disciples who were of his train, and who had devoted themselves unto him, he
called Twelve Apostles, to render him a more particular subjection, and be
nearest to his person. Even amongst those, there were Three to whom he declared
himself more familiarly then to the rest: He showed them those marks of his
Divinity, which he hid from their companions; He communicated many secrets of
the future, during the agitation of his approaching death, and amongst the
disquiets of his last thoughts.

Besides this, he witnessed more tenderness for one of the three, then for the
two others. S. John without difficulty calls himself the Beloved and the
Favorite of his Master: He everywhere glorifies himself of that favor; And
methinks he used it with liberty enough, whenas he slept in the bosom of so
great and dreadful a Master. Consider him but in the Picture of the Holy
Supper, and see how he carelessly rests his head on a place whereto the
Seraphins conveigh their looks with devotion.

Since the Author and Consummator therefore of Virtue as well as of Faith, has
had his Inclinations and his Friendships, and would not always command Nature;
A Prince ought not fear to love after an Example of such Authority which yields
him a full permission; And by the principles of a more wise Philosophy then was
that of Zeno or of Chrysippus, he may be sensible, without being called
Intemperate.

The motions of his Soul need only be just and well regulated. Let him do good,
but let him observe a proportion and measure in the distribution of the good he
does. Let him not presently thrust into his Council those whose conversation
was grateful to him: We ought to make a difference betwixt persons which
delight us, and those which are profitable to us; betwixt the recreations of
the Mind, and the necessities of a State. And if he take not an especial care
in the examen of the different Subjects he imployes, he will make Equivokes for
which his Age will suffer, and which will be reproch'd him by the Ages to come.

Courtiers are the Matter, and the ^^ince is the Artist; who can easily ^ender
this matter fairer, but not better ^en it is: He can add unto it colors and
shape in the outside, but cannot give (...) any interior goodness: He may make
(...) Idol and a false God of it; but he can neither make a Spirit of it, nor
an able ^an.

Even in Christendom such Idols are to ^e seen: There have been always unworthy
persons happy; Monkies have ^een caressed in Kings Cabinets, and ap^arell'd in
cloth of gold; In Egypt there ^ave been Beasts seen on the Altars; Every where
there have been Defects and Vices ^^dor'd. What I am about to tell Your
Highness, I have learned from You; and (...) find it worthy of the spirit of
Marcus Intonius the Philosopher. There is an Au^hority which is blind and dumb,
which neither knows nor understands; which appears only and which dazles; which
is pure re^^n'd Authority, without any mixture of ^ertue or of Reason. There
are Grandees who are only remarkable by their Great^ess; and their Greatness is
all without them, and altogether separate from their persons.

These Great ones (my Lord) make me ^emember certain fruitless Mountains, which
^ formerly saw traveling about the world, which produce neither herb nor
plant; They touch Heaven, and serve the Earth for no use; Their sterility makes
their height accursed. These, after the same manner, are not less unprofitable
then they are great; and I look upon them as^ the vain Monsters of the power
and magnificence of Kings; like the Colosses which they have raised, and the
Pyramids which they have built: They are the burdens and hindrances of their
Kingdoms, which weigh down all the parts of the State; They are superfluities
which occupy more room then necessary things. This is to be understood,
considering them in a weakness which is innocent, and before they have added
the injury of their Actions to the unworthiness of their Persons.

These are the fair works of Fortune; these are the slights and extravagancies
of this Goddess, who is without eyes and without judgment; to whom Rome has
given so many Names, and dedicated so many Altars. You have heard of some
hypocondriacal Queens who have fallen in love with a Dwarf, a Moor, even a Bull
and a Horse. Fortune is much of the same humor of these giddy-brain'd
Princesses; she commonly selects the most ill-favored and the most ill-shap'd:
when the Pretorship is in question, she preferrs Vatinius his King's Evil before
the Virtue of Cato: And that we may say nothing that is worse, she practices
Profuseness, nor does she pay Deb^s.

But we speak of a phantasm, when we ^peak of Fortune. The force of the Stars,
and the necessity of Destiny, are also other phantasms which the opinions of
men form, after which I have no mind to run. Let us seek some more apparent
cause of this fa^^or, which seems to have no cause; And as bear as we can, let
us observe the birth of this same perverse Authority.

What we seek, is it not a transport of Passion, which without reasoning
escapes from the animal part, and stops at the first pleasing object, and at
the first satisfaction of the Will?

Is it not a sport and a fancy of Power, ^n exercise and an employment of
Royalty, which takes a pleasure to do strange things; To astonish the world by
Prodigies, To change the fate of the little and miserable, To paint and guild
the dust?

Is it not on the contrary a serious and deliberate error, a cheat to true
fidelity, done to ones self by ones self, helped by the imposture of
Appearance, which sometimes disguiseth men in such a manner, that they are to
be known by none but God? It Is certain, that most commonly they wear such
doubtful marks, and what appears of them is so false, that he alone who has
made them knows their true value.

But the Effect, which we take so much pains to draw from the obscurity of the
Causes, should it not be a Present made by Occasion? For, it is she who commonly
offers Servants to Princes; She obliges them to take what comes to hand, and
what comes in sight. Their impatience being unable to suffer delay, and their
softness being an enemy to all manner of trouble; to spare themselves the
tediousness of enquiry, and the difficulties of choice, they set to work the
nearest Instruments, and retain as it were by custom those whom they took but
by chance.

To conclude: This Favor which raises it self to this height without any
foundation, should it not rather be an effect of selflove and a complaconcie,
which no man refufeth to his own opinions? Should it not be our honor which we
conceive engaged in the perfection of our work? Should it not be a leven of
that natural pride hid in the minds of men, which particularly swells the
hearts of Kings, when the maintaining of a fault which they have committed is
in question, that so they might not confess that they can err.

Whatsoever this Favor is, it is none of Virtues creatures, not so much as of
the virtue of Blood; Merit has no share in it, not even the merit of the Race.
The freed men by Claudius; the Servants of Constantine's Children; the
Governors of those of Theodosius; the ^usebius's and the Eutropius's, are no
legitimate Favorites, far less legitimate Ministers. And truly, I pity the
Empire, and am ashamed of the Emperor, when I see the Empire and Emperor in
such servile mercenary hands. With horror I look on those base spectacles of
unhappy Reigns, those monstrous productions of evil times; Blind times, times
full of darkness, unhappy in Princes, and barren of Men. And in your opinion,
was there ever any solitary person so estranged from Court, who was so little
interessed in the things of this world, who without disdain could look on
things so disjointed, and see the world overturned after such a manner? Was
there ever so calm a Contemplative, who without emotion could see people of
naught wrest into their hands the conduct of great States, and seat themselves
at the stern, although they ought only to have been at the oar? Yet has this
been seen, and that often too. The Consulare was profaned more then once by
infamous persons; And he who under another reign must have been hid amongst
the Baggage, has had the command of an Army.

But besides the Eusebiusses and the Eutropiusses, the History of the Empire of
the Orient wants not many such shameful examples: It shows us miserable
Eunuchs, who had only learned how to comb women and how to spin, lifted up all
at once to be Heads of the Council and Captains General. And other more recent
Histories produce such as were Barbers, Tailors, Grooms of the Chamber the
evening before, the next morning changed into Chamberlains, Ambassadors etc.
employed about the most important Negotiations and most illustrious Offices of
their Country. So that whatsoever our Man can say, He who admires the Court and
the Arts of Court, audacious Ignorance has often presided in the Conduct of
humane things. Although he swears that he has seen rays about the face of
Monsieur the Duke of ***, this false light is but a deception of the sight and
an illusion of his mind. Fools have often held the places of Wise men; and
there was a time when those who ought to have dictated the Laws and pronounced
Oracles, could neither write nor read. It was not that their common sense was
the clearer, for not besng imbroil'd in any stranger knowledges. They neither
had the goods of Nature, nor any acquired goods: They only had what commonly
follows natural and acquired goods; I would say, a good opinion of themselves,
accompanied with the despising of others. Although it is not the common course
to know affairs by revelation, and that they are to be learned by Experience,
unless we can outgo Experience by the strength of Reason. They persuaded
themselves, that Authority supplied all that; and that immediately after their
promotion God was obliged to endow them with a spirit of well-governing, and to
render the Princes election valid by a sudden illumination of his Ministers.

Yet it is not so to be ordered. It Is all what God has been pleased to do for
the Ministers of his only Son, of whom we have said somewhat at the beginning
of this Discourse. It Is whereby he mocks proud Philosophy: He has confounded
humane Prudence, by taking those new and gross souls to be the Considents of
his Secrets, filling them very full (as an antieut Christian says) because he
found them very empty. He has taken from their cabins and from their shops,
those whom he would make the Kings and Doctors of Nations. Other Ignorants must
never pretend to be so enlightened; Nor that in stead of the Spirit of
Prophecy, explicating of the Scriptures, and the gift of Tongues, they should
expect from hence the knowledge of past things, the penetration into things to
come, the light which disembroils the intrigues of the Court, the science of
making War, and the dexterity of treating Peace.

Besides, they commonly succeed very ill in a Prosession which they never
learned, and in the exercise whereof they have indiscreetly cast themselves
without the help of any preparative discipline, without any ground of
experience, without knowing so much as the first elements of Civil wisdom. You
must make use of Address and of Method, to conduct a Boat and to guide a
Chariot: You must know the ways, if you will go for a Guide. I have seen Rules
and Precepts how to discharge the office of a Porter, and that of a Jailer,
although they are two employments which are of no great difficulty. You must
therefore learn all the Trades, and study all the Arts, even the least and
those which are most ^asie. And shall he who is to direct humane kind, need no
instruction? shall the World be governed by Chance and Adventure? May wethus
with three Dice play for the safety of Nations and Kingdoms?

This is indeed unworthily to be in stead of God; it is to act Phaeton in the
World, and unequally to dispense light^and heat on the face of the earth; It Is
to endanger the burning of one part, and the freezing of the other. Ignorant
Favorites every day run this hazard, and are engaged in this continual danger;
I mean, of losing themselves and of losing their Country, even when they have
refined their Ignorance by the Customs of Court; and that two or three good
successes which come from the pure liberality of God, have made them have a
good opinion of themselves, and made them believe they did the good which they
did but receive.

All their Actions are then out of frame; they are the false Measures of a
false Rule. In stead of knowing where to stop at such a point of Occasion, so
much enquired after by the wise, and so necessary for the perfecting of
affairs, they always either go before or after it; either they pass beyond it,
or they attain it not. To day, out of anger, they declare a War; To morrow, out
of cowardliness, they beg a Peace: They flatter the natural Enemies of their
Country, and offend the ancient Allies of the Crown. In Spain they would give
Liberty of Conscience; In France they would introduce the Inquisition. The
Frontiers are naked and disarmed, and they sortifie the Heart of the State.
They have a mind to raze the Citadel at Amiens, and to build one at Orleans.

But the Elections which they make of others, are very worthy of that which was
made of them. For an Embassage to Rome they propose to the Prince an expert
Captain of a Troop, who has signalized himself in diverse battles. Upon their
recommendation, an old Prodigal is placed in the Exchequer, who in his youth
spent all he had, but who speaks admirably well of Economy. They require the
Charge of Chief Justice for a man who is indeed of the Longrobe, but renowned
for his little knowledge in Learning. Of the same form he was who lived at
I'aris in our fathers days, when the Ambassadors of Poland arrived there; they
having complemented this man in Latin, he prav'd them to excuse him for not
returning them an answer, Because he never had had the curiosity to learn the
P^lonian language.

You smile, my Lord, and are astonished at the great literature of this man of
the Long-robe. He made many other Equivoques, and some are told of him which
are nothing ungrateful. It was he who thought Seneca was a Doctor of the
Canon Law, and that in his Book de Beneficiis he had fully handled all matters
concerning Benefices. One *** of that time made him believe that Morea was the
Moors Country. And there is nothing more true, then that he sought a whole day
in his Map for Demecracy and Aristicracy, thinking to find them as well as
Dalmatia and Croatia.

It were a pleasure to be Learned under such a Reign, and the Muses may have
great hopes of protection from such like Ministers. But let us proceed and not
consider the interest of the Muses, whose fate it is to be poor and ill used
under all kind of Governments, and by all manner of Ministers.

These understand Men and Business, as you see. After having dissipated the
Revenues of the State in evil and ridiculous expenses, that they may appear
parcimonious, they suffer an important Occasion to be lost for want of Fifty
crowns, which they will not allow for the dispatch of an Extraordinary Courier:
They expect the day of the Ordinary Post, and imagine that Occasion will stay
for him as well as they do. A Politic Doctor who has whistled them to his
lure, and put into them five or six words out of our Taci^us, for having
alleged it a hundred times a day on every accident, has recommended unto them
Secrecy and Dissimulation. This lesson being taught them, they make a Mystery
of every thing; they express themselves but by casts of their eyes, and by
motions of their heads: At least they speak only in the ear, even when they
praise their Master, and say, That he is the greatest Prince in the world.

This religion of Silence has gained upon their minds with so much
^uperstition, that they scruple to give necessary Orders to those who are to
execute them, so much are they afraid to discover what was resolved in Council.
They attentively hearken to an Alchymist, who promises them mountains of gold:
With open arms they receive a Banished person, who with ease discovers to them
the Conquest of his own Country: And trusting on the faith of one or other,
they imbarque themselves in some great Design, and begin a huge War, which the
second day after they are tired withal. They do a thousand such like things.
And if these Examples are not to be found in this Age, they were certainly in
the past. If these Ignorant presumptuous, if these ridiculous Almighty-men have
not been in France and Germany, there have been of them in Spain and in Italy.

The misery of the Times, (It Is better to accuse the Time then the Prince) this
public misery, which has caused Money to be made of Iron and of Leather,
which has set a value on the vilest things, has also brought in request such
men, and introduced them into the Cabinet of Kings; whither they have drawn
along with them all the ordure of their births, and all the vicious habits
which servile minds were capable of. For this is one Chapter of their their
History, which ought not to be forgotten. And it is certain, that their
Innocence never lasted much longer at Court, then that of the first Man's did
in the terrestrial Paradise.

At first, although perhaps they were not born wicked, they did believe they
ought to become so, and so discharged themselves of their Consciences, that
with less encumbrance they might manage the affairs of State. Moreover, they
thought that Pride was well becoming their dignity; That should they appear the
same they formerly were, their condition would be nothing changed, and their
Civility would replace them into that Equality whence they had newly forced
themselves with so much trouble. Thus they apprehended not to fall into hatred,
that they might shun contempt: They have made themselves feared, being not able
to make themselves respected. They esteemed that there was no way left to blot
out the memory of their ancient baseness, but by the present object of their
Tyranny; nor could they hinder the People from laughing at their infirmities,
but by employing them to weep for their own miseries, and complain of their
cruelties.

With these fair Maxims and these Antipoliges which I have rough-cast, they
have governed the world; but they governed it after a strange manner: They have
overthrown what they would have maintained; they have broken what they had a
design to fix: They have caused as many ruins, as they intended to make
establishments; they have spoiled as many things, as they have undertaken. The
falls of Princes, and the loss of States, have been the successes of their
Administration. Having seized on the Sovereign power, (I consider them again in
their innocent infirmity) they have exercised it as children do knives, who
most commonly hurt themselves, and offend therewith their Mothers and the^^
Nurses.

IF the Temerity of such persons has not always been unhappy: If they have
arrived at the Port, steering a Course which in appearance estranged them the
farther off, (For it is most certain that these miracles have been seen; and I
know some who have saved themselves by actions, which should indeed have lost
them:) yet must we not confide in this blind Felicity which guided them; we
must look upon them as persons transported with a violent imagination, who pass
over Rivers in their sleep, without knowing how to swim and run over Precipices
without taking a false step. We must admire them as DIVINE BEASTS, and not
imitate them as REASONABLE MEN. This word I had from that good man Alexander
^icolomini, when I visited him as I passed the Seine, and found him on that
green bed which Thuanus speaks of.

If you ever are Favorites, (with his Highness's permission I shall address my
words to these two young Gentlemen who hear me) never propose to your selves
such like examples. They are very dangerous, how splendent soever they are:
They are Flambeaux lighted on shelves, they shipwreck young Pylots: They are
Addresses which lead their followers to death, which serve only to deceive
Posterity, to teach men Error, to give credit and reputation to Imprudence.

THE THIRD DISCOURSE.
AS those whom we left yesterday want a requisite Capacity, and have a very
short and limited Understanding, There are others to be found who have it too
spacious and too far extended, and who reason with excess. I speak of those
Speculative persons who commonly aim beyond the End; who quit the Road, to find
By-ways; who wander, that they may the sooner arrive whither they intend.

Let us, if you please, call them Extractors of Essences. They bring their
Advice to the Alimbeck, and reduce it to nothing by the force of subtilising
it: They evaporate in smoke the most solid Affairs. Let us call them
State-Hereticks; which in Policy would do, what Origin did in Religion. They
follow the shadows and images of things, in stead of linking themselves to
their bodies and to their reality. They embrace Probability, because they have
painted and embellished it after their mode: But they reject the Truth, because
it is none of their invention, and that it has its foundation in itself.

These Gentlemen fancy, That everywhere there is Subtility and Design; and
that all the Actions of Man are premeditated: Nothing presents it self to
sight, whereof they seek not the mystical and allegorical sense: These subtle
Interpreters of other men's thoughts, never stop at the letter: And when two
Princes with all their strength and with all the power of their States assault
one the other, it is believed they hold Intelligence to cozen the rest of the
Princes. They make Judgments very like those sportful ones which were made at
Athens; That the death of King Philip was not to be believed; and that he had
expressly caused himself to be killed, to entrap the Athenians.

By this ^ll encounter we may perceive how far a perverse subtility will go,
and what the spirit of Greece is and of these Speculatives. But there have been
Speculators in all Countries; there have ever been Alchymists and Bellows
blowers, who have distilled humane things, who have given more liberty then
they ought to their conjectures and suspicions. Because Jurius Brutus
counterfeited the Fool, they have misdoubted all other Fools: They fancied that
all Changelings imitated Brutus; That apparent Simplicity was a hidden
Artifice: That those who knew nothing, dissembled their Knowledge; That the
silence of those who said nothing, was a cover for dangerous thoughts.

It was the opinion which a Roman Prince had of a certain weak-witted man of
his time, whom the Pages hissed, and whom no body esteemed but himself: The
History relates, That he apprehended his secret virtues; and that the universal
scorn of the Court, and five and twenty years Impertinencies in deeds or words
before the face of all the world, could never secure him from that man.

From the same Principle of False subtilitie, those Visions spring which our
Man finds to be so ingenious, and which to me seem so ridiculous, which the
Doctors admire, and I cannot endure. At this passage Aristippus addressing his
speech to the two Gentlemen who heard him; Do you think (says he) that like
these subtle Doctors, Hannibal would not have taken Rome, for fear it would no
longer be profitable to Carthage, and lest thereby he should have been obliged
to finish that War which he had a mind to perpetuate? Did Augustus, in your
opinion, choose Tiberius for his Successor, that his loss might thereby be
regretted, and thereby to seek glory after his death, by the comparison of a
life so much different from his? Do you believe that the Counsel which was
found amongst his Memorials, to place good men in the Empire, was an effect of
his envy against Posterity? Was he afraid that some after-time another man
should be a greater Lord then he, and the Commander of more Subjects? Is it
credible, that the same Augustus made Love only out of Maxims of State, and
courted the Ladies of Rome but only to learn their Husbands secrets? Is there
any likelihood, that his soul should move only according to rule and compass?
That all his actions were balanced, and that all his vices were studied?

In my conceit, this is to make the World more subtle then it is. It Is to
interpret Princes, as some Grammarians explain Homer, who find what is not in
him, and accuse him for a Philosopher and a Physician, in some places, where he
only is a forger of tales and a composer of songs. Let Us sometimes content
ourselvs with the literal sense; Let Us not seek a Sacrament under every
syllable and under every point: Let Us not be so indulgent to our own minds, nor
so curious in searching into another man's. We need not go so far to seek the
Truth, nor take things so high: We need not relate to hidden causes, and the
Counsels of the past Age, present Successes, or which happened by Chance, or
which a slight Occasion has brought to pass.

The Stoics, who would not that the leaf of a tree should move without the
particular order of Providence, nor that a wise man should lift up his finger
without the leave of Philosophy; judged not more advantagiously of God, and of
that Person who was nearest God, then these Refiners presume of a Man, who is
often less then a mean one; who has but a quarter or half a share of the
Reasonable; who all his life never thought of being wise, nor of drawing near
God. There is no Mean whereby to ajust their Opinions to our common capacity;
They cannot descend to us. In the judgment which they make of Men, they cannot
presuppose a humane infirmity, that is to say, a Principle of errors and of
saults: A disease born with us, from which nor Alexander nor Caesar were
exempt; A defect which draws after it so many other defects in the persons of
the most perfect, in the conduct of the wise, and if you please, even in that
of Solomon himself.

Great Events are not always produced by great Causes. The Springs are hid, and
the Machines appear; and when the Springs are discovered, we are astonished to
see them so small and so weak; we are ashamed of the high opinion we had of
them. A jealousy of love betwixt particular persons, has been the cause of a
general War; Names given or taken by chance, The Green and Red, at the Games of
the Circus, have made parties and factions which have torn in pieces the
Empire. The Motto or the body of a Device, the fashion of a (...) very, the
relation of a Domestic, a Ta^e told at the Kings going to bed, is in
appearance nothing; and yet this Nothing has been the beginning of Tragedies,
wherein so much blood has been shed, and so many heads made sly. It Is but a
Cloud which passes, and a stain in some corner of the Air, which vanishes
rather then abides: And yet it is this light Vapor, it is this almost
imperceptible Cloud which raises those fatal Tempests which States are
sensible of, and which shake the very foundations of the Earth. Yet some
foermerly have imagined, that it was their Masters Interests which enflamed all
the World, when it was only their Servants Passions.

I doubt not but the King of Persia made most specious pretenses to justify
his Arms when he came into Greece, and but that his Manifests told wonders of
his intentions: He wanted neither Pretenses nor Right: He forgot not, that the
great King came only to chastise the petty Tyrants, and that he offered the
People a rich and plentiful liberty, in stead of a poor and barren servitude.
He falsified his design several ways; and yet swore, perhaps, that this design
was immediately inspired him from the immortal Gods, and that the Sun was the
primary Author of it. Not withstanding some Manifests which he dispersed
abroad, and some color of Justice and of Religion which he color'd his
Enterprise withal; This was the truth of the business:

A Grecian Physician, the Queens Domestic, having a mind to review the Port of
Pyreum, and to cat the figs of Athens, put this fancy of War into his
Mistresses head, and got her to engage her Husband in the Design. So that the
King of Kings, the powerful and redoubted Xerxes, raised an Army of Three
hundred thousand Combatants, cut the Mountains, dried up Rivers, overburthen'd
the Sea, for nothing but to bring back a Mountebank into his Country; methinks
this gallant person might well have gone the journey with less expense, and
with a less numerous company.

But there presents it self to my memory (my Lord) another thing which deserves
to be known, which you will find nothing ungrateful. It happened in the Kingdom
of Macedonia, more then fourscore years before the birth of King Philip; at the
time of that famous Conspiracy, which of one State made two, and divided the
Court, the Towns, and Families.

It was Melcagers Wife, Governor of a Frontier-town and General of the Cavalry,
who obliged her Husband to revolt, and that sor a very worthy subject. The King
having heard of the spirit and gallantry of that woman, he had a mind to see
her one day privately. It was nothing difficult for him to obtain a favor which
she easily granted to lesser great Lords, and to less civil persons then
himself: She accustomed not herself to tire the constancy of her Lovers, nor
to cause any of them to die for despair. The King being come to the place
assigned, and by misfortune finding her to be no such thing as he had fancied
her, he at first sight witnessed his disgust, and went away presently with very
little satisfaction. This affront was so briskly resented by her who took it,
and who had no ill opinion of her own merit, that from that very hour she vowed
revenge: And being unable to effect it better then by corrupting her Husbands
fidelity, and debauching him from the service of his Master, she to that end
employed all the charms both of her mind and countenance. She on so credulous a
spirit made use of the most subtle inventions which an artificial soul is
capable of. And you need not doubt but in the heat of her revenge she would
have had an infinite many Husbands, to have engaged an infinite number of
Enemies against the King, and to have demanded satisfaction with more swords of
the offense which she believed she had received.

Thus did Meleager quit the service of his King, and imbark himself in the
Party of a Tyrant, without knowing what motion ^^rove him, nor what passion he
revenged. He acted a person he understood not; He was his Wives soldier, and
thought himself one of the chief Heads of the League. So easy, you see, it is
for a man to deceive self in the judgment which he makes of the actions of men;
since men themselves who act, are themselves he first deceived, the true cause
being not always known unto them. They are often blind instruments, and are
without knowledge of the interests or passions of another.

The Speculatives of Macedonia forbore not to publish palusible and specious
reasons for Meleagers revolt. Some say, that a reproach which the King cast on
him in presence of the Thessalian Ambassadors, did so deeply strike him to the
heart and made so wide a wound, that it could never be cured, That the caresses
and favors which he received since that, were useless plasters applied to his
wounded heart; and the remembrance of an injury, took from him the sense of a
thousand benefits. Others allege the refusal of an Office he had demanded for
his Son; which indeed was not given to another, but was suppressed, to keep him
from entering into his family. There were some who excused this his change by
the love he bore his Country and his zeal for the ancient Religion, which
pretense the Tyrant took to make war with the King. All Histories hereupon
exercise their subtilities, and were all sal^ly ingenious and subtle. They
sought the source of this ill, some on this side, and some on that, and none
found it; None of them spoke of Meleager's Wives di^dain, which was the only
cause of her Husbands defection; which indeed was never discovered till by the
after-age, and long after the Kings, the Tyrants, and Meleager's death.

THese two Inrodes which we have made into Greece and Macedon, were in our way,
and I dare believe they were nothing displeasing to Your Highness. But I
believe further, That You judge as well as I, that it is much more fit to
divulge Visions in History then at the Council; and that Subtility, when it is
amiss, is less dangerous when it relates things done, then when we deliberate
what is to be done. And here, that we may say nothing which can be worse, It Is
the cause why things are not done at all.

The People of Athens are too able to deceive the People of Thebes: Those plant
their nets so high, and these fly so low, that they must do something
extraordinary to be taken. I say moreover, The Athenians sometimes employ their
subtilities to make themselves believe so, and thereby deceive themselves. From
their false. Principles they must necessarily draw false Conclusions, and can
never negotiate happily, nor ever bring their Adversaries about to them,
keeping themselves always in terms so far from them, and coming so little near
them, that they are so far from joining together, that they cannot so much as
know one another.

It Is hard to hear better Orators, or to see Opinions better debated. But you
must look for no more: They therein place all their care and all their
industry: They make it so much their study, as if Discourse were the principal
end of Deliberation, and somewhat above Action it self. They had rather make
their Eloquence appear to the ruin of the State, then to preserve it without
speaking word. They esteem it a greater advantage to bear away the bell in
Council from the rest of their Companions, then to beat their Enemies in the
field* So that they account as nothing the disgraces of War, hoping always to
have their revenge at the next Treaty. And yet there they meet with some Mind
of seel which is incapable of persuasion, which will cut what it cannot untie,
and with a firm and constant Negative break all their snares and all their
wiles, without troubling it self to unravel them.

Witness that Governor of Figeac, who being at a Conference which Queen
Catherine held with the Deputies of the King of Navar and the Huguenot Party;
which was to make them quit, before the time agreed on, those Places of
security which had been put into their hands: She had brought from Paris a man
almighty in words, to whose Rhetoric nothing till then had been impossible. He
from the beginning makes himself admired by the Assembly: In pursuit he raises
sweeter passions in the hearts of the Deputies; and after having overcome their
minds, he gains their wills: And already the most mistrustful had forgotten the
Massacre, and would no longer have any Places of security: They acquiesced on
the word of the King, and the Treaty was about to be concluded to the great
satisfaction of the Queen; when in a moment all their labor was lost, and all
her Orators Eloquence was overthrown, by that brisk answer which the Governor
of Figeac made. This Princess had addressed herself to him with a triumphing
Mine; and having asked him (rather to crown a thing done, and to gain applause,
than that she thought she wanted his opinion) what he thought of the Speech he
had heard: MADAM, answered he, with a voice so strong, that it broke the
Articles of the already half-concluded Treaty, METHINKS THIS GENTLEMAN HERE
HAS STUDIED VERY WELL; BUT NEITHER MY COMPANIONS NOR MY SELF ARE OF OPINION TO
PAY FOR HIS STUDY WITH OUR HEADS.

Yet this Gentleman, of whom I shall speak in another place, was a very expert
Negotiator, who had in other occasions succeeded most happily; And although he
reigned in the Art of Well-speaking, yet was he not of those men who can do
nothing but speak: He made this Science serve a better, and preferred not with
them the glories of his Mind before the good of his Masters service.

Our Men in effect are rather Declamators then Ministers; rather Sophists then
Counselors. They are not so much offended at the ill success of affairs, as
they are pleased with the honor they have gotten for having well oration'd on
every one of the debated Propositions, and for having made themselves admired
by the Deputies and by the Assembly. Their vanity easily consolates their
misfortunes. It Is sufficient for them to treat on the Deliberative Gender
according to the precepts of Quintilian, and to know how to manage things
through all those ways which Aristotle teaches. These are the bounds of their
Ambition: If they have not sinned against the Rules of Art, they are fully
satisfied. And therein I find them like a Physician of Milan, whom I knew at
Padua: This man being content with the possession of his Science, and (as he
said) of the enjoyment of the Truth, did not particularly enquire into Medicine
the Cure of Diseases: Nay, he once boasted, That he had killed a man with the
fairest Method in the world; E morto, said he, canonicamente, e con tutti gli
ordini.

In easy businesses they sow thorns, that they may reap them. In the least
Occurrent which presents it self, they raise a thousand difficulties: They find
as many Expedients, and most commonly form no Resolution: The very many things
which they see in every Subject, taking from them the liberty of choice; and
Abundance rendering them poor. They entangle themselves in the multitude of
their Reasons, and most commonly stop at the worst. And this is the reason:
It Is because the worst is the last Endeavor of their already tired Fancy; and
that it having been to seek beyond Common sense, which was already drawn dry,
it seems to be more theirs then the rest which were drawn from that public
spring, or which they had taken from Experience.

At this rate, what a good thing is That sobriety of knowledge and of
understanding, so much esteemed by the sacred Scriptures? Let Us confess it to
the shame of Humane Reason, and of the Subtility of the Sophists: A great Mind
being alone, is a great Instrument to commit faults; And if a necessary
Judgment weigh it not down and clear it not, to subject it to use and
accommodate it to example and practice, doubtless its penetrating vivacity
would be far more fit to agitate Metaphysical Questions then to give good
Counsel, then to undertake or to act as one ought. In effect, humane actions
must be humanely managed, that is to say, by possible and familiar means, in a
way which holds from the Body as well as from the Mind; with Reasons which
sometimes fall under sense, and which do not always abide in the upper Region
of the soul.

Those Refiners who act otherwise, are good to embroil Negotiations, and are
nothing worth to bring affairs to conclusion: They are excellent Disorderers to
confound a State, but ill Ministers to govern it. They succeed in Disorder, and
as the Spirits of the Air they mingle themselves amongst Thunder; but they have
no more force as soon as a Calm appears, the point which dazeled us being but a
light of Lightening; it is very dangerous to make use of such like address in
the variety of accidents, and in the several distortings of a civil life.

But were it a true and continual light whereby they are guided, were it the
Sun it self which conducted them, it makes not that they must always find the
end they seek, and that they must arive whither they tend. And of this, my
Lord, I should have somewhat else to say, if the noise of a Coach and of
several voices which I hear, did not give me notice that this is that hour of
Audience which Monsieur the Duke of Espernon has demanded of Your Highness.

THE FOURTH DISCOURSE.
THE Landgrave failed not to be brought the next day at the ordinary hour into
the Chamber appointed for Conversation. After having witnessed to Aristippus
the satisfaction which his last Discourse had given him, he desired him not to
fall on a new subject, till he had finished what he had left imperfect.
Aristippus obeyed him, and spoke much after this manner.

A Man cannot believe how Reason wanders; I speak of that which is most right
and the most enlightened: And how much Men deceive themselves; I mean the most
able and the most intelligent: That there is a great distance betwixt Words and
Things; and that it is not the same thing to bring forth, as it is to conceive;
to execute, as it is to discourse. In Conception and in Discourse, it seems as
if all laughed, and that all would please us. To a Mind employed in a
delightful Exercise, in the search of what it desires, and in believing what is
sought, there is nothing but joy, nothing but what tickles us. In this
condition it receives them as the first delights of Love; it relisheth those
sweets which spring from new Opinions, and from the discovery of the Truth, or
of somewhat which resembles it. So long as the Mind thinks, and so long as it
reasons, no body disquiets it in the possession of its Object: It masters
Designs and Enterprises; it runs after fair Idea's which suffer themselves to
be taken at pleasure; and meeting neither with contradiction nor resistance, it
enjoys the purity of an Intellectual Good, which was never yet altered by
Action*

But neither is this all: It must at last quit these enchanted places, and
issue out of these vast spaces, to enter into the true World. You must set your
hands to the work, and come to Action after Meditation Then it is that things
take a new face, when they are no longer so fair, nor so easy: Then it is,
that the Soul is in labor and suffers the throws of travel: Then it is, that
painful Effects follow voluptuous Reasonings; and that what appeared a Friend
and favorable in thought, revolts and becomes an Adversary in the operation.
It Is then no longer a Merchant at the Port, who trades by the Map, and
proposes to himself gain without danger, and a voyage without a storm: It Is a
maker of Vows in the midst of a Tempest, who now repents that he ever parted
from home; who casts his wares into the waves, who seeks for a plank to save
his own life. The winds do not rise against words and deliberations, throw not
themselves against shelves: The Cabinet is a place of peace and rest, where we
trace out and where we design things absent, and objects which are far off.
Besides, Picture may represent a thing, and yet not be it; There is always a
difference: And there needs but a beginning of Passion, but the weak boilings
of Anger, but a light tincture of Shame, but a slight grimace to spoil all the
resemblance, and to make another thing, even a contrary thing of what we
esteemed the same, or at least like it.

I shall leave you, my Lord, to think on the second part of this Comparison,
and conclude, That Affairs have days, byasses and postures; which are neither
to be seen nor observed but in the affairs themselves, which embroil all the
draughts and all the notions which out of it could possibly have been formed of
it. There are certain motions and certain times which render our own knowledge
unknown unto us: Study cannot prevent them, Discourse cannot sever them from
action: They hold and link themselves so fast unto it, that there is no way
left to sunder them; and on the other side, they pass so quick and so
imperceptibly, that it is impossible to copy them.

The Romans meant this, when they said, That a man ought to deliberate with
Occasion, and in the presence of Affairs; That a man ought to consult with his
Enemy, and resolve himself at sight of his Mine and looks: That the Gladiator
took Counsel in the Ampitheater; That often Counsel was rather to be ravished
then to be taken.

This is principally to be understood in War and Military actions. But there is
a War (which is hardly cr^dible) even in peac^able and disarmed Actions: We
must fight everywhere, one way or other. And Doubt, Objection, Contrary Reason
do not always assault us in the Front nor openly; they often lie in wait for us
and in Ambushes.

Those Difficulties which were hid from our mind, in an instant present
themselves to the fight. Time breeds its hindrances, Men often cause theirs.
One only Circumstance changes all the nature of an Occasion. After we have
concluded, That this, or that will happen; nor this, nor that happens, but a
third Event, which puts Foresight in disorder, and Conjecture to confusion.

The defect is in the Matter, not in the Undertaker. The Act may be well
understood, and the Design well laid; but the Instruments may be to blame, the
Marble and the Copper may be corrupted. Besides, a thousand accidents, I know
not what, may come no man know from whence: There may come misfortunes from
Heaven above, and from below the Earth; A Thunderclap may ruin the materials,
a subterranean Wind may make your work fly in the air. And if you will believe
an ancient Poet, The Gods will sometime recreate themselves; they make it their
pleasure and their pastime to sport with the Thoughts of Men.

Good and Ill Policy are equally subject to these latter inconveniences; nor
can we assure ourselves of any thing against Heaven: B^t without the Heavens
intermedling, the Policy we speak of forbears not to be unhappy. In building
them, it sees the falls and ruins of its works; or rather it sees only the
Maps and the Projects, because it rather designs then builds. It figures
Business and Undertakings, as formerly Republics and Princes have been
fancied, which had only a being in the Mind, and could never be but by Miracle.
In effect, what are these Affairs and these Enterprises but bold and magnifick
Dreams, which flatter the Imaginative part, and unprofitably amuse Reason? What
are they but admirable Tales, and impossible Histories?

After this manner the Speculatives compose Romances in their Counsels, and
form Propositions somewhat like those of that Artist who was so famous in the
History of Alexander: You know he found Colossuses which were little, and
Pyramides which were low. He would have made a Statue, which in one of its
hands should have borne a City, and pour a River out of the other.

These men also dote magnificently, and their thoughts are no less vast nor
less irregular. There is no proportion of that Greatness which they conceive,
to the Meanness of what is feasible. Matters are not capable of their forms;
and their Pieces cannot be acted, because they cannot be fitted for the
Theater; there needs too many Engine^ and too many Machines; there are no
Actors in all Europe to act such Parts: The representation of them would be
difficult to a King of Persia, and yet for such they chose the Prince of
Miranda.

Do not fancy, my Lord, that I intend to laugh. The first journey I made into
Italy, I met with one of these gallant Spirits, who proposed the Conquest of
Greece, and was but little more powerful then he whom I but now mentioned. But
Your Highness may observe, if you please, by the way, That this brave Man's
Father was a Neapolitan, and his Mother of Florence, and that they had taken
care he should be bred at the Court of Rome. It Is true, they chose a means very
proportionable to the end, and they did raise a great Enemy against the Great
Turk: Must he not have been confident of a great many Miracles, to have thought
to have done any thing with such small Forces?

Yet must I in his favor confess the truth; I never met with so fruitful, nor
so hot a Fancy as his; There never was so quick a discourse, which ran over
more, or which with more difficulty could return to its source. But this
fertility and this capacity did nothing but furnish matter to his
Extravagancie, and give but the more scope to his fond thoughts: The farther
his Reason went, the farther it stragled from his end.

After a long Conference I had with him, I knew that the great Design, which he
called The Interest of God, and the Business of the Virgin Mary; which he was
going about to solicit in the Court of Princes; had no other foundation but
the desire of an Intelligence with the Cossa^ues, the hope of some Revolt in
some place or other, the word of a Greek Hermit, and the Vision of a Melancholy
person. Yet was he, as I at first told you, a very good Wit; There was a great
deal of pleasure to hear him: And out of Constantinople and Greece, about which
his extravagancie rolled, he forbore not in other matters to be wise enough. I
have heard him deliver Oracles, and speak things which methought were
Revelations; so far did I find them beyond the common reach of a humane spirit.
He erred only in subtility; he had too much of that which lifts up and moves*
and too little of that which settles and fixes it self. His very Reason was
agitated; He dictated Dispatches at dinner; He slept with his eyes open: And I
shall tell you, my Lord, from one of his Domestics who is yet living, and who
commonly lay in my chamber, That from his open eyes there commonly issued such
frightful rays, that he was often frighted with them, and was never well
accustomed to them.

To a Man of this Temper, the same advice to govern himself well might be
given, as was to one for his health. One must tell him, if he would give the
World leave to speak; Thicken your blood a little, temper your Fire with your
Plegme: Make not use of all your Reason; Be not altogether Intelligence, and
all Light: Make your self a Beast sometimes; that is to say, stop at the
nearest object; and enjoy this day, without tormenting your self too much about
to morrow. Suffer not your mind to be overcharged with this infinite Foresight,
which seeks out evils as far the ends of the Earth, and even to the last of
Posterity; which throws it self so far into the future, that it forgets the
present, and forsakes those things which are, for those which may be*

Did you never hear speak of the Soul of that Philosopher, which commonly went
out of his Body to run races and to take journies? Once when this wandering Soul
would have returned as it was w^nt to do* it found no more a Body in condition
to receive it, his having been assassinated during that interval of time it was
away. If Greece be not a liar, this poor Philosopher meditated longer then he
ought to have done, and his Meditation cost him his life.

But this is the moral sense of the Fable; which tells us, that if we will
live, we must not altogether unlink our selves from our bodies, nor separate
our selves from matter. Our Reason must not estrange us from our own present
interest, and from the business in agitation: It must not think to fly at all,
and carry all before it; Nor fancy to beat the Turk with words, or conquer the
World with subtilities.

In some occasions let us take a Septentrional soul, mixed of more earth then
fire; and let us quit this Oriental spirit, whose fire is so subtle, that it
rather seems an illusion then a truth. Let Us mistrust the Eloquence of Athens,
and the Wisdom of Florence; since this has been nothing profitable to those
who practiced it, and her Doctors are become slaves for teaching it. I shall go
yet further: what beyond the Mountains is called The French Fury, has more
then once prof^^ably succeeded; I do not say in the Field and in War; I say at
Rome, I say in the Conclave* which is the great Business of Rome, which is the
Camp of Policy, which is the Theater of Prudence.

But here is wherewith very much to astonish the perpetual subtility and the
endless Ratiocinations which our Distillers of Tacitus his Maxims make. Here
are four words (without more ado) in opposition to all the babble of that
insolent Policy, which in despite of Destiny, even to the exclusion of
Jupiter, would preside over the Government of humane things.

Prudence it self counsels us, that we should not always take its Counsels: she
advertiseth us, that she meddles not with the regulating of extremities, nor
with the conduct of Despair: she in some encounters dispenses us from those
things, which in others she ordered us. Without offending her, we may cross the
fields when there is danger on the right and left, and try whether an excess
may not cure us, when other remedies have ill operated; and cast our selves
into the arms of an Enemy, when she is no longer able to defend us.

Thus, as you see, with the consent of Prudence, one may be Imprudent. And to
this purpose it will not be unhandsom for me to tell Your Highness, what one
day happened to me as I was in Treaty with a French Lord, who till then had
been extremely happy, and yet with some eluctancie had taken party in an
Occasion wherein it was necessary to hazard somewhat. Being urged to conclude
and ^esolve, Yes, said he; but if I do it, I shall yield much to Fortune. I
could not avoid answering him, You owe as much (Sir) to Fortune, you have
received as much from her: You cannot therefore give her much, you can only
return her somewhat.

And indeed, as Fortune commonly goes where she uses to go, and will not lose
her first benefits; so she will also have those she favors confide in her, she
will have them make some advance, and not demand a reason of her for all she
does. A man must not always be so regular and so methodical; A man must be
bold, to be happy: But it is not properly those whom we speak of to day, who
want courage and boldness. We may look on those wise timorous persons in our
next Conference, wherein I shall endeavor out of my memory to design their
Picture; Your Highness has so ordered me to do, since you obliged me
absolutely to remember all what I most willingly would have forgot.

THE FIFTH DISCOURSE.
THE Court has been governed by another kind of Men; and there are still some
of them to this day. The People call them Wise men: And in effect they want
neither Sense nor Experience; They know the Nature of Affairs, and the
Possibility of every thing. But commonly their Knowledge remains hid in their
mind, and produces but a vain and idle Contemplation, which is fertile only in
barren thoughts. It Is a Virtue which finisheth in itself; It Is a Power which is
never reduced into Act: whether it be that they feel themselves not strong
enough to undertake the good which they see, and that their eyes are better
then their hearts* or whether their advantage being more certain in the
present, they prefer it before a good which is not yet.

Howsoever it be, They advise themselves, rather then counsel their Master;
They answer his sentiments, and not his demands. And if they fear the rigor of
the Times, or the incommodity of the Ways, they would decline proposing him a
journey in January, or persuading him to pass the Alps, if their business lay
at Paris. Their advice issues all from the inferior part; they are all
terrestrial and material: Interest always carries it with them beyond Honor or
Reason. Being sensible of no more powerful temptation in their souls then that
of Gain, they ground their opinions on the same baseness and on the same
considerations that a Farmer or a Receiver would do, were he but seated in the
same place.

Let the Ship which carries them perish, if it will, and let the Public run
the hazard; They easily comfort themselves for the shipwreck of the State, so
as there be but a Skiff in which they may but gain the shore and secure their
own family. We should very much deceive our selves, if we took them for those
violent Zealots, who would be Anathema's for their Brethren, and who earnestly
desire to be blotted out of the Book of life, so as those of their own Nation
were pardoned.

Yet a man cannot absolutely say, that they have ill designs against the State,
and that they desire its ruin: They reserve only to themselves their first and
most tender affections: Excepting their own Interest, I believe their Masters
would be very dear unto them. But the mischief is, that they are never without
their Interest, no more then from themselves; They find it wheresoever they
cast their eyes: Their particular Profit presents it self every where, as his
own shape did to that Ancient sick person, who perpetually had it before him.
They cannot divide themselves from Business, to look on it with the least
freedom of Judgment: They cannot extract out of their soul their Reason simple
and pure, without mixing it with their passions. So that although they discover
a Conspiracy which is hatching, yet they oppose it not, for seat of offending
the Conspirators, and to leave their Children such powerful Enemies* They have
not courage enough to utter a bold Truth, if it be never so little dangerous in
respect of the establishment of their fortune, although most important to their
Masters service.

A wretched and miserable Prudence* They consider not, that a Spy who gives
advice, is not more mischievous then a Sentinel who says nothing; And that they
are as well the cause of the Princes loss by their silence, as the others by
their treachery. They consider not, that leaving him to that danger whence they
could withdraw him, they do no less contribute to his ruin then those who
drive and precipitate him into it. They perceive not, that Infidelity do^^ no
hurt, which Weakness is not as capable to perform.

This being so, my Lord, Is it not of them the Spirit of God would speak in
chap. 22. of the Revelation, when it places the Timorous in the number of
Poisoners and Assassinates, and other execrable men, when it condemns them all
to the second death, to that death which is so strange and terrible, to that
lake burning with fire and brimstone?

I know not the true intention of the Holy Ghost, and will not assure you that
they are comprised under that rigorous sentence: But yet I very well perceive,
that they are the last and the worst of all Cowards; and that it is not so
shameful to fly in a Battle, as to give a timorous Counsel. For at the least,
if we fall into misfortune in war, a man may excuse himself either from the
disadvantage of the Place, or from the number of the Enemies, or lay the fault
on his own Men; and as Dust, the Wind and the Sun merit the glories of the
Victorious, so also are they guilty of the loss of the Vanquished. At worst, a
man justifies himself by accusing Fortune, which in all Ages has been esteemed
the Mistress of Event, and the Sovereign Arbiter of Battles.

It is not so with Politic Assemblies, whereinto this blind Power is not
admited; where the Mind acts freely and without constraint; where Prudence
quietly exercises its operations, and finds none of those obstacles and
impediments which oppose themselves to the effects of valor. For which cause,
all the excuses of Soldiers and of Captains have no place amongst Counselors
and Ministers. A wise man cannot warrant success; but he ought to answer for
his Intentions and for his Advice.

There Is therefore no baseness like to that which begins at our Chamber, and
removes not simply by the approaches and presence of Danger, but which cannot
endure the only imagination of it, but which shakes at the least mention made
of it. And to speak truth, It must needs proceed from the entire annihilation
of that liberty which is born with Man, and from the last corruption of that
Principle of Generosity, and of that sense of Honor which we all have; since
it is the cause we even deny to own or to consent to the Truth, seeing in that
condition a Man is not so much as capable of the proposition of a difficult
Good. There is no way left to obtain so much from them, as to set a good face
on it, even in a place of security, to do so much as declare themselves,
without danger, for the good of their Country; to dispute their Rights in a
chair, and serve but for its tongue. A strange thing They would rather accept
of Servitude, under the title of Peace, then to resolve on a Defense which were
to be effected with the arms and the blood of other Men.

We may also observe some Men, who expect till ill Fortune be arrived, that
they may be astonished at it: They have a bold spirit, although they have a
timorous soul. These Men speak high, when there is Time and Ground enough
betwixt them and the Danger. Cicero was after this manner courageous: Never did
the least word escape him, which was not worthy of the Greatness of the
Commonwealth. He at least was valiant in the Senate; and he, methinks, protests
in some of his Letters, That had he been invited to the Feast of the Ides of
March, he should have had nothing left.

Such a Citizen is not fit to fight a Duel; He would not willingly in his
doublet engage himself amongst Musket Shot. He takes more care then other Men
for the preservation of his life, because he esteems it worth more then theirs,
and that it is nothing unhandsom to fear the loss of a thing so precious. He
fears Death, or, to speak more civilly, Nature fears it in him; but he fears
neither Envy nor Hatred; but he equally despises the threats of Great men, and
the murmr of the People. If his Forces are not sufficient to throw down
Tyranny, he makes use of his voice and of his breath to stir up others to the
recovery of their liberty: He at least calls Men to Arms as loud as he can, and
contradicts Ill, if he cannot resist it. All his opinions fly high for the
Greatness and Glory of his Master. He professes enmity with all the enemies of
the State: Disgrace and Poverty are nothing grievous, when he suffers them for
a good cause; And Death it self, if it surprise him not, and gives him but time
to consider i^ well, he at last resolves to receive it like an honest man, and
puts on valor out of necessity: By a long and serious meditation he forms to
himself an acquired Courage which is no less staid then the natural.

Our Prudent persons arrive not at this height. Besides Death, they admit of so
many other kinds of extremity, that they still meet with some one or other
which stops them the very first step they make rewards Good. They despair,
before they ought so much as to be afraid: They have always very great motives
and very strong considerations, very important causes, (these are the terms
which they use) that thereby they may avoid the performance of their duty. And
because there is no Maxim in Policy, which is not combated by another Maxim as
certain and as probable as that, and that the Future has as many shapes and
faces as our imagination can fancy; They turn it about to look upon i^ only on
that side which terrifies them, and so with Reason defend themselves against
Reason. They always consider, that the actions of men are exposed to many
inconveniences; and never consider, that all the ill which may happen, happens
not: whether it be that God by his grace diverts it, or that we by our address
shun it, or whether the imprudence of the contrary party breaks the blow; it
being most certain, that our faults often cast us into dangers, from whence
those of our Enemies withdraw us. But they taking things at worst, and
presupposing as certain all doubt^ul accidents, they regulate their
deliberations as if they necessarily were all to happen, and commonly act not
at all, because they ^ain would act but too securely. Or perhaps they do not
dive so deep into business; and very seldom it is they bring them to the last
point: They content themselves with a light mediocrity of success, and with the
beginnings of good hap; they dare not promise themselves the continuation of
them to the end in the least thing: So that with this their cold and heavy
wisdom they may defer the fall, but they cannot escape it; they shore up the
ruins which they are not able to relevate: They at most gain but some days, or
weeks, and keep their affairs in hand till some who are more bold operate on
them more efficaciously. It Is an observation of Aristotle, That as the vivacity
of Alcibiades his mind became extravagant toward his children, the solidity of
Phocion's changed into matter of weight when it descended from him to his race.
But let us say more then Aristotle; That the wisdom of these Ministers is not so
long a time in degenerating into weakness, into languors, and into cowardice.
Before it pass thus corrupted to their children and to their posterity, it
spoils its self from its very issuing out of the soul, and before ever it come
to action. It appears weak in their Propositions and in their Counsels, which
can be called neither prudent nor wise, without speaking improperly, without
doing an injury to such fair Names, without offense to true Wisdom.

What an error it is! As if Wisdom could never be courageous; That it must
always fear, and always tremble. These new Wise men are acquainted with the
Wise men of Antiquity: They have read Aristotle as well as we, and yet have not
profited by that old Oracle which Aristotle reports; THAT A MAN MUST CALL
DANGER TO THE RELIEF OF DANGER, AND SAVE HIMSELF FROM ONE EVIL BY ANOTHER EVIL.

How deplorable soever the condition of the present is, they cannot resolve
themselves for Novelty or Change: They would rather suffer Change then make,
and expect it, then prevent it. In stead of obeying the Oracle, and tempting a
second Danger, they accustom and make themselves familiar with the first: In
stead of doing an endeavor to withdraw themselves from an evil course which
they are fallen into, they seek a supportable posture to abide in. They are
engaged in Evil so, as the Evil presses them not, and so as they recoil to the
last extremity: It Is sufficient for them, so as Death be remitted to another
time, and that they in the mean time may enjoy only the intervals of an ill
life. Doubtless they would be of the opinion of a Spanish Poet, who said, That
a Quartan Ague was a good thing, because a man was secure to live a year with
it, at least to live six months, at least from a sudden death.

What they do therefore, is not to reign, is not to conquer, is not to triumph;
It Is only to live, and that also after a strange manner: It Is to spend the time
from morning till afternoon, and so to draw on till the next day. Their
Government is neither Peace, nor War, nor a Truce: It Is a Rest of Idleness;
it is a dead sleep which by artifice they procure the People, which is neither
good nor natural.

They know not how to cure, but only how to paint the sick and make them look
well. They would reclaim Rebellion by Caresses; they glut it with benefits and
with gratifications: But they thereby render it more powerful, and nothing the
better; They increase it is force, nor do they diminish its malice: They
sometimes take from it some Men which are to be sold, and such Advantages as
serve to no purpose, and they perceive not that it is to cultivate disorder
thus lightly to touch its branches and its buds, and not to put the iron to the
hody and to the root.

All their Experience is but the History of Misfortunes, which happened to
those who durst, and did undertake. All what is not easy, they call
impossible; and fear magnifying objects, and almost infinitely multiplying
every individual, when three Malcontents retire themselves from Court with their
Train, they fancy an Army of Enemies in the field, which draws along with it
Towns and Communalties without resistance: And afterward they do not put
themselves in posture to chastise them, but they seek to sweeten them; and in
stead of visiting them with Canons and Soldiers, they send them Gown-men,
employed with Offers and Commissions, and promise them far more then they could
hope for by the Victory.

Thus they oblige a Prince to descend from his throne to treat with his
Subjects, They make a Sovereign a Private person, and a Legislator an Advocate.
By this breach they break that distance which separates him from the People,
and change Power into Equality: The Guilty ascend the Tribunal, and deliberate
concerning their own fact with the Judge; they name the place of the
Conference, and it is accepted* they choose for this Parley such persons as they
most confide in, and they are granted them: And they there speak neither of
Grace nor of Pardon; these terms would be of too harsh sound and would offend
their ears. But the offended Master solemnly declares, That all was done for
the good of his service, and thinks himself beholding to those unfaithful
servants for the injuries they have done him.

To conclude, the Design of these men being only to license the Company, and
to divide the Allies: they grant them more then they demand; they are prodigal
of the Public Faith; they husband not the Kings name; and after this manner
they bring him to the brink of two extremities equally dangerous: For whether
it be, that he will keep his word by the ruin of his Affairs, or whether he
will establish his. Affairs by the violation of his word, he is still reduced
to a most deplorable condition, either to hazard his State by being faithful,
or to forfeit his Honor that he may continue King.

But if before all this, whilst things being still whole, he desires to take a
generous resolution, and worthy of himself, if he will no longer have his
bounty a rent and a certain revenew to Rebels; if he be wearied to see his
Coffers exhausted to pay his Enemies Armies, and every day to purchase what he
never gets; then do these able Counselors represent unto him with several
gestures and grimaces that he must not sharpen business; That wise men yield to
the violence of times, as the gods do to the necessity of Fate: That Princes
which reigned before him never durst stir that stone: That it were presumption
to think to do better then our Fathers have done; That War is an ill means to
reform a State; That to pluck a body in pieces to make it new again, is the
remedy of a Magician; That to burn a house to make it clean, is the advice of
an Enemy, and the resolution of a furious person.

Neither is this all, They in pursuit produce great Common-Places in praise of
Peace and Repose; they employ all the skill of the Rhetorician to exaggerate
the miseries of war; They forget not the profanation of Temples, nor the
violation of Divine and Humane Laws, to make their own Cowardice relish in his
mind, under specious terms; and to persuade him that they have Reason, they
never confess they are afraid. They live thus near the Prince, and maintain
themselves betwixt him and the Rebels by the that common necessity which there
is of their Mediation to manage this filthy Trade, and to preserve two Parties
in a State, that so the one may not destroy the other.

They are also most commonly a friend to strangers: What need we dissemble,
they far more apprehend to render their Neighbor ungrateful to the King, then
to disserve the King their Master, so that during their Ministry, no man must
speak of protecting the weak against the oppression of the strong, of awaking
pretensions which are asleep, of undertaking any thing out of the Kingdom* what
Justice, what Fitness, what Facility so ever seems to persuade such an
Enterprise. They condemn the memory of Charles the Eighth, and curse the Voyages
of Italy; They even deride those of the Holy Land* till even they offend the
piety of former Ages; not fearing to repeat after an impious fellow engaged in
the latter, That they were the Feavors of those times, and Popular diseases;
That they were from the youthfulness of our Princes, and from the heat of Liver
in our Counselors. One of them maintained, That Alexander had never been; That
his History was but a Romance, that that of Amadis was not more fabulous, nor
more unlikely.

If their soft counsels do not always prevail over their Masters Vigor and good
inclinations; if some sensible injury which cannot be dissembled oblige the
State to a public resentment; then when they cannot blame the thing in its
principle, they decry it with all their power in its consequences and effects;
And as if the Victory were not worth the charge of the War, upon the taking of
a Town from the Enemy, they say, That it is to lose to gain, after that manner;
so many honest men sacrificed to the vanity of one (this one perhaps, is a
Prince of the Blood, or a Son of France) so many millions transported out of
the Kingdom for the gaining of a paltry place; the expense of the Artillery
alone would perfect our ruin, did we make but such another Conquest.

Such kind of Ministers would not have pleased themselves at Carthage with the
Victories of Hannibal in Italy; They cried out in Council upon the arrival of
good news, when they poured forth bushe^s full of those Roman Knights Rings who
had been killed in the War; Let him keep his iron Rings, and his paper
Trophies, and send us back our Men and our money; the Affairs of the Republic
were never either more flourishing or more ruinous; It never had more
reputation abroad, nor more misery within its own bowels.

Such Ministers have caused the end of two Empires, and have lost Rome and
Constantinople, by the fatal faintness of their Counsels; They have opened the
door to all the Barbarians, They have shamefully purchased peace either from
the Goths or Vandals, or other Northern people, whence all the ill in the world
comes: They made no account of the dishonor of the Empire, and the infamy of
the Roman Name: So as by the sweetness of the word, they might correct the
bitterness of the thing; and so when they paid Tribute to their Enemies, they
might be suffered to say that they gave a Pension to their Allies; They minded
not the fortune of the future, nor what would become of Posterity, so as they
might but live as long as the State which they governed could last.

Yet let us once more pardon them, and not accuse them of Treason. I believe
they would not sell and deliver up their Master; but they are not angry that
the world should know that they can do it; upon some occasions they make no
difficulty of setting a price on him; they suffer him to be trafficked for:
They even afford Merchants some Patterns, although they will not part with the
whole Piece. It Is one of their Maxims, THAT ONE MAY SOMETIMES DECEIVE THE
PRINCE FOR HIS OWN GOOD. And when they hold intelligence with the Ministers of
other Princes, they call that To labor for the general good of Christendom, and
to maintain Peace betwixt the Crowns.

In our Fathers days it was believed, that Barbarossa and Andreas Doria did not
misunderstand one another; yet cannot any man therefore say, but that the one
was a good servant to Soliman, and the other to Charles; But they had need of
one the other to make their services valued by their Masters, and to keep the
place they held: The Turk commended the Christian, and spoke of him as of the
onel^ man who troubled him: The Christian rendered the like to the Turk, in
terms altogether as obliging, and as advantageous. And a slave of Algier upon
this subject spoke very pleasantly to a Viceroy of Sicilia, That a Raven never
picked out the eyes of another bird of his own kind* And that if Doria were
ruined* Barbarossa would have little ^redit at the Port of the Grand Signor; as
also, Doria would descend more then one step lower in the Emperors Court by the
ruin of Barbarossa.

They helped and favored one another therefore reciprocally, for the
continuation of the War which was their Trade and their Business: And since
ambitious men* who consequently love honor, were capable of such a kind of
traffic, I leave you to imagine, if men loving only their own interest, and
knowing nothing else that is honest and profitable would not be glad to preserve
their Authority by such a Commerce; would they not, do you think, render
themselves necessary, that they might continue? would they not for Peace, which
would be a golden Harvest to them, and a Harvest which never fails, do what
others did for War, whose Vintage^s so uncertain, and whose fruits are so sharp
and bitter?

THese are the proceedings of our Wisemen in the Administration of the State,
and in the high Region of the Ministry; but when they go lower, and that their
duty is more easy, they therein acquit themselves no better of what they
ought. The affairs of particulars who depend on them, take the same course with
the public. In sure and easy occasions, wherein they might at an easy rate
show their strength, they cannot choose but make their natural weakness appear;
they would not lose the friendship of those whose goods they have ravished; and
at one and the same time, they fear and offend the same persons; they entertain
all the world with general answers, and such as precisely do not oblige. A man
never goes unsatisfied away from them, they never brave nor reject any man;
they afford a man nothing but fair words and fair hopes.

To him who demands Justice, they return Civilities and Complements; they
present him who has need of bread with Roses and Violents; after having held a
man a whole year in length, promising you all satisfaction from day to day, at
last when you press them to a conclusion, they desire you to tell them, and
thereby make it appear, that as often as you spoke unto them, they never
intended to hearken unto you.

A Pretender in the Court of Rome, having treated them after this manner, and
returning home, as he went, met with a Gallows at his going out of Bologne
(where the Court of Rome then was) and having a while staid before the Gallows
to look on a man who had been newly hanged, there, they say he cried out all at
once with a loud voice, HOW HAPPY DO I ESTEEM THEE MY FRIEND TO HAVE NOTHING TO
DO IN THE PLACE WHENCE I COME? You see whom, for their sakes men of business
envy, and whereto they oblige men to go seek felicity; and indeed Death for
Death, and one Hangman for another; a sudden Death, and a ready Hangman, were
yet better then all this.

Thus do they tire the patience of Sollicitors, thus they revenge the
importunity of Supplicants, nor do they make themselves angry to make them
despair: Wherein to speak the truth, their proceeding has I know not what
that is rare and worthy of consideration; Nothing can be imagined more sweet and
more calm then their Malice; their poison is composed of as much Sugar as
Arsenick, and the equality of their humor is like to the calm of that River,
where the lighter bodies go to the bottom without so much as the appearance of
one cloud in the air, nor one breath of wind which moves them.

A man of this make is a learned Artisan of calumnies; he never wants plaster
nor colors; he can admirably well prepare and polish an ill turn; he blames
with Elogies and not with Invectives; in appearance he bears testimony of some
great Desert, and in effect he breeds suspicions of any man's great Reputation.
You would say that he grieves for those he accuses, and pities those he
intends to ruin; Rhetoric teaches us grossly to speak ill, he has found out
a way far more quaint to do the same thing; this is called, to strike without
listing up ones arm; it is to hurt without drawing blood, or the appearance of
a blow. He disguiseth himself in a friend to hate one with the more security;
and that he might be thought charitable at the same instant that he
assassinates, he kills no body, till he has first made his funeral Oration.

He tells the Prince, the eyes of all men are turned toward him; the Soldiers
call him their Father, and the People think he is their intercessor toward
your Majesty; it is in his power alone to prevail with this universal favor, and
the possession of so many hearts, to form a party which may carry his name; yet
I believe he would not fail in his duty, and that all his are good intentions.
The Astrologers and the Poets promise him a Kingdom; but besides that, they are
people who never keep promise, its perhaps a Kingdom beyond Sea; perhaps he
must travel to the conquest of it to the farthest extremities of the Earth; yet
it is likely that he will content himself with the place which your Majesty has
given him about you; His ambition will be more wise and more modest then that
of other ambitious persons. Perhaps Sir, his designs will respect his Majesty's
Crown, and the Laws of his Country.

The Princes jealousy being kindled by these magnifick excuses, and with this
apparent sweetness, mixed with this bitter raillery, Mistrust with esteem enters
his soul. But there is yet something to be done; The work is happily begun, but
he must not stay there; the dissembling Courtier goes on* He adds, That
whatever may be said, and what Crime soever is alleged he can never resolve
to condemn a man who has served him so well; that Philip and Alexander must in
such a case consult with himself, and with the immortal gods; he must consider
whether there be more danger for him to dispatch a deserving servant, then
there is danger in declining it; You cannot lose him without a notable interest
of State; You cannot preserve him without the evident danger of your person:
Look Sir, which of the two is nearest, your State or your Person: Consider
whether it is better always to mistrust that man, or assure your self of him by
those means which are in your power. A Sovereign, can he be in safety, whilst
there is a particular person who can corrupt the Senate, desbauch the Legions,
and make the People revolt?

Thus without making high exclamations, or employing violent figures, he
persuades a timorous Soul, and drives fear into cruelty. Thus cruelty seems
sweet, and appears officious and doing good. By poi^oned praises, and a
thousand times worse then dry Slander, he advises to death, still in saying,
that he will not advise; he discharges himself from the envy of the Murder,
by the byas which he uses in making his proposition; he charge his Enemy
whilst he shuns the odious name of his Accuser; When he has perfected his
destruction, giving him his last blow, he still dissembles his hatred, he still
feigns himself good and compassionate.

But withal, he is so much afraid least he should not dye, and least the
League should prove the stronger, that after having cast either Philip or
Alexander into extreme resolutions, he causes another game to be played on the
other side; he advertiseth him whom he has destined to ruin, That he has no
means left to serve him any longer in the Palace against an infinite many
secret enemies, who do him very ill Offices; That for his part he knows no more
the present, and knows not what to think of the future, seeing the Prince in
such strange humors, and so far estranged from the first sweetness of his
Nature; That he esteems those happy which are retired to their own Homes, and
who have quitte^ the Court, where good men have lost a place, being only now
able to be witnesses of the violence of the wicked: That himself is ready to
take his leave, that at least he may not by his presence seem to approve the
evil which he cannot hinder by his counsels; and that neither his eyes nor his
ears share in those things which are preparing.

THis is but a little show of that great Trade of Juggling which is exercised
at Court; and it is near upon what (besides our Tacitus) a Manuscript History
which we have seen would say by its PESSIMVM INIMICORVM GENVS LAVDANTES; It Is
the explanation or paraphrase of a passage out of Ammianus Marcellinus, when he
speaks of the Court of the Emperor Constantius; and it shall be again if you
please of those two verses in the Divine Jerusalem, which the late King Henry
the Great esteemed so much and so worthy of Mounsieur. ***

Gran Fabbro di calunnie, adorn in modi
Novi, che sono accuse, and paion lodi.
It Is particularly in the Country of these two Verses where are excellent
Cheats to be found: And I call to mind one of the principal Ministers of the
first Court of Christendom, who past Master^ in this rare Science. As far off
as ever he saw a man whom he newly came from doing an ill office unto, he cried
aloud to him I HAVE SERVED YOU SIR: And with these Maxims of Deceit he a long
time governed the World. He grew extremely old in refusing and in granting
nothing, in saying neither I nor no; in receiving both parties with the same
serene countenance; Let him die then when he pleases; this Roman so little
worthy of old Rome, so far from the candor and sincerity of the ancient
Fabritius, with truth it might be inscribed over his Tomb, THAT HE DID LIE
THREESCORE YEARS AND TEN, and that the Comedy he acted lasted all his life.

It Is true, that we learn from some examples that formerly men lived happily
enough under those soft and languishing Governments, and that they have not
always been fatal to their Countries: But we must take heed in History whether
the administration we commend, is not the consequence of a better Reign,
whether it be not the remaining heat of a fire which is no more, and the motion
of a shake which is quiet: We must observe whether they are not the Fathers
Virtues which uphold the Childrens Infirmities; and their Patrimony which
furnishes desbauches. For in effect, after a long continued order, Business
moves almost of it self, and Policy cannot so soon receive a turn, being still
sensible of that good impression which some great Prince has left behind him.
Besides, it is the nature of the things of this World to require time, and with
trouble to pass from one condition to another. So that if it has happened that
the Commonwealth remain stable under such weak, feeble and ill assured Powers,
it was perhaps obliged for its repose to those good and solid foundations which
had long since been established, although that above it nothing appeared but
straw and earth. It was not so much the fruit of the present Government, as the
remains of the former happy conduct of Affairs.

THE SIXTH DISCOURSE.
TO this scrupulous and mistrustful Wisdom we may oppose a certain brutal
Virtue, if it be lawful to call it so; but the better to make it known, and to
define it by describing it, might we not call it a passionate, untutored
impetuous Probity, which rather follows the Fury of Nature, then the Discipline
of Reason, and has more Courage then Address?

At first it seems to be Vigor, and it proves Rudeness; it might be taken for
Force, and yet it is but Violence; wherein the Mind fixes it self, intending to
stiffen it self, and becomes immovable, by meaning to be too stable: Now it
imports a man very much to know how to turn and bend his Mind, according to the
exigence of occasions, and the variety of those subjects which present
themselves. If we render it supple and manageable, if it be not capable of
several forms; in a world, so changeable as this, its use which ought to be
universal, and not have any defined object, finds its bounds at the very
beginning of his carreer; It stops at some encounters, which ought to be in its
choice, and extends it self but to a very small number of things. And those
things happening but very rarely, those Ministers on the other side, who are
every day to be in action, they cannot with one only Drug make all kind of
operations, and with the same fire cool again, what they before heated.

I confess they have a good heart, and their intentions may be good; but they
want both art and method for the conduct of these advantages of birth. They are
made all of a piece; and if there be some overture of difficulty to be made,
instead that they should stoop their heads, they must have the wall raised;
They must constrain Time. Men, and Business to obey them, and to follow them:
Thus never entering into another sense, being ever unable to shift place,
acknowledging no other Reason but their own, they are not very fit to govern
States, where it is necessary to take new advice upon the novelty of those
accidents which happen, and where sometimes the Pylot may learn somewhat from
the Passengers.

What an unhappy regularity it is to go outright, and not to turn from a Gulf
which is in the midst of the way; to go over shelves, to have the honor not to
go aside; to reject a good resolution because another proposed it? Yet your
generous Imprudents fall every hour into these Gulfs, and continually rush
themselves on those shelves; being unable to arrive at the first glory of
Virtue which is not to fail, they neglect the second, which is to know how to
amend ones faults; because they cannot be Perfect, they will not be Penitent.

Whatsoever the cause be, good or ill, which they at first embrace, they hold
on with a blind obstinacy, wherewith they maintain it, and dispute as violently
for the least of their Sentiments, as for the Religion of their Fathers; They
would willingly be Martyrs for their own Opinions; they always continue a
commenced evil, to show that they undertake with Judgment what they do with
Perseverance.

If a Proposition which they have advanced by way of discourse, and which they
do not believe to be true, comes to be contested, they from that very time,
interess themselves in its defense; afterward they half persuade themselves to
it; in pursuit of reasoning, they hold it altogether assured, and quit it not
till from a problematick question, which it was at the beginning of the
Conference, they have in conclusion made it a a point of Faith.

If they are desired to consider that the Enemies are powerful and numerous;
They answer, They are a great many Men, but few Soldiers; That they are not
true EEnemies, but a mutinous Rascality: If it be remonstrated that a passage
cannot be made for the Army by that place which they purposed, they labor and
torment themselves so much about it, that it seems as if they pretended to make
it pass there by the only force of their words.

I do not here fancy things which are not; I do not create Artificial Men: I
know some, My Lord, and I could name them to you, who act in Council after this
manner, who will yield neither to evident Reason, nor to an established Custom,
nor to a received Practice.

They oppose the singularity of their Opinion to the consent of People, and to
a crowd of Examples. The Briefs and the Bulls of Popes, the Edicts and
Declarations of Kings are for other men, they are not concerned; They break all
public Acts when they agree not with their particular sense.

Have we not first seen in Flanders, and since in Italy, a Spanish Minister,
who was of this humor; he could never resolve to acknowledge for King of France
the late K. Henry the Great; he could never call him otherwise then the
Bearnois, or the Prince of Bearne, when he meant him a favor. The League was
dead, and without hopes of ever reviving. The Peace of Vervins was published,
and all its Articles executed; The Kings Reconciliation had been solemnly made
with the Holy See; The K. of Spain had sent him Ambassadors, and had received
his. Yet all this could not make the spirit of the Minister stoop; He would be
more averse to France then Spain, and more Catholic then the Church. His
opiniastrecy excommunicated him whom the Pope had absolved. And he still
remained on these terms till the year 1610. the very evening before when this
Bearnois was ready to make himself Master of a considerable part of Europe, and
who knows whether he would not have begun with the Duchy of Millan, which this
Minister was then Governor of, purposely to have made him change his note?

THose Wisemen we yesterday made the examen of, assure nothing at all, durst
not swear it were day at high noon, are not certain whether those things which
they see are objects or illusions; when a man inquires their Sentiment, they
always say I THINK, never I KNOW, and in businesses which are most clear, a man
can draw nothing from them but PERHAPS, IT MAY BE SO, and WE MUST CONSIDER,
which proceeds according to Aristotle from an opinion they have conceived of
the world, which is generally ill, and from appearances; So that they may be
sometimes deceived, but they are indeed seldom deceived. If they lose it is
because they play but too well; It Is themselves and their misfortune which they
ought to complain of, and not of the advantages and wiles of their Enemies.
They also first seek Safety and afterward Profit; They govern themselves by a
reasonable Discourse, which concludes with profit and certainty; Nor do they
live according to moral Institution, which proposes what is honest and
hazzardous.

You may fancy quite the contrary of the others we now speak of, who express
themselves in affirmative terms, who decide the most doubtful and the most
imbroyled affairs with a THIS IS SO, it CANNOT BE OTHER WISE, THERE IS AN
ABSOLUTE NECESSITY THAT IT MUST HAPPEN SO; these commonly quit the greatest of
their interests for the least of their Passions, they prefer praise to
Presents, and thanks before Rewards; they promise themselves wonders from the
future and from fortune; they make their doubts their suspicions, their hopes
valid even to infinity.

Yet let us confess the truth to the advantage of the men of this day, they are
far more worth then those of yesterday in Aristotle's Judgment, Timorous persons
are defective, for as much as they aspire not to those things the Magnanimous
are worthy of, and for as much as they aspire not even to those of which
themselves are worthy; But the Audacious are excessive only in that they
aspire to those things which the Magnanimous are, and not they worthy of. I
speak of Magnanimity as you may perceive with the rigor of Philosophers, and
not with a Poetical license, who might well call this days Men Magnanimous,
since they so call their Giants, their Phaeton, and their Capaneus.

It Is certain, that this Boldness and this Fierceness do not always displease
the world; In some encounters they have gained approbation and praise; They
have been esteemed and have succeeded in the person of that Roman, who seems so
honest a Man to my Lord the Duke d'Espernon, and to Monsieur the Marshal
Desdiguieres; your Highness is pleased that I should remember you of the style
wherewith he wrote to the Emperor.

The fidelity of that Roman was without reproach, and yet he was accused in his
absence, and found an Informer against him at Court; He commanded an Army in
Germany, and had great credit and authority in his Province, and among the
Soldiery: Being advertised of what had past at Rome, and of the ill offices
which were rendered him in the Palace, he wrote a bold and proud Letter to the
Emperor, the last words whereof were much like to these, My Fidelity has been
pure and entire hitherto, nor will I change it unless I am forced thereunto;
but whosoever comes to succeed me in my command, I am resolved to receive him,
as if he had enterprized against my life, LET US IF YOU PLEASE CAESAR AGREE,
LET THE WHOLE EMPIRE BE YOURS, AND MINE MY GOVERNMENT.

Such men hardly hold intelligence with the Enemy, but they easily bandy
against their Master; they are never Rebels out of a formed design, and out of
a malicious inclination, but they may be made so by disdain and resentment;
they want not Fidelity so long as they are trusted; These do no disservice, but
will serve after their own mode; They will be Arbiters both of their duty and
of their obedience.

One of these persons (whom you know my Lord) would prove unto me, it is not
long since, that he served his Master in disobeying him; it was at an
entertainment which lasted four hours betwixt us, when I gave him a visit at
his Government from your Highness. By a nice distinction which he made of the
King and of the State, he told me, that very lately and upon an occasion which
was not yet past, He had gone outright to the good of the State without having
hearkened to several different voices, which would have stopped him by the way,
alleging to him the Kings rame. Whereto he added, grounding himself or a
principle which he took somewhat high: That the King his first Master, Father
to the King that now is, had commanded him before his death, that if such a
time happened, and such an accident occurred, he should not fail to do such a
thing, what contrary order soever were brought him from Court to hinder him;
That he thought he was obliged in Conscience to follow the intentions of the
greatest and wisest Prince in the world, nor did he apprehend he could err by
conforming himself to the sentiments of him who never committed faults.

But I pray go on to verify that secret command, which is yet come to the
knowledge of no man, nor even to the Queen Dowager of the late King. To know of
a truth of this, the charms of Magic must be employed, the soul of the
greatest and wisest Prince of the the Earth must be raised; of him who
committed no faults; and it must be enquired whether that Minister who
alleges this, allege it not falsely. It Is a raillery to think still to
belong to Philip under the reign of Alexander; to endeavor to persuade ones
Master that a man has reason to disobey; That opiniastrecy has merit; That
it is sufficient to serve well, howsoever though against the will of him we
serve.

Let such persons who thus will serve their own way, be always if it be
possible two hundred leagues from Court. Let them be employed, if it may be so,
in obscure places, where ill examples being not so much looked upon, are not so
dangerous: But it would not be well to call them near the persons of a Prince,
where respect is no less necessary then service, and where they would be his
Tutors rather then his Counselors.

These are excellent men I do not deny it, but this excellency under the power
of another is not in its right place. They love the State and their Country,
but they hate Dependence and Subjection; their end is right, but the means are
oblique, and seem contrary to their end; For making the good of the Monarchy
their object, they use all the license which may be used in a popular
Government. Further yet, In serving they will serve like Sovereigns; themselves
have told me, in their entertainments of near four hours, That they were too
old to submit themselves to the first elements of their duty. When smiling at
what they told me, I went farther and told them, They were too great to learn
that lesson which a Doctor of the Court gave his Son in the Grecian history, MY
CHILD, MAKE THY SELF LITTLE. Good Governors of Provinces, and good Guardians
of the Frontier, good Porters of the Realm, so long as you please; But I grant
not, that you are good Ministers of State, and good Courtiers after the same
manner.

There are Affairs in which a man may take several parties, and some diversely
biased which offer themselves, of which we are to choose that which is most
proper to manage it well. In such businesses they bring the same passion, and
are born away with the same miscarriages which we have already observed on the
subject of News. A man can never see them out of one extremity or other. They
would rather fall then descend; they desire all or nothing; they seek Death or
Victory: Yet methinks it is much to carry away three quarters, when one cannot
obtain the whole; That betwixt Death and Victory there should be Peace, which
is a good of an inestimable value, which ought to be sought for by the
Vanquished, and desired by the Victorious.

But what is seemly with us, nothing persuades them, nor have they an ear for
our remonstrances; there is no way to divert their imagination from its object,
and to make them change their aim, they are enemies to all accommodation, and
so bound to those rules which they prescribe themselves, and to that rigor of
exact Justice which exasperates them, that it is impossible to render them
capable of Equity. It Is not possible to make them take a reward for a thing
when it is lost. They would have the same, and not the like; They combat the
sense of the Law with terms of Law, and injure themselves by doing themselves
right; They make me remember those Brothers so much celebrated in History, who
being equally to divide a Succession, broke a glass to divide it, and cut a
Suit in two, that each of them might have his half.

If these go not so far, and if this be to speak too much; Let Us at least say,
that in business they know not of how great use these temperaments are, and how
profitably be employed for the perfection of Affairs, by joining things at a
distance, and by facilitating those which are difficult. They understand not
these Relaxations, these Adjustments, as they speak now in Italy. This
necessary mean which seems often to come from Heaven, and which is needful to
conclude bargains with particular persons, and with far more reason* Treaties
of Peace betwixt Princes, Leagues Offensive and Defensive, Negotiations,
wherein the safety of People are concerned, and the fortune of Kingdoms.

Our sullen virtuous persons will not admit of these Tempers, nor of this Mean:
In a State which dies of old age, they would do the same as if they governed in
a newly established Commonwealth in the purity of its institution, and in the
vigor of its first Orders. They speak of nothing but of an absolute Power, but
of the Authority of the Senate, but of the force of the Laws, although they are
things which grow old as well as other things, and which growing old grow weak.

Hearken unto Cato's opinion in Caesar's cause, He says we must load him with
chains (he does not say, we must first seize upon him) we must send him in that
condition to our Alleys whom he has offended, that they may do themselves
right, and that he may be punished for his unjust Victories. These MUSTS are
very difficult to be put in execution, if Favor overpower Reason; we must,
continues he, have him come and plead his own cause in person, and give us an
account of his nine years Command; All must be done according to Law, that is to
say, according to my intrpretation, we must hazard all the Laws to observe
Formalities.

I persuade my self Your Highness thinks this austere Commonwealths man to
blame, although never man was more praised then he; Cicero was not only his
particular friend, he was his public Admirer; after his death, he did somewhat
more then make his Funeral Oration; and what he did, made way for Caesar's two
Anti Cato's: Yet Cicero speaking confidently to Pomponius Atticus confesses,
that the virtue of that man whom he so much admired was unprofitable for his
Country. He confesses that that Divine man, for so he called him, was out of
use, and knew not how to accommodate himself to the condition of those times;
That when he gave his opinion in Council, He thought he had been in Plato's
Republic, and not among the Lees of Romulus his People

This word of Cicero explains a Verse of Virgil, which your Scholasticks take
no notice of, yet it deserves the reflections of a Courtier. In the description
of his Hero's Buckler, wherein diverse figures were engraven, when he would have
represented that part of Hell which is inhabited by sacred Souls, he makes Cato
to precide with a Sovereign Authority, and gives him a Jurisdiction over Just
and Happy People.

Secretosque Pios, his dantem jura Catonem. And as a Poet who is a friend of
ours has translated it,

Aux Justes assemblez Caton done des Loix. And thus in English.

The blessed withdrawn, where Cato gives the Laws. To take the thing according to
the letter was to offend the Family of the Caesar's; nor could their Enemy be
beatified, but that their Cause must be condemned. But in my opinion Virgil and
the Caesar's herein understood one the other; doubtless he had discovered to
Augustus the secret of his fiction, which in appearance praises, and which in
effect mocks him; which shows us that Cato's virtue was of the other world and
not of this: Virgil would quaintly, and in a figured manner express, that Cato
was to go seek Citizens which were all good and virtuous. That he must make
himself an express People to be worthy of him; That Cato could not find a
place, unless in a Society which was not to be found on earth.

There in effect it is, where the Cato's must go to practice their Paradoxes,
and vent their generous Maxims; we do not live here in that Country; we live
not in the Country of Idea's and of Perfection, where Souls are discharged of
their Bodies, are cured of their Passions, are purged from the rest of their
humane Infirmities. Who ever say a Republic composed of Philosphers, much less
of Stoics only* It Is long since the World has lost its innocence; we are in
the corruption of Ages, and in Natures declension. All is weak, all is sick in
the Assemblies of Men; if therefore you would govern happily, if with success
you would labor for the good of the State, accommodate your self with the
defects and imperfections of your matter; dispatch your self of this
incommodious virtue, which our Age is not capable of; support what you cannot
reform, dissemble those faults which are not to be corrected; meddle not with
those Evils which discover the impotency of the Remedies, which decry Medicine,
and renders Physicians ridiculous; Respect those fatal Diseases which are sent
from high, wherein something is to be remarked which is strange and unknown,
When the finger of God appears, it must needs make the hand of man afraid.

In good time, if you can satisfy the honor and dignity of the Crown, yet do
not lose the Crown to preserve its honor and dignity; Do not so tie your selves
to what is savagely, rigorously and philosophically honest, that you cannot quit
your selves of it, lest necessity should exact from you what is more humanely,
more sweetly, and more popularly honest. Consider, that Reason is less pressing
in Policy then in Morality, that its extent is incomparably more large and more
free, when it intends to make People happy, then when we are only concerned to
make particular persons good. There are Maxims which are not just in their own
nature, yet which their use justifies. There are filthy Remedies, and yet they
are Remedies. These salutiferous compositions are made with Humane Blood, with
Ordure, and other vile things: But health is still fairer then these things are
vile; poison it self sometimes heals, and in such a case neither is poison an
evil.

Be not my Masters too honest, nor too just Cato's; Contend not the prize of
your bodies against this guilty person who has an Army to defend himself from
your Sergeants; Of a Mutineer, make him not desperate. In the name of God force
not this new Caesar to pass the Rubicon; to make himself Master of his Country,
to speak these remarkable words looking on the slain men of a Battle which he
won, These men willed their own mishap. After having done great things, I had
had Commissioners appointed over me, had I not made use of my Soldiers; I had
been condemned, had not my innocence been armed; I was threatened with chains
and with prison; I had been delivered to the Barbarians, had not my Cause been
as strong as it was good.

It Is a Monster, I must confess it; It Is a moral Prodigy to see a Citizen
impose Laws over a Town, to see a Subject treat with his Prince; yet such like
Prodigies cannot often be exp^ated but by dissimulation and by indulgence: When
such kind of Monsters cannot be subdued, we must endeavor to tame them. Were it
but to grant an armed Victor a justification of what was past to make him lay
down his arms, why should you opiniaster your self further, as to force him
take an Abolition? Insist not on the punctilioes of forms and words; give him
as full and advantageous an Acknowledgement as he can desire; let himself
dictate it, and do you write it; let it be written in gilt Paper, and
altogether perfumed with his praises.

I have elsewhere read with some manner of indignation, a Letter of John
Matthew Giberti Bishop of Verona, and Pope Clement the Seventh his Datary, it is
addressed to his Masters Nuncio with the King of Hungary* And by this Letter he
witnesses, That the Pope extremely desires the reconciliation of the Kingdom
of Bohemia with the holy See, but that he this Datary, foresaw a very great
impediment which might combat this extreme desire of his Holiness; it was that
it did not become the Grandeure and Dignity of the Church to sue to Kings or
Kingdoms: And that in a business of so great reputation order was not to be
overthrown, nor the fitness of things to be violated. That for that purpose it
were fit to find out some means to oblige the Bohemians first of all to begin
this practice, and make the advance of it; that presenting themselves to
Cardinal Campegno (who was Legate in Germany) they should be received with open
arms; but not presenting themselves, the Legate could not move toward them,
nor the Judge solicit the parties. That what they demand ought to be granted,
but that they were not to be offered what they did not demand. Is it not true,
that this man was a great Husband of the point of Honor? This ridiculous nicety
displeases me in this procedure of John Matthew Giberti, who otherwise was an
excellent man.

I am not only angry but vexed, that our Demosthenes should be of the number
of these men; I could wish it had been some other body who had said in the
Council of Athens, on the subject of a little Isle neighboring with
Samothracia, which was in contest betwixt the Athenians and King Philip, If the
King will restore you the Isle, and that the Treaty import the word Surrender,
I would advise you to take it; but not if he pretends to give it you, and if he
should call the restitution of what he has usurped over you a Benefit.

You may by this believe how such Great Persons have amuzed themselves on
trifles, and that this man prised the vanity of a word, more then the solidity
of the thing. If the Emperor Charles would have made a present of the Duchy of
Millan to our last Kings, and had Demosthenes been of their Council, he would
have counseled them to have refused the Present for fear of doing wrong to the
Rights they had to the Duchy. He would rather have kept his just pretentions,
and have consolated himself with the hopes of the future, then to have enjoyed
the advantage of the present, and to have accepted the possession of a second
Crown, upon such terms as he did believe were not worthy of the first.

In the wicked world wherein we live, when they execute Justice on us, do we
fancy it an act of Grace? Let Us not be avaritious of terms and of appearances,
so as the essential part remain. Let them carry away some Pictures and
Weathercocks, so as they leave us the Walls and the Roof. Let them call it a
Present, a Favor, an Alms if they please, when the piece is ours we may easily
give it a fairer name, and that which may please us better. Let us with honor
have those Islands which belong to us; but let us have them at any rate; Let us
rather applaud our selves for a little wrong we have suffered then complain to
posterity of a great injustice inflicted on us.

It were better not have a good and piercing sight in the discussion of ones
Rights, lest we should therein discover but too much Justice; it were better
not to be so able in a man's own business, lest a man should be thereby
over-perswaded. This so subtle and delicate a sense of the injuries which we
have received, is no very convenient thing, when the reparation we require is
concerned. So high an opinion of the merit of the cause with difficulty submits
it self to the Judgment and Decision of another. All this serves only to
render that impossible which we have a design to do, to amuse a man in a place
out of which he ought to go as soon as possible; these are not means to act,
these are hindrances of action; these are not means to level the difficulties
of a course, they are stones which lie before the end of it. They are in effect
elevated qualities which commonly accompany Nobleness of heart and Generosity.
But they commonly do more hurt then good; At least, they are not for every days
use, and those who are weak cannot use them profitably against those who are
more strong.

I know not how they understand it; But methinks a Treaty cannot be more
unhappily concluded or have a more sad success for the one of the parties, then
when* after along Negotiation, after an infinite many words thrown in the wind,
and writings which must be cast into the fire, it is obliged To appeal to
another Age, and must bring home again all its Reason and all its Honor* It
were far better to quit some of this Reason and of this Honor. Why not consent
to an accommodation which were reasonable, in consideration of what is
profitable, and which will be no ways dishonest in the necessity of times,
whereto Generosity it self and Nobleness of heart ought to accommodate
themselves?

LEt us not be blinded therefore with the Reputation of the Wisdom of the
Grecians; let neither the one nor the other of the Orators of Athens persuade
us; the Country, the Antiquity, the merit of those which have failed, instead
to justify their faults, renders them only the more visible and the more
remarkable. Let Us once in our lives make use of the liberty of our Judgment,
which ought not always to be subalternate to that of the Grecians and Romans;
it is a cause of consolation for our poor humanity, to see^ that even in Hero's
there has been somewhat of the Man.

How much good it does me (an excellent man formerly told me) to see that
Hero's have fled, that wise men have committed follies, that that great Orator
made use of an ill term, that so great a Politician has delivered an ill
opinion. These examples of weakness and infirmity were the spectacles and
pass-times which sometimes were the divertisements of this excellent Man; who
derided Demosthenes and his ridiculous point of Honor; but he mocked Cleon far
more with his extravagant Probity.

This Man having been called to the Government of the Republic, would
signalize his coming to his Place, by I know not what kind of good which was
new and strange; the next day after his promotion, he sent to desire his
friends to come to him, where being come, and every one with the hopes of
sharing with him in his good fortune, he entertained them with a Discourse
which was unexpected to them all, and had almost made them all fall to the
ground; He told them, That he had assembled them in his house to drive them
thence, and to declare unto them, that truly as a private man he had been their
friend; but being become Magistrate, he thought himself obliged to renounce
their Friendship. He thought this Declaration was an original of Virtue, an act
of heroic Probity, the fairest thing which could have been done at Athens*
since the foundation of the Town, since Theseus his time to that of Cleon; He
did believe that a Statesman was a public Enemy, and that for the first essay
of his ^igor, he was to dispatch himself of all his inclinations and of all his
friendships; That he was to break all the bonds of Nature and of Society.

I have seen some of these counterfeit Just men on this side and beyond the
mountains; I have seen some who to make their integrity admired, and to oblige
the world to say, that Favor could work nothing on them, take up a strangers
interest against one of his Kindred, or against a friend, although the reason
was on his Friends or Kinsmans side; They have been ravished at the loss of a
cause which was recommended to them by their Nephew or Cosen German; and the
worst office which could be done a good business, was, such a recommendation.
When diverse Competitors pretended to one and the same Office, they demanded it
for one they knew not, and not for him whom they judged worthy of it.

I protest again, that I do not enlarge the business, I am not an Exaggerator
like him who related nothing but Prodigies to Your Highness, and had seen
nothing of what he spoke. I give you an account, my Lord, from my own
experience, and I could name those I speak of; I have seen some who were so
afraid of favoring any body, that they disapproved, that they blamed, that
they condemned all the world, and most commonly without knowing wherefore. In
them it was rather extravagancy then cruelty, rather intemperance of tongue and
choler which exhaled it self, then premeditate malice, or a design of harming
any man* conceived in the Mind, and digested by time and by discourse. They
would have called Julius Caesar a DRUNKARD, although an hour before they had
said of him THAT A SOBER MAM HAD NEWLY RUINED THE REPUBLIC.

Your Highness has heard of that Counselor who commonly gave his opinion to
the death, and sometimes also slept on the Flower-de-luces. One day the
President of his Court gathering the Voices of the company, and having demanded
his, he answered him suddenly, and being not yet quite awake, That he was of
opinion that that ma^s neck should be cut off. But, says the President* the
debate is about a field; Let it be mowed then, replied the Counselor.

Once again, it is neither Malice nor Cruelty, it is Fancy, it is Peevishness,
it is Choler which prevails in the Temperature of these Counselors, which with
its smoke blacks their first motions, and their first words: This adust humor
imprints on their forehead a perpetual negative with which they sti^le the
prayers even in the very hearts of their suppliants. They refuse things which
were never demanded, which even were never intended to be demanded.

These Counselors are not those which ought to be called to the Council of
Kings, were they contrary to what they appear; yet were they not to be
commended to have taken so little care for Virtues outside, and for the
appearance of good. Should they have a well-meaning Mind, their Mine would
always spoil their good Deeds; their ill Humor would ruin all the merit of
their good Actions. Observe how they habituate themselves with a frightful and
inaccessible severity; how this fantasm of severity casts down and astonisheth
the world. Observe how they study to disfigure their outsides, how they wear
this vile vizard even at Weddings and at Feasts, where they affect it as well
as elsewhere to show themselves terrible and redoubtable.

If it were formerly spoken of a Grecian, a very honest and virtuous man, THAT
HE HAD NOT SACRIFICED TO THE GRACES; it may be said likewise of such Spaniards
or of such French men, very honest and very virtuous persons, who not only are
less devout then this Grecian, but that going from indevotion to impiety, far
enough from sacrificing to the Graces, they have cast down their Altars, they
have set the Temples of these good Goddesses on fire, they labor with their
utmost utterly to abolish the worship of them. Let Us finish their elogy, and in
the species represent the individuals, which Your Highness has observed in the
several Courts where you have been.

It Is impossible to come near them without being offended, they dart forth
points and needles from all the parts of their body; their praises bite, their
caresses scratch; and as there are some untoward persons who knock against
those faces they would kiss; they after the same manner cannot oblige without
disobliging; they cannot promise but with eyes and brows which threaten, they
grant favors and courtesies in the same tone with which others refuse them.

THE SEVENTH DISCOURSE.
HItherto we have assaulted no body, who could not defend himself; And if your
Highness think it fit, let us even excuse those whom we have accused; let us not
reproach men with the errors of their birth; let us be indulgent to humane
infirmity; let us allow somewhat to the temperature of the body, which may mark
the soul with its blemishes; let us be compatible with the weakness of minds,
since we receive them as they are given us, and that we are not the chusers of
(...) our selves.

The subtilty of the Understanding, the solidity of Judgment, a courageous
Prudence, a considerate Boldness, are not voluntary things. They depend no more
from our election, then our healths or a fair proportion. We are responsible
for our faults, but not for those of Nature; there is no man obliged to be
able, but there is no body but is concerned to be good; and if we cannot
furnish our selves for the glory of the Public with Courage and with Wisdom,
we at least ought to contribute our innocence for the repose of Common Society.

What shall we say then of those insolent Happy men, who combat with displaid
colors, the authority of the Laws and of Justice, who in the Government of
States produce a design formed for its ruin* which grow fat and become comely
from the juice and substance of exhausted Provinces, who build up their own
house with the wrack and dissipation of a whole Kingdom?

What shall we say of those insufferable Varlets, who revenge their least
quarrels with the hands and arms of their Master, who declare all those Guilty
of High Teason who do not fall prostrate before them; who by a bloody and cruel
Peace, all black with mourning and funerals, bring the people into d^spair,
reduce the honester sort of men to be unable to save themselves but in a Revolt?

Finally, What shall we say of such base Courtiers who triumph and yet were
never victorious, who enjoy in idleness the swears and pains of great Captains,
who at a Comedy or a Ball expect the news of the getting of some Battle, of the
taking of Towns, of which the Generals must give them an account?

Observe them in ancient and modern History; observe how all to them is
plunder, how all is prey, how they feed on all dead bodies (thus did they
formerly speak at Rome) and left nothing but loss and affliction to desolate
Families, to Orphans and to Widows. For although they came only out of the
dirt, to speak truly, of kind to no body, yet they believe themselves the Heirs
of all the world. There is no Officer of the Crown, no Governor of a place,
whose Succession they do not pretend unto, as belonging to them. They think
they are not in safety so long as there is a hole or a precipice in another
Man's power.

Your Highness persuades me, that this Description pleases you; it is because
you love the truth, how neglected or how much in disorder soever it be. You had
found it fairer, and the pieces of this description had been better ajusted,
had I but minded somewhat more the Rules of Art; but the crowd of things often
breaks compass and measure; I represent only, without any design of trimming
or of imbellishing; the world furnishes me with all what I display, which is
not ungrateful to your Highness. Let Us once again, my Lord, consult the long
experience of this world, an experience which imbraceth so many Ages and so
many Countries: Let Us enquire more particular news concerning those who govern
it, in despite of it, of those People who have reigned without a Crown,
without Right, and without Merit.

Such People commonly introduce themselves in Court by low means, and sometimes
by such as are but little honest. They sometimes owe the commencement of their
fortune to a well danced Saraband, to agility of body, to the beauty of their
face; they make themselves valued by shameful services, whose payment is not
publicly (...) ^e demanded, they put themselves in credit by the
recommendation only of vice.

Their design being only to make pl^asing Propositions, they enquire not
whether they profit or harm, so as they please it suffices. And to establish
this strict commerce, which they meditate with the Prince, they insinuate
themselves into his Mind, by the intelligence which they endeavor to keep with
his Passions: But having once possessed themselves of his Mind, they seize on all
the avenues, and leave not so much as an entrance for his Confessor. How weak
and tender soever his inclinations may be to ill, they water it, and dress it
with so much care that presently there springs up a great tree from a little
seed, and a violent and opinionated habit from a light disposition.

These are the Petroniusses and the Tigillio's about Nero; these are the
Advocates of Voluptuousness, who plead its cause against Virtue, and often
succeed better then Pleasure it self, when she presented herself to young
Hercules, and made him an Oration at the foot of the two ways.

It Is incredible to think, how many charms they use without employing those
(...) Magic, of which the people forbear not to accuse them. Good God, how
ingenious are they to invent new pleusures to a sated and disgusted Soul, with
what pungent sharpnesses do they awaken the sleeping lusts which languish and
can no more! For this purpose rather then want extravagant appetites, stranger
objects and unknown meats, they will seek them at the ends of the world, even
beyond the bounds of nature, even in the licentiousness of fables; To their
sense, the Sibarites were but gros^ly voluptuous for matter of delights, Naples
and Capua the corrupters of Hannibal, understood nothing at all.

Nor do they at the first blow become Masters; Virtue and they for a time
disp^teto gain favor in the Court of a Prince of eighteen years. Sometimes she
gets the better, and sometimes she yields it them; They with her, share the
Affections, the Mind, and the Time. Burrhus is hearkened unto, but they hinder
him from being believed. They are like Seneca's balance, but at last they
carry away all with them: The Epicure destroys as much in three days as the
Stoic builds in five years; at least a man may say, that having taken the
place, they by piece-meals undo the whole frame; they assault their Masters
good parts, the one after another. From Venial sins wherein they find this
young soul resuming the battle, and being upon his defense, they lead him from
step to step to Tyranny and Sacrilege.

At first they content themselves to breath in his ears, That it is not
necessary for a Prince to be so much an honest man, That its sufficient if he
is not wicked; that he would put himself to too much trouble to make himself
beloved; that he ought only to hinder himself from being hated. That solid and
perpetual Probity is too heavy and too difficult; But that its image which
changes not, has the same splendour as the original, and produces the same
effect; That from time to time a virtuous action which is no great matter of
cost, being fitly performed, may serve to entertain his reputation. Thence they
go farther, and leave him not in so fair a way; after having made him esteem
Good as an indifferent things they make him approve Ill reasonable, they afford
Vice the color of Virtue.

If he have a mind to dispatch himself* of one of his Parents against the
express defenses of the Religion of the State, which for bids us To shed the
blood of the Empire; they counsel him to cause them to be strangled with a
Bow-string, that one drop of it may not be spilt, and that Religion may be
satisfied. If there be an Incest in his thoughts, and that this Incest is
combated with some remorse, they presently come to the relief of his disturbed
spirit. They ease his pains by a wonderful subtilty, representing to him, that
there is indeed no law which permits a Brother to lie with his Sister; but
there is a fundamental Law of Monarchy, and Mistress of all the Laws which
permits a Prince to do what he will.

To authorize these great escapes, great examples are not wanting, They tell
him it is not in Turkey, and amongst Barbarians that he is to look for examples;
Gods own People, the holy Nation will furnish you with more then enough. That
King who built the Temple was also the founder of a Seraglio, and we at this
day see at Constantinople, but a copy of what was formerly to be seen at
Jerusalem. You content your self with one woman only, and he that was wise
above others, the wise Solomon had six hundred, which the holy Scripture calls
legitimate, without reckoning those which are otherwise. But you have heard
speak of the last will of his Father David, and of those gallant things which
he commanded by his Testament. I shall not exaggerate these things, consider
only by how many deaths he counseled his Son to secure his own.

In the Law of Grace you cannot find more sweetness; you stagger, you
apprehend, at the driving away of a Brother; the committing of a Cosen German
to prison. The Great ^onstantine, that most holy, most Religious and most
Divine Emperor, as he has been called by the mouth of Councils, has done more
without deliberation. Do you not know that he caused his own Son to die upon
the first suspicion which he had of him, It Is true, he regretted his death, and
acknowledged his innocence. But this acknowledgement came too late, and his
regret lasted but Four and twenty hours; he thought himself quit by causing a
Statue to be erected to the deceased with this Inscription, TO MY SON CRISPUS,
WHOM I CAUSED TO DIE UNJUSTLY.

After this, do you make a difficulty to discharge your self of a burden,
which incommodates you, to take out of your way a man who disturbs you in the
world, and who treads upon your heels, a Cousin in the third or fourth degree,
who has a design to leap over all these degrees, that he may put himself in
your place?

Have you any consideration for the character and for the person of Churchmen,
who refuse to render you a blind obedience; Charlemayn, who is oue of the
Saints of the Church, and a Predecessor to the Kings of France, had not such a
respect as you have. He killed with his own hands an Abbot in his Vesture at
the Altar ready to say Mass, for having denied him I know not what.

Do you reserve your absolute Authority? dare you not use force when the good
of your affairs requires it; The example of the same Charlemaine will take from
you all the scruples your conscience can make; although they tell you of his
capitular degrees, he knew neither a better nor greater right then that of
Arms; the pommel of his sword served him for his Seal and Signet. Do not think
that I would make you believe this; this is History, and is to be taken
according to the letter. To this day there are still Privileges found granted,
and donation of Lands made by the good and orthodox Emperor, Rowland and Oliver
being present, sealed with the pommel, and which he promised to warrant with
the edge of the same sword.

There have been Favorites, I do not tell you where, but there have been
Favorites, who have instructed Princes these dangerous Lessons, and I have it
from the Doctors themselves who made a collection for them of these fair
Histories.

Being at last tired out with defending crimes which were without a Judge, and
to excuse an all-powerful cruelty, they have freely told the Prince, That when
there was no example to be found, he might make one; that what had formerly
been unheard of, would being done cease, to be so; That it would be shameful
for the Sovereign Authority to give an account of whatsoever it were, and
misbecomming him who had Armies and Fleets to maintain h^s actions, to seek
words and pretenses to disguise them.

There is not a man (for this is the language of the Sejanusses and the
Plautusses) innocent in all the parts of his life, and who in his soul hates
not his Superiors; and consequently, the Prince cannot but condemn the guilty,
nor strike any but his Enemies: Consequently, he gratifies him whom he bereaves
of his goods, in that he takes not away his honor, and leaves him his life.
According to their principles, Loyalty is the virtue of a Merchant and not of a
Sovereign. They allege I know not what Poet, That in Heaven they in the same
scales put the oaths of Princes with those of Lovers: That the gods equally
laugh at one as well as at the other; That Jupiter commands them to be thrown
into the wind as vile things and of no concern.

Thus in a way of fooling and telling of fables, they quite persuade the
Prince, that he is not obliged by his word; after having persuaded him that he
is no longer subject to the fancies and visions of the Legislators; they
maintain that it belongs to him afresh to define unto men what is good or ill*
To declare to the world what for the future he will have to be just or unjust,
to set a price and value upon every thing, as well in Morality as in Policy.

THus are Tyrants made, from this stock Monsters are engendered; from such
Commencements we come to set Rome on fire, to butcher the Senate, to dishonor
Nature with desbauches, and declare War against it by Parricides. These
compliant persons are the first causes of so many miseries; and did not these
winds blow, we should be sensible of none of these tempests. It is not without
a cause therefore, that we speak with some esmotion, and that being in a good
condition for that matter by Your Highness's good conduct; Humanity invites us
to be compatible of the sufferings of deceased States and of afflicted People.
But let us not content our selves to lament them; Let Us turn our pity into
indignation.

Since that in the world there is no Good of so great use, and which so
universally communicates it self as a good Prince; nor no Ill which disperseth
it self more, and which is more pernicious then an ill Prince: There are no
where punishments great enough in all the extent of humane Justice for those
persons who change this good into ill, and who corrupt so salutiferous and so
excellent a thing; they had far better have poisoned all the wells and all the
fountains in their Countries; should they infect even the Rivers themselves,
water might be gotten from elsewhere, even Heaven would still furnish us with
some drops: But here of necessity, we must either drink water or poison;
against those Domestic Ills we are not permitted to use Foreign Remedies. We
are obliged to continue miserable by the Laws of our Religion, and to obey
furies and mad men, not only out of fear but also for conscience sake.

For which cause, since the persons of Princes, whatever they be, ought to be
inviolable and sacred, and that the characters of Gods finger makes an
impression which we ought to reverence on what matter soever it be engraven.
Let us turn all our hatred against those flatterers which cast us into these
miseries without redemption: Let us lay it on those evil Counselors which give
us ill Princes, which provoke innocents to murder, and Murderers to burn
Temples For in effect, their pernicious advice endears ever those resolutions
which have been taken. Their Maxims of Fire and Blood assure and fortify
Malice when it is as yet timorous and doubtful; they sharpen what cuts, they
precipitate what is falling, they encourage the violent when they run after the
prey, they inflame the desires of the Avaritious for our Goods, and those of
Impudent persons for our Wives.

NOw if they meet with natures which are not susceptible of those strong
Passions, and which are in anequal degree distant from and from Virtue. If they
light on these soft Princes, who are without sting or offense, and have no
inclination to ill, their nature inclining them so to idleness as not to suffer
them to stir out of their places. It Is still the worse for those people who are
to live under them, for abusing the simplicity of their pliant Master, and
taking the advantage which their spirit has over his, they reign themselves
openly. And observing it but as the right and title of their unjust Dominion,
to the weight of Tyranny they add the shame there accrues for suffering it from
a particular person.

You cannot imagine the wiles and artifice they use to attain hereunto, and
totally to subject to themselves the Prince. First, the method is to spur him
up with glory in the establishment of their fortune. They give him to
understand through several Trunks, that his Predecessors who were nothing more
powerful then he, made some far greater Creatures of theirs. That it is far
better to raise up new People, who have no dependence, and who shall only hold
from his Majesty, then to use persons of a good birth, and of a known Probity,
whose affections and party are already made; That it concerns his honor not to
leave his works imperfect, to labor for their imbellishment after having
established their solidity. That he ought to put them in a condition that they
may not be ruined but by themselves: That if he yields to the desires of his
Grandies, who will endure no Companions; and if he contents the complaints of
his People, who are Enemies to all growing Greatness, he will not for the
future have the power to do any good; he will be forced to call an Assembly of
the States General to dispose of the least Office in the Kingdom. Last of all,
that he cannot abandon a person who has been so dear unto him, without
condemning the conduct of many years, and rendering a public testimony either
of his past blindness or of his present fickleness.

It Is certain, that having begun to love a thing, for the love of it self, time
presently adds our own interest to the merit of the thing; the desire we have
that all the world should believe that all our elections are good, makes that
action out of necessity, which before was voluntary; so that what has been
done against Reason, being not to be justified but by Constancy, we never think
we have done enough; and upon this belief which we have, were we resolved to
discontinue our affection, yet it seems we are obliged to defend our judgment.

Now if these considerations can shake stable minds, and sometimes make wisemen
fail, we need not be astonished if they easily overthrow a weak Prince, who
makes use only of borrowed reason, and who will yield himself to be persuaded
by a very mean eloquence, so as it do but favor his inclination.

And now he is engaged in the making of this Subject whom he loves Great; he
speaks of him no more, but as his enterprise, and his end in it; he is without
minding it become an Idolater; he adores what he has made, and is like the
Statuaries of Athens, who of their own Works made their gods. His thoughts
which should be employed for Glory, and have no other object but the Safety of
the People, are all at an end in this gallant De^ign; he opens him his coffers,
and poures out treasures on him as well in dispight of others as to benefit
him. He has already conferred on him all the Offices of his Kingdom, and all
the Ornaments of his Crown; he has nothing left to give him but his own
Person; which at last he does with so absolute and so total a resignation, that
in the very Monasteries there is not an example of a will more subjected, and
more perfectly renouncing it self.

He appears but when his presence is necessary to authorize Counils, in which
he never bore a part, and he is content to show himself for no other purpose;
he is amuzed with petty divertisements unworthy of his condition and of his
age; but did they give him babies to play withal, neither would he be offended;
his Domestics are every day changed, and he likes it well; they take from
about him all that speaks, and he guesseth not why; they make him altogether a
new Court, and he admits of it; they ruin under several pretenses all that is
^minent and virtuous in the State, and he consents thereunto.

Against those who are less suffering, and harder to be brought under the yoke,
open arms and force is employed; Those that are rich and peaceable, are
assaulted by accusers and calumnies; To those whose services maintain them, and
whose fidelity is without reproach, they grant ruining Commissions, or ill
Armies to assault strong places, that they may lose their reputation or may
lose themselves. Some are driven away with an absolute command to retire
themselves, others are banished by an Embassy; and in the place of all, as
many as there are of them, the ambitious Courtier places persons at his
devotion, who never look farther then their Benefactor, and stop at the next
cause of their fortune.

Thus is the poor Prince at mercy and discretion of his Favorite, casts not
forth a sigh but a Spy renders him an account, utters not one word but what is
told him again* So that in the midst of the Court he is sensible of the
irksomness of a solitude; he sees nothing about his person of his acquaintance,
and has not one only faithful ear to whom he may say, I suffer. But besides
that he is so far engaged that there is no way for him to release himself; the
other has made all the world either his Enemy, or suspected, that he may have
none but him to trust. By having long had the possession of Affairs, which he
communicates with no man, he alone understanding all, and knowing the State, he
at last becomes a necessary evil, which neither can the Prince be cured of but
by a dangerous remedy.

After this manner, in an absolute Peace being well with all his neighbors, no
forregn Army appearing on the frontier, without stroke striking, or having
ventured further, then from the Palace to the street, he sees himself miserably
fallen into another man's power, which is after the loss of a Battle, the worst
thing which could happen him. The unhappy moment which first engaged him to
commence his affection, and to believe more then he ought, has reduced him to
this deplorable extremity. And to speak home, the Battle of Pavia was not so
funeral to Francis the First, nor the taking of Rome to Clement the Seventh:
For if their disgrace was great, at least, neither was it voluntary: If they
lost their Liberty, they in their affliction preserved the greatness of their
Courage; and if they were taken Prisoners, it was by a great Emperor, who was
their enemy, and not by one of their petty Subjects. There is no captivity so
miserable, so base, nor so infamous as that of a Prince who suffers himself to
be taken in his Cabinet, and by one of his own; He could not have exercised a
more cowardly patience, nor be more shamefully unhappy.

I shall go further yet, when a King eats his People to the very bones, and
lives in his own State as in an Enemies Country, he does not so far estrange
himself from the duty of his Place, as when he obeys another. There is a great
difference betwixt Tyranny and Royalty; yet it resembles it a great deal more
then Servitude. It Is at least some kind of Government, and one way of
commanding men, although it be not the most perfect. But for a Sovereign to
give himself as a prey to three or four pet^y Fellows, and not reserve so much
as the disposition of his own Will, to follow his own Inclinations, nor the use
of his own Judgment in the knowledge of affairs: In such a case I know not
what name to give him, and there cannot be a more miserable Interregnum then
his life, during which he does nothing, and yet does all those evils which
happen to the People.

In this condition, he is civilly dead, and has as it were deposed himself.
It Is only his Effigies which is used in public, which out of custom, and for
a show has some duties paid unto it, and to whom many useless Congees are
made. Men are no longer bound to the legitimate and natural power. They follow
another which is stranger and usurped; which is in a violent way born from the
first, and in adultery. Royalty is forsaken to run after favor, of which the
Arabians say, That it is a Girl which often kills her own Mother.

What a brave thing it was in former times to see a King of Castile, who durst
not walk abroad, nor put on a new Suit without the permission of Alvare de
Luna! all favors which others demanded of him, he was obliged to obtain from
him; the most he could do was to recommend his Servants to his Favo^^^e, and to
do good offices toward him, for those whom he loved. What a brave thing it
would be to see such a Courtier as he was, who revoked the elections of his
Prince, restored those again to their places which his Master had endowed. What
a brave thing it were, that he should not like that his Master should once in
his life read a paper which he presented him to sign, and that he should
complain it was to offend his Fidelity, and forget his past Services!

But it was a braver and far more excellent thing for this man who governs his
Masters mind, and soveraignly commands over his Subjects, for himself to obey a
Mistress. What if it should happen, that Love should govern the Politics, and
that the Fortune of a whole Kingdom were the pastime of a debauched Woman? For
it is too true, that such persons have strangely derided the authority of the
Laws and the Majesty of Empire more then once; they have trampled under foot
Crowns and Scepters; they have taken pleasure and sported themselves with the
violation of Justice, and have exercised cruelty with afflicting and rendering
Humane kind miserable.

Let us for once pass by those Histories which with their remembrance terrify
and wound the imagination: Let Us not mention the blood which those Women have
caused to be spilt: Let Us suppress the frightfulness and formidableness of
their Tragedies; and let us produce but one little touch of the bravery of their
humor. Not long since there appeared one, who was risen to so high a degree of
insolency, that having been solicited about a certain business, which had been
represented unto her just and facile to be done, that she might the more
willingly employ herself therein, she answers with a fierceness worthy of her
Nation, and of that Country whence come all our Rodomontado's, That she used
not her credit so lavishly, that another might serve in so slight an occasion,
and do just and possible things, for her part she accustomed herself only to
undertake those which were unjust and impossible.

How many Mischiess do you think follow such an one? How many violences are
committed under the shadow of (...) unjust Fortune? And the Courtie^ has not a
Groom who believes it not to be his right to treat evil such persons who are
free, and by alleging only their Masters name to commit outrages with
impurity? Are there any people about him, who at least do not plunder if they
forbear from murdering; who do not make sale of a sight, or of an audience of
his; who enrich not themselves with the refuse of his Avarice, and with the
superfluities of his house?

All this while the Prince sins not, and yet he forbears not to be guil^^ His
ignorance is unpardonable; his Patience is not Virtue, and the disorder which
either he knows not of, or which he suffers, is imputed to him before God even
as if himself had made it. With a great deal of reason therefore, that Prince,
who was according to Gods own heart, in express terms, desires him, and that in
the fervency of his most ardent prayers, THAT HE WOULD CLEANSE HIM FROM SECRET
FAULTS AND ACQUIT HIM FROM THE SINS OF OTHERS; This last word, signifies it
not, that Kings ought not to content themselves with a personal and particular
Innocence; That it matters nothing for them to be Just, if they lose themselves
by the Injustice of their Ministers?

And to this purpose, I will not let slip a pretty escape which a religious man
of Italy in our Fathers days made, preaching before a Prince of that Country;
being in the middle of his Sermon, wherein he had discoursed of the duties of
Sovereigns, and not minded to tire himself with staying too long in the general
Thesis, he all at once breaks forth in these words, which he addressed to him who
heard him.

I saw, my Lord, a strange Vision last night; Methought the earth opened before
me, and I distinctly looked into the center thereof, I considered the torments
of the other life, and all that terrible train of Gods Justice, since which, my
Imagination is scarce well reassumed Amongst the wicked of the past ages; I
knew many of these Detractors, Murderers, Impious persons and Hypocrites ran
thither in great troops, and crowded at the brim of this Gulf; but having
observed in their lives the visible marks of their Reprobation, I thought it
not strange to see them arrive whereto I had seen them march; what astonished
me most extremely above all, was, that I perceived you there my Lord, in this
unhappy throng which was at the brink of destruction; and even as I was thus
affrighted and interdicted by the novelty of so unexpected an encounter, I
cried out to Your Highness, Is it possible that a man should damn himself by
praying to God, and that you should go to hell, yo^* my Lord, who are the best
and the most religious Prince in the world? Whereunto Your Highness Answered me
with a sigh, I DO NOT GO FATHER, BUT I AM LED THITHER.

THe fertility of this subject is so great, that it will furnish us with
Discourse for all the next week, but we must end with this, and conclude, That
the distance is great enough betwixt the Sovereign and private Persons, to
raise them up very high, and yet leave them room enough below him. IT IS GOOD
THAT HE WHO IS NEAREST THE PRINCE SHOULD BE EXTREMELY DISTANT FROM HIM; IT IS
FIT THERE SHOULD BE MANY THINGS WHICH THE BEST BELOVED MAY NOT REACH.

Justice admirs of favor, we have long since confessed it; Reason destroys not
Humanity, opposes not it self against honest affections, it condemns not
Familiarity and Confidence. Philosophy and Christianity agree in all these with
Nature; and the Son of God when he made himself Man has by his example
authorized all this: Let there therefore be a Favorite at Court, Heaven and
Earth allow of it; Let there be a man, we would have it so, who is the Princes
Confident; But let there not be a man who day and night besieges the King; who
by a violent usurpation appropriates him to himself; he who will have to
himself alone a good which ought to belong to all the world, exercises the
same Injustice as if he hid the Sun from the world, as if he shut up Churches
to all the People in it.

Let the Prince send forth as long as he please a reflection of his Greatness
on those Subjects who have found favor in his sight; Let him communicate unto
them the rays of his power; But let him not transfer it entirely into their
persons; let him never cast off from himself his Globe of light; Let his
Liberality enrich particular persons, so as it do not impoverish the Kingdom;
Let his Benefits abundantly flow in some places, so as he remain Master of the
Spring. The Oracle of the Low Countries upon this subject, made me this answer,
that knowing and wise man Justus Lipsius, when I consulted with him at Louvain.

Must the King and he who reigns be still two different persons? Must he
correct all their Edicts, and change a word in all their days? Where there is
the tenth or fifteenth of our Reign, must he blot out our Reign, and make it
our Servitude, or at least our subjection; It never was the intention of him
who founded Monarchies, that Sovereignty should be so basely abused, as to make
it change place, that it should never be where it ought to be. Sovereign Power
is of the nature of those things, which are so much ours, that we cannot give
them to another, nor separate them from our selves. Its legitimate so long as
it remains in the hands of those who have received it from the Laws of the
State. But the same Law will have it so, that it cannot pass from one to
another, unless it be by means of birth, or the election of the People. Here
ends that answer of the Oracle of Louvain.

Our wise Predecessors were herein wise, as well as in other things; As they
did not make the Crown elective in favor of themselves; they would not make it
a propriety in favor of the King, nor so absolutely entrust it to him, that it
should be in his power to institute an Heir, examples whereof may be seen in
the Histories of other Countries; They would not the King should have the power
to resign the Kingdom at his pleasure, and to whom he pleased; That he could
deligate the whole or any part. But on the contrary, by a Law which is of the
same age and of the same force as the Salick, they ordained it should be
unalienable and indivisible.

And those Politicians who have taken most liberty; those insolent and temerous
Doctors which have entered a process against their Judges, having had the
boldness in their writings to touch the Lords Anointed, and to treat of the
deposing of Kings; expressly intimate this case wherein Subjects are not obliged
to acknowledge their Prince, When himself, say they, acknowledges a foreign
Authority, and makes himself Tributary to another. So incompatible with
Royalty, have they esteemed all manner of subjection and dependence; and what
is Royalty, say they* but the vain Magnificence of a Feast, but a monster of
ceremony, if he who exercises it has a Superior or a Companion?

For my part I wade not so far: I am satisfied to say, that in Presumption
there is somewhat more noble then in weakness; and that such like excesses are
less to blame then such like defaults: Those who march at a venture in an
unknown Country, and who bind themselves too much to their opinions, are of far
more value then those who follow blind Guides, and who out of too much docility
fail. In fables there are Hero's which have been mad, but there are none which
have been weak; Sometimes there appears the overflowing of their passions, but
the stupidity of their minds is never mentioned.

In effect, what would it be, my Lord, to be at one and the same time at the
highest rise of Humane things, and at the lowest stage amongst men^ To be
called His Majesty, and His Highness, and to be possessed of nothing but what is
little and low; To need a Curator on the Throne, and a Pedagoge in Council. O
God send this evil to those of Asia.

But we must speak more like Christians, and more charitably; Let Us conclude
with a Prayer which shall comprehend Asial with Europe, and which embraces the
general good of the World. LORD TURN AWAY FROM ALL STATES AN EVIL WHICH IS THE
CAUSE OF SO MANY OTHER EVILS, DENY NOT SOVEREIGNS THE SPIRIT OF COMMAND AND
CONDUCT, WHICH IS FIT FOR THEM TO GOVERN; GIVE THEM UMDERSTANDING ENOUGH TO
COUNSEL THEMSELVES WELL, AND TO CHOOSE THEIR COUNSELORS AS THEY OUGHT.

AN ADVICE pronounced and since written.
Wherein is the Extract of an entertainment, in which was discoursed of
Ministers, and of the Ministry of State. To Monsieur Girard, Official and
Archdeacon of Angoulesm.
YOu shall have your desire; for who can refuse a man who demands with so good
a grace? Were not even this man my perfect friend, were he not my Reverend
Father ^ God, were he not the beginning of an ^rchbishop, and more then one
half of a ^onsignor? Should not this man (patience little, for I am not yet at
the end of this ^eriod) should not this man I say, so consi^erable in respect
of his Character and De^rts have the power over me and my wri^ings, which a
perfect friendship and fidelity of forty years require.

I therefore now send you Sir, my Advice of the other day Augustus his
Favorite, of the last Edition reviewed, and the Letter to the Qu. of Sweden;
you will please to communicate them to Monsieur the Governor since he seeks
divertisement, and believes he may find it in my writings. But I shall entreat
you to advertise him, that in the Advice nothing was added to what was spoken;
should I reduce it into order, I should fals^^e the thing which was not treated
with method, nor by the Rules of Art. Here it is as it past in the liberty of
conversation which followed the reading of the first and fifth Discourse of
Aristippus.

THe Prince ought not to follow his own inclinations when he is to choose his
Ministers; herein he must away with capricio^s and fantasies: Let him in other
things sport and divert himself as he pleases; in a choice of so high a
concern he must use the severity of his Judgment, and with the first bring with
him the indifferency of his will; it ought to be a pure operation of Reason,
free and dispoiled of love or hate.

After an exact search, and serious deliberation, after having been plena^ily
satis^^ed on all those difficulties which he made (...) himself, and which were
made by others. He may conclude, That this particular persons leisure wa^ the
Republics loss, and that that lost as much time as he spent in his repose. But
in pursuit, having tried the person he chose, and having received those
services he hoped for, if he will do what is just, he will make his Minister his
Favorite, and will not suffer him to desire any thing beyond the
acknowledgement of an obliged Prince; it is just he should not impart common
honors to an extraordinary virtue, that he should not avaritiously dispense his
favors on a place whereon Heaven has poured forth all hers.

But do you remember Sir, that I spoke of Agrippa and of Moecenas who are long
since dead, and have left behind them none of their race, although the earth be
large, and the number of the people which inhabit it not small. Augustus could
never have found through all its extent, two better or more efficacious
instruments for those glorious Enterprises he designed: He had need of those
two men to establish that eternal Peace he intended the Universe; these men
were necessary for him to persuade obedience to people that were free, to make
his arms revered by the vanquished, to render that Power which was terrible to
all the world, grateful to every particular person.

Besides which, they were friends worthy of Augustus, enlightened with the
clearest lights of wisdom, when they were to deliberate; they burnt with zeal
and affection, when they were to execute things deliberated. Sometimes they
followed the intentions of Augustus, otherwhiles they prevented them. They did
not only obey his words and his commands, but even the signs he made and his
desires. None but they could have born the splendour of so lively and active a
virtue as his, far enough from being able to have upheld it, to fortify it as
they did, and to cooperate with it.

Is it not true, that a Prince who has such Ministers may take some hours of
rest without prejudice to the Public repose, may take up the debates in his
mind without disturbance to his affairs? I am confident you are of my mind, but
you must also confess, that such Props as these are not in Sholes under one
Reign or in one Kingdom, not even in History, which embraces several Raigns
and Realms. Such helps as these are rare presents from heaven. A man had need
know how to choose; these kind of elections are not every day to be made; all
Ages are not so happy as that of Augustus; And that man whom the world may
sometimes stand in need of, perhaps may not be then born.

THere are some Souls capable of Fear, which was the second point of our
conversation, which otherwise are fair souls* and want not light; But they are
without fire, or so ill kindled, so weak, and so languishing, that they appear
to be without action; these Souls are only fit to exercise easy virtues, they
know not how to act, but when they move without resistance; such Ministers to
be sure will never trust to Chance; they would have a God for their security,
and more then an Oracle for their assurance in the least of their undertakings;
their Master may have courage, but the timerousness of their Councels blunts
the edge of his courage, they always restrain, and never spur him forwards.

Take heed, I beseech, you of those able Cowards Aristippus entertained us
withal; observe how a new experiment puts their wisdom in disorder, how a
simple report without an Author or foundation, casts them out of their ordinary
situation; how grave and dissembling soever they are at the first allarm, their
Mask falls, all their business is to be read in their faces, in the afternoon
you may know the Dispatches they received in the morning (so that good wise
Gentleman Mr. Conrart once told us) although they endeavor to palliate
themselves with a constrained silence, the esmotion of their mind still appears
in their troubled looks.

When our Philip de Comines learnt from the mouth of the Duke of Venice, the
League which was concluded against King Charles his Master betwixt that
Seignory, the Pope, the King of the Romans, etc. this news which he nothing
suspected, and during the time of his Embassy did so surprise him, that if you
will believe Cardinal Bembo, it almost made him quite lose his wits. And when
he went out of the Senate with a Secretary of the Seignory, who had order to
accompany him, My friend, said he, pray repeat what the Prince told me, for I
have quite forgotten it; I no longer know what is become of my Memory, or of my
Reason.

This example is singular, whether it were by reason that such a secret was
kept amongst so many Senators, and so many Ambassadors, who treated about this
League or by reason of our Ambassadors surprise, who seeing them every day
never was sensible of any thing which concerned their Treaty, yet ought he not
for this lose the good reputation which he had otherwise so well deserved. A
thunderclap in a serene Sky, may well astonish a man who thinks not on a
tempest. But there are men, and I know some, to whom every noise is a
thunderbolt, and who are astonished at every thing. There are some men whom
Confidence and Despair alternatively sometimes take and leave again in one day.
So have an agitation, and so mis-becoming the dignity of a wise man (I speak of
the wise of this world, not of the Stoically wise) is far estranged from that
equality of mind, which ought to appear in all the several changes of Humane
things; in the ebbings and flowings of Court. It is not Constancy which we are
to witness amongst the extravagancies and sickleness of fortune? shall a Pil^^
tremble and grow pale at sight of the first rising billow, shall he let the
Rudder fall from his hands? shall he quit his place? shall he abandon the ship
in a tempest if it cease not as soon as it pleases him?

A funeral news may happen which may cause a universal astonishment, men may
every where cry out, that all is lost; They may bring news that Hannibal is at
the City gates, that a Province is revolted, that another is shaken. In this
public consternation shall the Minister hide himself in the recesses of the
Palace, to weep for the miseries of the State, to make vows amongst the women?
On the contrary, were I to be credited, he ought to appear in public Piazzo's
and in all other frequented places; he ought to be at every turn of ill
fortune, and because he ought not to fear he deserves to be respected. A Poet
has gone before me, MERVITQVE TIMERI NON METVENS.

Neither the audacity of evil Subjects, nor the debility of honest men, nor the
murmurs of ignorant people, nor the discourses which he shall hear in his
chamber of those who will wager his ruin in the Court below, will be able to
disturb the serenity of his looks, which manifests a peace without and
tranquillity within.

By his good mine he will reassure afrighted hearts, he will keep himself erect
over those ruins which may fall under him, je will never despair of the
Republic, but considering THAT MEN ARE AS OFTEN DECEIVED IN DESPAIR AS IN
HOPE, AND THAT THE SICKNESSES WHICH SOME DIE OF, AND WHEREOF OTHERS ARE CURED,
HAVE THE SAME BEGINNINGS; after having herein employed all possible remedies,
and forgotten none of the secrets of Art, he will cast himself into the arms of
Providence, and recommend his Affairs to God, this also I acknowledge from that
good and wise Gentleman Mr. Conrart.

THis a^^urance in astonished persons, and this calm in a tempest, must needs
proceed from that strong constitution of mind which is nothing subject to those
disorders which the Passions raise, and which are nothing shaken with what
impetu^sities soever fortune clasheth with them. But whatsoever the Barbarians
of the Court say, or if you had rather call them the enemies of learning, the
study of Wisdom is no unprofitable help to Magnanimity and Judgment.

True and good Philosphy, for there is one which is false and evil, renders
death familiar unto us by a frequent meditation; it bereaves us of fear, and
diminishes ill; it teaches us that the only faults which we commit, are the
only mishaps which befall us; and the consolation which a man receives who is
at no loss by his imprudence, but by the infidelity of others is to be
preferred to the good successes of him who gains by his crimes and not by his
virtues.

That Minister of whom you fancy I have made this Picture, but which I reserve
in my secret Repository, being called to the Government in such troublesome
times, ought to uphold himself on these principles; he ought to pass from the
Philosophy of words to that of actions; an unforeseen accident will never
overthrow his Rules nor his Maxims, because there can be no accident which he
foresees not, and smells not a far off. He will neither apprehend the danger of
his person, nor the ruin of his fortune; he will apprehend nothing but blame
and an ill reputation; And although Prudence be a Virtue principally employed
for the preservation of him who possesses it; yet neither will Prudence hinder
him from prizing several other goods more then his own life.

But when things grow better, and times become less evil, he for that will not
sleep out a calm, nor unbend himself from his former vigor. Our wiseman will go
before all disorders, not only with quick and penetrating eyes, but also with
a firm and an undaunted heart. If he sees some sign of change appear, and the
least presage of a civil War, he will endeavor to stiffle the Monster before
its birth. It would be vain to represent unto him those inconveniences which
threaten him in particular, if he will oppose himself to a springing faction,
he will pass by all those considerations which stop the greatest part of our
other wisemen, and he will only mind the performance of his duty, without
caring for the greatness of the danger he is engaged in.

Were there a Son, or the Brother of a King, who were persuaded to embr^il
themselves, he would never sharpen that Son or that Brother, far less would he
flatter them: He will give counsel to the Father and the elder Brother which
should neither be timorous nor cruel. And if any man seek to estrange from him
the affection of these young Princes, he will rather serve them without their
good will, then please them by disserving them: He will not so much respect
what they would then seem to will, as what hereafter they would indeed; nor so
much the interest of others, wherein others engage them, as he will their true
and natural interests, which can never be separate from those of the King and
Crown.

After this manner he will undertake the public Cause with a courageous
Pro^i^y* and will not make the least appearance (...) indiscreet zeal appear;
his force will be without rudeness or sharpness; his fidelity to his Master
without hatred; to his Masters Brother or Son he will manifest a respectful
bol^ness, and full of modesty in those occasion* wherein others would ruin all
by violence or negligence Howsoever as it was said at first, he must be
resolved come what will to the worst can happen; to save the State he must be
prodigal of himself, he is the Kings own man. He must not only engage himself
in a dangerous action, the event whereof is doubtful, but devote himself to an
assured death, if his Masters service exact it from him.

It Is this quality which is so necessary for a Minister To love the Princes
person as much as the State; the one and the other passion ought equally to
possess his Soul, one without the other being deficient: we went yet further,
and after having answered what was alleged in de Aubignys History concerning
the Dukes of Joyeuse and Espernon. I thus return to our subject.

IT has been formerly spoken of two Macedonians, That the one loved Alexander,
and that the other loved the King; it is not well done to part what ought to
remain entire; why should we separate the King from Alexander, and divide that
poor Prince in pieces? it were a violent division, and a violence even to
Nature; it is to cut one body into two; the Kings interests are inseparably
united with those of the State, and I must confess that I cannot approve the
meaness of Cardinal Birage, who usually said, I am not Chancellor of France, I
am the Kings Chancellor, he might as well ^ave added, And the Queen his Mother,
whose Creature he was; not to take things at worse, methinks he is not to be
commended for so ill an expression.

Good Princes themselves protest, They belong to others, and owe themselves and
all to the Commonwealth* Magistrates and other Officers with far more reason ow
themselves unto it. They will never therefore at the same time give and take
away the same thing; their souls are too noble to be capable of so base an
avarice; will they repent themselves of their liberality? will they secretly
take back a present which they solemnly made before all the world? for so I
call the administration of Justice, of good Judges, and of good Laws.

Unless than Melanois reckoned France as nothing, he could no way better then
thereby have made it appear, that he was a stranger to it, and that to him it
was altogether indifferent But let it not be displeasing to the Cardinal of
Birague; the Minister ought to love the King and State both at once together.
And if besides that, he love some other thing, his second affections must
always rank themselves under the subjection and orders of the first.

If he marry, he ought not to contract himself with any who is suspected by the
State, or gives any cause of jealousy to his Prince* but for this its too too
much, he ought to renounce his own Country, he ought to break all the bonds of
Nature, he ought to sacrifice all for the good of the State, if the good of the
State require it. He ought to make it appear, that in a Monarchy there may be a
young Brutus, who prefers his duty before his Children, and can even lose them
when its necessary ^or the Kings service. He shall witness himself another
Marquis of Pisani, who one day said of his only Daugher, of she who since, and
to this day is the wonder of her Age, If I knew that after my death she should
be the wife of a man who were not the Kings Servant, I would strangle her now
persently with mine own hands.

But if the Minister be unmarried, and if he keeps himself chaste, it will be
so much the greater advantage to his Masters affairs, and they will be less
subject to inconveniences; it will be no small matter That to him who ought
perpetually to labor either with courage or with his mind, defended pleasures
are unknown, which have turned so many wise men into beasts, and led so many
Victors in triumph; but the ground of it indeed were, that even he would be
without legitimate passions which at least amuse and divert, if they do not
debauch and corrupt. Domestic cares which usurp so much time from business
will not rob an hour from such a Minister; he will never think of the
establishment of his Family, he will not have one thought but for the Eternity
of the State; his affection which would have been divided betwixt his Wise, his
Sons and Sons in Law, which would have run into other successions, and other
dependancies of Marriage, so that the least part of it would but have come to
his Masters share, w^ll then be united and gathered together in one only
object; his soul being void of little cares will be altogether filled with
those of the public, etc.

ANd then neither will he be troubled to seek for venale tongues or mercenary
pens. He will be far better praised by the public voice, then by those of
particular persons. These will neither be starved, and beggarly Orators, nor
di^^y and ragged Poets to speak well of him; but whole Provinces which have
been eased of their burdens and taxes, great and goodly Cities whose ancient
privileges have been preserved, Blessings and Applause will follow him every
where; at the same time he will be called the Port of the Afflicted, and a
ruining Shelf to those who are Violent; the Peoples comfort, and the terror of
Forainers, by reason that he by his prudence will reduce them ^o reason, nor by
his vanity will be offensive to them.

Thus the Enemies of the State will admire the virtue of which they have cause
to complain; And what would they not then give for a man who had given them so
much trouble? with how many millions would they purchase one Minister? what
promises what artifice would they not employ if they possibly could? I do not
say altogether to debauch him, but even to sweeten him, were it never so
little; there is nothing but they would do to soften the firmness of his heart,
and to hinder his mouth from speaking the truth; but he who believes he
possesses the Spring of Pearls and the Root of Gold; that King who boasts to
have the price of all things in his coffers, is not rich enough so much as to
pay for the very silence of such a Minister as I fancy.

Our Conference ended with a digression which was nothing displeasing to the
company, and by two examples which are the one far enough from the other, but
which both equally pleased you. Neither must I forget the last point of the
other days Advice.

A Wife and Children are powerful hindrances to stop a man in his course to
glory; whosoever has them has given hostages to Fortune, and undertakes
nothing but with co^^traint, for fear of losing what he has given; The sad
representation of a Widows mourning, and his Children being under age,
continually presents it self before his eyes, it enters into all its
deliberations. And when his Mind makes its escapes by a generous motion, this
second thought presently succeeds, which reduces him into the road again of
vulgar spirits. He marches into the Field only when the signal is given him
from Court; he raises the siege before a place when it can hold out no longer
in obedience to the secret orders he receives from his Wife. In the most
honorable occasions he regrets the smoke of Ithaca, he sighs for the absence of
Penelope; He prefers the wrinckles of an old woman, who expects him at home,
before that immortality which is promised him if he will but remain with the
Army.

This same man being married, is grown another in Wedlock; formerly he believed
it was piety to hazard himself for his Country, and now he believes it is
cruelty not to preserve himself for his Family. He no longer thinks on virtue,
forasmuch as he cannot leave it in his Testament; he cares for nothing but
Wealth, and Offices which may succeed from him to his; for which he has such
irregular desires, and such a blind ambition, that he no longer knows God nor
the King, and sticks neither at Altars nor Thrones when his interest is
concerned.

Had not Stili^on been married his end had been more happy, then the first part
of his life was sparkling The Emperor Yheodosius, to whom he had rendered very
profitable and most signal services, judged him worthy of his Alliance, and
gave him to Wife his Ncece Serena, who by adoption was his Daughter, he
afterward received a second mark of greatness, and had the honor to be Father
in Law to the Emperor Theodosius; but he thought it a small matter that his
Sister should be Emperatrice, and that his Son should still be his sisters
Subject and remain but a private Person: The mischief was, he had this Son, and
that he loved this Son more then his duty. Eucherius was the cause why Stelicon
died guilty of high Treason, and an Enemy to the State; although he had
formerly been the Princes Tutor, and the States Protector, although he had
defended both the one and the other against the Treasons of Ruffinus, and the
Enterprises of the Barbarians.

PRrince Maurice of Orange was no ordinary man, and his actions deserve
respect; he is particularly to be considered (these are the reflections of an
Italian A cademick) although he professed himself of a Sect which not only
permits Marriage, but ordains and commands it, yet would never marry; whether
he believed he should never get Children which resembled him, or that he
apprehended that if he had any, the consideration of his fortune (...) make him
undertake something to the prejudice of the public liberty, or whether he
would not divide that affection which he thought he was obliged to preserve
entire for his Country.

THis was near upon my advice the other day; and since you thought it not fit
to be lost in the air with the rattle of words, and that Monsieur our Governor
will not be angry to see it in paper, you will oblige me to carry it to him,
and to make him this small present from me; Were I in a condition to go abroad,
I would ease you of the trouble, and spare your O^ation, but I know that the
pains which you take for me are pleasant unto you, and that speeches cost you
nothing.

It Is not the first time, my dear Sir, that I have better expressed my self by
your mouth* then by mine own. You have oftener then once been my Ambassador (I
use your own terms) as well toward Monsieur the Marshal d' Effiat, as to
Monsieur the Count d' Auaux; you have made your self heard by those good Lords,
and have after a strange manner made me been valued. Let Us go yet further on in
the History; in confidence of me you have gone to Monsienr the Archbishop of
Thoulouse, and Monsieur the Bishop of Lisieux. You promised them my Letters to
oblige me to write unto them, and they came to you to meet them, when they knew
you had any for them Before Jansenius or the Jansenists were spoken of,
^onsieur the Abbot of St. Cyran called you My A^ro^a; he received you with open
arms, and you have been always well entertained by the illustrious persons of
our age; he therefore in my opinion will not treat you less favorably then
those; it is necessary for him to dive^t himself, and for that purpose you will
come most opportunely after so many troublesome businesses and so many sad
objects wherewith our Province has been of late filled; ^he may untire his
mind, and rejoice his sight with these our lines which you shall give him.

For the Picture it self which you promised him, its another story. It Is not at
all in my Cabinet as you fancy, it is still in the Painters Idea, and
consequently it will be difficult for you to make good your promise. Such
Pieces require leisure and meditation. An old Artist as I am, having some honor
to lose, and being obliged to have a care to preserve the good opinion which
men have of him, he ought to respect the judgment of the public, and not to
abuse those favors which he has received. Althongh I will paint no more, I
have far less mind to daub.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the most remarkable things in ARISTIPPVS.
A.
ACtion, It Is easy to deceive ones self in the judgment which men make of
actions, since those who perform them are first deceived, Page 42 Agrippa,
Augustus his Minister of State, 143. Alcibiades, the vivacity of his mind, 69,
70 Ambition being not well regulated, causes the loss of great persons, 156 A
famous Artisan whom Alexanders history mentions, 55, 56
B.
BArbarossa kept intelligence with Andreas Doria, 77 Birague a Cardinal, his
remarkable baseness, 152
C.
CAto an austere Commonwealths-man, but out of fashion, who could not fit
himself to the manner of his times, 98, 99. A verse of Virgil well applied, 100
Cicero was valiant and courageous, at least in the Senate. 67 Citizens are
seldom so now, 67, 68, A brave Citizen ought to be like Cicero. ibid. Cleon
Governor of the Commonwealth of Athens mocked for his extravagant probity, 108
Comines his astonishment and surprise, 145 Conference. What natural knowledge
soever we have, and what light soever comes from above, we are not to scorn a
scrutiny of reason, and the greater light of truth which is gained by
Conference. 2, 3, 4 The Conquest of Greece proposed by a petit Prince of Italy.
56 Of Counsel, it is the great element of a civil life, nor less necessary then
fire or water, 2, 3 Counselors, There are some who out of a peevish and
fantastic humor commonly think on death, and commonly sleep on the
Flowerde-Luces 110. Such Counselors are not to be called before Princes. 110,
111 Court, Tricks and deceits used therein, 78, etc. He who takes and gives
counsel is not esteemed less wise, 9, 10
D.
DEliberation. How that is to be understood which the Romans said, that we
ought to deliberate with occasion, and in the presence of affairs, 54
Demosthenes, appeared too punctilious in the Council of Athens, about that
small Island which was in contest betwixt the Athenians and King Philip. 104,
105 Andrew Doria kept intelligence with Barbarossa, although a good servant to
the Emperor Charles 5. 77
E.
EQuivoques which were pleasant of a G^^^mans to what learning was unknown. P
29, 30. Events, Yhe greatest are not always produced from great Causes. 39 An
Ecclesiastic Italian, his good and very expressed sally, preaching before a
Prince of that Country 133 134
F.
FAvor is a Daughter which often kills her own Mother 130 Favorites described,
113, 114. How they introduce and raise themselves in Court, and how by little
and little they possess themselves of the Princes mind, 116. What tricks and
slights they use altogether to subject (...) Prince, that they may reign
themselves apparently 125. Of he unhappy captivity Princes are reduced unto by
their Favorites, 126, 127. There can be no (...) more unhappy then the life of
such a Prince, who suffers himself after that manner to be governed by his
Favorites, 129. A Prince in such a condition is civilly dead, and (...) as it
were deposed himself; it is his (...) only which is made use of in public 130.
An example of a King of Castile who du^st (...) even go to walk, nor so much as
put on a new Suit without his Favorites leave. 131. Of the unhappy condition a
Prince or State is reduced unto, when a Favorite himself obeys a Mistress, when
Love governs the Politics, ib. A good lesson for Kings and Princes touching
the choice and raising up of their Favorites and Ministers. 134, 135.
Favorites, Kings can hardly live without Favorites, 17. It were a tyranny to
hinder Kings from having them, 18. It Is no crime to have a Confident, ibid. In
Heaven there are benevolent Aspects, and favorable inclinations rather toward
one then toward another, ibid. The Son of God even in this world has had his
Favorites, 19. Of the prudence and discretion a Prince ought to have in the
choice of his Favorites and Ministers of State, 20. Princes often deceive
themselves in the choice they make, raising persons of no worth without virtue,
without knowledge, and without experience to the Government and Administration
of Affairs of State, 20, 21. Some fair thoughts touching those Grandies who are
only remarkable from their Grandeur, 21, 22. Concerning the cause of this new
favor, and of the birth of this evil Authority, 22, 23. This favor is none of
virtues Creature, nor so much as the Virtues of the blood, 24, 25. These new
men grown great deceive themselves, if they persuade themselves that God is
obliged to send them his spirit of governing well, and to invalidate the
Princes election by the sudden illumination of his Ministers, 27. To govern
well, instruction and experience are necessary, 20, 21. The good opinion which
an ignorant Favorite haeth of himself, casts him into continual danger of
losing himself and of losing the Country. 28, 29. Friendship, without it
felicity is imperfect and defective, Virtue is weak and impotent. 1 Friends are
the most profitable and most desirable of all outward goods 1, 2. Fortune and
its productions are extravagant and ridiculous, 22 Fortune is esteemed Mistress
of Events, and Arbitrator of Battles, 65. This blind power has no admittance
nor power in Politic Assemblies, Ibid. Fortune will have those she favors
trust in her. 61
G.
GIlberti Bishop of Verona and Datary to Pope Clement 7. appeared too
punctilious, speaking about reconciling the Kingdom of Bohemia with the Church,
104 Great men remarkable only for their greatness, 21. Like those high barren
mountains which produce neither herb nor plant, 21, 22. Of God. That there is
none but he who is plenarily content in himself, 2
I.
Jealousy of love betwixt particular persons has been cause of a great war,
39 Ignorance is very dangerous in a person who has the government and
administration of Affairs of State, 21. Bold Ignorance has often precided in
the conduct of humane things, 26 Of Interest. It always overbears both honor
and reason, 63. A man too much tied to his own interest, is not capable of the
government and administration of the State, 62 Joseph the Patriarck a great
Minister of State, wonderfully honored by his Mr. Pharaoh, 15, 16 Italy breeds
excellent Cheats, 84, 85, Judgments which are quickest want clearness in their
own interests, 3, 4 Justice when it is too severe is not always best, sometimes
it is even pernicious and hurtful, 101, 102. When Justice is done we must
imagine it is a favor, without standing on Punctilio's, 105. It Is better not to
be so quick and clear-sighted in discussion of matters of right, for fear of
finding therein too much Justice. 106
K.
KIngs, their condition is unhappy if reduced by Favorites, vid. Favorites,
Kings are not to be contented with a personal and particular innocence; and
it is to no purpose for them to be just if they lose themselves by the injustice
of their Ministers. 133. A good instruction for Kings, for their choice and
election of Ministers or Favorites, 134, 135. The learned and wise Lipsius his
answer on this subject. 136.
L.
ALvares de Luna the King of Castiles Favorite to what height of insolency his
favor and power arrived toward the Prince his Master, 131 The extravagant and
ridiculous Love of some hypochondriacal Queen, 22. Of the Love governing the
Politics when the woman is possessed of a Favorites heart, 131
M.
Marriage; A woman and her children are most powerful hindrances to stop a man
who seeks after glory, 155. The Mind takes a wonderful pleasure in
Rati^cination, 51, 52. What appears its f^ie^d and favorable in its thought,
revolts and ^ecomes contrary in the operation. 52. Maxims to govern happily,
and with success (...) labor for the good of the State, 101. There are Maxims
which are not just in their (...) nature, but whose use justifies them, 102
Mecenas Minister of State and favorite to Augustus, and of the facility of his
manners. 143, 144. Meleager by the provocation of his Wife (...) himself into a
revolt, and engages in the party of a Tyrant against the King his Master,
without knowing of a truth what (...) moved him thereunto, 41, 42, 43.
Ministers of State, Kings and Princes cannot reign without them, 5. Princes to
make, cannot be without them; and Princes made need them, 6. An explication of
what Plato says, That God gave Kings two spirits to govern, 7. Several degrees
of Servants, who all find place in the administration of a State, 7, 8. Fair
Elogies of a true and perfect Minister of State, 8, 9. Besides those Gods and
Demons wherewith the Ancients accompanied their Hero's, they gave them men also
to assist them in their undertakings, 9. A Prince who in time of need makes use
of a Ministers counsel, is not to be esteemed less wise or less Sovereign, 10,
11. A wise and faithful Minister may call himself the Temperament betwixt the
power of one person, and the public good of the Commonwealth, 12. In Greece
Ministers of State reigned with their Kings, 12, 13. In Persia they are called
the Kings eyes, ibid. The Roman Emperors honored them with the Title of Friends
and Companions, ibid. They caused Statues to be erected for them, placing them
near their own, and rendering them very great honors, 13, 14, A man without
virtue, without knowledge, and without experience is not capable of the
Government and administration of affairs of State, 20, 21. Knowledge and
experience are necessary for well governing, 28. The good opinion which an
ignorant Minister of State may have of himself is very dangerous, and may be of
a pernicicus consequence, 26, 27. It Is not necessary for a Minister of State to
be very subtle, vide Subtilty. A Minister ought not to be tied too much to his
own interest, 62. The consideration of his own interest causes Timidity, and
captivates his liberty of speech and action, 62, 63. Those who have a
passionate Probity, indocile and impetuous, are not fit to be placed near the
person of a Prince; their employment thrives better at a distance, 94, 95. vide
Probity passionate. Maxims which such are to learn who are called to the
Government of State, 101. Some to seem virtuous, and not to be corrupted in
their Offices, render themselves ridiculous out of an extravagant Probity, 108
Of Ministers and of the Ministry of State, 138, 139. A Princes care in the
choice of a Minister, 142, 143. Two true and perfect Ministers of State, 144,
145. It Is a rare thing to see a brave Minister or Favorite, ibid. The Picture
of a true and perfect Minister, ibid. A Minister of State ought to have as well
Boldness as Wisdom, ibid. He ought to have an equality of mind, which ought to
appear in the several changes of humane things, in the ebbings and flowings at
Court, 146 He ought to be constant and resolute, without being astonished at
any ill news, or of any ill success, 147. Study and wisdom is no useless help
to Magnanimity, and to the judgment of a Minister, 148, 149. He ought to love
the Princes person as well as his Estate, and both equally, 151. Meaness of
Cardinal Birague, ibid. If a Minister marry, he ought not contract an alliance
suspected to the State, no which causes jealousy, 152, 153. He ought to
renounce blood and Kindred, ibid. If he do not marry, it will be much for the
advantage of his Masters affairs, ib. A Spanish Minister could never resolve to
acknowledge the late Henry the Fourth, for King of Franc, always calling him
the Bernois or the Prince of Bern, when he intended him a favor, 90, 91
Mucianus Minister of State to the Emperor Vespasian, 5, 6.
N.
NEstor a good Minister of State, Agamemnons wish, 9 Night, why the Grecian
Poets gave it the name of Wise and Counselor, ibid.
O.
OCcasion is subject to change, 54 Prince Maurice of Orange would never marry
for several reasons, 157
P.
PIcture may represent a thing, but yet cannot be that thing, there must still
be a difference, 53 Of Phocion, and the solidity of his mind, 69 Politic
Assemblies, the mind ought in them to act freely without constraint, and
prudence is quietly to exercise its operations, 65, 66 Of the baseness of those
who tremble at the re^ital of the least danger which restrains and hinders men
from speaking their minds, 66 A Physician to the Queen of Persia was cause of
that War which Xerxes made in Greece, 41. A Physician boasted to have killed a
Patient with the fairest method in the world, 47, 48 The Marquis of Pisani
greatly affectionated to the Kings service, 153 Poets were the ancient
Preceptors of humane kind. 9 Policy forbears not to be unhappy without heavens
intermission, 55 Presumption. In it there is something which is more noble then
in weakness, and such excesses are less blameable then such like defaults, 138
An extravagant Probity, 108 A passionate, ridiculous and impetuous Probity,
which may be otherwise called a Brutal Virtue, 87. Those who have that natural
obstinacy, and which do not nor will not know any other reason besides their
own, are not very fit to govern a State, ib. They often fall into pits in the
midst of a way, and incessantly fall on shelves only to have the honor not to
go to the left, 88, 89. They express themselves in affirmative terms, and
decide the most doubtful and the most embroiled business with a So it is, 91.
They are to be preferred to the timorous, 92, 93. This boldness and rudeness
have in some encounters been approved, and sometimes succeeded, 93, 94. Those
who are naturally so, hardly correspond with an enemy, but they easily go back
against their Master 94. They are not fit to be near a Princes person, their
employment is better at a distance, 95, 96. They love the state and their
Country, but hate dependence and subjection, 96. They are good Governors of
Provinces, and good Guardians of a Frontier, but they cannot be good Ministers
of State, or good Courtiers, ibid. In business wherein they may choose their
side, and wherein of many who offer themselves the fittest to manage them,
ought to be chosen; they are commonly in one extreme or other, 96, 97. They are
Enemies of all accommodation, and are not acquainted with those tempers or
adjustments which are so profitably used for the perfection of business, 97,
98. In a State which dies of old age, they would the same thing, as if they
governed a Republic newly established, 98, 99. Like Cato give sentence against
Caesar, 99. Such Maxims as to govern well, they ought to learn, 101. A man must
not be too severe nor too ridged, but must sometimes accommodate himself to
times and seasons, ibid. It Is unnecessary to make punctilio's on words and
forms: Great persons to blame upon that occasion, 103, 104. It Is better not to
have so good and penetrating a sight in the discussion of Rights, least we
discover but too much Justice, 106, 107. There are some who to appear virtuous
and incorrupted in Office, rendered themselves ridiculous by an extravagant
Probity, 108. There are some who for fear of favoring any man, disapprove,
blame, and condemn all the world, and most commonly without knowing why, 109,
110. Such men are not to be called to the counsels of Kings, 110, 111 Prudence,
A man may be imprudent with the consent of Prudence, 60
R.
REason. Even the right and that which is most clear wanders often; and the
most able and the most intelligent men are subjects of deceit, 51 Remedies
though filthy are still remedies, 102 Royalty is ^not compatible with
subjection, 138
S.
SEcr^sie. A singular example of a kept secret, 146 Society. Men can neither
live well, nor be men, nor be happy the one without the other, 2. Societies
advantage above Solitude, ibid. Solitude. God only enjoys a most happy
solitude, ibid. Stilicon unhappily ended his life, having been too ambitious
for his children, 11, 156 Subtilty. Of those who entertain so vast and extended
an intelligence, who reason with excess, 35. They are like extractors of
essences, ibid. It Is an error to think that wisdom cannot be courageous; that
it ought always to fear and tremble, 70. Danger is to be invoked to the relief
of danger, and we must get out of one evil through another, 70, 71. The ill
conduct of wise Ministers, when some ill business happens, some trouble or some
rebellion in the State, 71, 72. They are often also friends to strangers, and
apprebend more to displease a neighbor King, then to disserve the King their
Master, 74, 75. If a sensible injury which cannot be dissembled, oblige the
State to a public resentment, they do not blame the thing in its principle,
but in its consequences and effects, 75. They are like the Ministers of
Carthage, who never comforted themselves with Hannibals Victories in Italy, 76.
Such Ministers were the cause of the loss of two Empires, they lost both Rome
and Constantinople, ibid. They would neither sell nor deliver up their Master,
but neither are they angry the world knows it is in their power, 77. They keep
even sometimes intelligence with the Ministers of other Princes, although it be
even in open war, 77, 78. In particular affairs they only give good answers in
general, without precisely ever obliging any, and thus they can tire out the
pateince of Solicitors, and often reduce them to despair, 78, 79. Nothing can
be imagined more sweet or more quiet then their malice; they strike (as they
say) without lifting up the arm, 80, 81 Women, the insolency of those who
possess a powerful Favorite or Minister of State; and how unhappy it renders a
State, 131, 132. They are the Heretics of State, 35. There are speculatives in
all Nations, which afford more liberty then is fit to conjecture and suspicion,
36. Strange and ridiculous Visions produce in them a false subtilty,37. They
presume too advantagiously of a man who often proves less then mean, who
possesses but a quarter or one half of the reasonable part, 39. Great Events
are not always produced by great Causes. Vide Events. Evil Subtilty is the
cause things are not effected, 44. It Is not necessary for a Minister of State
to have so much subtilty. 35, 44. A great mind alone is a great instrumentt to
commit faults, 48 Sobriety of knowledge, and of knowing is a good thing, 48,
49.
T.
TImerousness is dangerous and prejudicial to a Minister of State, or to a
Favorite, 144. 145 Timero^s persons are placed in the number of Poysoners and
Assassins, how that is to be understood, 65. They are the last and worst of all
^^wards, ibid. A wiseman ought to expect without astonishment, till ill fortune
be come, 67 Treaty. It were expedient to quit somewhat our own reason and
Honor, rather then not to make a good and honest accommodation, 106 Tyrants,
how they by degrees make and form themselves, 117, 118
W.
WArs. The quarrels of Valors often sets the world on fire, and not their
Masters interests, 40. The war of the King of Persia against Greece was only
undertaken to bring home a Muontebank, 41. Weakness of mind is a subject of
consolation for our poor humanity, to see that something of the man was in
their Hero's, 107.108 A Woman despised by a King obliges her Husband to revolt
for to revenge herself, he being ignorant of what moved him thereunto, 41, 42
Wisdom; the refutation of what some Philosophers say that a wise man needs no
body; and what is separate from him, is to no puppose, 1, 2. Court- Wise men
counsel themselves instead of counselling their Master, 62, 63. A wise man
cannot warraut success, but is to be responsible for his intentions and for his
Advice, 66 Our Prudent Politicians should imitate the courage and magnanimity
of Cicero, 67. Timerousness so possesses their minds, that they despair before
they ought to be afraid, 68. They regulate their deliberations, as if all
doubtful actions must needs happen, and commonly act not at all, because they
would act securely, 68, 69, They ought to consider that all that ill which
might happen happen not always, ibid. They do not always sound the bottom of
things, and seldom bring them to the last point, 69. Their Wisdom is
precipitate as soon as out of their souls, and never comes to action, 69, 70.
FINIS.

