A Help to Holy Walking, OR, A GUIDE TO GLORY. CONTAINING Directions how to
Worship God, and to Walk with him in the whole Course of our LIVES.

Genesis 5.24. And Enoch Walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.

Genesis 6.9. Noah was a Just Man, and Perfect in his Generation; and Noah Walked
with God.

John 4.23,24. The Hour comes, and now is, when the True Worshippers shall
Worship the Father in Spirit, and in Truth; for the Father seeks such to
Worship him: God is a Spirit, and those that Worship him must Worship him in
Spirit and Truth.

By EDWARD BVRY, Late Minister of Great Bolas, in Shropshire.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Nevil Simmons, at the Princes Arms, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1675.

TO The Right Worshipful, truly Noble, and really Religious Lady, the Lady
Wilbraham, of Woodhey, in the County of Chester, the Pattern of Piety, the
Honor of her Family, Sex, and Country; E. B. wishes all Happiness External,
Internal, and Eternal.
Madam,
SEeing Custom seems to plead prescription, and most Writers, Religious or
Profane, make bold to prefix some Great Name before their Writings, the better
to Commend them to the World: I having these Papers by me, designed for the
Press, and not being willing to break Custom, and having as much need of
Protection as any, was not long in determining, but quickly made choice of your
Ladyship, partly emboldned thereto, by your thankful Acceptance of a former
Tract. My Ends in this Dedication is not to Interest you in any of my Errors,
or Mistakes; if any such be found, let them be charged upon me; and I assure
you, when they are Discovered, I shall be ready to throw the first stone at
them; and were I Conscious of any such, I should be loath to prefix yours, or
my own Name before it: Neither is it that I think you need it, for I know not
of any thing herein contained that you are Ignorant of; however it may not be
un-useful to mind you of the things you know, Phil. 3.1. 2 Pet. 1.12. Neither
is it to tell the World how much I am engaged to you, and to the Worthy
branches of your Family; for though I own your Courtesies thankfully, yet I
know they were not bestowed to this End, that others should take Notice of
them. But it is to let the World know, how High an Esteem I have of you, and
that I think you are fitter to Judge of Writings of this Nature than many
others, it being but a real History of your own daily Practice. And also that I
may point out unto the World (who are better led by Example, than by Rule) a
Pattern for their Imitation, for in you they may see these Directions reduced
into Practice, which otherwise they may think inpracticable: And also that the
World may be convinced (who in this looser Age is apt to think the contrary)
that Gentility, and true Piety may Lodge together in the same Breast; and that
our Age, as well as the Apostles, 2 John 1.13. does afford some Elect Ladies,
and that they may not think that Gentility and Debauchery are termius
convertabiles; and he that owns one, must own the other also: but that there
are some (and alas! too few) Noble, and Generous Spirits, that the Temptations
of the Devil, nor the Allurements of the World, neither Riches, Honors, nor
Pleasures, can draw, or drive away from Christ. And, Madam, though those that
know you, take Notice of many Excellent Qualifications in you; as Humility,
Self-denial, Prudence, Temperance, Charity, etc. Yet real Holiness, true Piety,
and the power of Godliness, is the most fragrant Flower in your Garland, and
the most Orient Jem that does Adorn you; without which the rest would not be so
resplendant; for by Sincerity Virtues are Adopted Graces. The World, I know, is
as always it has been, not only out of their way, but also out of their Wits
in matters of Salvation, and stark blind in Spirituals, and only dote upon
gilded Vanity, and Worship a Golden Calf; yet the time is coming, their minds
will change when they shall see all their Glory, how high soever it fly,
vanish like Smoke before their Eyes into nothing. Now, they take them all to be
Fools, or Mad men, that run Counter to the Courses of the World, and the
Corruptions of the Times; and most men had rather be Honorable, than
Religious; Great, than Good. But when they have cast up their Accounts at
Death, they will find there was a mistake in the Reckoning: They will then see
Holiness was the best Fashion, though lest worn; and that all the Pomp in the
World was but gilded Rottenness, a dead Carcass stuffed with Flower; and that
at Death all the Gold in the Indies signifies no more than a handful of Dirt or
Dung. The Time is at Hand (and long it cannot be) that one Dram of Grace will
be worth a World; and one glymps of God's Favor worth a Thousand Crowns and
Kingdoms. Humility and Self-denial are two Soul-adorning Graces, though seldom
seen worn in the Breast of great Persons; they are the first Lesson Taught in
the School of Christ, though few ever take them out; they are Beautiful in
Great men, as well as Poor: And submissive Devotion in Religious Duties does
not wrong Majesty it self. Virtue is better than a Thousand Escutchions; and
it is true Nobility where God is the top of the Kin, and Religion lies at the
bottom. It Is a greater Honor to be a Child of God, than to be Born of Princes;
and to be Espoused to Christ, speaks more of Honor, and Happiness, than the
World can conferr. Riches of themselves make not the Souls better or worse;
neither does God think ever the better of men for Wealths sake, except they
take Christ's Counsel, and make Friends with this Unrighteous Mammon, and by
this means have their Riches made up into a Crown for their Head in the World
to come. If these things seem Questionable to any, a little time may resolve
the doubt, when it will plainly appear, that a bare profession of Religion will
serve no man's turn for Salvation, Mat. 7.22. and 25.1,2, etc. The Lamp of
Profession may Light a man to Death, never to Heaven. Madam, I Write not these
things for your Instruction, but I had need to speak them out, that others may
hear. My Prayers to God are that you may go on in Honoring him, who has
Honored you. And improve all for his Glory, from whom you have received all;
knowing you cannot do too much, or suffer too much for him, who has done so
much, and suffered so much for you; you cannot buy this Gold too dear, the
World you may buy too dear, and most men do with the loss of their Souls.

Madam, as to this unpolished Piece, though I am conscious to my self of many
wants, yet I hope a Will to do good is not wanting: He that did receive a
Turtle for a Sacrifice, when a Lamb was wanting, and a little Goats Hair, when
no Butter was to be had; and commended the Widows mite, when she had no more,
I hope will receive this when he knows I have no better; where but little is
given, of him less will be required. The Subject I know is necessary, if not
spoiled in the handling; though the Ring look dusk, yet the Diamond will
sparkle. Multiplicity of contrary Studies, and other Employments, as most that
know me can Witness, might, perhaps, have pleaded my Excuse for Writing, (as
indeed it did satisfy me for several Years) so I hope it will plead my Excuse
for coming forth in so homely a dress. When Paul beheld the Idolatry of the
Athenians, his Spirit was moved; and when I beheld the formality of Professors,
no wonder, if, with Crassus dumb Son, I spoke, when I saw my Father wronged.
Among all the Objection I could think of that might come in against this my
well-meant Labor, I found none that said it was impossible it should do good,
I am sure none can justly Object it was not intended for good; those that
really desire to lead a Holy life, I hope will own it; as for others, those
that have neither good word for God, nor for his ways, I cannot expect they
should have any for me; however, my witness against them will be upon Record.
Madam, if you have better at hand, you may bestow this upon some wanting Soul,
for whose sake it was Written. I have not further to add, but desire of God in
these declining Times, when Atheism, Profaneness, Superstition, and Debauchery
are too much in Fashion, that he will keep you and yours from the Temptations
laid in your way; that you may shine as Stars of the first Magnitude to
enlighten this dark Hemisphere, that you may grow in Grace, as you grow in
Years, and may be presented blameless at the Coming of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; that your Interest in Christ, and Title to Glory, may be cleared
up, that when you come to dye, you may have nothing to do but to dye, and
resign up your Soul into the Hands of Christ; these are the desires, and shall
be the Prayers, of him who is,

Madam, Yours to his Power to Serve you, Edw. Bury.
Eaton, Nov. 2. 1674.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, I think my self obliged to give thee some Account of this
following Treatise; for in the beginning of it thou will find mention made of a
former Treatise, which indeed is not yet Published; containing the Doctrine of
Holy Walking. Now, although this was first designed, and first begun, and in
Order of Nature should have been the First born; yet it fared with it as it did
with Zarah, Genesis 38.28. This Pharez has made a breach, and came out first;
and, like Jacob, supplanted his Brother, and got the Birthright; yet happily the
other may not be strangled in the Birth; if this prove not too Chargable in the
keeping: Know then, when I first set upon the Work, I intended it to be Divided
into five Parts, all in the same Method; the first containing, 1. An
Introduction to the whole. 2. The Explication what Holy Walking implies. 3. The
Reasons why it is necessary. 4. The Objections against it Answered. 5. Reproof
to several sorts that Live otherwise. 6. Some Considerations put to them. 7.
Some gross mistakes about Holiness. 8. Marks of Holy Walking. 9. Devices of
Satan to keep Men in sin. 10. The Privileges of the Godly. 11. Qualifications
requisite to an Holy Life. 12. Moving Considerations thereunto. 13. Hindrances
in the way to Heaven. And Lastly, Helps and Directions. The Second Part is the
present Book here presented, of which I need give you no other Account. The
Third contains Directions, 1. For the Thoughts. 2. For the Words. 3. For the
Actions. 4. For the Affections. 5. For the Consciences. 6. For Recreations. 7.
For Apparel. 8. For Eating and Drinking. 9. For Redeeming Time. 10. For Buying
and Selling. 11. For Company. 12. For Solitariness. 13. To bear Affliction
well. 14. In a particular Calling. The Fourth contains a disswasive, 1. From
Sin in general. 2. From Pride. 3. Atheism. 4. Covetousness. 5. Drunkenness. 6.
Adultery. 7. Swearing. 8. Lying. 9. Murder. 10. Idleness. 11. Apostasy. 12.
Idolatry. 13. Hypocrisy. 14. Stealing. 15. Contention. The 5. and last
contains Relative Duties, 1. Of the unmarried in reference to Marriage. 2. The
mutual Duties of the Husband, and Wife. 3. The Husbands peculiar Duties. 4. The
Wives Duties. 5. Parents Duties. 6. The Duties of Children. 7. Of Masters. 8.
Of Servants. 9. Of Magistrates. 10. Of Subjects. 11. Of Ministers. 12. Of
People. Now, only the second of these sees the Light; the first and last are
well near Finished, and may ere long show themselves, and the rest in time, if
my Life and Health be Continued, and I be not in the mean time convinced that
they will be useless: I know the World is full of Books, and many that complain
most, read least; but should we observe most men's Devotion and their Carriage
in the World, we may Imagine, that Books, that reduce Christianity into
practice, and teach us our Duties to God and Man, are yet wanting, that is not
sufficiently taught, that is not sufficiently learnt; there are need of more
Books that maintain the Vitals of Religion, in an Age, when almost all
Religigion is turned into a matter of Formality, and Ceremony, and little of
the power of Godliness appears. I have not in this, neither do I intend in the
other, brought you any new Lights, but to direct you in the good Old way,
mentioned, Jer. 6.16. which the Saints in former Ages have Walked in, and which
will be proved to be the only way to Heaven, though of late there are many new
attempts to find a better; but if any, but the way of Holiness end in
Happiness, let me be called a false Prophet. Men's Brains were never better
stufft, nor their Tongues ever more busy, but their Hearts are empty, and
their Hands are idle; never more talking of the way, and never less walking in
it: And if good words would save, without good Hearts, or good Works, or good
Duties, never so many would go to Heaven as in our Age. Most men's knowledge
floats in the Brain, and little sinks, or soaks down into the Heart, or seasons
the Life, or Conversation; hence, like Children that have the Rickets, by
reason of some Obstructions, the Head grows too big for the Body. If a bare
Profession of Religion would serve turn for Salvation, (but it will not, Mat.
7.22. and 25.1,2,3, etc. to the 14.) many would be saved, for they can Number
their Prayers as the Papist does his Beads; but God does not accept them by
Number, but by Weight; He is a Spirit, and will be Worshipped in Spirit, and in
Truth. A little Grace (I fear a little Profession) makes a great show in a
Great man; the power of Godliness is for the most part left to the Poor, that
are more willing to take pains, and have little to lose. But whether God will
be satisfied with this, that those to whom he has given most, should do least,
is a Question should be thought of. A bare Profession makes many a man have a
high Conceit of himself, but the Law allows not a man to be Judge in his own
Cause. My Design in the following Tract, is not to make the way to Heaven
narrower, nor the Gate straiter than it is; but to put you up some Way-marks,
that you mistake not the Road It Is not to make the Burden heavier than needs
must; but to show you what Burden it is that Christ would have you take up: It Is
not to quench the smoking Flax, or to break the bruised Reed, but to awaken
the dull and drowsy Formalist, and to set him on fire that was quite out* and
to show the mistakes of those that think the way to Heaven to be so broad, that
a whole Parish may go abreast, and a reeling Drunkard can hardly step aside;
and the Gate so wide, that a Man may enter, not only with the World, but with a
load of Sins also on his back; and that they may use their Prayers, as others
do their Charms, with good Success, though they understand them not; but God is
not much taken with a little Lip labor, when the Heart is absent, Prove. 19.26.
Ezekiel. 33.32. The Time is coming Men will be convinced to purpose, that their
Soul was their chiefest Jewel; that Heaven was no Fable, and Hell no
Scarecrow, nor Eternity no Melancholy Fancy; and that God spoke in Earnest
what they took in Jest: That Sin is no matter of Sport, and the Service of God
no Formal Complement: That those were the Wisest that made Provision for
Eternity, and those the veriest Fools that fooled away their Salvation, and
Sold their Souls, as Esau his Birthright, for a Mess of Pottage, or for that
which was worse, for a base Lust, and laid out their money for that which is
not Bread, and their Labor for that which profits not, Isa. 55.2. But the Time
will come they will Repent the bargain. But to return, it may be Objected, this
plain Discourse is not suitable for this Learned Age, but the Sick Man desires
to have Medicum non Eloquentem sed Saventem, and rather desires to be Cured,
than Courted. Those that Sin in English, why should they be reproved in Latin,
but in plain words. Had I had better at Hand thou had had it, and how it came
to pass I had no better, I can give thee this brief Account. When by Providence
I was laid aside as a broken Vessel, and the Time was come that the Levites
were sent every one to his Field, Nehem. 13.10. and I not having that Provision
made as many others had, and but little, if any thing left to maintain a
numerous Family, I was forced to Fight against Poverty, almost to the neglect
of my Study; so that I can say, with the Apostle, Acts 20.34. (and many that
knows me, may say as much for me) These Hands ministered to my Necessity and
those that were with me: My Head being filled with other distracting Studies,
and my Hands with other Employments, that I had few spare hours (except by
Night) to mind those Studies, so that I hrought forth this, as a Bear does her
Whelps, a confused Lump, and had no time to lick it into Form. It Is a Basket of
unripe Fruits, blown down by the Wind of Worldly Distractions; yet mistake not,
had my time been more, and my Abilities greater, it should have spoken plain
English: I would not have hid any Fruit with Leaves, nor been a Barbarian to
the meanest Reader, nor have wrapped up my meaning in a Cloud. Reader, my Advice
is, if thou find Christ here, though not in soft Raiment, but as in his
Infancy but meanly clad, yet reject him not; good Counsel in plain English is
not to be rejected; and a good Stomach will not reject good Meat, though not
Modishly dressed. If there be any thing here Offered, contrary to God's Word
reject it, and so shall I when I know it; if not, rejecting of it will be a
dissowning God himself. If thou meet with (as I fear thou may) some
Tautoligies, or Repetitions, look upon it as the Fruit of broken Studies, and
interrupted Meditations. I have said enough, and, perhaps, too much, and shall
add no more, but wish that God, who has inclined my Heart to Write it, may
incline thine to Read and Practice it; and if thou have any benefit by it, I
shall think my pains well bestowed: This is the unfeigned desire of him, who is

Christ's, and the Churches Servant, and a well-willer to thy Souls Health,
EDWARD BVRY.
Eaton, Nov. 2. 1674.
A Help to holy Walking OR A GUIDE to GLORY.
CHAP. I. Motives to holy Duties.
HAving in a former, Treatise handled the Doctrine of holy walking, and showed
the excellency and necessity of it, and given you Marks and Motives to persuade
you to it, and Directions in it, and answered the Objections that are made
against it; I shall come now to treat of it in particular, and show you how to
demean your selves toward God, in the several parts of his Worship, wherein
consists the main, though not the whole of holy walking: And in every part of
Gods worship, I shall give you Directions for the right performance. But
Reader, will thou resolve to follow those Directions? For otherwise it is in
vain for me to write, or thee to read, it will but make thee sin with a Candle
in thy hand, What good will Meat do if not eaten and digested? Or Physic do if
not taken? Or a Plaster if not applied? So what good will Directions do, if
not followed? It is not enough to read thy duty, but thou must do it, nay it is
not enough to do it, but thou must do it well: Those that worship God, must
worship him in Spirit and in Truth, it is not a little lip labor, or knee
service will serve his turn without the Heart, and the Heart rightly qualified,
he regards it not, he will have none of it, for there is none holy as the Lord,
1 Samuel, 22. And the Lord admits of none into his service that are not holy, Lev.
10.3. I will be sanctified by those that draw near to me, Lev. 20.7. Be ye
holy, for I am holy, He is a living God, and requires living Sacrifice, and
will not take up with a dead heart: There must be a principle of life in thee,
or thou art nor fit to come into his presence, for he is a consuming fire unto
his Enemies, there must be Regeneration, or there can be no Salvation, John
3.5. And without faith it is impossible to please him. Heb. 11.6. it is not
enough to worship him, but it must be in sincerity and truth, Josh. 24.14 What
is thy Resolution, will thou worship him or will thou not? there are few in
plain words will deny it, but in actions they do, either they worship him not
at all, or give him that he requires not, or do it in a manner he regards not:
They are like the Son that said to his Father, I go Sir, but went not, Mat.
21.30. But shall we take it for granted that thou will worship him? but will thou do it in truth and sincerity? otherwise God will not regard it. I fear we
may say of many, as Joshua of Israel Josh. 24.19. You cannot serve the Lord,
for he is an holy God, but is it your Resolution as theirs was in the verses
following, Nay, but we will serve the Lord, and that you will choose the Lord
to serve him, consider what you do, you must take him to be your God, and be
willing to have your Souls cleansed from all your sins, and must be willing to
take the Lord Jesus Christ as he is offered in the Gospel, to be your Lord and
Husband, and be as willing to be ruled by him, as saved by him, and must
resolve to obey his Laws, and do his will, and live in the performance of those
spiritual duties he requires at at thy hand. Yea, thou must have a settled
Resolution to cleave to Christ, and obey him even in the most despised,
disgraceful, dangerous, difficult and costly part of duty: Though it be to the
loss of thy worldly enjoyments, yea, and life it self: I know many would pick
of choose their duties, this they would do, but that they would not; they scum
of the Fat and sweet of duty, but leave that which is difficult, or dangerous,
but God will have no such Servants: obey him thou must, though thy Father,
Mother, and all thy Friends become thine Enemies upon the account; yea, in some
cases thou must not only leave, but hate Father and Mother, etc. yea, thy own
life for his sake yea, though thou loose thy credit and esteem in the World,
and be made a scorn and a reproach for his sake; though thou loose thy
pleasure, and never see merry day whilst thou live; though it endanger thy
Estate, and bring thee to Poverty; though thou loose thy Liberty, and be cast
into a Prison; yea, though thou loose thy life, and be brought to a Stake to
suffer; yea, though thou see few or none walk that same way with thee: Noah
must obey God, though the whole World disobey him; yea, thou must obey him,
though his commands be never so contrary to thy carnal interest, or never so
opposite to flesh and blood, and though they are never so hard or difficult, or
dangerous, or costly, before ever thou take upon thee the profession of
Religion, sit down first and reckon the charges, lest like many thou begin to
build, and be unable to finish it; and not like many, put their hands to the
Plow, and then look back: or like the stony ground when persecution arises,
presently are offended: resolve to give him thy heart with thy hand, or he will
have none of thee, he knows the heart, and try the reins, and thou can not
deceive him with a dissembling show, when Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire,
he slew them. When Ananias and Saphira played the Hypocrite, he struck them
dead. Cleanse thy heart therefore if thou will serve him, and serve him thou
must, or do worse: Thou can never err on that hand, in serving him too well;
he deserves more and better than thou can give him, his wages will be beyond
thy work: now that I may prevail with thee to serve God, take these following
Motives.

1. Motive, We should worship and serve the Lord our God, because he has
commanded us so to do, and his command makes it our duty; we are his Creatures,
and we owe our selves, and all that we have to him for our Creation. He made
us, and therefore has most right to us; He made us for his service, and
therefore it is all the reason in the World that we should serve him; for who is
the Pot, but the Potters? and this is the service he requires of us, to worship
him according to his will, and praise him for his benefits, this is all he
requires at our hands, even this Tribute of praise, and shall we be so
ungrateful to our great Benefactour, to deny him this? Nay, we are his also by
right of Redemption, for we had sold our selves unto slavery, even to Satan,
and were become Bondslaves to this hellish Pharaoh, who exercised more cruelty
to our Souls, than ever Pharaoh did to the Bodies of the Israelites; and in the
slavery had remained for ever, had not God sent his own Son to ransom us with
the loss of his life, and the shedding of his precious blood: Satan was the
strong man armed that kept his house in peace, till Christ a stronger than he
disarmed him, and took away his weapons wherein he boasted. And now being
bought with a price, we should glorify God with our Bodies, and with our Souls
which are Gods. The end he aimed at in our Redemption, was his own glory as
well as our liberty; and this he expects from our hands, is, we being delivered
from the fear of our Enemies, might serve him without fear, in Holiness and
Righteousness before him all the days of our Lives, Luke 2.74,75. Nay, we are
also his by Covenant, under our Hand and Seal in our Baptism, we were
dedicated to his service, which Covenant since we have often ratified at the
Sacrament of the Supper, and how can we deny our own act and deed? He is our
Lord, and we should worship him, Psalm, 45.1^. Now that worship and service is
required of us is evident, Scripture and Reason speaks as much, 2 Kings 17.36.
You shall not fear other Gods, nor bow your selves to them, nor serve them, nor
sacrifice to them, but the Lord who brought you out of the Land of Egypt with
great power, and a stretched out arm, him shall ye fear, and him shall ye
worship, and to him you shall do sacrifice, and his statutes, and his
ordinances ye shall observe. Exodus 34.4. You shall worship no other God but
him, the like we have, Exodus 20.50. 1 Chronicles. 16.29. Give unto the Lord the
glory due unto his Name, bring an Offering and an Oblation before him, worship
him in the beauty of holiness. Yea, Christ himself preaches this doctrine,
when the Divil tempted him to fall down and worship him; he answered, It is
written thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
Mat. 4.8. Yea, he directs us with what worship to worship him, John 4.23,24.
The true worshippers worship him in Spirit and in Truth, God is a Spirit, and
those that worship him, must worship him in Spirit; and of this spiritual
worship we may also read, Phil. 3.3. Or will you hear the counsel of an Angel
from Heaven, you have it, Rev. 19.10. Worship God, yea, this is the practice of
the Angels, the work they do, and the work that the Angels, and gloryfied
Saints shall do through all Eternity, Heb. 1.6. But what are Testimonies in so
plain a case? few deny it, though few practice it as they ought, we might bring
you examples from the beginning of the World to this day, of the godly in all
Ages that have thus worshipped, thus served God, though many in all Ages, the
more is the pity, have given that to the Devil, which is due to God alone; many
have sacrificed to Devils, and worshipped and served the Creature more than the
Creator blessed for ever, Romans 1.25. To prove that it is so, now, I need not
instance in the Indians, that know no better, nor in the Papists that worship
stocks and stones, and the works of their own hands, which iS forbidden, Exodus
20.5.6. Isa. 2.8. And swear by God and our Lady, as the Israelites did by God
and Malchon, and some other Mediators with Christ, but how many may we find
serve the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; though they covenanted to fight
against them in their Baptism: if the Devil bid them sweaty they will swear, if
he bid them be drunk, they will be drunk; or if he bid them lie, or steal, or
decieve, they will obey; let God say what he will to the contrary: Yea, though
he set them upon the hardest, difficultest, dangerous work they will do it,
though they venture life and limb in his service; but let them at the end brag
of their wages, that so love the work, but as with Paul, Acts 24.14. In the way
which men call Heresy, so worship the God of your Fathers.

2. Motive, Thou should serve God, for he is the best Masters; yea, there is
no other that deserves thy best service but him: The tongue of Men, nor Angels
cannot express the excellency that is in God, our Cockle shells cannot
comprehend this Ocean; what qualifications can thou desire in a Master? that
are not to be found in God as the abstract? for all the excellency that is to
be found among the Creatures, is but as a drop of this Ocean, a ray of this
Sun, and a spark of this fire. Would thou have one that is able to defend
thee, and see that thou art not wronged? Here is Omnipotency it self, if he set
thee on work he can bear thee out. The Devil may shake his chain, and wicked
Men may gnash their teeth at thee, hurt thee they cannot, all the powers of
darkness can do thee no wrong. The Devil could not touch one of Jobs cattle
without Commission sealed in Heaven; and if thou faithfully serve him, he will
never grant any Commission, but what shall be for thy good, Romans 8.28. He is El
Shaddai, a God able to destroy, or remove all rubs out of his way: But no other
Master can defend thee against him, Or would thou have a merciful, loving, or
tender hearted Master? the World cannot afford thee such another; never was
there indulgent Father, or tender hearted Mother, more careful over their only
child, than God is over all his servants, Isa. 49.15. Can a Woman forget her
sucking child, that she shall not have compassion on the Son of her Womb? yea,
they may forget, yet will I not forget thee says the Lord. Behold I have
engraven thee upon the palms of my hand thy walls are continually before me.
Never was Goldsmith more careful of his gold, that it shall not be in the
Furnace longer than need is, than God is of his People, they shall be no longer
in the Furnace of affliction, then necessity requires, till their dross is
consumed, and they refined: Or would thou serve a wise Master? One able to
direct thee and instruct thee in thy work? One able to counsel thee what to do,
and what to forbear? Here is one that is Wisdom it self, yea the Fountain of
Wisdom. The foolishness of God says the Apostle is wiser than the wisdom of
Man. 1 Cor. 1.25. That is that which in the eyes of the World is foolishness,
he can over wit, and over work all his Enemies, and thou can not be in such a
strait, but he can help thee, nor in so much danger but he can deliver thee, as
he did Israel at the Red Sea; Daniel in the Lions Den, the three Children out
of the fiery Furnace, Jonah out of the Whales belly, and Peter out of Prison.
Or would thou serve a Master that is faithful and just, that will make good
his word, and fulfill his promise? God is such a one, he is more faithful than
the Sun and Moon in their courses, Has he said it, and shall he not do it,
has he spoken it, and shall he not bring it to pass? Heaven and Earth shall
fail, before one tittle of his word shall fail, till all be fulfilled. The
experience of five Thousand years cannot produce one example when God has
falsified his word. Or would thou serve some honorable Person, God has the
highest titles of honor, he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and the Ruler
of Princes, he is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, the Castles of a thousand hills
are his, yea, all the Beasts of the Forests, all Nations to him are but as a
drop of a Bucket, or the small dust of the Balance. Never fear then, he is
able to pay thee thy wages. David delighted more in being his servant, than in
being King of Israel, never any lost by his service; would thou serve one
that is loving and kind? why he is love it self, see one act of his love, John
3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believed in him should not dye, but have everlasting life. See the
love of the Father in giving, and the love of the Son in dying; and would
thou serve a patient Master? He is infinite in Patience, if thy heart be right,
he will bear with much: Now what Master in the World will thou compare to him?
if none, why wilt not serve him, and yet alas, most men serve the Devil his
sworn Enemy: one of these two thou must, thou do serve, for these are the two
grand Commanders, and the one or the other all Men obey. The Devil is thy sworn
Enemy, and seeks thy Soul to destroy it, 1 Pet. 5.8. He offers much indeed, but
cannot pay thee, he has nothing of his own, but his vicious qualities; what he
shows thee is but what he baits his hook with, or with the Fowler his snares,
not to feed thee, but to entrap thee; he hunts for thy Soul like a blood hound,
and nothing will serve him but thy dishonor. The World also will deceive thee,
and promise pleasure, and pay pain, it will never pay thee thy wages, and wilt
forsake such a Master as God is, and commit thy self to such known cheats?
Heaven and Earth may stand amazed at thy folly: well, remember thy wages they
will give thee.

3. Motive, As he is the best Master, so he sets his servants about the best
work, when the Devil sets his about the basest drugery: A wise servant before
he is hired, would know his work, that he may demand answerable wages: Now the
work which God sets his servants upon is reasonable, and easy, and pleasant,
and delightful, it is the works of Piety and Charity that he requires, to love
God above all, and our Neighbors as our selves: These are the two great
commands, and upon these hang all the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 22.37. etc.
Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Rom 13.10. And is not this a pleasant and
delightful duty, and is it not reasonable that we should love God our great
Benefactor, in whom we live, and move, and have our being; and our Brethren
that are of the same flesh and blood: To believe in him also is our duty, and
is it not reasonable when we can never prove that ever he deceived any. To
praise him also is our work, this is an Angelical work, fit for Heaven, and
Heaven-born Souls, and will be the work of Eternity, where Saints and Angels
shall make up one quire, to Trumpet out the praises of God: To hold communion
with him, this is a Christians happiness here, and to converse with him in
Glory is Heaven it self. It Is no wonder then that the Service of God is called
perfect Freedom, and his Servants are called his Freemen, 1 Cor. 7.21. It Is no
wonder that Christ tells us, his Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light, Mat.
11.30. for all those that feel it find it so, through Divine Assistance. I
know, to a Carnal Heart, and unsanctified Soul it appears otherwise; but it is
the Galls, Sores, and Putrified Corruption of Nature that makes it so; the
easiest Yoke upon a galled Neck seems uneasy: Learn but this one Lesson, get
but this one Qualification, to love God above all, and all the rest will prove
easy; Love makes Labor light: the Love of Christ constrained the Apostle
Paul, and made him willing, not only to be bound, but to dye for Christ; then
Prayer would be no difficult Duty, for who would not willingly go to him he
Loves, and pour out his requests into his Bosom? when he knows he shall have a
supply, and has such promises as those; ask, and you shall have; seek, and you
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you, Psalm. 50.15. Praise also then
will be a delightful Duty; how apt are we to Commend those we Love, and speak
well of them? Hence it is, that the Saints and Angels in Heaven are not weary
of this work, even to Eternity; Communion with God is no toylful, but
delightful Duty, for Union, and Communion with God is the Souls Happiness; nay,
it is here a Heaven upon Earth, and will be their Heaven for ever, which is
sweet here, though much interrupted; what will it be then when we enjoy him
Face to Face, and see him as he is? here it fills the Heart full of such Joy,
as no Stranger shall ever meddle with, Prove. 14.10. I know the world brags of
their pleasures in the Devils Service, and are afraid to be Christians for fear
of losing them, but this is but one of the Devils Lime-twigs, in which he
fetters them, and one of the deceits of the Father of Lies: a true Christian
finds by Experience more true Joy, more ravishing delight in one days Communion
with Christ, than ever he did in the Service of sin; for, in the midst of
laughter the sinners heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
Heaviness. But a Believer may eat his Meat with Joy, and drink his Wine with a
merry Heart, for God accepts his Work, Eccl. 9.7. And with joy they can draw
waters out of these Wells of Salvation, Isa. 12.3. Yea, shout for joy if he be
of an upright Heart, Psalm. 32.11. There is none in the world that has more true
Cause of Joy than they have; here they are under the Divine Protection of God,
and are sure to want nothing that is good; and when this Earthly Tabernacle
shall be dissolved, they have a Kingdom prepared for them. But what is the
Devils work which he imploys his Servants about? It Is the basest drudgery, the
most servile Slavery, the most sordid, unreasonable, Dangerous work in the
world; he sets them to hate God, who is the chiefest good, to hold up weapons
of defiance against him, from whom they have their Life and Breath, and Being;
to Blaspheme his Name, abuse his Creatures, break his Commandments, Persecute
his Children, both by Hand and Tongue; pluck the Stars out of his Right Hand,
the Signet of his Finger, the Apple of his Eye, his Jewels, those whom his Soul
Loves; yea, to de-throne him, and set up the Devil in his place; yea, he makes
them so mad upon it, that they will venture Life and Limb in the Prosecution;
yea, Liberty and Estate, and Ruin their own Souls, and as many more as they
are able; and will not be persuaded by Ministers, Parents, or their Godly
Friends, from such Courses; when the Devil enters into these Swine, they run
headlong till they Ruin themselves.

4. Motive. Thou should serve the Lord, because he best deserves thy Service;
he has done more for thee than all the World besides, and that which all the
World cannot do. It was he that Created thee, and gave thee a Being when thou
wast nothing. It was not long since there was nothing heard of thee, and God
had no need of thee; he was Infinite in his Perfection, and Glory before thou
wast, and thou have added nothing to his Happiness, and wilt not own him for
thy Creator? Yea, he has made thee a Rational Creature, when he might have
made thee a bruit Beast; he made thee capable of Communion with himself, yea,
in his own Image, when he might have made thee a Dog, or Toad, or Serpent, or
the most despicable Worm that crawls under thy Feet: what Excellent Faculties
has he bestowed upon thee? As Undestranding, Will, Affections, Memory,
Conscience, and such like. Yea, he has made thee Little lower than the Angels,
Psalm. 8.4,5. Thou wast the Clay, and he was the Potter; he might have made thee
a Vessel of dishonor, and shall the thing formed say to him that formed it,
why have thou made me thus? Not only so, but he has given thee thy Limbs, and
thy Senses, when thou might have been Blind or Lame, or Deaf or Dumb; and is
not this a Mercy, thou have the use of Reason, when others run raging in the
street, Mad, Frantic, or Lunatic? Yea, it is he that maintains thee at his own
Cost and Charges; it is his Corn, and his Wine that feeds thee; his Wool, and
his Flax that Clothes thee; it is his Silver, and his Gold that inriches thee;
all is his, and all is his free-gift; thou deservest not the Crumbs that fall
under thy Table; and is all this nothing? Hos. 2.5. etc. Yea, had thou these
things of thy own, they could do thee no good, without his Blessing; Food could
not nourish, nor Clothes keep thee warm; he gives thee Peace, when thou
might have been in bloody War; Health, when thou mighest have been on thy
sick Bed; and Plenty when thou mighest have been in pinching want; and is all
this nothing? Why now does he do this for thee, but that thou might Serve
him? Have thou now a better Friend, or greater Benefactor to bestow thy Service
upon? Can the Devil, or the World, or thy Friends, or thy Wealth do thus for
thee? I know they cannot; why then are they preferred before him? Nay, this is
not all; when thou had Revolted from God, and sold thy self a Slave to Satan;
when thou wast in thy Blood, and no Eye pityed thee; when thou could not help
thy self, and wast unworthy to be helped; he sent his own Son to Redeem thee out
of thy Slavery, to suffer what was due for thy sins, even the pains of Hell,
and the cursed Death upon the Cross, and that when thou wast his Enemy, and all
to free thee from the guilt and filth of sin, and from the punishment due for
sin, from the Curse of the Law, the wrath of God, the Slavery of Satan, and
from everlasting damnation; and is all this nothing? Yea, all this was done
that thou might Serve him in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of thy
Life, Luke 1.75. Nay, further, he bestows upon thee many helps and
furtherances; he gives thee his Word, his Ordinance, his Sacraments, his
Ministers, the motions of his Spirit, the checks of thine own Conscience, and
the Example of his People; Promises, Threatenings, Mercies, Judgments, and all
to this End; and yet does he not deserve thee? Has the Devil, or the World
done more for thee than he has? Why then will thou serve them? Did they Create
thee, or art thou theirs by right of Redemption? Do they preserve, or maintain
thee? Do they Feed, or Cloth thee? Or pay thee Wages? No, no, all thy Friends
in the World, nor all the Angels in Heaven could not satisfy for our sin; did
they Love thee better than he that laid down his Life for thee? Or, will they
make better Provision for thee than God will? Or pay thee better Wages? Then
Serve them and spare not; but deceive not thy self, they cannot do it; what
can want if thou be God's Servant? He is every way furnished to help thee;
art thou ten thousand Talents indebted, and can not pay a farthing? Christ
will be thy Surety, and discharge thy debt; have thou Scarlet sins lying upon
thy Conscience? Here is Blood to wash them away, it is he, and he alone that can
forgive sins. Here is the Bread of Life to feed thee, and the Water of Life to
refresh thee, the Spiritual Manna, fit Food for thy Soul; the true Nectar and
Ambrosia: he that eats of this, shall never Hunger; and he that drinks of this,
shall never Thirst. Here is Rich Robes to Cloth thee, and Eye salve to make
thee see; and Gold tried in the Fire, to make thee Rich, Rev. 3.17,18. Here are
Graces as Jewels to adorn thee, the Wedding Garment to make thee a welcome
Guest; he is, Mecor Majim Chajim, A Fountain of Living Water, Jer. 2.13. Tzur
gnolanim, a Rock of Ages, Isa. 26.4. All the water of Consolation is in this
Sea, all the Light is in this Sun, and all Comfort in this God; Can find such
another Master that has done, and will do for thee, as he has, and will do?
the Devil and the World will deceive thee, if they promise to do it.

5. Motive. Thou should serve God, for as he has the best work, so he gives
the best Wages, and Servants usually seek for such Masters; something he gives
in hand, as earnest of the Bargain, and encouragement in the work; and reserves
most to the Years end, when he will plenteously recompense all thy pains, and
remove all cause of repining; in hand he gives his Servants his Spirit, this is
the mark he knows them by, those that have not the Spirit of God are none of
his, Romans 8.9. This is called, the Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15. Ye have
received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father; it is called the
earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts; this is called the Comforter, John 15.27.
and it is given to instruct us, and to lead us into all Truth, John 18.13. And
doubtless those cannot want Comfort that have such a Comforter, they cannot
lose their way, that have such a Guide; he it is that dictates their Prayers
for them, for they know not what to ask; yea, God for the Comfort and
Consolation of his Servants here in the World, gives them an Interest in the
Promises Recorded in the Word of God, which are more worth than the World; the
greatest King on Earth cannot make and perform such Promises to his greatest
Favorite, they are well called great and precious Promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. For
great things are promised in them that believe, that apprehends an interest in
them, may live upon his faith, and his hope in the absence of all Creature
enjoyments; these are his Fathers Legacy: it is true, Believers have but little
in hand, yet much in a Promise; but little in Possession, yet much in
Reversion; they have Heaven and Earth in a Promise; here they have a Promise
they shall not lack, but at Death they shall receive their Inheritance; yea,
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither is entered into the heart of Man, to
conceive what God has provided for those that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. Here they
have a Promise, and God has put his hand to it, they shall not want
protection, nor provision, God has promised he will never leave them nor
forsake them, Heb. 13.5. And if God be for us, who can be against us, yea, that
they shall want nothing that is good, Psalm. 34.9. The young Lions lack and
suffer hunger, but those that fear the Lord shall want no good thing. Psalm.
84.11. The Lord is a Sun and a Shield, he gives Grace and Glory; and no good
thing will he withold from them that live uprightly: If we have sincere hearts,
if wealth be good for us, we shall have it; and if poverty be good, why should
we not be content? sometimes Physic is as necessary as food. They have a
Promise of Deliverance out of Trouble, Many are the Troubles of the Righteous,
but the Lord delivers them out of all, Psalm. 34.19. and 50.15. Take one place
for all; Romans 8.28. All things shall work together for good to those that love
God. What matter then is it what our sufferings are, when we are sure we shall
get by them? God that brought Light out of Darkness, and Order out of
Confusion, can work Good to us out of Evil, there is no Condition a servant of
God can be in, but in the Scripture he may find Comfort, or Company, or both;
yea, God bestows his graces upon his servants, which are better than the most
Orient Pearls, or costly Jewels; these they are adorned with, and no other did
ever wear them: they have the rich Robes of Christ's Righteousness, the Garments
of Holiness, this is Gods Livery, and all his servants wear it; yea, he adopts
them, and makes them not only his servants, but his children, 1 John 12.2 2
Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father to you, and you shall be my Sons and Daughters,
says the Lord Almighty, he makes them not only Sons, but Heirs, Heirs of God,
and joint Heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. Gives them the Wedding Garment, Mat.
22.12. Yea, marries them to his Son, Cant. 6.3. Thus we see there is good wages
if there were no more, but they have much more in Reversion, a Kingdom, a
Kingdom of glory, they shall enter into their Masters joy, Mat. 25.24. Yea,
into a Kingdom prepared for them, from the foundation of the World; yea, into
life eternal, Mat. 25.34.46. See now if thou can meet with a Master that
gives better wages, the Devil indeed promises much, but performs little; all
this says he will I give thee, when he can give just nothing: but suppose he
had the World at his dispose, what good would it do thee? it cannot give
content, and make thee happy. Indeed there was one dreamed of happiness in a
prosperous Estate, but when he wak't it was but a Dream, Luke 12.16. etc.
Content grows not in the Worlds Garden, these outward things bear no proportion
to an immortal Soul; they are of too base a birth and breeding to give it
content, but if it could satisfy at present, what will thou do at Death? then
they must down to the Chambers of Death, to Hell it self, there to remain for
ever and ever; this is the Devils wages which he will certainly give all those
that serve him.

6. Motive, To serve God in the sincerity of our Hearts, is the only way to
true happiness; and to serve any other Master but him, or to serve him
Superstitiously, or Hypocritically, is the certain way to Ruin and
Destruction; all those that have served God in sincerity, not one of them have
miscarried; and of all other, there is not one that ever attained Heaven and
Happiness; the way of Holiness is the only Road to true Happiness; and how can
the end be attained, if the means be not used? it is Godliness that has the
Promise of this Life and that to come; Happiness is that which all men seek,
but few men find, because few sought it in a way of Holiness.

The Covetuous man thinks if he could get Riches, he should attain Happiness;
and this makes him Moil and Toil, and Cark and Care; yea, make himself
miserable, that he may be happy; and yet never attains so much as content: and
wounds his Conscience to get an Estate, and is but like a Sumpter Horse that
goes laden all the day with as much Treasure as he can carry, and at night
stripped of all, and turned into a dirty stable, with his galled back; so after
Death they shall be turned into Hell with their galled Consciences.

The Voluptuous man that places his happiness in pleasure, thinks if he can
but obtain his desire, he shall be happy; but how little satisfaction can he
find here? all his pleasure ends in a snuff, and the end of his Mirth is
Sadness; and all this while he deprives himself of true pleasure.

The Ambitious man thinks to ascend the steps of Honor, is to attain Happiness;
when alas this is the emptiest of all Bubbles, and how often do we see men break
their necks from the top of Promotion?

These men build the Fabric of their Hopes and Happiness upon a Sandy
foundation; where one dashing shower, or stormy tempest throws down their
Babel: but a Christian lays a sure foundation in Holiness, and in the fear and
service of God; they build upon the Rock which never fails them, they seek
Happiness in Gods way, Psalm. 128.1. Blessed is every one that serves the Lord,
and walks in his way; not every one that is Rich or Honorable, this is the
Worlds language, and not Gods; Deuteronomy. 7.14. If thou walk in his way, thou shall
be blessed above all People; that is, if thou serve him according to his will,
Psalm. 33.12. Blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord; that is, they chose
God for their God, and serve him as God, Mat. 5.3,4. etc. We may see who it be
that in Christ's account are blessed; not those that are Rich and Potent,
Honorable, or Mighty, but the poor in Spirit, those that mourn for their sins,
the Meek, the Merciful, the Pure in heart, those that hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, those that are reviled and persecuted for righteousness sake,
etc. that is, those that live holily toward God, and righteously toward Men,
that make the word of God, the rule of their Lives; that servant that did his
Masters will in sincerity, shall be blessed by him at his coming, Mat. 24.46.
He that in his Masters abscence improved his Talents well, shall be made Ruler
over much; and enter into his Masters joy, Mat. 25.21. He that refreshed the
People of God according to the Will and Covenant of God, shall receive a
Kingdom prepared for him by God, Mat. 25.34.46. Read Deuteronomy. 28. through out, And
see there the Promises made to the obedient; and the Curses denounced against
the disobedient, and see which are in the most hopeful way to happiness; yet
there are many that are apt to say with those, Job. 21.15. Who is the Almighty
that we should serve him, or what profit is it to pray unto him? or as Pharaoh
in the like words, Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord that I should obey him? I know
not the Lord, neither will I obey him: but the Lord after made himself known in
his destruction. There are many that have business they tell us to follow, and
cannot live by the Scriptures, or hearing Sermons, neither have they time to
pray in their Families, etc. But let these prayerless Families beware of the
Curse, Jer. 10.25. Psalm. 79.6. Have any greater business to do than to serve
thy God, and secure thy Soul? as thou make the world thy business, so it is
like to be thy Portion; but it will leave thee short of happiness: the best of
Saints, and the wisest of Men, have taken another course, and have sailed in a
course of Holiness, to the Port of Happiness; for no other Wind blows thither.
Enoch walked with God, and God took him. Genesis 5.24. That is, he walked in the
ways of God and obeyed the command of God: the like we read of Noah, He was
perfect in his Generation, and walked with God, Genesis 6.9. This course of life,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob followed. David also, and Hezekiah, Johosophat and
Josiah, and many more; it is said of these they served God with a perfect heart.
Job, was a just man and one that feared God, Job 1.8. So was good Obadiah, 1
King. 18.3. thus Daniel and his fellows, Dan. 3.17. and 6.2. thus Paul,
Cornelius, Zachary, and Elizabeth, Act. 27.23. and 10.22. Luke 1.6. and thus
was Christ himself, no guile was found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22. All these
walked in the way of Holiness to Heaven, Read a List of more, Heb. 11. But
there is no word of encouragement to any other to expect Heaven; nay, God tells
us in plain words, they shall never come there; 1 Cor. 6.9,10. Neither is there
any one example of any that lived and dyed in their sinful course, that ever
was saved: what may we gather hence? but this, if ever you would attain to true
happiness, serve God with a sincere heart.

7. Motive, Thou should serve the Lord, because as he is best able to reward
thee for thy obedience, and pay thee for thy work; so is he best able to punish
thee for thy disobedience: For as all his promises are yea and a men, faithful
and true to his People, so are his threatenings to his Enemies: thou art not at
liberty to choose thy own Master, who thou will serve, thou art engaged to him,
and serve him thou must or do worse; thou art his by right of Creation, for
whose is the Pot but the Potters? And by right of Redemption he paid a price
for thee, and bought thee dear: So also by Covenant right, thou have devoted
thy self to his service, and taken Press money to fight his Battles, and if thou
revolt, he will avenge the quarrel of his Covenant against thee: Hence it is,
thou may well fear his wrath, and expect his judgments, if thou perfidiously
betrayest thy trust, and revoltest to the Enemy. Christ himself bids thee not
to fear those that can kill the Body and can do no more, but fear him that can
cast Body and Soul into Hell, Luke 12.5. If he be not glorified by thee, he
will be glorified upon thee; if he have not the glory of thy Salvation, he will
have the glory of thy Destruction, Luke 19.27. Those mine Enemies that would
not that I should reign over them, bring them and slay them before my face: God
takes those for his Enemies that will not be ruled by him, and will prove a
sore Enemy to them: And did thou know what it is to be an Enemy unto God, and
what it is to have God to be an Enemy unto thee, it would send thee trembling
to thy grave: it is he that has the keys of life and death at his girdle; He
kills and he makes alive, he brings to the gates of death and back again, and
there is none that can deliver out of his hand: He need not muster an Army
against thee, to destroy thee, the least Fly, or Gnat, or Hair may end thy
life, if it have a Commission from God: thou art but a Worm, if he tread upon
thee, he leaves the dead behind him; if he withhold thy breath thou returnest
to the dust, for thou have no more breath than what he puts into thee; how then
can thou grapple with the Almighty? or contend with God? were thy flesh of
Brass, and thy Sinnews of Iron, were thy foundations as the Earth, or as the
Pillars of Heaven, thou were yet too weak: who ever hardened himself against God
and prospered? whilst thou remainest his Enemy, well may thou fear his heavy
hand, there is no judgment that ever thou read threatened, or ever executed
upon sinful wretch, that thou can be secure from; Thou know not but the
Waters may drown thee, as they did the old World, or as the Red Sea did
Pharaoh, or fire from Heaven may consume thee as it did Sodom and Gomorrah; and
also Nadab and Abihu, and the two Captains and their Fifties at the prayer of
Elijah; thou know not but the Plagues which fell upon Egypt may fall upon
thee and consume thee, or that thy life may be ended by the Sword, the Famine,
or the Pestilence: thou know not but an Angel may smite thee as Herod, and
thou may be devoured with Worms; or that the Earth may open and swallow the
quick, as it did Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: thou know not but thou may be
struck dead for the next lie thou tellest, as Ananias and Saphirah were; or
whether Bears may not devour thee, as they did those Children that mocked the
Prophet; or whether thou may not be stricken with Leprosy as Gehazy; or thy
house may not fall upon thy head as upon Jobs Children. In a word, whatever a
man destitute of Grace and Divine Protection may be brought to suffer, thou
have no assurance but it may be thy Portion, Read Deuteronomy. 28.15. etc. Where thou
may see thy own miserable condition; but this is not all, those spiritual
judgments which are worse than these are seized upon thee: Blindness of Mind,
Hardness of Heart, Searedness of Conscience, etc. And eternal judgments dog
thee at the heels, and will certainly seize upon thee, except Repentance
prevent it; as soon as Death makes a separation between Soul and Body: never
any Unregenerate, Unrepenting, Unrighteouss, or Unclean Person shall ever go to
Heaven, John 3.7. Luke 13.3. 1 Cor. 6.9,10. Rev. 21.13. and there is no middle
place, for the Scripture owns no Purgatory, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be
turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God. See the doom of the
wicked servant, Mat, 24. last. He was cut in pieces, and his Portion was
appointed with the Hypocrites: and that unprofitable Servant that improved not
his Talent, Mat. 25.30. He was bound hand and foot, and cast into utter
darkness; and all the wicked, ungracious servants that improve not their
Talents as God appointed shall then be bid; Depart ye wicked into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41.48. This is Gods
judgments to his Enemies, and this is the Devils wages to his friends and
servants; who then would have such an Enemy, or such a Master? learn directions
to serve God, as follows in those duties mentioned.

CHAP. II. Of Duties in General.
HAving in the foregoing Treatise, showed you the Excellency, Necessity and
Benefits of an Holy Life; and the deadly danger of all unholy Course; I hope
many of you are resolved to alter that course of life: you have too long
already lived in; and will begin to question what shall we do to be saved? To
this end in this part, I shall point out some necessary duties, which every
Christian is bound to perform, and lay down some directions by them for the
right performance of them.

Now my desire is, that you would resolve to practice what out of Gods word I
shall prove to be your duty; otherwise to what end shall I write them, or you
read them: what say say you, will you do it, or will you not? it is not a slight
business, neither will a slight resolution serve your turn; you will meet with
many Racks in the way, and therefore had need to be well grounded; with many
storms of temptations, and therefore had need to lay a good foundation; you
have spent too much time already in the service of Sin and Satan, and it is pity
you should any longer serve so bad a Master: and now God gives you a call unto
his service; methinks it should be no hard question to resolve, neither need
you any great time to consider, whether God or the Devil be the best Master?
whether Holiness or Sin be the better work? whether Heaven or Hell be the
better wages? whether the Transitory Pleasures of Sin, or the endless joys of
Heaven be more desirable? have thou need of much time to consider of this
business? if thou yet stand at a stay, let me put in something that may turn the
Scales: consider to whom thou art most engaged, to God or Satan? art not thou
Gods by right of Creation? he made thee of nothing, and whose is the Pot, but
the Potmakers? he made thee a Rational Creature, when he might have made thee a
Brute Beast; a Toad or a Serpent, or the most despicable Worm that crawls under
thy feet, and is it not he that maintains thee at his own Cost and Charges?
thou have not Food to eat, or Drink to drink, or Clothes to put on, but what he
gives thee; neither Health nor Strength, Limbs nor Senses, Life nor Breath, but
from him; it is his Corn and his Wine, that feeds thee, it is his Wool and his
Flax that clothes thee; it is his Silver and his Gold that makes thee Rich, Hos.
2.5. And is it yet a Question, who should be thy Master? Have any better
Friend, or greater Benefactor? Nay, further; thou art his also by right of
Redemption; when thou soldest thy self to be a Slave to Satan, did not he buy
thee by his precious Blood, out of that Hellish Slavery? Did not he lose his
Life for thy Ransom? Did not he lay down his Life to free thee from the guilt
of sin, and from the filth of sin, and from the punishment due for sin, from
the wrath of God, the Curse of the Law, the Slavery of Satan, and from
everlasting damnation? and have thou yet a better Friend to trust to? The work
God sets thee about is wages as well as work; it is equal, it is reasonable, it is
honorable; his Yoke is easy, and his burden light: The wages also differs;
the one gives everlasting Happiness, the other endless misery: and can not
yet determine who shall be thy Master? Consider then, what God minds in these
his Commands; is it his own benefit, or thine? What profit is he like to have
by thy Obedience? Or what damage by thy Disobedience? Alas! thou art so far
below him, thou can neither do him good or hurt: All the benefit or damage
redounds to thy own Soul. Consider also, what the Devil minds; doubtless, thy
Ruin: He goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet.
5.8. And art not yet determined who shall be thy Master? Consider then, whether
ever thou knew one Man that ever was made Happy by following a sinful Course
of Life: Or ever thou knew one Man made miserable by God's Service, or an
Holy Course of Life. And now, if thou have reason, make use of it; and I doubt
not, if thou would be brought to consideration, thou would soon resolve. I
shall at present take it for granted, and shall proceed; first, to give you
some general Directions to be observed in all duties; and then descend to some
particular duties unto God, and give Directions for these also: the general are
these that follow.

1. Direction. In all the Duties thou performest to God or Man, see that thou
have a Divine warrant for it out of the Word of God; that which he Commands, is
our Duty; and what he forbids, is our sin if we do it; where there is no Law,
there is no Transgression; and where it is no Commanded Duty, there thou can
expect no Blessing; yet many Men are apt to invent ways for God's Worship, as
if the Scripture were difficult; and, with the Pharisees, Teach for Doctrines,
the Commandments of Men; they set up their Posts by God's Post, and their Dagon
by God's Ark, but it will never stand; they take much pains, and be at much
cost in the Worship of their own devising, but they will lose their Labor; and
when they come for their Reward, God will ask them, who required these things
at their hands? When therefore thou art pressed unto a Duty, enquire whether God
Command it, or at least, whether it be consonant to his Word, if not, reject
it; we must not Worship God after Men's invention, or Humane Traditions,
contrary to his revealed Will. God has left us work enough to do, we need not
invent more. We read indeed of some Idolaters that fained themselves gods, and
then patcht up a kind of Idolatrous Worship to these gods; thus Baals Priests
cut and wounded themselves till the blood gushed out, not much unlike to our
Popish whippings: Some also poured out Drink Offerings to the Queen of Heaven,
and baked Cakes for her, Jer. 44.17. Yea, some of them Offered their Children
to Molech, and made them pass through the Fire; yet all this Labor was lost,
yea, worse than lost, it became their sin, because it was to a strange god. In
like manner, many Worship the true God in a false manner, by giving him such
Worship he never Commanded, neither ever came it into his mind. But the
Scripture is a sufficient Rule for Worship, where all the material parts of
Worship are prescribed; only some necessary Circumstances are left to Humane
prudence to determine, as the Time, and Place, and other such like, which may
be altered according to the present occasion; yet we read in Scripture of
Voluntary Humility, and Worshipping of Angels, but God does not allow of it,
Col. 2.18. The Church of Rome does therefore exceedingly err in thrusting upon
us those new invented, needless Ceremonies, such as God never made, neither
ever gave power to Man to intrude into his worship; yea, also they err in
adding many things as Fundamentals, which are errors of their own devising,
such as their five added Sacraments, their private Mass, Communicating in our
kind, propitiatory Sacrifice for the Sick and dead, Prayers to Saints departed,
and to Angels, Images, Crucifixes, Popes Pardons, Indulgences, Pilgrimages, and
many more; but these wanting Authority, are not to be heeded by us; yea,
amongst us also we have too many Popish Superstitions, received by Traditions,
which God has never warranted, and therefore we ought not to observe them. But
in all thy Duties, whether it be an Act of Divine worship, or any Duty to thy
Neighbor, search the Scriptures, if it be not according to this Rule, own it
not: See what need Christians have of knowledge to know what is sin, and what
is Duty; what is Commanded, and what forbidden.

2. Direct. When thou know thy Duty, and have a Divine Command for it, delay
not, but set upon it; many undo themselves by delays, they think to do that
hereafter, which they never Live to do; practice is the Life of all. Set upon
the performance of those Duties which God requires at thy Hands; take them as
they lie, and do not pick and choose. It Is the practice of some Men, and those
of no small note, for Religion, to pick and choose their Duties; this they will
do, and this they will not do; they scum off the Fat and sweet of Duty, and
leave the difficult, dangerous, costly part of Duty undone; but this is not
sufficient, neither will it evidence any one to be a Christian indeed: Many,
especially great ones, run on with this mistake; for a little Grace makes a
great show in a great Man, yea, oft-times the show is taken for the Substance;
many will perform such Duties as are in Credit in the world, and like to cost
them but a little, which yet refuse self-denying, difficult or dangerous
Duties. They will hear, and read, and confer, and, perhaps, pray in their
Families, and some other such like External parts of worship; and if God will
be pleased with these, and Heaven will be had upon such terms, they will have
it: but if he require self denial duties, or those which cross their own
Interest, if they must take up the Cross and follow him, and deny themselves,
hate and forsake Father or Mother, Wife or Children, Lands or Livings, Pleasure
or Honor, Liberty or Life, for his sake; they will not buy Heaven at so dear a
rate. But God is resolved he will abate nothing, and they are resolved they
will bid no more; and so they part. But has not the same God Commanded the one
as well as the other? And has he not wisdom enough to know which is the best,
and nearest way to Heaven? Or would he willingly torment his Creatures, and put
his Servants to unnecessary Troubles? Can these Men think to find out a nearer
way to Heaven than God has prescribed? Or that they shall ever come there
without his knowledge, without the Qualifications he requires. Surely they are
much mistaken; yet how ordinary is it even for Professors themselves to study
Arguments for sin, and against duty, when the one suits with their Carnal
Interest, and the other crosses it. But Christians that have taken Christ upon
his own terms, and are delivered from the power of sin and Satan, think they
can never do enough for Christ. They are always questioning, what shall I do
for him, that has done so much for me? What shall I render to the Lord for all
his benefits? Psalm. 118.12. It Is the very end why we are delivered from our
Enemies, to serve God in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of our Lives,
Luke 1.74,75. It Is the mark of those that Love God, to keep his Commandments,
John 14.15. When others perform duties only in Subserviency to their own Carnal
Interests, and therefore only own that part and duty that suits with their
designs, as Jehu, in his Reformation of Idolatry, and set up their Staff, and
say, hitherto will I go, and no further; then a godly Man that makes the
enjoyment of God his ultimate end and aim, will, like Daniel to the Lions Den,
or the three Children to the Fiery Furnace, before they will either neglect
known duties, or commit known sins: Others are forward in the cheap part, but
backward in the costly part of duty; and the Devil might also buy their
Profession it self out of their Hands; many that will hear, and read, and pray,
because it costs them little, yet will hardly be persuaded to be Charitable to
the Poor, and Liberal to Pious Uses, because it is costly; or to forgive
Injuries, love Enemies, make Restitution of ill gotten Goods; venture their
Estates, Lives, or Liberty, when the Cause of God requires it; then they cry
out, with Naaman, the Lord be merciful to me in this thing: but God will abate
nothing of his price, he will have Universal Obedience, or he will own none at
all.

3. Direct. Would thou perform Duties in an acceptable manner? Then hold on
in a constant course of Duty; it is not enongh to begin well, but thou must hold
out well: The same Reason that persuaded thee to enter into such a Course of
Duty at the first, may persuade thee to hold out to the end; there is the same
ground for the one, as for the other: If it be because storms arise, Troubles
and Persecutions look thee in the Face, this might have been foreseen; thou
should have sat down first, and reckoned the Charges; Christ told thee
before, Through many Tribulations we must come to Heaven. He that is now
ashamed of Christ and his Cross of Service, the time is coming, Christ will be
ashamed of him: Thou must follow him through thick and thin; through good
Report, and evil Report, or thou art like to lose him; yea, though thou meet
Death it self in the Face. It Is not he that sets out well, but he that
continues to run well, is like to get the Prize; it is not he that gives the
Onset, but he that Fights well, is like to get the Victory: You did run w^ll,
says the Apostle, who hindered you? Gal. 5.7. So run, that you may obtain, 1
Cor. 9.24. It Is not he that begins well, but he that holds out to the end,
shall be saved, Mark 13.13. It Is he that is Faithful to the Death, that shall
receive the Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. Many Promises are made to those that
overcome, Rev. 2.11.17.26. and 3.5.12.21. There are many, that in a day of
Gospel Prosperity, cry Hosanna unto Christ; but when storms are up, then cry,
Crucify him. This Age gives too full a Testimony to this Truth. But those that
are Faithful to God will be constant in his Service, what danger soever looks
them in the Face. Many are like to Weather-Cocks, turn with every Wind; or like
a Ship without Ballast, are tossed with every Storm: But a sincere Christian is
like a Ship in the Harbor, that has a sure and steadfast Rock to Anchor upon.
Many are like the Planet Mercury, good in a good Conjunction, and bad with the
bad: Or like Proteus, that can turn themselves into any shape for Advantage;
but a true Christian gives this for his Motto, Semper idem, always the same;
the change of Times, the change of Company, the change of Religion, makes no
change in him; he knows God changes not: Poverty and Prosperity are God's
trying Times, wherein may be discovered what is in the Heart; Hazael, when a
mean Man, never thought so much evil had been in his Heart, as appeared to be
there when he was Advanced. The stony ground did not at first appear to be so
deceitful, as indeed it proved. But Holy Job was the same on the dunghill, as
on the Throne; in Adversity, as in Prosperity; he did not serve God for Riches,
nor will he forsake him in Poverty: Have thou been a Professor of Religion, and
have thou hitherto performed the duties Commanded? What madness now possesses
thee, that thou will leave his Service? What can thou object against him? Is
the Devil a better Master? Or will he set thee about better work? Or will he
give thee better wages? If Religion be not good, why did embrace it at first?
If it be, why do leave it? If thou now leave off, all thy Labor, and all the
pains that ever thou have taken will be utterly lost in reference to Salvation;
If the Righteous forsake his ways, all his Righteousness shall not be remembered
to him, in his sin he shall dye, Ezekiel. 18.24. It may be thou have gone many a
Mile to hear Sermons, spent many an Hour in Prayer, and Humiliation, and many a
Day in Fasting, and Humbling thy Soul; and will thou lose all thy Labor at the
last? Nay, will thou now dishonor that God, which time was thou seemedst to
Honor? And will thou strengthen the hand of Wicked Men in their wickedness?
And weaken the hands of poor doubting Dhristians? And sadden the Hearts of the
godly? Will thou bring the Blood of Souls upon thy own head? If not, hold on in
a course of Holy Duty, Whatever opposition thou meet with in the way; Heaven
will make amends for all the sweat and blood thou losest; and Hell will be
sower sauce to thy sweet Meat: What madness is it, to leave thy work a little
before thou should receive thy Wages?

4. Direct. Let all the Duties thou performest, either to God, or Man, proceed
from a right Principle; from a Heart sanctified by Grace, and purified by
Faith, and seasoned with Love. Make the Tree good, and his Fruit will be good;
but a Corrupt Tree brings forth evil Fruit. An evil Tree cannot bring forth
good Fruit, nor a good Tree evil Fruit. It Is impossible that a Corrupt Fountain
should send forth sweet Water, or a filthy Vessel sweet Liquor. Let the Love of
God be the strongest Motive to thy Obedience, and let this engage thy heart to
every Duty: Though thou should do the duty required, if thou do it not in
obedience to that Command, God will not own it. Whatever thou do, do all to
his Glory, and in Obedience to his Command, or thou will lose thy Reward; let
thy heart say in sincerity, Propter te propter te Domine; it is for thy sake,
and in Obedience to thy Command that I do it, and for no sinister respect
whatsoever. Hypocrites may do the thing which God Commands, but from another
ground, and for another end; they savor of the Cask, and smell of
self-Interest; they reach no higher than themselves, as water ascends no higher
than the Fountain Head. Jehu did what God Commanded in destroying Idolatry, and
rooting out Ahab's Posterity; but all this while he has a Kingdom in his Eye.
But the Love of God Oils the Chariot-Wheels of a Christians endeavors; it
carries him above, beyond, and out of himself. God tells him what he would
have done, a Christian never examines the Command by any Carnal Interest,
whether he may reap gain, or loss, Honor, or Disgrace by it; come what come
will, he resolves to do it, if God command it, whatever stands in his way,
though he meet Death it self in the Face, he will go on, God calls him; and,
with Samuel, he cries out, Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears; he knows he
that sets him on work, can bear him out. Now, all Service that arises not from
this ground, is slavish, and mercinary, and merits nothing at Gods hands but
blows; he that does the thing Commanded, and knows not of the Command, does
not Obey God in the work; and if he know that it is Commanded, and does it, yet
not because it was Commanded, but upon other account, God will not Reward this
as Obedience. The Pharisees knew that Prayer, Fasting, and Alms-deeds were
Commanded duties; yea, they performed those duties, but not because God
Commanded them, but that they might be applauded by Men; therefore Christ sends
them to men for a Reward, Mat. 6.1,2,3, etc. The performance of a duty will do
us little good, if we cannot say, with the Apostle, The Love of Christ
constrains us. Many are constant attenders upon the Ordinances, not out of
Love to God, or Obedience to his Will, or any delight they have in the duty,
but for fear of punishment, or hope of reward, either from God or Man; or for
popular Applause, or one thing or other of that Nature; and these Men, perhaps,
in the mean time have their handS upon the works, and their Hearts busied in
the Devils Service; and they look upon Gods Service as a Slavery, and glad when
they are Released. But a sincere Christian is like the Servant mentioned, Exodus
21.15. that says, I Love my Master, I will not go Free; though there were
neither Reward in Heaven, for my Obedience, nor punishment in Hell, for my
disobedience, I will do it because it is my Masters will, and I delight in the
work it self; this Love of God in the Soul, is as weights to the Clock, or as
Oil to the Jack, it sets it on work for God: love makes labor light, they do
it for Conscience sake, Romans 13.5. when others do it for gains sake. Saul obeys
for a Kingdom, and Jehu for a Crown, and when this was obtained, their
Obedience was over; they are like to Dogs, they follow their Master till they
meet with Carrion: examine now thy heart, what is the ground of thy obedience,
if it be lower than thy love to God, and desire to obey him, it is not right.

5. Direction, Let all thy duties whether to God or Man, be performed in the
manner which God requires; now Christ himself tells thee, God is a Spirit, and
he that worships him, must worship him in Spirit, John 4.24. and the Apostle
tells us, that bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable
unto all things, 1 Timothy 4.8. It Is not the Motions of the Body, nor the moveing
of the Lips, it is not Bowings, Couchings, Cringings that he is affected with,
if the Heart and Affections go not along: this is one main difference between a
sincere Christian, and an Hypocrite; both may do the same Duty, both may join
in the same Prayer, and both may hear the same Sermon, yet one may be accepted,
and the other not; nay, for the Bulk and Materiallity of the Duty, the
Hypocrite may exceed the other; the Pharisees they fasted, they gave alms,
they made long Prayer, they tythed Mint and Anice, and yet all this while lay
under the Curse, and were Enemies to God, and persecutors of Christ; their
heart was absent from their duty, and it was not right to God, they lost all
their labor in Heavens way, because they had little trading with, and little
knowledge of God, or their own hearts: Hypocrites feed upon the husks of duty,
nnd never meet with Christ in the duty; when a sincere heart has trading with
God, and sweet communion with Christ himself: if ever therefore thou would
perform pleasing Sacrifice to God, be sure to wind up thy heart and affections
unto God, and never content thy self with any duty till thou meet with Christ
in the duty; duties are appointed to be done, not for their own sakes, but to
help the Soul to mount up to Heaven upon their wings, which is the place of its
rest: in them the Soul is trading with God for Christ, and if we make not this
use of them, they will do us no good. God regards not so much the external part
of duty, though this is not to be disregarded, as he does the internal; he
looks, especially at the carriage of the heart in the duty; my Son says he,
give me thy heart, if this be present, many infirmities shall be past over; if
this be absent, though the duty be never so gloriously acted in the eye of of
the World, it is hateful in the eye of God: Cain and Abel both offered
Sacrifice, and in the matter of their Sacrifice we know not, the one exceeded
the other, yet one was accepted, and the other rejected: why what was the
matter? because the one was accompanied with Sincerity, the other with
Hypocrisy; and as God, so all good Men make it their business to look to the
heart in duty, they carry it along with them to God, and offer it at his feet,
they know the more of the heart is in the duty, the better God loves it; and
the more of the heart is in the sin, the worse it is: they look more and grieve
more at the miscarriage of the Heart in a duty, when it lies dead, or dull,
than at a mis expression, or external failing; when thou come therefore unto
God in duty, gather in thy scattered thoughts and affections, and let them meet
here as lines do in a Center, or as the Sunbeams in a burning glass; this will
make thy Prayers Hot and Fervent, which otherwise would be Cold and Remiss;
when our Spirits are raised by the Spirit of God, and the Flesh kept under in
the duty, then we are like to prevail: it is not the Multitude of loose or lone,
and cold expressions will serve turn; the Pharisees out-did many Christians in
long Prayers: but it is the Spiritual performance that God requires; cold
Petitions do but put denyals into Christ's mouth, we must perform every duty as
if it were for Life and Death, for Eternity; yea, as if it were our last duty
that ever we should perform: such performances as these are acceptable to God,
and beneficial to Man.

6. Direction, Thou must perform all thy duties as in a right Manner, so to a
right End; for the End either Makes or Marrs the Action: now the Ends are such
as God himself has appointed in his word. Now God never ordained duties, or
good works to be trusted in for Salvation; thou can never merit Heaven by thy
Prayers, or other Duties; they were not commanded for this end, indeed they are
a causa sine qua non of Salvation: for though they cannot save us, yet we shall
not be saved in the neglect of them, they are the way to the Kingdom, though
not causa regnandi, Christ has purchased to himself a peculiar People, zealous
of good works; they are of special use for us, in the way that God has
appointed us to walk in; God has appointed us to do them, and threatened us,
and will punish us if we neglect them; as I shall more fully prove when I treat
of them particularly; and that it is Gods will and command, is enough to
satisfy an honest heart, though there were neither reward, nor punishment for
the doers, or neglecters of them: this is the way to glorify God, John 15.8.
Hereby is our Heavenly Father glorified, when we bring forth much fruit. Mat.
5.18. Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. By this means also we may be
instrumental of others Conversion. Wives are commanded to carry themselves so
holily and wisely, that thereby unbelieving Husbands may be won to the Faith, 1
Pet. 3.1. and as they may do good to others, so they may bring comfort to
themselves; these breathings out of Grace, will be an Evidence to the Soul of
the love of God, when we find the Spirit helping our infirmities, teaching us
how, and for what to pray: these products of Grace will yield the Soul no
little satisfaction; yea, by this means we obtain many blessings from God: what
sweet returns of Prayer have the Saints had? how often has God answered them
in the very Petitions they have asked? Christ bids them ask and they shall
have; seek and they shall find; knock and it shall be opened to them; and how
many can experience this truth? though God promise the mercy, yet he will be
sought to for it, and what sweet and ravishing incomes of the Spirit of God
have Christians oftentimes in the Hearing, Reading, Meditating, and conferring
of the word of God; receiving of the Sacrament, and other Religious duties? and
what Satisfaction and Comfort? It Is true, we must not trust to them for
comfort, as the Cause, but as the Instrument: Hezekiah found Comfort upon his
sick Bed from the Faithful performance of God's Will. But this is not all; one
special end why God appointed them, is to bring the Soul nearer unto Christ by
them, and to this end we must use them; they are as Ladders to help us up to
Heaven, to lift us above our selves, to lay hold upon Christ; we must make use
of them, as a Traveller does of a Boat or Bridge, to help us over unto Christ;
or as he does of a Staff, or Style, to help him in his Journey; though they in
themselves have no Excellency, yet they help us over where true Treasure is;
though they be empty in themselves, and vain to those that trust in them, yet
are they enriching to the Saints that trust not to them, but use them for the
ends appointed; but many, like Foolish Lovers, woo the Maid, when they should
Court the Mistress; or like Foolish Travelers, play with the Style, or fall in
Love with the Boat, and neglect their way; they trust to their duties; but
these were never appointed to save us, or to make up Christ's Merits
Satisfactory, for this is sufficient; but that it may help us to lay hold upon
Christ's Satisfaction: Use them therefore for that end.

7. Direct. When thou have done all this, and all that thou can, say thou art
an unprofitable Servant, and have done no more; nay, not so much as was thy
duty, Luke 17.10. And take heed of resting in, or trusting to any thing but
Christ for Justification or Salvation; trust not to thy duties, for they will
deceive thee; and prove like Egyptian Reeds, not only break, but run into thy
hand; they were never appointed for this end, to trust to them; let the Papists
brag never so much of their Works of Supererogation, or of their Merits; let
the Ignorant Person brag of his good meaning, his good heart, and his good
serving God; let the Civil Man brag of his paying every Man his own, and
upright dealing; and the almost Christian of his Repenting, Returning, and
Reforming; alas! all this will deceive them, this is not the Blood of Christ,
we must have some better shelter to keep off the storms of God's fiery
Indignation: the Prophet tells us, all our Righteousness is as filthy Rags, or
a menstruous Cloth, Isa. 6.6. And will God, think you, delight in this? The
Heart, which is the Fountain, is Corrupt, and never cleansed from Original
Corruption; and can we think the streams thence issuing can be sweet? This
bitter Root sends many branches of Actual sin, which mix themselves with our
best duties, and make them abominable in the Eyes of God: These are the dead
Flies that spoil all the Ointment; we cannot do a duty, but we spoil it in the
doing: and if we could, unless we could do every duty thus to the end of our
Lives, what Advantage should we have by that one? We must Live free from evil
thoughts, vain words, and evil Actions, or we cannot stand approved by God;
nay, if we could do so, and Live free from the least Transgression for the
future, this will not discharge us of our fore-past Debt; will the constant
payment of Rent for the future, clear up the arreares that are behind? It Is a
vain thing to think to be saved by our own good works, or justified by our good
duties: Alas! they are too much defiled with sin, and self to be satisfactory
to God; and yet how ready are Men to lay hold upon any thing that will give
them the least hope, and trust to good hearts, and good duties, and good
meanings, when there is no such thing; and loath they are to come out of
themselves, confess themselves to be such Bankrupts, as indeed they are; but
the vanity of these hopes, I shall give you in the words of an able Divine, who
speaks fully to my purpose; who tells thee, that thou can not bring in
perfect Righteousness into the presence of God, and have no Christ to trust
unto; thou must desire and pray till Heaven and Earth shake; till thou have
worn thy Tongue to the stumps, endeavor as much as thou can, and others
commend thee for an exact Christian; mourn in some Wilderness till dooms day,
dig thy Grave with thy nails, weep Buckets full of hourly Tears, till thou
can weep no more; Fast and Pray, till thy skin and bones cleave together;
promise, and purpose with full resolution to be better; yea, reform thy Head,
Heart, Life, and Tongue; leave some, nay, all sin; Live like an Angel, shine
like a Sun, walk up and down the World like a distressed Pilgrim; so that all
that see thee may commend, and admire thee; dye ten thousand Deaths, lie at the
Fire back of Hell as many millions of Years as there are Grass piles upon the
Earth, Sands on the Sea shore, Stars in Heaven, or Motes in the Sun. I tell
thee, not one spark of Gods wrath will be quenched by all these Duties, for
they are not the Blood of Christ, etc. Shepherd, Sincere Convert.

CHAP. III. Directions in Hearing the Word.
HAving given you some general Directions necessary in all Duties, without
which no duty, either to God, or Man can be acceptable to God. I shall next
descend to some particulars which God requires at our hands, and lay down some
Directions, how they may be performed to God's Glory, and the Souls Advantage;
for it is not the mere doing of a duty, but the well doinging of it that attains
these ends. The first I shall mention, is that great duty of hearing God's
Word: (As for the Preaching of it, I shall give Directions among those Relative
duties; which, God willing, I intend to Treat of in it is place.) If I could
sufficiently instruct you in this, I need not speak much of the rest; for this
would be a help in all the other: for in the Word are Directions for the other
also. I need not stand to prove this is a duty, I hope few will deny it. As for
those that are above Ordinances, so as to neglect them, Time has discovered
their Folly: does not God send his Messengers to Preach, and is it not our duty
to Hear? The Apostle tells us, Necessity is laid upon him, and woe to him if he
preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.18. And is Preaching their duty, and is not
Hearing ours? Yea, does not Christ himself teach us how to Hear? And gives us
Cautions to that purpose; to take heed how we hear, And what we hear? Mark
4.24. Luke 8.18. And oftentimes calls upon those that have Ears to hear, that
they should hear; and in many Parables gives Directions about hearing, as in
the Parable of the Sower and the Seed; of the good Seed, and the Tares, and
many more. But my business is at present only by way of Motive, to put you on
to the Duty; and by way of Direction to help you in it: I shall at present use
those Motives, drawn from the benefit of the Word; for who is not moved with
Profit and Gain? But here is the greatest gain to be had, it is the ordinary
means to bring Men to Christ; I say, the ordinary means, for God is not tied to
it, Romans 10.14,17. Faith comes by hearing; to this end God sends Paul to the
Gentiles, to open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from
the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.17,18. When Christ met with Paul in the
way, Acts 9.9,10. He does not Instruct him himself, but sends him to be
Instructed by Ananias; and when he sent an Angel to Cornelius, it was not to
Preach the Gospel to him, but to direct him to Peter, Acts 10.35. It was by
Preaching that Peter Converted 3000. at one time, Acts 2.37.41. The Word is the
Seed, that being sown in a good heart, fructifies abundantly, Mat. 13.8. The
neglect of this is threatened, Mat. 10.14. Whosoever shall not receive you, nor
hear your words, etc. It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the
day of Judgment, than for them; and few are brought in that neglect this Duty:
Nay, it is of daily use to those that are Converted, to build them up; it is the
Milk that must nourish them, and make them grow; for where there is Life, there
must be Food: David, by this means became wiser than his Teachers, and had more
Understanding than the Ancient, and what condition soever a poor soul is in
here, he may find directions. Art thou in sorrow and distress? here consolation
is to be had; here the Soul by faith sucks sweetness out of the Promise: art
thou in affliction? here are Cordials to uphold a fainting heart, directions to
bear them well, and promises of a seasonable deliverance: if thou run astray,
here thou may hear a voice behind thee, saying, this is the way walk in it,
God has here set way-marks to guide thee: If thou be dead, or dull, here are
rousing considerations to quicken thee: if thy faith be weak, here it may be
strengthened: if thy Soul be sin sick, here is a Physician directed to, and a
Potion prescribed will effect the cure: If thou art troubled with Satan's
Temptations, here is Armor of proof, the Sword of the Spirit for thy defense,
with which Christ himself broke the Serpents head, Mat. 4.4,7,10. In a word,
here is that way to life pointed out unto thee, that will never fail; when all
the learning in the World, and all Humane Policy, and good Meanings and
Intentions will deceive: now that thou may hear with profit, take these
directions following.

1. Direct. If thou would hear with Profit, resolve then to break through all
the difficulties, and oppositions that lie in thy way; for doubtless there will
be many snares laid for thee, and thou will find many hindrances to this duty;
many Enemies will appear, and without a strong Resolution to go through, what
ever danger lies in the way, thou will hardly hold out. I do not mean that the
cursory hearing of the Word is thus opposed, but the practicing of it when
heard. The Devil is a sworn Enemy, and therefore expect he will do his worst.
Thou shall find, that if he can have his will, there shall never Godly Minister
be settled: Do you not see what oppositon is raised, what contention breaks out,
before a faithful Pastor can be settled; what Instruments does he use to hinder
the work? Who will neither spare Cost nor pains in the business. Or, if they be
settled, how often does he raise one or other to worry them, and make them weary
of their places, if not of their Lives? For he knows such as these Discover his
wiles, and hinder his Trade; and if he can but stop their Mouths, and drive
them out into the Wilderness, he may Rule without control. It be not the
Drunken, Debauched Clergy that he fears, these bring Fish to his Net. If this
will not prevail, he endeavors then to work such a prejudice in the Hearers
Hearts, to their Ministers, that they seldom profit by them: if they can have
nothing against them, but concerning the Law of their God, yet he persuades
them they are Phanaticks, because more serious in Religion than some others
are; and so diverts what he can from hearing them, and then he thinks himself
sure of them. Sometimes he sets them about their Worldly business, or to go to
Fairs, etc. He knows there is no danger to him in that; or persuades them to
drouse, or sleep out their time, or sit idly at home, or spend the Sermon time
at Dice, or Cards, or other unlawful Games: For others, he has a Companion at
the Alehouse door to call them; he knows there they are secure. If thou break
through these difficulties, he will endeavor to lull thee asleep in the
Congregation; or if awake, to distract thy thoughts with Worldly business, that
when thy Body is in the Congregation, thy mind shall be in the shop or Fields;
or, perhaps, he may let thy Eyes wander upon this Beauty, or that new Fashion,
and thus divert thy mind from thy Duty. And those that would be very attentive
at a Stage Play, are very heartless at a Sermon, as if it did not so much
concern them; or, if thou do hear attentively, yet he will make thee a
forgetful Hearer, and pick up the Seed as fast as it is sown, Mat. 13.4.19. How
often do men leave all behind them at the Church door? and that man cannot give
an Account of one passage in a whole Sermon, that can give you a large account
of a Stage Play, or idle Tale, or Story; or, if any thing be remembered, it must
be some misexpression, or something that must render the Preacher contemptible,
and so bring him into Question: And if they remember any thing that is good,
the Devil persuades them they shall never practice it; or, at least, defer it
till hereafter: or if they practice any, it must be the light, and cheap, and
easy part of Duty, and so as good never a whit, as never the better. These,
and a thousand such, are the wiles of the Devil to keep thy Soul in bondage,
which if he do, thou art undone for ever. He has Instruments also which he
sets on work, wicked men; some to draw, and some to drive; some by one means,
some by another, to hinder thee. Oh! take heed what you do, says one, you will
run your self upon the pike of danger; you will make your self contemptible to the
World, says another; you will hazard your Estate, or Liberty, cries a third; our
Forefathers, says another, were honest men, yet never followed these Courses.
Others, on the other hand, will load you with scoffs, and scorns; and if this
serve not, with downright Persecution: and, which is most dangerous, thy own
deceitful heart will side with Satan, and help to betray thee; Carnal reason is
ready to suggest, what need so much ado, there was never good World since there
was so much Preaching? when, alas! the cause is not in the much Preaching, but
in the little practice. Now, having so many Enemies, you must come with a full
Resolution to break through, or never begin.

2. Direction, If thou would profit by the word Preached; be sure to
propound to thy self right ends, and take heed of the by ends, which. many bring;
it is the end that makes or marres the action; many glorious works have been
spoiled by a bad end. Let the duty be never so excellently performed, if the
end thou aimest at in the performance be not right, the duty is abominable in
Gods account; thus the Fasting, Prayer, and Alms deeds of the Pharisees,
though all commanded duties, were by God rejected, because it was popular
applause they aimed at, Mat. 6.1,2,3, etc. Thou may hear all the days of thy
life to no profit, as too many do, if thy ends be not good; ask thy self
therefore this question, when thou come to the Ordinance: What do I here? or
what errand come I about? what is my end in coming? or what do I desire? or
would get by hearing? and get thy Heart and Conscience to return an answer; and
if thy ends arise no high-than thy self, they are false and deceitful: if every
man would speak out, or if we could hear the voice of Conscience speaking
within them, we should find many false hearted, that neither perform the duty
in obedience to God, neither take they pleasure in the duty it self; may not
some of you say? it is not love to God, or his Word, but for Customs sake we
come; We and our Fathers before us were always good Churchmen; but if this be
all, thy ends are low and base: others might say, we come to hear of some
easier way to Heaven, wherein we might go with our Sins in our hearts, and the
World upon our backs; but these Men cannot endure Soul-seeking Sermons, but cry
out of such Preachers, as Ahab of Micajah, he never Prophesies good of me, but
evil; and therefore they hate them, as Herodias did John Baptist; and delights
in those that daub with untempered Mortar, and cry peace, peace, when there is
no peace. Many, especially of the Younger sort, they come to see, and to be
seen; to show their New Clothes, or observe the Fashion that other wear; and
being Examined, this is most they can remember. Many come that they may be
accounted forward Prosessors, and are tickled with popular Applause; but when
it is more in Credit to Persecute than profess, these, perhaps, follow that
Profession. Some come, with the Butterfly, to paint her Wings, and these are
all for gaudy Notions, and store their Heads, and not their Hearts with what
they Learn; some weary of their own Houses, come to drive away the time;
perhaps, to get a nap of sleep; some come for fear of the Law, lest that take
hold upon them; and some to stop the mouth of Conscience, which otherwise will
give them no rest; some come to speak with a Friend, which otherwise they knew
not how to meet with so conveniently; and as they came by chance, it is a great
Chance if they receive any good by their coming: Some come to enquire out some
good bargain, others to appoint some merry Meeting, or some drunken match, or
Game at Cards, or Dice, or Bowls; and, perhaps, some come on purpose to entrap
the Minister in his Words, or wrest them to a wrong Sentence: these Men's
memories are much like to Sives, they keep the refuse, all the best runs
through; Christ himself had such Hearers: if these, or like to these, be thy
ends, thy heart is rotten, thy Duties stink in God's Nostrils, and they will
never do thee good; thou may expect a Curse from God, and not a Blessing. But
a true Christian aims at higher ends, viz. that he may know his Masters will,
and knowing, may obey it, and may glorify him by obeying; and by this means he
may get nearer unto Christ, and have, and maintain more Communion with him;
that he may know more of the Excellency that is in Christ; that he may be more
enamoured on him; that he may see more of his own heart, and the deceitfulness
of it; and more of the vileness of sin, to hate it more; that we may have
clearer Evidences of God's Love to his Soul, and of his Interest in Christ;
these, and such like are a Believers ends, in hearing the Word. If now thy ends
be lower, it is a bad sign of an Hypocritical, or Profane heart.

3. Direct. If thou would profit by the Word preached, come unto it with thy
heart rightly qualified, and rightly disposed, with thy affections rightly
ordered. One reason amongst, others why so many come to, and return from the
Word empty, is, because the heart is not fitted for the Duty: get thy heart in
Love with God; this is the way to thrive by his Word: how greedily do we read a
Letter from a Friend, especially if we expect some promise in it of some great
Courtesy? the Word is Gods Epistle sent from Heaven, stuffed thick with
gracious promises; if we entertain hard thoughts of God, we seldom profit by
his word; get a love also to his Word, as David, O how love I thy law, it is my
Meditation continually: we remember that which we love; What is the reason that
many can remember an idle story, or love song, or stage play, that cannot
remember one passage, or sentance in a whole Sermon? why, because they love it
better: exercise love also to the Minister, or thou will hardly profit by his
preaching: prejudice is a great hindrance to the Soul. See this in Ahab, he had
a prejudice against Micaiah, and hated him, and therefore his wholesome counsel
was rejected, 1 Kings 22.8. etc. The Pharisees also having a prejudice against
Christ, carp't and cavilled with him; but few or none believed in him: which of
the Scribes and Pharisees have believed on him? all his gracious words would
not win upon them: and when a People have a prejudice against their Pastor,
ten to one they profit little by him. Come also with a believing heart, the
word which they heard profited them not, because it was not mixed with faith in
them that heard it, Heb. 4.2. If the Devil can but bring us to this distrust in
God, and to call in question the truth of his word; he has what he would have:
for who will leave a certain Inheritance, for an uncertain Hope? and take much
pains when they doubt of a recompense; or leave beloved Sins, or perform self
denying duties, upon such uncertainties? they should bring also humble hearts
to the duty, for it is the humble that God will teach, when he looks upon the
proud afar off, James 4.5. 1 Pet. 5.5. A proud Spirit is like Laodicea, and
thinks himself rich and wants nothing, when he is poor, and blind, and
miserable, and naked. Rev. 3.16,17. If there be any in the Congregation that
set themselves against God and his Word; it is commonly the Proud and self
conceited Persons: it were them that set themselves against Jeremy, Jer. 42.3.
It were the Proud men that said he spoke falsely in the Name of the Lord. He
that comes with absence of his own wants, is most like to have a supply; he
that comes with a conceit of his own righteousness, is likely to go away empty;
he fills the hungry with good things, but the rich he sends empty away, Luke
1.53. He that thinks he knows any thing, knows nothing, that he ought to know,
1 Cor. 8.2. Come therefore to the Ordinance with an Hungring, Longing,
Thirsting, Panting desire after this Bread of Life, and Sincere Milk of the
Word; for then thou art most like to prevail for something to fill thy Soul. A
full Soul loatheth the Honeycomb, but to an hungry Soul every bitter thing is
sweet: many Promises are made to the hungry; those that hunger and thirst after
righteousness are blessed, Mat. 5.6. these thirsting Souls shall have Wine and
Milk, Christ and his Graces without Money or Moneys worth, Isa. 5.51. Come not
with a slight apprehension of, or a slight desire after it, lest it be denied
thee; set not light by it, as those that were bidden to the Wedding. Mat. 22.2.
etc. David had high prizing thoughts of it, it was sweeter to him than honey,
and the honeycomb, yea better than thousands of Gold and Silver, Psalm 19.10.
and to Job, better than his appointed food: this made David meditate in it day
and night; and by this means he came to have more understanding than his
Teachers: bring also a mind free from Worldly cares, and fears, and desires;
these are the Thorns that choke the Word, Mat. 13.22. Bring not the Love of any
sin along with thee, for this will make the Word unprofitable: he that says, I
will not be made clean; God may say, thou shall never be made clean; resolve to
obey the Word in the strictest passages of it.

4. Direct. Would thou profit by the Word Preached? It Is necessary then that
thou make some preparation for the receiving of it. The Heart of Man is
compared to the Ground, the Minister to the Seeds-man, and the Word to the
Seed. Now, you know the Ground must be prepared before the Seed be cast in,
otherwise thou can not rationally expect a Crop. The Body must be prepared,
and the humors gathered to an head, before Physic work kindly: what business
of moment can be done without preparation? And can we think, in this business
of so great concernment, it is sufficient to rush hand over head without
consideration? Some preparation should be made before the Sabbath came, in
setting thy Heart, as well as thy House in Order; the Command is, to remember
the Sabbath, to keep it Holy: And when the day is come, there are some Duties
required before thou rush into the Congregation; perform those Duties in thy
Family, and in thy Closet that are required; beg of God a blessing upon the
Ordinance, and upon the Minister, that he may speak a word in season to thy
Soul, that it may meet with thy Corruption, and may strengthen thy Grace, and
benefit thy Soul: how can expect a Blessing, that do not beg for it? This
is one cause that many go away barren, because they came unprepared: Lay thy
Heart open before God; say, as Samuel; speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears. In
thy Prayer, open thy Soul to God; unlap thy Ears, and desire a Plaster: offer
up thy Sin-sick Soul to this Physician, that he may pour Oil and Wine into thy
Wounds; who knows but this may be the Time of Love, wherein God may say unto
thy Soul, Live. Come with a resolution to deny thy self, thy Carnal wisdom, and
whatsoever shall be found contrary to the will and Command of God: Come not
with a Resolution to oppose God in any thing, though it be never so cross to
flesh and blood, or to thy Carnal will, or Interest; or be never so opposite to
thine own Natural Inclination or Appetite. Why should we come to know our Duty,
if we will not do it? Or our sin, if we will not leave it? The word of God
seldom works upon a fore-stalled affection. If thou know (and know thou
may, if thou carefully observe it) what has usually hindered thee in times
past, from profiting by the Word; take heed of that for the time to come.
Sometimes thou will find that it was Pride; thou sets up thy own will against
God. Sometimes passion; this put thy Heart out of Frame for the Duty. Sometimes
Worldlyness; this filled thy Heart with vain thoughts: Beware of these for the
time to come. Especially beware of these sins which are most predominant in thy
Soul, for this will spoil the Duty. Come with a strong Resolution to Obey God
in every thing. When he forbids any sin, resolve to leave it; when he Commands
any Duty, set about it; for to what end else do thou hear, if it be only to
know thy duty, and not to practice it; it will but procure thee the more
stripes; but many are like those silly Women, mentioned by the Apostle, ever
Learing, and never come to the knowledge of the Truth. And they are like
Balaam, let God deny them never so often, they will come again; fallen they would
have a dispensation to sin, and go to Heaven in a sinful way. But we must, with
good Old Ely, say, It Is the Lord, let him do with me as he lists. Or like
Paul, Lord, what would thou have me to do? Come also with a good stomach,
then the Word would be savoury to thee; such a man will not strain courtesy,
and carve all from himself, but greedily feed upon something. Now, he meets
with such a man, says one; now he hit such a one home: but what is this to
thee? Is nothing there that thou can eat? Get also some Acquaintance with the
state of thine own Soul, how the matter stands between God and thee, or
otherwise thou can hardly divide the Word aright, and apply it: there are
threatenings for obstinate sinners, and there are promises for the penitent;
there is Milk for Babes, and strong meat for Men. How wilt know thy own
portion, if thou know not the state of thine own Soul? If a sick man come to an
Apothecary's shop, and may make choice of what Medicine he pleases, and yet
neither know his Disease, nor what will Cure it, he may as well take, nay, it is
more like that he will take that which is hurtful than that which is helpful.
So a poor humbled sinner oft-times lays hold of the threatening, which belongs
not to him, and the presumptuous man of the promise. And, lastly, when Death
comes, say to the World, stand by (as Abraham to his Servants) I will come
again.

5. Direct. If thou would profit by the Word Preached, come to the
Ordinances with an hungring, thirsting desire after it; this is the Food of
Life, and it is only the hungring Soul that is rightly qualified for it; The
full Soul loatheth the Honeycomb, Prove. 27.7. What should a full stomach do at
a Feast? Or a full Soul at a Sermon? How sweet, how good, how precious was the
Word to David, Psalm. 19.10. And to Job, better than his appointed Food, Job
23.12. And how pitifully does David complain when he found the want, Psalm.
120.5. And how earnestly did he desire it? And thirst after it? Psalm. 42.1,2.
As ever Chased Heart did for the Waterbrooks; and had thou ever tasted the
sweetness of the word, or rather of God in the word, I needed not words to have
persuaded thee to love it. But that I may set some edge upon thine Appetite, I
shall desire thee to consider with me these few things: first, consider whose
word it is; is it not the word of that great God, that made Heaven and Earth,
and all things therein contained? One that is able to make it good, both in the
promises and threatenings: and is also Faithful, and will make it good? Heaven
and Earth shall fail, rather than one tittle of his word be un-fulfilled; and
shall we slight a Message sent from such a one? Had a Potent Prince sent a
Message, whether a promise, or threatening, how diligently should we have read
it? And how greatly should we have been affected with it? with Joy, or Sorrow.
Now, God sends his Messengers with a Message of peace, if we will accept it, if
not, they are to denounce war; yea, and threaten everlasting ruin, and
destruction; and yet who regards it? Read the contents of his Letter, Deuteronomy. 28.
throughout. Nay, the matter of this word of God is of greatest concernment,
were it but for trifles, it were no matter, but it is concerning Life and
Death, nay, the everlasting Salvation or Damnation of Soul and Body, and
therefore not to be slighted; they are Fools that Jest with such edged Tools.
Here are Instructions drawn up how you may avoid Hell, and attain Heaven; how
you may get rid of sin, and get out of the Slavery of Satan; how you may have a
Remedy for your sin-sick Souls, and a Plaster for your Wounds; how you may get
an Interest in Christ, and a Title to glory: In a word, how you may avoid
Misery, and attain everlasting Happiness; and is not all this worth your
serious consideration? Again, here is a Rich Legacy bequeathed to you by your
Heavenly Father, even exceeding great and precious Promises, more worth than
the World; and are not these worth the reading? At these Breasts of consolation
thou may suck and be satisfied, for they can never be drawn dry; thou will
never repent the pains thou take this way. This Word also is excellent in it
self, and therefore called the Word of Salvation, Acts 13.26. as pointing out
the only way to Salvation: the Word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. as holding
out Christ the only Reco^nciliator: the Word of Life, Phil. 2.16. as pointing
out the only way to Life. Here also is contained our Evidence for Glory, and
all we have to show for Heaven; this tells us what Qualifications are necessary
to Salvation: here we find a Redeemer, a Savior, a Surety to discharge our
Debts, and Redeem the Soul out of the Slavery of Satan; yea, out of the hands
of Divine Justice: This is God's Love Letter, wherein he makes Love to sinful
Souls, and offers them Christ for a Husband, and Heaven with him for a
jointure; here thou may find a cure for a wounded Conscience, and a sin sick
Soul; when neither Men nor Means, neither Food nor Physic can do thee good;
here is a Plaster pointed out to draw out the Vennom of sin, and staunch the
blood; yea, the way to Eternal Life is here chalked out, and shall we trifle in
such things as these? many are the Promises made to those that walk after this
Rule, Romans 3.12. and many are the threatenings against those that contemn it,
Deuteronomy. 19.20. Porv. 1.23,24. Isa. 6.9,10. 1 Samuel 2.25. Methinks such
considerations should breed an appetite to it.

6. Direction, If thou would profit by the word, be sure to carry thy self
well in the time of hearing; we must take heed how we hear, as well as what we
hear; if thou should make these preparations as before directed, yet all may
be spoiled at last; Resort therefore timely to the Ordinance, it is more fit for
thee to wait for God, than God wait for thee; late coming argues a weak
stomach, hungry Persons will not strive to be last at a feast, and an hungry
Soul will make haste where meat is to be had; and when thou art there behave
thy self reverently, set thy self as in the presence of the great God; say as
Jacob, this is no other than the house of God, and the gate of Heaven: and
carry thy self as if God were present looking upon thee; many by their light
behavior manifest their little zeal: did apprehend God present before the
eye of thy Soul, it would keep thine eyes from sleeping, and thy heart from
wandering; join with the Minister in every part of Gods worship; God is the God
of order, and not of confusion; a private Prayer is most suitable for a private
place, and private duties as before should be performed in the Closet, be more
ready to hear, than to offer the sacrifice of Fools, Eccles. 5.1. When the
Minister prays join with him, and pray with Devotion; when he sings, sing with
the understanding, when he preaches, here with attention; attend not only to
the words, but to the sense; and not only to the sense, but also to the Divine
Obligation that lies upon thee; draw out all thy strength in the performance of
the duty; hear as if it were for thy Life, for thy Soul, for Eternity, as
indeed it is, Deuteronomy. 32.46,47. Set your hearts upon all the words which I
testify among you this day, which you shall command your Children to observe:
for it is not a vain thing for you, because it is your life, and through this
you shall prolong your days; and you must not only hear with attention, but
with understanding also; for how can you profit by it, or what good will it do
you, if you understand it not? and yet some Ministers (the more is the pity)
seek to hide their meaning in a Cloud of words, and deliver their message
either in an unknown tongue, or in unknown Notions; and it is the folly of some
hearers, that delight in those Sermons they understand not, the Mass bites not,
but what wise man will delight to gnaw bones, that may have flesh, Paul, had
rather speak five words in the Church to edification, than two thousand in an
unknown tongue, 1 Cor. 14.19. and when thou do understand it, prove it by the
Scripture, and take it not upon trust; it is Christ's counsel, search the
Scriptures: and the Apostles, try all things, and hold fast that which is good:
and the Bereans are commended for so doing, Act. 17.11. and when you have found
it to be wholesome meat, apply it to the heart; this is the sum of all, and
without this it will do you little good. what good will Meat do if not eaten?
or Physic if not taken? or a Plaster if not applied? do as an hungry man
does, lay hold on something to feed upon, when nice stomachs carve away all to
others: now he meets with this man, or that man, but did he say nothing to
thee? will another man's meat feed thee? or another man's Physic make thee well?
close with it thy self, lay thy heart open to the Word, strive not against it,
submit to it, endeavor not by subtle Distructions, cunning Evasions, false
Glosses, partial Interpretations to evade the force of it, or blunt the edg,
but with David when reproved, cry out I am the man; wrest not out of Gods hand:
if any sin be reproved, reform it; if any duty pressed, practice it; if the
Minister teach thee any thing thou know not before, remember it, and bless
God for it.

7. Direction, If thou would profit by the word preached, demean thy self
well then after hearing; it is not enough to give diligent attention, nay, to
perform all the foregoing duties, for the most of the work lies behind; when
the Minister has done, thy work begins; thou must call it to mind, ruminate
upon it, do as the clean Beasts under the Law, chew the Cud; what ever slips
out of thy memory will do thee little good, it is what thou remembrest, is most
like to profit thee. Now to this end call to mind the Ministers Method, what
was his Text, how divided, how explained, what observations he raised, how they
were proved, by what Scriptures, by what reasons, how he applied them, what
marks or motives he gave under such Uses, etc. If he take not this method,
which is exceeding good for the memory, yet observe at least, what design he
followed, what he driv'd at, what sin he reproved, what duty he pressed, what
grace he excited, and thus doing thou will gather up some gleanings of this
Sermon; especially observing if he pressed any duty thou neglectest, or reproved
any sin thou live in: if all the rest be forgotten, remember this, and what
he taught thee that thou knew not before; now when thou have thus called
these things to mind, meditate upon them: for as Meat cannot nourish, if not
digested, no more will the word till by meditation, thou make it thy own;
meat is easily cast up when it lies undigested in the stomach: so here when the
Seed is sown and not covered by harrowing, the Fowls of the Air pick it up; and
when the word is not covered by mediration, the Devil steals it away, Mat.
13.4.19. If any thing lie dark or difficult to thee, go to the Minister, or
some understanding Christian to confer of it, make known thy doubts, and this
is a good way to get knowledge. The two Disciples that came to Emaus, inquired
by the way and discoursed: and it is thy duty to speak of the Word in thy house,
and as thou go by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest
up, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Oh what benefit might Christians get, were they careful of this
Duty? the word of God would then dwell plentuously in them; this would make a
deeper impression in the Heart, and would be a notable means to grow in
knowledge. When thou have passed thus far, than press it upon thy own heart, for
what good will it do thee otherwise: examine thy self by the Marks and
Characters, whether thou have those gracious Qualifications, yea or no? whether
thou art yet under the power of sin and Satan? and whether delivered? and be
accordingly affected: press home every reproof to thy self, and see how far
guilty thou have been; mourn for it, and reform; lay to heart every exhortation
to duty, and let every motive strengthen thy Resolution, practice every
direction, and make the best use of every passage for thy Souls good; and be
sure to practice what is taught thee: otherwise thou may hear all the days of
thy life to little purpose, it is not the hearers of the Law, but the doers that
are justified; he that knows his Masters will, and does it not shall be
beaten with many stripes; yea, it is not enough that thou practice it thy self,
but thou must endeavor that others may do so also: to this end thou must
instruct thy Family, thy Children, and thy Servants what in thee lies, press
them on also to obedience, this is a commanded duty, Ephesians. 6.4. Deuteronomy. 4.9. And
it was the practice of the Saints in all Ages, Deuteronomy. 18.19. Prove. 4.4. and
31.1. And because all thy services without Gods blessing are worth nothing:
it is thy duty to go to God by prayer, to fasten these truths upon thy heart,
which thou have heard, and open the heart of thy Family; Paul may plant, and
Apollos water, but it is God must give the increase: mark also from time to time
how thou do grow, or decrease. These Directions well used, through Gods
blessing, will make thee profit by hearing.

CHAP. IV. Directions in Reading the Word.
THe next Duty I shall point out unto you, is the Reading the Scripture, and
other good Books, which open and apply it; for this also is necessary, and very
beneficial to the Soul: and though it be not sufficient where the preaching of
the word is to be had; yet, it is a necessary addition, and many a Soul has
had experience of much good received by it: this word is the Law of the Lord
which is perfect converting the Soul; and many instances might be given of men
converted by it; especially where the word of God has not ordinarily been
preached. That it is a commanded duty, see Deuteronomy. 17.19. where the King is
commanded to take this book of the Law, and read therein all the days of his
life, that he may learn to fear the Lord and keep his commandments; and if
Kings themselves are not exempted, notwithstanding the multiplicity of their
business, who then can plead exemption? yea, the Priests were to read it in the
ears of all Israel, Deuteronomy. 31.11. It Is the Apostles advice even to Timothy, to
give attendance to reading, 1 Timothy 4.13. and as it is a commanded duty, so it is
the practice of the godly in all Ages; Moses took the book of the Covenant, and
read it in the ears of all the People, Exodus 24.7. So did Joshua, Chap.
8.34,35. So did Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34,35. and Nehemiah Chap. 8.38.18. and 9.3.
thus the Enuch Acts 8.30. yea, there is a blessing pronounced upon it, Rev.
1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy,
and there is good reason for it, for as the Sun is to the World, such is the
Word of God to a Christian, the very light of their lives, and the life of
their Souls: but as it fares with the Sun, because it commonly rises and sets,
therefore it is not sufficiently heeded and admired; so it is with the Word,
being common, it is not sufficiently prized; Mannah you know was at first
admired, at the last loathed: so it is here, if God should send a Famine of the
Word, it would be prized as it was when a Cart load of Hay was given for a few
Chapters of the New Testament; the worth of it will be known in the want of it:
as Health is best prized in Sickness, Peace in War, and Liberty in Bondage. Now
for the Persons that ought to read, they are all that are in a Capacity; for if
any were exempted they would be Kings, for the multiplicity of their business;
but the book of God must be to them a Vade mecum, a constant Companion; Parents
are to teach their Children in it, and under these two Relations, all
Superiors and inferiors are contained, Deuteronomy. 6.7. It Is the Devils practice
and policy no doubt to keep Men from reading the Scriptures; Christ bids search
the Scriptures, and how dare Papists and others speak the contrary? we are
commanded to let the word of God dwell plentifully in us, and it is made a mark
for a blessed man to meditate in Day and Night; here is the Mine out of which
we must dig for knowledge, Prove. 2.3,4. Oh that men would spend that time in
Reading, Meditating, and conferring of the word of God; which they do in Vain,
and idle Visits, needless Recreations, Carding, Diceing, Drinking, Drabbing,
and such like; how much would it conduce to their Souls health? this makes more
to the evening their accounts with God, and making preparation for the Soul,
than the other will: I know it is objected, that the Scriptures are difficult to
understand, and therefore dangerous to be meddled with, lest they be abused;
this is the Objection of the Papists on the one side, it being their interest
to keep men in ignorance: and the Sloathful on the other, who will not Plough
because of Winter, Prove. 20.4. but this should rather quicken our diligence,
than serve for a discouragement; if difficult duties be neglected, we shall
never reach Heaven, it is true some things are difficult, but the most necessary
are plain and easy: here indeed a Lamb may wade, and an Elephant may swim, but
the gains will countervail the loss and charge; here is a Lamp to light us, the
dew of Heaven to refresh us; a sword to defend us, a key to open Christ's will
to us; flaggons of Wine, and Apples of Paradise; take therefore these
Directions in thy Reading.

4. Direction. If thou would Read the Word with profit, it is necessary that
thou prepare thy heart for so solemn a duty; come not out of a huddle of
business, with thy heart full of the World, to discourse with God; take not
Gods word, any more than his Name, in vain: take it not profanely into thy
mouth, without due regard, or consideration, lest he turn thee away with a
Curse, instead of a Blessing: it is a business of great concernment, even of
Life and Death; yea, of the Eternal well or ill being of thy Soul; and
therefore not to be slighted: beg leave therefore of God before thou meddle
with it, yea, beg his blessing upon it, without which nothing can do us good
for Soul or Body; the want of due preparation, causes many to find the word so
ineffectual: yea, find so little sweetness in it. Again if thou would profit
by it, hold on in a constant course of Reading; it is not reading by fits and
starts will serve turn; many are now off, now on; now they will, and then they
will not; as the World gives them leave, or as the humor takes them: this is
not sufficient; but get a strong Resolution to hold on in a constant course of
Reading what ever comes of it; break through all the difficulties that lie in
the way, a little now and then, will do thee little good; without this
Resolution Satan will baffle thee, and lay some temptation in the way to
hinder: the World will divert thee, and one business or other present it self
to be done at the same time: thy own corruption will oppose it, and thy
deceitful heart make thee delay it; but this being the food of thy Soul, be not
diverted from it any more, than thou would be from thy Meat: but this is not
sufficient; thou must not only do the duty, but do it well: to this end get thy
heart in order, get it cleansed from distracting thoughts and cares, and freed
from disquieted motions, and perterbations: A full Vessel can receive no more:
and a heart full of the World has no room for Heaven; say therefore to thy
Worldly cares and thoughts when thou come to this duty, as Abraham to his
servants, when he went to Sacrifice; stay here and I will come to you again:
set thy self as in the presence of the great God; apprehend him by the eye of
Faith, beholding thee; this will keep thy thoughts from roving, and thy
imaginations from wandering, in his Service; and awe thy heart, and curb thy
Affection. Bring with thee also a Spiritual Appetite, to the means of Grace;
come with an empty stomach, or why do thou seek after Food? An hungry man is
most like to taste and relish those dainties; the Word was to David sweeter
than Honey and the Honeycomb; and to Job, better than his appointed Food: If
there be Spiritual Life in the Soul, there will be an Appetite; for no Life can
be preserved without food. Bring Faith also along with thee, which is the mouth
of the Soul, and without this the Soul can receive no nourishment; The Word
which they heard profited them not, because it was not mixed with Faith in them
that heard it, Heb. 4.2. Reading will do thee little good, if thou believe not
the Truth of what thou Read, or doubtest of the performance of the Promises,
or Threatenings. Faith also will subdue Carnal Reason, and help thee out when
thou art at a stand. But above all, seek help from above, from God; here are
many difficulties too hard for thee to grapple with, which cannot be understood
but by Divine assistance. Paul may Plant, and Apollos Water, but God gives the
Increase: it is he that opened Lydia's Heart, and must open thine, or the Word
cannot do it; beg therefore his assistance, and come thus prepared to the Duty;
this is the likeliest way to speed.

2. Direct. If thou would profit by Reading of the Word, be sure to propound
right ends to thy self; for the End Crowns the Action. Many read much, and
profit little, because their Ends are bad; they undo themselves, and lose their
labor by this means: Some Read for Custom, and for Fashion sake, and make
reading the end of reading; and are like the silly Women, the Apostle speaks
of, always Learning, and never come to the knowledge of the Truth; and so the
work be done, matter it no more: Some Read to fill their Heads with knowledge,
and their Brains with Notions, that they may thereby be able to discourse with
applause, when yet they never suffer it to sink down, or soak into, or season
the heart; but such speculative knowledge does little good, yea, great hurt: It
makes them sin with a Candle in their hands. And some Read to a worse end, that
they may be able to oppose the Truth, and maintain Error, and pervert the good
ways of God: thus the Pharisees, thus the Jesuits, and many Heretics: But
every one should, and a true Christian does, in this duty as well as others,
make God's glory in the Salvation of his own, and others Souls the mark he aims
at; and regulates his Actions accordingly: And doubtless, from God he will
receive his Reward. When others, as it was self they aimed at, so from self
they must expect their wages. A Believer, he would know more, that he may obey
better; he would know God better, that he might Love him more; and know God's
will, that he might do his work; he would know his work as well as his wages;
his Duties as well as his Privileges: He reads he word of God, and those Books
which open and apply it, that he may know Truth from Error; and follow the one,
and fly the other; and may not be seduced by false Teachers, nor drawn aside
from the Rule to the Right hand, or to the Left: He would know Light from
Darkness, and have the Scales of Ignorance fall from his Eyes; he would know
good from evil, that he might follow the one, and avoid the other; he would be
able to try the Spirits, whether they are of God or no; yea, to try all things,
and hold fast that which is good: he would know Vice from Virtue, and discern
what is sin, and what is duty; that he be not like those that in Persecuting
the Saints, think they do God good Service: he would be acquainted with his own
Heart, and know the state of his own Soul, and whether his Evidences for Heaven
be good or no: he observes what qualifications the Scripture requires, for
Heaven; and then by Scripture Light he would discern them in his own heart, and
endeavors to Read his own Name in the Book of Life, and see what Interest he
has in Heaven, in Christ, and Glory; and what Evidences for Salvation, and
what Signs of his Election, Vocation, Justification, and Adoption; and what
right he has to the Promises, which are his Father's Legacy: He would be able
by the word to reprove Errors, and defend the Truth; yea, to reprove the works
of Darkness, and repel all the fiery Darts of Satan, and be able to walk
comfortable in the way to Heaven, and to fetch Consolations out of God's word,
to bear him up under the saddest Afflictions. They would be able to teach
others in the way they should walk, and Instruct them in the Holy Path, and
reprove them when they err, and convince them when they go astray, and reduce
them back that have wandered, and gone awry; and build them up that are already
brought in: These are some of the desires of the godly in Reading the
Scriptures, and not as the Butterfly, only to paint her wings; and these are
the ends thou must aim at in thy Reading it, and then thou will Read it with
Profit.

3. Direct. If thou would profit by thy Reading the Scripture, and other
good Books, Read with the greatest diligence, attention, care, and
circumspection, that possibly thou can; for all thou can do is little
enough: This is a Commanded Duty, and the work of God; and a Curse is threatened
to them that do the work of the Lord negligently. Cursory Reading will do thee
little good; and hence it is, that many read much, and profit little, because
they read it carelessly; many read an idle Romance, or wanton Love-Song more
attentively than the word of God. Read it, as if it were for thy Life, and the
Life of thy Soul, and for Eternity, as indeed it is: Set thy Heart upon it,
then art thou like to profit by it. Matters of Life and Death usually affect
us; and shall not matters of Salvation, and Damnation affect us much more? Were
but thy Life endangered by a heartless, careless Duty, who would be mindless,
or careless, in the performance? Nay, how vigilant, diligent, careful, would
thou be? And is not the Life of the Soul much more worth? The word of God is of
great Concernment; whether we consider the Author, or the Matter of it, it
should put us on to the utmost diligence: The Author is the great God of
Heaven, one that can put Life into both his Promises, and Threatenings; nay,
will do it, for he is Faithful. And the word is an Epistle sent from Heaven,
from this great God, and that for our Instruction, Admonition, Reproof, and
Consolation, 1 Cor. 9.10. and 10.11. Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written
afore-time were written for our hearing, etc. This is God's Statute-Book,
whereby he Rules the world, wherein are greater Rewards promised, to obedience,
and greater Punishments threatened to the disobedient, than any King upon Earth
can annex to his Law, or can Execute, if he should threaten them. There is
therefore great Reason why we should be more conversant in those Laws, than the
Laws of the Land, though these be necessary, because the danger is greater. In
the one we stand in danger of Life, or Liberty, or Confiscation of Goods; in
the other, of Eternal Damnation. It is said of the Jews, that many of them
could as readily Answer to any point in the Law, as they could to their own
Names; and that they knew how many words, yea, syllables, yea, letters were in
the whole Law. God grant their diligence rise not up against us, to condemn us
for our negligence. If a Father, or Master, or Ruler, or Prince, can Command
Reverence from their Inferiors, surely God may much more from us. If we receive
a Letter from a great Man with such heedfulness, and Read it with such
diligence, and attention, and mark every passage with such circumspection, and
care; surely much more care and diligence should be used in this Epistle sent
from Heaven; from the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Nay, but the Contents
thereof, the Matter therein contained requires diligence; it is Matter of
greatest Right, and greatest Concernment; it is our Father's Will, and herein is
Recorded the Legacy he has left us. Now, who will neglect a Fathers Will,
wherein an Inheritance is bequeathed? Here is the Rule we must live by, and the
Law we must be Judged by; and are these Matters to be slighted? Here is all the
Evidence we have for Heaven; and should this be dis-regarded? How careful are
Men of their Evidences of their Lands? They will hardly part with them out of
their own Hands; and yet alas! how seldom do many men take these Evidences into
their hands; too Evident a Sign they have, but little hopes of good by it. Now,
without the diligent perusal, how shall we come to the knowledge of them? Here
are High Mysteries, in which we may easily be mistaken, and it is very dangerous
to be mistaken: what need have we then of circumspection? These, and many other
Considerations may put us on to diligence in Reading, Marking, and Observing
the Scriptures.

4. Direct. Would thou Profit by Reading? Then Read the Word with Judgment,
Understanding, and Discretion. This is necessary in every duty; nay, in every
Action. A Wise Man, says Solomon, Orders his affairs with discretion; but it
is required, especially in a work of so High a Nature, and of so deep
concernment, as this is: many Read much, and profit little, because they
understand little; they are like the Eunuch, to whom Philip said, Understand
thou what thou Read? He said, how can I, except some man should guide me?
Acts 8.30,31. Now, discretion should be used in regard of the Circumstances; of
Time, and Place, and Order, and Method; for the want of discretion in these, a
duty may be spoiled: Concerning Time, every thing, says Solomon, is beautiful
in it is season; all our Time must not be spent in this Duty, then others as
necessary would be omitted: one duty must not justle out another, yet sometime
must, and as much as can well be spared should be reduced for it; yea, we
should rather redeem Time out of our sleep, or recreations, than neglect it;
and it should be the most seasonable time, a work is most excellent in it is
season. Morning, and Evening seem ordinarily the fittest Seasons for Reading
the Scriptures in the Family, for private Reading as occasion serves; and for
Place, that which is freest from distractions, and fittest for Edification, and
Order; for private Reading, a private place, this does most benefit a private
Person, though that which is more public Edifies more than one: A Method also
is to be heeded in Reading the Scriptures, or any other Book; a disorderly
Action, or Duty seldom profits; Order, and Method are good helps to the Memory:
Read the Scriptures throughout, in order, except some Chapters that are less to
Edification; and so for other good Books, Read them throughout; he that Reads a
Chapter here or there, at adventure; or, a leaf here, and another there, in
another Book, profits little: and it is also necessary that thou understandest
what thou read; it is not so much the words and phrases, as the sense thou
should look after. The Jews, as I told you, had great care of the
Scriptures; they counted the Words, Syllables, and Letters contained in the
Law, and yet were Ignorant of the sense, and mist of the meaning. When thou
read a dark passage in the Scripture, rest not till thou understand it: To
this end Divines have given several Directions, such as these: If thou be able,
compare the Original and Translation together, and, perhaps, this may resolve
thy doubt; every Language has a peculiar Elegancy: and some words are of so
hard a signification, that they cannot fully be expressed in a Translation. Now,
knowing the Original will abundantly help, and the knowledge of Arts, and
Sciences is also of great use; let the Enemies to Learning say what they will
to the contrary. If this help thee not, look into the Context, observe the
Circumstances, and scope of the Place, and receive no Interpretation which
Crosses that. If this will not do, compare this place with others the like, and
admit not such a sense as contradicts other Scriptures; especially compare it
with the analogy of Faith, those plain Doctrinal conclusions, gathered out of
other plain Scriptures, of which no doubt is made, and if it agree not with
this, reject it; for Truth it self cannot oppose it self. We must reduce dark
places to those that are plain; and not force those that are plain to the dark
ones. If this help not, read some Learned Exposition upon the place: If this
fail, seek assistance from God; for, as the Sun cannot be seen but by it is own
light; so the will of God cannot be known but by his own Spirit: he that
Faithfully, and Carefully observes these Directions, may through Gods blessing
come to know as much as is necessary.

5. Direct. If thou would profit by the word thou read, carefully observe
the general scope of it, and what design God is aiming at, and what End he aims
at, in it, and prosecute the same design, and aim at the same mark that he
does; for all Scripture is given for our Instruction. Now, if we heedfully mark
the general scope of the Scripture, and the end which God drives on in the
main, is to make himself known to the world, in his wisdom, power, and
goodness, to the end, that man may own him as their Lord, Owner, and
Benefactor, and his Son Jesus Christ, for their Redeemer, and Savior, that he
might get himself Glory in their Salvation. Now, in thy Reading prosecute the
same design that God does, and aim at the same end which he does; and this is
the likeliest way to profit. The Scripture in general sets before thee the
knowledge of God, and thy self; what God is, and what he has done; what thou
wast by Nature, what by the Fall, and what by thy Restoration: and also what
God requires at thy hand. In the prosecution of this End, the Scripture handles
those points which conduce hereunto. As first, in the work of Creation thou
may see God in his wisdom, and power, for none else could make the world of
nothing; yea, every Creature will point out God to an understanding man; for it
passes the power of Men, or Angels, to make the least Fly, especially without
pre-existent matter; nay, the Creatures do not only show that there is a God,
but also s^ forth the Attributes of God; as his Eternity. Wisdom, Power,
Majesty, Goodness, and Perfection; these clearly shine forth in these his
works. The least Creature, if you follow him home to his Original by Divine
Meditation, will point out an Omnipotent Arm for his Creator: And when thou
read of his works of Providence, these also speak the same thing, and Teach
the same Lesson. The wonderful works and Miracles he has wrought for the
preservation of his People. The Rule and Government which he has set in the
world; the preservation of his Church, and the frequent deliverance he has
given to his People Recorded in the Scripture, bespake to us his Power, Wisdom,
Goodness and Truth. When thou read of the Works of Redemption; this bespeaks
Christ the Lord, the Son of God, as he is witnessed from Heaven, by Angels, by
Saints, by Enemies, by Devils, all which gave Testimony to his Divinity; and
that he was truly man is also evident by his Incarnation, Birth, Growth,
Actions, Passions, Death and Burial, and Resurrection etc. And that he is the
true Messiah, the Savior of the World, is clearly evident by Scripture light;
here thou may find that all the Prophesies that went before of him, are
clearly fulfilled in him, and no other: and such Miracles wrought, and such
mighty Works done, and such gracious Words spoken, that make it plainly appear,
that he is indeed the Son of God the Savior of the World. Again, when thou
read the Commands, Threatenings, Punishments, etc. Know these are to deter
thee from Sin, and to drive thee home to God thy Benefactor: and when thou
read the Promises, Invitations and Encouragements, these are to draw the
nearer to him, therefore carefully observe what ever thou read, and some way
or other it will conduce to bring thee nearer to God: this is Gods end in
writeing the Word, and should be thy end in reading it.

6. Direct. Would thou profit by Reading? then meditate upon what thou
read, this is the way to make what thou read thine own; it was this way
that David got more understanding than the Ancient, and became wiser than his
Teachers, Psalm. 119.98,99,100. and 66.11. Now Meditation is a studious Art of
the Mind, wherein a Man searches out some hidden truth, by the discourse of
Reason; and it is one of the most profitable heart-enriching duties thou can
perform: this will fetch in Provision like a Be, from every Herb, and Flower;
yea, from every Weed, Thorn and Bramble will yield some Honey; this will store
thy Heart with Treasure new and old, there is no Creature so barren, but will
yield some Fruit; nor dead Tree, or hard Stone that is so barren, but it will
yield some increase; no Creature but will yield a helping hand, no Fowl but
will lend a Feather to mount the Soul aloft: A Christian skilled in the Divine
Art of Holy Meditation, can never want an Object fit to work upon: and if the
Creatures thus furnish us, doubtless the Word of God cannot be fruitless: the
Word of God of it self is Mysterious and Dark, at least some part of it, the
Well is deep, and Meditation is the Bucket, hereby Divine Mysteries are drawn
out, and the Water of Life pumpt; in cursory Reading many things pass by
without regard, which by Meditation are fetched back and made use of: This is
not only a help to the understanding, but the Memory also: it leaves a deep
impression upon it: What in cursory Reading is soon forgot, is pressed hard upon
and imprinted to the Memory by Meditation: hereby the Heart is stored with
wholesome truths, which otherwise would be barren and empty of any thing that
is good; and stored only with Vanity and Folly, this seasons it, and fills it
with good things, which otherwise would be a Cage of unclean Birds, a very Sink
of Sin and Filthiness; this seasons the thoughts, which produce Works and
Actions. Meditation in the Word is that which David was excellent at, and every
blessed Man should follow, Psalm. 1.2. and Solomon advises to, when he bid
search for Wisdom as for Silver, and dig for it as for fine Gold, Prove. 24.
this also has a Promise of speeding annexed, Prove. 2.12. etc. This is the way
which the faithful in all Ages have taken, and hereby it was they became
famous: We find Peter alone upon the House top, a fit place for Meditation,
you may find Isaac in the Fields meditating, Genesis 24.63. Act. 10.9. Elijah
upon Mount Carmel, and Daniel by the Brook of Vlai, and how Sapless and
Unsavery are all the Pleasures in the World to a Man skilled in Divine
Meditation? The Philosophers that knew little of God, and less of the
Scriptures, were so taken up with their Phylosophical Notions and Speculations,
that they oft-times mattered not their Meat, or their Drink, or their necessary
recreations; Archimedes was so taken up with his Geometrical Notions, that when
the City Syracuse was taken, he was heedless; yea, when a Soldier stood ready
to kill him, would not be drawn off, till Death it self ended his
Contemplations: if the Creature can bring such satisfaction, what will the
study of the Creator do? and the Meditation of Heaven and Glory? but alas,
where shall we find a wise Man? many read it not at all, others cursorily, few
fruitfully, most are forgetful hearers, and forgetful readers; but Meditation
would fix it in the Memory.

7. Direct. If thou would Read with profit? apply what thou read to thy
self, and bring thy heart to the Rule, and thy Graces to this Touchstone, and
behold thy Face in this Glass of the Word; to what end is Meat given, but to be
eaten? or Physic but to be taken? or a Plaster, but to be applied? many read
much, and profit little, because they apply not what they read to themselves:
perhaps they can apply it to others, and say, here is for such and such a man,
when they neglect their own Portion. They are like the Pharisees, they bind
heavy burdens, and grievous to be bourn, and lay them upon other men's
shoulders, but they themselves will not touch them with one of their fingers:
but why will thou deal so liberally to others, and deal so deceitfully with thy
own Soul? does it want nothing, or does God speak nothing to thee, but only to
others? In the things of the World thou art not so kind, thou would not be
deceived by another, neither would thou give away thy Estate with thy own
hands to another; and why art thou so injurious to thy Soul, in things of a
higher Nature? thou will not deprive thy belly of Food, nor thy back of
Raiment; and must thy Soul only be deprived of both? An hungry man will not
thus dispose of his meat, nor a covetuous man of his money; and this thy
liberality shows thou have neither a stomach to these spiritual dainties, nor
a desire after these spiritual and heavenly treasures. This word is of general
use to all, every one has his Portion: for as God has made nothing in vain,
so he has spoke nothing in vain: when therefore thou read his Precepts
wherein he commands duty, and forbids sin; persuade thy self that God is now
particularly speaking unto thee, and apply what is speaking to thy self, as if
there was no other Man or Woman in the World besides thee; or as if God by an
audible voice called thee out by Name, as he did Samuel, and gave thee these
Commands to observe these duties to do: these sins to avoid: and let it deter
thee from sin, and quicken thee to duty; as if God himself had spoken to thee
from Heaven: When a Minister reproves sin, some guilty Consciences say he means
me; it is true, if thou be guilty the Minister does mean thee, and God means
thee; when the Word speaks against Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, then it means
thee, if thou art guilty of those sins; When thou read the precious Promises
which God has made unto repugnant Sinners, assure thy self, if thou be such a
one, these promises will be made good to thee; yea, as sure as if thy Name were
written by the finger of God in the Scripture, and annexed to them: yea, as if
they were made to none but thee, and those threatenings thou reapest in the word
of God against unrepenting Sinners; assure thy self if thou be in that
condition, thou art as much concerned in them, and they will be as certainly
made good upon thee, if thou continue in this condition, as if they had been
only denounced against thee: and those reproofs which thou read for sin,
take them to thy self, as spoken by God to thee, if thou be guilty of the sin
reproved; for assure thy self God means thee in them; and those Marks and
Characters of Divine graces, and gracious Qualifications scattered through out
the Scriptures, make use of to try thy self by, and make use also of all the
Admonitions God gives thee; and of all the examples thou find of Divine
vengeance, let them deter thee from sin; and all the examples of Holy Saints
encourage thee in good; and generally of all sorts of Directions, Instructions,
etc. thus doing thou will gather good by thy Reading.

CHAP. V. Directions for Meditation.
THE next Duty I shall speak of, is Meditation; a necessary, though much
neglected Duty. Yea, Christians themselves, that make Conscience of other
Duties, and are much in hearing, reading, and Prayer, yet are too backward;
yea, unskilled in the right performance of this duty. But did they know the
benefit of it, and the incomes many receive by it, they would not neglect it:
it brings much Advantage to a gracious Soul, and stores it with many Heavenly
Truths, which those that neglect it never attain: In this a man ingages all the
powers of his Soul, and bends his mind to consider, and muse upon some
Spiritual Object; for I speak not of it here, as wicked men use it, to devise
mischief; but as a Christian duty. Now, Meditation is either Occasional, and
Sudden; or else Solemn, and Set, for both are necessary, both are beneficial:
The former is occasioned by Objects occasionally presented, by the Providence
of God; either to the Senses, or brought to the Memory, and resembles those
sudden Ejaculations, suddenly occasioned; only in the one a man speaks to God,
and in the other a man speaks to his own Heart. Thus we see David, by beholding
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, those glorious Lamps of Heaven, he falls out into
Admiration, of God's Love to poor man, in raising him above these, and making
him but a little lower than the Angels, Psalm. 8.1,2, etc. Such occasional
Objects were the grounds of many of Christ's speeches, and Sermons: And a
Christian by this means may learn something from every thing he either sees, or
hears.

That Meditation that is set and solemn, is, when a man separates himself from
other Employments, and sequesters himself and thoughts from worldly affairs, to
consider of some portion of Scripture, or some point of Divinity, or some work
of Nature, for his own satisfaction, and his Souls good. That this is a
Christians Duty few Christians will deny; that it is a beneficial duty, all
that have tried it in good earnest, will easily confess; experto creed Roberto.
That it is too much neglected, we may acknowledge with shame and sorrow. Joshua
was Commanded to Meditate in the Law of God day and night, Josh. 1.8. This was
David's practice, Psalm. 119.59. And this he makes the Character of a Godly and
Blessed man, Psalm. 1.2,3. It was Isaac's Custom; as also Paul's and Peter's,
and many others. This is the way to digest the meat we eat; and can meat
nourish, if not digested? This is the chewing of the Cud, when we ruminate upon
what we hear, or see: Meat undigested in the stomach feeds Diseases, when it is
digested it feeds the Body. What is the Reason so many good Sermons are lost
amongst us? And so many gracious Providence pass un-observed, but for want of
this? Doubtless, one Sermon well digested by Meditation would bring more
nourishment to the Soul, and breed more good Blood, than now twenty do. By
Meditation a man searches and ransacks the Soul, and finds out every dust-heap,
every Corruption; and sees whether those Divine qualifications necessary to
Salvation be there or no; when others are strangers at home, by this he gets
light into the Understanding, heat into the Affection, and it puts Life into
all his Duties. By this he comes to see the Vanity of the World, the emptiness
of the Creature, the vileness of Sin, the beauty of Holiness, and the fullness
of Christ: By this the Heart is taken off the World, and set upon Heaven; and
sees by the Eye of Faith those things which are invisible: By this he tramples
upon sublunary things, and fixes his Eyes upon things within the vail. By this
Stephen saw God, and Moses talked with God; and Paul was carried up into the
third Heaven. By this Afflictions are made light, and the Cross easy, and
Christ's Yoke delightful: this makes a man choose Sufferings, rather than sin;
and pain rather than sinful pleasure: this helps the Soul to fly to Heaven, and
hold Communion with Christ himself; and like the busy Be, to gather Honey
from Flowers and Weeds; which to effect, take these following Directions.

1. Direct. Concerning Occasional Meditation, though it be not what I chiefly
intend; yet being of daily Use, I shall speak something of it at present. A
Christian that Trades for Heaven, may have much Goods brought home in this
Ship: He may get Advantage by all he hears, or sees, or observes; for there is
nothing in God's Book, or in the Book of Nature, but will Instruct us in some
necessary Lesson, concerning God, or our selves; and mind us of something that
may conduce to our Advantage: And he that can make a good use of every thing he
sees, or hears; and pick some Spiritual Food, and refreshing from it, must,
doubtless, be a flourishing Cedar in the House of God, and enjoy Heaven upon
Earth, and Spiritualize all the Creatures. How often in Scripture may we read
that Christ by occasional occurrances, minds his Hearers of Spiritual things;
from a Well of water he Instructs the Woman of Samaria concerning the water of
Life. And by occasion of Bread, he minds them of the Bread of Life: and from a
Sower and his Seed, shows that a bad Heart is the cause that the Word proves
unfruitful; and many more such like. David, as before was hinted, beholding the
Heavens, is raised up in his Meditation to God, himself, and his Love to Man,
Psalm. 8.1,2,3, etc. Solomon sends the Sluggard to School to the Ant, or
Pismire, that gathers in Summer, for Winter: And Christ sends those that are
distrustful of their Fathers Providence, to observe the Fowls of the Air; how
he feeds them: And the Grass of the Field, how he Clothes it; and no doubt but
a wise man may make a Sanctified use of all these. If a good wit can make a
good use of every thing, much more a good Heart: Had we but this Art of
Meditation, every thing would yield a suitable object* we have the whole world
before us, the greatest want is of a good Heart to improve these Objects, that
offer themselves to our view; the least Creature would be useful, if we were
not wanting; every day that passes over our Heads, may put us in mind of our
latter end. Thy Bed may mind thee of thy latter end, and the time when thou
must lie in the dust: and thy rising up may mind thee of thy Resurrection: The
rising Sun may mind thee what a glorious day that will be, when Christ with his
Saints and Angels shall appear at Judgment; each one shining as the Sun in his
Luster. When Night approaches it may mind thee that thy days are numbered, and
that thou have now one fewer to spend, than thou had in the Morning; and mind
thee what account thou can give of it, and make thee consider that the World
cannot recall it: Every Pain and Grief, Ach and Trouble, yea, every gray Hair,
may mind thee of thy Mortality: and how little beholding thou art to sin, which
brought all this into the World? When thou see the Heavens adorned with those
beauty spots, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, thou may think, if the Porch be
so glorious, what is the Palace? if the Pavement be so beautiful, what is the
Court? the Throne it self? When thou considerest their Beauty, Altitude,
Magnitude, Selerity, and Influence, thou may well admire the Creator; and
with David cry out Lord what is man, etc. Who can but admire when he looks upon
the Earth, the Huge and Massy Globe; the unweiley Creatures hanging in the
midst of the Air of nothing, distinguished into Hills and Dales, and Woods, and
Rivers, furnished with such variety of Trees, and Grass, and Herbs, and
Flowers, and the numberless number of living Creatures, Birds, and Beasts, and
Fishes, and creeping things, and all provided for by the great Householder! Who
can behold the Rageing Sea kept within his Banks in the Ebbings and Flowings,
and view the Streams and Fountains, the Springs and Rivers, and not cry out the
finger of God? now among all these, there is not one Fly or Flea, not one
Graspile, or Leaf of a Tree, but yields matter of Meditation and Admiration:
Ah! what a rich Soul will that be that gathers fruit from all these?

2. Direct. If thou would perform thy duty well; It Is necessary thou set
upon it with due preparation. I speak not now of occasional Meditation, which
is the duty of all men, and at all times; but of set and solemn Meditation,
which is a duty at some times only, and when thou come unto it, thou should
come preparedly: no duty can be well performed without, much less this, so
serious and solemn a duty: this requires the exercise of all the powers of the
Soul, and the whole bent of the Mind; they must be wholly set upon some
special Object, which for the time we make the matter of our Meditation: this
duty is as the chewing of the Cud in the clean Beasts, or as in digestion to
the Body: for as digestion turns Food into Soil, and Blood, and Spirits, and
Flesh; So Meditation turns thee Truths received into Affections, Resolutions,
Acts, yea, into a-Holy Life and Conversation: now the Preparations required,
are either Internal or External; the Internal is chiefly the Heart, and the
Understanding; the Heart is the chief Instrument in the Work; if the Instrument
be in Tune, the Music will be good; if that be out it will be little worth:
The success of the Work depends much upon the frame of the Heart: if that be
right God will vouchsafe to dwell there, and give in his Assistance in the
duty, and without his assistance the duty will do us little good: There must be
Grace in the Heart, as well as knowledge in the Brain, or the Work will not
prosper in our Hands: get thy affections as much off from the World, and as
resolvedly set upon Christ as thou can, for Christ will admit of no Partner;
and as a gracious Heart, so an Understanding Head would much forward the Work:
it is a sweet Conjunction where these meet, but if severed, the former is most
requisite: come with an empty Heart, and it will be filled; with an enlarged
Heart, and it will be satisfied: this duty is enough to exercise the whole Man,
were the Faculties a thousand times more capacious then they are; Angels
themselves cannot dive into the bottom of many Mysteries: lay by therefore all
other Thoughts, Occasions, Business and Concernments whatsoever, and gather in
thy whole strength, and set upon the duty; bring not a full Vessel that can
hold no more; if a Vessel be full of Water, there is no room for Wine; if thy
hands be full of Muck, thou can hold no Money; if thy Heart be stuffed with
Trifles, it can hold no better Treasure; When thou mountest this Hill of
Contemplation, be sure, with Abraham, leave all at the foot of the Hill: say,
stand by Pleasures, stand by Friends, stand by World and Worldly things, I am
going to Sacrifice, and will come again: When we come into our Princes
presence, we leave our Muck behind us, and bring no unsuitable Company with us;
much more when we come into Gods presence cast off all sin; out with the World
and Worldly thoughts: yea, all other thoughts, though at other times good,
which will any ways disturb thee; and dispose thy business so that thou may
not be hindered: and for external preparation, it consists in the Observation of
some needful Circumstances, as Time, Place, etc. For Occasional Meditation all
Times, and all Places are fit, when an opportunity is offered; but not so here:
the Sabbath day is a fit time, when other duties are not on foot, but this is
not enough, upon other days experience will best instruct thee, when the
Spirits are most lively, and active, and fit for the work, in the Morning, or
in the Evening; the like I say for Place, where thou find it most convenient
at home, or abroad; in the House, or in the Field, the Place which is most
suitable and freest from distraction is the fittest: Isaac walked into the
Fields, Christ in the Garden, Peter on the top of the House; but I conceive
ordinarily, for this set Meditation, that place which Christ appointed for
private Prayer is suitable for this secret duty, viz. The Closet, with the door
shut, Mat: 6.46. In a word, when thou feel a sweet gale of the Spirit
assisting thee, lose not the oppertunity, strike while the Iron is hot, perhaps
thou may do more then in an hour, than at another time in a day.

3. Direct. Having thus prepared thy heart for the Work, and made choice of a
fit time and place set upon it; set thy self seriously as in the presence of
God: apprehend him taking notice of thee, how thou performest this duty, and
this will keep thy heart from wandering, and thy thoughts from roveing; yea,
before thou begin, put up some pithy fervent Petitions for Gods Assistance, and
Direction, and that he will give thee his holy Spirit to the end; and that he
will take possession of thy heart, and keep thy thoughts from wandering from the
duty; for without Gods Assistance thou will but strive in thy own strength, and
lose all thy labor: when thou have made this entrance by Prayer, make choice
of some profitable Subject to Meditate upon; all Meditation, though Set and
Solemn, and serious, is not that I treat of. How seriously does the Covetuous
Man study how to grow rich? yea, perhaps how to deceive his Brother? How
serious is the Voluptious Man studying how to get Pleasure, or satisfy his
lust? the Ambitious Man how to get honor? and the Envious Man how to do his
Neighbor a Mischief? yea, the Holy Ghost says he cannot sleep till it be
done; but this is Devilish, and not Divine Meditation: but single out some
choice, profitable Subject, and let thy thoughts run upon that: that which may
wind up thy Affection nearer unto God, and which is well worth the time thou
imployest about it: the Word of God, or Natures Garden will furnish thee with
Flowers enough to gather Honey on: The Scripture will abundantly furnish thee to
this end; no Verse but may be matter of Meditation: this is the Cannon whereby
thou may try good from bad, and truth from error, by this thou may know
what is Duty, what is Sin, what is true, and what is false; or thou may take
any Common place in Divinity for the Subject of thy Meditation: here thou may
find a large Field to walk in, and many necessary, yea, fundamental truths may
fall under consideration, but take heed of meddling with secret things which
belong only to God, there is enough revealed for thy Salvation, and this should
be sufficient for thy satisfaction: were it needful, I might lead thee by the
hand, and show thee matter sufficient to work upon, as the Nature and
Attributes of God, but this is such a bottomless gulf, that the Angels
themselves could never sound, or fathom; yet here we may sail by the Scripture
Chard in safety: consider also the Works of God, the Decree, Creation and
Providence: consider thy own Estate in the Creation, after the Fall, and in thy
Restoration: consider Christ the Mediator, in his Nature, and Offices; his
Incarnation, Birth, Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Death and Passion; his
Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession; and his coming at the last to
Judgment: and here thou have matter enough to spend thy days about. Consider
also the Commands of God, and the Duties he requires at thy hands; and the
promises he makes to the Obedient, and the threatenings to the Disobedient.
Consider also the four last things, Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell; and by
this thou see there is work enough in Natures Garden: Also, there are a
thousand things well worthy thy consideration; there is not a Weed in the
Field, a Tree in thy Orchard, an Herb in thy Garden, a Beast in thy Pasture, a
Fowl in the Air, or a Fish in the Sea, or River, but will Teach thee something;
and it is a barren Heart indeed that cannot draw a Meditation from the least
Gnat, or most despicable Worm that crawls under his Feet.

4. Direct. Having thus prepared matter, and pitched upon some suitable Subject
to Exercise thy thoughts and Meditations upon; proceed then to drive on thy
intended design to a head; and to the end thou did propose. Now, this end
should be the enlightening of the Understanding, and the clearing it from Error,
or Ignorance; and the quickening the Affections, and raising them to a higher
pitch, and the bringing of the Will to a Resolution. In Meditation, if rightly
managed, the Soul Exercises two sorts of Acts; the one direct, the other
reflect: the first upon the Subject Meditated upon, the other upon the Soul it
self. By the first we find out the Rule, by the second we apply our own Hearts
to the Rule, and observe our deviation, and obliquity: the first enlightens the
Understanding, and the other quickens the Affections; by the first we come to
know what is true, what is false; what is good, what is bad; what is sin, what
is duty; and consequently, what is to be chosen, and what refused: By the other
we apply our Actions to this Rule, and try whether we have walked according to
it; wherein we have gone astray, and which way to return. Now, as there are two
sorts of Acts, so there is a different way for the Souls Acting, for the
attaining of those several ends. For the first of these, some have pitched upon
this course, which though all men are not able to follow, yet I shall set down
for the use of those that can. And that is to have recourse to those places
that Natural, and Artificial Reason affords us, which may help the Invention,
and ready the Memory, and much facilitate the Work; I mean, those Logical
places following: As first, to consider the thing about which we Meditate, what
it is; and therefore as ability does serve, consider it in the definition, or
the description of it; but stand not overlong, or over-nicely upon this, or
any of those that follow, lest what you get one way may be lost another; what
you get in the Understanding, be lost in the Affections. And when thou have
found out the Nature of the thing, consider it also in the distribution of it,
if it be a Subject capable of the sorts, kinds, and parts of it; this will give
room to thy thoughts, and thy proceeding will be more distinct: Consider it
also in the causes; the Efficient, Material, Formal, and Final Cause: The
Efficient Cause is that by whose Virtue, Force, or Efficacy a thing is, The
Material Cause is ex qua res est, of what matter a thing is made; the Form is
whereby a thing is, that which it is, and the end is the Cause for whose sake,
or for what purpose a thing is. Consider also if the Subject will admit, the
Fruits and Effects; for these are useful, and helpful in the work, and are also
pertinent to our business. Consider also the Subject wherein it is, and about
which it is occupied; as also of it is Properties, and Qualities; either adhering
to it, or inhering in it; together with the opposite and contrary; this also is
useful: also the comparats, and desperats; what it is like, and what it is
unlike; fit similitudes, much Illustrate, and give great light to the
Understanding: Testimony also is to be regarded, but Noble Command assent like
those of Scripture; Holy men's Testimony is of good use, but Divine Authority is
all in all. Or if you think this way too intricate, you may take such a Method
as is most Familiar to explain the Subject you treat of; raise thy
Observations, clear the Doctrine from difficulties, and doubts; prove it both
by Scripture and Reason, and then make use of it according to the Nature of the
Subject; let it inform thee in the useful consectaries, and conclusions, that
may thence follow; let it Instruct thee in the duties it reaches forth; let it
be for Examination, how thou have carried thy self, or whether thou have the
required qualifications for reproof: if thou have gone astray; for
encouragement: if thou have done thy duty; for caution, for the time to come;
and press all home upon thy heart: Such a course is like to furnish thee with
suitable matter for thy Souls good.

5. Direct. When thou have thus far proceeded, and by Meditation have informed
thy self of what is necessary in the present point; and have found out, by the
use of Reason, and Scripture Light, what is Truth, and what is Error; what is
sin, and what is Duty; what thou ought to do, and what to avoid. Thy next
work is to press this upon thine own Head, and compare thy Head and Actions
with the Rule, and try wherein thou have gone right, and wherein thou have gone
astray: for if thou do not thus reflect back upon thy own Heart, and Life, the
duty will do thee little good. If thou only study to find out Truth from Error;
or what is sin, and what is duty, without Regulating thy Life and Actions
accordingly; and endeavor to fill thy Head with Notional knowledge, it will
but aggravate thy sin, and thou will sin with a Candle in thy hand. But when by
this Impartial Trial, thou find out wherein thou have sinned, and come short
of thy duty, which the Law of God requires at thy hand; or want those
required qualifications necessary to Salvation: Press those things home upon
thy heart, till they make some Impressions there; yea, till they stir up the
Affections, and work upon the Will to a through Resolution of Reformation for
the time to come. This is the Life of Meditation, and without this it is little
worth. When thou find wherein thou have come short, to come to a Resolution,
to make more have: and where thou have sinned, gone astray, to return; and
where thou have sinned, to Reform: Press on thy Meditation till thou find
some Life in it, according to the Nature of the thing: if it be good, till thou
find a sweetness in it; if bad, till it appear odious. If it appear to be good
by Scripture Light, and rectified Reason, then the affection of Love must needs
be stirring, for good is it is object, and evil as evil cannot be loved. When it
appears to be bad, the affection of Hatred will close with it as it is object,
for the Understanding when it is informed, in the Nature of the thing according
to it is apprehensions, and conclusions sends down report unto the Heart, where
the affections dwell, and every affection closes with it is proper Object: Love
with good, and Hatred with evil. Good things difficult to be obtained, stir up
desire; evil likely to some stir up fear, Romans 7.24. O wretched Man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? This will make thee bewail
thy miserable Condition, when thou can not enjoy the thing desired, yet long,
and hunger, and pant after it, as David did for the enjoyment of God, Psalm.
42.1. He that tastes the sweetness of it, and cannot get it, must needs
earnestly long after it. Whether it be the removing the Judgment, or the Sin
that causes it; or whether it be the attaining the gifts and graces, which we
want, it will work in us a Resolution to our power to endeavor the obtaining
of the thing we want: and when we find it is not in our own power, this will
put us on to a Resolution to go to God, in whose power it is to dispose of
these things; to confess our wants and failings, and imperfections, and
dis-ability; and, like a Beggar, unlap our sores, to move pity, and to Petition
him to grant us those things which we so earnestly desire; and rest confident
we shall enjoy the Mercy desired; the ground of which confidence is the promise
of God, who bids us ask, and we shall have; seek, and we shall find; knock, and
it shall be opened to us. And the Experience of the Saints in all Ages, who
have thus prevailed. And this also will work in us a strong Resolution to use
all Lawful means, and all possible endeavors, for the attaining of our
desires. It Is a faint wish indeed, that is not seconded with endeavor. This
will make us be careful of our selves for the future, when we consider our
miscarriages for the time past; this was the result of David's Meditation,
Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies,
Psalm. 42.5.11. And without this our labor is lost; it is not enough for a
Traveller to know he is out of the way, but he must return into it.

6. Direct. In Meditation beware of those things which usually prove hinderance
in the Duty; for whosoever shall make Trial of it, shall find enough to do to
manage it well, and perform it well as it ought to be. The Devil, that knows
how much he is disadvantaged by it, will never suffer thee to do it without
opposition: he lays many snares to entangle the Heart, and render it unable,
and unfit for the work: If he can divert the Heart, which is the most necessary
Instrument in the work, he is well enough; hence often he steals it away: and
as in Prayer, when we should seek God, we had need to seek our own hearts. So
also in Meditation; for the Heart many times, like a sloathful Servant, gives
us the slip, when there is most work to do: Sometimes the Devil fills the Heart
with distracting cares, and thoughts of the world, which commonly crowd in upon
us, when they should stand back, and give place; this is an hindrance in all
duties, but especially in this; wherein the whole man is required, and the
Heart cannot be spared: here we should have an heart in Heaven, but how can it
mount up, when her wings are clipped? And her feet fettered, and clogged? How can
our thoughts soar aloft, when they cling fast to the Earth? How unstable to the
duty is it when we come with a Fancy of some Earthly Happiness? Or hug some
thriving Project in our Brain? And solace our selves with some Worldly
Advantage, while we pretend to have our Conversation in Heaven, and our
Communion with God. The Scripture tells us, The Friendship of the World is
Enmity to God; and he that is a Friend to the World, is an Enemy to God, James
4.4. The Apostle advises, not to Love the World, nor the things of the World;
and if we Love the World, the Love of the Father is not in us, 1 John 2.15.
Beware therefore of this snare, entertain no Discourse with the World till thou
have finished the work that lies before thee. Do, as Moses, leave thy shoes
behind thee, when thou come into God's presence, Exodus 3.5. Or, as Abraham,
all at the foot of the Hill: when thou ascendest this Mount of contemplations,
say, stand by Profit, stand by Pleasure, stand by World, till I come again; and
though these knock at the Door, open it not; come not with a Love or liking to
any known sin, this is a notable hinderance in this case, and will spoil thy
Duty; this dimmeth the eye of the mind, that it cannot see Spiritual things: As
it hinders Prayer, so it hinders Meditation also, Psalm 66.18. If I regard
Iniquity in my Heart, God will not hear my prayer, neither will he succeed thy
Meditation: Those that will preserve precious Liquors, put them into clean
Vessels; and those that will store up clean, and Holy Thoughts, must put them
into pure Hearts: what Communion has Light with Darkness, or what Fellowship
has Christ with Belial? If thou use violence to thy Conscience, thou art a
stranger to an Heavenly Life. Laziness also is another hinderance to this work,
when men are loath to take pains with their own Hearts; and Meditation cannot
be managed well without much pains, there is scarce any thing hinders knowing
men more than this; when men cannot away with diligence, they either omit, or
slubber over the Duty; and as good never a whit, as never the better: few men
are willing to sequester their thoughts, and affections from the World, and to
be intent upon the Duty, and Exercise their Graces in their Order, or their
Affections upon their proper Objects, and hold them there till they find
success. The Heart of man will prove false, and Treacherous, and is hardly
brought unto, or kept upon the Duty; it will find some starting hole or other,
and frame some excuse to be gone, if we use not violence to force it: How
lazily will it demean it self? How ready will it be to depart before the work
be done, and make some Vagaries, or entertain the thoughts of the World, or
divert it self to some more pleasing Objects; and if thou look not about thee,
will pass away the time idly, and give over before the work be brought to any
perfection: but thou must deal by thy Heart, as thou would do by a sleighty
Servant; persuade, command, threaten, and chastise, force it into the presence
of God, and let it not stir till the work be done.

7. Direct. When thou have thus wound up thy heart by Meditation to the highest
pin, and worked thy Affections into a heat, and brought thy work into a good
posture, and gathered Observations for thy use: Take heed of letting thy heart
flag too suddenly, or thy Affections cool over-hastily; keep up that Spiritual
Life, and vigor as long as thou can; Live in the strength of that meat, if
possible, as long as Elijah did, forty days; yea, labor to be the better for
it all thy Life. It Is not safe in a great heat, to cool too hastily: he that
climbs high should descend by leisure. Have thou met with God in the Duty? Stir
not thy Foot before thou have given him thanks. We are apt to be sensible of
our pressing wants, and our desires are let out for a supply in our needs; God
hears of us then, we cry, arise, and save us: but a gracious Heart should be as
sensible of Mercies, as of Miseries; and be as ready to render praise for the
one, as to put up Prayers for the removal of the other: But most men are like
the Lepers; of ten, that are healed, but one gives thanks. And it is thy Duty
also to Treasure up that knowledge which thou have gained by this Duty; store
up in thy Book or Memory the Conclusions thou have gathered: Have by Reason and
Scripture found, that sin is bitter? Lay up this as a certain Truth, for
hereafter. Have thou found that Grace is Lovely, and Holiness amiable? Remember
this also, lay up these Resolves, that they may stand thee in steed in a day of
Temptation; that if ever Satan, the World, or thy own deceitful Heart should
hereafter persuade thee to love sin, or disown Holiness, thou may reply, nay,
but at such a time, in such a place, I found by such Scriptures, and such
Arguments, that sin is filthy, and Holiness Lovely; in what false glass soever
you now represent them to us. Nay, not only so, but devote thy self wholly unto
God, and Resolve that thou will Live according to those Conclusions, thou have
raised, and those Truths thou have found out; and that thou submit thy self to
his Will, so far as he shall reveal it unto thee. Without this what benefit
can expect from the Duty? When thou have found out the Duty, and by
undeniable Arguments can prove it to be thy Duty, and yet wilt not do it,
thou will be beaten with the more stripes. If by the force of Reason, and
Evidence of Scripture, thou find out that the way of sin is to be forsaken, and
the Duties of Holiness to be performed; and yet thou forsake Holiness, and
choose sin, what Excuse can thou plead? Thou will but sin with a Candle in thy
hand: but if upon these Considerations, thou set thy self to hate sin, as the
greatest evil; and walk in the path which is called Holy, in sincerity; then
shall thou reap Fruit by thy Meditation. If thou find upon Consideration, that
God is the chiefest good, and Love him as the chiefest good, happy will thou
be: If thou find the Devil to be the worst Master, and break out of his Prison,
and resolve thou will never give him one more Act of willing Obedience, it is
well: or, if thou find in the reach of thy Heart, that thy Grace is not true,
and thereupon thou resolvest never to give thy Heart any rest, till thy
Relation be changed; and God be thy Father, and Christ thy Husband, it is well:
Or, if in the search thou find Evidences of true Grace, Record them; they
will be of use in a day of desertion, and help against the Devils fiery Darts:
The Result of David's Meditation was to return home to God, Psalm. 119.59. So it
should of ours, if it make us not more in Love with God, and Holiness, and more
to hate sin, and wickedness, it does us no good; if it strengthen not our
Graces, or weaken not our Corruption, we lose our Labor. In a word, conclude
the whole Duty; either with Prayer to God for a Blessing, or if it may be
convenient, with some Verses of a Psalm that is suitable.

CHAP. VI. Directions in Prayer.
THE next Duty I shall speak unto is Prayer; which is not only Work, but Wages;
not only a Duty, but a Privilege. Now, Prayer is an Offering up our desires
unto God, in the Name of Christ, by the assistance of the Spirit, with
Confession of sin, and thankful acknowledgment of God's Mercies received; Psalm.
92.8. John 18.23. Romans 8.26. Psalm. 36.5,6. Dan. 9.4. Phil. 4.6. For the kinds
of it you may take notice, there is Confession, when we acknowledge our sins to
God: There is Petition, when we beg of God those things necessary for Soul, or
Body, for this Life, or that to come: There is Deprecation, when we beseech God
to turn away the evils felt, or feared; from our selves, or others: There is
Intercession, when we pray for others also; and there is Thanksgiving, when we
thankfully acknowledge the Mercies received. Now, Prayer is either public in
the Congregation, or private in the Family, or secret in the Closet: each of
these should have their time; each has a Promise, and we may find Precepts
for, and Example of them. That Prayer is a Duty, is acknowledged by most, and
denied by few, till of late Years, wherein some have argued themselves above
Ordinances; but the Scripture owns no such thing, we have the Command of God
for it, which is Authority sufficient, and the only Rule to walk by: It Is a
Divine Command that makes it Duty; read these following Scriptures, 1 These.
5.17. Pray without ceasing. Col. 4.2. Continue in Prayer, and watch in the same
with thanksgiving. Romans 12.12. Continue instant in prayer. Psalm. 59.15. Call
upon me in the day of Trouble, etc. I might instance in many Promises made to
it, and many threatenings to those that neglect it, and show you the Examples of
the best of Saints; yea, of Christ himself, that spent whole nights in Prayer:
All which sufficiently prove that it is a Duty; and therefore let us set upon
it with all alacrity: many are the encouragements unto this Duty; some from
God, some from Prayer it self, and some from our own Necessities: From God his
Promises to hear and help, may encourage us, Psalm. 50.15. and many other
places: his Attributes, this assures us he is able to help, and faithful in his
Promises, and will do it. The Relation that is between God and a Believer gives
him hopes; he is their Father, Christ their Elder Brother, their Head and
Husband; yea, their Redeemer, and Intercessor. The Experiences they have
Recorded of all Ages: The Returns of Prayer, is no small encouragement, which
shows the Efficacy and Force of it, and how prevalent it has been with God;
and therefore one calls it the almost, if not altogether Omnipotent Grace of
Prayer. I might give you a taste of it thus. It has changed the course of
Nature; stopped the Sun in the Firmament, Josh. 10.12. and brought it back ten
degrees, 2 Kings 20.11. Quenched the Rage of the Fire, Dan. 3.27. Stopped the
Mouths of Lions, Dan. 6.22. Divided the Red Sea, that Israel passed through,
Exodus 14.21. It has prevailed over great Armies, and Potent Princes; as over
Pharaoh, which it overwhelmed in the Sea, Exodus 14.21. Over Amalek, Exodus
17.12. Over Sennacherib, 2 Kings 19.32. It has withheld Rain from the Earth,
for a long time, and after procured it, James 5.17,18. It has brought Angels
from Heaven, for the help of man; thus to Daniel, Chap. 9.21. For Hezekiahs
help, 2 Kings 19.35. where an Angel slew in one Night, in the Camp of
Sennacherib, a hundred forty and five thousand: And to Elisha, 2 Kings 6.17.
where the Mountain was full of Horses and Chariots of Fire about Elisha. It
has brought Fire from Heaven to consume the Enemies, 2 Kin. 1.10.12. It has
procured Bears to devour those Children that mocked the Prophet, 2 Kings 2.24.
It is the way to cast out Devils, Mat. 17.21. and to work strange deliverances;
as Jonah out of the Whales belly, Jonah 2.10. Peter out of Prison, Acts 12.5,
etc. By this the Widows Oil was increased, 2 King. 4.3. And Miracles might be
wrought, Mark. 11.23. This is the way to recover the Sick, James 5.15. To
divert Judgments felt, or feared; thus Moses often stood in the gap: This is the
way to procure pardon of Sin, Luke 18.13. To avoid the Temptations of Satan,
Mat. 26.41. To have deliverance out of Troubles, Psalm. 50.15. To procure the
Spirit of God, Luke 12.13. To get Wisdom, James 1.5. Who now would not set upon
such a Duty? Now, to perform this Duty well, take these Directions.

1. Direct. There are several Qualifications requisite to every one that would
rightly perform this Duty of Prayer, in an acceptable manner, without which a
Blessing cannot be expected; for though Christ bids ask, and we shall have;
seek, and we shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to us. Yet St. James
tells us, we ask, and have not, because we ask amiss. It is necessary, in the
first place, that thou be a Child of God, and have the work of Grace wrought
upon thy Heart, or otherwise thou have no assurance of being heard: The blind
man, John 9.31. could say, God hears not Sinners. I know it is the Duty of
others to pray; and the Apostle incourageth Simon Magus to the Duty, if,
perhaps, the thoughts of his heart might be forgiven: But, till the Heart be
brought over to God, we have no assurance that God will hear us: the Sacrifice
of the wicked is abomination to God; till then, we cannot comfortably call God
Father, nor come with boldness to the Throne of Grace; neither will Christ
Mediate, or Intercede for us, while we remain his Enemies; neither will the
Spirit of God assist us in the Duty, Romans 8.15. It is in Christ, and through
Faith, that we have boldness and access with Confidence to God, Ephesians. 3 12. It Is
necessary also, that we hate sin, if we come to God; for he is a devouring Fire
to his Enemies, and will not be reconciled to those that are reconciled to Sin:
How can we heartily pray against Sin, and for Holiness, if we love Sin, and
hate Holiness? As all unconverted Sinners do. This is dissembling with God,
when the Heart is not with him; If I regard Iniquity in my Heart, says David,
God will not hear my Prayers, Psalm. 66.18. Yea, God, who is Holiness it self,
requires Holiness in all those that draw near to him; and he being a Spirit,
will be Worshipped in Spirit and in Truth: Without Holiness no man shall ever
see God with Comfort, Heb. 12.14. Knowledge also is requisite, for God cannot
abide the Blind, and the Lame in Sacrifice; without this the mind cannot be
good, nor the Service acceptable: without this a man knows not what to pray
for, or what to pray against; what to seek, or what to shun; what is sin, or
what is Duty; what he wants, or what he has; and what blind worship is he like
to offer, he can never Pray as he ought. Self-denial also is necessary; he
should in all things subject his will to the will of God. A notable Example we
have in Christ himself, whose Meat and Drink it was to do his Fathers Will. So
when he had prayed that that bitter Cup might pass from him; yet adds, not my
Will, but thine be done: and thus he has taught us to pray, Thy Will be done
in Earth as it is in Heaven. Faith also is require^; for if those shafts of
Prayer, are not headed by Faith, they will never reach Heaven; this is the
Condition required, whatsoever you ask believingly, you shall receive, and
without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Nay, further, Patience
is also required; we must wait for an Answer, not like those short-winded
Bethulians, that set God a time, and will wait no longer: but refer all to his
Will, who best knows his own time; yea, the best time, and fittest Season. He
ought also to be an Humble man; for God resists the Proud, and gives Grace
to the Humble: He that has not low self-denying thoughts of himself, God will
have low thoughts of his Service; he fills the hungry with good things, but the
Rich he sends empty away. He must also beg for the power and assistance of the
Spirit, Romans 8.26. God knows the voice of his Spirit: Come not in thy own
strength. Thou must also be painful, and Laborious; not only pray for Mercies,
but endeavor for them; a few faint wishes will not serve turn: Sin must be
fought against, as well as prayed against: endeavors must be used.

2. Direct. Before thou come to this Duty of Prayer, prepare thy Heart to meet
the Lord thy God, in so solemn a Duty. Were thou but to meet some Prince, or
Noble Man, thou would make some Preparation; much more should thou when
thou art to meet the great God, one that knows the Secrets of thy Heart, and
thy Ends and Motives in the Duty. What business of Concernment is there, but
needs some preparation? Much more, when the Soul is so deeply concerned in it.
Examine therefore what Relation thou stand in to God; whether he be a
Friend, or an Enemy. Who can come with boldness to him, that has offended him,
and is not Reconciled? If thou have not a Mediator to Intercede for thee, and a
Surety to undertake thy Debt, how dare thou approach to the Creditor, to whom
thou owe ten thousand Talents, and can not pay a Farthing? How dare
approach this Consuming Fire, that art but Chaff, and Stubble? And what hopes
have of speeding, if thou be not within the Covenant? The promise belongs not
to thee. But when thou can find an Interest in God, and in the Covenant, and
in Christ; can call God Father, yet rush not rudely into his Presence, but
study well what things he has promised; for those thou may boldly ask:
Heaven and Earth shall pass, but his Word shall not pass, till it be fulfilled.
But if thou ask amiss, that is, what he never promised, no wonder if thou
receive it not; acquaint thy self well with the Attributes of God; his Power,
Goodness, Justice, and Truth, etc. This will be an Excellent Foundation for thy
Faith. And when thou art come before him, set thy self as in his Presence, and
let thy Heart be affected with awful Reverence of him, who is the Searcher of
the Heart, and Tryer of the Reins. There Is many that come to him in prayer, and
little consider with whom they have to do. Come also with a full purpose, and
Resolution, (or else never come) to leave, and forsake all those sins thou
shall confess; For if thou regard Iniquity in thy Heart, God will not hear thy
Prayer, Psalm. 66.18. It Is a vain thing to think to get pardon for those sins
thou will not leave; or a dispensation to Sin. Meditate before hand of the
Number, Nature, and Quality of thy Sins: Of the Purity of God's Law, the
Justice of God, his Threatenings against Sin, and Sinners, and the punishments
he has brought upon the World for sin; the little Good that Sin has done
thee, and the great hurt, etc. These Considerations may work in thee a loathing
of sin, when thou see that it is the cause of all thy Miseries, then will thou put up real desires to have it Mortified; and till then thou will but
dally with God. Study well beforehand what are thy wants, which thou would
have supplied by God. Let it be thy daily work, to think what Sin, and
Corruption is strong in thee, and what Grace is weak or wanting, and what thou
would beg at God's hands; and have not thy Errand to seek, when thou should
do it. Study well also what Mercies thou have received, and forget not to
render to God the Tribute of Praise: Thankfulness for one Mercy, is a real
Petition for another. Many, like the Lepers, will come in a Petition for
Mercies they want, but few in Thanksgiving for Mercies received: Most men are
like the Swine under the Tree, they eat the Crabs, or Acorns, but look not up
from whence they come: And where as it is a Commanded Duty to Pray one for
another, it is necessary that we sympathize one with another. Mourn with those
that Mourn, and Rejoice with them that Rejoice: It was Nehemiah's practice (and
he should herein be our President) when all went well with him in his own
particular, the Afflictions of the Church could wring Tears from his Eyes,
Nehem. 1.4. And if any jarr be between thee and another, be Reconciled, this is
Christ's Counsel, Mat. 5.23. Mark 11.26. Come thus prepared, and there is great
hopes of speeding.

3. Direct. Would thou put up a prevailing Prayer? See that thou make it to
God alone, and not to Saints, or Angels, or any Creature whatsoever. This is
that Homage which he has reserved to himself, and that Honor that he will not
give to another. Many are the Commands which are in Scripture for this Duty,
Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of Trouble, and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall Glorify me. And Christ bids us go to our Father in Secret, and our
Father which sees in Secret will reward us openly, Mat. 6.6. This was the
Refuge which the Godly run to in all their streights: Hither Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob went, Genesis 18.27. and 28.3. and 32.11. Hither Moses goes, when God
threatened Israel, Exodus 39.11. Yea, Joshua, Hannah, Samuel, David, Solomon,
Elijah, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Peter, and Christ himself, and thus he taught us
to do, Mat. 6.9. Our Father, which art in Heaven. Many are the Promises which
are made to those that go to God, in the Name of Christ; and many are the
Experiences which Believers have had of the Return of Prayers made to God. But
in the whole Book of God there is not one Precept for, or approved Example, of
any one, that sought either to Saint, or Angel; nor any Promise to any that do
so, or any Experience that any have had any Return to their Prayer; no, nor
encouragement to provoke us to believe that God approves it, but the contrary.
There is nothing in Scripture to ground our Faith upon, and what is not of
Faith, is Sin. We may find God himself styled, A God, Hearing Prayers; A Title
given to no Creature, in Heaven, or in Earth. God is Omniscient, and knows all
things; the very thoughts, and wishes, the sighs and breathings, the longings,
hungrings, and pantings of a broken Heart, are known to him; and he knows when
Prayers proceed from unfeigned Lips; he is Hoker Lebh, Scutator Cordis; The
Searcher of the Heart, Jer. 17.10. And it is a Privilege, that no man on Earth
can claim; neither have we any assurance, that Saints, or Angels in Heaven can
do it. Again, he is every where present, at all times, and in all places (which
the Angels themselves are not, being finite Creatures) and therefore is always
in a readiness to help. We know he hears our Prayers, but have no assurance
that the others do: He is Omnipotent, and able to help us; he is, El shaddai,
God All-sufficient, Genesis 17.1. Able to remove all rubs out of the way; but the
Creature cannot help us, they are but the Cistern, he is the Fountain, they
have no more than what he puts into them. Yea, all Religious Worship is due to
him alone, whereof Prayer is a principal part, and cannot be given to another
without offense. It Is from him that we receive every good and perfect gift,
James 1.17. and therefore unto him we should go to beg it, who keeps the
dispose of them in his own hands, and will be sought unto before he part with
them. God is the Object of our Faith, and should be of our Prayers; for, How
can we call upon him, upon whom we have not believed, Romans 10.14. The very
Heathen, by the Light of Nature, acknowledge this Privilege; this Duty was due
to God alone: they put up their Petitions, to those they esteemed gods, as the
Mariners in Jonah's Ship, called every man upon his god, and advised Jonah to
do so also, Jonah 1.5. And God himself threatens the Families that call not
upon his Name, Jer. 10.25. And in their distress threatens to send them to the
gods they serve. How much then are those to blame that Pray to Saints, and
Angels, as the Papists; or offer up Religious Worship to any other but to God
alone, but till they can prove it a Duty by direct precept, or approved
Example; till they can prove they are Omnipresent, always at hand; Omniscient,
and know all things; Omnipotent, and can help us in all our straits, which they
will never do; lets us never leave the Fountain that is all this, and go to the
Cistern that cannot help us.

4. Direct. If thou would speed in Prayer, then go to God in the Name of
Christ; if thou take him not along with thee, thou will not be welcome; if thou
come not clothed in thy Elder Brothers Garments, thou will return without the
Blessing. We are by Nature Enemies to God, and he is a consuming Fire to his
Enemies, and Christ must be the Skreen, to keep us from burning; it is he alone
that can Reconcile us to his Father: It Is he in whom he is well pleased, and
through him he cannot be offended: He is the High Priest, that Offers up the
Prayers of his People, when he has perfumed them with the Incense of his own
Righteousness, Rev. 8.3. It Is he that presents their Prayers to God, and makes
them acceptable, which otherwise would be abominable: He is the Altar, whereon
a broken Heart must Offer up the Sacrifice of Prayer, and Praise. Now, when I
speak of going to God in the Name of Christ, I do not only mean using Christ's
Name to God, or Concluding our Prayers with such words, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen. Though this is Lawful, if serious, yet not sufficient; we read
of some, Mat. 7.22. that had Preached in his Name, and in his Name had cast out
Devils, and in his Name had done many wonderful works; and it is probable, they
had prayed in his Name also, and yet he would not own them. But those that come
in his Name, must believe in him for Salvation; roll themselves upon him, lay
hold upon him by a Lively Faith, for their Lord and Savior; for their Head,
and Husband; for their Mediator, and Advocate; and give up themselves wholly
unto him: Take him upon his own terms, as he is offered in the Gospel; to love
him above all, and forsake all others for him; to obey him in all, though all
the World be offended at it; to resign up our selves, and all we have to be at
his dispose; to be willing to be any thing, do any thing, suffer any thing, he
would have us; and so to come with Confidence to God, trusting in the Merits of
Christ; believing that for his sake we shall have our sins pardoned, our wants
supplied, and our Souls saved. He is the only way to the Father, and without
him we can have no Admittance; he opens the doors, and brings us into the
Presence Chamber, Ephesians. 2.18. He is the only Mediator between God and Man, Heb.
9.14. 1 Timothy 2.5. Now, God never gave any such Honor to the Saints, nor
Angels, in the Scripture, though he denies them none that is their due. Many
Promises we have, that whatsoever we ask in Christ's Name, shall be given us,
John 14.13. But no promise in Scripture of prevailing in any other Name: Nay,
the contrary; for if Noah, Daniel, and Job departed Saints, whom God dearly
Loved, could not be heard for Son or Daughter, Ezekiel. 14.14, etc. What hopes can
we have of others? Perhaps, the Papists will tell us, they do not pray to
Saints, or Angels, that they should help them, but only Mediate for them; but
who made them Mediators? There is only one Mediator between God and Man, even
the Lord Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy: 2.5. And there is no other qualified for the
Office: It Is necessary that he must be both God, and Man; that is, to Mediate
between God and Man, and that he be perfectly Righteous, which no Son of Adam,
Christ excepted, ever was: All others have Oil little enough, and none to
spare. Neither does the Scripture make mention of any other; nay, excludes all
other: For Christ is called the only Mediator. None can make our imperfect
prayers acceptable to God, but he; none can be present in all places, to
receive all Petitions, but he. The Saints and Angels are but finite Creatures,
and cannot be in all places at once; and what assurance can we have, when we
pray that they are present, and hear all prayers, and understand all Languages:
How can Peter, or the Virgin Mary, at the same time, be present at Rome,
Venice, London, and ten thousand places at once, if they are not Infinite? As
we have no Precept in Scripture, to make these our Mediators; no more have we
Examples of any that did, though there were many Saints then dead, Job 5.1. To
which of the Saints will thou turn? It Is Christ alone that knows that meaning
of the Spirit, in the hearts of the Faithful, Romans 8.27. And in his Name we
must go to God, if we would be heard.

5. Direct. If thou would put up prevalent Prayer at the Throne of Grace,
look well to the matter of them; ask nothing of God but what thou have some
ground to believe thou shall receive from God. Every thing will no more bear a
Prayer, than every stream will a Ship. Thou ought not to pray for those
things which are against the Glory of God, the Edification, and good of the
Church, and thy own, and others Salvation: They are rather Curses, than
Prayers, that are poured out by wicked men for the Extirpation of a Faithful
Ministry, and the rooting out of the Godly, or the power of Godliness; and
these will prevail for a Curse upon the Head, and Heart of the Imprecator. Thou
must not pray for a Commission to break thy Sovereign's Laws; this will not be
granted: Or, to do things contrary to his revealed, or for any thing evil in it
self; or that which is contrary to God's Nature to grant; or contrary to his
Eternal decree. Thou must not pray for a dispensation to sin, and for
assistance in the Act of Sin; or to reconcile God and Mammon, or Christ and
Belial; or for Salvation without Sanctification; or for Pardon of Sin, without
Faith and Repentance. Neither ought thou to pray for Trifles, and things of
small concernment; it is not fit for a Subject to go to his Prince, to beg a
Point, or a Pin. Neither should thou pray for that which thou will not
endeavor to get: Many could wish for Heaven, that will not work for Heaven.
But thou may pray for all those good things; for Soul, or Body; for this
Life, or that to come; for thy self, or others; which are necessary, which God
has Commanded thee to ask, or promised in his Word to give. Thou have a good
Foundation for thy Faith, to ask what Divine Writ Warrants thee to ask, or
promises shall be given. And thou must beg them as they are promised; what is
absolutely promised thou may beg absolutely: And what is conditionally
promised, beg it if God see it good for thee: Ye ask, and have not, says the
Apostle, because ye ask amiss The Apostles are reproved, that would have asked
Fire from Heaven, to burn up the unprofitable Samaritans, Luke 9.54. Every
Petition should be grounded upon the Word of God, and not upon Carnal Conceits:
We should ask what God thinks fit, and not what we our selves think fit: It was
an unanswerable Petition of the Mother of Zebedee's Children, that her Sons
might sit, one at Christ's Right Hand, and the other at his Left, in his
Kingdom. If we ask any thing according to his Will, he will grant it us, 1 John
5.14. Where God Commands us to ask, and promises us to give; here is a double
ground of assurance. Now, the good things we should beg of God for our selves,
or others, are either Spiritual; or Temporal: Those which are Spiritual, are
absolutely necessary to Salvation, or they are not; those that are, are these,
or the like: The Spirit of God, Faith, Repentance, and the rest of the Graces
of God's Spirit; these we must beg absolutely, because they are not promised
upon Condition: Others are not so necessary to the Being, but the well-being of
a Christian: As Peace of Conscience, Assurance, Joy in the Holy Ghost, etc. And
these, as they are not absolutely promised, nor absolutely necessary, should be
asked with submission to the Will of God, as he sees it best for us. Temporal
Blessings, as Meat, Drink, Clothes, Health, Peace, Prosperity, etc. We must beg
in submission to God's Will; as we have Christ for an Example, Not my Will, but
thine be done. Every Prayer must be grounded upon Faith, when the promise is
conditional, you shall have them, if they be good for you, you must pray, Lord
give them, if they be good for me; and for the Circumstances, we must not limit
the Holy one of Israel, to time, place, manner, measure, or such like: And in
Deprecation of evils, Spiritual, or Temporal; observe also this Rule, that
which hinders Salvation, pray absolutely it may be removed; if not, submit unto
the Will of God: These Rules observed, thou may expect an Answer.

6. Direct. Would thou put up a pleasing, and prevailing Prayer unto God,
then thou must regard the manner of it, as well as the matter. Every Prayer,
good for the Matter, is not acceptable to God, because it is exceeded in the
manner of the performance. A wicked Man may put up a good Petition, when God
regards it not. Balaam's wish was good, to dye the Death of the Righteous, and
that his last end might be like his. Now, as it must proceed from a Right
Fountain; a Heart purified by Faith: So every Petition must be pointed by
Faith, or it will never pierce Heaven. Nay, it is not enough to have Faith in
the Habit, but it must be in the Excrcise also, and drawn out into the Act,
without Faith we cannot please God, Heb. 11.6. No wonder then, if many men's
prayers are rejected, for all men have not Faith. Now, Faith helps a man to a
Foundation to build upon, the Promises, and Attributes of God; this keeps the
Heart from wavering, and the Soul from fluctuating. It points us out to Christ,
the Mediator, sitting at the Right hand of God; which offers up our prayers,
and brings us an Answer of peace. Now, though Faith be absolutely necessary,
yet it is not sufficient; there must be Repentance also, and hatred of sin: If I
regard Iniquity in my Heart, God will not hear my Prayer, Psalm. 66.18. Non
prodest medicam salum, dum ferrum in vulnere, let every Sin thou confessest,
draw sorrow from thy Heart; and, if possible, Tears from thine Eyes; such
prayers are likeliest to prevail with that God that cannot behold Iniquity with
approbation. So likewise Zeal, and fervency is a necessary Qualification; it is
not every cold Petition will get Admittance at the Throne of Grace, or pierce
the Ears of God; he hears not sluggish prayers, this puts denials into his
Mouth: Every one can deny a cold Suitor. Had the Woman of Samaria been of this
Temper, she had gone away without an Answer. We should be fervent in Spirit,
serving God, Romans 12.11. It Is God's complaint, Hos. 7.14. They have not cried
unto me with their Heart. Prayer is a part of God's Worship, and a Curse is
threatened to them that do the Work of the Lord negligently. The business is of
great Concernment, and therefore should not be slightly performed. If a Man
were to beg for his Life, how earnest would he be? He would use all the
Arguments he could, and beg heartily. Now, this is for thy Life, and the Life
of thy Soul; if thou prevail, well and good; if not, thou art undone; Men, or
Angels cannot help thee, thy Diseases are so many, and thy wants so great.
These Zealous Prayers are sometimes called, the renting of the heart, Joel
2.13. Sometimes wrestling with God; and thus Jacob wrastled, and prevailed: And
in Scripture it is sometimes expressed by the Motions of the Body; Hannah moved
her Lips, Solomon spread abroad his Hands, the Publican beat his Breast, and
Christ fell upon the Ground. Sometimes it is expressed by deep Sighs, and Groans,
which cannot be expressed, Romans 8.26. Sometimes by loud Cries, Psalm. 32.3.
Sometimes by often repeating the same Words, as in Christ, Mat. 26.30. And
sometimes by bitter Tears, as in Peter, Mat. 26.75. Heb. 5.7. Who in the days
of his flesh, when he had offered up Prayers and Supplications with strong Cries
and Tears, etc. Yet this is not enough, we must also watch and pray, or watch
in prayer, it is Christ's own Command. Now, Watching is the proper Act of the
Body, it is but Metaphorically Attributed to the Soul: Now, both are required;
if the Body sleep, the Soul cannot watch; and if the Soul snort in Security,
Bodily Exereise profite^ little. Watch that there be no sin lying upon thy
Conscience, or Lived, or delighted in; that there be no passion predominant in
the Soul, no Temptation of Satan entertained, no Worldly thoughts foisted in to
spoil thy Duty, no drousiness creeping upon thee; watch that thy Heart grow
neither Cold nor Lazy, in the performance, or steal away from the Duty; that
Pride, nor self appear there; that no roving Imagination, vain thoughts, or
needless tautologies appear there: But above all, take heed thou come not in
thine own strength, but by the assistance of the Spirit of God, perform the
Duty which is given to this end, Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.26. Jude 20. Praying in the
Holy Ghost, this illuminates the heart, discovers what is sin, and what is
Duty; what a Man is, what he has, and what he wants; what a God he has to
deal with, what he requires, and works in us, both the will, and the Deed.

7. Direct. If thou would speed well at the Throne of Grace, be sure to
demean thy self well after the Duty; if thou miscarry, then thou will lose all
thy Labor; think not that the Duty is over when thou art off thy Knees; no,
there is good part behind: Call thy Heart to an Account, how it has carried it
self in the Duty; if this were duly done, it durst not wander, as it usually
does, for fear of a check; and having found out it is carriage, be affected
accordingly; if well, rejoice, and bless God for it; it was he that kept it in
Order: If ill, check it, and make it smart for it, and stir it up by some
rousing Considerations. Examine also what assistance thou have had from the
Spirit of God, God promises the assistance of his Spirit, in the Inditing their
prayers, and teaching them what to ask; if he have made good this promise,
bless God for it, and be encouraged by it for the future; and expect the
fulfilling those desires that the Spirit assisted in the pouring out: If thou
have not met with this assistance, it is, doubtless, thy own fault; for God
never breaks his promise, if we keep the Condition; search out the fault, and
amend for the future; set Faith on work for the return of thy prayers, for no
doubt, if thou prayest according to God's Will, thou shall receive the Mercy
prayed for. Many deal by their prayers, as foolish Children by their Arrows;
they shoot at Rovers, and mark not where they light: Most Men lose their
prayers, and heed not whether God hears them, or not; Answers them, or not;
they make prayer the end of prayer; and rest satisfied, if the work be done,
without on Answer; they observe not where they light, or what comes of them. If
thy Petition be Lawful, expect an Answer; if it come, be sure that which is
gotten by prayer, be worn with Thanksgiving; be not like the unthankful Lepers,
go away, and let God hear no more of you. And when thou prayest against any
sin, be sure to set Heart and Hand on work, to Mortify that sin. And when thou
prayest for any Mercies, be sure to Labor what thou can, in the use of means
to attain that Mercy; it is a vain wish which is not seconded with endeavors:
it is but a mocking of God, that will not be mocked; and a ridiculous thing to
pray for that he will not endeavor for: As if a man should pray to come to
London, and will not set a step that way. If thou prayest for Spiritual
Blessings, use means to obtain them; and if for Temporal things, be diligent in
the use of a Lawful Calling: it is the hand of the diligent that makes Rich.
When thou prayest for thy Neighbor, be as willing to help him, to thy power,
as to pray for him. Many men show more Divinity in their Words, than Humanity
in their Actions; one penny is more hardly got from them than thrice God help
you. And when thou have put up thy Requests, then with patience wait for an
Answer; as Hannah, when she had poured out her Soul to God, she depended upon
him, and looked no more sad, 1 Samuel 1.18. It may be, though God has promised,
and will perform; yet he will not give it at the first asking; he will make
thee seek again, and wait also. When Peter was in Prison, and the Church prayed
for his deliverance, it was the last Night, before God granted their Petitions,
Acts 12.5,6. But be it sooner, or later, when the Mercy comes, give God his
Tribute of praise; this he requires, Psalm. 50.15. And this was David's
practice, Psalm. 116.2. And Christ charge this upon the Lepers, as their
fault. If he deny thy Request, seek out what is the cause, and, perhaps, thou
may find some sin un-repented of, and then no wonder if God hear thee not;
resolve, with Saul, it shall dye, though it be thy Jonathan, 1 Samuel 4.37.
Destroy that Achan that offends God, and troubles Israel. Or, perhaps, the
Petition required is not suitable; or thou failedst either in the manner, or
end: if so, be more wary the next time. If neither of these wait for an Answer,
set upon the Duty with stronger resolutions, if prayer be not strong enough,
join Fasting: Some sins, like some Devils, come not out but by prayer, and
fasting. If thou can not do it thy self, call in help; take these Directions,
and thou will find the banefit of prayer.

CHAP. VII. Directions in, and about Singing of Psalms.
THE Next Duty I shall Instruct you in, is Singing of Psalms: A Duty much
pressed, and practiced, both in the time of the Law, and in the time of the
Gospel; and many thousands of Believers have received benefit, and have been
refreshed by it. The Book of Psalms, it is evident, is of Divine Institution.
and compiled by the assistance of the Spirit of God: And though sundry other
pieces of Scripture, have been by several Persons, in several Ages, called in
Question, yet this was never Questioned by any. It Is expressly mentioned by the
Apostle Peter, Acts 1.20. Yea, is acknowledged to be Canonical Scripture, by
Christ himself, the great Doctor of the Church, Luke 20.42. And David himself
says, in the Book of Psalms, the Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right
hand, till I make thine Enemies thy Footstool, Luke 24.44. All things must be
fulfilled, which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms, concerning me. The Hebrew Title of this Book, is, Sepher Tehillim,
a Book of Hymns, because it chiefly consists in praise and thanksgiving unto
God, for his benefits: And this Title seems to be taken from the Inscription of
the 145 Psalm, where the word is used; and the whole Psalm spends it self in
the praises of God. In the Scripture indeed, we read of Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. But what the difference is between
these, is not easy to show; no doubt, one, and the same Psalm, may admit of
either of these Names. Some have distinguished them thus, Psalms, say they, are
those that contain Exhortation to Holiness, and Directions to an Holy Life:
Hymns contain praises to God, for his benefits, Spiritual, and Temporal; and
Spiritual Songs are a mixture of both. The Original word Mizmar, comes from a
word that signifies cutting off superfluous things, and signifies a eomposure
of Harmonious words, without Superfluity, or Excess; and it is sufficient, that
the whole Book, containing several Subjects, is called by this one name, of
Psalms; even by Christ himself. Now, this Divine Ordinance, or Holy Duty,
though both Commanded; and Commended, and practiced by Christ, and his
Apostles, and the Church of God, even down from David's Time, to this day; yet
is denied by some, and Questioned by others, to be a Duty; but I think they may
Question (as some indeed do) all the Ordinances, as well as this; for, what but
the Ignorance, or wilful perverting of the Scripture, can be the ground of such
a denial? It may be indeed, they have never performed this Duty as they ought
to do, and so never received that benefit and refreshing from it, that others
have done; and hence they judge it is improfitable, and condemn the Ordinance
for their own fault. But doubtless, many thousands of Believers, may speak out
their Experiences, and tell you, they have been refreshed by it. That it is a
Christian Duty, shall, God willing, be further showed you; and that it is both
profitable and pleasant, is easy to prove. The Psalms are a Rich Storehouse
of all manner of Provision; and those that are conversant herein cannot be
Ignorant of it. Here are Instructions for the Ignorant to lead them in the way
to Heaven, and guide them by all the by-ways of Error, and Folly; here are
Incitations to the dull, and sluggish, to rouse them up out of the sleep of
Security. Here are prayers to draw down Mercies from God, and praises to God
for Mercies received. What shall I say? Whatsoever Estate a Christian can be
in, here he may find Comfort, or Company, or both. Here, as in a Glass, are
represented, and set forth, the thoughts, the words, and Actings of a gracious
Soul, in every Condition; and the Experience they have had of God's help at
hand, in every Condition: How often does the Psalmist begin like Jonah in the
belly of Hell? And is raised up to Heaven before the Conclusion. And it is
wonder that any should desist from such an Angelical duty, which so much
resembles Heaven: But because many, no doubt, out of Conscience, Question the
Duty: I shall first prove the Duty Lawful, and then give my Advice, how it may
be performed.

1. Direct. If thou would perform this Duty acceptably to God, and
profitably to thy self, be well convinced that it is thy Duty; halt not between
two Opinions, do it cheerfully, and understandingly; which thou can not do,
so long as thou doubtest whether it be thy Duty, or whether God will own it at
thy Hands; Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin, Romans 14.23. To this End, view
the Arguments following, which I suppose may be sufficient to prove it thy
Duty. My business in this Treatise is not to meddle with Controversies; yet so
far as the digression may be tolerable, and my Method and Design will allow, I
shall speak something for thy Satisfaction. Consider therefore, God has
furnished Man for this Duty, in giving him this Musical Faculty; with which, as
with all the rest, he should Glorify God: And how can he Glorify him better
with it, than with Trumpetting out his praise, and Singing forth his Glory?
This is the way that David stirs up his Tongue to praise God. This was an
acceptable Service unto God, even before the Ceremonial Law was given, Exodus
15.1. Then Sang Moses and the Children of Israel this Song unto the Lord, etc.
By this means also the Spirit of God is stirred up in us, Ephesians. 5.18,19, Be
filled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs. This leaves a sweet relish and delight upon the Spirit, Psalm.
104.33,34. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I Live; I will sing unto my God
while I have my Being; my Meditation of him shall be sweet. Nay, this is that
which Saints and Angels do in Heaven, and shall do for ever: Thus the Angels
did, Isa, 63. even with an Audible voice: As also of our Saviors Birth, Luke
2.13. and Rev. 5.8,9. and 14.3. and 15.3. And this shall be their work for
ever. Yea, it has been Prophesied, that there shall be Singing in Gospel
times, Isa. 20. In that day shall this Song be sung. Isa. 52.8. Thy Watchmen
shall lift up the voice, with the voice together shall they Sing, etc. Which
the Apostle Interprets to be in Gospel Times, Heb. 2.12. Yea, all Nations are
stirred up to sing praises unto God, Psalm. 100.1. Psalm. 95.12. Which includes
both Jews, and Gentiles, and must be understood of Gospel Times, as it is
Interpreted, Heb. 4.3. Neither can this Duty under the Law be Typical; for
neither Scripture, nor Reason can show, that Singing Psalms Typified out a
Believers Singing with the Heart in Gospel Times, any more than prayer with the
Voice, Typifies out praying with the Heart. Nay, Christ, and his Apostles,
after his departure, would not have used it, had it been Ceremonial: If this
serve not, we have plain Scripture Commands for the Duty, even in Gospel Times,
Ephesians. 5.19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs,
Singing with Melody in your Hearts, Col. 3.16. Teaching; and Admonishing one
another, in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing with Grace in your
Hearts to the Lord, James 4.9. If any be Afflicted, let him Pray; and if any be
Merry, let him sing Psalms. Now, all this shows this is a Duty: If yet, this
satisfy not, we have the best Examples, to warrant us. I shall set before you
the Angels, at the Birth of Christ, Luke 2.13. And the Holy Men of God in the
Time of the Law; David was called, The sweet Singer of Israel: But this is not
all; we have the Example of Christ himself, and his Disciples, which is without
Exception, Mat. 26.30. After Supper they sung an Hymn; which probably was the
same which the Jews were accustomed to sing, at the Passover, viz. those Songs
of Degrees, from Psalm. 112, etc. to Psalm 118.19. However, this shows the
Lawfulness of the Duty. We have also the Example of Paul and Silas, that Sang
in the Prison, with an Audible Voice, for the Prisoners heard them, Acts 26.25.
We have also the practice of the Church down since the Apostles Time; and all
those cannot likely persist in an Error, so long: This we have for our Warrant,
and little can be said against it; and therefore I shall conclude it is a
Lawful, and Laudable practice.

2. Direct. Is concerning the Matter of our Singing, which must be Holy, not
Profane; to God's Glory, and not our own: There are many that think it is a
Gospel-Duty, to Sing Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, and yet they
Scruple the Singing of David's Psalms; and thus they seek a knot in a Rush:
David's Psalms were an Acceptable Service unto God; and we read not where ever
God disclaimed them: They were used, and Sung, not only by himself, but others;
not only in his own Time, but in succeeding Generations; where they Praised God
with David's words: As we find in Solomon's Time, 2 Chronicles. 5.13. In
Jehoshaphat's Time, 2 Chronicles. 20.21. In Hezekiah's Time, 2 Chronicles. 29.20. In
Ezra's Time, Ezra. 3.10,11. In the two former places, we find David's words
used; in the two latter we find an express Command, and Example of Praising God
with David's words, and with the words of Asaph: You see the estimate the
Church of God put upon them; yea, as may be apparently proved, they were thus
in use, even to Christ's Time, as History Records, these Psalms of David in the
times of the Law, were sung by the four and twenty Orders of Musicians, which
seem to Typifie out the Twenty four Elders, men ioned Rev. 5.8. The Song of
Moses, the Servant of God, Exodus 15.1, etc. Was Sung, not only by him, but by
the People; not only by Men, but Women also, Exodus 15.20,21. Yea, Moses was
Commanded to write his other Song, and teach it unto the Children of Israel;
and put it into their Mouths, Deuteronomy. 31.19. And to what purpose was it thus
written, and thus to be learnt, but that they should sing it? I have already
proved we ought to Sing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, the very Name gives
unto David's Psalms. Nay, there is strong probability that Christ himself, when
he was upon the Earth, Sang David's Psalms at the close of his Supper; for if
he would conform to the Custom of the Jews, to Sing an Hymn at the close of the
Passover: What ground have we to think he did not conform to them in Singing
the same Hymn, which they were wont to do: which was as has been said, David's
Hymns; however, the Scriptures make mention of no other. And it is observed,
that the Ancient Hebrew Copy of Saint Matthew's Gospel gives favorable Light
unto it, by making use of the word there, which is the Title unto David's
Psalms. We find also the Apostle Penned good part of the Second Psalm, Acts
4.24. and why not Sing it? And if Christ, and his Apostles had had any other
Hymns, they would have been left upon Record, as some of their Prayers are; but
no such thing is to be found. Nay, we read that the Angels themselves, in their
Celestial Harmony, conforming themselves to the words of David, and allude
unto the Song of Moses, the Servant of the Lord; and therefore, doubtless, it is
not unlawful for us to do thus. It Is true indeed, we are Commanded to sing in
the Spirit, and so we may, if we use a Form indicted by the Spirit, and Sing
them with the Heart, and Understanding: We are Commanded to Pray by the Spirit;
and can any Imagine, but so we may, though we use the Form Christ has bid us
use. But if we expect an immediate impulse of the Spirit; dictating to us both
sense, and Meeter, and putting words into our Mouths as we sing; not one of a
thousand, if ever any at all, will be found to have such a gift. Indeed, in the
Apostles days, when extraordinary gifts were given, some such thing might be,
which now cannot be expected, any more than the gift of Healing: And seeing
that David and Moses, Men endued with the Spirit, Pen their Songs for the
Public good; let us be contented to see by their Light, and not presume to
compare with them, much less, to exceed them: We may find special Psalms
appointed upon special occasions; as for the Sabbath day, etc. And the Book of
Psalms is so perfect a Sentence, that there needs no Addition; and if it did,
doubtless, God would have ditected some to have perfected the work; it is a
great boldness for any man not endued with the Spirit of God, to thrust upon
the Church an Hymn of his own making, and lay aside those indicted by the
Spirit: If we must Sing, it must be David's Psalms, or worse; I think no humble
man will compare the beats of his own brain with the immediate impulses of the
Spirit: I know not what Warrant we have to leave the one, to use the other.

3. Direct. Be satisfied also concerning the Persons obliged to perform this
Duty; for some that confess it is a Christian Duty to be done in Gospel Times,
yet think not that all Christians are hereby engaged: Some conceive it is the
Ministers Duty alone; as he is the Mouth of the People to God in Prayer, so
should he also be in Singing; and the rest should tacitly consent, and join in
Heart, but should not vocally sing. It Is easily granted, that a godly Man, for
his own solace, may sing alone; and thus David did his Night-Songs upon his
Bed, Psalm. 77.6. And it is evident also in the Primitive Times, when the gift of
Tongues was in use, and other extraordinary gifts, which now are ceased: One
that had a Psalm given by Divine Inspiration, might, and did Sing alone, and
the rest joined, as aforesaid, and said Amen to it: For it was impossible, and
improbable, that all should sing together by such a Divine rapture. But this
gift failing, and David's Psalms Lawful; yea, the best we have, or can have:
The whole Church may join in these, not only in Heart, but in Voice: I think
this need not be controverted. God, that is the God of Order, and never
established, or owned Confusion, has formerly owned this, as I have showed:
Where Priests, and People; Men, and Women, joined together, as in Moses Song,
Exodus 15.1,2, etc. The whole Church of Coloss was exhorted hereunto, Col. 3.16.
And not the Pastors, and Select Elders only: And if God would have such Select
Choristers for this Work in Gospel Times, he would have given Instructions, and
Directions for their Qualification, and Election, as he has done for other
Officers, besides some Ministers otherwise Godly, and able, are not fitted for
this Duty, neither have they such a Musical Faculty, as to be fit to be the
Mouth of the People in this Duty: And God has endued many of the People in
this, beyond their Minister; and doubtless, it is not given in vain: Moses and
the Children of Israel Sang together, Ex. 15.1,2, etc. Yea, in Gospel Times,
Christ, and his Disciples, Mat. 26.30. The like we read of Paul and Silas; and
why should we doubt that have such Leaders? I know not. The Angels that were
ten thousand times ten thousand: yea, thousands of thousands, joined together
without Confusion, Rev. 5.11,12. But you will say, here is no Expression of
Singing: See then those hundred forty and four Thousand, that followed the
Lamb; those sang a new Song, which no other could Learn, Rev. 14.1.3. And this
shall be the Saints work for ever. But some question whether Women may sing in
the Church, and think they have cause enough for their doubt, because the
Apostle does peremptorily forbid a Woman to speak in the Church; but she cannot
sing, but she must speak, 1 Cor. 14 34. But this is grounded upon a mistake:
Indeed, they ought not to speak by way of Office, or Public Teaching, but must
be under the Authority of her Husband: Neither to make Questions there, but at
Home, lest they transcend the bounds of Modesty; but that they must not speak
at all, will not be proved. Sapphira spoke, when Peter demanded her Answer.
Nay, then they must not say Amen, to the Prayers, a Duty enjoined to all in
general. We read of Miram, and the Women, they Sang, and were not reproved,
Exodus 15.20,21. And that it was the practice in the Primitive Times, for Men
and Women to Sing together: The Ecclesiastical History may inform you. But some
Men doubt whether Carnal Men and Women ought to Sing, or whether Christians
ought to join with them, if they do; and the reason is, they think hereby they
hold Fellowship with them: But what Reason is there that a Man may pray in a
mixed Congregation, and not sing, when as this is but a more deliberate sort of
Prayer; the Voice is Natural, the Tune Artificial; so far we may join, and the
Matter is common to both: And for the Manner, if they sing Spiritually, then
they are fit to be joined with; if not, what Spiritual Communion have we with
them? No question, but it is their Duty, and why may we not join with a Man
doing his Duty? Moses Sang with a Rebellious People, and God Commanded him to
write his Song, as a Witness against them, Deuteronomy. 31.19. And there is no Psalm,
but every one in the Congregation may Learn some Instruction from it, and make
some good use of it.

4. Direct. Be well satisfied also in Singing David's Psalms, as they are
turned into English Meeter; for this also in our Age is become a Scruple unto
many: For when they cannot deny this to be a Duty, yet they exclaim against
this as a Humane Invention, which has no Warrant from the Word of God. It Is
true, we have no Command, totidem verbis, for so doing; no more have we for the
Translation of the Hebrew Bible into English. But doubtless, if Englishmen
ought to study the Scripture, and read it, it is necessary that it be Translated
into a Language they understand. If David's Psalms may, and ought to be Sung by
Englishmen, it is to be Translated into English, or how can they Sing with the
Understanding? And why should it not be Sung in the English manner; which is,
when it is fitted with apt measure, syllables, and Meeter, as Englishmen use in
their Songs; and not only them, but also other Nations. If it be Lawful to
Translate the Hebrew Bible into Prose, in reference to Reading; why not into
Meeter, in reference to Singing? As for the former, I know none but the Papists
that deny it; who would thereby keep the People in Ignorance, that their own
Juggling should not be spied: But doubtless, if this Command of Searching the
Scriptures, and letting the Word of God dwell plentifully in us, etc. belong to
Englishmen, they must be Translated into the English Tongue, that they may be
able to do it, which not one of a thousand could do in the Original Language.
Now, God Commands us to Sing Psalms, as well as Read the Scriptures; which very
few are able to do, so long as they are locked up in the Original Hebrew; and
therefore the Translation is necessary: And that they should be fitted with
such Measures, and quantity of Syllables as is necessary to make them fit to be
Sung the more Melodiously, by English men. I know not why any should deny this;
for why may not Hebrew Verse, and Meeter, be turned into English Verse, and
Meeter, I see not; as well as Hebrew Prose into English Prose? In the Hebrew
they are fitted to be Sung, and Poetically Compiled; and many Verses together
in some Psalms are in Meeter, as the Skilful in the Tongue affirm; as
Buxtorfius, in his Thesaurus, and others. And why should not the English have
their manner of Singing, as well as the Hebrews, and other Nations? And why
should not the Translators preserve the Elegancy of the Original Language?
Which they cannot do, if they should let slip, and neglect those Poetical
Fancies, Accents, Tones, and Tunes, which the Hebrews kept; and with which the
Psalms, and other Poetical parts of Scripture are penned: And therefore Poetry
is no Humane Invention, but used by the Holy Ghost himself, in the Penning of
the Scripture; and may, no doubt, be used Lawfully by the Translator also. But
those, that by a Common, and Ordinary gift compose Psalms, and Hymns; both for
Matter, and Manner, this is a Humane Invention; especially if imposed upon the
Church, or read suddenly before Consideration be had before, by the Church;
whether they are according to the Scripture, yea, or no. Nay, the Translating
of the Scripture may as well be called an Humane Invention as this. Neither can
it be called an Humane Imposition, when none are compelled to Sing, nor no
punishment threatened for the neglect. But some will say, the Translation is
full of Errors, and therefore we cannot join in the Duty: Alas! what can be
done of Man, but it will appear to be done by Man? The best Translation of the
Scriptures is not without its faults; and shall we therefore use none? When Men
do their endeavor, God takes the Will for the Deed. The Septuagint Translation
is abundantly faulty, as the Learned know; and often varies from the
Hebrew-Text: Yet Christ and his Apostles make use of it. Nay, in the Hebrew
Copy, as it is observed in the Old Testament, there are 800. diverse Readings;
and in the Greek Testament, above a Thousand. God has, it is true, promised to
keep his word to a tittle, but not in this, or that Copy, or Translation, but
in the whole; we have the whole. Some say, that Translating it into English
Meeter, there is often adding to, and taking from, contrary to God's absolute
Command, Deuteronomy 12. last. But consider, here is no Addition, but an Explication;
no Duty added, only the words altered, the sense remaining; and a Translation
may admit of such a Cavil, and all Expositions will hereby come under the
Reproof: You may as well say, that Preaching, opening, and applying Scripture,
is adding to it; for here are more words used: Thus you see none have need to
Scruple the Duty.

5. Direct. As concerning the Tune, wherein those Scripture Psalms are to be
sung; for in this also is some Controversy: For some charge it to be a Humane
Institution, foisted into God's Worship. To this, I say, I shall add thus much:
That seeing God has Commanded us to Sing with the Understanding, which must
needs be, not in the Hebrew, but the English Tongue; and he gives us no
Direction concerning the Tune, wherein we must Sing. By this it is apparent,
it is best to our own choice, so that we transgress not against that general
Direction, given in the Word, Let all things be done decently, and in Order. An
English Psalm may, doubtless, have an English Tune, so that it be grave,
decent, and comely; not lite, wanton, or frothy; but such as becomes so Holy a
Majesty, and is suitable to so grave a Matter. It appears plainly by Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, and others, that in their Times, David's Psalms were put
into Songs, for their Edification; and Eusebius Reports of some rejecting
those, used such Songs in the Church, as would make Men afraid to hear them.
The Jews, it is confessed, had their peculiar Tunes, and Accents; either set
down by the Penman, or added by the Singer; but these are hid from us, and I
suppose, fully known by no man Living; and the little that remains cannot be
accommodated to our English Version: And therefore seeing that God has given
us a Language different from theirs, and suffered us to serve him with words
different from the words they served him with. So likewise has he given us
Tunes and Tones different from theirs, and no doubt, will accept of them at our
hands. Every Nation and Language has some proper and peculiar Dialect of their
own, and yet God accepts of all where the Heart is right: And as he has given
us Liberty to Pray to him in our own words, which we may gather from the
Answers, and Returns which many have of their Prayers. So likewise, no doubt,
he will accept of our Praises, in our own Tunes; which appears also by the
Refreshings, which many have found in this Duty. God himself has appointed the
substance of his Worship, and left the Circumstances to Humane Determination;
he has Commanded the Preaching of the Word, but for the Time, and Place, and
other Circumstances, he determined not. In the Passover, he appoints what Meat
to eat, but left it to their own choice, whether to drink Wine, or water, or
any other Liquor. So singing of Psalms are appointed by him, but in what Tune,
he does not determine, any further than the general Directions, of decently,
and in Order reach. Hebrew Tunes, as I said, are much unknown; and if known,
cannot agree with our Language; no more do ours with other Languages. Now, if
we sing, it must be in some Tune, but no Tune being peculiarly Commanded; our
own, no doubt, may be Lawfully used. Neither can it be justly called an
innovation thrust into God's Worship, any more than the Word Translated out of
the Original into English, in which the Scriptures are Read; yet this is held
to be Lawful. It Is Invention indeed, which savours of nothing but of the Wit,
or Will of Man, thrust into God's Service, and is not agreeable to the Rule,
this may be suspected, and rejected; but this is not of that Nature: The
Question before us, is, what Reason can be given why we may not use English
Tunes, as well as English Words, in God's Worship; seeing the one is as
Consonant to Scripture, and Reason, as the other. Another scruple that some
make upon the like ground, is, the reading of the Psalm, in Order to singing.
Indeed, were all men able to repeat the Psalms without Book; or had all those,
to whom singing is a Duty, the gift of Reading; or were furnished with Books to
Read, this were not necessary; but till this comes to pass, which will never
be, Reading is of use; the whole Congregation is to sing, and unless all were
thus Qualified, how can they sing, if it be not read? Nature it self dictates
to us, we must use means to bring to the end, and the Scripture never denies
it. Now, this is a good means for Instruction, and why may we not receive
Instruction by the Ear, in Hearing, as well as by the Eye, in Reading. In
Prayer, we think it more convenient to join with the Minister, hearing him,
than if we could read the same Prayer along with him in a Book. When all Israel
sang together with Moses, it is like it was read to them, Exodus 15.1,2, etc.
for doubtless, all had not Copies of it, if they could have read, neither had
committed it to Memory. Neither can the Reading of it any way hinder the
Melody, neither will it hinder, but help the Understanding, neither any way
dull the Affections: And thus I hope I have removed those Objections, and
Answered the doubts of those that scruple this Ordinance.

6. Direct. If thou art now convinced, that Singing Psalms is a Gospel Duty;
yea, thy Duty, which God requires of thee, set upon it then with hopes of
Success; but be sure to observe, that in this, as well as in other Duties, thy
End be good; otherwise the Action must needs be bad. Many a man loses much
Labor, and pains, and spends much Time to little purpose; an evident Example
we have in the Pharisees, Mat. 6.1,2, etc. who Fasted, Prayed, and gave Alms;
all Excellent Duties: But those Sacrifices, though otherwise good, being mixed
with the Dung of their own self-seeking, and desire of popular applause, God
throws it back into their Faces, as Dung, without a Reward; and so it will be
with thee, if thou seek thy self, and not God, in the Duty: If Custom, Credit,
or a desire of Popular Applause, drive thee on to this Duty, and not the
sincere desire of God's Glory, thou may expect thy Reward from Men, and not
from God. Many Men in Singing Psalms, aim at no higher End, nor make any better
use of it, than they do in their Profane Songs, or Ungodly Ballads, viz. Their
own Recreation, to drive away the Time, or a desire to be Applauded for their
good Voice, or Tune, or Excellent gift in Singing. But the chief End which
every Christian should aim at in all his Actions, especially in all his Acts of
Divine Worship, should be God's Glory, and his own Souls good; if this be laid
aside, thou may expect a Curse, and not a Blessing upon thy proceedings. If
this be wanting, the Duty is spoiled; if this be minded, God will accept of it,
though accompanied with many Imperfections. This Heavenly Duty is performed to
this End, by the Angels, and the whole Church Triumphant, as before is showed,
and will be the Work of Eternity; and here upon Earth, if Heart and Voice go
together: It Is a resemblance of Heaven, and represents, though darkly, that
Melodious Harmony that is in Heaven, amongst those Glorious Choristers. We
should make Melody in our Hearts, and not only with our Mouths. Look upon it as
a part of God's Worship, and Service, and appointed for Spiritual Consolation,
not for Profane Recreation; and therefore we should, with the Psalmist, say,
Not unto us, Lord; not to us, but to thine own Name be the Glory. Let us work
for God, and he will not fail to give us a Reward; and there is great Reason
why we should in this Duty Trumpet out his Praise, for all we have is his, and
from his hand it is we receive every good and perfect gift: We have our Life,
and Being from him, and have no more breath than what he puts into us; and
there is all the Reason we should render to him the Praises due for all: And
this is one way we have to Praise him, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. Thus the Holy Men
of Old have gone before us, and aimed at this very End. Thus Deborah, and
Barak; Moses, and Miriam, and many more; and thus David resolves to do, Psalm.
7.17. I will Sing praise to the Name of the Lord most High, Psalm. 111.1. And
exhorts others to follow his Example, Psalm. 30.4. Sing unto the Lord, O ye
Saints of his, etc. Psalm. 47.6. and 92.1. Now, this Duty, though it especially
concerns the Godly, as those that have received the most, and greatest Mercies,
and have the greatest abilities for the Work; yet others also having received
all they have from God, are also obliged to render Praise, and Thanks to God,
and are frequently called upon, thus to do, Psalm. 110.1. where all Nations are
excited to this Duty. And as God's Glory is chiefly to be minded, so our own
Benefit is not to be neglected, and our Souls good. And the Psalms serve also
for Instruction, and Direction; for this, as well as other Scripture, serves to
this End, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. And if we observe, every Psalm will yield us
some profitable Instruction, Direction, or Exhortation; and inform us in many
things concerning God's Word; his Attributes, Providence, Promises, Word, and
Works; or something concerning our selves, or others; good, or bad; concerning
this Life, or that to come: And this we may not only Treasure up in our own
Hearts, but also press it upon others, and Teach one another in Psalms, and
Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. Nay, wicked Men may hence be Instructed, Convinced,
and Reproved; to this End, Moses Song was Indicted, Deuteronomy. 31.19. It Is matter of
Consolation also to the Godly in all Conditions; here are Petitions put up to
God, here are Promises made by God: Perform this Duty now to right Ends, and
doubt not of a Blessing.

7. Direct. If thou would have a Blessing of God accompanying this Ordinance;
or, if thou would Sing Psalms profitably, then do it in God's way, as well as
to a right End; it is not the bare performance of the Duty will serve the turn.
Many content themselves with the Husk, without the Kirnel, and think a little
Lip-labor sufficient; and come with no more Reverence, nor so much, into God's
Presence, than they would come into a great Man's Presence, to Sing a Profane
Song. If such Service would please, God would have many Servants. But it is the
Heart that God requires, or he will have none of their Service. Trust not,
therefore, with the Papist, Opere Operato, in the Work done, for God must have
it done in his own way, or he will not accept it. A good Duty may be spoiled by
the ill doing it, as well as a good Tool by ill handling. The Duty we Treat of
is not so easy, as many think it is: Many carelessly performing it, and finding
little benefit by it, have mistrusted the Duty, rather than themselves; like
the Maid in Pliny, that being suddenly struck Blind in the Night, blames the
Sun the next Morning for not Rising. Men are apt to accuse any thing; yea, God
himself, rather than themselves: Because they themselves feed upon the Husks,
they think there is none that taste the Kirnel; and so lay it aside, and plead
against it. But upon the same grounds many of them plead themselves above
Ordinances, and rest not, till they plead perfection; and look upon Ordinances
as beggarly rudiments; but to leave these to their self-delusion. When thou
approachest to God in this Ordinance, being part of his Instituted Worship, be
sure to bring thy Heart along with thee, and engage it in the Duty. God says
of the Heart, as sometimes Joseph did of his Brother Benjamin; you shall not
see my Face, if your Brother Benjamin be not with you: You shall not see his
Face, if the Heart be absent. Heart and Voice must join together, or it will
make no pleasing Melody in the Ears of God: He is a Spirit, and must be
Worshipped in Spirit and in Truth. For, as Fervent Prayer may prevail, where
cold Petitions are denied: So hearty Praises are acceptable, when others are
esteemed but as a mocking of God. We must sing with the Affection, and with the
Understanding also: The whole bent of the Soul must be set upon the work; the
Blind, and the Lame, and the Heartless Sacrifice is abominable unto God. My
Son, says he, Give me thy Heart. Whatever thou offerest without the Heart, he
will have none of it: The more of the Heart is in the Duty, the better he loves
it. Thou must sing with the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15. Thus David, when he began to
sing, lift up, not only his Voice, but his Soul to God, Psalm. 25.1. and calls
upon all that is within him to bless the Lord, Psalm. 103.1. And we have
Exhortations to this Duty, Col. 3.18. Ephesians. 5.19. The Lowing of an Ox, the
Grunting of a Hog, make as Melodious an Harmony in God's Ears as a Heartless
Prayer, or Praise. God is a Spirit, and must be Worshipped in Spirit, and in
Truth: Nay, it must not be only with the Heart, but with the Heart rightly
Qualified: An ungracious Heart cannot but savor strong in the Nostrils of God,
worse than a stinking Carrion does in ours: we must sing with Grace in our
Hearts, as the former Scriptures plainly testify. Sincerity is necessary;
approach not near him, without the Wedding Garment: Hypocrisy spoils all thy
best Actions; we may as well expect sweet Water in a dirty Channel, or stinking
puddle, as a good Duty from a rotten Heart. The Graces of the Spirit must adorn
that Soul, that must be welcome into God's presence: Neither is it sufficient,
that they be there in the Habit, but they must be drawn forth into the Act;
for, as we must Pray, and Sing with the Understanding, and Affection, so we
must Pray, and Sing with Faith, believing those Promises made by God, and those
Petitions put up, that they shall be in Time Answered. Bring Hope along also,
to wait for the Accomplishment, and Love to God, and Delight in his Service,
and desire of his Glory, and other suitable Graces: And thus doing, expect a
Blessing upon the Ordinance, and benefit by it.

CHAP. VIII. Directions in Observing the Sabbath Day.
THE next Duty I shall Treat of, is the Observation of the Sabbath Day, for
this also is a Commanded Duty; this is that stated time for the Worship of God,
and necessary for his Service. For if we must Worship God in some place, so
some time is also required for this Worship: and God himself has appointed out
what he thinks most suitable, Exodus 20.8. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it
Holy, etc. Yea, he has enjoined it to be observed upon pain of Death, Exodus
35.2. Whosoever does work therein shall be put to Death. And we read of the
Man, that gathering sticks upon that Day, was by God's special Command to be
put to Death, Numb. 15.32. etc. But there are many that easily grant, it was a
Duty obliging the Jews, but not the Gentiles; and is of no force at present to
Christians, but Ceremonious, and so abolished with the Ceremonial Law; but for
Satisfaction know, something in the Command was Ceremonial, and that cease;
something Moral, and that remains. Nature it self teaches us that there is a
God; and the same Nature teaches, that this God is to be Worshipped; and
Reason tells us, some time must be allotted for this Worship: God appoints one
day of seven, for this Work, and that is Moral; but what seventh day, whether
from the Creation, or no, is left to God to determine. Many that know not the
true God, yet alot some time for the Worship of their Imagined Deities; but
that it must be this, or that day, Nature teaches not, but is alterable at
God's dispose, but not at Man's; and that it was observed in Remembrance of
their deliverance from Egypt, was Ceremonial, Deuteronomy. 5.15. And Typified out a
deliverance by Christ, a Rest in him, and his Resting in the Grave. As also the
rigid Observation of it, enjoined to the Jews, when they must not go out of
their places, kindle a Fire, dress any Meat, bear any burden, etc. upon it.
Christian Liberty has freed us from this; but for the Observation of one day
in seven, for God's Service, is Commanded by God, approved by Christ, and
practiced by the Apostles, and all succeeding Generations, 1 Cor. 16.2. and
what power on Earth, then can make it void? It was a Law given to Adam in
Paradise, before there was any Ceremony used, or enjoined, or any Savior
needed, or promised. I say, for the Substance of it, though it was afterward
pressed more strictly, and some Ceremonies added to the Jews; and therefore it
belongs to all his Posterity, though the Ceremonial part concerned them only;
and though we read not that it was Observed in those first Ages, yet it follows
not, that it was not, when many thousand things then done could not be
expressed in so short a History: Yea, the same seems to be known to the Jews
before the Law was given, Exodus 16.23, etc. To Morrow is the Rest of the Holy
Sabbath, etc. When it was after that God gave it in the Command; and if this
Rest upon the seventh day be Ceremonious, why not the Command of Labor on the
six other days also? And why does not this cease to be a Duty as well as the
other, and then the idlest Persons may be the best Christians? We may find this
Command reaches even to the stranger that is within the Gates, when I think the
Ceremonies are not pressed upon them. Many Reasons also are given in the Command,
which belong to us, as well as to the Jews, as from the Equity of it: God, who
is the Disposer of all, gives us Six days, and reserves one to himself, which
he calls his own; The Sabbath of the Lord thy God: And Christ tells us, The Son
of Man is Lord of the Sabbath; and from his own Example; he Rested, and
therefore Commands us to Rest; the End was, to Worship God in it, and to
Dedicate it to his Service, for the Resting of Man and Beast upon it; and
distinguishing his People from others, etc. and does not this concern us as
well as the Jews? God requires no less proportion of Service now, than he did
then, and therefore no less time to do it in. Our Bodies require as much Rest
as theirs, and our Souls as much Food; and why should not we have the like
time? And this being the Substance of the Fourth Command, I think neither Man,
nor Angel, can alter it; for who can proportion it better than God himself?
Nay, the Circumstances in the delivering of this Law, shows to be Moral. It was
spoken by God's Mouth, as well as the other; written by the same Finger of God,
in the same Tables of Stone, put into the Ark, where the Ceremonies were not;
it has a special Memento put upon it: Remember the Sabbath, to keep it Holy.
Christ himself owns it, when he bids the Jews Pray that their Flight be not in
the Winter, nor on the Sabbath day, Mat. 24.20. which Flight was forty Years
after his Death. The opposition which wicked Men make against it, proves it to
be of God also; for if the Devil herein prevail, we might almost bid farewell to
all our Religion.

1. Direct. Before thou can make Conscience of Observing the Sabbath, thou
must be well convinced that it is thy Duty. To this End I have already proved
it to be of Divine Institution, and a Branch of the Moral Law; binding, not
only Jews, but Christians also. But I foresee one main rub must be removed,
before the way be cleared; that doubt which makes many to stumble: Whether the
first day of the Week, or that which we call the Christian Sabbath, be of
Divine Institution; and whether Christians be obliged to observe it as a
Sabbath. Much has been Written by Divines to satisfy this doubt: My purpose
is not to speak much to it in this place, this Treatise being of another
Nature, yet something is necessary; for while this doubt remains, who will make
use of the following Directions? It Is true, we cannot prove in Scripture,
neither is it said, totidem verbis, that Christ did Command that the Sabbath
should be changed, from the last, to the first day of the week, then there
could be no Controversy; but we have that which is equivalent to such a
Command, that it was changed by Divine Authority, and very probably by Christ
himself; the Scripture yields us sufficient Witness Christ is called the Lord
of the Sabbath, and the Holy Ghost calls it his day, Rev. 1.10. which seems to
intimate, he is the Author of it: As the Sacrament is called his Supper,
because he Instituted it; and had it not been altered by him, I know not who
would have been so bold, to have distinguished it from other days by this Name;
he was every way as Faithful in his House as Moses was, yet Moses, we know, by
God's appointment, stated a time for God's Worship, Heb. 3.2.6. and no doubt, a
settled time is as necessary for us, as for them, to Serve God in. We find
Christ himself owning the day in his own Person; as in his Resurrection, and
finishing the work of our Redemption, a greater work than that of Creation, and
better deserves a special Memorial: And the Apostle tells us, He entered into
his Rest, and ceased from his own Work, as God did from his, Heb. 4.10. aluding
to the Creation, from which, when God Rested, he Ordained the Sabbath. We may
also Read, that Christ, after his Resurrection, appeared diverse times to his
Disciples upon the first day of the Week, when they were met together; Read
John 2.19. and again, verse 26. And doubtless, not without Divine Providence
pointing out this day to us; and after his Ascension, when they were met
together upon that day, he pours out the Holy Ghost upon them, Acts 2.12. We
Read also, that this was the day the Apostles did keep as a Sabbath, and also
the Churches met together to perform Sabbath days duties; to Preach the Word,
to Administer the Sacraments, Prayer, Works of Charity, etc. Acts 20.7. 1 Cor.
18.2. Upon the first day of the Week let every one of you lay by in store, as
God has prospered him And as it is conceived, forty Years after Christ's
Decease, Saint John, by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, calls it the Lord's
day, whereupon he received his Revelation, Rev. 1.10. Neither do we Read, that
the Apostles ever kept any other day, as a Sabbath; it is true indeed, upon the
Jews Sabbath they often Preached, taking Advantage of the Multitude then
gathered together, which Advantage at other times they wanted. Now, if the
change were thus made by Christ, and his Apostles, it was by the directions of
the Spirit of God; for the Apostles delivered but what they had received from
God, 1 Cor. 11.23. It was upon this day they met to Preach, and break Bread,
Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.1,2. Now, were there no Precept, the constant Example of
the Apostles, and Churches in the Apostles time, may satisfy us, for they were
Inspired by the Spirit of God, and appointed them both by Doctrine, and Example
to Teach his Church; and to this End gave them Instructions in the time between
his Resurrection, and Ascension, which Instructions are not all Recorded; yea,
the constant practice of the Church in all Ages since the Apostles time, give
us no little Light; for though Christians have been at great difference among
themselves about other matters, yet few questioned the change of the day; both
Greeks and Latins, both Papists and Protestants, both Lutherans and
Calvenists, hold to this, and God's Blessing upon their Endeavors is great
encouragement; he would never succeed them in so sinful a Course, were it such;
nay, the remarkable Judgments of God upon Sabbath Breakers, bespeaks God for
the Author, for none in the World could Lawfully have done it without him. Thus
I have shown you, I hope, sufficient grounds to Build upon; I proceed now to
Direct you to keep it as a Sabbath.

2. Direct. If thou would Faithfully Sanctify the Sabbath, as God Commands
thee, make preparation for it before it come; for there is hardly any thing of
great Concernment well done without some preparation, and much more here: we
prepare the Body for Physic, before we take it; we provide in Summer for
Winter, and lay in Provision in Harvest; we prepare in the Day for the Night,
and work when we have the Light: We prepare in Health for Sickness, and in
Youth for Age: And were we to appear before some great Man, we should make
preparation accordingly; and shall we only be wanting in the Service of our
Lord, and Master, and rush into his Presence without prepared Hearts? God bids
us remember the Sabbath day, to keep it Holy, or to Sanctify it, as it is,
Deuteronomy. 5.12. The word Remember, signifies either to call to mind something past,
or to commit to Memory something for the Future, and both are necessary to this
business. God sets this Memento upon it, to Teach us, that those that will keep
it well, when it is come, must Remember it before it come, or otherwise our
Nature is so Corrupt, that it will take hold upon some Occasion or other to
draw us aside from the Duty in hand: We can forecast for Fairs, and Markets,
sometimes long before, and make preparations for them according to our needs,
whether to buy or sell: We consider our wants to have them supplied, and make
preparations accordingly; and yet how few make preparation for the Market day
for the Soul. Many tire themselves in the Labors of their Calling in the Week
days, and then use the Lord's day no otherwise than a Beast, only Rest from
their Labors; for their Spirits being spent, and their Bodies tired, they are
more fit for sleep, than any Holy Duty; and rushing rudely out of the World,
into the Service of God, they bring so much of the world with them, that it
renders them incapable of any Spiritual Duty. But thy Care should be, to
sequester thy Heart, Thoughts, and Affections from the world, and set them upon
God; and empty thy Heart of worldly Cares, and Troubles, that thou may mind
the business God sets thee about. The want of this is one Cause why Men get so
little benefit by the Ordinances; and hear so much, and profit so little,
because they come not with empty Hearts; a full Vessel can receive no more,
when the Prophet multiplied the Widows Oil, when there was no more empty
Vessels, the Oil stayed: When the Head and Heart are full of the World, this
Water of Life will run over. But our Duty is to prepare the Heart for so great
a work, as the Entertaining our Lord, and Master, the great God of Heaven and
Earth, who invites himself to Sup with us: He is the Searcher of the Heart, and
the Tryer of the Reins. Before the Sabbath come, use such foresight,
diligence, and Meditation; and dispose, and seasonably dispatch thy Worldly
business, that thou may be more free, and fit for the Duties of the day. We
find Israel did thus prepare to Sanctify the Sabbath, Exodus 16.22. and
gathered Manna enough the day before; and this was usual among the Jews, Luke
23.54. And that day was the Preparation, and the Sabbath drew on. Thus Nehemiah
prepared against the Sabbath, that it should not be profaned, Nehem. 13.19.
And Gods Example in this is binding to us; he finished his works before, and so
should we, and should not meddle with any unnecessary Worldly business then,
either with Hand, or Heart, that our Duties be not pestered with the World; but
that we may be as free to serve the Lord, if possible, as if we had no worldly
business to look to; but many forecast business for that day, or make it
necessary through their former neglects; but this will appear to be their Sin,
and their Folly. Solomon bids us look well to our Feet, viz. our Affections,
when we go into the House of God, Eccl. 5.1. And it is good to consider whose
Presence we come into; and, with Holy David, wash our Hands in Innocence,
before we compass his Altars, Psalm. 26.6. Examine how the Case stands between
God and thy Soul, and venture not into his Presence in an unregenerate
Condition, or having sin unmortified, or unrepented of, lest he break thee in
pieces, and there be none to deliver thee. Consider what sin thou have
Committed, especially in the week past, and be humbled for them; lay aside thy
worldly business betime on the Eve; when others only sweep their Houses, do
thou sweep thy Heart: Set some time apart for Reading, Meditating, Conferring,
Instructing thy Family, and Praying with them; reconcile the Differences, if
there be any in the Family; between Husband and Wife, Parent and Child, Master
and Servant; yea, Neighbor and Neighbor, that your Prayers be not hindered;
for God can hardly be well served, where the Members of a Family Live at
Discord. In a word, prepare thy Heart to meet God the day following.

3. Direct. Would thou Sanctify the Sabbath? Take heed thou do nothing that
is unlawful upon that day. This is appointed by God for a day of rest; and not
only, as some say, from sin, which should be Committed no day, but also from
Labor, which at other times is Lawful, the works of our Calling; yea,
unnecessary recreations are forbidden, Exodus 20.10. In it thou shall do no
manner of Work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter; thy Manservant, nor thy
Maidservant, thy Cattle, nor the Stranger that is within thy Gates. Jer.
17.21,22. Neither do ye any work, but Hallow the Sabbath day, etc. Neither will
a bare cessation from work serve the turn, for rest is Commanded for an Higher
End, that we might serve God with more Freedom; and therefore Idleness is a sin
worse than Bodily Labor, upon that day; and when Men use not rest as a means,
but as an End, it is an egregious breach of the Fourth Command; and it is a gross
mistake to think, that is an acceptable Duty, on that day, which is a great sin
any day. He that keeps the Sabbath only by resting from his Labor, keeps it
but as a Bruit Beast; yet the most of Men spend great part of the day in
Idleness, or what is worse; and think, if they give God their Bodily Presence
for an hour, or two, it is sufficeable; but God will not be mocked: we should
think it were an unprofitable Servant that would work but two or three hours in
the day. God gives us six whole days for our work, and shall not we give him
one whole one for his? well, rest we must from our Labor, but that is not all;
we must spend it in God's Service: we must forbear our work, that we may do
his, and beware of all that hinders us; and that is not only our work, but our
pleasures and recreations, works of our Calling we are forbidden, and that upon
pain of Death, Exodus 31.15. He that does any work upon it shall surely be put
to Death: And God meant as he spoke, we find that he Commanded the man that
gathered sticks on the Sabbath day to be put to Death, and he was stoned, Numb.
15.36. And there is great reason, for how can a man serve God, when Heart and
Hand, when his Thoughts and Affections are entangled in the world? How can he
serve two Masters, but he must slight the one? when the Body is indisposed by
Labor, how can the Heart be free? And God Commands the Heart; My Son, give me
thy Heart. Neither will he have a divided Heart, he will have all, or none; and
he Commands not only our selves, but also our Children, and Servants; yea, even
the Bruit Beasts to rest from their Labor, that our Hearts may be the freer,
and there be no occasion for roving thoughts, and to avoid distraction in God's
Service. Recreations also, except those that are purely necessary, are also
forbidden, even those which are at other times Lawful; sports and pastimes are
no less dangerous than work; yea, much more, for they draw away the Heart more
than honest Labor. Augustine thought it was more Lawful to Plough on the
Lord's day, than to Dance; but many of our wanton Youth are of another mind;
but the one brings Profit, the other often tends to the debauching of Youth: And
doubtless, God himself has forbidden these vain pastimes, Isa. 58.13. If thou
turn thy Feet from the Sabbath, doing thy Pleasure on my Holy day* and call the
Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord, Honorable, and shall Honor him; not
doing thy own ways, nor finding thy own Pleasures, nor speaking thy own words,
etc. Worldly and vain Discourse you see is also here forbidden; for every
moment of this precious time should, if possible, be improved to a Spiritual
ufe; our own words should not be spoken, our own pleasure should not be sought,
worldly cares and fears should that day be banished the mind, for these
distract a Man in the Service of God: These are the Thorns that choke the Word,
and it becomes unfruitful, Mat. 13.22. Indeed, distracting, carking Cares, are
always unlawful, much more in recourse to God himself; but provident Cares at
other times a Duty, now become a Sin, and must be laid aside as much as may be,
that the Heart may be free; we read in Scripture of many sorts of work
forbidden: As Jornying upon the Lords day, but only to the Ordinance called, a
Sabbath days Journey, Exodus 16.29. for this distracts the mind as well as work:
Let them look to it, that use that time to Ride to Fairs, or Markets, Acts
1.12. Buying and Selling is also forbidden, Nehem. 13.16,17. See how zealous he
was against it; but it is a practice too much in Fashion. Carrying of Burdens is
also forbidden, upon no less Cruelty than the Destruction of Jerusalem, Jer.
17.22. Nehem. 13.19. In a word, whatsoever hinders in God's Service; nay, does
not some way or other further it, cannot be Justified: As for dressing of Meat
or Drink, any further than is necessary, or convenient; or spending overmuch
time in Bed, or needless Dressing, or spending time any ways unnecessarily, is
no doubt, a Sin.

4. Direct. Though there be a Rest Commanded by God, and a Cessation from the
works of our Calling, upon the Sabbath day; yet all works are not forbidden
thereupon, there is still Liberty given for good works: for works are forbidden
as they tend to the distraction of the mind, and hinder us in the Service of
God; but those works that further it, are not only Lawful, but Commanded; these
in general are works of Piety, works of Charity, and works of Necessity: Works
of Piety are such as tend to the Worship and Service of God, as part of it, or
as a means or help thereunto. Thus it was Lawful for the Priests under the Law
to kill and Sacrifice the Beasts that were to be Offered, which was a servile
work, and unlawful, had it not been Commanded, Mat. 12.5. Have you not read in
the Law, how on the Sabbath days the Priests in the Temple profane the
Sabbath, and are blameless. And no doubt, it is Lawful in Gospel Times for
Ministers to Preach the Word, Catechize, and Personally to Instruct the People,
though it be to the spending of their Spirits, and the Tyring of their Bodies,
more than on any other day of the week: Paul he Preached long, even till
midnight, upon that day: And it is Lawful for him to Travel that day to the
Meeting place; and it is Lawful for the People also to come to hear: Yea, it is
their Duty, though it be several Miles, if they cannot otherwise enjoy it: We
read of a Sabbath days Journey, Acts 1.12. which is conceived to be about two
Miles. We may see this was a Custom in Israel, 2 Kings 4.23. when the good
Shunammite desired her Husbands leave to go to the Prophet; he answered her,
wherefore will thou go to him to day, it is neither New Moon, nor Sabbath;
implying these were usual times to go, Psalm. 84.7. Every one of them in Sion
appears before God. Works of Mercy also are necessary, whether to Man, or
Beasts; God desires Mercy, and not Sacrifice, Hos. 6.6. Now, this Mercy is
either to the Soul, or to the Body: To the Body, visiting the Sick, healing
their Diseases, easing their pains, relieving their Necessity, if able; this is
approved by Christ, Luke 13.11. when Christ heals the Sick, and disputes the
Case with the Pharisees; yea, giving, or gathering Alms upon that day, which we
find was the Apostles Command, and the Churches practice, 1 Cor. 16.1,2. and
that which Christ will Reward at the last, Mat. 25.35. Meat and Drink also must
be taken moderately, for the refreshing of thy Body, and the making it fit for
the Service of the day. Christ himself approves of this, when he justifies his
Disciples for plucking the Ears of Corn, Mat. 12.1,2. Spiritual Mercy must be
showed also; such is informing the Ignorant, reducing the Erroneous, exhorting
the Negligent, comforting the Disconsolate, Instructing one another in our most
Holy Faith, Reconciling those that are at variance; yea, the Bruit Beasts
themselves must that day taste of thy bounty; if one be fallen into a Ditch or
Pit, we must lift him out, Luke 14.5. We may, yea, must loose our Ox and our
Ass from the Stall, and lead them out to water, upon that day, Luke 13.15.
Physicians, in cases of necessity, may Travel, to Visit their sick Patients,
and Midwives attend upon their Office; but it should be Charity, and Necessity,
and not for filthy Lucre, that this should be done. We should not sell our
Labor upon that day, but do it for common Charity; otherwise a just Cause may
to us prove sinful. Works of Necessity also are Lawful, so they be truly so,
and not feigned: when an House is on Fire, we may leave the Ordinance, to seek
to Quench it, though with Bodily Labor. The Mariner, in his Journey, must
attend his work, but his Heart in the mean time should be in Heaven: The
Soldier, if set upon, should defend himself; we find Joshua compassing Jericho
seven days together, Josh. 6.15. and one of them must needs be the Sabbath.
Though the Jews at first did scruple Fighting upon that day, and many of them
were Murdered by the Enemy; yet at last they resolved to Fight in their own
Defense, 2 Mac. 4.1. A Husbandman, in Harvest time, I suppose, for fear of an
Inundation, or the apparent loss of Grain, or Hey, may Labor to prevent it;
but take heed a Necessity be not feigned: Many are necessitated for want of
forecast, and some forecast, that there may be a Necessity, neglecting it all
the week, and then say, must not Cattle be looked? Or such a thing be done? But
know what may be done before, or let alone till after, ought not to be done;
it is not thy wilful neglect can procure a dispensation to break God's Law; but
most men strain their Christian Liberty to the utmost Link, but take heed of
going beyond; be not deceived, God will not be mocked.

5. Direct. To the sanctifying of the Sabbath, thou must not only observe an
Holy Rest unto the Lord all the day, and forbear thy own thoughts, words, and
works, as formerly I have showed; but there are also many Duties of Religion to
be performed; as part of that Worship to be given to God, upon that day, that
the whole time, as nigh as may be, may be spent in the Religious Exercises of
the day. Now, the Duties required, are either Public, or Private; the Public
are in the Congregation of the Saints, when the Church meets together to
Worship God. The Private are in the Family, or in the Closet: He that only
rests from his Labor on the Sabbath, keeps it no better; yea, much worse than
a Beast. Idleness is a sin at all times, especially then; this is the Market
day to lay in Provision for the week following, the Harvest, to provide in, for
winter, and shall we Trifle now? All Time is precious, much more this; we
should leave any work undone before we should leave God's work undone, or
carelessly do it. The Public Duties required at our hands, are according to
the Relations we stand in; more is required of Public Persons, than of
Private. The Ministers are God's Stewards to dispense his Mysteries, to Divide
the word of God aright, and to give every one his Portion; and therefore he
must look to his Charge, and make preparation beforehand for his work. He is
the Mouth of the People unto God, and God's Mouth to them; and therefore he had
need to set a watch over his Lips, that he Offend not with his Tongue. Parents
and Masters they should not only come to the Ordinance themselves, but bring
their Children, and Servants there to be Taught. Prayer is an Ordinance of God,
and should be performed in the Public, where Minister and People should join
together to make their Requests known to God in the Name of Christ; and beg
such things as are necessary for themselves, or others; for this Life, or that
to come: It should be performed with Faith and Fervency, with Humility and
Reverence, with Wisdom and Discretion, both by Minister and People: (...)
Complements with God are unsavory, and unseemly. The Word also should be Read,
and Preached by the Minister, and the whole Counsel of God made known, Acts
20.20.27. and that without mixture of Humane Invention; without Ostentation,
Plainly, Faithfully, Powerfully, Truly, Zealously. And the People they should
hear with Attention, Diligence, Watchfulness, Understanding, and Care; they
should Examine that which is delivered by the Minister, whether it be agreeable
to the Truth, like those Noble Bereans, Acts 17.11. They should Treasure it up
in good Hearts, and bring forth good Fruit in their Lives and Conversations;
for without Practice knowledge is little worth. The Administration of Baptism
also is a Sabbath days work; Upon the Sabbath, says Christ, they Circumcise a
Man; this is given the Minister in Commission, Mat. 28.19,20. which is to be
done according to Precept, and Scripture Examples, without External Additions,
and the People ought to be present at it, and join with the Minister in Prayer
for a Blessing, and not turn their backs upon it through carelessness or
contempt. The Sacrament of the Supper also should be as frequently Administered,
as Convenience will permit, Acts 2.42. And it is the Ministers Duty to Teach and
Instruct the Ignorant, to convince the gainsayers, reclaim the scandalous, if
they can; and if they will not be Reformed, to keep them back from the
Sacrament; yea, to take Christ's way: And if they be obstinate, cast them out,
and not suffer the Ordinance to be polluted, or contemned. God complains of the
contrary, Ezekiel. 22.26. Her Priests have violated my Law, and have profaned my
Holy things, they have put no difference between the Holy and Profane, etc.
And it is Christ's command, not to give Holy things to Dogs, Mat. 7.8. The
People they should partake of it, and come with prepared Hearts to this Holy
Banquet, and be careful that they have on the Wedding Garment, or they will be
no welcome Guests to his Marriage Supper: They should there Exercise their
Graces of Knowledge, Faith, Love, and Obedience, etc. knowing that the neglect,
or unworthy receiving is a dangerous sin, Acts 20.6. 1 Cor. 11.17. Singing of
Psalms also is a public Duty, and should be performed by the whole Church, and
in so doing, they should lift up their Hearts, as well as their Voices, and
Sing with the Spirit, and with the Understanding also. Visiting the Sick,
relieving the Poor, Gathering, and Collecting for them, is this days Duty, 1
Cor. 16.2. Catechizing, especially the Younger sort, is the Ministers Duty; and
it is the Peoples Duty to send them: And all this must be done to God's Glory,
and the Edification of our selves and others.

6. Direct. Though the public Worship and Service of God be chiefly to be
minded, and intended upon the Lord's day, yet it is not only that which is
required. Many private Duties also are to be performed; and in thy Public and
Private Duty is all the whole time to be spent. What those Public Duties are I
have already showed you, and shall now speak of those that are Private; I mean,
such as Private Persons, especially Masters, and Parents, and Governors of
Families ought to do: Let the Inferiors also here Read their Duties. Some of
those are to be done before the Public, by way of Preparation; and some after,
by way of Digestion: Concerning Preparation I have spoken already, and yet here
something may be added; for, as thou must remember the Sabbath before it come,
to prepare for it; so when it is come, improve it to the best Advantage: And to
this End, Rise as timely in the Morning as thy Health will permit. Were it to
go to some Market, or Fair, or to do some earnest, or important business, how
early would thou Rise? And why not now, the better to fit thy self for thy
Masters work; and to Sanctify as much of the Consecrated time as thou can,
and do God as much work as may be; and Reason good, for God is the best Master,
and pays the best Wages; and therefore he should have most work done: And by
this means thou will redeem the more time for thy private Devotion. When thou
first awakest, Consecrate thy first thoughts to God, and begin the day with
some Fruitful Meditation, suitable to the Season, and the work in hand, for
this will fit thee for after-Duties. But if thou let the World, or Sin have thy
first thoughts, it is hard getting them out of possession of thy Heart. Examine
thine own Heart, what Graces thou have weak, or wanting, that thou would have
supplied; what Sins are strong, that thou would have mortified; what sins
thou have Committed, especially the week last; what Mercies thou have received,
that so thy Heart may be affected accordingly: Go to God with shame in thy
Face, and sorrow in thy Heart; and, if it may be, with Tears in thine Eyes, and
confess thy sins to him, and never rest, till thou have a discharge. Many give
themselves so much Liberty of sleeping in the Morning, that much of those
secret Duties are either neglected, or slubbered over, and they have little
time to set the Heart in Order. But how can a man expect a Blessing, that is
guilty of such neglects? But these secret Duties are not sufficient. If thou
have a Family, call them together, in convenient time, Read some Portion of
Holy Scripture to them; and, if thou can, fasten something upon their Spirits
by Familiar Discourse, or otherwise, and then join with them in Prayer to God
for the pardon of the sins of the Family, and a supply of Grace, and a Blessing
upon the Public Ordinances, for their Souls good: And here forget not to put
up some Petitions for him who is to be your mouth unto God, that he might do it
prevailingly; and that he that is to be God's mouth to you, may reach your
Hearts, and speak a word in season to your Souls, and meet with your beloved
sins, and put you on to your neglected Duties. If Holy Paul desires the Prayers
of his Hearers, Col. 4.3. much more need have your Ministers. And having thus
disposed thy private Devotions, make timely resort unto the public: It Is an
ill Custom which many have, to stay late, and savours but of little Love to the
Ordinances. These Men would make more have to a Feast, or Banquet, perhaps, to
a Stage Play, or Morrice-dance. And when thou have thus done, and brought thy
Family along with thee, behave thy self, and see that they behave themselves
gravely, and orderly, and join with the Minister; hear attentively, pray
zealously, and sing affectionately, and do every Duty cheerfully; write the
Sermon in thy Book, or in thy Memory, especially the most material Heads; and
after the Morning Exercise, use sobriety in Meat and Drink, lest thy Body be
surcharged, and become unfit for the Evening Exercise; for though Meat and
Drink may be taken, yet no more than fits thee for thy Duty: Spend the
inter-mediate-time in Prayer, Singing, Repeating, Meditation, etc. and frequent
the Evening Exercise as thou did in the Morning; and when the Public is
done, spend the remaining part of thy time in private Duties; as Repeating the
Sermon, and Examining the proficiency of thy People, encouraging the Diligent,
reproving the Idle: In Meditation of what thou have heard, pressing it upon thy
own, and People's Hearts, and put it into Practice, which is the Life of all;
without which it is like Food eaten, but not digested; which seeds Diseases, and
not the Body. Call thy Family together, suffer them not to wander after Vanity:
Read some Portion of Holy Writ; and, if it may be, make them understand God's
Will in it. Catechize, and Instruct them in the Fundamentals of Religion, Pray
with them, and for them, for the Pardon of their sins, and a Blessing upon the
means; Commend them, and all thine, and all the Israel of God into God's
Protection, and so conclude the day in Secret with God as thou beganst; confess
the miscarriages of thy Heart, and bless God for the assistance thou have
found; follow this course, and the Sabbath will prove a Market Day for thy Soul.

7. Direct. It Is not enough to Sanctify the Sabbath thy self, but God
requires, thee to improve thy Authority, that those under thy Charge may
Sanctify it also: And if by thy negligence, or remissness thou suffer sin
to be Committed on it, and wilt not hinder it, it will be laid at thy door, and
charged upon thine Account, qui non prohibet cum potest, Jubet. Now, this
chiefly concerns Superiors, for to them is the Command chiefly directed, Exodus
20.10. They are to Command, and others are to Obey. All Governors therefore,
whether Civil, Military, or Ecclesiastical, are hereby obliged to improve their
Interest and Authority, to hinder the Profanation of the Lod's day, and to
promote the Sanctification of it. It was good Joshua's Resolution, He and his
would Serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. And God himself, who could not be mistaken,
faith of Abraham, He knew that he would Command his Children, and Household
after him, to keep his Commandments, Genesis 18.19. The Magistrate is Custos
utrius and Fabulae, and therefore should look to it, that the Commands of God
be not broken, or Contemned. They should be Nursing Fathers to the Church, and
therefore should see that their Children take good ways, and run not into
dangers, Isa. 49.23. They are Vicegerents upon Earth, and should Act like God,
and see his Commands observed; they should encourage the good, and punish the
disobedient; they should Reprove, Threaten, Restrain, and Punish the
Disobedient, for the Profaning of the Sabbath; and encourage the good, that it
may appear they bear not the Sword in vain. This was Nehemiah's Practice in the
same Case, Nehem. 13.15, etc. The Fourth Commandment says as much, which is
Directed to Superiors, who have most Power to Reform this amiss. An Example of
a Magistrates Power we have in Josiah, who Commanded all his Subjects to stand
to the Covenant, he had made with the Lord, and made them to Serve the Lord
their God; though doubtless, many of them had rather have Served Baal, 2 Chronicles.
34.32,33. That is, he forced them to an outward compliance. We find in many
places, Death is threatened to the Profanation of this day. Now, if the
Magistrate had not Power to punish, as some imagine, who should inflict his
Death? Can it be imagined, that God immediately from Heaven struck them dead
for every such Transgression? We find indeed, the Law Executed, Numb. 15.36. by
the Command of God, upon the man that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath, but it
was done by the hand of man; though men cannot be compelled to become true
Christians, yet they may, and ought to be forced to an outward Compliance, and
restrained from the open violation of the known Laws of God, though they will
not Sanctify it in their Heart, they should be restrained from Profaning it
with their Hands, or Tongues. False Prophets should not be suffered to deceive
the People, and those that Teach Errors and Heresies, should be restrained. But
alas! here is our Misery, we have few Nehemiahs in our Time, to redress these
abuses: Many not only do it themselves, but take Pleasure in those that do; and
the Sabbath is Profaned, and few lay it to Heart. Ministers also in their
place should see to the Observation of it, though they cannot compel, yet they
may persuade, and denounce the Judgments of God against the wilful breakers of
his Law: The Word and Sword should go together; and if they prove obstinate
Sinners, they should be cast out, as those that are not fit for a Christian
Society; Excommunication has proceeded, I suppose, against Persons for less
faults in God's Account. Governors of Families also, whether Parents, or
Masters, should look to those under their Charge; for neither Son nor Daughter,
Manservant, nor Maidservant, should break this Law; and though they have not
the Power of Life and Death, as the Magistrate has, yet he has Power to
Command, Rebuke, Restrain; and, if need be, to Correct: And why has God given
this Power into their Hands, but to this End? Abraham, Joshua, David, and
others, did thus Reform their Families, Genesis 18.19. Josh. 24.15. Psalm. 101.
throughout. Ephesians. 6.4. Esther 4.6. Servants that are of another Religion; as
suppose a Jew, or a Mohammedan, yet ought to be restrained from the open
Profanation of it. But alas! many Parents, and Masters will Profane it
themselves, and it cannot be imagined that they will see to their Children, or
Servants; yea, often both by Precept, and President, they Command the
violation; and many that will not openly Profane it themselves, yet wink at
others when they do it; but cannot God, think thou, discern the thoughts of
thy Heart, and see thy approbation of it? Some plead, as Lot of Zoar, it is a
little one, it is a small matter, the more shame to break a Command of God for a
small matter; if the Devil mend thy Wages, thou will mend thy Work, and a
greater Temptation will make thee break them all, but thou will find none so
small; some plead a necessity for doing this or that, but was it not thy
neglect that made it necessary? Some plead Youth must have some Recreation, so
they must have Food and Raiment, shall they therefore steal for it? Why may
they not have it out of thy six days, as well as out of God's one? Give them of
thy own, and not of another time for it.

CHAP. IX. Directions in Baptism.
IN the next place, I shall come to Treat of the Sacraments, and give some
Directions in the right use of them, which is a business of very great
Concernment; and the most miscarry, and lose their Labor that use them. I
shall spend a few words concerning Sacraments in general, and then Treat of
them severally. A Sacrament is a visible sign, and Seal of the Covenant of
Grace, Instituted, and Ordained by God himself, whereby he confirms unto the
Elect, the free promise of the Gospel; Christ, and all his Benefits, and also
binds them unto Obedience to his revealed Will. The Covenant which God made
with Adam in Paradise, was a Covenant of Works, engaging to perfect Obedience
upon pain of Death, and Damnation; do this, and Live: And had man continued in
Innocence, he had been everlastingly happy upon that Covenant terms. But when
by the Instigations of Satan, man had broken this Covenant, and Transgressed
that Command, which forbid him to eat of the Tree of the Knowledge, of good and
Evil; he lost by this Transgression that Image of God, wherein he was Created,
and in the room of it had the Image of Satan stamped upon his Soul; and instead
of Original Righteousness, had Original Sin, and his whole Nature was depraved.
And after which Fall, it was impossible that he, or any of his Posterity,
should ever have been saved upon the first Covenant terms, and lay under a
necessity of perishing, if the great God had not found out a way, which Man nor
Angel could not have done, to Reconcile sinful Man to himself, by a Mediator;
and to this end, sent his own Son, out of his own Bosom, to be made Man, that
being God and Man, he might be a fit Mediator between God and Man: Who by his
Death and Passion discharged the Debt, bought the Prisoners into his own hands,
and enters into a new Covenant with them, even a Covenant of Grace; the Tenor
of it is, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved; and unto
this Covenant the Sacrament Seals. Now, this Covenant, in the Time of the Law,
and in the Time of the Gospel, was one and the same for Substance, though under
a different Administration. It was then more dark, and Typical; now more clear,
and manifest: and even then also God gave them Seals to this Covenant, which
were Circumcision, and the Passover; not that they were needful on God's part,
for his Promises are, Yea, and Amen; but on Man's part they were, lest being
sensible of his own unworthiness, he should doubt, and despair of God's Mercy.
Now, in the Time of the Gospel, God altering the Administration (for when the
Substance was come, the shadows fled away) he altered the Seals also, and
appointed only two, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper: The one for our Entrance
into the Church, the other for our growth and nourishment. These, and these
only are our Gospel Sacraments; as for these five added by the Papists, they
are properly no Sacraments at all; for the Covenant of Grace is not Sealed by
them. Some of them want a Divine Institution, some of them have not the Nature
of a Sacrament, and a Divine promise is wanting, and therefore a Blessing
cannot be expected. Now, Baptism is the first Sacrament of the New Testament,
both in regard of Institution, Administration, Order, and Use, and therefore
comes first to be Treated of. The word is taken from the Greeks, and signifies
to wash, or dip, etc. and it is Attributed in Scripture to many things, but I
shall not trouble you with them, only in this place we Treat of it as it is a
Sacrament of the New Testament, Instituted by Christ, whereby Persons are
dipped in, or sprinkled with water, in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost; and so Dedicated, and Devoted to the Service, and Worship of God;
and entered into his Church, and Listed into his Company, his School, and
Family, and have all the Blessings, and Benefits of the New Covenant; Christ,
and all his Righteousness, Merits, and Graces, Pardon of Sin, Regeneration,
Adoption, Sanctification, and Glorification Sealed up to them; for the Water,
as it is of a cleansing Nature, signifies the Blood of Christ, which cleanses
us from all Sin. In this Sacrament there is a mutual Covenant made, and
ratified between Christ and the Soul; the Soul gives up it self to Christ,
promising Obedience to his known Will, and that he will Worship no other god,
but Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: And God, for his part, promises Christ, and
his Benefits, upon Condition, that Man prove Faithful in his Covenant; and no
doubt, God will not fail in his part, if Man perform, which that thou may do,
take these Directions.

1. Direct. Because some Scruples do arise about Baptism, it seems necessary to
speak something to them; for those that Question the Ordinance it self, are not
like to use the Directions. The very Essence of Water Baptism is denied by
some, and questioned by others, whether it be a standing Ordinance in the
Church; but that which some question, and others deny, I think need not be
questioned, and cannot be denied; and for their Confutation, I need say no
more, but search the Scriptures; for he that reads the Scripture, and believes
what he reads, cannot be Ignorant. Baptism was given in Commission by Christ to
his Disciples, Mat. 28.19,20. and that it was to be done with Water, see it in
their Practice; you find Philip Baptizing the Eunuch with Water, Acts 8.38. And
Peter Baptized Cornelius thus, and his Family; in both places Water is
mentioned, and they were both immediately Directed to do it by the Holy Ghost.
But the greatest Controversy lies elsewhere, between us and the Anabaptists,
who it be, that are Subjects capable of this Ordinance, this therefore shall
fall next under consideration. I need not step so far out of my way, as to tell
you they ought to be rational Creatures, such as are capable of being in
Covenant, and to have the Graces and Benefits of the Covenant bestowed upon
them, and so stand to reprove the foolish, ridiculous Custom of the Papists in
Baptizing Bells, etc. Neither need I tell you it must be a Living Creature, and
not one that is dead; and so reprove the Custom of those, which seemed to be
Baptized for the dead, or in their stead, or in their Name; a Custom which
seemed to be crept into the Church, in the Apostles days, 1 Cor. 15.29* which
Custom Ambrose and Tertullian speak of. But to come nearer the Question in
Controversy; you may assure your selves, that those, and those only that are
Members of the visible Church, are to partake of this Ordinance: Those that are
in Covenant should partake of the Sign and Seal of the Covenant, Genesis 17.11.
Romans 4.11. Now, these are the Godly, and their Seed, Acts. 2.39. The Promise is
unto you and to your Children. The seed of Faithful Abraham are either those
that are of Riper Years, or of Infants: Those that are of Riper Years, are
such, as being Converted to the Faith, hold fast the Foundation, and manifest
Repentance, for sins past, and profess Obedience for the time to come; and of
those, I think, is no scruple made by any that own the Ordinance, if there be,
see Mark 16.15,16. Acts 37.38. Now, Infants that are within the Covenant, are
such as have one, or both Believing Parents; that is, such as profess Faith in
Christ, and Obedience to him, and Live accordingly, that the Children of those
are in the Covenant, and have right to the Seal, by a Birth-priviledge, many
able Divines have largely proved, both by Scriptures and Arguments; the
Scriptures they make use of, are such as these, Genesis 17.7.9. 1 Cor. 7.14. Gal.
3.9.14. Col. 2.11,12. Acts 2.38,39. Romans 4.11,12. Mat. 28.19. Mark 10.13, etc.
Luke 18.15,16. Romans 11.16. and many others. Now, you must know, that Godly
Parents are under a twofold Consideration, as they are Men, and the sinful
Offspring of Adam; so their Children are the Children of wrath by Nature; but
as they are Believers, and the Sons of Faithful Abraham, and ingraffed into
Christ, the second Adam; so they, and their Children also are in Covenant: This
might be Evidenced by Arguments, but my Discourse being practical, and not
polemical, I shall refer you to those that have purposely Treated of it: Yet,
lest any should be at a loss, consider Children of Believers in the Time of the
Law, were Members of the Visible Church, and in Covenant with their Fathers,
and received the Seal and Sign of the Covenant, for such was Circumcision, Genesis
17.11. Romans 4.11. and that by God's own Command, Deuteronomy. 29.10,11,12,13, etc. And
I conceive it will not be proved, where they were ever taken out of Covenant,
or lost this their Birth-priviledge, or what they have in lieu of it, or that
our Privileges are straightened by Christ's coming, and therefore we conceive
they are still in Covenant, and therefore being every way as capable of the
seal of the Covenant Baptism, as the Jews Children were of Circumcision, it
ought to be Administered; besides, it was for unbelief the Jews were broken off,
Romans 11.20. and that both Root and Branch: How then came the Believing Jews to
lose this privilege for their Children? Yea, the Promise is made to them that
Believe, and to their seed, Acts 2.39. And Believers Children have been long in
Possession, let their Enemies disprove their Right.

2. Direct. I Will take it for granted at present, that Infants of one, or both
Believing Parents are within the Covenant, and Members of the Visible Church
upon their Parents Account: It is their Birth-priviledge, and therefore it is
requisite that they receive the sign, and seal of the Covenant, which is
Baptism; that being the initiating sign whereby Members are Orderly entered into
the Church, Soldiers are Listed into Christ's Company, and Scholars into his
School; and therefore it is the Parents Duty to present them, and to Enter them
into the Covenant, and bring them timely unto this Ordinance, and Dedicate them
unto the Lord, even in their Infancy, as Hannah did Samuel, even when he was a
Child. But because the Child claims this not as he is an Infant, but as he is
the Child of such Parents: It Is necessary that the Parents, one, or both, be
rightly qualified; they should be such as own God in sincerity: For though a
serious Profession, not contradicted by a vicious life, may, and must satisfy
the Church, who cannot search the Heart, yet it will not satifie God, who
tries the Reins and the Heart. It Is necessary also that they have a competent
measure of Knowledge, as well as Faith, and the other Graces of the Spirit,
that so they may perform the Duties required. It Is requisite they should know
in what condition their Children are in by Nature; that they are born the
Children of Wrath, as well as others, and derived a poysonful Nature, even from
them; for though they themselves may be Gracious, yet they begat not their
Children as they were Gracious, but as Men and Women, the sinful Offspring of
Adam; it is Nature and Corruption, and not Grace, that is derivative. A Man will
never prize a Plaster, that knows of no Wound; nor Physic, that knows not
that he is Sick; nor this Remedy, till he know of the Disease. The knowledge of
this will make a man admire God's Goodness to himself and Children, and to
bewail the inward Distempers of the Soul; and wrestle with God for the Pardon
of this Corruption, and for his Sanctifying Grace, and Spirit, when others
little regard it; and bless God, that has provided such a Remedy, sent such a
Savior into the World, and entered into such a Covenant; not only with
Believers, but their Seed; and given such a Seal to it, for the confirmation of
their Faith: For though it abolish not Sin utterly, as some Teach, yet has it
a tendency to the Mortification, and the weakening of it. They should know also,
by what Right their Infants enjoy this Privilege; this should put them upon
it, to clear up their own Interest, and improve it, to renew their Covenant, to
Act Faith, and suck sweetness from the Promises, which are made to Believers,
and their Children; and upon this Confidence that God is their God, and the God
of their Seed; they should Offer up their Children unto God, and Dedicate, and
Devote them to his Service, as I said before; List them into his Army, and
Enter them into his School, desiring of him not only to allow them the external
badge of Church Members, but also make them Members of the Invisible Church;
yea, Living Members of Christ's Mystical Body: And be earnest with God to
Baptize them, not only with Water, but also with the Holy Ghost; and lay claim
to the Ordinances upon this Account; and not only so, but it is their Duty to
endeavor what in them lies, to make them his Servants, by Training them up in
his Fear, and to Teach them their Duty, both to God and Man. For, as Parents
usually Covenant for their Children about the Affairs of the World, and
Interest them in Earthly Privileges; so do they here Enter them into the
Covenant, and Interest them thereby into the Blessings of the Covenant, except
afterward they wilfully revoke it. Parents neglect of this was formerly
accounted a great Sin; as we see in Moses, Exodus 4.24. when God would have
killed him for neglecting Circumcision, and threatens such a Soul that is not
thus Dedicated, to be cut off from his People, Genesis 17.14. And where God
changed his mind, or relaxed this Law, is not easily found. But alas! how
careless are most Parents of this Duty? Some Scruple it, and so neglect it; but
most bring their Children to the Ordinance, as they themselves come to Church,
merely for Fashion sake; as they beg for nothing, so they expect no benefit by
it: it is more of Custom, than Conscience; and more of Ceremony, than Service;
it is blind Obedience they yield, not knowing what God requires at their hands.

3. Direct. In this Duty aim at God's Glory, the strengthening of thy Faith,
and the good of thy own, and thy Childrens Souls: Many a good Action is spoiled
for want of a good End, as I told you, the Fasting, Prayers, and Alms of the
Pharisees were, Mat. 6.1,2, etc. In this Ordinance God aims at the foresaid
Ends; his Glory is his ultimate End, and should be ours: He annexes this Seal
to his Covenant to strengthen our Faith; use it therefore to this End. And by
this our Children are Entered into Covenant: As we Live, and Move, and have our
Being from him, so we should Live, and Move, and Act for him; not only in this,
but in all other Duties: This is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, and in this
it excels all the Water in the World: For our Baptismal water, though not in
regard of it is Essence, yet in it is Use and Efficacy, passes all other, though
never so precious: others may Comfort the Heart, but cannot Sanctify it; Abana
and Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus, may be more beautiful to the Eye, than the
River Jordan, yet cannot heal Naaman's Leprosy; it had not that Sanctive
virtue put into it by God. So this Baptismal water is set apart, and Sanctified
to an Holy Use; even to Seal the Covenant of Grace to Believers, in which
Covenant God offers Christ, to be our Lord, and Savior; and promises with him
to give us pardon of Sin, Regeneration, Adoption, Sanctification, and
Redemption; yea, Heaven, and Glory; and thereupon sets to his Seal in this
Sacrament: And Man, on his part, promises to take Christ as he is offered in
the Gospel, to be his Lord and Savior; and promises to believe in him, to be
Ruled by him, to forsake all other for him, and to be his Faithful Servant to
his Death; and thereupon accepts of the Offered Element, and so puts to his
Seal to the Covenant, and by so doing devotes himself to his Service. So that
this Sacrament is an engaging Sign, and Seal of the Covenant between God and
Man: All the Blessings of the New Covenant are included here; for the Seal is
of as large an extent as the Covenant it self, and as a Seal accepted to an
Evidence, makes it Authentic; much more God's Seal annexed to his Word, is
firm and sure; Heaven and Earth may pass away, but God's Word, thus Ratified,
shall never fail. We have God's Promise, under Hand and Seal, and if we perform
on our part, doubtless, God will never fail on his; he assures us hereby, that
he will be a Reconciled Father to us in Christ; and we shall be his Adopted
Sons and Daughters, he will be our God, which is more than can be expressed in
words, or conceived in mind. Now, from this Covenant thus ratified, a Believer
in the saddest Affliction may fetch Comfort, and refreshing. The Spirit it self
being the Keeper of this Seal, produces it many times to a Christians Comfort;
and enables him to read his Name in the Covenant, and shows him the Great Seal
for it. Thus David could fetch Comfort from his Circumcision, when he was to
Encounter with Goliath; what is this Uncircumcised Philistine, etc. And why may
not we from our Baptism, in our Conflicts with the Goliath of Hell? God is not
a Man, that he should lie, nor the Son of Man, that he should Repent. Now, that
this is a Seal of the Covenant, see Romans 4.11. where Circumcision is Called the
Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, in which place Baptism succeeds. See also,
Col. 2.11,12. wherein we see, We are Buried with him in Baptism, and with him
also raised again. And that all the Blessings of the New Covenant are Sealed by
this is evident also, Gal. 3.27. For as many of you as have been Baptized into
Christ have put on Christ, Romans 6.4,5. where the Benefits both of his Death and
Resurrection are promised; as also Remission of Sins, Mark 1.4. Yea, Salvation
also, Tit. 3.4. By this Ordinance we give up our selves unto Christ, Romans 6.34.
Now, what are the Ends thou aimest at in this Ordinance, when thou presentest
thy Child to be Baptized? Is it the Duty, as well as the Privilege thou
regardest? Do thou Enter him into the Covenant, with an intent to Dedicate
him to the Lord, and Train him up in his fear; to bring him into God's Family,
and make him a Member of his Mystical Body? 1 Cor. 1^.13. For by one Spirit we
are all Baptized into one Body, to make him a Member of the Church, Gal. 3.27.
That he may be Holy, to Marry him unto Christ, etc? it is well. If only Custom,
not Conscience, move thee, thy Ends are bad, and thy Actions Sinful.

4. Direct. Rest not in the Common Privileges of this Sacrament; take not up
with Common favors, but lay hold by Faith upon the main Benefit: What
privilege will it be to be Listed into Christ's Army, when we neither fight
his Battles, nor receive his Pay? Or to be entered into his School, if we be not
Taught, nor Instructed by him; to be of the Number of those that Worship God,
when it is not in Truth and Sincerity? To make a visible Profession without the
practice, to have a Name to Live, and be dead; or to have a Name to be a Child
of God, without the privileges of Children? To be a Member of the visible
Church, and no Member of Christ's Mystical Body? To adhere to the Vine, and not
be Planted in it? To be distinguished from those without the pale of the
Church, as Jews and Heathens; and not from rotten Members, as Hypocrites and
Dissemblers? To have a form of Godliness, without the power and practice of
Holiness? Alas! these things are common to good and bad, as Circumcision did
difference the Jews from all other People, yet most of them were strangers;
yea, Enemies to God; for all are not Israel, that are of Israel: But it is the
Circumcision of the Heart that differenceth them from the World. So it is here,
Baptism differenceth Christians from others; but it is the Baptism of the Spirit
that differenceth the good from the bad. Yet these External Privileges ought
not to be slighted, as the Apostle Argues at large, Romans 3.1,2, etc. yet ought
they not to be trusted to, or rested in. The main thing intended in this
Ordinance, is, that Christ, and all his benefits be Sealed up unto the Soul,
therefore lay hold by Faith upon these things, or thy Labor will be lost: This
Sacrament is the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11. The sign of the
Covenant, Genesis 17.11. Lay hold therefore upon Christ in the Ordinance; yea,
upon whole Christ, as he is offered in the Sacrament, for Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption; and with him Grace and Glory is to be had. But
if thou take up any thing under Christ, the Ordinance will be of little worth
to thee. When thou bring thy Child therefore to the Ordinance, take not up
with Common Benefits; lay out for Christ, and satisfy not thy self without
him. The Ordinance of it self is but a dry, and empty Husk, Christ is the
Kirnel; it is as a Well, Christ is the Water; and what good will a dry Well do
thee? It Is but a broken Cistern, if trusted to, it can hold no Water: What is a
little cold Water applied to the Body, if the Water of Life be not applied to
the Soul? Be thou Real in thy Dedication of thy Child to God, and really Act
Faith upon the Promise, that God may bestow his Son upon him. Thou may find
in Scripture footing for thy Faith, many Divine and precious Promises made by
God. Consider such Scriptures as these, Romans 6.38. As many as were baptized
into Christ, were baptized into his Death, etc. And if we be dead with Christ,
we believe we shall also Live with him, 1 Pet. 3.21. The like Figure whereunto
even Baptism does also now save us, etc. Mark 3.11. Heb. 1.9. John 3.5. Heb.
10.22.24. Gal. 3.16. Luke 3.3. Acts 12.16. and 22.16. Ephesians. 5.26. Titus 3.5. 1
John 1.7. The blood of Christ cleanses us from all our sins; which Blood is
here signified by this Baptismal Water: Here thy Faith may find a Foundation
sure, and steadfast; take up with nothing short of Christ: bring the word of
Promise along with thee to the Ordinance, press God with his Word, he cannot
deny it; but without the Promise the Ordinance is of little Efficacy: But thus
doing, thou will find it a refreshing Ordinance. Christ, and all his Benefits
may be found in this Baptismal Water; yea, whatsoever is necessary for the
Soul. Persuade thy self therefore, that seeing such Scripture expressions hold
forth the Sacrament to be the Laver of Regeneration, and the New Birth, to wash
from sin, and is Instrumental to our Salvation, and Seals up the Covenant,
yea, Christ, and all his Benefits to the Soul. No doubt it will be so to thee,
and to thy Children, if the failing be not on your part. When thou see the
Minister apply the Baptismal water to the Body of thy Infant, do thou by Faith
behold God the Father applying Christ, his Merits, his Blood and Benefits to
the Soul; and as verily as thou see the one done Sacramentally, so verily do
thou believe the other to be done really, and truly. It Is the coming to the
Sacrament without Faith, and without the word of Promise, that makes it seem so
empty, and vain; but doubtless, there is a rich supply to be had. If we suck,
we shall be satisfied: the Well indeed is deep, and Faith is the Bucket: If we
have no Bucket, we are like to have no Water.

5. Direct. That this Sacrament of Baptism be rightly Administered, it is
necessary that it be done agreeably, to the mind, and will of God, expressed in
his Word; for God will have his own work done in his own way; he has not left
it to Man to use his own will in his Worship: But we must follow the Pattern,
and Example he has left us, and Obey the Precept and Command he has given us;
and be directed by Scripture Light, and perform the Duty in a right manner, and
form, as well as to a right End. It Is necessary therefore in the first place,
that it be Administered by a Lawful Minister; it is the work of those that are in
Commission, and we find not any Commission Sealed unto any other than the
Apostles, and their Successors, the Ministers of Christ, set apart by God, and
the Church for this, and other Holy Duties, for the work of the Ministry; that
this is part of their Commission, we may read Mat. 28.19,20. Go Teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I Commanded you; and
lo I am with you always, even to the End of the World. Those therefore that
run before they are sent, and incroach upon this holy Ordinance, without a
Call, let them remember the sin of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and also their
Punishment, for incroaching upon the Priests Office. And as he must be rightly
Called, so he should be rightly Qualified for the work; that he may not only
know, but also Teach the People the Nature, End, Use, and Benefit of this
Sacrament; that he bring not forth a dumb Idol, which neither he, nor the
People know, nor Understand. The Subject Recipient ought also to be rightly
Qualified, if he be of Years of Discretion, he should know the Principles of
Religion; the Nature, End, and Use of the Sacrament: He should profess Faith
in, and submission to Christ. And if they are Infants, the Parents should be
thus Qualified. The Church they have their Duties too; It Is their Duty, not
only to be Spectators, but to join Hand and Heart in the Work, that they beg of
God for the Party Baptized; that not only the Sign, and Seal, but the Grace of
the Covenant may be conferred, and that a Seed may be sown in this Ordinance,
that in time may spring forth. It Is necessary also that a right Element be
used, viz. water, true, Natural water, without any Sophistication, mixture, or
Composition, for this is agreeable to the will of Christ; and the Papists
Addition of Salt, Spittle, and Cream, is a Humane Invention, and no wise
pleasing to God. We find Christ was Baptized with water, and the Apostles used
no other: The River Jordan, Salem, and other places were frequented to this
End. Thus the Eunuch, thus Cornelius were Baptized; and this is most suitable
to the End for which it was Ordained, and best Answers the Type and Shadow of
it, in the time of the Law, and serves best to signify, and Represent the
blood of Christ; for as water is of a mundifying Nature, so is the Blood of
Christ unto the Soul; and this also is agreeable unto Antiquity, water being
always used in the Primitive Time. Niciphorus Reports, when a Minister, for
want of Water, used Sand in Baptizing a Man; that Baptism was by the Church
accounted a Nullity, and the Man was after Baptized with water. And it must
also be done in a Lawful, and due manner and Form; the External Form consists
in the Ministers words and Actions: For words, it is not Lawful for him to use
what words he pleases, but the words of Institution; he must Baptize in the
Name of the Father, the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: And his Actions should be
agreeable to his Words, and so he must either dip, or dive, the Baptized Party
into the water, or pour, or sprinkle water upon him. It Is conceived in the
Primitive Time, in those Hot Countries, dipping in the water was most used,
which in some places, especially in those cold Countries, the Church has
altered, for God will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice; and the Scripture seems to
hold forth many favorable Instances, for washing or sprinkling, Heb.
9.10.19.20,21. Acts 2.42. and 16.33. Mark 7.4. It is not like that all these
were dipped; the word in the Original signifies washing, whether by Diving into
the water, or by pouring water upon, Ephesians. 5.26. Titus 3.5. For as Circumcision,
applied to one part of the Body, did suffice; so Baptism, though the water be
not applied to the whole, may yet signify the blood of Christ applied to the
Soul; and the Conscience is said to be sprinkled with this Blood; for as a
little Bread, and a little Wine signifies whole Christ; so a little water
signifies his Blood; and serve to seal the Covenant as well as more.

6. Direct. When thou have solemnly entered thus into Covenant with the Lord,
and his Vows are upon thee, and accepted the Offered Sacrament, and set to thy
Seal, and obliged thy self to the performance, know then, it is thy Duty to
perform thy Vows unto the Almighty; remember with whom thou Covenantest: It Is
with one that cannot be deceived, and that will not be mocked, and one that is
well able to avenge the Quarrel of his Covenant, and that will avenge it if
thou perform it not. It was wise Solomon's Counsel, Eccl. 5.4,5. When thou
vowest a Vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in Fools;
pay that which thou have vowed: Better it is that thou should not Vow, than
to Vow, and not perform. Thou have in thy Baptism Dedicated thy self up to God,
and bound over thy self to his Obedience; thou have taken Press-mony from him,
and engaged thy self to fight his Battles, and to be an Enemy to his Enemies:
And can thou without horrid Treachery fight the Devils Battles against him?
Thou have vowed thy self against Sin, the World, and the Devil; and will thou
take part with them against God? It is Death for a Soldier to leave his
Colors, and side with the Enemy, and is it nothing to leave God, when we have
taken Press-money, and Pay from him, and join with the Devil against him? What
benefit can thou then expect by thy Baptism, or what good is it like to do
thee? Simon Magus was Baptized, but had little benefit by his Baptism, he was
still in the gaul of Bitterness, and in the bonds of Iniquity, and had no part,
or lot, in the benefits of the Covenant. If Herod made Conscience of a rash,
and unlawful Oath, how much more should Christians of so serious, so solemn, so
Beneficial a Covenant? The keeping whereof would make them everlastingly Happy;
and the breach thereof will make them eternally Miserable. What horrid
Treachery is it for thee to vow Service unto God, and to perform it to the
Devil, and the World? To carry God's Mark in thy Forehead, and the Devils
Brand in thy Heart. To call thy self a Christian, and Live the Life of an
Heathen, or Infidel? What is this, but to put a Sheeps skin upon a Wolves back?
Or the Kings stamp upon counterfeit Coin? Consider if thou do thus, Baptism
will be so far from saving thee, that it will condemn thee; and the Baptismal
water that was cast upon thee will prove, like the water of Jealousy, unto the
defiled Woman, Number. 5.27. it will be attended with a visible judgment, and
prove a Curse, and not a Blessing: What benefit do thou intend to receive by
it? Do expect the Benefit of the Covenant? Do imagine that God is engaged
to thee, and not thee to him? Thou art much deceived, if thou break with him,
thou dis-ingagest him. God indeed Offers Christ, if thou will receive him; and
promises upon that Condition to be a reconciled Father to thee, to give thee
Remission of sin, Regeneration, Adoption, and Glory for ever; and hereunto he
puts this Seal to the Covenant: And thou promisest upon thy part to accept of
Christ upon the offered terms, vowedst Obedience to him, and Dedicatest thy
self to his Service, and thereupon acceptest the offered Sacrament, and set
thy Seal to the Covenant. Now, if thou perform thy part, God will, doubtless
perform his: Heaven and Earth shall pass away before one tittle of his Word
shall pass, especially that given, and ratified under his Hand and Seal; but if
thou break with him, and accept not of those Mercies upon the required
Conditions, God is not engaged to make good what is thus Conditionally promised
in the Covenant, unless thou can prove it to be an absolute grant, that all
that are thus Baptized, Live how they list, shall be saved; and then the
Ministers, Scriptures; yea, Spirit, and all are of little use. No, no, God will
cashire, and disband such Soldiers, and cast out such Non-proficients out of
his School, and such unfaithful Servants out of his Family. But alas! how many
of these may we find in the World? That Vow Obedience to Christ, and perform
Service to the Devil: If he bid them swear, they will swear; if he bid them be
drunk, they will Obey: Yea, many, that though they would be loath to break
their word with Man, much more their Vow, or their Oath, yet make nothing of
these Sacramental Vows: But consider, God will not lose by thee, neither thy
sin, or Obedience can hurt, or benefit him, but the benefit, or damage will
accrue to thy own Soul.

7. Direct. Make a right Use of thy Baptism, and improve it through the whole
course of thy Life; for the Efficacy of it is not limited, or bound up to any
moment of Time, but is a Flower that never loses savor; a Jewel that never
loses it is virtue: It Is a Fountain that never is drawn dry. And breasts of
Consolation, where thou may suck, and be satisfied. Those that use it only
as an Idle Ceremony, that never improve it, or look after it when it is once
past; and make no Advantage, or Use of it; are more foolish than those that
take great care to have the Evidences of their Land Sealed, and never make use
of the Inheritance, thereby conveyed. Use it therefore for the best Advantage
for thy Soul: This is a needful, though much neglected Duty. The serious
Consideration of the End and Use of Baptism, and the benefits and privileges
Sealed up by it to us, and ours, and our own engagements therein to God, may be
of great Use to us in the whole course of our Lives, in many cases and
conditions. Baptism may be compared to the Marriage knot, by virtue whereof the
Wife lays claim, not only to her Husband, but whatsoever is her Husbands; and
it is as a Seal to an Evidence, which ratifies it, and makes it Authentic, and
adds force and Efficacy to it. Baptism, though not to be iterated, or renewed,
yet the Covenant thereby once Sealed, remains Authentic for ever, till we
pluck off the Seal, or renounce the Covenant. This is a notable means to put us
on to mourn for our Sins, and therefore it is called the Baptism of Repentance;
as it does oblige us to Repent, for the consideration of our Miscarriages
toward God, since we gave up our selves to him, and the falling short of what
we have promised, and might have been, and done may well keep us humble, and
penitent. When we are tempted to sin, and to break the Commands of God by sin,
we may look back to our Covenants to the contrary, and the Vows which we have
made; and it may terrrifie us to think that we should break such a Covenant
with God, when we make some conscience of Promise to Man. Think with thy self,
have I dedicated my self to God? What Sacrilege is it? What perfidious
Treachery is it now to Serve the Devil, his sworn Enemy? Have thou Vowed
Obedience to thy Maker, and promised to renounce the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh; how then can thou think to look God in the Face at the last day, if
now thou sidest with his greatest Enemies? Was thy Body washed with water,
signifying the blood of Christ, and shall thy Soul be still defiled? Will thou
return, with the Dog, to the Vomit, and the washed Sow, to her wallowing in the
Mire? How may the consideration of this fill thee with shame and sorrow? Hence
also thou may set Faith on work to fetch virtue from the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, to kill sin in thee, and raise thee up to newness of
Life; for if thou be Buried with him in Baptism, it is thy Duty thus to do, Romans
6.3,4,5. When Corruption is strong, fetch strength hence to weaken it; when
Grace is weak, hence thou may strengthen it. This is an excellent means to
assure thee of thy Salvation, of the Pardon of thy sins, and the rest of the
Mercies promised in the Covenant; for the Covenant being ratified and Sealed,
what should hinder the performance? God, doubtless, is real in his Promise, and
true in his Covenant; he did not intend to deceive thee by an empty Ceremony,
or set his Seal to a blank: No, no; nor if thou revoke not, he will not revoke.
Is not this the Sacrament of Regeneration? Is it not called the Laver of
Regeneration? Signifying the washing away of sin, Acts 22.16. Arise, and be
Baptized, and wash away thy sins. Yea, of Salvation, it is said to save us, 1
Pet. 3.21. Has not God given thee a pledge in thine Hand of his Gracious
meaning toward thee? And what need has he to dissemble with thee? Does he
gain any thing by thee? Yea, though thou art relapsed, yet look back to thy
Covenant, and return. See God's Advice in such a case, Jer. 3.1. Thou have
played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet return unto me, says the Lord. God
will not depart till thou art willing to let him go: And from hence also you
may fetch Arguments for Brotherly Love among Saints: we are all Baptized by one
Spirit, into one Body, and therefore should sympathize each with other, as the
Members do. Those are some of the daily Fruits, you may gather of this Tree,
many more grow upon it.

CHAP. X. Directions in Receiving the Sacrament.
THE next Duty to be spoken to, is the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which is
an Ordinance of God, wherein by the External signs of Bread and Wine, set
apart, and Sanctified to that End and Use, and duly Administered by God's
appointment, the Lord signifies, and Seals up the Truth of his Covenant to
his Elect; and they Seal up their Covenant with him. This Sacrament is a Sign
to Represent, a Seal to Confirm, and an Instrument to convey Christ, and all
his Benefits to a Believing Soul. The principal Efficient Cause, or Author of
this Sacrament, is the whole Trinity, but especially Christ, who is the Angel
of the Covenant; he it is that made the Covenant, and ratified it with his
Blood; and therefore it must be he that adds the Seals, he makes the Promises,
and must make them good. The Essential parts, or Matter of the Sacrament, are
either External, or Internal, the one perceived by our Bodily Eyes, the other
by the Eye of Faith: The External is the outward Signs, or Symbols, viz. Bread
and Wine; which, though they are not changed into the Body and Blood of Christ,
as the Papists Teach; yet are they not naked, bare, or empty things; but such
as really exhibit, yea, Seal Christ, and all his Benefits to a Believing Soul:
No other Bread nor Wine in the World, though a drop, a bit were worth a
Kingdom, are to be compared hereunto. The Internal Matter is Christ, and all
his Graces; these are signified, resembled, exhibited, and applied by the
outward Elements. The Form is that which gives a Being, and perfection to the
Matter, without the which this Bread and Wine would be but Common Bread and
Wine: This also is External or Internal; the External Form consists in the
Lawful Administration, and participation of it, according to God's Word; the
Internal Form is the Union between the Sign and the thing signified. Now, this
Sacramental Union is an Act of God's Spirit, by whose virtue Christ his Merits,
and Benefits are not only resembled, and presented to the mind, but are really
made one, with the Elements; yet this Union is not Natural, according to place,
for there is no mutation of the Sign into the thing signified; neither is the
thing signified included, or fastened to the thing signifying, it cannot be a
local Union, that Christ's Body should be locally present with the Sign; for
Christ's Body, though Glorified, cannot be in all places at once. Neither is it
a Physical Union, as if of two United, losing their proper Forms, should by a
mixture make a third; but it is a Spiritual Union, whereby the Lord Jesus is
really conveyed to the Soul; for besides his Divine presence, and the presence
of his Spirit, he is present with his Body and Blood, not locally, but
Sacramentally; he is Symbolically present to the mind, he is present
Spiritually by the Eye of Faith; Efficaciously present, though absent in Place;
yet we find the fruit of his presence in our Spirits, the Ends of the Sacrament
are the confirmation of our Faith, the Sealing of the Covenant of Grace, and to
be a Badge or Note of our Profession, to be a pledge of our Obedience to, and
Communion with Christ, and a Testimony of our Society with the Church; and may
seem as a Prospective Glass to view Christ afar off. In the Covenant, God
promises to be our God, and the God of our Seed, and sets to his Seal; and we
Seal the Counterpane, and engage that we and ours will Serve the Lord; and by
virtue of this Covenant; so mutually entered into, all the Promises and Benefits
of the Covenant are ours: so that you see a right receiving of this Sacrament
is of very great Concernment, and the unworthy Receiving is very dangerous.
Here is Manna for a believing Soul, but Poison to an unworthy Receiver: This
nourished Peter, but Poisoned Judas; it feeds the good, but kills the bad; it
makes some better, and some worse; some more Holy, and some more Profane; it
increases Grace where Grace is, but increases Guilt where Grace is wanting:
It Is like the Sun when it shines upon a Garden of Herbs, it makes them smell
more odoriferously, when upon a Dunghill it makes it smell more fulsomly: It Is
like the passing through the Red Sea, safe to Israel, dangerous to the
Egyptians; he that brings strange Fire he shall be burnt by it, Lev. 10.3. God
will be Honored by those that draw near to him; he that comes without a
Wedding Garment, shall go away, not with Grace in his Heart, but with Bolts
upon his Heels, Mat. 22.12. According to a man's preparation, such is like to be
his Entertainment: He that Sows nothing, shall Reap nothing; and he that Sows
Vanity, shall Reap Folly; and he that Sows sparingly, shall Reap little, 2 Cor.
9.6. He that takes most care and pains is like to have the best Crop.
Methinks there needs no more Motives to persuade you, than the benefit of
worthy Receiving, and the danger of the contrary; the one has his Grace
increased, the other his sin; the one has his Salvation Sealed up; the other,
without Repentance, his Damnation: He has God's Curse under Seal, and they Eat
and Drink their own Damnation, and are guilty of Christ's Death.

1. Direct. If thou would partake of the Sacrament worthily, thou must
Examine thy self, whether thou have those Habitual Qualifications which are
requisite for so Holy a Duty. There are several Graces that must be Exercised
at this time; but how can a Man Act Grace, that has it not? He that comes to
the Wedding Feast, without a Wedding Garment, is not like to be a welcome Guest,
Mat. 22.12. Without Grace in Exercise this Ordinance will do thee little good:
Thou may indeed eat the Bread, and drink the Wine, these are bodily Actions,
but without Faith thou can not feed upon Christ in the Ordinance; and what
good will a bit of Bread, or a sup of Wine do thee? Faith is the Hand that
receives him, the Mouth that feeds upon him, and the Stomach that digests him,
and sucks sweetness from him. Try whether thou have Spiritual Life; a Man, by
Nature, is dead in sins and Trespasses, and without Regeneration he remains
thus; and what good will a Feast do to a Dead Man? If you put Meat into a Dead
Man's mouth, what is he benefited by it? Will it nourish him? Can he eat it,
swallow, or Digest it, when he cannot Exercise any Act of Life, without which,
Food will be in vain? No more can this Sacrament nourish till a Man be
Regenerated, and new born, and have a Principle of Spiritual Life put into him.
A wicked Man is a Stranger to the Covenant of Grace; he has not the required
Qualifications, neither does he intend to keep the Condition; and what then
has he to do with the Seal? Or what hope can he have of the Privileges? If a
Man has Evidences for Lands mutually Signed and Sealed, if he fail in the
Covenants on his part, how can he expect another should make good his? A wicked
Man is Uncircumcised in Heart, and those that were not circumcised, were not
permitted to eat the Passover, to which the Lord's Supper Answers, Exodus
12.43. Now, these Habitual Qualifications are such as the Scripture requires,
and such as make up the Wedding Garment: And a Man should have Evidences to
show, before he lay claim to such an Ordinance; he should be in Covenant,
before he receive the Seal of the Covenant. This Ordinance is not for the
begetting, but for the strengthening of Grace. The Apostle, to this End, bids a
Man Examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, 1
Cor. 11.28,29. For he that eats this Bread, and drinks this Cup of the Lord
unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords
Body. The word Examine signifies to take a strict Account of himself, and make
a diligent search into himself; as whether he be Gold, or dross; whether he be
chaff, or Wheat; it may be it is a Metaphor taken from a Goldsmith, that try
their Gold, whether it be pure, and the dross purged out, and consumed; or from
those that try their Coin, not superficially, but by the weight, by the sight,
by the sound, by the touch stone, that so they may not be deceived with what is
bad, and counterfeit; and so must we in this case: Especially considering the
Devil has much counterfeit coin goes abroad for current, and most Men are
deceived; and it is easy to be deceived, especially when our own Hearts are the
greatest Cheats, Try thy Evidences for Heaven, whether thou art Regenerated or
not; otherwise thou art not for Heaven, John 3.3.5. Whether thou art an Adopted
Child of God? For none else ought to eat at his Table: Christ will not be Food
to nourish any other, he will not have the Devils Brats Dine at his Table; none
ought to sit there but those that shall sit with him in the Kingdom of Heaven:
Have thou those Graces that always accompany conversion? For these are
necessary in this work, as Sanctified, and Sanctifying knowledge, without which
thou can not discern the Lord's Body, or know God, or thy self, or the Tenure
of the Covenant of Grace, the Nature of the Sacrament, or the state of thy own
Soul, etc. Faith also is necessary to lay hold upon Christ in this Ordinance,
and feed upon him, etc. Repentance for sin past, and new Obedience for the time
to come. Love also to God, to his Word, and to his Children, with a longing
desire after Christ in the Ordinance; for what shall we do at a Feast without a
stomach: The Trial of these Graces I shall now wave, having in another Treatise
partly handled it; it is called, The Souls Looking-Glass, or, a Spiritual
Touchstone, to which I refer you, because I will not Actum agere, do a thing
that is done before.

2. Direct. Though Habitual preparation, and a gracious disposition, of which
we have Treated before, be absolutely necessary, without which a Man cannot be
a welcome Guest to this Marriage Feast, as we see in the Foolish Virgins, Mat.
25.1,2, etc. who, notwithstanding they had Lamps in their Hands, yet for want
of this Oil of Grace in their Hearts, were not admitted, but the door was shut
against them. I say, though this be necessary, yet it is not sufficient; it is
not enough to have a Marriage Garment, but we must have it on, and made clean
and handsome, if we would Honor the Wedding. It Is not enough to have Faith, and
Knowledge, and Love, and Obedience, etc. in the Habit; but we must have them in
the Exercise: what good will they do us, if we use them not? It Is not enough to
have Lamps in our Hands, yea, and Oil in our Vessels, though most go without,
but we must have our Lamps always burning; we must rise, and trim our Lamps.
When we go to meet* the Bridegroom Christ in such a Duty, we must snuff our
Candles, that they may burn bright: It Is not enough for a Musician to have an
Instrument, but he must have it in Tune, or it will yield bad Music; nay, he
must have skill to use it, or it will not do; nay, he must be in a capacity to
make use of his skill, which is not if his hands be cold or numbed, or
otherwise out of Order. The Souls Music is quickly spoiled if it be out of
Tune: It Is not enough for a Carpenter, or Joyner to have Tools, and Matter to
work upon, but he must often by grinding, or whetting, put an edge upon them,
or they are not fit for his purpose. It Is not enough to have Household stuff in
abundance, but it must be set in Order, not on a confused heap; yea, and
scoured, and made bright, if we would use them to adorn the House. And in like
manner, it is not enough for a Christian to have the forementioned Habits, and
Qualifications, but he must reduce them into Art and Exercise; he must scour
them up against such a good Time as this, and rub off the rust, and make them
fit for use; yea, make use of them, for to this End they were given. And a
Christian, notwitstanding the Habits, may, and will be an unworthy Receiver, if
they be not in Exercise. It Is necessary that some Vital Operations cooperate
to the Receiving, Digesting, and Concocting our Meat, or it will not nourish;
and so that this Spiritual Food may prove Refreshing to the Soul: It Is
necessary that there be a principle of Spiritual Life, and the Actings of
Grace, concur with the Receiving, and Digesting of it. A Godly Man may
sometimes be in an Appoplexy, and have a stupifyed Soul, and a benumbed
Conscience; he may have his swooning Fits, when Life is scarce discerned to
appear: It may seem David sometimes was in this Condition, or some other great
Distemper. Now, you know though there be Life, yet in such case it is not safe
to give Food; stir up therefore thy Graces, and get them in Exercise, it is the
best way to procure heat and digestion: Consider seriously what thou art about,
and with whom thou have to do, and what is the danger of unworty Receiving, and
the benefit of the contrary: Consider thou have a price put into thy Hand, O
let not an Heart be wanting to get wisdom. In this Ordinance all thy wants may
be supplied; here thy Graces may be strengthened, and thy Communion with God
renewed. Thy Covenant with God is here ratified, and Christ, and all his
Benefits made over to thy Soul: Here thou may have the pardon of thy sins,
and whatever else is requisite for thy Soul, if thou come preparedly, and Act
Faith upon the Promise, and improve thy Interest in the Covenant; come
therefore with a Thirsting desire of Christ in the Ordinances; this is a
Qualification required, Isa. 55.12. John 7.37. Rev. 22.15. Long after this
Bread of Life, for this Longing shall be satisfied. Come with Confidence to
have thy needs and wants supplied, and to this End, Exercise Faith on the
Promise, this Grace is all in all in the Duty; it is both the Hand and the
Mouth: Exercise Repentance for sin past, and resolve to Obey for the time to
come. But if thou come unprepared, thou eatest and drinkest thy own Damnation,
and becomest guilty of the Body, and Blood of Christ; let such such
Considerations as these move thee.

3. Direct. If thou would worthily partake of this Sacrament, propound right
Ends to thy self in so doing; the End, as I have said, as in other Duties, so
in this, either makes or marrs the Action. Now, the End, though last in the
Execution, is first in the Intention; it is the first mover: What is it that a
man will do, but is for some End; this, like the weights on a Clock, or the
Spring in a Watch, sets all the Wheels on work, and is the cause of the
Entrance, and continuance of the Motion: Who is it that Builds an House, but he
propounds some End for so doing, otherwise it is an irrational Enterprise? The
skilful Archer shoots not at random, but the Mark is in his Eye. The skilful
Pilot propounds to himself the wished Haven, as his End, and all his endeavor
tends thither. Every one incoming to the Ordinance propounds one End or other,
but if thou propound a wrong End, take what pains thou will, thou will, like
the Pharisees, Mat. 6.1,2, etc. lose thy Reward, if thou perform, with them, a
Commanded Duty, and aim not at God's Glory, but thy own, thou must look a
Reward elsewhere, and not from God. The Papists, as they Corrupt this
Sacrament, in leaving the Institution, and making Additions, and detractions of
their own devising, which never came into the mind of God; so they pervert it
to wrong Ends to further their own Hellish designs; as to Murder Kings, blow up
Parliaments, Massacree Protestants, and conceal their Hellish Plots, etc. and
many others, I fear, come with base, low, and unworthy Ends to this Sacrament.
Custom brings some, shame others, fear of the Law a third sort, etc. and coming
in their sin, with unprepared Hearts, and vicious Lives: They make the Table of
the Lord the Table of Devils, as the Apostle complains; and instead of Sealing
the Covenant with God, they Seal a Covenant with the Devil, to remain his
Slaves, and have the Curse of God, and their own Damnation under Seal. Now, the
Principal End which Christians should aim at, is God's Glory, in the
Remembrance of the Death of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.24.26. Do this, says Christ, in
Remembrance of me: By eating this Bread, and drinking this Cup, we show the
Lord's Death till he comes. These Elements set apart, and Sanctified to this
Holy Use, being thus taken, we profess, and, in a manner, Preach to others the
Death of Christ, and the Benefits thereby procured, which is the sum of the
Gospel. This Sacrament is unto Christians as the Pillar of Stone Erected in the
midst of Jordan, by Joshua, for a Memorial of the wonderful passing of Israel
over Jordan; or, as the Pot of Manna, commanded to be kept in a Memorial that
Israel was forty Years fed in the Wilderness with Bread from Heaven. So is this
Sacrament to be Received, even to the End of the World, in a Memorial of
Christ's Death, and Bloody Passion, and the Benefits procured to the Church by
it. And if Israel had sufficient Cause to keep the Passover for a Memorial of
their Deliverance from the Egyptian Bondage; much more, and greater cause have
Christians to keep this Feast, for a Memorial of their Deliverance from this
Hellish Pharaoh, the Devil, and his Slavery: This is one End why God left us
Sacraments, that whenever we did partake of them, we might Remember this
Deliverance, and bless God for it; this should put us in mind what Christ has
done for us: His Life, his Doctrine, his Miracles, his Death and Passion, and
the whole work of our Redemption. But alas! many Men, when they have the
Sacrament in their Mouths, have the Devil in their Hearts; they seldom mention
God's Name, except in an Oath, or vain speech: But these Men's damnation
sleeps not. Another End is the Sealing of the Covenant between God and us, as
I have often mentioned; God on his part ratifies it, and assures us by his
Seal, he will make it good. And we on our part Dedicate our selves to his
Service, and annex our Seal: He promises to be our God, and we promise to be
his People: But many are not in the Covenant, and have nothing to do with the
Seal, for this is not a begetting Ordinance but confirming those that are
begotten: such as these Seal a Covenant with Death, and Hell, Isa. 28.15. This
Sacrament is like the Water of Jealousy, mentioned in the Law, if a Woman that
drinks of it were pure, it would make her fruitful; if defiled, it would make
her Thigh to rot, and her Belly to swell. Another End is for the increasing
Faith, and other Graces; it is not for the begetting, but increasing Grace, and
therefore pre-supposeth Grace to be there; as also for the maintaining
Communion with God, and Love one with another, they being Members of the same
Body, and Heirs together of the same Glory.

4. Direct. If thou would receive the Sacrament profitably, examine what it
is thou stand in need of, and what thou would have God to give thee, or do
for thee; for the Sacrament was Ordained to supply our wants, and heal our
Diseases. It Is the Souls Market day; now, when a Man goes unto the Market, he
considers what he wants, and what he needs to buy: Now, a Christian's wants,
which he here comes to supply, are principally in his Graces: It Is Spiritual
wants, Soul wants, that are here supplied; if Grace be wanting, there is no
supply promised: but if it be weak, there is: Food may nourish a weak Man, and
make him stronger, but it will not give Life to a dead Carcass: The Sacrament
is not a begetting, but a nourishing Ordinance, and God gives none leave to sit
at his Table but such as are his Children: Who will invite a dead Man to a
Feast? Now, though all God's Children have the Truth of Grace, yet have they
many defects in Grace. A Child that has Life, must have Food to maintain Life,
and to bring him to his Maturity, and full growth. Now, the wants we should
examine before the Sacrament, are either defects in Grace, and decays of Grace,
for here is a supply to be had for both, if we make a right improvement of this
Ordinance: Defects in Grace are often discerned by the prevailing of
Corruption, examine thy self well concerning the state of thy Soul, cast an Eye
over the several passages of thy Life, and bring thy Thoughts, and Words, and
Actions to the Rule, and compare them with the Word of God; hereby thou may
see what is strait, what is crooked; look into this Glass of the Law, and thou will see thy own spots; when thou comparest it with the Rule, thou will see thy
Deviations, and wilt find where thou have come short, and where thou have gone
out of the way: Make a Catalogue of thy sins, especially those since thy
Conversion, and since thy last renenewig thy Covenant with God, by this
Sacrament; and consider thy sins, with their several aggravations, and when
thou see what thou should have done, and what thou have done, compare the
one with the other, and compare the difference, and see how short thou come;
it is the Direction of the Holy Ghost, Jer. 3.40. Search and try your ways, and
turn unto the Lord. Come then to God with shame in thy Face, and sorrow in thy
Heart, and, if possible, with Tears in thine Eyes; confess these thy sins, with
their aggravations: Aaron was Commanded to lay his Hands upon the Head of the
Scapegoat, and confess over him all the Iniquities of the Children of Israel,
and all their transgressions and sins, Lev. 16.21. Christ is our Scapegoat,
let him bear all our Iniquities. To name thy sin, without sorrow, is but an
aggravation of it; mourn for it therefore, but let the Love of God, and not the
fear of punishment, be the strongest Motive to Repentance: When thou see
Christ Crucified afresh before thine Eyes in the Ordinance, consider, and say
to thy self, Oh, what a wretch was I, to pluck him out of the Arms of his
Father, and cause him to suffer such Hellish Torments for my sake; it was my
sin that were the Nails that pierced his Hands, and his Feet, the Spear that
wounded his Side, the Thorns that pricked his Head, the Traitor that betrayed
him, the Judge that Condemned him, and the Executioner that put him to Death.
It was not the Devil, nor his Instruments, the Jews nor Gentiles, nor all the
wicked Men in the World, could have done it, had it not been for the sins of
his Elect: Methinks the consideration of this should work upon an Ingenious
Heart; and when thou have confessed thy sin, resolve to forsake it; God makes no
promise of Pardon to any other: And look steadfastly upon Christ offered to thee
in the Sacrament, for Pardon of sin, and power against it, he is a propitiation
for sin, Romans 3.25. The Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World,
John 1.29. Having now found out thy defects of Grace, for it is weakness of
Grace that makes us run into sin: Go to God for a supply, Christ is ready with
supplies; if thou be but sensible of thy wants, come to the Ordinance in God's
way, and where thou art weak Christ will strengthen thee, and where Corruptions
are strong, he will weaken them: Be not ashamed to show to him thy nakedness;
unlap thy Sores, that thou may have a Plaster, and Christ will be thy
Chyrurgeon, and Physician. In thy decays of Grace, though there be great cause
of shame and sorrow, yet none of despair; there are Recovering Plasters, as
well as Healing; be but sensible of thy want, and go boldly for a supply. Come
with an empty Soul to Christ, and he will fill it; it is the full that are sent
empty way.

5. Direct. When thou come to this Ordinance be sure to set thy Grace on
work, quicken them up unto the Duty, let them not flag, nor faint, for then thy
work will be to little purpose; what good will Tools do, if not used; and how
can they be used, if not in Order? A Workman that would Live by his Works, sees
that his Tools be sharp, and fit for the work, without them we can do nothing;
nay, if they be dull, or blunt, the work will not go forward; and therefore let
us stir up our Graces, as Deborah did her Soul, when she was to sing forth the
praises of the Lord, Judge. 5.12. Awake, awake, Deborah; awake, awake, utter a
Song, etc. Or as David did his Soul, Psalm. 42.5. Why art thou so sad, O my
Soul? And why art thou so disquieted within me, etc. Psalm. 103.12. Bless the
Lord, O my Soul; and all that is within me praise his Holy Name, etc. Stir up
thy Self, and lay hold upon him, Isa. 64.7. This is the time for thee to renew,
quicken, and strengthen thy Grace; it was given thee for such a time, and for
such a Use as this is; let not this Opportunity be let slip that may be done
now, which cannot be done at another time; renew thy Repentance, and quicken
it: This may be done by the consideration of the Number, Nature, and Effects of
thy sins, and among the rest this is one, it brought the Lord Jesus Christ to
this shameful Death: Here thou may see him Crucified before thy Face, his
Body broken, and his Blood poured out; and may look upon him whom thou have
pierced, and mourn for him as for an only Son, Zach. 12.10. Quicken thy Love to
God also, and this thou may do by the consideration of his Love to thee, and
what he has done for thee, especially in the work of thy Redemption, held out
in this Ordinance of the Sacrament: Had thou had a Temporal deliverance from
Turkish Slavery, thou would have been thankful to thy Deliverer, and have
Loved him for it; much more then is due to him that Redeemed thee from the
guilt of sin, and from the filth of sin, and from the punishment due to sin;
from the Curse of the Law, the wrath of God, the Slavery of Satan, and from
Everlasting Damnation. Renew thy fear of him also, consider the Fervency of his
wrath, against Sin, and Sinners, when thou see it was so hot against his own
Son, when he stood in the room of Sinners; and let this make thee fear to
Offend. This also may quicken thy Love to thy Brethren; yea, to thine Enemies,
when thou considerest how dearly God Loves thy Brethren in Christ, and what he
suffered for them; and to thine Enemies, when thou considerest the Torments
which Christ endured for thy sake, when thou wast his Enemy, and Commands thee
to imitate him in Loving those that hate thee. But especially quicken, and
Exercise thy Faith, for this is all, and in all, in this Duty, and much
conduces to the well performing of it: It Is true, Christ has all fullness in
himself to fill empty Souls; he is the Bread and Water of Life, to feed and
Refresh the Hungry and Thirsty; of his Fullness we receive Grace for Grace, John
1.14.16. In him all Fullness dwells, Col. 1.19. There is in him both fullness of
Merit, and fullness of Spirit; Mortifying, Sanctifying, Quickening Virtue: Here
Soul-wants may be supplied. But the way of obtaining this at God's Hands, the
way of emptying of Christ into the Soul, is by the way of Ordinances; the Word
and Sacraments are the Breasts of Consolation, from whence we must suck and be
satisfied: These are the Pipes through which the Water of Life run, from the
Fountain into the Cistern; from Christ to our Hearts. Christ is the Olive, and
these the Golden Pipes, that convey the Oil into the Candlestick, Zach. 4.12.
It Is true, he could convey it immediately, and empty himself into the Soul,
without any Instrument at all, but this is not usual, where the Word and
Ordinances are to be had. But that we may get benefit by the Ordinances: Faith
is necessary, the Well is deep, and Faith is the Bucket to draw up this water
of Life; and though the Conduit be full of water, and we empty Vessels, yet if
we bring them not thither, they will still remain empty; nay, though we bring
them, and place them under the Cock, if we turn not the Cock they are empty
still: The Child that plays with the Breast, is not satisfied till it suck:
Thou must suck Honey and Oil out of this flinty Rock, Deuteronomy. 32.13. Faith is the
Souls Eye, which must be fixed upon Christ; the Souls Hand, to lay hold upon
Christ; the Souls Mouth, to feed upon him: Christ, and all his Benefits are
offered in the Sacrament, but without Faith they cannot be laid hold upon.

6. Direct. Having showed you what Preparation is necessary, and also what
Qualifications, and how thou should stand affected when thou come to this
Ordinance. I shall next show thee how to demean thy self in the very Act of
Receiving. For thy External behavior, or outward demeanor, it should be such
as is suitable to the Ordinance, and to the presence of the Great God;
Reverent, Grave, Seemly, and such as bespeaks Humility, and self-abasing, not
Light, and wanton, and gazish, but such as becomes a Guest at such a Table; yet
beware of such Voluntary, or Superstitious Humility, such as the Papists, and
some others use, which has no Footing in the word of God; the surest way is
to take the Scripture for our Guide. But for thy Inward Carriage, which is most
to be regarded, be sure thy Heart be not wanting, for God cannot endure
Heartless Service; if this Instrument be not in Tune, the Musitioner is bad;
here, if any where, God calls, Son, give me thy Heart; and nothing else will
serve turn but the Heart, and the Heart broken, and bleeding. Come with the
Heart humbled, God cannot endure a proud Person, especially in an Ordinance,
that hold forth, that which may humble thee; here is Christ Crucified, and his
Blood shed for thy sin; thou wast the Traitor that betrayed him, the Judge that
Condemned him, and the Executioner that put him Death; and will not this work
upon thee? Is it nothing to have Blood lying upon thee, the Blood of the
Innocent, the Blood of a Friend, the Blood of a King; yea, the Blood of the Son
of God? What ingenious Spirit but would melt at such a Consideration? Every
Sacramental Action of the Minister may further thy Meditation, and help thee up
to Heaven in thy Contemplation. When thou beholdest the Minister, who stands in
the place of God, setting apart, and Consecrating the Bread and Wine, by the
Word and Prayer, will not this bring to thy Mind, the Love of God to thy Soul?
Who from Eternity set apart his only Son, Jesus Christ, to be thy Mediator, and
Advocate; thy Surety, and thy Savior; well may it be said, God so Loved the
World, etc. May not the thoughts of this furnish thee with Heart-raising,
Heart-warming Meditations. And when thou see thee Bread broken, and the Wine
poured out, does not this Lively represent the bitter Death, and bloody Passion
of the Son of God, Jesus Christ, thy sweet Savior, and Redeemer; his Body was
broken, his precious blood was shed for the Remission of thy sins, which
otherwise could not have been forgiven. Ah! what a wicked thing then is sin,
when nothing would satisfy Divine Justice but the death of the only begotten
Son of God? When the Bread and Wine thus separated, thus set apart, from common
use, are held forth to thee, apprehend God himself, giving Christ, yea, Christ
offering himself with all his Treasures to be thy Husband, thy Surety, thy
Mediator, and thy Savior: Ah! what Soul-refreshing thoughts may this produce?
Well may thou say, with David, Lord, what is Man, that thou art mindful of
him? Or rather, Lord, what am I, that thou regardest me, and have provided such
a Feast of Fat things for me, with Wine on the Lees? When thousands are laid
aside as good as I by Nature. And when thou receivest the Elements at the
Ministers hand, let thy Faith lay fast hold, and clasp fast about the Lord
Jesus Christ, and take him, as given by God, to be thy Husband; and Resolve
that the Devil and all his Instruments shall never draw off thy Affections from
him; but thou will, all others being forsaken, prove his faithful Spouse. And
when thou Eatest, and Drinkest the Bread and Wine, let thy Faith feed upon
those Spiritual dainties, hereby represented, upon this Nectar and Ambrosia;
this Bread, and this Water of Life: Receive him, and all the Benefits of the
New Covenant by Faith, and in the whole Action let thy Heart Close with God,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and let the whole bent of thy Soul be set upon
him, and by such Meditations stir up thy Heart to bless God, and praise him for
his Mercy, and to Love him above all, and to vow Obedience to him; and as thou
look upon thy sin with one Eye, to hate and abominate it, so look upon
Christ with the other, to keep thee from despair; as he is offered up in the
Sacrament, a Sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice, and beg of God humbly, yet
believingly that he will accept of this Sacrifice as satisfactory for thy sin,
and pardon what is past, and give thee power against Sin for the time to come.
Consider also the giving and receiving of this Sacrament, is a further
ratification of the Covenant, as I said before, wherein God offers Christ and
all his Benefits; and promises to be thy God, and the God of thy Seed: And thou
promisest that thou and thine will Serve the Lord. Let this strengthen thy
Faith in his Promises, for he will never break his word; and let it strengthen
thy Resolution, that thou will never break with him, then this will be to thee
an Happy Ordinance.

7. Direct. If thou would receive Benefit by the Sacrament, behave thy self
well after thou have received it. All thy work is not done; nay, most is to be
done when thou have turned thy back upon the Congregation; it is not the making
a Vow, but the making it good, the fulfilling of it, that is the most of the
work; it is not the preparing for the Duty, or carrying thy self well in the Act
of Receiving (though this be necessary) that is sufficient, God expects some
after-work: A Servant that is refresht with wholesome meat, and drink, ought not
to be Idle, nor to spend his time vainly, there is a greater tie lies upon him,
to diligence and pains taking. So he that comes from such a Feast, and is
refreshed with such Dainties, should be more Active, Lively, Quick, and
Disposed to Spiritual Exercises; plung not thy self too suddenly into worldly
business, distract not thy thoughts about things here below; for, as in sweats,
it is dangerous to cool over-suddenly: So it is here, when the Affections are
raised to Heaven, let them not suddenly grovel upon the ground; when they are
heated, let not the cold wind of the World suddenly benumb them: And when thou
do set about Worldly business, remember there is a business of greater
concernment lies upon thy Hands; and therefore do all in Subordination to God,
Redeem some time for Divine Meditation, to consider what thou have been about,
and with whom thou have had to deal? Thou have been renewing that Covenant
between God and thy Soul, which was made in Baptism, and therefore look to it
that thou make it good. It is better not to Vow, than to Vow and not perform.
Consider whether God makes good his Promise Sealed by this Sacrament; if not,
doubtless, the fault is thine own: God gives thee Christ, and thou give him
thy self; if thou hold, God will not flinch: He promises Heaven, and Happiness;
and thou promisest Love, and Obedience: And those Vows which thou made in
Baptism, and renewest in this Sacrament, must be fulfilled; it is an horrible
thing to prove Treacherous to this God, and to break Covenant with him; God
will avenge the Quarrel of his Covenant. It Is a dangerous thing to have God for
an Enemy, and our Consciences for our Accusers; resolve therefore to make good
thy Engagements, and fulfill thy Vows. Consider in the Sacrament what
Entertainment thou have met with from God, and what welcome he has given thee;
have thou sped, or no? Did he meet thee in the Ordinance, or have thou had an
Answer of thy Prayers, or have been frustrated of thy hopes and expectations?
If so, examine thy Preparations, and demeanor before and after the Duty, happily
thou may find some miscarriage; if so, humble thy self, and be more careful
for the future; take notice of the repulse, and be humbled, yet despair not:
Sometimes the Ordinance may be more beneficial after, than at present, as the
Sacrament of Baptism usually is. If thou have met with some Fruit, but not so
much as thou expectest, or desire, consider thou art not to be thy own
Carver; he deals his Mercies as he sees best, thou must wait upon him in a
longing Posture, it will come in the most suitable Season; if thou have found
any, it is more than thy desert, bless God for it, from whose bounty it
proceeds: If it be not so much as thou expectest, it is more than thou
deservest; it is to be owned, he that is not thankful for a little, God will not
trust him with much: Thou give him thanks for Bodily Food, and wilt be
thankful for Crumbs, and not for Christ? For Temporal Favors, and not for
Spiritual Mercies? And this should be expressed in deeds, as well as words;
thou should live thanks as well as speak thanks: And as Christ gives himself
to thee, so give up, not only thy Name, but thy Heart to him; keep alive in thy
Soul the Spiritual Fervor, and maintain thy ground against thy Corruptions: See
how thy Graces grow, and how thy Corruptions dye; this is the way to grow in
Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Walk in the
strength of one Ordinance to another, and thus doing, thou will be a growing
Christian, and thou will find, through the Blessing of God upon thine
Endeavors, that the Sacrament, which many get little benefit by, is indeed a
Soul-fatting Ordinance.

CHAP. XI. Directions about Oaths.
THE next part of Divine Worship that I shall Direct you in, is the right Use
of an Oath; for though rash swearing be an horrible sin, as I intend, God
willing, elsewhere to demonstrate. Yet an Oath in it self is Lawful, and
necessary; yea, a Commanded part of God's Worship, Thou shall fear the Lord,
and serve him, and shall swear by his Name, Deuteronomy. 6.13. The like we find, Deuteronomy.
10.20. My work therefore, in the first place, will be to show you what an Oath
is, and then to prove it Lawful, and afterward to give you Directions in this,
as I have done in other parts of God's Worship. An Oath is a part of that
Religious Worship which we owe to God, in which, being Lawfully called
thereunto, we call God to witness the Truth of what we Assert, and our real
intention to perform what we promise, and to reward, or punish us according to
the Truth, or Falsehood of what we say. That it is a part of Religious Worship,
the Texts before quoted serve to prove, 2 Cor. 1.23. Moreover, I call God for a
Record upon my Soul, that to spare you I came not as yet unto Corinth. 2 Chronicles.
6.22,23. If a Man sin against his Neighbor, and an Oath be laid upon him, to
make him Swear, and the Oath come before thine Altar, in this House, then hear
thou from Heaven, and do, and Judge thy Servants by requiting the Wicked, by
Recompencing his way upon his own Head, and by Justifying the Righteous, by
giving him according to his Righteousness, Lev. 19.12. Ye shall not swear by my
Name falsely, neither shall thou profane the Name of thy God, Exodus 2.7. You
see it is a part of Religious Worship, for herein God is called to be a Witness
to Justify, or to Condemn; who only knows the Integrity of the Heart, and the
sincerity of the Intentions; yea, sometimes it is put for the whole Worship of
God, Isa. 19.18. Where swearing to the Lord is meant worshipping the Lord: Nay,
we have the consent of all Nations, that always have esteemed an Oath Sacred,
and Venerable. Poets, Philosophers, Heathens, and Infidels make Conscience of
this Religious Band, and Reason shows it also; for hereby we acknowledge the
Wisdom, Power, and Justice of God: His Wisdom in Searching the Heart, and
knowing the hidden thoughts, and intentions of it: His Power, in being able to
punish it, and his Justice, in giving every Man accoding to his desert; and
this Worship he will not give to another, Jer. 12.16. They taught my People to
Swear by the Name of Baal, Amos 8.14. Zeph. 1.5. The Lawfulness of an Oath is
confessed by most, and denied by few, and those Contemptible, we have Scripture
warrant for it; yea, the Command of God, as you have heard, Exodus 22.10. Where
an Oath was to be taken in the Case of lost Goods, Isa. 45.63. Unto me every
Tongue shall swear, Isa. 65.16. He that swears in the Earth shall swear by
the God of Truth. Now, God would not have Commanded any thing that was sinful
in it self, as a part of his Worship. Nay, he does not only Command it, but
lays down the qualifications of an Oath, Jer. 4.2. Thou shall swear the Lord
Lives in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness; and in what Cases it ought
to be required, Exodus 22.11. Neither can there any Reason be given, why it is
not Lawful as well in Gospel times, as under the Law; it was not Ceremonious,
nor Typical, neither in the Matter, Form, nor End: Nay, we have Examples of God
himself, and therefore it is not intrins^cally Evil, Genesis 22.16. By my self have
I sworn, says the Lord, Heb. 6.13. Because he could swear by no greater, he
swear by himself, Jer. 44.26. I have sworn by my great Name, says the Lord,
Amos 4.2. The Lord has sworn by his Holiness. We have the Example of Christ,
Mat. 5.18. For Verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot, or
one tittle shall in no wise pass, till all be fulfilled; compare this with Heb.
8.14. Surely, Blessing, I will Bless thee, etc. This is called God's Oath, and
frequent are the Asservations of Christ: Verily, verily, we have the Example of
the Holy Angels also, Dan. 12.7. The Angel lift up his Hand, and swear by him
that Lives for ever. The like we have, Rev. 10.6. we read of the Saints
Swearing. Genesis 14.22. and 42.15. Josh* 14.9. 1 Kings 20.3. Yea, in Gospel
times, Paul, Romans 1.9. God is my Witness, whom I serve in my Spirit, I say the
Truth in Christ I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me Witness in the Holy
Ghost, etc. We have the Custom of all Nations, which shows it is a Principle in
Nature; who, when witness is wanting, take an Oath as a Religious Band; and
because they know not the Heart, appeal to God, that does know it: Neither is
there any thing in an Oath that is intrinsecally Evil; neither the Matter,
Form, nor End, the calling upon God, the Searcher of the Heart, to bear witness
to the Sincerity of our Intentions, for the Satisfaction of others, that cannot
otherwise be satisfied; what Evil can there be in that? Heb. 6.16. An Oath is
for Confirmation, the end of all strife, 2 Cor. 1.23. Indeed all rash common
Swearing is forbidden by Christ, and also by St. James.

1. Direct. As concerning Oaths, Consideration must be had of the parties
themselves concerned; and they are either the Parties requiring an Oath, or the
Parties of whom an Oath is required, for both of them require some
Satisfaction: He that requires it should do it by Authority, and have a Lawful
ground, or otherwise he cannot; he ought not to exact it by force: every Man
cannot force another to Swear, and without just Cause no one ought; in such a
Case they ought not to be Obeyed: And for the Person Swearing, which is Agens
Principalis, the chief Actor in the business: It Is necessary that he have the
use of Reason, and that he be sui Juris, his own Man; and the things that he
swears to give be at his own Dispose; and hence it follows, the Children,
before they come to the right use of Reason, ought not to take an Oath, neither
indeed should their Oaths be imposed, or regarded; neither does such an Oath
bind the Conscience, being Ignorantly taken; they are Ignorant of the Nature of
an Oath, neither can they come with deliberation as they ought, or compare
their Action with the Rule, or right Reason; therefore they ought not to be
Admitted. But at what Age that is, I think is not easy to determine; for
doubtless, some attain it soon, some later; but I think our Laws say Sixteen
Years of Age, and before that time their Testimony is not Valid: And an Oath
may bind the Conscience of some, if otherwise Lawful, though the Testimony be
not Valid by the Law. But alas! how Common, oh, too Common, is that Customary
Swearing of Children, even before they can speak plain, as if they sucked it in
with their Mothers Milk, and had been taught it with their Mother Tongue, as
doubtless, they are, either by Precept, or Example; for how many, before they
can speak plain, lisp out Oaths against God himself, whose Name they Profanely
abuse, to the dishonor of God, the shame of their Parents, the damage of the
Nation where they Live; for because of Oaths the Land mourns; and to the
apparent hazard of their own Souls; who, without Repentance, will Eternally
Curse their Parents in Hell for their sinful Education. Again, Mad and Frantic
Men are not fit to take an Oath for the same Reason; for though they once had
the use of Reason, yet through their Distemper, it is lost. The like we may say
of Fools and Idiots, that never had it, and so never knew the use of an Oath;
though too many of them, though they cannot speak Reason, can Swear, and Curse,
and take the Name of God in vain; and their proneness to this, and other sins,
and their backwardness to what is good, discovers them to be of the Sinful
Offspring of lapsed Adam, and is a strong Argument for Original Sin; and their
want of the use of Reason is some extenuation of their Sin: God requires little
where little was given, yet it excuses not a toto, but a tanto; it discovers a
foul Fountain, that thus bubbles up; their Words, their Actions, their
Discourse is not to be heard, why then their Oaths? Again, Men, when far gone
in Drink, or Passion, are not fit for this considerate Duty, neither can they
do it without Sin, because not with Mature Deliberation; though some Cases
their promisory Oaths may bind them, and they ought not to break them, though
it be to their own damage, Psalm. 15.4. For Drunkenness, or Immoderate Passion
is no Excuse of their Sin, but an Aggravation; for one Sin will not Excuse
another. Again, if a Man be in his right mind, and otherwise qualified, yet
it is necessary that he be sui juris, his own Man, at his own dispose, and not
another, in the thing he swears, otherwise he cannot avoid sin, what Course
soever he take: As, suppose a Son under the Tuition of a Father, or a Servant
of a Master, should without Parents, or Masters Consent, swear to go a Journey;
as suppose in Popery, on a Pilgrimage; this is a Sin, because he is not at his
own dispose: We read in the time of the Law, if a Woman Vowed a Vow, or a Maid
in her Fathers House, if her Husband or Father approved not of it, it was void;
consider then whether Vows of single Life, or Marriage Promises without Parents
consent, be valid; I am sure they are sinful: Those under Authority should not
dispose of themselves by Oath, without Parents Consent.

2. Direct. Having already shown you who may swear, and who ought not to swear;
I come, in the next place, to tell you by whom you ought to swear; and here
also we shall meet with much Corruption in Practice, though an Oath is Lawful,
when Lawfully required; as by a Lawful Magistrate, in a Lawful Cause, from a
Person rightly qualified, as I hove already Discoursed, yet it is not Lawful to
swear by whom he pleases; for an Oath, as I told you, is part of Divine
Worship due to God; and his Glory is Concerned in it, and he will not give it
to another, Genesis 21.53. Jacob swear by the fear of his Father Isaac; that is,
by the God whom his Father feared: That we ought to swear by God, I have showed
you already, both by Scriptures and Examples, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20. and many
more: But where we have any Injunction, or Toleration, given to swear by any
thing that is not God, is not easy to find; yea, it is plain Idolatry, to
ascribe unto any Creature Divine Worship; it is a setting of them in the place
of God, yea, a dishonouring of God, and setting up something else in his stead.
In a Lawful Oath we do not only assert the Truth for that we do, or ought to do
without an Oath, but we ascribe Omniscience, Omnipotence, Omnipresence; yea,
the Justice, wisdom, and Truth to God: we acknowledge him to be the Searcher of
the Heart, and the Tryer of the Reins; and that he is both the witness, Judge,
and Revenger of Falsehood, and Lying; and furthermore, by Prayer, and Invocation
God is called upon to give Testimony, with the Conscience of him that swears,
that he speaks the Truth from his Heart, with an Imprecation in which a Man
acknowledges that God is a just Revenger of a Lie, and binds himself to be
punished by him if he swear falsely, or speaks an untruth wittingly or
willingly: and now I appeal to any Man's Conscience, if these things can be
Attributed to any Creature, without gross Idolatry; can we ascribe to the
Creature Omniscience, Omnipotence, Searching the Heart, and witnessing with the
Conscience, that we speak the Truth, and an ability to punish, or reward
according to the Integrity of the Heart; to protect the Innocent, and detect
the Guilty? what is this, but to make them Gods, in giving to them the
Incommunicable Attributes of God? Can all this be done without Idolatry? We
may find God in Scripture complaining of this Sin, and threatening to punish
such Sinners, Jer. 5.7. They have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no
Gods: See Swearing by the Creatures, is in God's Account, and Scripture
Language, a forsaking of God, Jer. 12.16. They have taught my People to swear
by the Name of Baal. God threatens such as Swear by the Sin of Samaria, that
they shall fall, and never rise again, Amos 4.8. Now, this was swearing by the
Idols of Samaria, for Samaria was full of Idols: Let those look to it, that
swear by the Popish Idol the Mass, or by our Lady, which they make their great
Idol, and set her up as high, and in some cases higher than Christ himself.
Nay, those that in their Oaths join any thing with God, as if he were not of
himself sufficient, cannot be Excused, as those, Zeph. 1.4,5. That swear by God
and Malchom; and the Excuse which many make, for this horrid Crime, is indeed
the aggravation of the Sin; they say, what they swear by are petty trivial
things, and therefore no Offense; they take not the Name of God in Vain: But is
not the Offense the greater, when we give the Incommunicable Attribute of God
to those petty things; if there be no need of an Oath, why do thou swear? If
there be, why do not swear by God, when thou have so many direct Commands,
and so many Examples of God, Angels, and the best of Men. Neither is the
Practice of some of the Holy Fathers, an Excuse sufficient; Joseph's swearing
by the Life of Pharaoh, is by most, if not all Learned Expositors, judged his
failing, learned by Custom in Pharaohs Court, and will no more warrant the
Practice, than Noah's, Lot's, and David's Example will Drunkenness, Incest,
Murder, or Adultery: And whereas some use the Expression, as thy Soul Lives,
etc. This is not properly an Oath, but an Asserveration, wherein God is also
tacitly invoked to witness the Truth; it signifies such a thing is as really
True, as thou art alive, yet does invoke his to witness this Truth; it is hard
to say which is the greater Sin, to swear rashly by God, which is Blasphemy, or
to Swear by the Creatures, which is Idolatry.

3. Direct. Having showed you who may swear, and by whom; I shall, in the next
place, speak of the Matter of an Oath, and here also many Offend. An Oath, for
the Matter, must be about Lawful things, and possible, or else it cannot be a
Lawful Oath: If we swear to do an unlawful thing, we must not perform it, for
it is a double Transgression; if to do an impossible thing, we cannot do it; a
rash Oath is better broken than kept: What a Snare then do Men run into, and
how do they put themselves upon a Necessity of sinning, that swear in their
Rage to do what God forbids them to do? Swear to do that which they must not
perform: See this in David, when he had rashly sworn the death of Nabal, and
all his Household, many of them, no doubt, Innocent Persons, yet after was
pacified by wise Abigail, and blesses God for the preventing the shedding of
Innocent Blood, 1 Samuel 25.32,33. The like Oath we read of Saul, who swore the
Death of Innocent Jonathan, but was prevented by the People. When Herod
performed his rash Oath to Herodias's Daughter, and cut off John Baptists Head.
But a Lawful Oath is agreeable to the mind and will of God, about things
Honest, Just, Good, Possible, and Weigty, and in thy Power: If it be
impossible, then thou can not do it, and therefore thou should make no
such promisory Oath. Now, a thing may be impossible several ways, as in Nature;
as for a Man to fly, or a Fish to speak: Some things, though possible in
Nature, yet impossible in regard of Time, or other-like Circumstances; it is
possible to go to London, and to Rome, but it is impossible to be at both places
the same day: And some things may be possible in Nature, yet impossible by
Accident; as for a Man to swear to come to s ch a place, by such a time, and he
be taken Captive by the Enemy, or fall dangerously Sick, etc. in such a Case
it is well to put in such a Caution, If God permit; the bond of such an Oath is
loosed, as it was in Abraham's Servant, in case the Maid would not come with
him. Again, we ought not to swear to perform unlawful things, any thing which
is the breach of God's Law; as to kill a Man, to Steal, or to Commit Adultery,
etc. Whatsoever is against Piety toward God, or Charity toward Man:
Whatsoever is against the good of the Church, or the Glory of God, and the
Commonwealth thou Live in: whatsoever has any evil in it, ought not to be
the Matter of an Oath; for an Oath ought not to be Vinculun Iniquitatis, a band
of Iniquity. No Man is, or can be tied to break God's Law; or if such an Oath
be taken, it ought not to be kept: Hence Herod sins both in Swearing, and also
in performing his Oath. But some will say, if he had not performed it he had
been perjured: I Answer, when a Man swears to break a Command of God, he is
perjured as soon as he has sworn, because he took an unlawful Oath; and if he
perform it he adds sin to sin, as Herod did Murder to Perjury; and such a Man
must Repent of his rash Oath, and not add sin to sin, in persisting in his
rashness, to the further breaking of Gods Commands. The Holy Ghost gives us a
Rule for swearing, Jer. 4.2. Thou shall swear the Lord Lives, in Truth, in
Judgment, and in Righteousness. In Truth, for otherwise thou will forswear thy
self; for thou must not take an Oath against thy Conscience, nor of doubtful
things, which thou know not to be true. Now, there is a double Truth, one of
the Tongue, and another of the Mind; that of the Tongue is when a thing is
really so, as it is attested; that of the Mind, when a Man thinks in his
Conscience he speaks nothing but the Truth; In Judgment not rash, or
ventrously, but with due Consideration of the Nature of the thing, to be worthy
the weight of an Oath, the Nature of God, whom we call to witness, and under
whose Divine Judgment we set our selves, in Case we speak false; and in
Righteousness, that the thing we swear be Lawful, and possible, and like to
bring Glory to God, and good to our selves, or others.

4. Direct. The next thing to be considered, is the form of an Oath, for this
also is stumbled at by some, and is to be minded as well as the Matter; this
should be agreeable, or at least not contradictory to the word of God. Now, the
Form of an Oath is either External, or Internal; the External Form consists in
words, or signs, or both; the Internal Form consists in the true Sense and
Interpretation of the words of the Oath; a little of these in their Order. The
External sometimes consists in words, without signs, and thus a Man swears, and
calls God to witness the Truth of his Intentions in plain words; and this Oath
is variously worded, according to the Use, and Custom of the Country Men Live
in: And thus we may find, as before has been proved, God, Angels, and Men have
thus sworn. Sometimes also Men swear, and affirm by signs without words, and
this is most frequent where there are many that enter into an Oath, or
Covenant, when the words of the Oath, or Covenant are either read, or spoken;
and those that are willing to enter into that bond, make it known by some
External sign or token, by some Action or Gesture, as by a nod with the Head,
bowing the Body, standing up, or to a side, lifting up the Hand, or otherwise,
according as they shall be required by the Imposer; or by writing down their
Names: By any of those they may testify their consent, and this is as binding
and Obligatory, as if the words were uttered. And sometimes we may find an Oath
taken both by words and signs, and this is the most Solemn manner of Swearing:
Thus God frequently is said to lift up his Hand, when he swears to his People;
thus the Angel, Dan. 12.7. he held up his Right Hand; and his Left Hand to
Heaven, and swear by him that Lives for ever; and this has been the Custom of
Heathens, and Infidels, as well as Christians, in making Oaths, and Covenants:
Diverse are the Rites and Ceremonies which the Heathens have used at such times;
yea, many and various are the Customs of the Godly in such Cases: One was the
putting the Hand under the Thigh; thus Abraham swear his Servant, Genesis 24.2.
And thus Joseph swear unto his Father Jacob, Genesis 47.29. Another Form much in
Use, was lifting up the Hand, as was even now spoken of; this was used by God,
Angels, and Men; by God, Deuteronomy. 32.40. For I lift up my Hand, and say, I Live
for ever. By Abraham, Genesis 19.22. I have lift up my Hand unto the Lord most
High; and false swearers are said to have a Right Hand of Deceit, because they
lift it up deceitfully, Psalm. 144.8 11. And various have been the Ceremonies
that have been used among Christians in the Primitive Times, and in succeeding
Generations; among us the putting the hand upon the Bible, and kissing it is
most in Use, or both; which is but a professing sign of our consent, and I know
not any cause of Scruple in it; thus for the External. The Internal Form of an
Oath is the right sense and Interpretation of the words; and therefore an Oath
should not consist in aequivalent, or ambiguous words, or phrases; for then a
Man may take them in a different sense from the Imposers mind, and may require
one thing, and another may attest another; but the sense should be obvious to
both giver and taker, or otherwise nothing; or at least we know not what is
witnessed, and the Oath proves vain; nay, the very end of an Oath, which is the
Investigation of Truth, is closed, Heb. 6.16. An Oath is the end of strife; and
thus the Name of God is taken in vain, and this part of his Worship profaned,
and abused; and it is no better than a Lie, when we affirm by Oath, what in the
Imposers sense is not true, and so it proves Perjury: But the words should be
taken in the plain Common sense, which is obvious to all. Neither should there
be equivocation, or Mental reservation used in an Oath; this is the sallacious
dealing of the Papists, who by this means think to evade all Oaths, and delude
the Imposer, but they most delude themselves, and wrong their own Souls; for
God will not be mocked, whose Worship is abused: They hide part in their Minds,
and so subvert the sense; as thus, they swear they were not at Rome, and think
in their Minds, not an Hundred years ago; but what is mentire, but contra
mentum ire, though this may serve, in foro humano, God can easily detect such
juggling deceits, and will never hold those guiltless, that thus take his Name
in Vain, and, like Jezebel, deceive under pretense of Religion.

5. Direct. If thou would honor God in this part of his Worship, see then
that thou aimest at right Ends. In thy Oath, the End must be Lawful, and good,
or the Duty will prove a Sin, and a Snare. A Man may swear that which is Truth,
and yet if his End be bad, it will prove his Sin. Now, the End of an Oath, as I
said before, should be for the Confirmation of some necessary Truth in
Question, which cannot otherwise be proved, Heb. 6.16. Men swear by him that is
greater than themselves, and an Oath for confirmation to them is the End of all
strife. Now, it should be a weighty business that requires an Oath, and a
necessary Truth that is in Question, some doubtful Matter, which cannot
otherwise be found out, or proved, that cannot be Evidenced, but by an Oath. In
this Case we find the Apostle vindicating himself this way, when there was no
other way to do it, Romans 1.9. God is my Witness, whom I serve with my Spirit,
that without ceasing, I make mention of you always in my Prayers, 2 Cor. 1.23.
I call God to Record, upon my Soul, etc. We see he appeals to God, the Searcher
of all Hearts, to witness with him, and for him, his Affection to them. It Is
the Glory of God in the manifestation of Truth; and our own, and Neighbors
good should be principally minded in this Duty; but too many have by, and base,
and low Ends in it, and not accordingly. When a thing depends upon the Faith of
the Speaker, and cannot otherwise be found out, and yet is necessary to be
known, an Oath of the Lord may be Imposed, Exodus 22.10,11. If a Man deliver
unto his Neighbor an Ass, or an Ox, or a Sheep, or any Beast to keep, and it
dye, or be hurt, or be driven away, no man seeing it, then shall an Oath of the
Lord be between them both, that he has not put his Hand to his Neighbors
goods, and the Owner of it shall accept thereof, etc. There are some things
that are not fit for an Oath, as those that have been handed down to us, by
Tradition; as whether there were ever any such Cities, as Troy, or Carthage,
and whether they were Sacked, or spoiled; though we are confidently assured,
this is a Truth, we ought not to swear it, because it is out of the reach of
Personal knowledge: We must swear no more than we Personally know to be true.
Some things also are obvious to Common Sense, as that a Quadrangle has four
Angles, a Triangle three, etc. these things are not doubtful, and an Oath will
not make them more clear; but a thing which cannot otherwise be determined,
when we dare not rest upon the Credit of the Revealer, when it is doubtful, and
cannot be proved but by witness; and this witness is suspected either to want
knowledge, or Conscience, every Man being a Liar, Romans 3.4. Now, because there
is so little Faith and Justice among Men, it is necessary to appeal to God
himself to witness, which cannot deceive, nor be deceived; and this is done by
an Oath, which is the ne Plus Vltra, the End of Contention: For he that makes
no Conscience of this, is not fit for Humane Society. The very Heathens
themselves, when they swear by their Idol-gods, were careful of swearing
falsely; yet among Christians in Name, every one has not this care; nay, it is
too evidently known that many take little care of their words, or Oath. But
this is a strong Bond, and none will break it that fear God, or make Conscience
of any thing. But how much do those stray from the very End of an Oath, which
is the Investigation of Truth, that affirm by an Oath that which they know to
be false, and call God to witness to a lie; the very Heathens will rise up in
Judgment against them, and Condemn them; those that seek thereby to hide the
Truth, and not to manifest it, and mind not God's Glory, but their Neighbors
Injury by it, as wicked Doeg in his Information against David; though he speaks
the Truth, it is to a bad End. Those also are guilty that swear to that they know
not, though it prove to be true, yet they are perjured Persons, they swear the
knowledge of it which they did not know; those also that swear vainly, idly,
and to no purpose; those that swear and never intend to make good their Oaths,
or if they did intend it, do not do it. Surely these Men when they call God to
witness their Lies, do not believe there is any God, or that he takes any
notice of them, or think they can deceive God, as well as Men, or that he
approves of it; but he will call them to an Account, and set their Oaths in
Order against them.

6. Direct. If thou will not Offend by thy Oaths, take heed then of rash,
foolish, customary swearing, too much in use in our Times, and for which the
Land mourns, Jer. 23.10. It connot but be distastful to God, who will not hold
him guiltless, that takes his Name in vain; to have his Name tossed by every
Drunken Sot, upon the Ale Bench; and when Men thunder out Oaths and Curses upon
Earth, it is no wonder if God Thunder out his Judgments from Heaven. When those
ill-boading Fowls feed so near the brink of the bottomless Pit; it is a sad
Presaging that God's Judgments are near. Customary swearing cannot be without
much sin, for the very Nature of an Oath being an Act of Religious Worship to
God, shows it should be taken upon mature Deliberation, and serious Meditation;
but Common Experience shows in Customary swearing these things are wanting, but
the Name of God is irreverently tossed in their filthy Mouths; and thus many
Men Curse away their Blessings, for the most of Men are guilty this way; they
swear down Vengeance from Heaven upon them, and oft-times upon their Posterity;
for the Curse of God haunts the House of the Swearer, Zach. 5.3,4. And God will
be a swift witness against them, Mal. 3.5. The Common swearers cross the very
End of an Oath, which is, as I said, the Investigation of Truth, of some
necessary weighty Truth, which cannot otherwise be made to appear: But many of
their Oaths are spent for the obscuring of Truth, and the Justifying of Lies;
and if Truth be spoken, it is either about such trivial matters, unfit to have
the Name of God mentioned, or added to them; neither is it any great matter
whether they are affirmed or no, and no Body so much as desires any such
Confirmation by it, or is little the better Credited to the Oaths of a
Customary Swearer, than they do to their words; for Common Swearers are
oft-times accounted Common Liars, and an hundred Oaths will not Sugar some of
their Stories, and make them fit to be swallowed, when they speak, as often they
do, against Reason, and Experience; for many Men use their Oaths to fill up,
or, as they think, to adorn their Discourse, instead of other Eloquence; but
such Rhetorical Figures may be used in an Oration in Hell. They think
themselves the bravest men, that can swear the biggest Oaths, and wish
damnation to themselves in the fittest Expressions, and indeed they are some of
the Devils stoutest Champions: But from such many times an Oath either needs
not, or boots not, if they speak Reason they may be believed without, if not,
an hundred Oaths will not make it pass for current. Now, if we search out the
Original from whence these Oaths proceed, we may find from a sinful Custom, and
a depraved Nature they learnt to swear; but, it was when they learnt to talk;
and in some it is more Custom than Curstness: It befalls them, as with men in
some Distempers, their Excrements pass from them at unawares, so do their
Oaths, they know not when they swear; but it is a bad Custom, which makes God
our Enemy, and Hell our Portion: were there but a Law made, that for every Oath
they swear, they should lose a Joint, or forfeit a Pound, and duly Executed, it
would make men break off such a Custom: Sometimes those rash Oaths proceed from
some perturbation of the mind; as Anger, etc. which is a short madness, and
indeed it is a right mad man's part they Act, when another Offends them, and they
fly in the Face of God: Sometimes it is the Fruit of Gaming, and unlawful
Recreation; but sure it is a bad Tree that yields such unsavory Fruit: Take
heed therefore of these, and swear not at all, but upon just Occasion; an Oath
in it self is not sinful, as is Murder, Adultery, etc. no more is it desirable,
for it self; as Love, Charity, etc. but it is to be used as Physic, when other
Food will not serve, not for, its own sake, but for Healths sake, for Truths
sake. It Is an Holy thing, and the more Holy a thing is, the more dangerous, if
abused; it is bad playing with edged Tools, yet many Profanely call God to
Witness at their Cards, Dice, Tables, or invoke him to their Assistance; those
make too bold with God, and shall have no thanks for their Labor. In this Sin
there is nothing to bait a Temptation; it carries neither Profit nor Pleasure
along with it, and the Actors in this sin serve the Devil for nothing, yet they
shall not go un-rewarded.

7. Direct. If thou would not Offend God by thy Oaths, take heed of false
Swearing, for this is the most dangerous of all. If a Man shall Answer for
every Idle word, as Christ himself affirms, Mat. 12.36. and for every vain
Oath, he be liable to Damnation, as St. James affirms, James 5.12. much more
then for false swearing, wherein Men call forth God to witness to their lie,
and so in Effect they deny him to be God; but their Damnation sleeps not. God
tells us, by his Prophet Zach. 5.4. That his Curse shall enter into the House
of him that swears falsely, and there remain, and consume both the Timber and
the Stones thereof; and the Prophet David makes it a mark of a Citizen of
Heaven, that having sworn to his Neighbor, will Faithfully perform, though it
prove to his own Injury, and dis-advantage, Psalm. 15.4. And indeed he is not
fit for Humane Society, that regards not his Oath, for what Bond will then hold
him? Now, there are two sorts of Oaths, and in either a man may sorswear
himself: There are assertatory Oaths, when a man says such and such a thing
was done, or it was not done, or it was done thus or thus, or these and these
words were thus spoken, and calls God to witness the same, that he speaks the
Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth; if now he knows, that what
he says is contrary to the Truth, this is direct Perjury, and a sin, which,
without Repentance, will certainly sink him into Hell, and is a shrewd Sign of
an Hardened Heart, and a wicked Mind. Nay, if he affirm that to be true upon
Oath, which is doubtful to him, and of his own knowledge he knows not whether
it be true or false, he cannot be Excused: As if he should upon Oath affirm
such a man, in Ireland, to be dead, and know not whether he be Living or dead,
he is guilty of this Sin if it prove true, and the man is dead; this does not
Excuse him, for ought he knew he might be Living. A man should certainly know
the Truth of that which he positively asserts by Oath. Again, there are
promissory Oaths, in which a Man is bound to another, to do such a thing for
him, or give such and such a thing to him; and does not only promise, but
Swears to fulfill his Promise: As when a man swears to be a Faithful and Loyal
Subject to his Sovereign, or a Faithful Soldier to his Captain, or a Loyal
Wife to her Husband; or to give such a thing to his Friend, and calls God to
Witness the sincerity of his Heart, and to punish him if he prove false; and
when he takes this Oath intends not to perform the thing Promised; this, in
God's Account, is Perjury: Though Man cannot perceive it, God does, who is
called to Witness the Integrity of his Heart, when there is no such matter.
Nay, his Fact is not Excused, though the guilt is lessened, if afterward he
perform it; for when he took it, it was with an intent to deceive: Or if he
take not his Oath in the known Sense of him that requires it, this is not
Justifiable; for an Oath is for the securing, or Satisfaction of the Imposer,
and ought to be without Fraud, or aequivocation, or Mental reservation in the
Sense of him that Administreth it. Again, though a man's Intentions be never so
Sincere when he takes his Oath, if afterward he fail in the performance, if the
thing promised be Lawful, and possible, he cannot clear himself from Perjury.
And though every false Oath be dangerous and deadly, yet there are aggravations
that make some worse than others: As to take a false Oath before a Magistrate,
in a Public Assembly, in a Court of Judicatory, whereby an unjust Verdict is
procured from the Jury, an unjust Sentence from the Judge, whereby the Innocent
Person loses his Life, or Livelihood; this is worse than in a private Cause,
to a private Person, in a business of small Concernment. The Godly, in all
Ages, have been very careful to perform their Oaths; as Joshua to the
Gibonites, though gotten by Fraud, and great Cause; God is Offended at the
breach of Covenant, as we find many Years after, when Saul, in his Zeal, had
Slain some of them, God brought a three Years Famine upon the Land, and was
never satisfied, till seven of Readiness Sons were Hanged, Josh. 9.19. 2 Samuel
21.1,2.

CHAP. XII. Directions about Vows.
THe next part of Divine worship, if it may properly be called so, is a vow;
and this also, I shall give some directions in; as being a business of great
concernment, and that many have, and the Papists this day do much err in. I
shall first show you what a Vow is, and then show you the several sorts of
Vows; a Religious Vow, is a solemn promise made to God, by a fit Person, in a
fit manner, of some lawful thing, which is in his own choice, upon some special
occasion, and for some Religious end; I say it is a solemn promise, to
distinguish it from a purpose, and it is either expressed in words, as the Vow
of Jephthah was, Judges 11.30. And Jephthah vowed a Vow unto the Lord, and
said, if thou shall without fail deliver the Children of Ammon into my hands,
what comes first out of the Doors of my House to meet me, shall surely be the
Lords, etc. or in the heart, as Hannah who vowed a Vow, that if God would give
her a Man child, that she would dedicate him to the Lord, 1 Samuel 11.13. She
spoke in her heart, only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard; now these
Religious Vows, are to be made to God alone this we have precepts, and
presidents for; but no prcept, or president to make Vows to departed Saints, or
Angels; Psalm. 76.11. Vow and pay it unto the Lord, Isa. 19.21. They shall Vow
a Vow to the Lord, and perform it; Jacob vowed a Vow to God, Genesis 28.20.
Israel vowed a Vow, Numb. 21.2. but where read we of any Vows to Angels, or
departed Saints; It must also be made by a fit Person, one that is compos
mentis, in his right mind, children, fools, or madmen are not fit to do it;
nay, he should be at his own dispose, especially in the matter which he Vows: a
Maid in her Fathers house, or a Woman that had a Husband, their Vows were
quallified by the Fathers, or Husbands dislike, Numb. 30.34. etc. It should
also be of things in their own power, otherwise they cannot perform in a fit
manner; that is, with Meditation and Consideration: for some lawful thing, for
an unlawful thing ought not to be vowed, any more then sworn: hence the Vow of
those forty that bound themselves under a Curse, neither to eat nor drink till
they had killed Paul, Act. 23.14. was unlawful; it must be upon some special
occasion, and the engageing the heart more against sin, and unto duty, and to
some spiritual end, as Gods glory, and our own good: now a Vow being of the
nature of a promissary Oath, it ought to be performed with like care, and taken
with the like deliberation, and fulfilled with the like fidelity, Eccles.
54.56. When thou vowest a Vow to to God, defer not to pay it, for he has no
pleasure in fools, pay that which thou have vowed, Isa. 19.21. Psalm. 61.8, and
66.13.19. now a Vow is either general, or special; a general Vow I call that
which concerns all Believers, at all times, and in all ages, and this is that
Covenant wherein God and Man are mutually engaged, and obliged each to other;
wherein God for his part promises Christ, and all the blessings of the new
Covenant, and Man promises to forsake all other, and keep close to God; God
promises to be their God, and they promise to be his people. This Covenant was
sealed to the Jews, and by the Jews in Circumcision, and the Passover; and to
Christians, and by Christians in Baptism and the Lords Supper, as ye have
already heard: this is part of Gods worship, and will be to the end of the
World; but this is not properly called a Vow, neither comes in the definition;
there are some legal Vows, and those are such as of the Nazarites, Numb. 16.2.
as also those of vowing Sacrifices, and oblations, these were part of Gods
worship in the time of the Law, but are not now; and there are Vows for some
bodily exercise, as for Fasting, forbearance of Wine, or strong Drink. etc.
these are not part of Gods Worship, but only helps to it: thus the forbearance
of the Rechabites drinking Wine, Jer. 35.6. Vows of things that are arbitrary,
that may, or may not be done, and are left to Man's choice, those are properly
Vows, and not such which are commanded, these are Duties before they are vowed,
nor of things forbidden, these remain sin after the Vow: now a Vow is either
absolute, or conditional, when a mercy is given in, and we Vow some thing by
way of thankfulness; conditional, when we promise if God would give us such a
blessing, then we will do thus and thus; thus Jacob vowed, that if God would
prosper his Journey, and give him bread to eat, and raiment to put on, then he
should be his God, and that stone should be Gods house Genesis 28.20. the like did
Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.11. some also are temporal, binding for a time, and some
perpetual binding for ever: now that you may vow and not sin, take these
following directions.

1 Direct. If thou will make a Vow, then thou must make it unto God, and to God
alone; for there is no Scripture warrant to make it to any other, thou have
many commands, and many approved examples, of making Vows to God, but none at
all to any other Creature, Psalm 76.11. Vow and pay unto the Lord our God, but
where read thou, make Vows and fulfill them to this Saint, or that Angel? for
Vows are of the Nature of promissory, or the oath, but we may not swear by
Creatures, but by God alone, as I have already proved; I know this contradicts
the practice of Papists, but why do they contradict the Scripture by their
pactice? they Vow to this Saint, and that Angel; one Vows so much Oil, another
so many Candles, another this, another that, but who requires these things at
their hands? where have they their Warrant? what promise have they to ground
their faith upon? when we read of Vows in Scripture, we read they were made to
God, Numb. 30.2,3. if a man Vow a Vow, a Vow to the Lord, etc. if a Woman Vow a
Vow to the Lord, etc. Deuteronomy. 23.21,22,23. when thou shall Vow a Vow unto the
Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it, Isa. 19.21. when Jacob vowed a
Vow, it was neither to Saint or Angel, but to God alone, Genesis 28.20.21. and why
should we not follow such approved examples: but follow the Dictates of our own
Brain? some Vows are conditional, if thou will give me this and this, then will
I do thus and thus, this was Jacobs in the place before recited: if thou will
give me Food and Raiment, thou shall be my God, and this Stone shall be thy
House; thus was Hannahs, 1 Samuel 1.11. if thou will give me a Son, then will I
give him unto thee, now this can be directed to none but to God alone, because
he alone can perform the condition: O their vows are of thankfulness for
mercies received, thus David frequently Vows, Praises and Thanks, and to whom
should this be made, but unto him from whom every good and perfect gift comes,
Jam. 1.17. who deserves the praise, but he that grants the Mercy? we return
thanks, for I know the Papists tell us, we may as properly Vow to Saints, as
unto God: with this distinction to God, we Vow thankfulness for mercies
received, to the Saints as our Mediators, for whose sake we did receive them:
but the Scripture acKnowledges but one Mediator, between God and Man, even the
Man Christ Jesus, and how came they to the knowledge of any other? we know,
because God has told us, that every good and perfect gift comes from him; but
we are ignorant, whether we receive any benefit by the intercession of Saints
or Angels: We have commands to make Vows to God, but not to them, and if there
had been such an honor due to Saints departed, the Scriptures doubtless would
not have been altogether silent; nay, we read the heavy judgments the Lord
threateneth, Jer. 44.25.26. to them that made Vows, and would fulfill them unto
the Queen of Heaven, and let them take heed of such a reward: we deny it, and
they must prove it by Scripture, where such liberty is granted to pray to them,
as if we had, which will never be proved: yet is there a difference between the
one and the other, Vows are a more strict and binding act of Religion, than
Prayer is, for in a Vow there is prayer and something more, prayer to God for
his grace to perform the Vow, and also a purpose and promise of performance; we
may put up Petitions to mortal Men, but not make Vows to them; yea, the matter
of a Vow is sometime such, as is due to God alone, as when obedience, or such
like are promised; it is from God alone we may expect the mercy we want, it is
from him alone we receive what we have, it is he only knows the heart, whether
we are sincere or no; and he only can bring us to an account, or reward or
punish us as we deserve, and therefore unto him alone Vows are to be made and
paid.

2. Direct. That a vow may be lawful, it is necessary that the Subject, the
Party vowing be rightly qualified; now that it may be so, three things are
requisite they should be endowed with knowledge, faith, and other
qualifications of the mind, they should be sui juris, at their own dispose, in
the thing they vow, and they should be free, and no force put upon them in what
they do; but should do it willingly, and spontaniously, for God loves cheerful,
not constrained service, a free will offering: that knowledge and understanding
is necessary none can doubt: if a Man vow and not know, or not consider the
Nature, Use, and end of a vow, this will be but blind Sacrifice, it should be
done with great wisdom, care, deliberation, and circumspection, which cannot
be without knowledge, Eccles. 56. suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to
sin, neither say thou before the Angel it was an error, it is a point of folly
after the vow to enquire; those that want the use of reason, whither they are
children in their nonage, or Fools or Idiots, such as are not compos mentis, in
their right mind, but mad or brainsick, these are not fit to make a vow: now
it is hard to determine the just time, when a child's vow is obligatory, or
becomes obliging, some come to their discretion sooner, and some later, and
some as I said not at all: The Hebrews held the vow of a man child was not
valid till twelve years of age: and the maids at eleven, but this seems young
enough; there is many that have lived many more years before they are fit to
vow, for till they know the Nature, End, and use of a vow; how should they
perform such a duty, faith also is necessary in this case, for, whatsoever is
not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. and without faith it is impossible to please
God, Heb. 11.6. other graces of the spirit also are required, yea, a gracious
temper and disposition, for those that are in the flesh cannot please God; and
they should have grace, not only in the habit, but also in the act, or they
will receive little benefit, by this duty: again the Party should be sui juris,
his own man, and not under another command; he must be at his own liberty, as
touching the thing he vows, or else his vow is unlawful, we read Numb. 30.4,5,
etc. that if a woman in her youth, that is past a child, vows a vow in her
Fathers house, if her Father approved of her vow, it was rati, fied, if not, it
was well, the like we read of a-married Woman, whose vow was ratified or
nullified by her husband; and the like party of reason, shows that a Son, or
Servant, or Subject, ought not to vow against the mind of Parents, Master or
Prince, concerning things wherein they are subjected to them; can a Son vow to
leave his Parents? or a Servant his Masters service, during his engagement
without their leave? to go on Pilgimage, or to live Monastical lives; the Law
of Nature and Equity make such vows sinful, when it is to the wrong of the
Superiors; the inferior, in this case puts himself upon a necessity of
sinning, by such a vow; if he keeps it, he breaks the law of God, which
commands obedience to the Superior, whom they disobey: if they break it, they
sin also against God, who tells us it is better not to vow, than to vow and not
perform: some of the Papists themselves (who give the largest liberty in this
case; I conceive more than ever God gives,) acknowledge that a wise without her
husbands consent, ought not to enter into a Nunnery, or vow a Monastic life;
and the like parity of reason, holds for other inferiors, in the things
wherein they are subjected: again, this is a free will offering, and no absolve
commands lie upon us, neither do we sin if we vow not, Deuteronomy. 23.22. if thou
forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in the, therefore none should be
constrained, or compelled to it; it should be voluntary, at every ones own
dispose; there is none should be brought to it by force or fraud, by fear or
violence, it should be voluntary out of faith, and conscience, in way of
thankfulness, for mercies received; and for the obteining those we want, by
which we bind our selves to some necessary duty, for good ends, so long as they
are conducible to those ends, Deuteronomy. 23.21. when thou shall vow a vow unto the
Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it, for the Lord thy God, will surely
require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee. I will pay my vows says
David, which my lips have uttered when I was in trouble, Psalm 66.13,14. and
132.2,3.

3. Direct. If thou would not offend in thy vows, take heed thou vow not any
thing that is unlawful, or unnecessary, or unsuitable: if thou vow any thing
repugnant to the word, or will of God, it cannot be acceptable to God; nay,
whether thou performest or no, thou art a transgressor; there are some vows
which bind unto commanded duties, as to dedicate our selves wholly unto God,
and to obey him, that our vow in Baptism, which we often iterate in the other
Sacraments, these vows are absolute, and without condition; some are
conditional, as the vows of Jacob and Hannah before mentioned: if God give in
the mercy, then are we obliged to make good our words, as they did, and also
Jepththah; but in all, whether absolute or conditional, beware of vowing any
unlawful thing: we are commanded to abstain from evil, yea, from the very
appearance of it, 1 These. 5.22. if in our vows we dedicate any thing to God,
let it be such as he approves of: he likes not the hault, the blind, nor the
lame in Sacrifice; Lev. 22.23. neither will he be served with the hire of a
whore, nor the price of a dog, Deuteronomy. 23.18. thou must vow something that is thy
own, and lawfully got. Thou must not vow any thing sinful in it self, or sinful
by circumstance, or necessary accident: we see the Vows of Paul's Persecutors,
that they would neither eat, nor drink till they had killed him, Acts 23.12.
was sinful in a double respect: First, as it was a breach of God's Law, Thou
shall not kill; and also in that they Vowed a thing not in their own power; so
that they were forced to break it: Our Vows also should be Considerate, and not
rash, nor heady, as was that of Jephthah, which put him upon that unpleasing
Work, of Sacrificing his Daughter, Judge. 11.30,34. And that of Saul, in binding
his People from tasting Food, which had like to have cost Jonathan his Life, 1 Samuel 14.25. Neither can those Vows be justified of the Papists, wherein they
bind themselves, and take the Sacrament upon it, to Murder Heretic Kings, as
they call the Protestants, and to Massacree Protestants themselves: But by what
warrant is it done, and who gave them this Authority? A Vow should not be
vinculum Iniquitatis, a bond of Iniquity: These had no better Excuse than Herod
had for Murdering John Baptist; nay, not so good: They Vow it intentionally, he
did not; they perform willingly, he with reluctance. Neither should Vows be to
do things Superstitious, as that of the Papists Pilgrimages, to the Lady of
Loretto, and such like. Nay, it is not every Lawful thing that should be the
Matter of a Vow, but something that is weighty and considerable, and tends to
some good End; it is Lawful to take up this stick, or that straw, to pare the
Nails, or clip the Hair; but these things are not fit Matter for a vow, it is
but a taking God's Name in vain, and the abusing of the Ordinance, to use it
upon such trivial Accounts. Neither should it be of such things, which must be
done whether they will or no; as for a Man to vow that he will dye, or come to
Judgment; but it should be of some necessary thing, agreeable to the Scripture,
to Dedicate our selves to God, to Obey his Commands, as in Baptismal vows, 1
Pet. 3.21. Of Thankfulness to God for Mercies Received; thus the Psalmist,
Psalm. 22.25. My Praise shall be of thee in the great Congregation, I will pay
my Vows before them that fear him, Psalm. 66.13, etc. Or for other things, as
David vowed to give himself no rest, till he had found out a place for God's
House, Psalm. 132.2, etc. Numh. 6.2. As Hannah, for a Son, promises to give him
to God; for vows either bind us unto sin, and these are unlawful, or unto Moral
Obedience, which is Lawful, or unto Ceremonial Obedience, which was Lawful, but
now is not, or unto something which is an help to Obedience; as Fasting, which
is an help to Prayer; abstaining from Wine, and strong Drink, which is an help
to mortify the Flesh, to Alms-deeds, etc. Or some indifferent thing; as Paul
binds himself by a vow not to cherish his Hair for a time, and from eating of
Flesh, in Case of Offense, Acts 18.18. 1 Cor. 8.13. The Rechabites abstaining
from Wine, and Strong Drink, Jer. 35.6. And so we ought to do, if we find our
Nature inclined to Intemperance, in the use of these Creatures. Now, these are
most properly Matters for vows, which are not Commanded Duties, nor forbidden
Sins, but will be helpful to us in those Duties that are Commanded.

4. Direct. As the Matter of a Vow must be Lawful, so also it must be possible,
and in a Man's own power to perform; and it should be in a Man's Choice whether
he Vow or no, and before the Vow whether he do the thing or no; for if it be a
Commanded Duty, he is bound to it whether he Vow or no; but if he Vow he has a
double engagement upon him, and a double sin if he neglect; for it is better not
to Vow, than to Vow and not perform, Eccl. 5.5. But a Vow properly should be a
thing at a Man's own Choice, and also in his own Power; but what a Man is bound
to before as his Duty, is not in his Choice; it is his Duty though he had not
Vowed: As to Obey the Will and Commands of God, etc. But yet to quicken and
stir up our selves to Obedience, it is Lawful, and I conceive many times
necessary, and useful, to renew our Covenants, and bind our selves to that
which God in his Word has bound us to, and made our Duty; as the Baptismal
Covenant is often renewed in the other Sacrament: Yet had it been our Duty to
have Devoted our selves to God's Service, had we never Covenanted to do it; and
so in other particular Duties. Now, in so doing, we make not our selves more
Duties than we had before, but stir up our selves better to perform them; as if
we vow a stricter watch over our Hearts, a more constant course of Family
Duties, a more constant attendance upon the Ordinance, and tie our selves to a
set time for Meditation, self-Examination, and such like Duties; David
frequenty vows the perfotmance of that, which were his Commanded Duties: As of
Sacrifice, Thanksgiving, and the like. Now, concerning things indifferent,
which we may either do, or forbear; it is good before hand to consider our
Ability to perform them, and not after the vow to enquire; God has no pleasure
in the Sacrifice of Fools, Eccl. 5.4. As the Matter must not be sinful, so
neither impossible, or out of our Power to perform; as their vow was, both,
that vowed never to eat Bread, till they had killed Paul: Neither should it
entrench upon our Christian Liberty; lay not a stumbling block before thine own
Feet: Make not that Sin which God has not made Sin, except it be for a greater
good, and an apparent help in Heavens way; as when a Man vows Chastity, that
knows not whether he have the Gift of Continency, and so lays a snare for his
own Feet, and, perhaps, brings himself into a necessity of Sinning: It Is a sad
thing, that a Man should renounce Marriage, and vow a Single Life, when he
knows not whether he has Power to contian: To remain Single is no sin; nay in
some Cases, a Benefit, where this gift is given: But to vow it, is to vow a
thing that is not in their Power; God has assured no Man that he will give him
this gift, and if he do not give it, it is not to be had; he requires no more
than he gives; he that will not put New Wine into Old Bottles, nor suffer his
Disciples to Fast, till they were able; will not require this at their hands,
which he knows they cannot bear. Christ himself tells us, It Is a saying, all
Men cannot bear, Mat. 19.11. And the Apostle tells us, all Men have not this
Gift, 1 Cor. 7.7. And this has proved a Snare to many, who can neither Marry,
nor contain; but the Apostle tells us, it is better Marry than burn, and God
has provided Marriage for those that cannot contain: And why then should any
put a Bolt upon this door against themselves? And for the rest of Monastical
vows, as they had their rise either from Infidels, or were grounded in
Superstition; so are they besides; yea, contrary to the Law of God: For herein
Men Worship God after their own Inventions, and Teach for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men; and when they look for a Reward, God will ask them, who
required these things at their Hands. They vow Poverty, that they may Live at
ease; and in plenty, by the Sweat of other Men's brows: This takes Men from a
Lawful Calling, which they should follow, 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every Man abide in
the Calling wherein he was Called: And from their Honest Labor, which is
Commanded, 2 These. 3.10. If a Man will not Labor, let him not Eat: It makes
them neglect their Duties to their Relations, in providing for their Families,
a Commanded Duty, 1 Timothy 5.8. He that provides not for his Family, has denied
the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. Their Regular Obedience makes them
slight the Laws of God, to follow the dictates of Man; yea, makes God's Laws of
no Effect. Mark 7.8. It makes them do all in way of Merit, which the Scripture
denies, Luke 17.10. When you have done all that is Commanded, say yc are
unprofitable Servants, Romans 6.23. The Wages of sin is Death, but the Gift of
God is Eternal Life, Romans 4.6. and 8.18. and 9.16. 2 Cor. 4.17. Where we see,
all we enjoy is of free Grace, and and no room left for man's Merits: Such vows
as these therefore have no footing in the Scripture, and therefore are not for
our imitation.

5. Direct. If thou would by thy vows Glorify God, or benefit thine own
Soul, thou must look at the manner as well as the matter, for this also is to
be regarded; many a Duty materially good is spoiled by the ill performance, as
we see in Sacrifices and Oblations, and in the Observation of the New Moons,
and Solemn Assemblies, all appointed, and Commanded Duties, so spoiled in the
doing, that God would not own them; yea, his Soul did abominate them, Isa.
1.10, etc. And 66.3. He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a Man; and he that
sacrifices a Lamb, as if he Cut off a Dogs Neck; he that Offers an Oblation,
as if he Offered Swines Blood; he that burns Incense, as if he Blessed and
Idol, etc. We see Commanded Duties may be grievous Sins, when ill performed.
Now, a vow, as well as an Oath (for a vow is a Promissory Oath to God) should
be made in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness. In Truth and so it should
be made with a sincere Heart, without fraud, deceit, aequivocation, or
Hypocrisy: For as God requires the Heart in all Service, so likewise in this.
A Promise made to him with Guile, and Hypocrisy, is but a mocking of him, that
will not be mocked. It Is like Annanias and Sapphira, their Devoting the price
of their Land to God, and afterward keeping back part of the price to
themselves, and by this lost themselves. A notable Example we have of a serious
vow worthy our Imitation; we may read, 2 Chronicles. 15.14,15. where we find Judahs
entering into Covenant with God, it is said, they swear unto the Lord with
Trumpets, and shouting, and with the Cornet, and all Judah rejoiced at the
Oath, for they had sworn with all their Hearts, and sought him with all their
desires, etc. And how acceptable this was to God, we may find in the following
words; he was found of them, and the Lord gave them rest round about. But take
heed of being like those, Jer. 3.10. that turned to God, But it was feignedly,
says the Lord: But it is better not to Vow, than to Vow, and not perform; for
God will avenge the Quarrel of his Covenant. And as a Vow should be in Truth,
so it should be voluntary, not by constraint; for it should be with a willing
mind, and therefore it is called a free will Offering, and God expects it should
cheerfully be performed, Deuteronomy. 23.23. That which is gone out of thy Lips, thou
shall keep, and perform the Free will Offering, according to what thou have
Vowed unto the Lord, which thou have promised with thy Mouth. Though God do not
Command thee to Vow, as in the Verse before; If thou shall forbear to Vow it
shall be no sin in thee; yet when thou have engaged thy Soul, he expects the
performance; for as a Vow is free, so should the performance of it also. This
shows, when Young Persons are put into Monasteries, Nunneries, or Religious
Houses, as they are called, and forced there to take the required Oaths, of
Single Life, Regular Obedience, etc. and that against their wills; it is not of
Gods Devising, but of the Devils Invention: And likewise when Children, against
their Parents wills, are enticed, or allured to take such Oaths, and Vows, and
so alienate themselves from their Parents Obedience; this is no pleasing
Service to him: See his mind, Mat. 15.5,6. Parents must not be wronged upon
Religious Accounts. And as Vows should be in Truth, so likewise in Judgment;
blind Sacrifices were never acceptable to God: Men should well understand what
they do, and know the nature of a Vow, and the Lawfulness of the thing Vowed,
and the profitableness thereof, and how it conduces to their main design,
before they engage. There are some things God will not have devoted to him, as
the price of a Dog, or the Hire of a Whore, Deuteronomy. 23.18. Those that Vow also
should know their ability to perform, and not make them, and be forced to break
them, for, ultra posse non est esse, God delights not in the words of such
Fools, Eccl. 4.5. A vow should tend also for some Profit, for Body or Soul, as
Jacob's did; but what profit is there in voluntary Poverty, Pilgrimages, in
vowing Oil, Candles, etc. to Saints departed, no man was ever yet able to find
out. It should be made in Righteousness also, and should be at their own
dispose, as before was said, to vow that Service to one, which is due to
another is a point of injustice, and no Law of God requires it: It must be of
fit things also; we must not Serve God with what is not, our own, it must, in a
word, be in that which may conduce to God's Glory, and the furtherance of our
great design; or otherwise it is either sinful, or foolish.

6. Direct. When thou make a Vow, look to it, that thy Ends be right, for
that denominates the Action to be good, or bad, though the Duty be never so
Glorious in the Eyes of Men, they are abominable in the sight of God, if done
for base, or by-ends. Now, the end should be in this, as in all other Duties,
the Glory of God, convinced with our own, or others good; this should be our
ultimate end, and aim. A Gracious Soul in every Duty should be able to say,
propter te, propter te Domine, this I do for thee, and for thy sake; and with
the Psalmist, Psalm. 115.1. Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be
the Glory. A Christian in all his Duties should follow the Direction of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye Eat, or Drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the Praise and Glory of God, Col. 3.17. Whatsoever ye do, do all in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, etc. Though Vows are not strictly any part of God's Worship,
yet are they helps and furtherances in it, and therefore should be carefully
made, and faithfully performed: We read, I know, of Believers, that have made
Vows unto God for the performing of Spiritual Duties, which they must not have
neglected, though they had not vowed it; but this makes it not Worship, but a
help to Worship; and if they are of things indifferent, yet are they not part
of God's Worship, but that which conduces to the better performance of
Worship. I know the Papists they say, they are part of his Worship, though they
are made of things not Commanded; as Meats, Drinks, Apparel, etc. and tend to
perfection; and by the keeping of them, a man may attain to a higher
perfection, than in the Observation of Commanded Duties; but what Scripture
says thus? Their End, which is to Merit by them spoils all their Duties, and
makes them abominable in the sight of God. The Vows we read of in Scriptures,
were made to other Ends, and are all conducible to this great end, viz. God's
Glory. Some have vowed thankfulness for Mercies received, some Sacrifices,
Burnt Offerings, Incense, etc. Psalm. 66.13,14. and 61.8. and 132.2, etc. Some
have made Conditional Vows, if God would give them in such Mercies, they would
do thus and thus; thus Jacob Dedicated himself to God for ever, if he would
make Provision for him in his Journey, Genesis 28.20,21. And Hannah, that if God
would give her a Son, she would Devote him unto God for ever, 1 Samuel 1.11. Read
Lev. 27. throughout, Psalm. 116.12,13,14. What shall I render to the Lord for
all his Benefits, etc. I will pay my Vows unto the Lord. And as God's Glory, so
our own, and others benefit is to be regarded, and may be regarded in a Vow;
it is some stay and ground for our Faith, and some confirmation for our
assurance, as we see in the forecited place, 1 Samuel 1.11, etc. when Hannah had
made her Vow, she looked no more sad: Sometimes they are made of Thanksgiving
for deliverance, as the Mariners in Jonah's Ship, Jonah 1.16. made vows to
their gods: Sometimes they are made to prevent Sin for the time to come; as
when we vow Sobriety, and Moderation, to prevent the sin of Drunkenness,
Gluttony, Pride, or Covetousness: Thus some vowed against drinking Wine, or
strong Drink, as the Rechabites, Nazarites, and others: Some make vows to
humble their Souls, Numb. 30.13. Every Vow, and every binding Oath to afflict
the Soul, the Husband may Establish it, or the Husband may make it void.
Sometimes for the mending of our Lives, or the reforming what is amiss;
sometimes for the leaving of some Sin, or the performance of some Duty, etc.
These and the like are the Ends which we should look after, when we enter upon
a Religious Vow. So likewise at the good of others; as when we bind our selves
to give Alms, to Relieve the Poor, to Redeem Captives, or do works of Charity
to our power; these are good Ends, if God's Glory, and not our own Applause, or
thoughts of Merit, interpose not; as also to lay out something for Religious
and Pious Uses, the maintaining of Faithful able Ministers, etc. David vows, he
will not give Rest, or sleep to his Eyes, or come within his House, till he had
found out a place for the House of God, Psalm. 132.2, etc. But where do you read
of any that vow, and thought to Merit at God's Hands by so doing.

7. Direct. When thou have made thy vows, thy next Duty is to keep them, to
perform the word that is gone out of thy Mouth: It Is better not to vow, than to
vow and not perform; but it must be supposed then that the vows be Lawful and
allowed by God, otherwise the performance is but adding Sin to Sin, and
increasing the guilt: He that vows to commit Sin, ought not to do it. If thou
Sin in thy Vow, do not ratify it by performing it, as Herod, who made a rash
Vow, but did increase his guilt by Cutting off John Baptists Head. But
supposing thy vow be Lawful, thou can not Lawfully break it; nay, though the
performance tend to thy damage, for if thou do, thou committest a Sin as bad,
if not worse than Perjury; When thou have Vowed, therefore deferr not to pay,
for God takes no pleasure in Fools, pay that therefore which thou have Vowed,
Eccl. 5.3,4,5,6. Deuteronomy. 23.23. When thou have Vowed a Vow unto the Lord thy God,
deferr not to pay it, for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and
it will be sin to thee; but if thou will forbear to Vow, it shall not be sin to
thee; that which is gone out of thy Mouth thou shall keep and perform a
Free Will Offering according to what thou have vowed unto the Lord thy God,
which thou have promised with thy Mouth, Psalm. 76.11. Vow and pay unto the Lord
your God, etc. More places might be instanced in, if these were not sufficient.
If thy vow be rash Repent of the rashness of it, but if it be otherwise Lawful,
it must be performed, if it prove to thy damage, it is a reward of thy Folly.
But if it be unlawful, repent of thy sin, and Folly in making it, but it must
not be performed; for a Vow must not be a bond of Iniquity: Christ himself
shows the wickedness of such a vow, Mat. 15.5,6. where by their vow Corban,
they made null the Command of God, concerning honoring Father, and Mother, and
Relieving them. It is not Lawful for us to Dedicate those things to Pious Uses;
yea, to God himself, which we owe to anotner; David's rash vow, 1 Samuel
2.5.12.39. was not performed; he vowed the Destruction of Nabal, and all his
Family, and Blessed God for keeping him from doing evil. The wicked vow of
Paul's Persecutors ought not to have been fulfilled, had the power lain in
their Hands, Acts 23.21. Nor the rash and unadvised Vow of Saul, which tended
to hurt and not to good, 1 Samuel 14.39. Nor such Superstitious vows, as we read
of, Jer. 44.25. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, saying, ye and
your Wives have both spoken with your Mouths, and fulfilled with your Hands,
saying, we will surely perform our Vows, that we have Vowed, to burn Incense to
the Queen of Heaven, and to power out Drink Offerings unto her, ye will surely
accomplish your Vows, etc. God takes it ill in them, and sorely threatens them
for it. But if the Vow be Lawful, he expects the fulfilling of it; as we see in
Jacob's Vow, made Genesis 28.20. God minds him of it, Genesis 31.13. I am the God of
Bethel, where thou anointedst the Pillar, Numb. 30.3, etc. A Young woman's vow,
if her Father contradict it not, shall surely stand good. See also Lev. 7.16.
and 22.17. and 27.2, etc. Psalm. 76.12. Yea, the Lord threatens those that make
not good their vows, that vow a better, and pay a worse, Mal. 1.14. Cursed be
the deceiver, which has in his Flock a Male, and voweth, and Sacrifices unto
the Lord a Corrupt thing. Yea, we find he punished this Sin in Annanias and
Sapphira, who Devoted the price of a Possession to God, and after kept back
part of it, and were both struck dead for it, Acts 5.1,2, etc. A Godly Man,
when he promises Reformation of Life, the leaving of any known Sin, the
performance of any Religious duty, the doing of any Pious, or Charitable work,
etc. will make good his Vow. But how usual is it for wicked Men in their
Sickness, distress, or danger, to make vows and Promises of Reformation, which
they forget as soon as the danger is past, and return, with the Dog, to the
vomit, and the washed Sow, to her wallowing in the Mire.

CHAP. XIII. Directions in Fasting.
THE next Duty I shall Direct you in, is that Useful, though much neglected
Duty of Fasting, which, though in it self is no part of Divine worship, neither
is it Commanded for it self; yet when it is performed in a right manner, and to
a right End, is a notable help in other Religious Duties, and a good Spur to
put us forward to worship God, and fits us for his worship. Now, before I show
you what a Fast is, I shall show you what Fast I mean, for there are Fasts of
several sorts; and it is not the bare abstinence from Meat, that is sufficient:
There are some necessary Fasts, when men Fast whether they will or no; as when
they have nothing to eat, and this is too often the Poor man's, and the Prisoners
Fast; but this is against their wills, and so not thanks-worthy. Again, there
is a Natural Fast, when a man abstains from Food for want of a Stomach, as the
other did for want of Meat, and this is the Sick man's Fast; and oft-times the
Rich man Fasts also, this also is in-voluntary, and deserves no praise. There
is also a Physical Fast undertaken for Healths sake, this is not it we Treat
of; and there is a daily Fast, when Men use the Creatures very temperately, and
moderately; not to please, or satisfy their Appetite; but to maintain their
Life and strength, to do God service; they eat to live, and not live to eat;
and live to serve and praise God; and this should be every Christians Fast.
There is also a Superstitious Fast, such as the Papists use; an abstinence from
certain meats, upon Religious Accounts, when in the mean time they fully gorge
themselves with other meats every way as nourishing, and provoking to Lust, and
this upon the Account of Merit: And there is also a Civil Fast, when upon
Politic Accounts, some sorts of meats are forbidden at some times; as with us
Flesh in the Lent, for the encouragement of our Trade of Fishing, and for the
preservation of Cattle: There are some Miraculous Fasts; as that of Moses and
Elijah, and of Christ himself, all which Fasted forty days together, and tasted
no Food; but these are for our Admiration, not for our Imitation. There is also
a Spiritual Fast, an abstinence from Sin, which all should Imitate; and there
is a Hypocritical Fast, such as the Pharisees used, to be seen of Men, Mat.
6.2, etc. These hang down the Head like a bulrush, Isa. 58.5. And there is a
Diabolical Fast, wherein the Devils Service is promoted; A Fast for strife and
debate, and to strike with the Fists of Wickedness, Isa. 58.4. Such a Fast
Jezebel Proclaimed, when under pretense of Religious Worship, she took away
Naboath's Life for his Vineyard, 1 Kings 21.8, etc. This is of the Devils
Invention: But there is a Religious Fast set apart upon a Religious Account,
for a man to Afflict his Soul, and this is that we now speak to, which is the
Sanctifying, or setting apart a day, or some portion of time, to the Lord, upon
some extraordinary Occasion, by the voluntary abstinence from meat, and drink,
and other Comforts of this Life; as also from Labor, and Worldly business, so
far as Mercy, Comeliness, and Necessity will permit, for the more serious
humbling of the Soul before God, and pouring out our requests to him for the
preventing, or removing of Judgments felt, or feared; or the begging the
Mercies we want, or the continuance of those we enjoy. That such a kind of Fast
is Lawful, the Scripture is evident; it was Commanded, Lev. 23.27,28. Exodus
33.5. Joel 2.15. Mat. 6.16,17. and 9.15. 1 Cor. 7.5. And such a Fast was
Observed, Esther 4.16. Dan. 9.2,3,4, etc. 1 Cor. 7.5. Acts 13.23. We have the
Examples of the best men; yea, of Christ himself in so doing. Nay, Jews, Turks,
Papists, Protestants, etc. all agree in this; that it is a Duty, though they
differ in the manner, and Ends of the Duty: Yet must we not look upon it as any
part of Religious worship, or desirable for it is own sake, for it is a thing
indifferent in it self, and it is to be used so far forth as it conduces to the
main design of God's Honor, and the good of the Soul, and serves to the Ends
propounded in the Scriptures, which is the humbling of the Soul, and making us
more sensible of our wants, and more fervent in our Prayers. And Experience
shows when it has been joined with fervent Prayer, very great things have been
wrought by it, great Deliverances have been got, great Mercies procured, and
great Judgments diverted. Now, this Religious Fast is either Public, or
Private: Public when Commanded by Public Authority, and generally Observed;
as Joel 1.19. Jonah 2.7. 2 Chronicles. 30.13. And Private, when it is performed by a
Person, or Family, Esther 4.6. And of this Fast Christ speaks, Mat. 6.17,18.
Now, that you may keep a Fast as it ought to be kept, take these following
Directions.

1. Direct. If thou would prevail with God in such a duty as this, either
to beg the mercy wanting for thy self or others; or to divert the judgment felt
or heard, it is necessary that thou be rightly qualified for the work, for an
unqualified Person is like to do but little good; a fast as I told you, was
either public or private, that which is public is commanded by Authority, and
here all men are enjoined for to come; and indeed it is every man's duty; because
every man has offended; for high and low, rich and poor, noble and ignoble,
young and old, one with another, none are excepted, no not the Bridegroom or
the Bride, nor the child that sucks upon the Mothers breast, Joel 2.16. Gather
the People, sanctify the Congregation, assemble the Elders; gather the
Children, and those that suck the Breasts: Let the Bridegroom go forth out of
his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet, etc. nay, the very Beasts of the
field are not exempted, Jonah 3.7,8. Let nither man or beast, heard or flock,
taste any thing, let them not feed or drink water, but let man and beast be
covered with sack cloth: and cry mightily unto God, yea, let them turn every
one from his evil ways, and from the violence that is in his hands, who can
tell if God will turn or repent, etc. In this fast, the Minister most commonly,
is their mouth to God, and Gods mouth to them; yet they have need of
qualifications for the duty, for though he perform much of the external part of
the duty, yet, the internal rests upon them: thy heart should be qualified to
put up an acceptable prayer to God, great ones are not excepted from this duty,
for their sins are great, yea, perhaps greater, and admit of greater
aggravations than others do, and their examples much, followed; Infants you see
though incapable, were not freed, even such as hang upon their Mothers breast,
and though they had not actually sinned, yet were a part of that sinful lump of
mankind, and deserved judgment as well as others: and therefore should be
timely traind up in this Christian duty, and their cries for meat, and the very
bellowing of the Beasts might stick something upon the heart of man, and help
further to humble and break it; yea, many of those little ones, being Gods
Elect, their presence may be an arguing with God, to spare, as the presence of
Jehosophat moved Elijah to come to Ahab, 2 Kings 3.19. this was one Motive why
the Lord would not destroy Niniveh, because there were sixscore thousand souls
in it, that knew not the right hand from the left. But though all these come,
and it is their duty to come, yet all come not rightly prepared and qualified
for that work; if thou would indeed stand in the Gap, and turn away the
wrath of God from the Land: thou should be one in Covenant with God, and one
that has the work of grace upon thy Soul; one that has a friend in Court, an
interest in Christ the Mediator, and can through him go boldly to the Throne
of grace; one that can without lying, call God Father, and lay claim to the
share in his promises, one that art reconciled to God, through the blood of his
Son; such a one is like to prevail for mercy, it is not those that howl for
Corn and Wine he regards, it is not the crying of the Swine, or the bellowing
of Beasts he matters, if there be a full Congregation of unconverted Sinners,
that resolve to love, and not leave their sins: I question whether these men's
cries, do not prevail more to bring down judgments, than mercies; when men
covenant with ^od, and promise obedience and never intend to perform it; this
is but a mocking of God, that will not be mocked; and the breaking of the
Covenant with him, that can and will avenge the quarrel of his Covenant; we
cannot deceive him, though we come with Tears in our Eyes: If there be not
sorrow in the Heart, our Crocodile Tears will not Advantage us: But if there be
but weak gifts and parts, if the Heart be right, yet they will be owned; God
looks not so much at the outside as the inside of Duty. Though I know those
that carry on the work, especially in Public, should be men of parts and
Abilities (and it is well if all were thus Qualified) it is a sweet Conjunction,
where Grace and parts meet) they should know their own Sins, and the Sins of
the Nation to bewail and confess them, Ezra 9.4.6. Nehem. 1.6,7. They should
know their own wants, and the wants of the Nation, Dan. 9.11.18. In a word,
every Novice in Religion is not fit for so high a Duty, and therefore Christ
himself Excuses his Disciples for not Fasting, not only because the
Bridegroom was with them, but, as it is conceived, because they were not yet
fit for so high a duty, Luke 5.36,37. Mat. 9.15,16.

2. Direct. Would thou Fast as thou ought to do, and as God requires, it is
not enough to be rightly Qualified, but come prepared to the duty; there is
scarce any thing of moment can be well done without preparation, much less such
a Solemn work, and such an extraordinary duty. Now, the preparation requisite,
is partly External, and partly Internal; the External helps forward the other,
and they are such as these. On the Evening before lay aside thy Bodily Labor
betimes, that thou may trim up thy Lamp to meet the Bride groom the day
following; and prepare thy Heart against the next days duties, and take that
Evening but a moderate Supper, such as will help, and not hinder thee in the
ensuing duty; and continue as long as thou can without prejudice to thy
Health, or hinderance to thy duties of the day following; for thou should
deny thy self in sleep as well as in other Comforts of this Life; but all this
should be but in reference to the main work, and so no further to be used than
it is helpful to it. Now, the main work is to get the Heart into a melting
frame, and humble temper; for what good will it do us, to come and go with the
Heart unbroken? Now, that it may be so, the consideration of thy sins, and the
sins of the Nation, with the several aggravations of them, will be of great
use, when they are pressed home upon the Spirit by serious Meditations: Call to
mind therefore thy Original Guilt, and the pollution of thy Nature, and how the
whole Man, Soul and Body is defiled by it, and thy best Duties stained; as also
thy Actual Sins, many for Number, and heinous for Nature: Call to mind the Sins
of thy Youth, and of thy riper Age; the Sins of thy Calling, general and
particular; thy Relation Sins, and how thou have failed in every Relation thou
have been in: Thy Sins of Omission, Commission, and Participation; thy Sins of
knowledge, and Ignorance; of weakness, and wilfulness; against the Law, and
against the Gospel; against God, and against Man, with the several aggravations
of them; as against a great deal of Love, and Light; against Knowledge, and
Conscience, Promises, and Resolutions, Vows, and Covenants, Means, and helps,
etc. And not only thy own sins, but the sins of thy Family: The sins of thy
Relations ought to be Considered; yea, the Sins of the Nation; of Superiors,
and Inferiors; of Princes and Governors; for these should be Confessed, as
Daniel does, Dan. 9.2,3, etc. The Sins of Superiors, Inferiors, and Equals;
for from the greatest to the least, all have sinned, and come short of what
they should do: The Abuse of Mercy which we have had, in general in the Nation,
or in particular our selves; David could mourn in secret, when Men kept not
God's Law; and we should be mourning in Sion: And be sure come not before the
Lord to confess, or bewail any one Sin, that thou do not repent of, and
resolve to leave: Nor to bewail the Omission of any one Duty, which thou art
not resolved for the time to come to practice. Nor to beg for one Mercy, that
thou art not resolved to Labor for, as well as to Pray for; For if thou
regardest Iniquity in thy Heart, God will not hear thy Prayer, Psalm. 66.18.
Should thou come with a resolution to Live in sin, and pray for the Pardon
of it, thou do but mock God, that will not mocked, and take his Name in
vain; when thou say, Lord, when will thou give me this Mercy? God may say,
Man, when will thou leave thy Sin? When will thou give me thy Heart? If thou
say never, God will return thee the like Answer. Never think by thy Prayers to
benefit thy self, or the Church, if thou will not reform thine own Heart. And
as thou must consider thy sins, so also thy wants; what Mercies thou would
beg for thy self, or others; should a King promise at such a day to meet his
Subjects, and supply their wants, how careful would they be, not only to come,
but also to consider what Petitions to put up, and what Favors to beg; it is no
doubt but while we are in these Houses of Clay, we have a back bias of
Corruption, drawing us out of the way, and so many are our wants. Some Souls
are made up all of wants, they have no Grace, let them beg, and pray, and
endeavor that some may be bestowed, and to have their Hearts Sanctified, and
their Natures changed. The best of God's People have defects in Grace, and
these they should Labor to have removed, and their wants supplied. Some have
decays in Grace, and this is the time for their recovery; in a word, many
things we have to beg for our selves, many for our Friends; many for the
Nation, and many for the Church in general; many Judgments are threatened, which
we would have diverted, and many felt, we would have removed; know then before
hand, what Errant thou art come about.

3. Direct. Concerning our External Carriage in the days of Humiliation, I
shall speak something, for having made the preparation before mentioned, and
the day being come, there are some External Duties required, viz. That we rise
betimes that morning, and deny our selves that rest and sleep, which our
sluggish Nature requires, so far forth as we do not thereby dis-able our selves
for the duty, and that we spend the whole day in the work, and let us not think
a whole day too much, for if we prevail not for the diverting those Judgments
which our sins deserve; perhaps, we may spend many Years in greater Sufferings:
And it is thy duty also to bring as many of thy Family as conveniently may be
along with thee, especially those that have Understanding, that the
Congregation may be full, that we may join together as one man, in the work;
that may be done by many, that a few cannot do, I have observed upon such
occasions; men think one in a Family sufficient to come to the Congregation,
while the other mind their worldly Occasions; but as these Sow sparingly, so
they are like to reap little. The King of Nineveh will rise up in Judgment
against those, who Commanded all men and Beasts to rest and Fast, and what lies
in thee, come with an humble Heart, and a self-denying Spirit to the work; and
to this End Fasting is enjoined, which of it self is a thing indifferent, but
of excellent use to bring the Body into Subjection. Now, this should be a total
abstinence from all meat and drink, except unfeigned necessity forbid; the very
Name and Nature of a Fast implies this much, and if this abstinence be not
observed, it is no Fast. Esther we find, Commands the Jews neither to eat nor
drink for three days, and promises that she and her Maids would do the like,
Est. 4.16. Yet if this total abstinence be really prejudicial to the Health,
and prove a hinderance, and not a furtherance to the duty, it is Lawful to take
some little refreshing, for though Scripture Examples afford us not so much;
yet rectified reason, yea, and Scripture grounds warrant it, Hos. 6.6. I have
desired Mercy and not Sacrifice; a place urged by Christ himself upon such an
Occasion, Mat. 12.7. And Fasting being Ordained as an help, is no duty when it
becomes an hinderance, but then it should be but a small reflection, so much,
and no more, as will revive decayed Nature, prevent the danger, and fit a man
for the duty. The Papists in their Fasts, or rather mock-fasts, observe not
this rule; their Fast consists not in the abstinence from, but in the choice of
meats and drinks, for which we have no Scripture Evidence, nor indeed any show
of reason; they forbear flesh, when they gorge themselves with Wine, and strong
Drink, and Fish, and other Dainties, which no less pamper the Body, and provoke
Lust; but at this rate a Man may Fast, not only forty days, but forty Years,
with little Trouble: But a Scripture Fast consists not in the choice of Meat,
but in the abstinence from Meat, and Drink, not in the choice of Meat, for all
is alike Lawful, 1 Cor. 10.25.27. and 8.8. Heb. 13.8,9. And as Meat and Drink,
so also Bodily Labor is forbidden; this must be laid aside, as upon a Sabbath;
for Worldly business divert the mind, and unfit it for Duty. We find upon those
days of Atonement, as they were called under the Law, work was forbidden upon
pain of death, Lev. 23.27, etc. Whatsoever Soul it be, that does any work upon
that same day, the same Soul will I destroy from among his People. Also Number.
29.7. Lev. 16.29. Now, though the Ceremonious part of this be taken away, yet
so far as it conduces to the main End, viz. to Afflict the Soul, it remains in
Force: How can there be a Solemn Congregating together, or the work of the day
be carried on, if there be not a cessation from Bodily Labor? Again, Costly
and Gorgeous Apparel must be that day laid aside, as unfit for such a Duty; we
find Kings themselves upon such days, Girded themselves with Sackcloth, and
put Ashes upon their Heads, and did not, as in our times, mourn in Scarlet,
Silks, and Sattins, Exodus 33.4,5,6. Jonah 3.6. Music also, and other Sports
and Recreations must be abstained, as very unsuitable for Mourning times. God
complains of the Jews, that they in their Fasts did find pleasure; and may he
not Complain of many of us, that as soon as the Ordinance is over, fall to our
Recreations, as at other times, Isa. 58.3. Yea, from Marriage Duties, at other
times Lawful, and Sanctified by the word of God, 1 Cor. 7.5. Defraud not one
another, except it be with consent for a time, that you may give your selves to
Fasting and Prayer. Also Joel 2.16. Nay, all Delights and Recreations, whereby
the Nature of Man is refreshed, should be forborne: See an Example of David, 2 Samuel 12.16.20. And in Daniel, Chap. 10.3. These things serve partly to humble
us, partly to take revenge upon our selves, for our former Miscarriages.

4. Direct. Having Directed you in the External part of the Duty, it remains
that I speak something of the Internal, which is the very Life and Soul of the
Duty, without which all the rest is but a dead Carcass, a bare Name of a Fast.
When thou come therefore before God in this Duty, set thy self before him
with all reverence, as before an Angry Judge, justly provoked by thy Faults.
Come with shame in thy Face, and sorrow in thy Heart, and, if possible, with
Tears in thy Eyes, and make a full and free Confession of thy Faults, with all
the aggravating Circumstances thereof; and rest not till thy Heart bleed for
thy Sins: Should thou rip, and confess all the sins that ever thou had
Committed, with all the aggravations, with which they are clothed, if thy
Heart were not touched with sorrow for them, it would be but a further
aggravation of them, and provoke the Lord to Anger, and not to Compassion. If
thy Fast be private, confess all the evil thou know by thy self, till thou
can say with a good Conscience, I have kept nothing back. Now, this pressing
Sin upon thy Soul is called a renting of the Heart, Joel 2.13. Rent your
Hearts, and not your Garments: An Afflicting of the Soul, Lev. 16.29. In it you
shall Afflict your souls, and do no work at all, Lev. 23.29. Whatsoever Soul
shall not be Afflicted in that same day he shall be cut off from among his
People. Consider the Corruptions of thy Heart, thy Natural Corruptions;
consider the Number of thy bypast sins, and the weight of thy present
remaining Corruptions, the wrath of God is kindled against thee for them, and
the danger thy Soul is in of Hell, by reason of them. Consider sin in it is own
Nature is the worst of Evils, and the cause of all other Evils, it is the
foulest thing in the World; yea, fouler than the Devil himself, for that made
him foul; and could he be stripped of his sin, he would return to his Angelical
Glory. Consider it in the Causes, it had it is Original from the Devil himself;
he was the first Sinner, and the cause of sin in Men; and the Child very much
resembles the Father. Consider the Law of God, of which sin is a transgression;
it is Holy, Just, and Good, and no reason can be given why it should not be
Obeyed. Consider the Person against whom thou sinnest, and it is against God
himself, who is the chiefest Good; yea, the Fountain of all thy Mercies; One to
whom thou owe thy self, and all thou have; he that is thy Creator, and made
thee; it is he that maintains thee at his own Cost and Charges: One that is
able to save thee, or destroy thee. Consider it in the woeful Effects of it,
it is the Cause of all thy Judgments felt, or feared; yea, of Spiritual,
Temporal, and Eternal Judgments: For the Wages of Sin is Death, but the Gift of
God is Eternal Life. Consider it in the price that was paid to free thy Soul
from the Guilt, and filth of it, and that was the precious Blood of the Son of
God, who lost his Life to Ransom Souls from the slavery of Satan, and his Blood
to wash away their scarlet sins. The serious Consideration of these things will
much further thy Humiliation, and Soul-Affliction: And when thou have thus made
thy Heart to bleed for thy sins, go to God for a Plaster; but what good will a
Plaster do before there is a Wound? Beg of him the Pardon of thy sin; and not
only so, but power against it: Renew thy Covenant with him of better Obedience,
not only purpose, but promise amendment of Life; resolve against sin for the
time to come: Every sin thou confessest, let it be with a strong resolution to
meddle no more with it. This is that Spiritual Fast from sin, which is every
Christians Duty; to Fast from Food, and not from filthiness; from pleasure, and
not from profaness; from sleep, and not from sin, is the Devils Fast; such
Fasts he keeps, and such will be kept in Hell: But the contrary was David's
humbling of his Soul with Fasting, Psalm. 69.10. In which there must be a
confession of sin, an Accusation for it, a detestation of it, and also
self-condemnation. And though Prayer at all times should be fervent, yet
especially now in such a Duty; this is called a Crying mightily unto God, Joel
1.14. Jonah 3.8. And thou should bring Faith along with thee, believing thou
shall prevail, which may be grounded upon the many promises made to this Duty,
and the Experiences we have in Scripture of the success Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah,
Esther, Niniveh, and many other may witness; nay, where was it ever in
Scripture faithfully performed without success? Alms-deeds also should be
added, Isa. 58.6,7. Yea, we should testify our Humiliation by our ready
forgiving of others, and assisting those that stand in need. Beg also those
many things that are wanting, for thy self, the Church, or State; and as in the
Law, Sacrifices, and Offerings were given to God: Sacrifice thy sin to him, and
Offer to him the Calves of thy Lips, Prayer and praise; Dedicate thy self a
Living Sacrifice, and devote thy self to his Service.

5. Direct. The next thing considerable, is the time when this Duty is to be
performed; and in this, as in other things, the Papists differ from us: They
prescribe set times for Fasting, as necessary to be kept, and sinful if not
observed. We hold that there are no such fixed times to be observed: But the
Duty is incumbent on us as Occasions are offered. It Is true, there is mention
made of a day, Lev. 16.29. but this was Ceremonial, and ended with the rest of
the Typs, and Shadows; and there is mention also made of the Fast in the fifth
and seventh Month, Zach. 7.5. And of the fourth, fifth, seventh, and tenth
Month, Zach. 8.19. but this was during the Captivity, and so just occasion was
offered for Public Humiliation: but what is this to our business? We had the
like every Month in times of War, and public Calamity. And it is fit we
should have upon such Occasions: But what is this to our stated times, whether
Occasion be or no? When there is some great Judgment lying upon us, or some
Eminent Danger hanging over our Heads, then it is a suitable time for this
Exercise. We find in Scripture that there were Fasts kept by Believers in all
Ages, upon emergent Occasions; thus Samuel and the People Fasted, and besought
the Lord in their danger, 1 Samuel 7.6,7. And thus David besought the Lord by
Prayer, and Fasting, for the Life of his Child, when it was Sick, 2 Samuel 12.16.
And thus he besought the Lord for Jerusalem, when a sore Judgment from God was
upon it, 1 Chronicles. 21.16. The Inhabitants of Jabish Gilead Fasted, and humbled
themselves, when Saul and Jonathan were Slain, and Israel put to flight, 1 Samuel
31.15. And Jehosophat in his Fear, Proclaims a Fast, when he knew not what to
do, yet had he his Eyes up to God, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. And Nehemiah, when he heard
of the Destruction of Jerusalem, humbled himself by Fasting, Nehem. 1.4. And
Esther, and the Jews, when the Writings were Signed, and the time was set, when
they should all have been destroyed, Esther 4.1,2, etc. And Ezra, when he
apprehended danger at hand, Ezra 8.21. Yea, this is the Course which the Lord
himself Advises to in times of danger, or Public Calamity, Joel 2.12,13.
having threatened a sore Judgment; he adds, Therefore now, says the Lord, turn
ye unto me with all your Hearts, and with Fasting, and with weeping, and with
mourning, and rent your Hearts and not your Garments, and turn unto the Lord
your God, for he is gracious and Merciful, etc. And this Course the Ninivites
did take, and it succeeded, Jonah 3.5.8. Yea, Ahab humbled himself, when
Judgment was threatened, and it was deferred in his days, 1 Kings 21.27. Many
more Instances might be given to prove times of Public Calamity, seasonable
times for this Duty. When Sin also abounds, it is a time for God's People to be
Mourners in Zion, for assuredly Judgments will follow, Ezekiel. 9 4. 1 Samuel 7.6,7.
Psalm. 69.10. David wept, and chastened his Soul with Fasting; for where Sin
goes before unbewailed, Judgments necessarily follow after; and a Man may
foresee the Effect by the Cause; when such sins as usually bring Judgments are
Acted amongst us, we may look for the like Effect; for like Sins bring like
Plagues, Lam. 1.20. I have grievously Rebelled: And what follows? Abroad the
Sword bereaveth, at home there is as Death. See also Lam. 2.17. Jer. 7.12. Amos
6.2,3. And therefore in the prevailing of Sin, we have great cause to humble
our Souls, and stand in the Gap to turn away the fierce Anger of the Lord, and
never more Cause than at this day. Again, when thou find thy Corruptions
strong, and thy Graces weak, or when thou find some notable decay in thy
Grace, it is time then to look about thee. As also when thou would beg any
great thing at the Hands of God, go to him by Fasting, and Prayer: Thus Daniel
begs the Deliverance of God's People out of Babylon, according to God's
promise; he seeks to him by Fasting, and Prayer, Dan. 9.1,2, etc. and 10.2,
etc. For though God determine to do it, yet will he be sought to, for so great
a Mercy; and likewise when some Persons are designed for some great work in
Church, or Commonwealth, it has usually been done by Fasting and Prayer: Thus
Christ spent a whole Night in Prayer, before he chose his Disciples, Luke 6.12.
Paul and Silas were set apart by Fasting and Prayer, Acts 14.2,3. And in Case
of Spiritual desertion, we should thus seek to God, Mat. 9.14. And for the
furtherance of some great Undertaking, Esther 4.16. when Corruption is strong,
when Ordinary Food wlll not serve, we must use Physic. Some Sins, like some
Devils, go not out but by Prayer and Fasting: These are the times for this
extraordinary Duty; but what is this to Lent, or Holy Day Eves, whereon the
Papists keep their mock-fasts, but come not to humble their Souls for their
Sins?

6. Direct. Propound a right End to thy self in this Duty of Fasting, or
otherwise it will prove in vain, and be abominable in the Eyes of God. The Jews
took it ill from God, that he regarded them not: Wherefore have we Fasted, say
they, and thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our our Souls, and thou
take no notice? Isa. 58.3. Behold, says God, ye Fast for strife and Debate,
and to strike with the fists of Wickedness, etc. Is it such a Fast that I have
chosen, etc. Zach. 7.5. When ye Fasted and Mourned in the fifth and seventh
Month, even these seventy years, did ye at all Fast unto me, even to me; Hos.
7.14. They have not cried to me with their Hearts, when they howled upon their
Beds; they assemble themselves for Corn and Wine, and they Rebel against me. If
the Heart be absent, God regards not the Service. The Pharisees, Mat. 6.16,17.
they Fasted, but it was to be seen of Men, that others might look upon them, as
of an austeer course of Life, and therefore had a reward from Men, not from
God. The Papists make Merits their End; they Fast, and think to Merit Heaven by
it: But alas! what can poor sinful Creatures Merit at the Hands of God, but
Divine Indignation, and fierce Judgments? God may say of us, as of those, Jer.
14.12. When they Fast, I will not hear their Cry; when they Offer
Burnt-Offerings, and an Oblation, I will not accept them; but I will consume
them by the Sword, and by the Famine, and by the Pestilence, Luke 18 12. I Fast
twice in the week, says the Pharisee, yet the poor Publican was regarded
before him: See also Romans 14.6. 1 Cor. 8 8. Alas! were Men but acquainted with
their own Hearts, this conceit of Merit would soon vanish. Fasting, as I told
you, is an indifferent thing, and only useful as it suits with the main End:
Bodily Exercise profits little, but Godliness is profitable to all things, 1 Timothy 4.7,8. The true End of Fasting is either Ordinary, or Extraordinary, in
both the Glory of God is intended: The Ordinary Ends are such as these; the
subduing the Flesh, and bringing the Body into Subjection: Thus Paul, 1 Cor.
9.27. I bring under my Body, and bring it into subjection. God's People have
Flesh as well as Spirit, and have need to use all means to subject it, that
they may subdue their Corruption; and if Ordinary means will not do,
Extraordinary must be used; if the Temptation remain, this Duty must be
followed; and at length God will give strength, and his Grace shall be
sufficient for us: This is the way to Corroborate, and strengthen the Spirit,
and enable it to perform the required Duties: This puts fervency into our
Prayer, and enables us to Cry mightily to God. This way Men take some Revenge
upon themselves for their Sin, and for the abuse of Mercies; by this means a
Man is better enabled to grapple with Temptations, and bring under Corruptions,
and perform Duties of our General, and particular Calling more Heavenly: This
is the way to stir up the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, Zach. 12.10. Thus
the Prophetess Anna spent her time, in Serving God with Fasting and Prayer,
Night and Day, Luke 2.37. By Eating and Drinking, the Body becomes dull, and
heavy, and unfit for Spiritual Duties; but by moderate abstinence it becomes
more Active and Lively; and therefore Fasting and Prayer, are usually joined
together: For Fasting of it self does little good; Fasting testifies our
Humility, our grief, and sorrow for Sin, whereby we acknowledge our guilt
before God, and our unworthiness of Meat, Drink, Sleep, Raiment, or other
refreshing Comforts. Are these the Ends you aim at? Is this the Mark you shoot
at? And the white that is in your Eye? It Is well, if it be, to make you fitter
for the Service of the Lord, that you may do your Masters Will better, and wind
up the Heart to an higher pitch of Holiness, and Heavenly mindedness: But if
Custom, or Fashion, or the fear of Man, or popular Applause, or hopes of
Meriting any thing from God, be your End, your Duty will be Cursed, and blasted
to you, and be returned Sin into your Bosom. The Extraordinary Ends we aim at
in our Fasting, should be the removing of Evil felt, or feared; either
Spiritual, or Temporal; from our selves, or others; the begging those Mercies
we want, and the continuance of those we have, and fear to lose: These are the
Ends the Godly have used these extraordinary Fastings for, and this has been
successful to these Ends; these are means of God's own prescribing, and
promises are added of a good Success: And many Christians, for themselves, and
others, have found a Comfortable return; and that which could not otherwise be
obtained, has been gotten by Prayer and Fasting: But our Pharisaical, or
Papistical Fastings, our loose, careless mock-fasts, never did, nor never will
prevail with God for any Mercy, or the removal of any Judgment.

7. Direct. In the last place, look to thy Carriage after the Duty, that thou
demean thy self well; for thy work is not done when the Exercise is ended: Take
heed of resting in the Duty, or trusting to the work done; this is Popish, this
will make thee lose all thy Labor: It Is not the hanging down the Head, as God
says, like a Bulrush, for a day will serve thy turn. This, as other Duties,
are to be used as Boats, or Bridges to help thee over to Christ; Men do not
make Boats, or Bridges for their own sakes, or to look upon, but to make use of
for the End they are suited to; make not Prayer the end of Prayer, or Fasting
the end of Fasting: Use them not for their own sakes, but for Christ's sake, to
get nearer to him by them; play not with the Style, or Ladder, but Climb up;
Climb over by them. Take heed of Priding in the Duty, this is very inconsistent
with it, if it be performed with enlargement; beware, lest the Devil Fly-blow
it: Pride is a Worm which breeds in the best Fruits of the Spirit; yea, in ^e
Ruin of other Sins, even in Humility it self: Men may be proud of their
Humility; the Devil, like the Spider, can suck Poison out of the choicest
Flowers: If thy Duties be thus fly-blown, they will not down with God; they
stink in his Nostrils, whatever conceit thou may have of them. Examine also
at the close of the Duty, how thy Heart has demeaned it self in the Duty; if
bad, thou have cause to be humbled, and make thy Heart smart for it'; most Men,
if they Examine any thing, it is the External part of the Duty; and are troubled
more at a mis-expression in the Duty, than at the straying, wandering of the
thoughts, or the deadness of the Heart: But a Christians work lies most within;
he looks, as God does, most upon the Heart, though the other be not to be
disregarded. If thy Heart has carried it self well, there is cause of
thankfulness, none of Pride; for who made thee to differ? And what have thou
that thou have not received? View but thy failings, and this may make thee vail
thy Peacocks Plumes. Have got any strength by the Duty, hold it fast, and let
it not go; art got any thing nearer to God, keep thy station, and go not back;
lose not the ground thou have gained by thy Duty: If thy Heart be heated, take
heed of letting it cool again, the wind of the World will quickly do it; though
the Exercise be over, let not thy Spiritual Fervor and Heat be over. Elijah
walked in the strength of a meals meat forty days; a Christian should exceed
him, in such extraordinary meals: What good will it do a Man to work hard all
day, and have his work at Night as he found it in the Morning; and to travel
hard, and at Night be where he set out. Maintain the ground thou have gotten in
the Fight: Have thou put up Petitions to the Throne of Grace, mark how they
speed, that thou may behave thy self accordingly: Most Men lose their
Prayers, as Boys do their Arrows, they mark not where they light; many know not
whether God Answers them or no, nor scarce what they have asked. But those that
are burdened with the Sins they confess, and feel the want of the Mercies they
desire, take better heed. An Hungry, or a Thirsty Man, that begs for Meat, or
Drink, can easily perceive, and tell you whether they had a Grant, or a Denial:
Another that begs out of wantonness, not wants, heeds it not: A Man that
desires to have his Sores Cured, he observes how the Plaster suits with it;
when a Beggar, that gains by his Sores, matters it not, though they never are
healed. If God seem to deny thy Request, it is time to Examine what is the
matter; see whether it be Lawful, or Convenient, and if so, follow thy Suit,
give God no rest; he will first or last grant thy desire. Sometimes he deferrs
to make his People Cry the louder; if it be a necessary thing, take no denial,
thy importunity will not Offend God, as we see in the Parable of the
Importunate Widow. Many Christians are short-winded, they can Pray but a turn
or two, and then are out of breath, like the Bethulians, soon ready to faint:
If thou pray against Sin, fight against it also, hate it, and detest it: It Is a
vain thing to Imagine that God will subdue it without our endeavor: If thou
pray for Mercy, work for it also, this is the way: And enter into Covenant with
God to Live more Holily, and more humbly, and perform thy Covenant; better not
to Vow, than to Vow and not perform, Eccl. 5.5. If God grant thy Request,
return thanks; Live thanks, as well as speak thanks: If he seem to deny, wait
upon him in the use of means, and he will Answer in due time.

CHAP. XIV. Directions for Days of Tanksgiving, or Holy Feasting.
THE next Duty which I shall mention, is Holy Feasting, which is no part of
God's Worship, but is helpful to the Duty of Thanksgiving, as Fasting is to
Humiliation; it has been in use in the times of the Law, and is not useless in
the times of the Gospel, where there is just Cause for such Spiritual
Rejoicing. God in the Time of the Law appointed several Feasts to be Observed
by the Jews, upon several Occasions. Some Daily, as the Morning and Evening
Sacrifice; some Weekly, as the Sabbath, in Commemoration of the Work of
Creation, and to Typifie out our Eternal Rest in Heaven. Some Occasionally, as
the Thanksgiving of Moses, Deborah, and Barak, etc. Some Yearly; and these
either greater or lesser Feasts; the greater Feasts were three; the Passover,
appointed to be kept in Memorial of Isreal's Deliverance out of Egypt, which
Typically holds out our Deliverance by Christ, who was the true Pascal Lamb
slain for the sins of the People; of this Feast we may read, Exodus 12.1, etc.
and 23.15. Ezekiel. 42.21. and elsewhere. The next was Penticost, which was
observed fifty days after; wherein every Family Offered two Loaves of the first
Fruits: This is called the Feast of Harvest, Exodus 23.16. The third was the
Feast of Tabernacles, Instituted in Memory, that the Children of Israel Lived
forty Years in the Wilderness, and had no certain Dwelling Houses, but Lived in
Tents, and yet God made Provision for them; and hereby they were Taught, and we
may Learn, if we are Strangers and Pilgrims here, and have no constant abiding
City, but expect one in the Spiritual Canaan; we may find this Feast mentioned,
Deuteronomy. 16.13. Josh. 7.2. Exodus 23.16. where it is called the Feast of In
gathering, at the end of the Year. At these three Feasts all the Males were
Commanded to appear before the Lord, Exodus 23.7. The Annual Feasts of lesser
Account, were two; the Feast of Trumpets, and the Feast of Expiation, both
mentioned, Lev. 23.24.27. In which also it was not allowed to do any Work; nay,
it was forbidden upon pain of Death: Other Feasts were to be Observed after
certain Years; for as every seventh day was Holy to the Lord, so was every
seventh Year: For as Man and Beast was Commanded to Rest upon the seventh day;
so the Land was to Rest every seventh Year, that it might gather Heart, and
that the Poor of the Land might be fed of those things which the Earth did
Naturally bring forth, without Labor; and after seven times seven Years, which
is forty nine, the next, which is the fiftyeth Year, was the Jubilee, or Year
of Gladness, wherein Debts were forgiven, Land sold, returned to the Owners,
and Hebrew Servants were Released, and made Free, Lev. 25.9. To which Christ
seems to allude, John 4.18,19. who was sent to Preach the Acceptable Year of
the Lord, etc. Some Festivals also were appointed by Man, upon great Occasions,
and were Yearly Observed by the Church; as the Feast of Purim, Commanded by
Esther the Queen, and Mordecai the Jew, upon the Account, and in Memorial of
the Famous Deliverance of the Church in their time from the wicked Conspiracy
of Haman, Est. 9.17. And also the Feast of the Dedication of the Temple, either
after the Babylonish Captivity, Ezra 6.16. Or after it was polluted by
Antiochus Epiphanes, and again Dedicated by Machabeus, 1 Mac. 4.5,6. Which
Feast Christ himself seems to approve, by his Presence, John 10.22. And in
Gospel times we have our Feasts also; as every Seventh day for a Sabbath, of
which I have already Treated: Several other Festivals in later Ages have been
Observed, which Antienter Antiquity make no mention of, as several in Memory of
Christ's Birth, Resurrection, Assention, etc. Several to our Lady, and many in
Memory of Saints; of which I shall say no more, but what the Apostle does, Romans
14.5,6. One Man esteems one day above another; another esteems every day
alike, let every Man be persuaded fully in his own mind, etc. Let us not Judge
one another in those things; but were those observed as days of Thanksgiving
ought to be, they would not be so eagerly contended for by some, nor so eagerly
contended against by others. The Papists superstitiously forcing them upon us,
as parts of Gods worship; and their Idol worship thereupon has made some
perhaps, run too far on the other side; but many spending them as Feasts to
Bacchus, has made many abhor the other occasional Feasts we have had, as the
fifth of November, etc. commanded by Authority to be greatly observed, and
others as occasion falls out; which if you would keep well, or any of the
forementioned Holy Days, observe these Directions following.

1. Direct. If thou would offer up to God a pleasing Sacrifice upon such a
day as this is, get thy heart rightly qualified, and rightly prepared; there is
bad Music like to be where the Instrument is out of tune: this Duty is more
difficult than Prayer; pinching wants, and eminent dangers, puts a Man on to
prayer, as we see by the Mariners in Jonah's Ship; but self-denial is required
in praising him: ten Lepers could join in a petition for help, and but one
returned to give thanks. Thy heart must be qualified with Grace, or thou can
not praise God upon such occasions as thou ought: for what have thou to do
to take the Word, or Name of God in thy Mouth, if thou hate to be reformed,
Psalm. 50.16. It Is every ones duty, for every one receives mercy, and it is a
Rent due to the chief Land Lord, but every one cannot do it; Praise is comely
for the upright, Psalm. 38.1. It should be a Congregation of Saints where God is
praised, Psalm. 149.11. I do not persuade others from the Duty, no more than I
do from Prayer, but persuade them to cleanse their hearts before they come to
the Duty: for none but the Righteous can do the work of the day as they ought,
neither indeed have they cause to rejoice when God is their Enemy; and for
ought they know, they may Lodge next night in Hell: that rejoicing is the work
of the day, is evident Lev. 23,40. Deuteronomy. 12.12. and many other places. These
only are exhorted to rejoice, Psalm. 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord ye Righteous, and
shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart. Phil. 3.1. and 4.4. Psalm.
107.22. Declare his works with rejoicing. But how can we rejoice, or praise God
for Redemption, Vocation, Adoption, and the hope of glory, when we have no
interest in them? Thy evidence must be cleared up, or thou art unfit for this
Duty. Those, and those only, that have an interest in Christ, and a Title to
Glory, assured to them, can eat their Bread with Joy, and drink their Wine with
a merry heart: for ^od accepts their works. Others may speak as much, and
seem as confident, like the Pharisee; but there is a difference: the true
Christian speaks humbly, the Pharisee proudly, and boastingly: the one is
humbled for his remaining corruption, the other brags, though no sin is killed.
Paul cries out, O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of
Death? The Pharisee thanks God, he is not as other Men are, or as the Pulican:
The one thanks God for what he has, the other for what he never had. How often
may we hear Men give thanks, for their Election, Vocation, Sanctification, etc.
when there is little appearance of it, when their lives evidence, that they are
neither called, nor sanctified: the one praises God in pity to others, the
other in contempt, Phil. 3.8. To me who am less than the least of Saints, is
this Grace given. I thank thee, says the Pharisee I am not as other Men are:
One returns thanks out of Custom; the other out of Conscience. For preparation
to the work, dispose of, and lay aside, all thy Worldly occasions, as much as
possible; that they interupt thee not in the work: and take daily notice of,
and store up in thy Memory, what God has done for thy Body, and for thy Soul,
for thy Family and Relations, for the Land of thy Nativity; and the Church in
general. How shall we praise God, if we neglect, and forget his benefits? Psalm.
103.2. his Works and wonders, Psalm. 78.7. this is commanded, Psalm. 105.5. Exodus
13.8. The neglect of this is charged upon Israel, Psalm. 78.11. they forgot his
Works, and the Wonders that he showed them; and how many are deeply guilty of
this fault? They heedlesly receive mercies, and take no notice whence they
come, or let them slip out of memory; even those they were sometimes affected
with: and thou should not only remember them, but meditate upon them, to
aflect thy heart with them; take notice of the mercy, justice, and goodness of
God in them, value them according to their worth, as Jacob did Genesis 22.9.10.
Lord, says he, I am less than the least of thy mercies, which thou have showed
me: for with my Staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two Bands.
David when he beheld the glorious Lamps of Heaven, the wonderful works of God,
brake out into admiration, Lord what is Man that thou art mindful of him, or
the Son of Man, that thou regardest him? Psalm. 8.3.4. Outward mercies, but
especially Spiritual, should, and will affect the heart, if laid home by
meditation.

2. Direct. When thou keep a day, keep it to the Lord, and not to thy self.
Let thy ultimate end and aim be Gods glory, and the main design thou drivest on
be his praise: it is true in all Duties this should be regarded; but especially
in this: for this Time is set apart merely upon that account, to praise him
with an enlarged heart; and if thou propound lower ends than these, God will
not own thy work. These days are appointed to praise God, and not as many abuse
them, and pamper the Flesh; it is the Apostles advice, and doubtless our Duty,
1. Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the
praise and glory of God. And if in our ordinary course we should drive on this
design, much more in this extraordinary Duty, in so solemn a day, and exercise;
here the joy of the Lord should fill the heart, Spiritual and not Carnal Joy,
and the praise of the Lord should fill our Mouths, not vain laughter: we should
speak out the great works of God, which he has done for our Souls; and
whatsoever suits not with this, is unsuitable for the occasion; but it is a sad
thing, that many that pretend Conscience in the observation of Saints-days,
blame all those thot look upon them as indifferent. I say, that those to whom
honest Labor, at other times Lawful, is held a great Transgression, yet make
no Conscience at all of serving God upon these days; but spend their time
vainly, and profanely, neither to the benefit of Soul, or Body. These think
they serve God better at an Alehouse, at a Cockpit, or Bear-baiting, or
Stage Play; at Cards, or Dice, or other unlawful Games, than they can in an
honest Calling: But is this the Feast that God has chosen, to eat and drink,
and rise up to play? This may serve turn, if we worshipped such an Idol as
Israel then did, Fxod. 32.6. But shall we serve our God with such service, as
the Heathen did Baccus? He is a Spirit, and must be worshipped in Spirit, and in
Truth; and is eating and drinking, to Gluttony and Drunkenness this Spiritual
Service that is commanded? Shall we praise God for his Creatures, by
intemperance, and abuse of them? Yet are not these the Exercises of some of the
greatest Sticklers for such Festivals? Look into an Alehouse, and see whether
more meet not there upon such days as these, than the whole Week beside; and
many an Oath sworn, and many a Lie told, and many a vain word spoken, at such
times, and upon such occasions; yea, much Drunkenness, Debauchery, Quarrels,
Fightings; and sometimes Murder, is there committtd. And is this Gods Feast, or
the Devils Sacrifice? It more suits an Heathen Idol, than an holy God. Is this
the place where God is like to meet thee? or would have Death meet thee
here? or is the Discourse of the Company suitable to the work of the Day, will thou thank God for thy Reason, when thou have lost the use of it by drinking;
and transformed thy self into a Beast? or can then remember Gods benefits to
praise him for them, when thou can not remember what thou do? It Is far from
me to Judge any Man that keeps those days, as days of Thanksgiving ought to be
kept: And it is far from me to approve of them as they are kept. I know the
Godly are allowed to eat their Bread with Joy, and drink their Wine with a
merry heart; but it is Spiritual, not Carnal Joy: They ought upon Thanksgiving
days, to cease from their Labor; but that is not all, then they keep it but as
a Beast: But as a Fast is a help to humiliation, and makes Prayers the more
fervent; so Feasting in an holy manner elevates the Soul, and makes praises the
more hearty, when we freshly taste Gods goodness in the Prevision made for us:
Labor in both is forbidden, as it is an hindrance in the Duties in hand: but
it is sad that God is more dishonored in those days pretended to be set apart to
honor him in, than in all the days of the Year besides; but God will not own
such Servants, nor accept of such Service, when Men think there is nothing but
work forbidden upon that day, or nothing more than idleness required; but many
would glorify God much better in a Lawful Calling, than at an unlawful
Exercise, or unnecessary Recreation. I know Recreation is Lawful, as I hope in
due time and place to demonstrate and give Directions in it: But why should we
take Gods time for our use? if these days be appropriated to Gods Service, let
them be spent in his Service; if for our Recreation, let us never put the Title
of Holy Days upon them, let them be left indifferent, to be used, or not used,
at pleasure, or People kept from dishonouring God in them.

3. Direct. In the observation of these days see thy grounds be good, and that
thou have a lawful calling to it; or otherwise God will not own it. It Is true,
Thanksgiving is a work of every day; but every day is not to be observed as an
holy Festival to God: come not superstitiously to it, as the Papists, nor
profanely, as the Sensualist, nor wickedly, as the profane Enmies to God, and
Godliness: See thou be invited to it, by real mercies received; and in giving
thanks, mistake not Judgments for Mercies, and Mercies for Judgments; it is,
true, we ought to Observe all God's Providence, and Bless God for all
Chastisements, as well as others, that is for the good which we receive by
them, as Job 1.21. But this should be with Humiliation, not Exultation: If thy
Foundation be rotten, the Building cannot be good; there are many that heartily
rejoice, and give thanks also to God, after their manner, for the downfall of
the Church, and the extirpation of the Power of Godliness. I fear our times are
not barren of Examples, of this Nature: This was the Sin of the Ammonites, and
will be the Sin of those that are guilty, Ezekiel. 25.6. Because thou have clapped
thy Hands, and stamped with thy Feet, and Rejoiced in thine Heart, with all
despite against the Land of Israel, therefore I will stretch forth my hand
against thee, and deliver thee for a spoil to the Heathen, etc. See, God takes
it ill, when Men exult over his People in distress; and if they praise him for
Correcting them, it is unpleasing Service to him; his Ends are their
Reformation, not their desolation, Zach. 1.15. I am sorely displeased with the
Heathen that are at ease, for I was but a very little displeased, and they
helped forward the Affliction: There is a Prophetic Prayer put up against Edom,
which in Jerusalem's Troubles Cried, Raze it, Raze it, even to the Foundations
thereof, Psalm. 137.7. God made the King of Assyria a Rod in his Hand to Correct
his People, but he intended to destroy them; but God threatens when he has
done his work upon Mount Sion, to punish the stout Heart of the King of
Assyria, Isa. 10.5, etc. When Afflictions lie upon the Church of God, do not,
with the Wicked cry Aha, so would we have it, Psalm. 35.25. These are mourning
Times, and God expects that thou should sympathize with them in their
Suffering: When one Child is beaten, the other should not Rejoice; they know
not but their turn may be next: If Judgment begin at the House of God, where
shall the Wicked and ungodly appear? Isa. 22.12,13. In that day did the Lord of
Hosts call to weeping, to mourning, to baldness, and to girding with Sack
cloth, and behold Joy and Gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, etc. But
this Iniquity shall never be purged off till they dye, says the Lord. God also
threatens those that Rejoice in mourning times, Amos 6.4,5,6,7. Let the manner
of the performance of this thankfulness be what it will, never so specious in
the Eyes of Man, if the ground of thy rejoicing be the Ruin of the Church, the
Affliction of the People of God, the extirpation of the power of Godliness, or
the Liberty of Profaneness, or Increase of it; it is abominable in the sight of
God, and thy Feast will please God no better than Jezebels Fast, where God's
Laws were broken, under pretense of his Honor. The like pretense we may read,
Isa. 66.5. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his Word, your
Brethren that hate you, and cast you out for my sake, said, let the Lord be
Glorified, but he shall appear to your Joy, and their shame. Some think God is
Glorified, when indeed he is dishonored; Men shall kill you, says Christ, and
think they do God good Service: Oh, the mischie of Ignorance, and Superstition!
But the Godly, in all Ages, have made the Flourishing of the Church, and the
downfall of implacable Enemies, the Cause of such Rejoicing; and not when one
part of the Church ruins another, and imbrues their Hands in one another
Blood; this is Cause of Lamentation. When Israel had destroyed their Brother
Benjamin, though in a just Quarrel, and by God's appointment, yet they lift up
their Voice and wept, because one Tribe was Cut off, Judge. 21.2.6. And it is
said, they Repented for their Brother Benjamin's sake. It Is Cause of mourning
when Protestants shed each others Blood, and the Enemies laugh at it, in their
Sleeves: And for Personal Mercy, see it be such as God has really given thee,
and not like the Pharisee, for those thou have not. As for Election,
Redemption, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and the hopes of Glory,
these well deserve thy greatest praise, but boast not of them before thou have
some good ground to believe thou have them; God will not thank that Man, that
thanks him for Gifts and Graces, which he never did, and, perhaps, never will
bestow upon him.

4. Direct. As for thy Carriage upon such a day, it should not be such as Men
Ordinarily use upon their Festivals, or Holy Days, loose, Propane, Idle, or
Careless, but such as is suitable to the Work in Hand, and helpful in the
Praising, and magnifying God, which is the main Work of the day. Remember
therefore into whose Presence thou come, and with whom thou have to do;
apprehend him by the Eye of Faith, taking notice of thee, and deport thy self
accordingly; he knows thy Heart, and tries thy Reins, and knows thy Ends and
Motives better than thy self: Do nothing therefore un-beseeming his Presence,
or which thou would not have him take notice of. And having, as before is
directed, Treasured up the Experiences of God's Mercies in thy Memory, and
warmed thy Heart by Meditation upon them, and by this means Tuned thy Heart to
his praises: When the day is come which is set apart, when thou wakest in the
Morning, and it should be betimes, (for thou have a great work to do)
Consecrate thy first thoughts to him, and let not the Devil, the World, nor Sin
Rob him of that Honor; but begin the day by some warming Meditation suitable
to the Occasion, or by some Laudatory Ejaculation: Discourse with him before
thou Discourse with the World, and raise thy Heart hereby to the highest pitch
thou art able; for having disposed thy Worldly business as much as possible,
and set it out of thy way, that it interrupt thee not in thy Duties; behave thy
self as if thou had nothing to look after but thy God, and thy Soul;
Entertain not a thought, if possible, of them, till thy Work be done. It Is
impossible to serve God as we ought in such a Duty in a Crowd of Business; the
whole Man is little enough, and too little for the Work; for thou will find it
a harder Duty than Prayer: Thy own Necessities, self-love, and self-Interest,
may animate a Man to Prayer, but Praising God is a self-denying Duty; and
though in some things thou may take more Liberty than in a Fast, as in the
Liberal use of the Creature; and in some things more than on a Sabbath, as in
outward expressions of Joy; yet thy Heart should keep as close to God in this,
as in any other Day, or Duty, and be as much enlarged to God: And though thou
may adorn thy self, and it is fit thou should, yet beware of Priding in thy
Clothes, this is unsuitable to a self-denying Duty: And though thou may eat
the fat, and drink the sweet, and eat thy Bread with Joy, and drink thy Wine
with a Merry Heart, yet immoderation is unlawful: Thou may drink, to
cheerfulness, not to excess; to help thee in the Work, not to hinder thee in
thy Duty: Prepare thy Heart in the Morning, as by Meditation, so by Prayer for
Direction, and assistance in the Work; to gather in thy scattered thoughts and
affections, and sequester them from the World, for the Service of the Day; and
forget not to praise him for private and particular Mercies, which thou have
Received, for returns of Prayer, etc. Jacob did thus for Temporal, as well as
Spiritual Favors, Genesis 32.10. God would have us sensible of these as well as
Church or State Mercies. Call also thy Family together in due time, Read some
Scripture suitable to the occasion, let them understand that they also are
concerned in the Duties of the Day. Sing some Psalm of praise to this purpose:
Let him that is merry sing Psalms, James 5.13. Praise God with them, and for
them; and re-count to his Praise the many Family Mercies thou have received;
take notice of your unworthiness, the more to exalt the Mercies received: But
Confession of Sin, so as to Afflict the Soul with them, is not suitable to the
day. Bring thy Family in due time to the Public (if it be publicly Observed,
otherwise carry it on in Private) and pay your Vows in the great Congregation;
and behave your selves in the remaining part of the day, as be-you were
Directed in the Observation of the Sabbath; for this time is Consecrated, and
made Holy to God, and should be wholly spent in his Service: And thou should
be as careful of thy Thoughts, thy Words, and thy Affections, as though it were
a Sabbath; for there is no danger of keeping them too intent upon God: When
thou come into the Congregation thou may say, as Jacob, Genesis 28.17. This is
no other but the House of God, and the Gate of Heaven; for here is done the
work that shall be done in Heaven: As for the oher expressions of Joy, as
Ringing of Bells, shooting off Guns, making of Bone-fires, etc. they are so far
Lawful, as they help forward the Work, and raise the Heart to an higher pitch
of Joy, and rejoicing in the Lord.

5. Direct. Having thus disposed and prepared thy Heart for the Work, and set
thy self as in the Presence of the ever-living God, that sees, and knows, and
takes notice of thee; set thy self then upon the work, of Glorifying God, and
render thanks to him from thy Heart, for all the Benefits thou have Received;
Praise is comely for the Saints: And this Religious Thankfulness, of which we
speak, is thy Duty. Now, it is either External, or Internal; the Internal is to
carry a thankful Heart to God, and this is every days Duty: External is, when
the Thankfulness of the Heart is expressed in Words, or Actions; the former
without the latter, is not sufficient; the latter without the former, is little
worth. Now, the External manifestation of thy thankfulness, is either Private,
or Public; Private by thy self, or Family; Public in the great Congregation;
and this also is either Ordinary, or Extraordinary; Ordinary, and this should
be done at every time when we come together to Worship of God: The
Extraordinary is upon Extraordinary Occasions; as some great Deliverances, or
the obtaining some great Mercies, or the bringing down some great Enemies of
the Church; this the Church ought to bless God for, and Offer this Sacrifice of
Praise in the Name, and Mediation of Christ, who prays over all our Prayers for
us, and Offers our Praises performed with the Incense of his own Righteousness.
Now, it is requisite, as I said before, that a Catalogue of those Mercies, God
has given in as a return of Prayers, be laid up, either in a Book, or in the
Memory; for if we neglect, or forget them, how shall we speak of them, to God's
praise; it is not enough to remember them, but we must also mention them to his
praise: Thus David, I will tell you what God has done for my Soul: He
acknowledges God the Author of his Mercies, and does not Sacrifice to his own
Nets, as many do, and burn Incense to his Drags, Hab. 1.16. But as the Church,
not unto us, Lord, not to us, but to thy Name be the Praise; he acknowledges
frequently his own worthlessness, that he may exalt God. Lord, says he, what
is Man, that thou should be mindful of him? Or the Son of Man, that thou
regardest him? Psalm. 8.4. I am less than the least of thy Mercies, says Jacob:
I am less than the least of thy Saints, says Paul. Yea, when it comes, let it
be a Free Will Offering; do it cheerfully, readily, willingly, as the Saints
and Angels do it in Heaven, heartily, not heavily; God Loves a cheerful giver,
and matters not grumbling Service: Be as willing to return Thanks, as ever thou
wast to have the Mercy. Set thy Heart on Work in this Duty, stir up thy self,
like the Psalmist, Psalm. 103.1, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is
within me Praise his Holy Name: Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all
his Benefits. It Is not enough to Praise him with the Lips, or bring our Bodies
before him, but the Heart and Life should Praise him; the Heart should Indite
thy Praises, and thy Tongue utter them, and thy Life and Conversation Seal to
them; thou should do thanks, and Live thanks, as well as speak thanks; this
is every days Duty, especially when we receive signal Mercies, we should return
answerable thanks; when National Mercies, National thanks should be returned,
Psalm. 50.15. Moses did so at the Deliverance at the Red Sea, Exodus 15.1.
Deborah and Barak did so, Judge. 5.12. The Jews also, when delivered from
Haman's Plots, Est. 8.11.17. And there is great reason it should be so; for
Praise is due to none but God, and to him the Vow should be performed; all our
Springs are in him, and all our Mercies are from him; yea, every good and
perfect gift, and this is the very End, for which he gives them, and it is all
he requires for them; this Pepper-corn of Homage is all his Rent, who is the
great Landlord; and though it be due from all, yet he expects it from his own
People especially; he will extort his own from others in another way, and none
but his People can do it to please him: This is to his Saints a fore-tast of
Glory, where it must be their constant Work. It Is a beneficial Duty also, for
Thanksgiving for one Mercy, is a real, yea, a prevailing Request for another;
Those that Offer praise, Glorify God: And yet we see how negligent most are in
this Duty; few take notice of the Mercies they Receive, but like Swine, eat the
Acorns, or Crabs, and regard not whence they come: Ten Lepers were cleansed,
and but one returns thanks; many are sensible of their wants, and with the
Horse-Leach, cry, give, give; yet are not sensible of their enjoyments, to
return thanks; yea, suffer some petty Cross to hide a thousand Blessings, and
keep them out of their sight.

6. Direct. When thou art thus prepared, thus fitted, go on in re-counting the
Mercies thou have Received, and bless God for them; this is the main Work of
the Day. Now, forasmuch as Mercies are various, all Men receive not alike, yet
all receive some, for which they should be thankful; give me leave to lead you
by the Hand a little, and show you some, the rest you may Observe your selves.
Bless God for what he is in himself, and what he is to his Creatures; in
himself, admire his Essence, for fathom it thou can not; the like we may say
of his Attributes, his Eternity, Immutability, his Power, Wisdom, Holiness,
Justice, and Truth, etc. Thou may spend thy days also in Admiring him in the
Works of his Hand; lift up thy Eyes to Heaven, and see the Sun, the Moon, and
Stars, those Glorious Lamps, those Beauty spots of Heaven; observe their
Distance, Courses, Influence, and Virtues; and well thou may cry out, Lord,
what is Man, etc. Psalm. 8.3,4. Look upon the Earth hanging like a Ball in the
open Air, stayed upon nothing; see how it is garnished with Trees, and Plants,
and Herbs, and Flowers; Inhabited with a Hundred sorts of several Creatures,
all Cared for by the great House-holder: Behold the Subserviency of one
Creature to another, and every one seems rather made for another than himself;
the Sun, and Moon, and Stars pour out their Influence on the Earth; the Earth
again yields Grass, and Herbs, and Fruits, for Man, and Beast; the Beasts are
for Food, or Service to Man; there is no Corner of Nature's Garden, but yields
Matter of Admiration, and Praise also to God. The Works of his Providence also
are full of Mystery, and Wonder, and may fill the Heart with Admiration, and
the Mouth with Praises, to see how the World is Governed, and the Creatures all
provided for: But especially Observe his Providence to his Church, in all Ages,
which is a Bush on fire, and not consumed; Lambs in the midst of Wolves, and
yet safe: See his Providence to Noah, when the whole World was drowned; to Lot,
when Sodom was burnt; to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; to the Church in Egypt, and
in the Wilderness: To Joseph, and to David; to the Jews, in Haman's time; to
the Apostles Athanasius, Luther, and generally down from the beginning of the
World to this day; descend to our own Nation, how wonderful has his Mercies
been to us? How strange was his bringing us out of Popish darkness? How
wonderful his preserving us from being reduced back again? How great his
Deliverance from the Spantsh Invasion, and after from the Powder Treason, and
many other Hellish Plots, hatc'd in Hell, against God's People upon Earth: How
has he continued our Peace, our Plenty, our Health, our Liberty; yea, the
Gospel among us, notwithstanding the Rage and Malice of the Devil, and his
Instruments. If we consider our own particular Mercies, and that as we are Men,
or as we are Christians: As a Man, thou art his Creature, and should bless
him for thy Creation; he made thee of nothing, when he had no need of thee; he
made thee a rational Creature, capable of Communion with himself, when he might
have made thee a Dog, or Toad, or the most despicable Creature that ever fell
out of his hands: And does not this deserve praise? He covered thee in thy
Mothers womb, and through him thou wast born: David blesses him for that,
Psalm. 139.13. Thou wast born in an Age of Light, under the Gospel, thou
might have been born in Turkey, or India, or the most barbarous place in
America; he provided for thee, when thou could not provide for thy self: he
gives thee Food and Raiment, and blesses them to thy Use, without which they
could not Feed thee, or keep thee warm: he has given thee thy Limbs, and
Senses, when thou might have been blind, or lame; or deaf, or dumb: Thou
have thy health, and strength, thy wit and reason, when thou might have been
upon thy Bed of Languishing, or running raging in the Streets; thou have fire
and water, two great Favors, were they wanted; thou have the ground to tread
upon, the Air to breath in, which thou have not deserved; and many thousand
other Mercies, and can not yet see Cause to be thankful? Peace and Plenty,
Health and Liberty, is given in to thee: But if thou art a Christian, thy
Obligations are much more; thou should then praise God for his Electing
Love, when he past by thousands, and set his Love on thee; for sending his Son
into the world, and for Christ's Suffering for thy Sins; for his Redeeming of
thee with his precious blood, for his Adopting thee to be his Child; his
Calling, Sanctifying, and Justifying thee for the Grace he has given thee, the
promises he has made to thee for the Gospel of his Son given to thee, for his
Spirit to direct thee, his Ministers to teach thee, thy own Conscience to check
thee, the Company of his Servants to encourage thee, and generally for all the
helps thou have in Heavens way, strength against Temptations, Corruptions, and
Alurements. Now, Christian, can see any Cause of thankfulness? Doubtless thou
may, especially if thou consider all this is given thee freely, without any
desert on thy part.

7. Direct. Having sounded forth the praises of God for his Mercy, which thou
have Received from him, and blessed him for Church Mercies, for State Mercies,
for Family, Relation, and Personal Mercies; thy next work is to go to God, to
Petition him, for the continuance of those Mercies, that are enjoyed, and
granting those that are yet wanting; for preventing the judgments feared, and
begging the removal of those that are felt; when thou have paid one Debt, and
Cancelled one Obligation, thou may go the bolder to borrow again. In private
thou may tell him what Sins thou would have mortified, and what Graces
strengthened, and Increased; what Temptations vanquished, what doubts resolved,
and what other wants thou would have supplied, for thy self, thy Family, thy
Relations, and Friends, who lie under Sins, or Sufferings, or Temptations; as
also for the place, where thou Sinnest, the Nation of which thou art a Member:
For the removal of the judgments felt, or feared; the continuance of the
Mercies enjoyed, and the bestowing of those that are wanting: The Reformation
of what is amiss, in Church or State; the infatuating of the Counsels of
blood-thirsty Enemies, the Continuance of the Gospel in the power and purity of
it; for a supply of Faithful Laborers in God's Harvest, and a blessing upon
their Endeavors; for a blessing upon the Government, upon the Kings Majesty,
and his Royal Relations, upon his Counsels, Magistrates, Ministers, and all in
Authority; for the preservation of the Land in Peace and Plenty, Health and
Liberty, and for the Church in general: That God would protect them by his
power, direct them by his Spirit, spread abroad the Gosspel to the Ends of the
Earth; make all the Kingdoms of the world the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his
Christ; that he would root out every Plant which he himself has not Planted,
and purge his Ordinance from every thing that offends, and bring down the
Potent Enemies of Christ, and set Christ upon his Throne, and pull down the
Throne of Antichrist, and bring in Jews and Gentiles to be one Fold, under one
Shepherd Jesus Christ the Righteous, and finish those sinful days wherein we
Live, And in the Conclusion, we should engage our selves by Covenant, that if
God shall give in a return to those our Requests, then will we praise and
magnify him, and devote our selves more to his Service; and in the Close of
the Duty remember the Poor: This is also a necessary work of the Day, and that
which God expects at our hands, as a testification of our Thankful hearts; and
with what Conscience can deny God this one Request, who has bestowed so much
upon thee? This was the Practice of the Saints in former times, upon such
Occasions, Esther 9.18,19,20. They made it a day of Feasting, and Gladness,
when they were delivered from their Enemies; a good day, of Sending Portions
one to another, and Gifts to the Poor: ^ The like we find, Nehem. 8.10. Go your
way, tat the Fat, and drink the sweet, and send Portions to them for whom
nothing is provided, for rhis day is Holy to the Lord, neither be ye sorry: And
we find in the following Verses, it was done: To be Liberal handed to the Poor,
is a Duty at all times, Deuteronomy. 15.7. Thou shall not shut thy Hand against the
Poor: but especially such a time as this, that they also may rejoice: A
blessing is pronounced to those that relieve them, and a promise added, Psalm.
41.1. Blessed is he that Considers the Poor, the Lord will deliver him in the
time of Trouble; but he tbat stops his Ears at the Cry of the Poor, shall Cry
himself and not be heard, Prove. 21.13. God has promised, He that Relieveth the
Poor shall not lack, Prove. 28.27. He that has pity on the Poor, lends to the
Lord, and that which he has given will he pay him again, Prove. 19.17. And he
that has this Worlds good, and sees his Brother has need, and shuts up
his Bowels of Compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God in him? 1 John
3.17. Neither shall such ever Inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 25.41.46.
Take heed therefore thou neglect not this so necessary a Duty, lest thou lose
all thy pains, which thou have taken. And when thou have closed up the Day in
such necessary Duties, as these are, and Commended thy self, and Family unto
the protection of God, yet know that thy work is not done, but thou must Live
thanks, as well as speak thanks; yea, the whole Course of thy Life should
testify thy thankful Heart. By this time, I suppose, you see these Holy
Festivals are not so easy to be kept, as many have Imagined; and many great
Zealots for Holy days, were they thus Observed, would have their Zeal to them
much abated.

CHAP. XV. Directions in Private Duties.
HAving already Discoursed of the Public parts of Gods worship, which for the
most part are performed in the Congregation; and given you Directions for the
right performing of them, as God has enabled me; I shall now in the Close of
this Treatise, speak something of those private Duties that every Christian is
bound to perform in their own Families, or Closets, when they are out of the
great Congregation, for this is no less God's Worship than the former; and does
as much, nay, more demonstrate a Man to be a Christian, and Evidence the Truth
of Grace, than the former; that is, a Christian that is so when no Eye, but the
Eye of God is upon him. I shall Treat of these more briefly, because those
Directions for Public Worship already given, will many of them fall in to be
observed here: It Is not enough to be a Christian in Public, when the Eyes of
the World are upon thee, but in private also. A Hypocrite may be zealous
abroad, that is loose at home; Holy in the Congregation, and Profane in the
Closet; mindful of Public Duties, forgetful of Private: But a true Christian
is semper idem, always the same, in all places, in all Companies, at all times,
and in all Conditions; he is like clear water in a Glass, shake it as long as
you will, it remains clear: But a Hypocrite by shaking discovers mud in the
bottom; or like the Needle in the Compass, though it may be disturbed by a jog,
or shake, will never fix upon a wrong point. The Pharisees they loved to pray
in the Temple, and in the Corners of the Streets, where they might be seen of
Men, but there is no mention made of their Closet Duties; but Christ bids enter
into the Closet, and shut the Door. Christianity is a Race, in which we must
run, whether we have Company or no; or whether Men behold us or no. A true
Christian is no sooner in the state of Grace, but he cries out, Lord, what will thou have me to do? And thinks he can never do enough for Christ, that has
done so much for him; he knows he is not his own, but bought with a price, and
therefore will Glorify God, with his Body, and with his Soul, which are God's.
When an Hypocrite Dedicates his Hands and Tongue to Christ, a true Christian
Dedicates his Heart: A Hypocrites work is most in sight, a true Christians is
most in Secret; the Hypocrites is most abroad, the others is most at home; the
Love of God constrains the one, and popular Applause drives on the other: A
true Christian Devotes himself wholly to God's Service, and Serve him he will,
not for a Reward only, but for Love, to him, and his Work; and will do his
Duty, whatever danger, or difficulty lies in his way; for as he draws out from
Christ strength to perform every Duty, and bear every Affliction, so he draws
out from Christ all the strength he has in his Service; Heart, and Hand, and
Tongue, and all shall be set on work for him; and he resolves he will serve him
in Righteousness, and Holiness, all the days of his Life. It Is the Hypocrite
that picks and chooses his Duties; this he will do, and that he will not do; a
true Christian takes Duties as they lie before him, and refuses none for
danger, or difficulty; private Duties go down with him as well as public, he
makes as much Conscience of Secret Duties, when no Eye, but the All-seeing Eye
of God is upon him, as in public, when the Congregation observes him. The
Thoughts what Christ has done, and Suffered for him, makes him think he can
never do enough for Christ. It Is a true Token of a hard heart, when the
Consideration of God's Mercy, and Christ's Sufferings, do not bend him to Duty;
and of all the Judgments in the World, a hard heart is one of the greatest: Ah!
what Cause have Men therefore to look about them, who feel this Disease
creeping upon them. The Scripture tells us, those that are in Christ are new
Creatures; that they have put on Christ, and live not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit: that they are dead to Sin, and alive to God; and have
Crucified the World, with the Affections, and Lusts thereof: how then is their
Assurance grounded, that conceit themselves to be in Christ, and shall be
saved, when none of all these things appear in them? nay though the contrary
appear; though they live in Sin, and do the Devil's work: look to it betimes,
God will not be mocked; his Servants ye are to whom ye obey, if ye suffer not
with him, you will not Reign with him; as you Sow you shall Reap, God will have
the heart, or nothing: if thou will to Heaven, thou must be a Christian; and a
Christian thou can not be, but thou must be one in Private, as well as in
Public; which that thou may be, take these Directions for Private Duties.

1. Direct. The first Duty I shall mention, but not of least concernment, is
self-examination. This indeed is private, for it is between thee and thine own
heart. Be often enquiring at home, what state thy Soul stands in to God; and
what interest thou have in the Blood of Christ, and what Title to Heaven: this
is a necessary, though much neglected Duty. Many that cast up their Shops, to
see whether they grow, or decrease in the World: and try their Evidences for
their Lands, to see that they are good; take not so much pains for the Soul, to
see whether all be well there. Union, and Communion with God, is a Christians
chiefest happiness; and without this, there can be no felicity, though we have
the influence of all Earthly enjoyments: yea, though we had the Honors,
Riches, and Pleasures, of a thousand Worlds: for all these end in a Snuff, and
will prove vanishing, fading, transitory things. The Soul of Man is a precious
Piece, and therefore should be most regarded. It Is next to the Angels, the
chiefest Piece that ever droped out of the hands of God, and was made in his
own Image; and the nearer any thing comes to the Image of God, the nearer it
comes to perfection: for God is Perfection it self. It Is the greatest Purchase
of the Blood of Christ, that which was of Infinite Value, more worth than the
World, was given to redeem it; and Christ knew well enough the worth of Souls:
and would not give such a Rate for a thing of little worth. In a word, it is
Eternal, and shall last for ever; and run parallel with the longest Line of
Eternity, and therefore precious: the vanity of Earthly enjoyments is seen in
this, as well as other things, it is uncertain, and momentary duration. Now this
precious and Immortal Piece, is in great danger; and without our care,
diligence, and pains, is like to be lost: a thousand Enemies besiege it, and
set it round, Enemies without, and within, and on every side: without the
Devil, and the World, who spread a thousand Snares to entrap it: within,
Corruptions, yea an inbred Traitor; a false, perfideous, treacherous, and
deceitful heart: these are Politic, Subtle, Crafty, and malicious Enemies.
The Devil will make no peace with us, but upon worse conditions, than Nahash
the Amonite offered to the Men of Jabish Gillead, 1. Sam. 11.2. Upon this
condition will I make a Covenant with you; that I may thrust out all your right
Eyes, and lay it for a Reproach upon all Israel: but his conditions are the
everlasting destruction of Soul and Body; and if the Soul be once lost, thou
art undone for ever; a thousand Worlds cannot redeem it, though they were
turned into a heap of Diamonds, or a Globe of Gold: Now, art thou a rational
Creature? and can thou see thy self, thy better part, in so much danger, and
art not sensible of it? will thou so regard a Limb, or Sense, an Eye, or a
Tooth, and shall the Soul be unregarded? will thou Consult the Lawyer about thy
Estate, the Physician about thy Health, yea the Farrier about thy Horses; and
shall thy Soul be neglected? God forbid: Wilt take care for Trifles, and
neglect things of greatest concernment; what greater note of a Fool can be
expressed? God is yet calling thee, and the Door of Mercy is not yet shut
against thee, opportunities are yet offered thee, and there is yet hopes; but
how long it may continue thou know not: up and be doing, make sure of Heaven
while it may be had; one of these days it will be too late: examine thy self by
the Word of God, cleanse the Fountain, that the Streams may be clear; stub up
the Root of Sin, when others are Lopping at the Branches; begin Reformation at
the right end. I should here have given you some Motives, Rules, Directions,
Marks, and Characters; to this purpose, to guide you in this difficult work,
but this I have done already in another Treatise of that Subject, called the
Souls Looking-Glass, to which I referr you, if you have no better at hand. Yea
when by Examination thou know the truth of thy Grace, yet is not Examination
useless; but consider the Growth of it also: true Grace is of a growing Nature,
like a Grain of Mustard Seed; that in time becomes a great Tree: thy Growth
should be in some measure answerable to the Food thou eatest, the means of
Grace thou enjoyest: that which stands at a stay, or declines, may be suspected
it is not true; it is a Monster in Nature, that is no bigger at twenty Years old,
than at two; it is sad when Men that should grow, decline, and lose their first
love: if this be thy case, consider from whence thou art fallen, and do thy
first work; consider who thou leavest, and whither thou go, and what will be
the Issue of it; at least consider what thou do, which no Hypocrite in the
World can do: and never give thy self any rest, till thou know that thou
outstrip'st them all; yea, till thou can Read thy Name Written in the Book of
Life, and can call God Father; and say with the Spouse, my Beloved is mine,
and I am his, Cant. 6.3.

2. Direct. The next Private Duty is, when thou know that thou have an
Interest in God, and a Title to Glory; and can without check of Conscience,
call God thy Father, and Christ thy Head and Husband: be sure then to keep
close to him, hold him fast, and do not let him go, like the Spouse, Cant. 3.4.
It Is said of Enoch and Noah, that they Walked with God; and thus in some
measure does every faithful Soul, and this is the surest, safest, course thou
can take: for there is none can hurt thee when thou art under his Wing, no
Enemy can molest thee, while thou art under his Tuition; trouble never grinds a
Man, till it finds him from God; take heed of growing strange with God: if thou
suffer him to be gone, thou may seek him sorrowing, and not find him. Many
that are constant in Public Duties, are defective in Private; but it is Secret
Duties, that chiefly maintains Communion with God: in those it is we most
engage our hearts to God, and God to us: now if thou would keep this
Communion with God, some things are to be avoided, some things done: The things
to be avoided are especially Sins, but above all, our Bosom Sins, those that
thou art most inclined to, and most easiiest yields to; and can most hardly
say nay: these God is most Jealous of, and these will make the greatest breach
between God and the Soul; and most havoc among thy Graces; these are they that
most deeply wound the Conscience, break thy Peace with thy God; and if not
forsaken, will procure a Bill of Divorce: it is thy Sins which is the cause of
all Judgment, Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal; and withhold Mercies from
thee: The love of Sin, and close walking with God, cannot stand together. Sin
is to Holy Spiritual Communion with God, as Water is to Fire, of an
extinguishing Nature: take heed therefore of the beginning of it; brush and
dash Babylon's Children when they are young, and the Cockatrice Eggs, before
they break forth into Serpents: entertain not a delightful thought of any Sin,
resist the first motions of Sin, avoid all the occasions, repel the
Temptations, and beware of the appearances of Evil; and get as far from it as
possibly thou can: for God, and Sin cannot be entertained, and Lodge together
in one Soul; thou must either break thy Peace with the one, or with the other
of these irrevocable Enemies: thou can not serve God and Mammon: all Sin is
of this nature, yet some Sins are more abominable than others, as
Worldly-mindedness, this will choke all that is good in thee; it were the Cares
of the World, and the deceitfulness of Riches, that choked the Word, and it
became unfruitful, Mat. 13.22. Pride also, is a damning Sin; and makes a Man
set himself in the place of God, and set up his own will for his Rule: this
turned Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of Paradise, and many into Hell. Idolatry
also is abominable, when Men set up other Gods, and serve them, God will not
take it at their hands: many more there are, of which we must be careful: Some
things likewise are to be done, yea every Duty adds some strength, and helps
forward this Communion: Private Meditations, and Private Prayers, are excellent
helps to this end: Meditation is an excellent help hereunto. Ah what sweet, and
delightful tastes of of God may a Man have, that Exercises himself in this
Soul-fatting Duty: Such a Man can find God in every Creature; and like the Be,
suck sweetness from every Weed, and Flower; he can get advantage by Prosperity,
and Adversity, Health, and Sickness; yea every thing he knows, sees, or hears
of: yea every Creature will lead such a Man to God, and Teach him some Lesson
worth his Learning: for as by the Vein the Mineral may be found, or as the
Stream leads to the Fountain, so every thing leads to God; and points out his
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; yea the consideration and thoughts of Gods
Attributes, Word, and Works, may fill the Soul with admiration, and make a Man
fall in love with God; every Chapter, Verse, and Line, of Holy Writ, is as a
Ladder to lift thee nearer Heaven, and draw thee nearer unto God: such a Man
knows how to Spiritualise every Evil and Moral Action; and what ever he does,
he can Engage God for to reward him: he can suck sweetness out of all cross
Providence, and when God seems to frown, can turn the Curtain aside, and see
his pleased Face; and view his Love in the dark Passages of his Providence.
Another means to maintain Communion is Secret Prayer, when the Soul can power
out it self into the Bosom of Christ, with Faith and Fervency; who has
promised to grant whatever they ask in his Name: Ah what sweet Crumbs of
Comfort, does many feel coming from Christ in such a Suit, when a Man spreads
his Case, and Complaint before Christ, as sometimes Hezekiah did the Blasphemous
Letter: how does this Engage God in his Cause, if thou maintainest Life in
these two Duties, thou will maintain Communion with God, and Life in thy Soul?

3. Direct. Another Duty Incumbent upon thy Soul, is to store thy heart with
knowledge, and understanding; without the which the mind cannot be good, Prove.
19.2. and this is done in Private, as well as Public; partly by Reading and
Conference: Reading the Scriptures and other good Books, this will notably
increase knowledge and understanding; but this I have already given Directions
in, and desire thee to make use of them. Meditation also is a fruitful Duty;
even that which is occasional: whereby thou may gather Observations, and
learn many Lessons for thy Souls good, from every Creature thou have to deal
with; but this I have already treated of: but this is not all, but if thou art
Converted, strengthen thy Brethren: we were not Born for our selves. If thou
have a Family, studdy and endeavor their Conversion also; teacheh them in the
way they should walk: for to that purpose God has given thee Authority over
them; thou art a King, a Priest, and a Prophet, in thine own House: Rule then
in thy Family, as a King, Instruct as a Prophet, and Pray amongst them as a
Priest; God will be served in thy Family, as well as in thy Closet, or in the
Public: therefore, sometimes, Particular Houses are called Churches; because in
them God is Worshipped: To this End prepare then what thou can, for the
Public Ordinance, by Instruction, Admonition, and Encouragement; remove what
rubs thou can out of their way, to believing, and obeying; show them the
necessity of Faith in Christ, and obedience to Christ; and if thou can help
it, let none serve thee, that will not serve God; this was David's resolution,
Psalm. 101.2. etc. Require an Account at their hands, what they learn, and what
benefit they receive: press these things more upon their Spirits, and fasten it
upon their Mind, that it may not be let slip, by repeating the Sermons, or so
much of it as shall be necessary, for their good; and press home, and drive at
what the Minister drives at in his Sermon: Reading the Scripture, also is an
useful means to increase knowledge, in thy self and Family; and should be done
in Private in thy Family, and in Secret by thy self; redeem time to this End,
and if possible, make them understand what they Read, drive the Nail to the
Head; this is the way to expel Ignorance, and to get Knowledge: this cannot
but work some Knowledge in the hearts of them that hear it. In this Word is
contained the Wfll of God, concerning Man's Obedience: and here is a Legacy left
us by our Fathers Will, the Promises which are our Evidences for Heaven; and
all we have to show for Glory: and shall this be neglected by us, or meanly
esteemed. Some may Object they have long tried this means, and see little
profit by it; but do thy Duty, and leave the success to God. Paul may Plant,
and Apollos Water; but God gives the increase: yet there must be Planting, and
Watering, or good Fruit cannot be expected; God serves his Providence, by the
use of means: The Bereans were commended for searching the Scriptures: and
Christ himself commends this Lesson to the Pharisees: this Book of the Law
should not depart out of thy Mouth, but thou should Meditate therein for
ever, Josh. 18. Psalm. 12. This Word of God should dwell plentiously in you, Col
3.16. It was Abraham's Practice to teach his Children, and Servants the fear of
the Lord, Genesis 18.19. This also is Paul's Counsel, Ephesians. 6.4. Yea, and God's own
Command, Deuteronomy. 6.6,7. The Words that I Command thee this day, shall be in thy
Heart, and thou shall Teach them diligently unto thy Children; thou shall talk
of them when thou fittest in thy House, and when thou walk by the way; when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up, etc. First, get them in thy Heart,
and all the rest will be easy; and there is great Reason for it: Thy Children
have Received a Poysonful Nature from thee, and thou have Dedicated them to
God's Service in their Baptism; and all the Reason in the World thou should
do thine Endeavor to bring them out of this miserable Condition, and do what
thou can to make them the Faithful Servants of God: Their Souls are precious
pieces, too good to be the Devils Drudges; and thou that can not endure to
see a silly Lamb, in the Mouth of a devouring Lion, rending, and tearing it in
pieces at his pleasure, how can thou endure to see thy own Children in the
Devils Hand, likely to Torment them for ever, and not be troubled? Set thy
Hands therefore to the Work, and by Catechizing, Instructions, Exhortation, and
Admonition, to work knowledge in them, and bring them to Consider their ways,
for Consideration is the first step to Reformation: Assure thy self God
requires this Private Duty at thy Hands.

4. Direct. Another Private Duty, in reference to thy Family, is to Pray with
them, and for them, and to join together in the mutual Praises of God. I have
already Treated of the Duty of Prayer in general, and have given Directions in
the managing well the Duty; look back upon them, and take the Directions, I
shall now press upon thee as thou art an Householder: and it is no doubt but
Secret Prayer is thy Duty, because thou have Secret Sins to Confess that none
knows of but God, and thine own Soul; and Secret wants to beg supplies for, and
Personal Mercies to be thankful for. But though this be necessary, it is not
sufficient; but if thou have a Family, these also must share in thy Prayers:
There is a Divine Imprecation against all those Families that call not upon the
Name of God. Now, this Duty should be daily done; yea, Evening, and Morning, I
think may Evidently be proved; that it is a daily Duty cannot be denied: The
Scripture requires us to pray without ceasing, to pray continually, and in
every thing to give thanks, and such like expressions; intimating to us, that
our Souls should be in a continual Praying Temper, and upon all Occasions
Offered, ready to perform this Duty; and we ought to Serve God all the days of
our Lives in Righteousness, and Holiness, Luke 1.75. Now, Prayer and Praise is
part of that daily Service we owe to him, which is also Typified out by the
daily Sacrifices, and Oblations, which were Offered to him in the Time of the
Law; Christians Prayer and Praise being in allusion to this, called, the
Offering up the Calves of our Lips, Hos. 4.2. And when Christ Teaches his
Disciples to Pray, he bids them say, Give us this day our daily Bread, which
shows us thus much, that it was to be their daily Petition, Acts 3.1. We Read,
that the Apostles went into the Temple at the hour of Prayer, which shows they
had their Stata precibus tempora, their appointed hours. And the Godly in all
Ages have made Prayer their daily Practice: David he Prays seven times a day,
Psalm. 119.164. Morning and Evening, Psalm. 92.2. Morning, Evening, and at Noon,
Psalm. 55.17. Yea, elsewhere at Midnight. Daniel Prayed three times a day
constantly; yea, when Death was threatened for so doing, Dan. 6.10. And there is
great reason for it, for we Receive daily Mercies, for which we have cause to
be thankful; and Commit daily sins, for which we have cause to be humbled; and
we have need of daily Supplies, for which we have cause to be earnest: And God
has given us leave to come as often as we will* and promises to hear us, and
supply us: What a needless scruple then is it to ask whether it be our Duty,
when it is our Privilege, as well as our Duty; we do not ask, how prove you it
to be our Duty to eat Meat every day, this would Argue but a bad Stomach: The
oftener we come to God, the better welcome we shall be, and have more Communion,
and Converse with him; and the more we Converse with him the better
Entertainment we are like to have. Others Scruple, whether a Man ought to pray
in his Family; these Men would fain find a knot in a Rush, and would Quarrel
the Duty they like not; but does not God tell us, Where two or three are
gathered together, he will be in the midst of them, Mat. 18.20. And are not
some Families called Churches of God, where Religious Exercises are performed,
Romans 16.5. Col. 4.15. Philem. 2. Here the Houses of Priscilla, and Aquila, and
Nymphas, and Philemon, are called Churches. And Joshua resolves that he, and
his House would serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. And we read of Christ praying with
his Disciples, and others: What ground of doubt can then remain, but this is a
Duty? Those that shake off this, would willingly shake off all the Ordinances,
and the rest of the Commands. In a Family are many particular Family-sins
Committed, which ought to be Confessed; many Family Mercies bestowed, which
call for a thankful acknowledgment; many wants, and Infirmities to be supplied,
which should be begged; and all these cannot be known, nor, perhaps, are fit to
be expressed by him, that is the Mouth of the People in public; and for
Morning, and Evening, these times seem fittest for this Duty, though some
Quarrel this also: God himself in the time of the Law appointed these for
Sacrifices, and Oblations; and Reason speaks it fit that in the Morning we
should praise God for the Mercies of the Night, and pray for a blessing upon
the business of the day; and at Even confess the sins of the day, and be
thankful for the Mercies; and Commend our selves into the Protection of God the
Night following: For as all we have is from him, so we should bless God for
all, but Spiritual Mercy should not be forgotten, especially for Christ, and
the work of our Redemption; the means of Grace, and the motions of the Spirit:
We should praise the Lord also with Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs;
this is a private Family Duty: Also the want of these Duties expose us to the
threatening, Jer. 10.25.

5. Direct. Another private Duty which lies upon thee in reference to thy
Family, and those under thy Charge, is reproving them when they sin, and
Correcting them when they will not amend, and restraining them what in thee
lies, from breaking God's Laws, and Divine Commands: Thou art God's Vicegerent
in thy Family, and bear his Image, and the stamp of Authority is put upon
thee, and must Imitate God in thy Government so far as thy Commission reaches;
though thou have not the power of Life and Death, as the Supreme Magistrate,
yet have thou a restraining power; yea, and if need be, the power to Correct,
so that it reach not to Life, nor Limb; and doubtless Joshua intended to put
this power in Exercise, when he resolvedly promised, that he and his House
should Serve the Lord, Josh. 20.15. Yet alas! how many Governors of Families
neglect this Duty. Some are debarred from it by their own guilt, being guilty
of the same sins they should reprove in others; this stops their Mouths, and
makes them neglect their Duty. These Men do more hurt by their Example, than
ever they are like to do by their reproofs; their way is therefore first to
cast out the beam out of their own Eye, and then to seek to pluck out the Mote
out of another. But I speak chiefly to those that seem to make some Conscience
of their Duty, for with those I am likeliest to prevail; and these also many of
them are extremely negligent, and have need of a sharp Reproof themselves.
Friends, do you verily believe, that ungodly Livers shall go to Hell, and being
once there, are in an irrecoverable lost Condition? And can you suffer such
among you, that are like to suffer the Torments of Eternal Fire, and hold your
Tongues, and never give them warning of their Danger? What an uncharitable
thing is this, that you will suffer those that are in near Relation to you,
perhaps, the Wife of your Bosom, or the Children of your own Bowels, to lie in
such a desperate danger, and never warn them of it. If thou saw a Blind Man
upon the brow of an Hill, ready to break his Neck; or a Mad Man ready to kill
himself, thou would call to the one, and warn him of the danger, and
restrain the other if thou were able; and will thou have Compassion on the
Body, and no pity on the Soul? Should thou see thy near Relations coming to
the Gallows, and might save their Lives for a few words speaking, would
be so uncharitable as to hold thy peace? were one of thy Intimate Friends in
Hell, and were there a possibility of their Delivery; would thou not go, and
ride, and speak, and pray, (supposing this were the way) in their behalf, and
for their sake? And will thou let them quietly go on in that way, that
certainly tends thither, and never show them the danger they are in? A vicious
Life, without Repentance, will as certainly lead to Hell, as God is God, and
the Scriptures are the word of God; for no unclean thing shall ever enter
Heaven, no dirty Dog shall tread upon that Pavement: Did thou certainly know
that thy Wife, or Friend, or near Relation were in Hell, and yet there were
hopes of their Recovery, if thou would be at some pains, or at some Cost;
what an uncharitable part would it be in thee, to let them lie for ever, and
for ever in those Infernal Flames, and not seek their ease; and wilt neglect it
now when it may possibly be prevented. Were but thy Wife, or Child in Turkish
Slavery, thou would pray, and entreat, and more than this for their Liberty.
What tender heart could endure to see another in raging Torments, yet this will
be the Condition of thy bosom Friends, if un-regenerate. Do thou see the
Devil leading them Captive at his pleasure, and have thou nothing at all to say
against it? It may be thou Prayest for their Conversion, and wilt not speak a
word to this purpose? What dissembling is this, and what mocking of God? If
there be a desire, it will be joined with endeavors: Should thou see thy
Friend in a Pit, ready to be drowned, would thou fall upon thy knees, and
Pray for help, and not put forth thy hand to help him? This would seem little
Love: God will have means used to serve his Providence. It may be thou fear
troubling them; but it is a Foolish Physician that suffers his Patient to dye
under his hand, rather than trouble him; in a Swoon we shaKe, and rub, and,
pinch, and use other means, which, perhaps may hurt them. The Papists are more
Charitable in their blind Devotion, how dear do they pay for Masses, Dirges,
etc. for the Delivery of their Deceased Friends Souls out of their feigned
Purgatory. But if your Charity to others be so cold, yet at least be Charitable
to thy self, and bring not the blood of others Souls upon thy Account; the Sins
which thou may hinder, and do not, will be laid at thy Door, and the Blood
of those Souls that perish through thy neglect, will be Charged upon thee;
carefully therefore set upon this Duty.

6. Direct. Thou must not only reprove them when they do amiss, and chastise
them when they will not reform, but thou must also Instruct, Teach, and
Admonish them to do good, and encourage them in well doing, and Teach them the
Duties they should do; it is not enough to leave the Evil, but they must do the
good; good Duties are required to be done, as well as Sins to be avoided. Now,
the best way to Teach them, is by Example; be a Pattern to them of an Holy
Life, and well-doing; most Men Learn better by Example, than Precept. A Man may
lead an Hundred, that cannot drive two: Let not thy Practice cross thy
Exhortation or Reproof, let them see by thy Example, that thou speak from
thy Heart. If thou press them to an Holy Life, and Live loosely, and
profanely thy self in the mean time, they will think thou art in Jest with
them, and think not what thou speak. Oh, how many good words may you hear
from some Men in an humor, when there is not one good Action to be seen; these
come not from the Heart, but from the Brain: That Exhortation is a Duty, is
seen by Abraham's Practice, and God's Command, Deuteronomy. 6.6,7,8. Prove. 22.6. Ephesians.
6.4. And there is good Reason for it: Thy Children have their defilement from
thee, and derived a Poysonful Nature from thy Loins, and were the Children of
Wrath, as soon as they were thy Children; and thou that have thus defiled them,
is it not reason thou should help to make them clean? They are near, and dear
to thee, part of thy self, of thy Flesh, and of thy Bones; did they not come
out of thine own Bowels? And they have none in the World so near to look after
them as thy self, and will thou neglect them also? Shall they perish for want
of Instruction, and Direction in Heavens way? Thou would Instruct them how to
Live in the World; and, if thou could, how to grow Rich and Honorable, and
wilt neglect them in the main thing, how to be happy? Thou can moil, and
toil, and cark, and care, and rise early, and lie down late, and eat the Bread
of carefulness, for their sakes, to get an Estate for them; and think thou
have never enough: and is thy care only extended to the Body; is the Soul of no
Value? do not matter so they be Famous in the World, though they are Infamous
in God's Account? and their Souls be eternally lost? were their Bodies
Diseased, thou would consult the Physician; if their Estates were in hazard,
the Lawyer: and shall the Soul bleed to Eternal death, without remedy, or
regard? they may curse the time that they were Born of such unnatural Parents:
They are Naturally Ignorant, and they must be taught; they are Corrupt, and
must be amended, or they will be undone: Oh, consider what will become of thy
Children an Hundred Thousand Years hence; they will be, either in Heaven, or
Hell, in endless Torments, or Eternal Joys: and it is much to be feared they
will miscarry. Were they but in Slavery, thou would seek their Liberty; and
will thou do nothing to help them out of Spiritual Thraldom? what comfort
may thou have of them if thou prevail, and be Instrumental of their
Conversion? how will thou Engage them for ever to love thee, and obey thee? but
what discomfort are they like to be, if they serve the Devil and Sin? what
ground of hope is there they should be true to thee, that prove false to God;
and if they perish through thy neglect, the Blood of their Souls will be
charged upon thee: and without Repentance, perish they will. Oh! how necessary
then is knowledge in parents; for where the Blind leads the Blind, both falls
into the Ditch: and what thoughts will you have at your meeting in Hell? Set
therefore upon this Duty betimes before it be too late; Train them up when they
are young, in the way they should walk; that when they are old they may not
decline it: Delays are dangerous, Life is short, the time of Death is
uncertain; the Heart grows harder, and Sin grows stronger, the Devil gets
better hold, and surer possession; every Day makes them more unfit than other
for Repentance. A Twig when young, is easily bent; but when old, it will break
before it bend: follow them again, and again, with Exhortations to an Holy
Life, deal seriously with them, take the fittest Seasons for the Work; let them
see the danger of Sin, and the Beauty of Holiness: and Treat them with so much
Compassion, that they may see thy love to their Souls; use also so much Zeal
and Fervency, that they may see it is not Trifles thou pressest them to take:
the fittest Time and Place, never in Passion, seldom in Public, show them
God's Word for it, turn them to the Chapter, and Verse: this, if any thing,
will silence them. If thou find an Inclination in them, follow it home;
encourage the good, and discourage the bad; let them find thou make a
difference between the one, and the other: this Course will bring Glory to God,
Peace to thy self; and Benefit to thy Relations.

7. Direct. For a Conclusion of the whole, be sure in the performance of all
those forementioned Duties, both Public, and Private; to keep a clear
Conscience void of Offense, toward God, and toward Man; and let the Ground of
all thy performances be the Command of God, and thy strongest Motive be thy
love to God, and thy dear Redeemer; and let no sinister End, or by Respect
whatsoever prevail with thee: let God's Glory be thy End, and Aim, and the main
Design thou drivest on; let thy endeavor be, to set the Crown upon God's Head,
and not upon thine own: Consult not thy self till thou can truly say in all
thy Duties, Propter te, Propter te Dimine, this I have done for God, and not
for my self: But if vain Glory, or a desire of Popular Applause, or Merit; or
any suchlike sinister Respects Fly-blow thy Duties, they will stink in God's
Nostrils, and all thy Duties will be lost, and thy labor will be in vain: he
that propounds a wrong End to himself, will lose all the pains he takes; as he
that Shoots at a wrong Mark, will hardly hit the right: But if thy Duty proceed
from a right Principle, a heart Purified by Faith; and if (...) Fountain, a
Purified and Sincere Heart, and from a Principle of Love to God, and are
directed to a right End, his Glory continues with thy own happiness; then are
they like to be a pleasing Sacrifice unto God: for where the Fountain is clear,
the Streams will be good; but till the Heart be right, their proceedings will
be defiled. Though Man Judge the Heart by the Actions, God Judges the Actions
by the Heart; he is Hoker lebh, Scrutator cords, the searcher of the Heart,
and the tryer of the Reins, and gives every Man according to his ways, Jer.
17.9,10. The Heart is the Fountan of all the Thoughts, Words, and Actions; now
if the Fountain be filthy, so are the Streams: Sweet Water, and bitter, cannot
proceed out of the same hole; if an Apple be rotten at the Coare, it will not
be long before the outside rot also: If the Heart be rotten, it sooner, or
later breaks forth, and rots the Life, and Conversation also; as it did in
Saul, Simon Magus, and many others. An inbred Distemper, will appear outwardly;
and a Soar not sound at the bottom, will Fester, and break out at length:
Sincerity is like a skilful Alchymist it turns all into Gold; weak
performances, defective Duties, shall be accepted: a Sigh, a Groan, a Desire
shall be understood, and answered But Hypocrisy on the contrary, turns Gold
into Dross, and Duties into Sin, and the most Glorious performance into
abomination; take heed therefore of this, and labor for the other: Faith also
is requisite in all thy Duties, leave not that behind thee in any Duty, if thou
meanest to speed; if Faith be absent, God will not be present: without Faith
'is impossible to please him. No Prayer can pierce Heaven thar is not pointed
by Faith, Heb. 6.11. he that comes to God, must believe that God is; and that
he is a rewarder of those that dilligently seek him. The Word Preached will not
prove it, if it be not mixed with Faith in those that hear it; nay, without
Faith there can be no Salvation, Mark 16.16. he that believes, and is
Baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned, Joh. 3.
last. Self-denial also is requisite; when thou have done all, say thou art an
unprofitable Servant. God gives Grace to the Humble, but looks upon the Proud
afar off; yea the Apostle says, he resists the Proud, or sets himself in
Battle array against him; bring not a proud heart along with thee, if thou
would speak with God in a Duty: submit to his Will, though thou see not a
reason for his Command, there is yet reason enough why thou should obey, as
Abraham did: content thy self to be at Gods dispose, do thy Duty, and he will
do his Work; but Limit him not to Time, Place, Manner, Measure, or other
Circumstances: depend upon him as Hannah did, when she had prayed, she looked
no more sad. Take heed when thou have done thy Work, of Heart-rising Thoughts,
or proud vain Glory; lest it make thee lose thy Reward: this will spoil thy
Duty, and make thee lose thy Reward: deny thy Self, and he will not deny thy
Reward: the lower thou think of thy Duties, the better God thinks of them;
and will Crown them with Success. And having begun well, be sure to hold out,
be thou constant to the Death, and he will give thee a Crown of Life: what thou
want, and beggest of God, endeavor with Heart and Hand to obtain it: true
Desires are always accompanied with endeavors, it is not enough to wish for
Heaven, but work for it: Corruption will not be abated, nor Grace increased,
without painstaking: love Holiness, and hate Sin, or thou will never hold out,
or do good: if thou regard Iniquity in thy Heart, God will not hear thy Prayer,
Psalm. 66.18. Joh. 9.31. God requires Holiness, in all that draw near to him;
and without it, no Man shall see him with Comfort, Heb. 12.14. If thou take
this course in thy Public and Private Duties, Peace shall be to thee, and to
the Israel of God. Now to him that is able to keep you from falling, and to
present you faultless before the presence of his Glory, with exceeding Joy, to
the only wise God our Savior, be Glory, and Majesty, Dominion, and Power, both
now and ever Amen.

FINIS.
THE TABLE
CHAP. I. Motives to Holy Duties. Page 1. 1. Mot. God has Commanded us to
serve him. p. 4. 2. He is the best Master. p. 7. 3. He requires the best Work.
p. 10. 4. Thou art most engaged to him. p. 13. 5. He gives the best Wages. p.
16. 6. Obedience is the only way true Happiness. p. 19. 7. God is best able to
punish there that disobey him. p. 22.
CHAP. II. Of Duties in General. Page 25. 1. Direct. See thou have a Divine
Command for all thou do. p. 28. 2. When thou know thy Duty, delay not to
do it. p. 30. 3. Hold on in the constant performances of them. p. 32. 4. Let
obedience proceed from a right Principle. p. 35. 5. Let all be done in a right
manner. p. 37. 6. In all aim at a right End. p. 39. 7. When all is done, say
thou art unprofitable. p. 41.
CHAP. III. Of hearing the Word. Page 44. 1. Direct. Resolve to break through
all difficulties. p. 46. 2. Propound to thy self right Ends in hearing. p. 49.
3. Come with the Heart rightly qualified. 51. 4. Make preparation for receiving
the Seed of the Word. p. 54. 5. Come with an hungring Appetite to this Feast.
p. 56. 6. Behave thy Self well in hearing. p. 59. 7. Demean thy Self well after
hearing. p. 61.
CHAP. IV. Of Reading the Word. Page 64. 1. Direct. Prepare thy Heart for so
Solemn a Duty. p. 66. 2. Propound to thy Self right Ends. p. 68. 3. Read with
diligence and attention. p. 71. 4. Read with Understanding, Discretion, and
Judgment. p. 73. 5. Observe the Scope, and Design, in what thou Read. p.
75. 6. Meditate upon it, and so mike it thine own. p. 77. 7. Apply it to thine
own Heart. p. 79.
CHAP. V. Of Meditation. Page. 82. 1. Direct. Concerning occasional
Meditations. p. 84. 2. In set Meditation, come fitted, and prepared. p. 87. 3.
Set thy Self, as in the presence of God. p. 89. 4. Pitch upon some suitable
Subject. p. 91. 5. Press it upon thine own Heart. p. 93. 6. Beware of those
things that hinder the Duty. p. 96. 7. Take heed of letting thy Heart Flag, or
suddenly cool. p. 98.
CHAP. VI. Of Prayer. Page 101. 1. Direct. Be rightly qualified for the Duty.
p. 104. 2. Come into Gods Presence preparedly. p. 106. 3. Pray to God alone,
and not to the Saints, or Angels. p 108. 4. Come to God in the Name of Christ,
not in thy own Name. p. 110. 5. Ask nothing of God, but what thou have warrant
for. p. 113. 6. Pray to him in a right manner, and to a right End. p. 115. 7.
Behave thy Self well after the Duty. p. 118.
CHAP. VII. Of Singing Psalms. Page 121. 1. Direct. Be Convinced that it is thy
Duty. p. 124. 2. That David's Psalms are Lawful. p. 126. 3. That all Men and
Women, good and bad, may Sing. p. 129. 4. That they may be Sung in English
Meeter. p. 131. 5. That they may be Sung in an English Tune. p. 134. 6. Let thy
Ends be right in the Duty. p. 137. 7. Sing with the Spirit, and with the
Understanding also. p. 139.
CAAP. VIII Of Observing the Sabbath. Page 143. 1. Direct. Be Convinced that
the first day of the Week is the Christian Sabbath. p. 146. 2. Make preparation
before hand to observe it. p. 149. 3. Do nothing that is unlawful upon it. p.
152. 4. Perform such works upon it as God requires. p. 156. 5. Perform those
Religious Duties as are commanded. p. 159. 6. Many Private Duties are also to
be performed. p. 163. 7. Improve thy Authority, that those under thee may
Sanctify the Sabbath. p. 166.
CHAP. IX. Of Baptism. Page. 170. 1. Direct. Scruples against Baptism removed.
p. 173. 2. It Is the Parents Duty to present their Children. p. 177. 3. Aim at
God's Glory, etc. p. 180. 4. Rest not in the common Privileges of this
Sacrament. p. 183. 5. See that this Sacrament be rightly Administered. p. 186.
6. See that thou performest thy Baptismal Vows. p. 189. 7. Make a right use of
thy Baptism. p. 192.
CHAP. X. Directions in receiving the Sacrament. P. 196. 1 Direct. If thou
would partake of the Sacrament worthily, examine thy Self. p 199. 2. Have
not Grace in Habit, but in Exercise. p. 202. 3. Propound right Ends to thy
Self, etc p. 205. 4. Know what it is thou stand in need of. p. 209. 5. When
thou come to this Ordinance, be sure to set thy Grace on work. p. 212. 6. How
to demean thy Self in the Act of receiving. p. 215. 7. Behave thy Self well
after receiving. p. 219.
CHAP. XI. Directions about Oaths. Page 222. 1. Direct. Consideration must be
had of the Parties themselves concerned, etc. p 225. 2. By whom you ought to
Swear. p. 228. 3. Of the Matter of an Oath. p. 231. 4. Of the Form of an Oath.
p. 234. 5. The End must be Lawful. p. 237. 6. Take heed of rash Swearing. p.
240. 7. Take heed of false Swearing. p. 243.
CHAP. XII. Of Vows. Page 247. 1. Direct. Vows must be made to God. p. 250. 2.
Who may make Vows. p. 253. 3. Vow not any thing that is unlawful. p. 256. 4.
Vow nothing, but what is in thy Power to do. p. 259. 5. Look to the manner of
thy Vows p. 262. 6. Look to thy Ends in this Duty. p. 265. 7. See thou keep thy
Vows, when thou have made them. p. 268.
CHAP. XIII. Of days of Humiliation. Page 272. 1. Direct. If thou would
perform this Duty aright, see thou be rightly qualified. p. 275. 2. Come
prepared to this Duty. p. 278. 3. What External Duties are requisite in this
Duty of Fasting. p. 282. 4. Of the Internal parts of th s Duty. p. 285. 5. Of
the time when this Duty is to be done. p. 288. 6. Propound a right End in this
Duty. p. 292. 7. Look to thy Carriage aftar the Duty. p. 295
CHAP. XIV. Of days of Thanksgiving. Page 299. 1. Direct. Get a well prepared
Heart. p. 302. 2. In this Duty, aim ultimately at Gods Glory. p. 305. 3. See
thy Call be Lawful to this Duty. p. 308. 4. See to thy Carriage in this Duty. p.
311. 5. Set thy Self upon the Work. p. 315. 6. Go on in recounting the mercies
thou have received, and bless God for them. p. 318. 7. Having sounded forth the
praises of God for his mercy, etc. p. 321.
CHAP. XV. Directions in Private Duties. Page 325. 1. Direct. Of Self
examination, etc. p. 328. 2. When thou know that thou have an Interest in
God, etc. p. 332. 3. Store thy Heart with knowledge, and understanding. p. 335.
4. Pray with thy Family in Private. p. 338. 5. Of Reproving, and Correcting thy
Family. p. 342. 6. Thou must not only reprove them when they do amiss, but
Instruct, Teach, etc. p. 345. 7. To keep a clear Conscience. p. 340.

The faults of Press, and Authors Pen,
Does show the Work was done by Men;
If you would Read the Authors mind,
Mend the mistakings here you find.

PAge 4. line 30. for who. read whose. p. 5. l. 17. for is, r. that. p. 7. l.
12. we left out. l. 22. for as r. in. p. 17. l. 1. for in, r. one. and he left
out. p. 20. l. 21. f. they r. who. p. 21. l. 3. f. Covenant r. command. p. 26.
l. 6. f. rack r. rubs. p. 29. l. 27. f. sick r. quick. p. 39. l. 11. f. love.
r. careless. p. 43. l. 8. if left out. l. 9. f. must^ r. may. p. 50. l. 7. f.
seeking r. searching. p. 53. l. 8. f. absence. r. sense p. 56. l. 31. f. death.
r. thou. p. 61. l. 22. f. distraction r. destruction. p. 72. l. 3. f. right. r.
weight. p. 86. l. 19. f unweily r. unweldy. p. 87. l. 15. f. soil r. chyle. p.
91. l. 10.11. wrong pointed. p. 93. l. 13. f. noble. r. none. p. 94. l. 5. f.
head r. heart, twice. p. 100. l. 22. f. reach r search. p. 8. l. 5. f. come r.
join. p. 114. l. 28. f. unprofitable r. inhospitable. l. 32. f. unanswerable r.
unwarrantable. p. 116. l. 3. f. exceeded. r. spoiled. p. 128. l. 25. f.
setence. r. sistence. l. 32. f. beats. r. brats. p. 134. l. 22. f. best. r.
le^. l. 27. f. lite r. light. p 136. l. 6. humane left out. p. 156. l. 1. f.
cruelty. r. penalty. p. 167. l. 26. f. this r. what is. p. 188. l. 3. f. wise
r. way. p. 190. l. 4. leave out up. p. 205. l. 25. leave out such. p. 214. l.
20. r. is. p. 217. f. thee. r. the. p. 231. l. 19. f. his r. him. p. 245. l.
21. leave out if. p. 250. l. 27. leave out the. p. 251. l. 24. f. O their. r.
others. p. 254. l. 27. f. well r. null. l. 29. f. party. r. parity. p. 263. l.
5. r. an f. and.

FINIS.

