portrait of Edward Bury VERA EFFIGIES EDVARDI BURII EVANGELII MINISTRI AN.
AETAT. SUAE 66 ANo. DOM. 1682


Inventiue art dame-natures curious ape
You see can counterfeit the bodies snape
Yet can noe more describe the mind then we
Heavens glory by ye spangled Canopy
This shaddows out the house who there does dwell
Ask in the book the picture cannot tell.
DEATH IMPROVED, AND Immoderate Sorrow FOR Deceased Friends and Relations,
REPROVED.

WHEREIN You have many Arguments against Immoderate Sorrow, and many Profitable
Lessons which we may Learn from such Providence.

1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14. But I would not have you to be ignorant brethren,
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have
no hope; For if we believe that Christ died and rose again, even so them also
which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. By EDWARD BVRY, formerly
Minister of Great Belas in Shropshire.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, 1693.

TO THE Virtuous, and truly Religious, The Lady Wilbraham, the Pious Consort of
the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Wilbraham, of Weston under Lizard, Barronet,
one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Stafford, E. B.
wishes all Happiness, External, Internal, and Eternal.
MADAM,
IT fares with me, as it is fabled of Pan, that pretended Rural God, who being
admitted into Apollo's Presence to show his skill upon his Oaten Pipe, at the
first he was bashful and timorous, but being uncontrouled, he grew bolder, and
Pip't louder; This was my Case when I wrote the ensuing Letter, which was in a
dark and gloomy Day; my Bashfulness, and Sense of Unworthiness when it was
finished, had like to have strangled it in the Womb, and to have kept it from
your sight, fearing what Reception it might meet with; but knowing what ever
was wanting, a good Meaning and an Intention to do good was not wanting; and
after some conflict in my self, I resolved to put it to the venture, and send
it I did, but your ^ind Acceptance beyond my Expectation, made me Pipe louder,
and without your privity I sent it to the Press, thinking, that having past
this Test, and you approving of it, others also might possibly do the same, but
had you past it by with a Check or Disrespect, you had spoiled my Music; yet
durst I not prefix your Name to it, as thinking it unworthy of you. But your
kind Acceptance of it when it was Printed, and Approbation, does make me yet
bolder to prefix your Name, and tell the World to whom it does of right belong;
and this will be some excuse for me, that you did not manifest your dislike,
nor forbid me to do it, the Reasons why I did this, and do now again Publish it
were given you then, there were many worthy Friends then, and since that time,
that lay under the like Dispensation of Providence that you did, viz. That had
parted with their near Relations, to whom I was willing to give a Word of
Advice and Comfort but my Occasions would not permit me to Speak or Write to
all, neither was I able to do it to all that needed my Advice; I therefore
imagining what does one good, may benefit another also, I made it public; this
Letter may speak my Mind when I am absent, even to those to whom I cannot come;
for I see Grace itself will not wipe off immoderate Tears, but they sometimes
flow like a mighty Torrent without Bank or Bottom, and though here be some things
peculiar to your Condition in the Letter, yet in the general it is of public
concern, the Disease is common, and the Receipt I hope will not be useless.
Most People first or last are concerned in parting with Relations, here are
Considerations to quiet them, at least they see the Death of others as well as
of their Relations; and here are profitable Instructions to improve that for
their own good, and Direction how to prepare for their own Death. These
Considerations made me make that public, which at first was intended for
private use, and I hope this second Edition will give your Ladyship, no
Offense, nor to read your Name in the Front; when I sent the Letter to you, I
did foresee that I must shortly come into the Furnace again, and so I did the
very Week I received the printed Book, I B^ried my eldest Son; as you had done
your eldest Daughter, and how soon I may have another Trial I know not. The
Lord grant I may learn the Lesson my self I am teaching others; some Additions
I have made, at the Request of several which may be more needful to others then
to you; I hope they tend toward the perfection, not imperfection of the Book.
But I forget my self, the whole being but a Letter, and that to your Ladyship;
I must not make the Gate too wide for the Building. I shall cease further to
trouble you, when I have committed you and your dear Relations into the Hands
of him that never leaves his, and subscribed my self

MADAM, Your much Obliged Servant, EDWARD BVRY.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction: Five Arguments to quiet the Heart at the Death of Relations.
1. Consider who did it, that great God whose they are. 2. Consider, Who we are
that are discontented Dust and Ashes. 3. What wrong is done to us, or our
Relations. 4. What Benefit are we like to have by mourning. 5. Our own
Condition is mortal, and shall suddenly follow.
Seven Lessons, To be learnt by the Death of Friends if all must die. 1.
Lesson, How little we are beholding to Sin? 1. It brought Death into the World.
2. It is the cause of all the Misseries we suffer in the World. 3. It Is the
cause of all Spiritual Judgment we meet with. 4. It lays us under the Wrath of
God, and makes him our Enemy. 5. It Is the cause of eternal Death, and eternal
Damnation.
Second Lesson. How little Good the world can do us in our greatest need. 1. It
cannot prevent Death though we had never so much of it. 2. It cannot procure us a
happy Life, or give Content. 3. The things of the World are uncertain and
momentary. 4. It can do us little good in our great Concerns here or hereafter.
5. It exposes us to a great deal of danger.
Third Lesson. Of how great concern Grace and a good Conscience is? 1. It helps
exceedingly to bring us through the World with Comfort. 2. It fits us to leave
the World, and takes away the Fear of Death. 3. Without it we can neither
please God nor enjoy him. 4. It will procure us a good Name to succeeding
Generations. 5. It will bear up the Heart at Judgment, and usher us into Heaven.
Fourth Lesson. If all must dye, then the Godly have nothing to Suffer. 1. The
Saints at Death shall be freed from all their Sins. 2. From all the Causes of
Sin, Temptations of Satan, and the World. 3. From all the Devil's Instruments,
Persecutions, and Trial. 4. From all the Effects of Sin, Losses, Crosses,
Pains, Sickness, etc. 5. They shall enj^y God, Heaven and Happiness for ever.
Fifth Lesson. If all must dye, how little Certainty wicked men have of their
Happiness. 1. At Death they must le^ve behi^d all their Riches. 2. They must
bid (...) to all their Pleasures. 3. They must lose all their Pomp, Glory, and
Honor. 4. After Death, they shall lose their God, their Souls, their Heaven
and Happiness. 5. They shall be thrown into endless ^aseless Torments.
Sixth Lesson. If all must dye, then we should prepare for our own Death. 1.
Consider seriously we mu^t die. 2. ^e have a great deal of Work to do ere we
die. 3. Many men as worldly-wise as we, do miscarry. 4. The dang^rous condition
we are in, while unprepared. 5. Preparation for Death, and our Evidences for
Heaven can do us no harm.
Directions to Die well. 1. Get an Interest in Christ, and a title to Glory. 2.
Be sure to see Sin dead, before you or your Souls will die. 3. Mortify and
Crucify the World, and subdue it. 4. Be sure to live well if you would die
well. 5. Learn to die daily, have death always before your Eyes.
Seventh Lesson. If all must die, bring your minds to be willing to die. 1.
Consider. Our Life is not at your own dispose, but God's. 2. The many miseries
Death frees us from. 3. It Is unbeseeming a Christian, to be unwilling to die,
when God calls. 4. If we resign our selves to God, we shall die to the best
Advantage. 5. The Joys of Heaven may sweeten Death itself. The Conclusion.

DEATH Improved, AND Immoderate Sorrow for Deceased RELATIONS And FRIENDS
Reproved.
In a LETTER Consolatory to the Virtuous and truly Religious Lady Wilbraham, of
Weston, in the County of Stafford, at the Death of her Daughter, the Lady
Middleton, of Chirk Castle.
MADAM,
LET it not be thought Presumption in me, though the meanest of a Thousand, if
I make bold to give my Advice in the midst of so many, much abler Counselors;
and to prescribe you Physic, when you have so many Learned Physicians at hand;
for happily I have more experienced that Distemper under which you labor, than
many of them, and can write a Probatum est upon my Receipts: Others may speak
more of the Disease than I can, yet few have felt the working of it in their
own Bowels more than I, even from my Youth up; and I am at present making up a
Dose for my self, who am in daily expectation of pa^ting with my Eldest Son, as
you have done with your Eldest Daughter, he being one in whom I took no small
content, and from whom I expected much Comfort in my Age; the Lord grant I may
take the same Counsel I give to others. When first I heard of your great, and
(as I think) unexpected Loss, and how soon your Joy, that a Man-Child was born
into the World, was turned into Sorrow, that a Woman was taken out of the
World. I confess I was suddenly surprised with Amazement, and cried out, How
vain a thing is Man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, and how vain are all
these transitory things we so much dote upon? And how little can they do for us
when we have most need? And how foolish are we to spend our time and money for
that which is not bread, and our labor for that which satisfies not? When I
saw so fair a Flower, so lately budded, and not fully blown, so soon withered
and dead, and what need we had, especially that were much older, to stand upon
our Guard, not knowing the day nor hour wherein our Lord and Master comes. When
I had spent some time in these Considerations, and bewailed the Public Loss, I
began to consider your Condition, who by reason of your tender, and happily too
tender Love, and Care of your Children, especially (as I imagined) of her, who
was your Firstborn, and the beginning of your Strength, and one who by reason
of her Age and Maturity more fit for your more intimate Society, I was afraid
your Burden would not be easily born; for I conceive you are better qualified
to bear a heavy Burden of another Nature than this, strong Affections many
times breed strong Afflictions, but God will have us hate Father and Mother,
Wife and Children, and our own Lives for his sake. These things considered, I
could not but sympathize with you in your Suffering, and put my Soul as it were
in your Soul's stead, and so bewailed and condoled your Condition, having many
times my self felt the weight of your Burden, I thought then with Job, That to
those that are afflicted pity is to be shown by his friend, Job 6.14. But
barely to pity, and not to endeavor to help, is but a poor kind of Charity;
but it was out of my reach any other way to help, than by Counsel and Advice,
and this I knew you needed not, yet not willing to be altogether silent, I
resolved to communicate to you my own Experience, and what it was that has
once and again calmed those tumultuous Thoughts that raged in my Breast. But
could I but imagine that your Sorrows were over, your Griefs suppressed, your
Trouble buried, and your Burden eased, I should not be so uncharitable as to
take them again out of the Ashes, or blow the fire that is too apt of it self
to kindle; but I fear the Flame is too great to be so soon extinguished, and
your Distemper too deeply rooted to be so easily removed; and the Wound too
great, to be so easily healed. Or that I could but imagine your Sorrows were
moderate, and no more than your Duty, I should not put you to the trouble of
Reading, nor my self of Writing these following lines. But I not only fear, but
also hear that you are a Woman of a sorrowful Spirit, drenched in Sorrow,
overpowered with Grief, and, like Rachel, weeping for your Daughter, and will
not be comforted, because she is not: And fearing, as others of your Friends
do, what the event will be, in parting with this dear Pledge, or rather Piece
of your self, especially when I read Godly Persons have sometimes been
strangely transported with Passion upon such Occasions; as Jacob at the
supposed Death of Joseph, Genesis 37.33. when he refused Comfort, and resol^^d to
go down to the Grave with him; but he should have learned to bury his Children
and Friends when alive, by acting their Death to himself aforehand. He showed
his Fatherly Love to his Son, but not his own Obedience to his Father. The next
that offers himself to our consideration, is David, a man after God's own
heart, yet not without his Faults and Failings; we find him excessively
mourning for the Death of rebellious Absalom, that had killed his Brother
Amnon, forced his Concubines, rebelled against him, and sought his Life; yet
when he was cut off by a deserved Death, partly by the hand of God, he mourns,
and over-mourns, till he was soundly chidden and threatened by Joab, and wished
he had dyed for him, 2 Samuel 18.33. We see Grace sometimes at an under, and
Nature predominant. These things considered, I thought it was my Duty, not only
to mourn with you, but to comfort you; not only as a Christian, but also as a
Minister, whose Duty it is to speak a word in season, and to comfort the
comfortless. Troubles I know seem harder and heavier, and are worse born when
they come suddenly, and unexpectedly, as I suppose this did, fore-warned
fore-arm'd; the more expectations we have of Trouble, the better preparation;
but unexpected Troubles surprise us before we get on our Armor, and then
tyrannize over us; doubtless then it is our Wisdom to be always upon our Guard.
Nature I know is prevalent, if not curbed by Grace, but Grace is given to some
to check its Extravagancies, and to regulate our disordered Affections. The
love of Christ, when it is predominant in the Soul, lessens or deadens our
Affections to all Earthly Enjoyments; the more directly we behold the Sun of
Righteousness in his Glory, the more dim-sighted we are when we turn our Eyes
to any Earthly Object. When a Christian acts as a Christian, and has his
Conversation in Heaven, he is set in a more Superior Orb, that all these
Sublunary things seem small, and work small alteration in him. But while our
Graces are imperfect, (and that will be while we are on this side Heaven) we
shall find Corruption stirring; but it is our Duty to take part with the Spirit
against the Flesh, and to make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lust
thereof. One of the Devil's Temptations to Job to make him murmur against God,
was the death of his Children: And this is your Trial at present, but in a
lower degree, he lost Ten at once, besides other Losses, and that by an
untimely Death, and, as might be imagined, by the immediate Hand of God; but
the Devil was frustrate of his purpose, instead of cursing he blessed God, as I
hope you will Job 1.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be
the name of the Lord. There are I know too many that repine at the Loss, which
never gave God thanks for the Gift. We are by Nature like sullen Children, if
we have not what we would, we will not have what we may; if one thing be taken
from us, we will throw all the rest after it; if we may not have the Knife, we
will none of the Meat. If Rachel may not have Children, she matters not Life it
self; Give me children, or else I die, Genesis 30.1. not considering that God
carries the Key of the Womb also under his Girdle, For children are the
heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward, Psalm. 127.3. One
Cross many times overshadows a thousand Blessings, and hides them out of our
sight, and if one Comfort be snatched away, we can take comfort in nothing; we
are like unto pettish Jonah, that would dye in a pet, and told God to his face,
he did well to be angry, even to death, Jonah 4.8, 9. And why was he in such a
ruff? Why, the Gourd which he loved was withered, and then all God's dealing
with him, his communicating himself to him, sending him upon his Errand,
delivering him out of the Whale's belly, signified nothing to him; how true is
that of the Heathen, Ira furor brevis est? Anger is a short Madness, and these
are like unto wild Beasts, hardly tamed. Now, though we are allowed to yield
something to Nature in such cases, yet nothing to Impatience; yet how apt are
we in effect to charge God of Injustice, and bear our selves as if he had
wronged us; yea, done us such wrong, that God, and Christ, and Heaven, and
Glory, and a thousand other Mercies would not satisfy or make us amends, nor
make us leave crying; witness our mourning, and over-mourning when God
manifests his Will in taking away our Children, or Relations, without our
consent: He has crossed us in our Wills, and will not let us have our Humor, in
withering some Gourd we delighted in, and would have had to flourish; and now
we are resolved we will cross him in his Will, and let him say what he will to
the contrary, we will not cease our Complaints. But when we act as Christians
it is not so; when our Graces are not clouded, nor raked up under the Ashes of
Corruption, then it will act otherwise; then there will be a total resignation
of our Wills unto God's Will, as two Bells melted together make one: When David
came to himself, he could say, I held my tongue, and said nothing, because thou
did it, Psalm. 39.9. And good Old Eli, when the Lord threatened the subversion
of his House, It Is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. And
Job, though at first he quarrels, yet at last lays his hand upon his mouth, Job
40.30. One Glimpse of God's Love in Christ, is able to dry up all those
immoderate Tears we shed upon such accounts, and to turn them into another
Channel, and make us instead of accusing God, fall out with our selves, and our
sins, for provoking him; and when we see our chiefest Treasure, our choicest
Jewels are safe, it will make us contemn all our other Losses; these things we
may spare, Christ we cannot spare.

Madam, Yet mistake me not, my design, and desire in this Letter, is not to
wipe all Tears from your Eyes, nor all Sorrow from your Heart, for some Grief
in this condition is doubtless Lawful, and your Duty; and it is a sin, yea, an
Heathinish sin, to be without Natural Affection, Romans 1.31. yea, such a sin as
was condemned by many of the Heathens, that had but the Light of Nature.
Solomon advises, To go to the house of mourning; for (says he) the living
will lay it to heart, Eccles. 7.2. That is, so mind it, as to make a good use
of it, and doubtless many profitable Lessons may be hence learnt: Such strokes
as these are not given in vain, we should hear the voice of the rod, and of him
that sends it, Micah 7.9. Yea, God himself complains, Isa. 57.1. The righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. God's Rod
has a Voice, and we must hear it, and happy are those that with Correction
receive Instruction; When God's hand is stretched out, the inhabitants of the
world should learn righteousness, Isa. 26.9. God is now speaking to us in this
Providence, and it is our Wisdom to hear what he says, and to learn what he
teaches. When the Pillars are removed, the House is weakened; and when the
Righteous, are taken away, our danger is more: I would have you therefore
sensible of the blow, as all of us should be when such a Breach is made among
us, and when there are fewer helpers, let those that are left put their
shoulders more strenuously to the Work, to keep up the Building. But my design
and desire is to prevent immoderation, which will hinder and not further you in
the Work and unfit you for your Duty; you may, you ought do mourn, but not as
those without hope for those that sleep in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. Ingenious
Children, when one is beaten, the other will cry, but they must take heed of
murmuring and repining against their Father; Lute-strings, when one is touched,
the other sound; and it is one of those Dues which we owe to our deceased
Friends, to lament at their Funeral; it is those usually that live undesired,
that dye unlamented. It was a Judgment threatened against Jehoiakim, that when
he died, he should not be lamented, Jer. 22.18. But we must not Water our
Plants so as to drown them, and that Sorrow that disables us for our present
Duty in our general or particular Calling, is doubtless our sin. Our chiefest
care for our Relations should be while they are living, and that is to make
provision to our power for Soul and Body, but for the Soul especially; for
alas, what is a moment of time to Eternity? But when God manifests by his
Providence, that it is his Will to transport, and transplant these Flowers into
a better Soil, though we should not be insensible of the stroke, we should not
murmr or repine under it, or accuse the Hand that gave it, but submissively
resign them up to him, who gave them, or rather lent them to us. David did what
he could for his Son while he was living, but ceased mourning for him when he
was dead. Our Tears, though they may be shed upon other accounts, yet it is pity
they should run profusedly in any other Channel but for sin: It being the true
penitential Tears that are the Holy Water that God affects, and the Devil
hates; for if any ^oss or Cross that befalls us, deserve one Tear, our Sins
deserve a thousand, for sin is the cause of all our Losses and Crosses that
befall us, and without Repentance will be the destruction of Soul and Body; and
when we see such direful Effects, and taste such bitter Fruits, we should bewail
the Cause, and root up the Tree. If our Sin lay heavy, our Crosses would seem
light; if we bathed our Sins in our Tears, we should not have so many left to
pour out upon these Occasions. Sin is the occasion of the Death of your dear
Daughter, and will be of your own Death, for had it not been for sin she had
not dyed. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
passed ever all, for as much as all have sinned; the wages of sin is death, but
the gift of God is eternal life. Nay, sin it was that put our sweet Savior to
death; these were the Nails that pierced his Hands and his Feet, the Spear that
pierced his Side, his Betrayer, Accusers, Judge, and Executioners; and can your
Daughter be more dear to you than God's only and beloved Son was to him? He
laid down his Life for her, and her Life is not too good to lay down for him;
he laid down his Life to purchase for her a Mansion of Glory, and she laid down
her Life to go to take Possession, for there is no other way to enjoy it.

Madam, In my present Address to you there are two things designed by me. The
first is, to abate the swelling Tide of your Sorrow, and to bring those Waters
within their proper Bounds and Banks; which I shall endeavor to do by giving
you some few Considerations to Meditate upon, that so when the violent Storm of
Passion shall be allayed, Reason may be spoke with, which cannot many times be
heard when Passion is raging; and after that, my intention is to point you out
some of those many profitable Lessons, which this Providence seems to hand out
to us, which if we can learn, doubtless we shall gain by this loss, or our
gains will be greater than our loss; for God's Rod has a Voice, and it is our
Duty to hear it, Micah 6.9. Nay, it is like Jonathan's Rod, 1 Samuel 14.27. it
has Honey at the end, and if we taste of it, it will open and enlighten our
Eyes. If God with Correction give Instruction, we may well say, as David, It
was good for me that I was afflicted, before I was afflicted I went astray, but
now I learn to keep thy commandments, Psalm. 119.67. Quae nocent docent, is a
Proverb, and that Lesson is best learnt that is set on with whipping, and best
remembered. Correction is seldom a sign of God's hatred, many times of his love;
For whom he loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son that he receives: If
we endure chastening, God deals with us as with sons, for what son is he that
his father, chasteneth not. And if we be without chastening, then are we
bastards and not sons, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8. Amos 3.2. You only have I known of all
the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for your iniquities. God
will be sure to plow his own Ground, whatsoever becomes of the wast; and to
weed his own Garden, though others are let alone, to grow wild; the punishing
Angel must begin at God's Sanctuary, Ezekiel 9. And it was no sign of Love, when
God said, Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone, Hosea 4.17. Since he has
made a match with Mischief, let him have his belly full of it. When Ignatius
was thrown to the Wild Beasts to be devoured, Now, says he, I begin to be a
Christian; for Afflictions are the Gemms and Jewels with which God does adorn
his best Friends; they are Pledges of our Adoption, and Badges of our Sonship;
so that they are no signs of his disinheriting us, and though he may seem to
hide his Face, yet it is no sign of his forsaking us. But now for the quieting
your Spirit under your present Suffering, and this dark Providence, I beseech
you ponder well these few following Considerations, which well weighed, may
through God's Blessing quell those tumultuous Thoughts that swell in your
Breast; and I desire the Lord to bless them to this end.

1. Consider who it is that has done you this supposed Injury, to take away
your Daughter without your consent: And here you may consider not only who it
is, but also what Interest he claims in her; and then consider whether your
Plea will hold good against him. Is it not the great God of Heaven and Earth,
whose Power no Creature is able to resist; whose Will is his Law, and whose
Glory is his End? Is it not he that is called Omnipotent, that does what
pleases him in Heaven, and in Earth, and none can resist him? And is he a fit
Match for you to grapple with? Is it not he that measures the water in the
hollow of his hand, and meteth out Heaven with his span, and comprehends the
dust of the earth in a measure, that weighs the mountains in scales, and the
hills in a balance. To whom all nations are as the drop of a bucket, and are
accounted as the small dust of the balance, that takes up the Isles as a very
little thing: And all nations are before him as nothing, and are accounted to
him less than nothing, and vanity, Isa. 40.12.15.17. Fear ye not me? (says the
Lord) do ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the s^nd for ^he
bound of the sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it; and though the
waves toss themselves, yet can they not prevail, though they roar, yet can they
not pass over it, Je^. 5.22. He sets bounds to the sea, and says, Hitherto
shall thou go, and no further; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed, Job
38.11. He numbreth the stars, and calls them by their names, Psalm. 147.4. He
removes the mountains, and they know not: he overthrows them in his anger.
He shakes the earth out of her place, and makes the pillars thereof tremble.
He commands the Sun, and it arises not, and seals up the Stars. He alone
spreads forth the heavens, and treads upon the waves of the sea. Which
makes Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the south. Which does
great things past finding out, and wonders without number, Job 9.5, etc. Who
lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, and the clouds are his chariot;
he walks upon the wings of the wind. He makes his angels spirits, and his
ministers a flaming fire. That lays the foundations of the earth, that they
shall not be removed for ever, Psalm. 104.3, etc. Is it not he that made the
World of nothing, and can as easily reduce it into nothing? He hangs the Earth
upon nothing, and that in the midst of the open Air, and gave a Being to all
his Creatures when they were nothing, and nothing comes to pass without his
Providence. Nay, is it not he that keeps the Keys of Life and Death at his
Girdle? I kill (says he) and I make alive; I wound, and I heal, neither is
there any that can deliver out of my hand. I lift up my hand, and say, I live
for ever, Deuteronomy. 32.39. He brings to the gates of death, and back again, and
does what pleases him in heaven, and in earth, and none can resist him,
neither dare any say; What do thou? And is this he that has done you this
wrong, and with him is it that you contend? But consider, Shall we provoke the
Lord to jealousy, are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10.22. Shall we provoke him
to a Duel, as sometime Caligula did their Heathenish Jupiter. Was there ever
any that hardened himself against God, and prospered? Job 9.4. Who ever could
boast of the last word, or glory in the last blow? The Walls of Aphek did
Execution on the Blasphemous Syrians, and the Angel of God upon the Assyrians.
If we harden our heart against God, he will harden his hand against us, for he
will lay us upon our back, ere he leave. But happily though we do acknowledge God
does excel us in Power, yet we imagine we have the better Cause, and therefore,
with Jonab, we think we do well to be Angry; or at least, with Job, we would
dispute the Point with him, Job 13.3. Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and
I desire to reason with God. Why, what has God done? Why, he has taken away
your Daughter in the midst of her days. Well, but has he no Interest in her?
Is it not he whose we are, and whom we serve? Was it not he that gave her her
Being, and breathed into her the breath of Life, and she became a living Soul?
Did he not give her her Being? It Is not long since there was nothing heard of
her; and did he not continue her in her Being till her death? Was it not he
that fed and clothed her at his own Cost and Charges? And was she not engaged
to him for every bit of Bread she did eat, and every drop of Drink she drank,
and for the Clothes she did wear? Was it not his wool, and his flax that
clothed her, his corn and his wine that fed her, his silver and his gold that
enriched her, Hos. 2.8. Let us take heed then of paying our Rent to a wrong
Landlord; her Limbs and Senses, her Peace and Plenty, her Wit and Reason, yea,
her Life and Breath were given, or rather lent her by God. It was he that
covered her in your Womb, and through him she was born, Psalm. 139.13. It was he
that put bowels of Compassion into your Heart, to make Provision for her, when
she could make none for her self; and to him she was indebted for every breath
she breathed, and for every Mercy that rendered her Life more comfortable to
her; and does it become Christians thus to quarrel with our great Benefactor?
Or is it meet that we should require of him an Account of his doings? Or expect
that he should bring his Will to ours? Whose is the Pot but the Potmakers, and
may not he if he please dash it in pieces with his foot? And who can say, why
do thou thus? Now, if this great God, this Omnipotent Being, this God that
has such an Interest in us, and such Authority over us, yea, greater than any
Man upon Earth has over any thing he does enjoy, has taken away one of his
own Creatures, and glorified himself with her that he had made for his own
Glory, shall we take Offense at it? That it was his Hand I doubt not but you
acknowledge, for nothing comes to pass without his Providence. Affliction
springs not out of the dust, neither does trouble arise out of the ground, yet
man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward, Job 5.6. These things come
not to pass by Fate, or blind Fortune, as the Heathens imaginee, or by Chance,
as the Philistines supposed, 1 Samuel 6.9. but the hand of God is in all this;
and therefore the lamenting Church concludes, That she will bear the
indignation of the Lord because she had sinned against him; Why should a living
man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Lam. 3.39. Is there evil in
the city, and the Lord has not done it? Amos. 3.6. That is, the Evil of
Punishment for the Evil of Sin. He is not guilty of sin, He is of purer eye
than to behold iniquity with approbation. Shall not the judge of all the earth
do right? Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, if the Lord commands
it not? Lam. 3.37. I form the light, and I create darkness; I make peace, and
create evil: I the Lord do these things, Isa. 45.7. Yea, we may find that the
Evil that came upon Jerusalem came from God, Micah 1.12. For God sits at the
Stern, and guides the great Affairs of the World; and when we sin, what can we
expect from a Righteous Judge but Sufferings? Where sin goes before, sorrow
follows, as the shadow follows the substance. But now you have found out the
Person, and the Fact is confessed, what Accusation will you form against this
Omnipotent God, seeing he has meddled with nothing but his own Creature, the
work of his own hands, and one that he has a greater Interest in than ever you
had? What Arguments will you use to defend your Cause against him? Job indeed
had a good mind to quarrel him, and as good a Cause for ought I know as any Man
living; for God himself commends him above all the Men upon the Earth, for a
perfect and an upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil; yet holds
he his integrity (says he to Satan) although thou movedst me against him, to
destroy him without a cause, Job 2.3. Oh (says he) that God would answer me,
Job 31.30. But when God accepted the Challenge, and posed him with some hard
Questions, he cries out, I am vile, what shall I answer? I will lay my hand
upon my mouth. Once h^ve I spoken, but I will not answer; yea, twice, but I
will proceed no further, Job 40.4, 5. Yea, we find him at the loss of his seven
Sons and three Daughters, the loss of all his Cattle, blessing the Lord: The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord, Job.
1.^1. We find him not cursing at the Chaldeans, or reviling at the Sabeans, as
many would have done; he knew whoever was the Rod, God's Hand held it; and
whoever was the Instrument, God was the Author. This Consideration quieted
David, when that dead Dog Shimei railed upon him, and cursed him; The Lord
(says he) has bid him curse David, 2 Samuel 16.7. This quiered good Old Eli,
when the sad Tidings of the death of his two Sons, and the ruin of his Family
was foretold, It Is the Lord (says he) let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. This Consideration also silenced Aaron, when his two Sons, Nadab and
Abihu, were both slain with fire from Heaven, Levit. 10.3. And Aaron held his
peace. He bridled his Passion, and submitted his Will to God's Will. And how
then dare we dispute the Point with God, that have neither Might nor Right on
our side, that are but frail, yea, sinful Dust and Ashes, poor Worms, that if
he tread upon us, he leaves us dead behind him? Who are we, that we should be
discontent with his dealing, while we have no wrong done us, or think to
struggle out of his hand when we have no Power, or be sullen under his Rod,
when it is for our own good? God is not engaged to give us any Account of his
doing; but sure it may suffice us, when he tells us, All shall work together
for our good, if we love him, Romans 8.28. And then why not this Providence? We
take bitter Pills, and unsavory Potions upon the Word of a Physician, when he
Sugars them with the hopes of Health: And shall we mistrust the great
Physician, that cannot deceive, nor be deceived? Yea, how unsuitable is it for
Christians to repine under such Dispensations of Providence, who daily pray,
Thy will be done in ^arth, as it i^ in heaven, cheerfully, readily, and
willingly, and yet murmr when his Will is done, and prefer our own Wills
before his? Nay, further consider if you are not Accessory to this Cross that
you now lie under: Or have you not a hand in making the Rod, wherewith ye are
beaten? There are two ways we may be Accessory to the Death of our Relations:
The one is, by lodging them too near the Heart; even in that Room which Christ
has reserved for himself: This makes God like a Jealous Husband, remove that
Servant out of the Family, which he sees his Wife dotes upon; as a Father takes
away the Knife, for fear of Danger, or the Meat, for fear of a Surfeit; for
many times we grasp those Thorns so hard till they prick us to the heart; and
then like Children we cry when we have hurt our selves. Some on the other side
through Carelessness or Covetousness neglect the necessary means of preserving
or restoring the Health of their Relations. But if you can clear your self of
the former, I think all that know you will clear you of the latter; for the
hand of God was so evidently seen in this Visitation, that no Providence, no
C^^^, no Cost, nor Pains could prevent, or remove it; God denying a Blessing to
all the means that were used, and did immediately dispute his own Right, and
claim his own Interest, and silence all Gainsayers. Oh how good is it for us
to hang loose to all Creature Comforts, and not set up any Idols in our Hearts,
but leave all our Relations to be at God's dispose; for many times we our
selves weave the Spider's Web out of our own Bowels, with which we are
entangled; and twist the Snare with our own fingers wherein we are held: Let us
therefore in the first place consider who it is that has done this supposed
Injury, and the serious Consideration of it will do much to allay the Storms of
our Passion, and quell and suppress those tumultuous Thoughts that rage in our
Breast, and do much toward the calming of our Spirits.

2. And as we have considered who it is we contend with, even the Mighty God of
Heaven and Earth; in the next place, it is not amiss to consider who we are,
that thus quarrel him, even Dust and Ashes, Worms-meat, poor, frail, indigent
Creatures we are that thus oppose the Will of this great God, and find fault
with his Government of the World. What King (says our Savior Christ) going
out to make war against mother King, sits not down first, and consulteth
whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with
twenty thousand? Or else while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an
embassage, and desires conditions of peace, Luke 14.31, 32. And this is our
Wisdom to do when we see we cannot grapple with him, to lay down our Arms, and
submit and sue for Peace, before the Contention grow too high; for doubtless we
may easily see we are not a meet Match for him, our Original is but from the
Earth; The Lord formed man out of the dust of the earth, and breathed into him
the breath of life, and man became a living soul, Genesis 2.7. and ere long we
must be resolved into Earth, Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shall return,
Genesis 3.19. And is such a despicable Worm able to contend with the Almighty?
Yea, all of us, high and low, rich and poor, noble and base, were bewen out of
the same rock, and dug out of the same hole of the pit, Isa. 51.1. And all
had the same Original, and are poor, frail, contemptible Nothings. Is my
strength (says Job) the strength of stones, or are my sinews of brass? Job
6.12. And what if it were? Were our Flesh of Brass, and our Sinews of Iron,
could we then grapple with the Almighty? Was ever any that hardened himself
against God, and prospered? Dust we are by Creation, sinful Dust by our
Defection, and to Dust we shall return at our Dissolution. Our father was an
Amorite, and our mother an Hittite. This may make us sprinkle the Dust of
Humility upon our Heads. It Is said, some Creatures are bred in Sugar, we cannot
boast of so sweet an Original, but may look back to the slimy Clay, and may say
to corruption, thou art my father, and to the worm, thou art my mother, and my
sister. The greatest Persons are but a little Air and Dust tempered together,
but Soul and Soil, Breach and Body, a Pile of Dust, and a puff of Wind. God
need not to Muster an Army against us, if he tread upon us, we are left dead
behind him; if he withold our breath, we dye, and our thoughts perish; he can
with a frown turn us into Hell, yea, turn Heaven and Hell and all into nothing:
And are we able to grapple with him? Nay, this is not all; we have not this our
poor Being of our selves, he it was that made the Clay of nothing, and he it
was that gave us our Shape and Being; he was the Potter, and we were the Clay
in his hands; he gave us a Being, and it is he that gives us a comfortable
Being. We are his Creatures, and he made us; the works of his hands, and
fashioned us: And shall we thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise?
Is not be our father that bought us? Has not be made us, and established us?
Deuteronomy. 32.6. Shall the pot say to him that made it, Why have thou made me thus?
Shall the ax exalt it self against him that heweth with it? God has more
Propriety in us than we have in our selves, or in any thing we enjoy, yea, in
our Children; these were given, or rather lent us for a time; and the Soul is
but a Tenant at will in the Body. Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a
price, therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirits, which are
God's, 1 Cor. 6.19.20. He gave us our Being, and can if he please quickly
render us a non entity, for when he lost his Property in us we find not; nay,
yet more, had we continued in our Integrity, in which we were created, we might
have had more to say for our selves, than now we have. God made us in his own
Image, Holy and Happy, but by our sin we brought not only Death, but all
Miseries attending it: The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is
eternal life, Romans 6.23. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, Romans 5.12. We
are the sinful Offspring of Adam, and we have inherited our Fathers
Corruptions. Infants are no Innocents, the first sheet wherewith they are
covered, is woven of sin and shame, blood and filth, Ezekiel. 16.46. The Image of
God is lost, and the Image of Satan set in the room; Original Righteousness
gone, and Original Sin in the stead; and by this means we have debased our
selves below other Creatures, and next to the fallen Angels, are become the most
vile; we became indebted unto God Ten Thousand Talents, and cannot pay a
Farthing; and therefore we were sold Bondslaves to Satan, under the wrath of
God, the curse of the Law, and liable to eternal Damnation, and may justly
expect every day to be cast into Prison, till we have paid the utmost farthing.
And yet shall we contend with our Maker, and complain of wrong, when all that
we have on this side Hell is free Mercy, and Hell it self is no wrong. Nay, let
us further consider, that we our selves are guilty of this we accuse God for;
our Posterity received their contamination from us, which occasioneth Death and
other Miseries; for had your Daughter not had sin, she had not dyed; and this
God, which we now quarrel, is our greatest Benefactor, and freely gives us all
that we do enjoy; We live, and move, and have our being from him; we receive
every good and perfect gift from him: We cannot live a moment without him, and
yet shall we quarrel him? He gives us our Being, yea, a comfortable Being, and
maintains us at his own Cost and Charges ever since we had a Being: We have
Meat, nor Drink, nor Clothes to cover us; neither Corn nor Wine, Wool nor
Flax, Silver nor Gold, but what is his, Hos. 2.8, 9. Neither Wit nor Reason,
Limbs nor Senses, Peace nor Plenty, Health nor Strength, Life nor Liberty, but
by his Gift; and when he pleases can call for all, or any of these from us,
for we have not a breath to breath but what he puts into us; and are we fit to
Challenge this great God to a single Duel, when we cannot move a Tongue or
Finger without his immediate Assistance; for we are so far below him, that if
we do well, we cannot benefit him; if ill, we cannot hurt him, Job 35.7. The
Sun would shine in its own brightness, though all the World were blind; so God
will not cease to be Glorious, though all the World were wicked: What can we
give him that is not his own? And our offered Incense would have a bad savor
if it did not smell strong of the hand that offers it. The Sun runs his
course; though the Atlanters curse him at his rising, being scorched with his
heat; and also the Moon, notwithstanding the barking of snarling Curs. So God
disposes the Affairs of the World; He rules, let the earth be never so
unquiet. But to our business: The Contention lies between God and us; the Maker
and Governor of all the World, and poor Dust and Ashes. Who shall have his
Will, and dispose of God's own Creatures, the work of his own hands; and you
see on what disadvantageous ground we stand, and may easily judge of the issue.
The Question in Controversy is, Whether God can Lawfully and Justly take away
any of those, which we call our Relations, though they are his Creatures, and
bring them out of this Vale of Misery unto these Mansions of Glory, which he
has provided for those that love him, without our leave and liberty, and free
consent, without doing us wrong. This we seem to deny, when we mourn, and
over-mourn, and grudge and repine, when God makes his Will known in such
Dispensations of Providence; for if this be not it, what is it? He gave you
your Daughter, or rather lent her to you for a time, and now requires but his
own, and that to consummate the Marriage between Christ and her Soul, and you
seem to forbid the Banes, and deny your Consent to the Marriage. Abraham was of
another mind, when he was commanded to Sacrifice his only Son, which was a far
greater Trial; this was his only Child, but yours is not; he must be the
Instrument to take away his Life, this is not required at your hands; he did
actively submit, you only passively, when you cannot resist; what in this case
we should do, were we able to resist, I know not. Now, though in plain words we
do not say God does wrong us, yet our murmuring at the Providence yields some
suspicion that these are our thoughts; for if God will not at our Request alter
his Eternal Decrees, to please our Humor, we are discontented, and in effect
we seem to quarrel him, that he did not receive us into his Counsel, when he
made his Decrees, and seem to say, as Alphonso, King of Arragon did affirm,
That if he had been of Counsel with God in the Creation, he could have ordered
things better than they were: And we seem to think it was not well nor wisely
done of God to determine the Death of our Relations without our knowledge or
consent, especially to call them out of the Vineyard so long before Night,
though it be but to give them their Wages. Now, if this be not the state of the
Controversy between God and us, I acknowledge I know it not; and in such a
case what Advocate shall we find to take our part, or plead our Cause. But let
us for once suppose a possibility that we were able by fair means or soul, to
persuade God to alt^r his unalterable Decrees, that they might be more mutable
than the Laws of the Medes and Persi^^^, that altered not: And suppose he
should hang the Keys of Life and Death at our Girdles, a Privilege which no
Man living ever yet enjoyed: Suppose it were left at our dispose, when, and
how, and where our selves and Relations should dye, do we verily believe we
could manage the business better than he does in whose hands it is? And could
we determine of a fitter time, and know better their Work is done, when they
could be spared, and when they are ripe for Glory? This were presumption in us
to think; so, does not the chief Husbandman better know when his Corn is ready
for the Barn, and his Roses for his Bosom? We should think it Presumption in a
Son or Servant, that should follow the Dictates of his own Will, and prefer it
before our just Command. But were such a Privilege granted us, which is
impossible that it ever should be, we might be the first that repented it; how
oft-times have we seen an over-desired, or over-cockered Child to be a Scourge
to the Parents, and to bring their gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
Sometimes by their vicious and lewd courses, which has made them wish they had
buried them in their Childhood; sometimes by continual Sickness, Weakness,
Pains, or other Affliction, Parents have been scourged for their inordinate
desires. Rachel so earnestly desired Children, that if she had them not, she
must die in a pet; God gave them to her, but it cost her her Life: There are
many, that by reason of Pains, or other Afflictions, long for death, and dig
for it, as for hid treasures, and rejoice exceedingly when they can find the
grave, Joh 3.21, 22. and their Friends are as willing to part with them, as
they are to go, and long for their death as much as they desired their lives.
But can we indeed think it fit that our Wills should be the Rule of God's
actings, or that we are really wiser than he is? God forbid: happily we are loath
to speak out, that these are our desires; but does not our reluctance make it
out? When a Child murmures, and repines, and cries, and snubs, when his Father
Commands him to do a thing, does it not show, that if he durst, he would
disobey, and that there is not a full resignation of his Will to his Fathers
Will? He that gives us our lives, and the lives of our Relations, is ever
fittest to dispose of them. Were Death at our dispose; Heaven would be long
empty, our Friends should nor come there yet, and our Enemies never; our
Friends should live too long, and our Enemies die too soon. But these things,
whatever we think or say to the contrary, are determined by wiser Counsels,
yea, an irreversible Decree; It Is appointed once to do, and after death the
judgment, Heb. 9.27. And we our selves shall ere long know by Experience, that
we are not secure from Death's Arrest; and happy will it be for us if this
Pursevant fetch us into Glory, and not force us into Hell: To prevent this,
it is good to subject our Wills to God's Will in all things, for we shall never
have content or satisfaction in our mind till this be done, but fears and
jealousies what if this or that happen; you see how vain it is to oppose our
Wills to God's Will, and think to resist him, or struggle out of his hand; it is
a thousand times easier to resist the Tide, and keep it back when it is coming
in, or to resist the universal Darkness that follows the setting of the Sun.
You have heard who it is we contend with, and that is God, that can do what
pleases him; and who we are that oppose him, those that cannot fetch one
breath, or move one finger without his assistance; and what the issue of such a
Contest will be, is not hard to Divine.

3. Cons. We have already considered the Parties engaged in the Quarrel, it
remains that consideration be had of the wrong that is done, that if it may be,
the Controversy may be ended. In this Quarrel you are the Plaintiff, and God
the Defendant, who has done the supposed wrong, and it is much if the Judge of
the whole Earth should do wrong; and God seems to be willing to have it brought
to the Trial, and to say, as sometimes to his own People, Micah 6.3. Oh my
people, what have I done unto you, and wherein have I wearied you? testify
against me. God need not to give an Account of his Actions, being a free Agent,
whose Will is his Rule, yet is willing to put the Matter to an indifferent
Judge, as he does the Controversy which he had with his Vineyard, Isa. 5.3, 4.
And now, O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you,
betwixt me and my Vineyard. What could I have done more for my Vineyard, that I
have not done in it? etc. He is willing the World should judge whether his ways
be equal or no; he desires a Bill may be drawn up by the Plaintiff against him,
and his Charge may be known, that he may answer for himself. The like we read
of, Job 32.35, etc. Oh that my adversary had written a book, I would take it
upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown unto me, I would declare unto him the
number of my steps, etc. Can you say be has been a hard Master, or a dry and
barren Wilderness to you? I know you will not, you cannot; but God may better
say to you, than Themistocles to his ungrateful Countrymen, Are you weary of
receiving so many Courtesies from one man? Or as Christ to the hard hearted
Jews, Many good works have I done among you, for which of these do you stone
me? Why is it that you complain, and spend so many sighs, and sobs, and
sorrowful tears? Why is your Countenance cast down, or why does Discontent
appear in your Face? Why, God has taken away from you your Daughter, which you
loved, and from whom you expected much comfort, and that without your leave and
^iking, and against your will. But will this bear an Action? Did not he love
her as well as you? And was he not as well able to prefer her? Was not she his,
as well as yours? Yea, had he not a greater Interest in her? She was his by
^^ght of Creation, did not he make her of nothing? Was she not his also by
right of Redemption, when his only Son lost his Life to buy her out of Slavery?
She is Christ's by Donation, being one that his Father gave to him, which he
will not lose, John 6.39. And she has also devoted her self to him, and
resigned her self and all she had to his dispose. She is also his by
Preservation; it is he that maintained her at his own Cost and Charges, ever
since she had a Being, and paid you well for Nursing her. Christ has also a
Matrimonial Right in her, she being espoused to him. In the time of the Law,
the Children begotten in Bondage were accounted the Master's; and you being
God's Servant, he has an Interest in your Children also. She is his Daughter
as well as yours; his by Adoption: What Interest you have, was only given or
lent, you being but Instrumental in her production, and will you yet dispute
the Point, which has most Right to dispose of her? She called him Father, and
so she was his Adopted Child, as well as you Mother: She was the Work of his
hands; he was the Potter, she but the Clay; and whose is the Pot but the
Pot-makers? He made her for his Glory, and will you not give him leave to
glorify himself in her Salvation? By a mutual consent she is married to
Christ, and if he demand his Wife, will you deny her? If any other lay any
claim to her Body, yet the Spirit returns to God that gave it; He breathed into
her the breath of Life, and it is he alone that restrains her breath. She was
yours indeed by Relation; both you and she are God's by Purchase. You are not
your own, but bought with a price. And he that has called her hence, will ere
long send for you after her. This is no continuing City, you look for, and she
has found one above, whose Builder and Maker is God. While she was here she
was a Tenant at will, in a poor crazy Cottage, a House of Clay, subject to
moulder about her ea^s: Now she is commanded by the Landlord to surrender, yet
with a Promise of a better Habitation. God has commanded to pull down this
Earthly Tabernacle, and has provided her a Palace, A house not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens, whose builder and maker is God; and has
exalted her from a Cottage to a Crown. And is this the wrong that you complain
of? Has not God much more cause to complain of you, that do what you can to
hinder her Promotion. She was under Age, but now comes to Inherit. If you say,
you had her not long enough, who shall be Judge, her Father or you? Do you
pretend to any Promise of a longer time? Produce it if you can; if not, lay
your hand upon your mouth. Could you have provided better for her than he has
done? If not, why do you envy her Happiness? He has sent for her home to his
own Court, provided a Husband for her, married her to his Son, who has lodged
her in his own Bosom: And what wrong is in all this? What cause of sighs, and
groans, and showers of tears? And he claims as great a Privilege in you as in
her, and ere long if it be denied, will distrain for it, and try his Title, and
repining will do no good; it is much better to submit, as David did, who fasted
and prayed when his Son was living, but when he was dead, comforted himself,
and said, I shall go to him, but he shall not come to me, 2 Samuel 12.23. But
perhaps, if a separation must be, you had rather have gone before her: But must
your Will needs be preferred before God's, who gave you liberty to choose?
Indeed this was David's fault and failing, till he was chid out of this Humor,
2 Samuel 18.33. O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom: would God I had died
for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son. Jonah in a pet had rather have died, than
his Gourd should have withered; he prayed for Death, and told the Lord, That he
did well to be angry, even unto death, for the Gourd's sake; but God had
determined he should live, and the Gourd should die. Our Lives are not in our
own hands, nor in our Enemies hands, but in the hands of God; we cannot appoint
God what to do, or who to call for, neither is it fit we should; he knows best
when our Task is done, and when we are ready. But you did expect she should
have lived longer, but what ground had you to build such an Expectation upon?
It Is true, she was young; but do not far younger than she was feel the dint of
Death? Yea happily, if it were well considered, as many die before they come to
her Age, as live beyond it; you your self buried one at a far younger age, your
knew she was Mortal, and why should you promise her more time than God had
promised her? I am sure God never made any Promise to frustrate his Eternal
Decrees; she might indeed have lived longer, even to the Age of Methusalem, had
God willed it; and she might also have died younger, yea, and never saw the
Sun. But who is it that he has made of his Cabinet-Counsel? Or who is it that
can come to a composition for a Lease of his own or Friend's Life? But is this
all the thanks you render to God for sparing her with you to comfort you for
about Twenty Years, that you murmur? Had it been more, happily had it been Twenty
more, the thanks had been all one, and your sorrow at the parting never the
less; and will nothing content except we be our own carvers? But suppose you
hoped she should survive you, and what then? Would not there have been grief at
the parting? But you would have had the burden cast upon her shoulders, but God
that bids us take up the Cross, will have the making of it himself, and lays it
upon whose back he pleases, and will not humor us so far as to let us have
our will, when it stands in competition with his own. And truly this Cross is
so perfectly of God's making, that he that runs may read it: But had he made
use of any Instrument, his Hand might have been seen in the Work. But she was
hopeful, and could not be spared; and is not this matter of Comfort to you,
which you make the ground of your Grief? The more Gracious, the more Glorious;
the more Holy, the more Happy, the better she was, the fitter for Heaven. There
are two things which may trouble us at the death of Relations: the one is, when
we can see no Evidence of Grace; the other, when we have neglected our Duty to
them, especially to their Souls, in their lifetime. The reason why David did
so woefully bewail the Death of Absalom, is imagined to be one or both of these.
When our Relations are fitted for Glory, I think it is no uncharitable wish to
wish them out of a troublesome World, in those Celestial Enjoyments. Paul did
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which was best of all. But to
wish those out of Glory that are in, were both an unprofitable and uncharitable
desire, and argues more Passion and Self-love, than well grounded Charity. Now,
there is no going to Heaven, but through the Ga^es of Death; and it is through
Death's Portal that we must enter. She has paid the Debt we all owe, and would
you have her endure these Pangs and Pains over again? You came not into the
World together, and it was unlikely that you would go together out; and when
ever a parting was, it was like to be with grief. She has changed her Husband,
but it is for the better; an Earthly for an Heavenly; she had a large Jointure
before, but it is much amended, it is now advanced to a Crown and Kingdom. She
has left her Relations behind, but she has better there, Saints and Angels,
the Souls of Just Men made perfect: There she can serve the Lord without
distraction, and sing Hallelujahs to Eternity without weariness; here
Corruption attended her best Duties, there sin and sorrow shall be no more;
here she was troubled with Satan's Temptations, there he cannot come to throw
one Dart, or shoot one Arrow at her; here she was liable to Pains, Aches,
Griefs, and Troubles, all these are there removed; here she could scarcely open
an Eye, or an Ear, but it let in sin, or sorrow; there all tears shall be wiped
away, and a sad or sorrowful thought shall never enter. And what cause has she
to complain of wrong? And if neither of you be wronged, why is this wast? Why
so many sighs, so many sobs, so many sorrowful tears, which might better run in
another Channel? Had she liberty ^o speak for her self, it might probably be in
such words as these, which Christ upon the Cross spoke ^o the Women that
bewailed him, Luke 23.28. Weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for
^our children, etc. those that are yet in the Vale of Tears; it is the
Church-Militant that deserves ^ity, not the Church-Triumphant. Lament rather
the condition of those that survive, for you know not what their Sufferings may
be; the other are out of harms-way, and safely landed in the Port of Heaven.
Now, is there such a wrong done you or her, that God takes her to himself
before you were willing to part with her, though he had a better Interest in
her than you could pretend, and made her fit for Glory, and translated her
thither? You agree both in the thing, but the Quarrel is about the time, and
the Controversy is, whose Will must be obeyed, or whose Judgment must be
preferred, which is the best time. Many of the wiser Heathens have submitted
with less contradiction: Anaxarchus, when told of the death of his two Sons,
answered, I knew that they were Mortal; Et stultus est qui mortem mortalium
deflet. Now in the present Controversy, may not God say to you, as sometimes
he did to his People, What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they
are gone from me? What wrong have I done, that you thus complain? One of us
must submit, and must it be me? Must I alter my Eternal Decrees for your sake,
or will there be no Peace to be had? The Lord may say, as Jacob did to Laban,
when he so fiercely pursued him, Genesis 31.36. What is my trespass? What is my
sin? Declare it before the world, that they may be our judges. Nay, has not
God in this very Affliction sugared your Pill, which might have been much
bittered; she might have been taken away in her younger years, before you had
such hopes of her Integrity, or at least denied you such Evidence of her
Conversion; then might you have feared she had been lost indeed; or instead of
one, he might have taken all your Children, when as yet two survive; o^ by the
same stroke he might have taken away your dear Husband, better to you than ten
Sons, as Elkanah said to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8. Or he might have suffered your
Children to be a heartbreaking to you, as too many in these days are, by their
vicious Lives and Conversations, who bring their gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave, which makes them with, with Augusti^^ that they had never married, or
had dyed childless. These are not such rare Examples in our days, but too
frequent. She dyed a Natural Death, many now adays, as well as Job, Eli, Aaron,
David, and others in former times were not so happy, as to say so of theirs.
Neither is there any guilt upon you, as upon some that have cause to mourn for
neglecting any means for the preservation of her Life, when some be wickedly
Accessory to their Childrens Death. If there were any fault, (which yet I
cannot accuse you of) it was in the excess of your Love, which I the more fear,
when I see the excess of your Sorrow; and this is a fault which Indulgent
Mothers are apt to run into. But you will say, you could more easily have born
any other Burden, or suffered any other Cross: Why then it seems God has let
you Blood in the right Vein, as he did the Young Man in the Gospel, that was
willing to do any thing Christ commanded, but part with his Riches; but Christ
will have a full resignation of our selves, and all that is ours, or he will
not own us. No beloved Delilah must be retained, the Cross that Christ appoints
we must bear, and must not pick and choose our own Burden: Luke 14.26. If any
man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, wife and children, brethren
and sisters, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. That is, if he
prize any of those before him, or will rather part with Christ than with any or
all of these, he deserves not the name of a Christian; for all we have in the
World is given to us as Love Tokens from God, to signify his Love to us, and
to oblige our Love to him; and sometimes God calls back some of these Gifts, to
see whether we love him or his Tokens better. God gave you liberty before she
dyed, to let her and you see the Fruit of her Womb, a Son, which though he soon
called off the Stage, yet at the Resurrection be shall stand in his lot. But
it is farther objected, It was a good Woman: And what then, must not good Women
dye? If Death would spare the Gracious, Heaven would be empty, for no other
shall go thither. Was she too good to be the Child of God, the Spouse of
Christ, an Inhabitant in Heaven, a Companion for Angels and Glorified Saints?
But was not her Goodness freely given her by her Husband? She had it not by
Nature, she was beautiful with the comeliness he put upon her, and all this was
in order to fit her for her Marriage. But was not her Goodness your Comfort, as
well as her Reward? Had that been wanting, there had been more cause of Sorrow
than now there is. But she could not be spared: For that it is best to let God
alone with the Government of the World, which he has so wisely managed for
above Five Thousand Years, and never was yet put to a strait for want of
Instruments; for he that of stones can raise children to Abraham, never wants
Instruments to do his Work. It Is he that took her hence best knows whom he can
spare; doubtless he can raise Instruments as well as in former times, and
qualify whom he pleases for the Work; his Vineyard shall be dressed, or he will
send Laborers in at the eleventh hour; she is called out by the Owner of the
Vineyard, to receive her Wages, who can send in more if he want: Had she had
more Work to do, she had had more time to do it in; her Father that loves her,
knows the World is infectious, and he has taken her out of the Corrupt Air,
lest she should take the Infection. But she was in the Prime and Flower of her
Age, and it is pity such Blossoms should be nipt; but God best knows when his
Roses are ripe, and when they should be plucked, and when it is the best Season
to gather his Flowers, and if he pluck this Rose in the bud, to put into his
Bosom, what need this Complaint? He takes not his People hence till they are
ripe for Glory. Though we know not the reason of his doings, doubtless he has
wise and gracious ends in all his Actions; it is not necessary for us to be of
his Counsel, yet he condescends so far to us, as to tell us, All things shall
work together for good to those that love God, Romans 8.28. And why may nor this
dark Providence do you good? Sometimes the righteous are taken away from the
evil to come, Isa. 57.1. And this may be the present case, and happily you may
have more cause to mourn that you are alive, than that she is dead; we know not
what Cup may be put into our hands, happily such as you would not desire to see
her drink. However Troubles and Afflictions are so common to Men of all Ranks
and Conditions, that the Holy Ghost tells us, That blessed are the dead that
dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them,
Rev. 14.13. To dye in the Lord is a Happiness, to dye for the Lord, says
Latimer, is such a Privilege, that is not granted to the Angels in Heaven:
Mors privare potest opibus non operibus. Death may deprive us of our Wealth,
except we have sent it before us to Heaven, but not our good Works. But this
your Daughter was your firstborn, and was it not fit she should have the
Precedence in her Death, as well as in her Birth? The firstborn has no
Privilege against Death more than the rest: When Death knocks, all must open;
yea, God seems to claim a greater Interest in the firstborn than in the rest,
Exodus 13.2. Our Savior Christ was the firstborn, yea, the only Son of his
Father, and as well beloved as your Daughter could be, yet suffered Death for
us: And shall we think a Son, or Daughter, or our own Lives too good for him?
Abraham did not deny his Son, his only Son, when God required him; yea, was
content to kill him with his own hands. And till there be a through resignation
of us, and ours, and all we enjoy, to God's dispose, till we are content to be
what he would have us be; and do and suffer what his Will is, we are not in a
Christian Posture, and God if he love us, will bring us to this, and if one
blow will not do it, more shall: Our stout Stomachs must stoop, and we must
bend or break; the best way to get from under the Rod is Submission, for we can
neither grapple with God, nor struggle out of his hands. Let us now sum up all
that is in Controversy between God and you, and let us see whether it will be
a considerable Charge. God took away your Daughter without your consent, and
against your will, laying more claim to her than you can, and brought her out
of a state of Misery, which you had involved her in, out of the Devil's Slavery
from under the Curse of the Law, and the Wrath of God, and Eternal Damnation,
and that by the precious Blood of his own Son, and by Regenerating her, and
Adopting her for his Child, changing her Nature, and giving her the disposition
of a Child, clothing her with the rich Robes of Christ's Righteousness, and
decking her with the Graces of his Spirit, Espousing her to his Son, providing
an Inheritance for her, and when she came to Age, has transported her thither,
and gave her Possession of the purchased Inheritance, those Mansions of Glory
provided for her from all Eternity; wiped all Tears from her Eyes, and all
Sorrow from her Heart, and all Sin from her Soul, married her to his Son, who
lodged her in his Bosom, gave to her the largest Fountain, even a Kingdom of
Glory. And for this you mourn, and will mourn, and think you do well to mourn,
and, like Rachel, refuse to be comforted, because she is not. This is the wrong
that draws Tears from your Eyes, and sorrowful Sighs and Sobs from your Heart:
And may not God call Heaven and Earth to Witness against you, that your
Complaints are causeless, and your Tears needless? Had he taken her in her
sins, and cast her into Hell, he had wronged neither the one nor the other,
though her condition had been deplorable; but now he may say of her, as
sometimes of his Vineyard, Isa. 5.3. What could I have done more for her than I
have done? And what Reason can you give why you sorrow as one without hope for
one that sleeps in the Lord? Were it a deed of Charity, could you prevail to
wish her out of those Celestial Enjoyments back again into a World of
Troubles, Vexations, and Dangers, and that only to bear you Company? Do you
think that all the Glory, Splendor, and Magnificence; all the Riches, Honors,
and Promotions the World ever saw, would be a Temptation to her to leave the
Beatifical Vision, and those Rivers of Pleasures which are at the right hand of
God for evermore? Alas, these are no more to those Celestial Enjoyments, than
a piece of rotten shining Wood to the Sun in its Splendor. And do you think
that Twenty Years in Heaven will not make amends for Twenty Years on Earth,
which she possibly might have lived?

4. Cons. In the next place it will not be amiss to consider how little good
your immoderate Mourning will do in this case: And truly in the upshot you will
find it will do much more hurt than good, even to your self, and all about you;
for by this means you perplex your self in vain, so that you can neither enjoy
your self nor any thing you have with that serenity of Spirit, as otherwise you
might do; and spend that Holy Water, those Tears to no purpose, which were
designed for a better use, and should be spent upon another Account, and would
do more good, did they run in a right Channel. You bewail the Effect, but it is
much better to bewail the Cause, for were that removed, the Effect would cease,
Non valet medicamentum dum ferrum invulnere. Sin deserves all the Tears we can
shed, and it is better weep for living Sins than dead Children; if the latter
deserve one Tear, the other deserves a thousand: And it is not for your own
sins alone that this Flood-gate should be opened, but for the sins of the
Times, our National sins; for from the greatest to the least, all have gone
astray; and if there be not a Reformation, we may expect a Desolation, and God
expects some to stand in the Gap, Ezekiel. 22.30. to turn away his wrath from the
Nation; and although there be so few, that they cannot prevail for the Nation,
yet their own Souls shall be saved, as God said of Noah, Daniel, and Job, Ezekiel.
14.14. Yea, in a common Calamity, before he gives Commission to the Destroyer,
he marks all that are mourners in Sion to be past by, Ezekiel. 9.4. Here Tears
will do good, for the fire of God's Indignation is only to be quenched with the
Tears of True Repentance: But I fear there will be in the day of Visitation few
of those Mourners found; few to stand up in the Gap, though many that make the
Breach wider. This way may do good to your self and others: Thus Job concerns
himself more with his Children when alive, than when dead, Job 1.5.21. Now,
which way can you imagine that the abundance of Tears which you pour out upon
this Account of your Daughter's Death, can benefit either you, or any one else?
In reference to God, it is neither pleasing to him, neither will it prevail with
him; not pleasing, for he has forbidden it: We should not sorrow as men
without hope for them that sleep in the Lord. For if we believe that Jesus dyed
and rose again, even so also them that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him,
1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14. And it reflects some dishonor upon him, when his People are
so unsatisfied with his dealing, and repine under his Dispensation of
Providence. It makes the World believe they take him for a hard Master, yea,
and question his Justice in the Act. It is no Credit to a Master, when his
Servants quarrel at their Diet, their Lodging, their Work, and their Wages:
Others imagine there is something in it that makes them complain. Now, God's
Glory is his End in all his Actions, and it should be ours, and to preserve
that in the sight of the World, we should never hang down the head but for sin,
our own sins, and the sins of others, because God is thereby dishonored, and
his Laws violated: And then that they cannot be prevalent with God is as
evident. You are offended that your Daughter is gone, Hinc illae lachrymae, but
it is an impossible thing to bring her again, and what else can you be satisfied
with? You can never prevail with him to alter his immutable Decrees, which are
as firm as the Pillars of Heaven, and the Foundations of the Earth, and the Sun
and Moon in their courses. And then again I am sure you are not benefited by
it, the present vexation you lie under, must needs make your Life uneasy, yea,
make you a burden to your self, thus to spend your time inter suspiria and
lachrymas, between Sighs and Tears, when the most miserable Bond-slave can do
no more. And hereby you also disable your self for your Duties to God and Man,
both in your general and particular Calling and Relations. Discontent in the
Heart makes a Christian, like Jonah, instead of praying to God, quarrels him,
Jonah 4.2, 3, 4. What Communion can you keep with God, when there are such
tumultuous Thoughts arising in the heart? Doubtless in this pet you cannot
serve God without distraction, neither attend your Worldly Concerns; and that
Sorrow is never pleasing to God, that thus disables you for your Duties, or
hinders you in Heaven's way. Neither can there any benefit arise to your
Friends and Relations; for while you are under such discomposure of Spirit, the
whole Family must taste of the Effects of it; for what comfort can you give
others, that refuse comfort your self? Or how can you Counsel them, that will
take no Advice your self? You have been long in the School of Christ, and he
expects, that being converted, you should strengthen your Brethren. But does
not your carriage put a block in others ways to comfort? This makes you that
you can take little delight in your remaining Relations; nay, to overlook, and
undervalue all your other Mercies, and cannot read Love in any of God's
dealings with you; your finger is still upon the Sore, and this one Cross hides
from your Eyes a thousand Mercies. It had such an effect upon David, though it
was no doubt his failing, when God had given him a Signal Victory, and by that
means brought him back again into his Throne; yet all this was nothing to him,
because Absalom was dead; and neither God nor Man was thanked for the Victory.
So it is with you, the lives of your Husband, Children, Friends, Relations; your
Health, Peace, Plenty, Liberty, Sense, and a thousand more, seem little in your
Eyes: All Haman's Honor, Wealth, Promotion, Children, were nothing to him, so
long as Mordecai the Jew would not bow to him, Esther 5.13. And though God has
given you abundance of these outward things, yea, himself, and promised you
Heaven and Glory into the Bargain, yet all this seems not satisfactory, your
Daughter is not. Now, would not this make a Man suspect she was you^ Idol, and
therefore God took her out of the way, that your Affections might run in the
right Channel. Well, but seeing no living Creature can be benefited by your
Tears, let us see whether your deceased Daughter may, and here is least ground
of all to imagine it. Indeed were the Papists Doctrine of Purgatory true, and
that Souls might be redeemed by Dirges, Masses, and such other Fopperies, then
your Money may do something; but this Fire that was kindled to warm the Popes
Kitchen, can never be extinguished by your Tears, but by the Oil of Angels. But
to pass by that exploded conceit, or rather deceit, as a groundless Fiction:
But whether the Soul be in Heaven or Hell (for a third place the Scripture owns
not) it is in a stated condition, which Eternity it self cannot alter, and our
Tears nothing avail to the one or to the other. In Heaven there can be no
augmentation of Glory; for how can they have more than fullness of Joy and
Pleasures for evermore? What can they have more than the Beatifical Vision of
God, and Fruition of Glory, than rivers of pleasures at God's right hand for
evermore? Communion with, and Enjoyment of God blessed for ever. And can your
Tears procure greater Glory? Here is the maximum quod sic, the highest Pinnacle
of Glory, as much as s^^ll Creatures are capable of at present, and at the
Resurrection, Soul and Body being reunited, their Glory shall be complete, yea,
everl^^^^^g Joy in the Presence of God. And had you your wish for her, it would
fall a thousand times shorter than her real Enjoyment: And what cause is there
of Tears, unless it be in those that envy her Happiness? Now on the other side,
miscarrying Souls can have no diminution of their Torments by the Tears of
their Friends; in their lifetime Prayers and Tears to God in their behalf had
been sit Physic, but when Death comes it is too late, let the Papists say what
they will to the contrary; As the tree falls, so it lies; and as Death
leaves us, so Judgment shall find us. Their own Tears can then do them no good,
though they should weep as much Water as there is in the Sea. There is a time
when God will be found, and there is a time when he will not be found. The Rich
Glutton could not in Hell procure one drop of Water to cool his Tongue: There
is no Redemption out of Hell, and there is no other place for miscarrying Souls
but Hell; the Tormentors will not be bribed, nor the fire quenched with Tears:
Their worm dies not, and their fire never goes out. Tophet is ordained of
old, even for the King it is prepared; he has made it deep and large, the pile
thereof is fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord like a river of
brimstone does kindle it, Isa. 30.33. So that it is evident immoderate Mourning
for deceased Friends either needs not, or boots not; those that dye well, are
set out of the reach of Danger, and those that miscarry, out of the reach of
Recovery. But I desire you further to consider, were your Daughter sensible in
Heaven, what sorrow you have for her on Earth, which is a thing too hard for me
to determine, what thanks think you would she return? We may imagine she would
speak to you in the Language our Savior Christ used to the Women th^^ lamented
him upon the Cross, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, for the misery that is like to come upon you. Yo^ may sigh away your
Comfort, and sob away you^ Health, and weep away your precious time, and
disable your self for your present Duty; but if you mourn all the days of your
Life, and weep till Doomsday, you would find your self where you began, and to
have gotten no ground. It is your Duty to do what you can for your Children
while they live, as David fasted and prayed for his Son, but when dead, say as
he, I shall g^ to her, she shall not come to me: Or as Job, The Lord gave, and
the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. God will not be
persuaded by all your Tears and Complaints to alter his Eternal Decrees to fit
your Humor, though you should drench your self in Sorrow, and drown your self
in Tears, yet it is all one; you may as well mourn that God will not give you
Power to resist the Tide, when it comes in in its strength; or resist the
universal Darkness that comes upon us at the Sun's setting, or stop the Sun and
Moon in their courses, or remove the Pillars of Heaven, or the Foundations of
the Earth, as this; for you cannot alter his Decree, or preserve the Life of
one that he has appointed to dye: He does not only appoint that all Men shall
dye, but the number of their Months are with him, and he appoints their Bounds
that they cannot pass; the time when, the manner how, the Instrument by whom,
are all known to him; and by immoderate mourning at the execution of his Will,
you seem to mourn that you are not God, or not able to resist him, or that he
made you not of his Counsel when he decreed your Daughter's death, which is so
absurd, that no Heathen could in plain words own it. And does not Experience
convince you, your Tears are vain? Was there ever any that by mourning brought
a Soul out of Heaven or Hell, or got any benefit by it? And will you think you
shall be the first? I know some have been raised from the Dead, by the mighty
Power of God, who had determined it should be so, for the confirmation of the
Gospel. But what is this to your case? Let your Grief therefore never exceed
the bounds of Moderation, for it will never do you good, or any one else. But
suppose it were possible to prevail with God in such a Request, and he should
give her her choice to go or stay, you would be never the better; you would
never prevail with her to return: There was indeed such a Petition made to
Abraham for Lazarus to come back into the World, but it was refused; and
Lazarus had met with such hard Measures in the World, that he was not fond of
the Journey; and doubtless she would not be persuaded with all your Arguments
to leave the Bosom of Christ, and the sweet Embraces of her dear Redeemer, to
accompany you for a while, for long it cannot be, before a separation must be
made again, for this is no continuing City; and truly to wish her to leave the
perfection of Glory, and to embrace an estate of Sin and Misery, and subject
her self again to Drudgery and Slavery, Pain and Sickness, Dread and Danger,
Persecution and Affliction, argues more of Self-love, than of true Affection to
her; and I believe when the Passion is over, upon consideration you would not
do it. If a poor Beggar's Daughter, going from door to door, were affected and
beloved by some Mighty Prince, who should take her, cloth and adorn her, marry
her, and make her his Queen, and after this her Mother should persuade her to
leave her Crown and Dignity, her Husband, Honor, and Preferment, and Pleasure,
and go along in her hand as before a begging, it would be hard to persuade her:
The Application is easy, and the Condescension far greater in this case, than
in that; to leave Heaven, to converse with you on the Earth; and were it in
your power, would you expose her again to Sin and Suffering, and to bear again
the Pangs of Death? Would you bring her back again into the Vineyard, now her
Work is done, and she is receiving her Wages, to endure the burden and heat of
the day, and all to bear you Company? You are groaning under the present burden
of Mortality, and are sensible of your Pains and Distempers, and would you wish
her in the like condition? She is now safely landed in the Port of Glory, and
would you have her back again upon the raging Sea, tossed up and down with
Storms and Tempests, among Rocks and Sands, among Pirates and Robbers, and all
this under pretense of Love and Tenderness? What worse can you wish to your
greatest Enemy? She is at her Journey's end, and would you have her tread over
those weary steps again, along the dirty, craggy, rocky, and thorny way, and
pass through those Dangers again she has once escaped. She was an Heiress, and
is come to her Age, and has received her Inheritance; and would you have her
wave her Inheritance, resign up her Crown and Kingdom, and again reduce her
self to servile Slavery, Bondage, and Beggary, carking Cares, and fretting
Fears? She has run the Race, and won the Prize, and would you have her run it
again, and put it to a second venture? She has fought the good Fight, and won
the Victory, and wears the Crown, and would you have her try for it in a second
Duel? Would you have her renounce her Crown and Diadem, divest her self of her
rich Robes, wherewith her Husband has arrayed her, and reassume the rags of
Sin, and the state of Suffering? She is now out of the Devil's reach, and must
she again feel his fiery Darts, and be taken ^n his Snares, and subject her
self to the Allurements of the World, where she shall have Snares said for her
in every State and Condition, every Relation, every Calling, every Enjoyment,
every Duty, yea, every Action? Would you have her ^gain hated, persecuted, and
maligned for Righ^eousness sake, and under continual Fears, Troubles,
Anxieties, and Afflictions? What pleasure think ^ou she can take, that has
been enchaunting ^ut Hallelujahs in the Heavenly Quire, when she ^omes to hear
Swearing, Cursing, ribald and un^avoury Speeches; and to see the Laws of God
broken, as is too frequent in the World; to see Holiness made a Scorn, and
Religion a Laughing-^tock, and those that are Godly made a Prey? Now, what
Arguments would you use to her to ^ain her consent to reassume her former
Estate? ^he has tried both, and knows the difference ^^tter than we; and we
usually say, Contra gustum non disputandum, Experience is the best Master:
Doubtless all your Arguments will prove vain in this case; she better knows now
the Vanity of the World, than formerly she did, and the worth of Celestial
Enjoyments; and her love to God is much more enlarged, her Understanding being
increased; for nothing but Ignorance can stave off our Affections from Christ.
Will you tempt her with Gold, Silver, Precious Jewels? Alas, if you should
empty the Indies, it will no^ do; she must leave better Treasures behind her*
These will but serve her to look upon but ti^^ Death, the other are more
durable, and la^^ even to Eternity, she treads better Metal i^ Heaven under her
feet, Rev. 21.21. The stree^^ of the City are of pure Gold. Or will brave
Apparel, costly Ornaments entice her? Alas, she must leave behind her the rich
Robes of Christ'^ Righteousness, and those Precious Gemms an^ Jewels wherewith
her Husband has arrayed her, far more precious than the World affords, thos^
Robes of Glory which no Man can describe Or will Honor or Preferment do the
work? Alas, the empty thing called Honor, bears no more proportion to Heavenly
Glory, than painted fire on the Wall to true fire; or a King upon a Stage, to a
King upon his Throne; or a liveless Carcass, to a living Man. And what
Preferment can there be greater, than to a Crown of Glory, and to be the Spouse
of the Son o^ God? If you offer her all the Delights of the Sons of Men, what
are those to the Delights of the Sons of God? To those Rivers of pleas^^e,
which are at God's right hand for evermore. These are like Jonah's Gourd, soon
withered; soon ripe, and soon rotten. Will stately Buildings, large Revenues,
Crowns, and Kingdoms prove a Temptation? Alas, this is too weak a Bait, to
allure a Heaven-born Soul: The New Jerusalem, whereof she is a Citizen, is not
to be paralleled in the whole World. See the description of it, or rather the
shadow, for no words in Humane Language can discover it, Rev. 21. where Gold
and Precious Stones are the coursest Materials, yea, too course to describe it
in its Glory. And for spaciousness, the whole Terrestrial Globe does not so
much exceed one square Inch of Earth, as the Heavens exceed the whole Globe.
But it may be her dear Husband may allure her; but she must then leave a better
Husband, even Christ, to whom her Soul was espoused before she went. But her
Father and Mother are here; but she has God for her Father, and Jerusalem that
is above is her Mother, and Angels, and glorified Saints her Brethren and
Sisters, and constant Companions. She was, it is true, a loving and dutiful
Child, and now is a loving and dutiful Wife, and she cannot transgress her
Maker's Laws, not her Husband's Will. With what scorn would she reject such
offers as these, if made to persuade her out of Heaven! Her love to her Husband
would answer all the Objections could be made. But how can you be so much
against the consummation of the Marriage, that were so willing of the
Espousals? I know you traveled in Birth till Christ was formed in her; it was
both your desire and design it should be so, and your delight when it was done;
and is his fetching her home so troublesome? What greater mischief could you
wish to the greatest Enemy you ever had in the World, than to wish him out of
Heaven? And it would be the most signal Revenge, if you could procure it. And
can it be Love th^n to your Daughter? You know not what Cup may be put into
your hand to drink, and would you have a glorified Soul to Pledge you? Were you
in a loathsome Prison, would you wish your dearest Friends to be in the like
condition? Or were you sick, must they be sick also? Is this an effect of L^ve?
Paul indeed desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; but he never
desi^ed any that were with Christ back again; he desired Agrippa, and those
that were with him, were such as he was, except his bonds. He did not desire
their Misery, but their Happiness. The World is but a Pesthouse, and every one
has some Plague Sore or other running upon him, and would you desire any
Friend you love to come into such infected Company? It is but a little while
and you will follow her; and it will be said of you, as of her, She is dead
also. And would there not be another separation if she survived? We are in this
Life like Men in a crowd, almost thronged to Death, and he that first gets out,
is best at ease; and would you wish her again in the midst of the throng? Now,
if you say, as I believe you will, these are not your desires to have her back:
Why then all these Tears, these Sighs, these Sobs, if you imagine she is better
than you? This looks as if you envied her Happiness, and would have her bear
part of your Burden. Nay, immoderate Sorrow signifies that you have hard
thoughts of her condition, for who can mourn for those he thinks happier than
himself?? Who mourns for his Childrens Advancement, especially if he knew they
were out of Danger; this would look more like Envy than Love, to mourn for
another's Welfare. If Galeacius, that Italian Marquess, when he was offered
great Riches, if he would renounce his Religion, cried out, Let their Money
perish with them, that hold all the Wealth in the World worth one day's
Communion with Christ. How much more may a glorified Saint say so, if he were
tempted by the World's Splendor to leave his Celestial Enjoyment, that City
of Pearl, that Mansion of Glory, the Beatifical Vision, the Enjoyment of
Christ, those Rivers of Pleasures, to come and make his abode in the World, for
any earthly Greatness; how scornfully would a glorified Saint entertain such a
Motion? And how little would these Promises affect him? The Martyrs that had
comparatively but a little taste of Christ, yet disrelished all things else in
comparison of him, and forsook all for him; Yea, loved not their lives to the
death, but laid them down at the Stake for his sake, and in his cause. But now
they enjoy him in Glory, what value think you they put upon him? The greatest
cause of sorrow for a dead Child is, when we fear their miscarrying, and are
conscious of the neglect of our Duty to them, in reference to their Salvation.
This we may mourn for, and it may be a corrosive to our hearts, and it should
make us careful for the time to come. But to mourn for those immoderately, that
we believe are translated into Glory, and have the highest pitch of Happiness
we could wish for them, is our weakness, or our sin, or both. Such Tears will
neither glorify God, nor benefit us or our Relations, living or dead, but are
spent in vain. And seeing weeping cannot prevail with God, nor with our
departed Friends to return, let us dry up those Tears, and make no more such
wast, but turn them into a right Channel, and mourn for sin, which is the cause
of their Death, and of our Trouble.

5. The last Consideration I shall commend unto you, is to consider your own
Condition, the uncertainty of your Life, and the have that Death makes to post
you after her; yea, you are following your lamented Daughter at the very heels:
For when your Part is played, you will march off the Stage. How soon a parting
blow will be given to divide you from your other Relations, you know not; how
soon Death will enter into your Lodgings: had your Daughter lived, it is not
likely you would have continued long together. You have lived a considerable
time, the most People in the World die younger; why then take it you so ill
that your Daughter is stepped over the Style before you, when you your self are
ready to tread upon her heels, and to tread out her footsteps? Yet a few
years, and then I shall go whence I shall not return, Job 16.22. And your place
will know you no more, Job 7.10. The thread of your Life will soon be cut,
which can never be pieced; and your Glass run out, which will never be turned;
and the Day be over, which will never dawn again. Such Meditations of Death did
always run in Job's mind, he is much upon this Subject, and had Death always in
his Eye: And the like would do you no hurt, but much good. O remember that my
life is wind, mine eye shall no more see good: The eye of him that has seen me
shall see me no more: Thine eyes are upon me, and I am not. As the cloud is
consumed and vanishes away, so he that goes down to the grave, shall come up
no more. He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him
any more, Job 7.7, etc. Let me alone, that I may take comfort a little, before
I go hence, whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness, and the
sh^dow of death, Job 10.20, 21. He knew that he had not long to trouble the
World, and therefore desired he might not meet with much Trouble in the World.
Death, whether it strikes you or your Relations, gives a parting blow; and
which ever goes first, the other will not stay long behind. Now, is it worth
the while to spend your days in sorrowing for your dead Daughter, when she has
drunk that Health that you your self must so quickly Pledge? Or to wish her
again for so short an Enjoyment, when one of these days you will enjoy her to
Eternity, when she shall be much more lovely than here she was? If you place
your Happiness in the Enjoyment of your Relations in this Life, it is a
short-lived Happiness, and you will shortly have occasion to say, as one about
to leave the World, Spes and fortuna vale te, Farewell Hope and Comfort for
ever. But sure while God is present, a Christian need not care much who is
absent. If we could be as sensible of the with-drawings of God from the Soul,
as of the departure of Friends and Relations, it would prove our greater
trouble: If our hopes were only in this life, we should of all men be most
miserable. Indeed there is cause of sorrow if they die unconverted, and breath
out their Happiness with their Lives. But for the Godly, they cannot only say,
Dum spiro spero, While there is Life, there is Hope; but also Dum expiro spero,
I have Hope in Death it self, Prove. 14.32. Death it self is a Door of Hope to
give them entrance into the Paradise of God, but to the Wicked a Trap-door to
let them into Hell. Both Godly and Wicked shall change their Place, but not
their Company, for they shall have such Company they delighted in here: Those
that must leave all their Comforts behind, no wonder if they are unwilling to
depart. Never had Adam more cause to be unwilling to leave Paradise, or the
Jebusites the strong Holds in Sion, or the unjust Steward to leave his Office,
or the Devils to go out of the Demoniack, when they knew they should never
enter there again, than a wicked Man has to leave the World. Solomon calls the
Grave our long Home; Man goes to his long home, Eccles. 12.5. And well he may,
some happily may sleep there Six Thousand Years before the Resurrection; but
Heaven and Hell may be called so much better, for what is that space of time to
Eternity? It Is called also, The house of all the living; because all that ever
did or shall live, shall there dwell together. God has provided all Men one
House in the Womb, and another in the Tomb; one when they enter into the World,
and another when they go out; and the Wise Man tells us, The day of death is
better than the day^ of ones birth, Eccles. 7.1. For man that is born of a
woman, is born to sorrow, Job 14.1. therefore the Coffin is to be preferred
before the Cradle. An Ancient Father calls the days wherein the Martyrs
suffered, their Birth-days, because then they began to live indeed; their
Marriage-day, because then the Marriage was consummate between Christ and their
Souls. It was an Epicure that said, Ede, bibe, lude post mortem nulla voluptas.
But it is better (says Solomon) to go to the house of mourning, than to the
house of feasting, Eccles. 7.2. Now, through this Gate your dear Daughter is
gone, and you are stepping after her, you are treading out her steps, and
others ere long will do as much for you; you are but a Vessel of Clay, and
begin to crack; your Pains and Aches, and Decays in Nature may mind you that
you are declining, that you have one foot in the Grave, and are you troubled
that another has stepped in before you? Yet a little while and you will enjoy
her to Eternity, when both of you will be stripped of all Infirmities and
Corruption, which here renders Communion less delightful, Where you shall be
ever with the Lord, and with the spirits of just men made perfect, 1 Thessalonians.
4.17. Heb. 12.23. Blessed is that Day, and happy will that Union be between
Christ and the Soul; and happy is that Man, whether he die old or young, that
shall come to Mount Sion, unto the City of the living God, the Heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general assembly and
Church of the firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of
all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of
the new Covenant, etc. Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. Oh, what a Glorious Meeting will
here be in Heaven! how Happy and Glorious will that day be, when we leave this
wretched World, and wicked Company, to enjoy the Assembly of holy and happy
Saints and Angels, yea, of God himself blessed for ever. Now she that formerly
was in her blood, and no eye pityed her, Ezekiel. 16.3, 4, 5, 6. does now shine by
the Beauty her Husband has put upon her, as the stars for ever and ever; and
ere long you will meet where you shall never part: Then will you solace your
selves in each others Love, and both in the love of your dear Redeemer: When
she will never repent that she died so young, nor you, that she lived no
longer. She is not lost, but found; she is but gone a days Journey before you,
and at Night you will Lodge together; you will over-take her, and find her in
her Father's Cabinet among his Jewels: She has gotten the start, and is at the
Race end before you, she has won the Prize; and is this matter of Grief or
Rejoicing? She has cast her Ground, and recovered the Hill, and is at the Race
end before you: You came not together into the World, and it was unlikely you
should leave it together. There was a probability you think she might have
survived you, but God determined otherwise. Some Roses are taken in the bud,
some are full blown, when others wither and fall, but those that grow longest,
prove but fading Flowers, and are of short continuance, sic transit gloria
mundi. God is not engaged to show us the Reason of his Actings, his Will is his
Law, and it is our Duty to acquiesce in it. We cannot resist his Power, and we
pray his Will may be done; let us not contradict our own Petition. God knows
best what is best, and he tells us, All shall work for the best to those that
love God, Romans 8.28. and this may suffice us. If you prefer your own Will
before his, or loved your Daughter better than your God, you cannot be his
Disciple. If you had rather enjoy her Company, than submit to God, God will
take it ill from you; he took her hence when he saw her Work was done, and left
you as yet to moil, and toil, and sweat in the Vineyard. Submission under his
strokes is your best and wisest course, contending against his Will is foolish
and sinful; foolish, because you cannot resist it; sinful, because you ought
not to resist; love to God and the Creature cannot be both in the same Party;
in the prevailing degree, we cannot serve God and Mammon. It Is your Wisdom
rather to mind your own end, than to lament hers. The Scripture frequently
minds us, and not in vain, for we are apt to forget it, of our latter end, and
the brevity of our Lives: And this, if well minded, would imbitter all Earthly
Enjoyments, and make us set a low value upon all Creature Comforts. Man that is
born of a woman, (says Job) is of few days, and full of trouble; he comes
forth like a flower, and is cut down he flees also as a shadow, and continues
not, Job 14.1, 2. And what more fading than a Flower? What more fleeting than a
Shadow? And sometimes it is compared to a Weaver's Shuttle, yea, to a Post that
hastes away: Your Glass is also running, and the last Sand is ready to drop.
It Is the Complaint of Old Themistocles, that a Man must die even when he begins
to live; when he begins to be Wise, Death calls him hence; we usually spend the
flower of our Age, the strength of our Bodies, and the vigor of our Spirits in
sinful Vanities, before we know why we live, or what Errand we came into the
World upon, little considering that upon a little Inch of Time depends
Eternity, our everlasting well or ill Being; many had their time before they
begin their Work, not considering that whether they sleep or wake, work or
play, their Glass is running, and their Time wasting. Few and evil (says old
Jacob) are the days of the years of my Pilgrimage; and yet few attain to the
number of Years which he then had attained. There is but a little time between
our Spring and Fall, and therefore our Lives may fitly he compared to Jonah's
Gourd, that sprung up in one Night, and perished in another: Death is stealing
upon us, tacito pede, with a silent foot, and it is an absurd thing (says one)
to ask when we shall die, but rather when we shall make an end of dying, for
every day Death seizes upon some of our Lives, and gains ground upon us, and
steals upon us insensibly, as the shadow does upon the Dial, till our Sun be
set; and whether sleeping or waking, we are in continual motion; we are like
Men under Sail, whether we heed or no, we are in continual motion. Yet many
that have one foot in the Grave, and the other ready to drop into Hell, yet put
far from them the evil day, and under gray hairs nourish green hopes and
desires; and Young Persons depend overmuch upon their Youth: But the Jewish
Proverb is, That many an old Camel carries a young ones Skin to the Market. And
we say, A young Sheep-skin may go thither as well as the old. And Experience
teaches us, that Old Men many times carry Young ones to their Graves. Man in
Scripture is compared unto Grass, which in the morning grows up and
flourishes, and in the evening is cut down dead and withered, Psalm. 90.5, 6.
Or like unto a Sleep, ver. 4. Or to a Dream when one awakes. To the Dream of a
Shadow, as Pindarus has it; or the shadow of Smoke (says another.) Or if
there be any thing more vain it may lively represent our Lives; and when Death
comes, he knows no difference between the Poor and the Rich, the Noble and the
Base. Time with his Sith mows down the Lillies of the Crown, as well as the
Grass of the Field. All flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of
the field; the grass withers, the flower fades, etc. Isa. 40.6, 7. Who then
would trouble themselves much about Worldly things? Who would cark and care,
pine and repine, when he knows not whether he have a day to live, or what shall
be in the Womb of the next Morning? How much better is it to mind our own end,
than to be troubled at another Death? For we must deny our selves in our
Relations, if we will be the Disciples of Christ. If we love any thing in the
World above Christ, we cannot be his Disciples; he will have the prevailing
degree of our love, or he will not love us; if we lodge any thing nearer to our
heart than himself, he will give us a Bill of Divorce, and put us away. The
resigning up our Comforts and Relations to him is the best way to secure them,
for God will remove our Idols out of his sight; we are his Spouse, and have
devoted our selves to him, and must hang loose to the Creature, and stick fast
to him, and not break our Vows to God, made when we were espoused to him, lest
we provoke him to Jealousy by our over-fond affecting any Creature-Comfort.
These things we can spare, Christ we cannot spare; let all go, so our Husband
remain. If we keep up our Love to him unspotted, these saddest Providence will
work for our good, Romans 8.28. Submission under the Correcting Hand of God, is
the surest, soonest way to get from under the Rod, when murmuring and repining
makes him double his strokes; for he will either bend us, or break us; humble
us, or make our hearts ache; he will bring down our stubborn Wills, or he will
know why; for it is in vain for us to think to struggle out of his hands, or to
keep out of his reach; and indeed the World is not so desirable now, neither
have the Godly found it so heretofore: So as to desire it for our selves or
Relations; for though it be a Wicked Man's Heaven, it is a Godly Man's
Purgatory, yea, all the Hell they are like to have; and who would desire to
live in Hell? When our Work is done, and our Wages ready, who would wish
himself again in the Vineyard, to moil and toil, and bear the burden and heat
of the day? When we are entering Canaan, shall we again have a hankering mind
after Egypt, the Onions, and Garlic, and the Fleshpots, and to have our Ears
bored, and be made Bondslaves for ever? The World is full of the Devil's
Lime-twigs, and he baits his Nets and Hooks with Riches, Honors, and
Pleasures, when he fishes for Souls. It may be said of Poverty and Riches, as
the Women in their Dances said of Saul and David, Poverty has slain Thousands,
but Plenty Ten Thousands. Many thousands dye of a Surfeit: Oh how hard have
many found it to guide a great Ship in a Storm and Tempest, when a little one
can thrust into any little Creek or Harbor? It Is hard carrying our Cup even in
a prosperous condition; it is much to keep under Pride, Sensuality, Passion,
Luxury, Drunkenness, and Debauchery, and other enormous sins, which are the
Worms which breed in abundance. It Is not in vain that Agur prays, Prove. 30.8.
Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me; lest I
be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Or lest I be poor, and steal,
and take the Name of God in vain. A Mediocrity, a Competency, a Sufficiency
without Superfluity, is the surest Portion; a State too big may be as
troublesome as a Shoe too big for the Foot: It Is not the greatness of the Cage
that makes the Bird sing, neither a great Estate that produces inward Joy. A
Staff may be helpful to a Traveller, when a burden of Staves may be
troublesome. The Moon never suffers Eclipse but at the Full. I know Poverty is
a hard Weapon, but Abundance is more dangerous and wounding. Hence it is our
Savior Christ tells his Disciples, how hard it is for a Rich Man to enter
Heaven, even as hard as for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, Matthew.
19.24. The Reason is, because it is hard for those that have Riches to keep off
their Affection from making them their God, by loving them, trusting in them,
and taking them for their Portion. But this does not always follow, some great
Men are good Men; but many times Pride and Sensuality are the Worms that breed
in the fairest Fruit, or in the finest Cloth. And if Riches be so dangerous,
what Estate should we wish for our Friends? The World also is a Pesthouse, and
almost every one ready to infect another; and is there not cause to rejoice
when any of our Relations are out of the reach of the Infection? It Is an Egypt,
not only for Slavery, Misery, and Bondage, but also there is scarce a House
where there is not some dead Person in it; yea, many Families, Villages, and
Towns there are where very few Spiritually alive are to be found; and who but
Madmen would delight to live among the Tombs? It Is a Sodom for Wickedness, and
but a few Righteous Lots to be found in it; and their Souls also are
continually vexed with the unclean Conversation of their wicked Neighbors.
It Is a Raging Sea, and the Godly are Weather-beaten, and continually driven up
and down by Storms and Tempests; and many Professors here make ship wrack of
Faith and a good Conscience. It Is an Inn, where good and bad are Entertained
for a Night, but the worst Men are accounted the best Guests; and if any
suffer, it shall be the Godly. The World is an Own Mother to Vice, but a
Stepmother to Virtue, as the Earth is to Weeds, when it would choke the good
Seed; so the Godly should suffer, did not their Father look to them. These are
Strangers, and it is no wonder if they meet with hard Usage, and that Dogs bark
at them. Happy therefore is that Person that has safely past through all these
Dangers, and is safely arrived at home, and got to his Journey's end. The World
doubtless is not desirable for our selves, or our Relations, that are already
past through the Pikes of Danger, and are out of the reach of the Devil and his
Instruments, and we our selves are pressing hard after. This may satisfy us in
this Providence. If you apply this to the present ^ase, your Daughter is out of
the danger, and you are a days Journey behind, and in a little time will
over-take her; and seeing the World, out of which she is gone, and you are
hastening, is not desirable; and seeing after a short space you will enjoy her
to Eternity without interruption. Then mourn not for her, but rather rejoice
that she has left you so much ground of Comfort behind her; that her Life was
such, that she lived desired, and dyed lamented, and was not a Corazine to your
heart, as many Children are to their Parents in this Age, when they behold
their vicious Lives and Conversations, and sometimes their untimely Death. But
she has left a good savor behind her, yea, a good Name, more precious than
precious Ointment. These Cordials may keep up your sinking Spirit, from
fainting under this sad Providence; the Lord grant they may be effectual to
this end.

By these and the like Arguments, Madam, I have upon the like Occasion
oft-times argued my self into content, and stilled those boisterous Storms and
Tempests, which Passion and Discontent had raised in my breast, and brought the
Controversy between God and me to this Result, That God was wise, and I was
foolish; and that it was much fitter for him to dispose of me, and my
Relations, than it was for me; and brought me to a Resolution, to let him, who
had ruled the World for so many thousand Years, to Rule it still. The like
Consideration had the like Operation on Job; though at first he had a mind to
quarrel God, yet at last he lays his hand upon his mouth, and humbles himself
in Dust and Ashes, and cries out, I am vile, what shall I answer? These
Meditations brought me to know that it was fitter for me to prepare for my own
Death, than to bewail the Death of another; yea, made me know that it was of
much more concern to take care of my Relations, while living, to fit them for
their Eternal Being, than to bewail them (especially those I have comfortable
hopes of) when dead; and to be troubled more at my own Neglects, than at God's
Providence. And the Lord grant that these and the like Meditations may have the
same or rather a better Effect upon you, to quiet your Spirit under this
present Providence.

But, Madam, though this be necessary to bring us to submit unto God, and bring
our Wills to God's Will, and to acquiesce in what he does, yet it is not
sufficient; God does not lash us only to make us leave crying, or to cease our
murmuring, but in these Visitations he has a further design upon us; his Rod
speaks more than this unto us, he expects that his Physic should have some
other Operation upon us, and not only leave us as it finds us, but should do us
some good also; the Father beats one Child, that the rest may beware. It was
good for me (says David) that I was afflicted, that I might learn thy
statutes. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I learn to keep thy
commandments, Psalm. 119.67.71. If God preserve us, it is no great matter whether
it be in Salt or Sugar; Fish prosper as well in salt as fresh Water. The
Wallnut-tree, they say, bears best when most beaten; and I am sure many times
Christians thrive best under Affliction: The Wind shaking the Tree, makes it
take deeper and better Root, quae nocent docent, bitter Pills may sometimes be
as necessary as Sweetmeats; a Lesson set on with whipping, is best retained;
and many times Correction does what Cockering will not; and there is no doubt,
whatever Man intends, God in Correcting his Children minds their good, Heb.
12.10. These bitter Pills procure sweet Health, as sharp Winters kill Weeds and
Worms; and God's Vines bear the better for bleeding, neither are they hurt when
superfluous branches are lopt off. Camomile, the more it is trod upon, the more
it spreads; and the more the Cypress-tree is bowed down, the more it rises.
Ephraim found the benefit of Affliction, this made him Obedient, when before he
was as an untamed Heifer, unaccustomed to the Yoke, Jer. 31.18, etc. Manasseh's
Prison and Fetters, were better to him than his Crown and Scepter, 2 Chronicles.
33.12, etc. As it is said of Queen Elizabeth, Mr. Ascham was a good Tutor to
her, but Affliction did her most good. Correction with Instruction is sure and
safe, Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, O Lord, and teach him in thy
Law, Psalm. 94.12. Feri domine feri (says Luther) strike me as much as thou will, if thou will instruct me; lash me and spare not, so thou will Lesson me.
God does chastise his People, that they may not be condemned with the world, 1
Cor. 11.32. God has a double end in your present Visitation, and both for
good; one to set an end to your dear Daughter's Misery, and the other to
prepare you for Happiness, by weaning you from the World, and raising up your
heart to Heaven, whither your Delight is gone: And happy are you if you learn
this Lesson, and wisely improve this Providence; if you learn the voice of the
rod, and of him that holds it, Micah 6.9. For the rod of reproof gives wisdom,
Prove. 29.15. Vexatio dat intellectum. A Father Corrects his Child, not so much
in Revenge for the fault done, as for caution for the future. Schola crucis,
Schola lucis, The way to the Crown is by the Cross. When God's Judgments are
abroad in the World, the Inhabitants thereof should learn Righteousness, Isa.
29.9. Under such Providence as these God would not have us be like unto bruit
Beasts in a Pasture, when one by one goes to the Shambles, the other regard it
not. All Spectacles of Mortality, especially those of so near a concern, should
mind us of our latter end, and make us prepare for Death, when we see younger
and stronger than we go to the Grave before us. We should be like ingenious
Children, when one is beaten, the other should not only cry and tremble, but
also take warning: We should not blame our Father's Cruelty, but our own Folly;
and if all work together for our good, why not this? Nay, doubtless a good use
may be made of this, and, if well improved, we shall have cause to say, with
the Psalmist, It was good for us that we were afflicted. Some Grapes may be
gathered from these Thorns, and some Figs from these Thistles; some Honey may
be licked off these Briars, for God's Rod, like Jonathan's, has Honey at the
end. Sensible we must be of this Providence, as doubtless Aaron was at his two
Sons deaths; but discontent we must not be. God complains, that Righteous
persons perish, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men were taken away,
and no man considers it, Isa. 57.1. Some use of such Providence we should
make, and get some benefits by these Trials. Now, among the many Lessons this
Providence holds out to us, I shall only point out these seven following, which
if you and I can learn by it, it will be happy for us.

Lesson 1. From this Lecture of Mortality, your dead Daughter, we may learn the
cursed Nature of sin, which was the cause of her Death, and how little
beholding we are to it, that thus rends one Friend out of the Arms of another;
for whatever Distemper our deceased Friends dye of, sin lies at the bottom, and
sets the Disease on work; but for sin, it is probable we had never dyed. For the
wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life. By one man's
offense sin came into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon
all, for as much as all have sinned. Now, shall we love the Tree, and hate the
Fruit? Love the Cause, and hate the Effect? Shall we be like foolish Children,
that hate the smarting Plaster, and consider not the Ulcerous Sore that makes
it necessary? We would have the Wound cured, and yet not have the Weapon drawn
out, for fear of a little smart. Had not Sin gone before, Death had not
followed; many Men love the Drunkenness, and hate the Surfeit. But did we see
sin in its own Colors, it would be worse than the Effects, for it is the only
Object of God's infinite hatred; for he hates nothing but sin, or for sins
sake; and yet sin seems lovely when we behold it in the Devil's Glass, or
through his Spectacles. If we could strip the Devil himself of his vicious
Qualities, he would return to his former Angelical Glory; yea, into God's
Favor, for he hates nothing he has made. Man in his first Creation was made
Holy and Happy, and had Power given him so to continue; and though by his
Constitution he was Mortal, yet by God's Blessing he had been Immortal for
ought we know, ^s the Soul is: But by eating the Forbidden Fruit, Genesis 2.17. in
all probability he had suddenly dyed, had not Christ interposed, and become a
Surety to his Father, and so gained a longer Lease, and paid the Fine; however
Man became obnoxious to Death, and dye he must. See how dangerous it is to play
at the hole of the Asp, and to ask Counsel at the Devil's Mouth, for so Eve
did, and for that Offense all her Posterity must eat bread in the sweat of
their brows, till they return to the dust out of which they were taken. No
Greatness can excuse us, no Wisdom can prevent it; but the most dangerous Death
is to dye in our sins. Sin it is that makes us uncurable, otherwise we had been
so armed, Death could never have entered, or pierced the heart, Romans 5.12. And
shall we hug this Viper in our Bosom, that will sting us to Eternal Death? For
sin is the very sting of death, without which Death were not so formidable.
Adam's Offense diffuseth it self to all his Posterity, as Poison does to every
part of the Body; and shall we love the Work, and hate the Wages? Actual Sin is
the Fruit of Original Corruption, and springs from this bitter Root, and it is
the cause of all our Misery; and shall we, like the foolish Dog, bite the
stone, and let the Passenger that threw it go free? Let us turn therefore all
our sorrow into sorrow for sin, for all is little enough to run in this
Chann^l. And let this be your Motive, though not one of the greatest, sin was
the cause of your d^ar Daughter's Death, and will ere long be the cause of
yours also; and happy will it be for you if this bitter Pill have this
Operation upon you, to make you hate sin with a perfect hatred.

2. Nay, it is not only Death, but also all the Miseries that accompany Life,
and are the forerunners of Death, which are the direful Fruits and Effects of
Sin. Could we see Sin in its own proper shape, it would appear most hateful and
detestable; but the Devil hides its Deformity from us what he can, and to this
end lends us his Spectacles, in which it appears lovely and amiable; but we may
best see it in the Effects. It was this that turned Angels out of Heaven, Adam
out of Paradise, and many thousands into Hell; and can the Tree be good that
brings forth such unsavory Fruit? This raced out the Image of God, and
engraved upon the Soul the very Image of Satan. The Devil knows well enough
that if we saw Sin in its own Colors, we must needs hate it, for who can fall
in Love with Deformity it self? And therefore misrepresents it, as a deformed
Hag paints her Face, and covers her Deformity, thereby to take her Prey, and
allure unwary Youth. So the Devil deals by Sin, and represents it in Virtue's
Colors; but the Glass of the Word would show it in its own shape. Indeed there
is nothing in the World that can fully resemble it, yet in the Scripture it is
represented by the foulest things imaginable; to filthy Ulcerous Sores, James
1.21. To the Mire that Swine wallows in, the Vomit of a Dog, to filthy Rags,
Menstruous Clothes, deadly Poison, a fretting Cancer, or Gangreen; it is so
infectious, none can escape the Infection; it infects the whole Man, like the
Leprosy in the Head, the Thoughts, Words, Desires, Affections, and Actions,
are all polluted and unclean, and smell of the Cask, and stink in the Nostrils
of God; our Eating, Drinking, Buying, Selling, Trading, yea, Plowing, is sin,
Prove. 21.4. And all our Religious Duties, if not performed with the Incense of
Christ's Righteousness, are defiled, Isa. 1.11, etc. and 66.3. Why? Those
Duties, though commanded by God, yet proceeding not from a right Principle,
directed to a right End, and done in a right manner, must needs be faulty. Now
sin, though looked upon as a harmless innocent thing, (and when Men have put a
fair Mask upon its soul Face) looks lovely; and the Devil hides its soul
Visage, as it is said the Panther does his deformed Head, purposely to take his
Prey, yet still it remains ugly: Pride covers it self with the name of
Cleanliness; Drunkenness is taken for Good-fellowship, and Covetousness for
Good Husbandry, etc. But the Effects are not so lovely, let the Devil and his
Instruments say what they will to the contrary; for it is the occasion of all
the Miseries that ever befell Mortal Man: We had never had aching Head, or aching
Heart, or Loss, or Cross, or any thing to molest us, had it not been for sin;
yet are we apt to overlook it, and yet have our finger always upon the Sore;
we cry out, Oh my Back, my Belly, my Bones, my Heart, but seldom Oh my Sin; we
are like him that complains of the pain in his Foot, but not of the Shoe that
pincheth him; of the Gout, Stone, Strangury, Surfeit, but not of the
Intemperance that is the cause. Pharaoh cries out, Take away the Frogs, the
Lice, the Darkness, let there be no more Hail, but not take away the Sin, the
hardness of Heart; that brought them. God when he threatens Death for sin,
threatens also all the Causes, and Forerunners of Death, and all the Evils
which accompany a sinful Life, for these are the Natural Productions of sin,
and much worse. Fruit it bears, if Repentance prevent it not, and like a mighty
Wind blows it not down before it come to Maturity, otherwise it will be bitter
Fruit: We have far greater cause to cry out, Oh my filthy Sins, Oh my Pride, my
Passion, my Covetousness, my Deadness, Dullness, Formality, Hypocrisy, etc.
than Oh my dead Father, my Husband, my Son, my Daughter. We should cease
quarrelling God, and turn the edge of our Anger, Sorrow, and Indignation
against Sin, and against our selves for our sin, and so our Quarrel will be
much more just. It Is a stubborn Child, that when corrected for a known fault,
will rather quarrel his Father, than acknowledge his own Guilt. We are apt to
cry out, Oh my Loss, Oh my Cross, than Oh my Sin, my Infidelity, my inordinate
Affections, which forces God thus to Correct me. Let us remove the Cause, and
the Effect will cease. Thus you see, whether we consider sin in it self, in its
pestiferous, infectious Nature, or whether we consider it in its direful
Effects, the Miseries that attend it, we have more cause to bewail it, than any
Loss or Cross that can befall us for sins sake, as the Cause is worse than the
Effect.

3. But this is not all, for sin procures Spiritual Judgments as well as
Temporal, and these are far more deadly and dangerous; for these Distempers
reach the Soul, when the other touch only the Body, or Estate; Sin defiles and
deforms all the Powers and Faculties of Soul and Body; Sin is so Infectious and
Contagious, and the Effects thereof so Malignant, that the greatest and most
dangerous Plague Sore, even that which rendeth the Soul from the Body, is not
so dangerous. It Is sin that hardens the Heart, and turns it into the Nature of
a stone. We read of a stony heart, and of all the Plagues that fell upon
Pharaoh, this was the worst, and a greater than this cannot befall a Mortal Man
in this Life. God complains of this, That the house of Israel were impudent and
hard-hearted, Ezekiel. 3.7, etc. And the great Gospel-promise is, To take away the
stony heart, and give them hearts of flesh. And as it hardens the Heart, so it
blinds the Mind, which by reason of sin is Naturally, Judicially, and Wilfully
blind; the Image of God consisted in Knowledge, Righteousness, and true
Holiness; these by the Fall were lost, and Ignorance, Wickedness, and
Profaness, the very Image of the Devil, were engraven in their stead, 1 Cor.
3.14. And Men walk in Darkness, till the Scales of Ignorance are wiped from
their Eyes, and Christ's Spiritual Eye Salve applied, Rev. 3.18. A natural man
cannot perceive the things of the spirit, for they a^^ spiritually discerned.
Many also are Judicially blind, God in his just Judgment giving them up to
strong delusion, to believe lies, Mat. 13.13, etc. They are Wilfully blind, and
God will not Cure them; like Hagar, they cannot see the Well of Water that is
before them. They are wilfully Ignorant, that they may sin the more freely; The
God of this world has blinded their eyes, 2 Cor. 4.4. He draws a Curtain
between them and the Light, and holds his black hand before their faces; and
were they anatomized, his Image would be found ^ngraven upon their hearts.
Light is come into ^^e world, and men love darkness rather than light, because
their works are evil. They are willingly ^gnorant of what they are not willing
to know; ^hey have also cauterized Consciences, seared with (...) hot Iron, and
reprobate minds, Romans 1.28. And ^istempered and disordered Affections, set upon
^rong Objects, loving what they should hate, and hating what they should love;
fearing Men and their threatenings, and despising God and his ^hreatnings; being
given up to vile affections, Romans ^.26. 1 Timothy 4.2. Yea, they are given up to
^tubbornness of Will, Judges 2.19. And of this ^e have Pharaoh for an Example,
that was be^ome Cannon-proof, that all the Judgments ^rought upon Egypt could
not work upon him. ^uch are mentioned, Jer. 44.19. that would bake ^akes to the
Queen of Heaven, let God himself say what he would to the contrary; they will
set up their Post by God's Post, and prefer their Dagon before the Ark;
therefore God gives up such to ^trong delusions, to believe lies, Romans 1.24.
The Memory also, though strong enough to retain what is bad, yet it is like a
leaking Vessel, that cannot retain any thing that is good. In a word, ^ll the
Powers and Faculties of the Soul are pol^uted, and the Members of the Body are
the unhappy Instruments to act the wickedness the Soul contrives: So that a
Toad or Serpent is not fuller of Poison, than Man's heart is naturally of Sin
and Wickedness, and of noxious Qualities, the Fruits and Effects of which, if
timely Repentance prevent not, will be the loss of God's Favor, which is
better than life, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand
are pleasure^ for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. The loss also of an Interest in the
Blood of Christ, will follow, which is of more value than the World it self,
for such trample upon the blood of the Covenant as an unholy thing, Heb. 10.29.
Yea, they do despite unto the Spirit of God, and put themselves from under the
favorable Protection of God, and tha^ Guard of Angels that God sends forth as
ministering Spirits for the good of those that love him; and makes Men incapable
of the sweet Communion of Saints, which David made his chiefes^ Delight on
Earth, Psalm. 16.2. It deprives them of the Peace of Conscience, a Jewel of
inestimable worth, and brings many times such a Storm there, that all the World
cannot allay; a^ in Cain, Judas, Spira, and many more; that Bird in the Bosom,
when it sings sweetly, makes better Melody than all the World can do. Sin also
deprives Men of all true Interest and Spiritua^ Right to all our outward
Enjoyments; a Civi^^ Right we may have, but a Covenant-Right we cannot have in
a Natural condition, for these things are not given, but lent to a wicked Man,
and an Account will be required to the utmost Farthing. In a word, unrepented
sin deprives Men of an Interest in God, in Heaven, and Glory, and of the
Beatifical Vision; for without holiness we shall never see God. Let us
therefore leave off sorrowing for petty Losses and Crosses, and turn the whole
Torrent of our Sorrow into this Channel, even against our sins.

4. Nay, the mischief of Sin ends not here, it also exposes us to the wrath of
God, and makes him our Enemy, that otherwise would be our closest, surest, and
fastest Friend; and did we ^now what it is to have God for our Enemy, it ^ould
send us trembling to our Grave; for when ^is Fury is kindled, it sets on fire
the foundation of ^he mountains, Deuteronomy. 32.22. It Is better have all ^he World to
grapple with, than with God; if ^e frown upon us, no Creature dare smile; If ^e
be for us, who can be against us? Romans 8.31. ^f God have a Controversy with
us, who dare ^ake our part, or move a Hand or Tongue in our Defense? We cannot
grapple with him, he is ^oo strong for us; we cannot fly from him, as ^onah
thought to do, he will over-take us; neither can we hide our selves from him,
Psalm. 136.^, etc. We cannot struggle out of his hand, ^or he is the Almighty,
and we but despicable Worms; if he tread upon us, he leaves us dead ^ehind him:
Before him the Holy Angels cover their faces, and all the Infernal Spirits
tremble. ^n his hand is the soul of every living thing, and the ^reath of all
mankind, Job 12.10. If he withold ^ur breath, we return to our Dust, for we
have ^o more than what he puts into us, how then shall we contend with our
Maker? Can Chaff and Stubble grapple with a devouring Flame? One blast of his
Displeasure can blow us into Hell, yea, Heaven and Hell and All into nothing;
and how are we like to make our Party good against him, when we cannot move a
Finger, ^wag a Tongue, or fetch a Breath, without his ^ssistance? Well, but let
us well consider whether our Cause be good: What cause has God given us to
take up Arms against him? Has he ^een a hard Master to us? Or withheld our
Wages? Jonah thought he did well to be angry, but was soon convinced. Job had a
mind to quarrel him, and seems of any other to have the best Cause, but when
the Contest began, h^ soon threw down the Cudgels, and lays his hand upon his
Mouth. Has not God been our greate^^ Benefactor, and done more for us than all
the World ever did, or can do? Is not he our be^^ Friend, and shall we become
his professed Enemies? Many good works have I done among you (says Christ) for
which of those do you stone me? John 10.32. God gave us our Being when we had
none, and shall we hate him for it? We were t^^ Clay, and he was the Potter,
and might have dashed us into pieces with his foot. He gave us Reason, when he
might have made us bruit Beasts, as Dogs or Swine, or more contemptible
Creatures. He has given us Limbs and Senses, when other^ want them, Peace and
Plenty, yea, Life and Liberty, and has made our Lives comfortable to us, when
we deserve not the Ground we tread upon, or the Air we breath in; and shall we
fly at the Face of God, and thus requite the Lord our Maker? Nay, has not
Christ suffered more for us, than any other has or can do? We had sold our
selves Bondslaves to Satan, and neither Man nor Angel could have redeemed us
out of our Slavery, or have paid a Ransom sufficient for us, but Christ laid
down his Life to free us from the guilt of sin, from the filth of sin, from the
Punishment due for sin, from the Curse of the Law, the Wrath of God, the
Slavery of Satan, and from Everlasting Damnation. And has he for all this
deserved our Malice and Hatred? He has bestowed more upon us than the World
has to bestow; it is he that sends us so many Ambassages for Peace, and rains
Heavenly Manna so plentifully about our Tents; he gives us Promises, such as
the greatest Kings upon Earth cannot make, and make good to their greatest
Favorites, as of his Spirit, his Graces, his Son, and his Glory: And is all
this nothing? Shall we foster sin in our Bosom, that hinders us in the
Enjoyment of those promised Blessings, and expose us to the wrath of God, and
the everlasting Destruction of Soul and Body, and expose us also to all
Miseries Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal? God forbid. Well, we cannot make our
Peace with God, till we break our League with Sin; and if God be our Enemy,
(and our Enemy he will be if we are at Peace with Sin) then we may expect he
will treat us as Enemies. Well may we fear that every bit of Bread we eat, will
choke us, and every drop of Drink we drink, may be our bane, and that every
Creature may wait for a Commission to end our days; that the Floods may drown
us, as they did the Old World, or the Fire consume us, as Sodom, or the Earth
swallow us up, as Korah and his Accomplices, or the greatest Judgments that ever
we read fell upon Mortal Man, may be our Portion. Oh, what need had we then to
leave sorrowing for other things, and turn all our Tears into the right
Channel, that it may drown our sins, that expose us to these Miseries and
Mischiefs.

5. Nay, but this is not all, for Eternal Death as well as Spiritual and
Temporal is the Reward of Sin, the everlasting separation of Soul and Body from
God, which is called, The second Death; and this is far greater than all the
Miseries before mentioned; for if the sinner be not reconciled to God, (which
cannot be before sin be mortified) he shall be cast into the Lake which burns
with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. This is the Natural Fruit and Effect of
every beloved sin, even the everlasting Damnation of Body and Soul; a thousand
thousand rentings of the Soul from the Body, is not comparable to one renting
of the Soul from Christ. Sin does that for us, that all the Men on Earth, and
Devils in Hell could never do, even pull us out of the Arms of God. This threw
Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of Paradise, and Millions of Souls into Hell.
This brought Death into the World, and is the very Sting of Death; and if this
Sting be not taken out, it will sting the Soul to Eternity. This imbitters our
Lives (as you have heard) while we are in the World, and opens the Door to let
us out of the World, and will open Hell it self to let us in, and is the only
bar to keep us from coming out. But if Sin were mortified, we might, with Old
Simeon, depart in Peace; and with Ambrose, say, I am not ashamed to live, nor
afraid to dye: And with Paul, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.
Death without his Sting, is like Samson without his Hair, or like the Drone-Bee
without a Sting, not terrible; he may hum, but not hurt; strike, but not sting;
kill a Believer, yet not hurt him; the worst is to send him to his Father's
House the sooner. But what is this to those in whom sin not only lives, but
raigns? It will bring sad tidings to such, it is indeed the cause of all the
Crosses and cross Providence they meet with here in this World, but brings
forth far bitterer Fruit, which will not be ripe in this World, which Reprobate
Wretches must feed upon to Eternity. Whatever we suffer here, we may thank Sin
for it; happily we have laid some Creature Comforts too near our hearts. Well,
the Achan must be removed, or God will not be pacified: But if we dye while ^in
is alive, our present Suffering, though to the ^oss of our Relations, Wealth,
Honors, Plea^ures, yea, and Life it self, is but a Flea-biting ^o our future
Torments. Then sin, how plea^ant soever it look now, will be found our greatest
Enemy. All Men in the World, and the Devil ^o help them, can but kill the Body,
it is Sin on^y that kills the Soul, and God casts both Soul and Body into Hell
for sin, the loss of which is more than the loss of the World, Matthew. 16.26.
The loss of it is incomparable and irreparable; ^he Rich Glutton could not with
all his Wealth Purchase one drop of Water to cool his tongue, Luke ^6.24, etc.
The Soul it self is a Precious Piece, next the Angels the most precious that
ever God made, being made in his own Image, and the greatest and richest
Purchase that ever was made, and cost the greatest Price, the Precious Blood of
the Son of God: It Is that which is most like unto God himself, and fitted for
Communion with him, and of Enjoying him for ever. It Is ^ndued with excellent
Faculties, the Understand^ng, Will, Affections, Conscience, Memory, and many
more, which make a Man differ from a Beast, and resemble an Angel. And for
dura^ion, it runs parallel with the days of Heaven, with the longest times of
Eternity; neither is ^here any thing in the World to be compared to (...), and
there is nothing but sin can hurt or wound it, and this alone makes it subject
to Eternal Torments, and rents it out of the hands of God, and the arms of
Christ, when nothing else can do it. Sin makes Men in a worse condition than
the Beasts that perish, which were in the Creation little lower than the
Angels; the one is thrown into the Ditch, and so ends their Misery, the other
into Hell with the Devil and his Angels, where they are ever dying, and never
able to dye; ever suffering those insufferable Pains, out of which is no hope
of Redemption; for when they have been there as many thousands of Years as
there are Grass-piles upon the Earth, Stars in Heaven, Sands upon the
Seashore, and Hairs upon their Heads, they are never the nearer going forth,
than they were the first day they were cast into it; for a thousand thousand
Millions subtracted from Eternity, does not lessen the Account. Oh, the
horrible Nature of Sin, which plucks the Soul from the Eternal Embraces of her
dear Redeemer, and from those Rivers of pleasures at God's right hand for
evermore, and lodges it among the Devils and the Damned in those Eternal Flames
to all Eternity, in those Rivers of Brimstone kindled by the Wrath of God, Isa.
30.33. Here we may behold the deadly Fruits of Sin, and shall we bewail the
Death of Relations, which indeed is the Fruit of Sin, and shall we not bewail
and prevent its more deadly and dangerous Effects, when without Repentance our
Souls as well as our Bodies are like Eternally to perish?

Lesson 2. From this Lecture of Mortality before us, is this, It may plainly
show us, how little good the World will do us when we have most need; and by
this we may take a true estimate of its Worth, or rather of its Vanity. We use
to say, that is good that will do us good, and it is a Friend that will help in
time of need. I am sure the World will not, cannot do it; it is true, if we look
upon it through the Devil's Spectacles, it will look fair, and so will an Old
Hag in her Paint and Plaster, but this is the way to be egregiously deceived;
but that there is really little worth in it, observe with me these following
Considerations.

1. Consid. Riches, Honors, Pleasures, or whatever else the World can brag of,
cannot prevent Death, though sometimes it does hasten it: The truth of this is
evidently seen in this Providence; for had it been a vast Estate, sumptuous
Buildings, costly Apparel, Men or Means, Food or Physic, that could have
preserved her Life, doubtless she had not dyed; but this could neither prevent
the Disease, remove it, or take away the Malignity of it: For when Death comes,
(and come it will) it will neither be bribed nor baffled. Diseases are God's
Servants, when he bids them go, they go; and when he bids them come, they come;
and what he bids them do, they do it, like the Centurion's Servant, Mat. 8.9.
Contra vim mortis, non est medicamen in hortis. If God strike, the Creature
cannot heal. God has the Keys of Life and Death at his Girdle, and our way is
to go to him, and neither trust to Physicians, as Asa, or to Witches, as Saul.
It Is he that kills, and makes alive, and brings to the gates of death, and back
again, Deuteronomy. 32.39. It Is he that passed that Decree, more firm than the Laws of
the Medes and Persians, That all men should once dye, and after death come to
Judgment, Heb. 9.27. By force of this, your Daughter dyed, and so will you ere
long. All that the Rich Man had, Luke 12.19, 20. could not bribe Death one
Night, neither can any Man Ransom his Brother from Death. The Rich Cardinal
Beuford found it true to his sorrow. Though Money be the greatest Commander in
the World, it will be out of Commission in the World to come. Death is a
perfect Leveller, it will Lodge the Poor and the Rich, the Fair and the Foul,
the Young and the Old, the King and the Beggar in the same Bed, without Respect
of Persons, let the World say what it will to the contrary; and Happy be those
that are prepared, or otherwise it will prove but a Trap-door to Hell. Death
regards not any, however dignified or distinguished; the King then must leave
his Robes, and the Beggar his Rags behind him; the Scull of the one retains no
impression of a Crown, nor of the other of his Slavery. Now, great Men are like
Capital Letters, they take up more room, and be more gorgeously adorned and
clad, commonly go before others, but signify the same thing: So the greatest
signifies no more than a Man, and the meanest signifies no less. Or like unto
Counters, some in the Account signify Pounds, some Shillings, some Pence, and
some less, but when they are in the Box, they are all of a value. So here, some
pass for Kings, and some for Peasants, but when Death has gotten them into his
Box, the Grave, they are all alike. Yet how much need have great Men of
Philip's Monitor, for they are apt to forget their Mortality? See Job 3.17,
etc. Some of the wiser Heathens have accounted Mortality a great Mercy, that
poor Creatures may be freed from their Misery: And so doubtless it is for those
that are prepared for Death, for they rest from their Labors. The Hebrew
Proverb is, That in Calvary there are Sculls of all sorts and sizes, Kings and
Captains, Lords and Lozels; one takes no more out of the World than the other.
Naked they come, and naked they shall go. Great Saladine had but his Shirt.
Now, though Riches cannot prevent Death, yet it may hasten it. Rich Men many
times are as Oxen in a fat Pasture, fitted for the Slaughter; sometimes they
are butchered by others for their Wealth, and many times they prove their own
Butchers, and kill themselves by Intemperance. The Sunshine of Prosperity
quickly ripens the Fruit of Sin, and when Sin is ripe, Ruin is ready. Bachus
or Venus opens the Door for Death to enter. Now, what good will it do to have a
fair Suit of Clothes, and a Plague Sore under it? Or a dainty Dinner with a
Surfeit? How often is Intemperance, which ends in Gouts, Surfeits, Dropsies,
and suchlike Diseases, the Fruits of a Plentiful Table? These open the Door of
Eternity, and light them a Candle to find the way to Death: Now, these are
Diseases Riches cannot cure. Seeing therefore the World is of so little use
when we have most need, why should we so greedily grasp after, and spend so
much time about it, as to neglect our greater Concerns, and despond so much
when we meet with disappointments? And why should we suffer those Vultures,
carking Cares, to breed in, and feed upon our Hearts, and eat out all the
Comfort of our Lives? What Recompense can the World make us, for all our pains,
and broken sleeps we have had upon its Account? It cannot warrant us a
Comfortable Life, nor a Happy Death; nay, not one day free from pain: Let such
as over-greedily grasp after it, remember Solomon's words, H^ (...) makes have
to be rich, cannot be innocent. And at leisure read James 5.1, 2, etc. Luke
6.24. Yet consider, it is not the having Riches, ^ut the over-loving of them
that is dangerous; for they are not evil of themselves, but great Blessings, if
not abused, and some of those Talents put into our hands to be improved by us;
but prove dangerous when abused, over-loved, or over-trusted in. But seeing
they can neither prevent Death, nor Diseases, the cause of Death, we should not
put too high a value upon them, nor take them for our Portion.

2. As the World cannot prevent Death, no more can it procure a happy Life: And
why? Because it cannot give Content and Satisfaction to the Enjoyer of it; and
how then can our Lives be Happy, when we are not content with our Condition,
and satisfied with our present Enjoyments? Content never did, nor never will
grow in the World's Garden, neither can Satisfaction be found in any thing
under the Sun: If we seek it here, Riches will say, it is not in me; Honors,
it is not in me; Pleasure, it is not in me, etc. Can we expect the Sun in a Pail
of Water? Indeed if the Sun shine upon the Water, we may see the reflection of
it, but if the Sun be clouded, all the Water in the World cannot show it. When
God shines upon us, he may be seen in every Creature, if not, the World cannot
show him: Our Earthly Enjoyments ca^ do us no good, bring us no Comfort,
without a Commission from God; and could they satisfy us for the present, it
would be but a miserable Portion, yea, a great Judgment; for what should we do
at Death, when they leave us? God did never give us these for our Portion, but
only a^ a Viaticum in our Journey. Our deceitful Hearts happily may promise
Content, had we an Hundred Pounds per Annum, but they will deceive us, for our
desires would be enlarged from an Hundred to a Thousand, and so in infinitum,
till Kingdoms, yea, the World would be too little for us, as it was to
Alexander. Covetous Men have a dry Dropsy, the more they have, the more they
thirst. Theocritus brings in the Cove-Man wishing he had a Thousand Sheep, when
this wish was obtained, he cries out, Pauperis est numerare pecus, It Is but a
Poor Man that is able to number his Cattle. And it is no wonder, He that loves
silver, shall not be satisfied with silver. The World is of too base a Birth
and Breeding to give the Soul content, for two things are requisite to
Satisfaction, and both of those are wanting; there must be Proportion, and
Propriety; but what proportion is there between a Piece of Gold and an Immortal
Soul? It can neither feed it, nor cloth it, nor make it better. And for
Propriety, this also is lost by the Fall; that which we call our own, is but
lent us, and we must be Accountable for it: And it is vain also, for what
Satisfaction can an Hungry Man take in a Pebble, or a Thirsty Man in a dry
Pumice-stone? What Satisfaction had Haman in his Riches, Honors, or
Preferments, without Mordecai's bow, or Ahab's Kingdom, without Nabath's
Vineyard? Something is still out of Order, some string or other out of Tune,
that mar^s the Music. And no wonder Content is not to be found here, for God
himself could not find Adam a help meet for him. If we could turn a heap of
Diamonds into a Spiritual substance, then it might bear some proportion to the
Soul, which is a Spirit, but except we could change it into God, the work would
not be done, for none but God can make the Soul happy. These Earthly things are
far worse than the Body, how then can they be a fit Match for the Soul? Gold
and Silver, Gemms and Jewels, are but the Garbadge of the Earth, they seldom
make bad Men good, or good Men better, but oft-times they make both worse; they
seldom procure Content, for the desire enlarges with the Estate, as the
Israelites Shoes did in the Wilderness with their Feet. Solomon could had
nothing in them but Vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.14. They are like
Smoke, they wring Tears from the Eyes; but draw not Sorrow from the Heart; or
like Thorns, the faster they are grasped, the deeper they wound: If God smile
upon us, they may bring us some Comfort, if not, all the Gold in the Indies
will do us no good, for this Coin is not current in another World; we may as
well satisfy an empty Stomach with Air, as a Covetous Man with Gold; for the
more Wood we lay upon the Fire, the more furiously it burns; a Ship may sink
under its Burden, before it be half full; and many Men have enough to sink
them, that have not half to satisfy them. Content is one main Ingredient of
Happiness, but till we have God, we cannot have it. Croesus's Wealth,
Alexander's Crowns, Heliogabalus his Pleasures, fall short of Happiness, or
Satisfaction, yet many are filling bottomless-tubs, and rolling Sysiphus his
Stone, and have Tityus his Vulture gnawing in their Breast; those that have
much of the World, have usually much trouble with it, and sometimes God spoils
all the Sport, by throwing some handfuls of Hellfire into the Conscience.
Reader, wast thou ever upon thy sick Bed, and received the Sentence of Death
within thee? What warming Comforts did the World then afford thee? Nay, has
not sometimes a pinching Pang of the Cholick, Gout, Strangury, or the raging
pain of an aching Tooth, put thee by all the Comforts the World can afford? And
why then shall we so much dote upon it, that can do us so little good when we
have most need? Till we can fill our Barns with Grace, and our Bags with Glory,
and extract Heaven out of the Earth, and God out of the Creature, we must never
expect Satisfaction in any Earthly Enjoyment, I know Riches of themselves are
the good Gifts of God, but become Snares, when they are over-loved, and trusted
in; it is not the having them, but the over-loving them is dangerous; they often
prove the occasion of Pride, Luxury, Tyranny, Oppression, etc. The World must
have the Head, and the Hand, but God must have the Heart. Set the World in its
own place, and there is no danger; send it before us to Heaven, and it will be
made up into a Crown for us. Cornelius's Prayers and Alms came up for a
Memorial before God, Acts 10.4. This is the way to make Friends with the Mammon
of unrighteousness, and at the last day Sentence will pass upon us accordingly.
Yet are there too many Professors that dote upon the World as much as ever
Jonah did upon his Gourd, or the Athenians on Diana's Temple But these things
are nec vera nec vestra, they are worth little; and if they were, they have
another Master: But there are Riches of another Nature, which nec prodi, nec
perdi, nec surrepi possunt, none can deprive us of them; Bags that wax not old,
a Treasure in the Heavens, that fades not away. A Beggar is an unsuitable
Match for a Prince, much more a bruit Beast; but it is a far more unsuitable
Match for an Immortal Soul to be espoused to a Wedge of Gold. When the Moon is
at the Full it is farthest from the Sun, and nearest to an Eclipse. If the Heart
be full of the World, there is no room for Christ; every Good is not suitable
for every Nature, it is not Natural to a Man to live under Water, nor for a Fish
to live on the dry Ground. Kingdoms may promise Content to carnal Hearts, but a
Gracious Man cannot take up with such poor things: One Dram of Grace will prove
a better Portion than the World affords.

3. As these Earthly things are unsatisfying, so they are uncertain; and this
is a certain demonstration of their Vanity: For had we never so much of them,
what avails it when we know not whether we shall enjoy them one day to an end?
A Kingdom would give us little content, did we certainly know we should lose it
at the Month's end, and our Lives with it; yea, Heaven it self would yield us
little content, did we know we should enjoy it only a Thousand Years, and then
be cast into Eternal Torments; the thoughts of leaving it would take away all
Pleasure of Enjoying it, and would be a Hell in the midst of Heaven. Now, all
these Earthly Enjoyments will be stripped from us at Death, happily sooner, and our
Death cannot be far off, and why should we dote so much upon them? Many
Thousands in our Age have been Rich over Night, and Poor ere Morning? Witness
France, Ireland, Germany, Savoy, and many others. Thus it was with Job, one day
(for ought we know) saw him the greatest Man in all the East, and Poor, even to
a Proverb. The uncertainty of these Earthly Enjoyments, is one of the greatest
Vanities that is writ upon them, how then can they be a suitable Portion for
the Soul, which runs parallel with the longest line of Eternity? What will
become of the Immortal Soul, when the Portion is spent? Why do Men make so much
have to climb the Ladder of Promotion, seeing so many break their Necks ere
they get to the top? Haman may witness this; for King's Favorites stand but in
slippery places, one day he glories in his Enjoyments, and the next day is
hanging on the Gallows he made for another, Esther 5.11, etc. and 7.10.
Ahithophel, one day his words were esteemed as Oracles, and presently after
falling into Disgrace, he hanged himself. This Age may produce many Examples to
this purpose. Sometimes the great Ones of the World hardly obtain a decent
Funeral, and what a condition is the Soul in that took the World for a Portion,
when the Body is neglected, judge you? Angels cannot help them, nor the Saints
in Heaven, if they were willing, and then sure nothing upon the Earth can do
it. The thoughts of fore-past Pleasures, Honors, or Treasures, will give
little ease to present Dolours, and the Wrath of God. It was small comfort that
Abraham gave to the Rich Glutton, Son, remember in thy lifetime thou had
pleasure, and Lazarus pain, now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. When
pale-faced Death, like Belshazzar's Handwriting, shall enter our Lodging, to
Arrest us to appear before God in Judgment, before we have evened our Accounts,
it will make our Joints to tremble, and our Knees smite one against another.
What will the World do for us then at Judgment? They will prove miserable
Comforters, when the Earth, and all the works therein, shall be burnt up, where
then is your confidence? Now many love Gold more than God, and Money is
preferred before Mercy. Now, Paul calls this Idolatry, Col. 3.5. And James
calls i^ Adultery, James 4.4. But this will prove like Achan's Wedge to cleave
the Soul asunder, or like his Babylonish Garment, serve for a Winding Sheet.
Riches at the best are deceitful, like Winter-brooks, dry in Summer; or like
Job's Friends, miserable Comforters. I have read of Fish in the River Araris,
which change color with the Moon; when it is at the Full, they are white, when
in the Wane, black. Thus the World does by us, when we want not, it smiles upon
us, but when need is, it looks of another color. There is no more proportion
between this imaginary Felicity that the World doats upon, and true Happiness,
than between painted Fire on the Wall, and true Fire; or between a King upon
the Stage, and a King upon the Throne; or between a liveless Carcass, and a
living Man. In the midst of all our Enjoyments one hour's tormenting pain
spoils all the Sport. At Death Riches take themselves wings and fly away, and
on whose Tree they will roost we know not. We usually call Riches Substance,
when it is but really a Shadow, an empty Nothing; if we look upon it through the
Devil's bewitching Spectacles, it seems gilded; it is like the Serpent Scytale,
of whom it is said, she allureth Beasts to her by her beautiful Colors, and
stings them to death. This made Paul be crucified to the world, and David as a
weaned child. The World is but a blaze at best, but many times proves an Ignis
Fatuus, which leads most Men out of the way; the best Account Solomon could
give of it was, It Is vanity and vexation of spirit. Yet many load themselves
with thick Clay, but Death will unload them, and cover them with common Earth.
Great Men a while disturb the World, and grasp at Crowns and Kingdoms, but now
Alexander's Ashes are contained in a little Urn; they are in the World as a
Guest in an Inn, for a Night; they sit at the upper end of the Table, fare of
the best, lie in the best Bed, but in the Morning they have most to pay. We are
in a Journey to Heaven, let us not fall in Love with what we see in our way, or
sit down at the Style, or Bridge. Let us use the world, as a Traveller does his
Staff, keep it, or throw it away, as it helps or hinders us. If Riches
increase, let us not set our hearts upon them, neither think our selves much
the better or safer for them, for we know not what World we may Lodge in the
next Night, or whether our Money there will be current Coin. It Is all one at
Death whether we have little or much, the Poor are as nigh to Heaven then as
the Rich, and sometimes better prepared. Riches are uncertain at the best, to
the Possessors, like the Sea, sometimes there is a Storm, sometimes a Calm;
sometimes it ebbs, and sometimes flows. They are like Winter Weather, very
variable; we see sometimes in the Clouds like Towers and Castles in the Air,
but a blast of Wind comes and they are dashed into another form, for they wanted
a Foundation, and so do many Men for their great Hopes: The Devil easily blows
up such blubs in proud Men's hearts, yea, such Tumors are apt to rise of
themselves. It Is observed that a Sick Man, a Covetous Man, and a Discontented
Man cannot take Pleasure in their Enjoyments; still there is something wanting
to give content. Job was a Rich Man, but his Heart did not cling to his Riches,
we see how patiently he suffered the loss of all; He made not gold his hope,
neither said unto the fine gold, Thou art my confidence, etc. Job 31.24, etc.
Riches make no great difference among Men, the Wether that bears the Bell,
happily may be a little better clothed, and fatter than the rest, but is a Sheep
still, and little the better for the Bell. Should the Devil not only show us,
but also give us all the Glory of the World, it is not much worth; these are but
Thorns that choke the Word, and make it unfruitful, the harder we grasp them,
the deeper they wound us, and ere long will be wrung out of our Arms; we can
find little Honey, but many Stings. But in Heaven there is Pleasure without
Pain, and Treasure which cannot be exhausted. A Heart in Heaven is one of our
surest Evidences for Heaven; and a Heart set upon the Earth, the saddest
Symptom of a Wicked Man; For where your treasure is, there will your hearts be
also. Those that are Friends to the World, are Enemies to God, James 4.4. And
though we expect a Paradise, it will prove but a Bochim, a place of Lamentation.

4. As the World can give little Content and Satisfaction to a Man, so it can
do us little or no good in our great concerns here or hereafter; it can do
little for the Body, and less for the Soul: I know the former especially will
seem a Paradox to many, who look upon Riches as the only Happiness, and hate
Poverty more than the Devil, and fear it more than Hell. But consider, Gold
cannot nourish us, nor keep us warm, both which are necessary to our
well-being; we have read of some that have been famished to Death amidst
infinite Treasures. But it will be objected, it will buy us Food and Raiment;
it is true, but Food cannot nourish, nor Clothes keep warm, without a
Commission from God, and he can do it without them, as in Moses, Elijah, and
our Savior Christ; neither can they prevent Pain, nor support us under it: If
they could, so many Rich Men would not labor under such Tormenting Distempers,
as the Gout, Cholick, Stone, Strangury, etc. as they do; and usually Rich Men
groan under such Distempers most, and Riches causes them more than cures them:
Yea, the raging pain of an aching Tooth, puts Rich Men as well as the Poor out
of Humor, and all their Riches cannot ease them; the Oil of Angels can do them
no good against the Plague or Pestilence, or Pestilentious Diseases, Fevers,
Smallpox, Consumptions, Surfeits, and such like; Riches are neither
preventing, removing, or supporting Physic: Yea, Death enters into the Courts
of Kings, as well as the Cottages of Peasants, or the Beggar's Cell. The Poor
Man's Diet feeds him as well as the Rich Man's Dainties; as Daniel's Pulse and
Water did him and his Fellows, as well as Court-Junkets did the other; yea,
they are as warm in their Rags as others are in their Robes: Yea, we oft-times
find that Surfeits and nauceating Stomachs, are the Fruits and Effects of
Plentiful Tables. As to the true and Primitive use of Clothes, viz. to cover
our Nakedness, and to distinguish the Sex, a Russet Coat may serve as well as a
Velvet Gown, or Satin Suit. The Poor Man sleeps as soundly upon his hard Bed
as the Rich upon his Bed of Down. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet,
whether he eat little or much, Eccles. 5.12. It Is true, his Fare is not so
costly, neither are his Cares so great, but he can take his Rest without
Distemper or Distraction, while his Rich Neighbor, his restless Spirit, and
carking Cares, read him nightly Lectures upon his Bed. I have read of Anacron,
who when he was Poor was Merry and Jocund, which was observed by a Rich
Neighbor, who sent him two Talents, which when he had, his care to keep it,
and his fears of losing it, so distracted his Mind, that he could not sleep,
which after a while he observed, sent back the Money, and was as Merry as
before. Solomon tells us, He that makes have to be rich, shall not be
innocent. And no wonder if with Gold Men get Guilt, if God throws sometimes
some handfuls of Hellfire into their Consciences, and spoils all the Sport. In
a word, many that eat their Bread in the sweat of their brows, and are clad in
their comely Russet, have their Health as well, many times better than our Idle
Gallants, that fare deliciously every day, and are clothed in Purple and fine
Linen, in whom the Effects of Drinking and Drabbing do daily appear; and if
such like Debaucheries set an end to their Happiness, and to their Lives also,
what wonder now, if the World can do so little for the Body, then much less can
it do for the Soul, for few bad Men are made good by it, and few good Men
better; Men are never the better for Riches or Honor in God's Esteem, many
times the worse, if they abuse their Talents. Indeed the Papists Doctrine of
Purgatory, Pardons, and Indulgences, if true, which they can never prove, give
the Rich a very great advantage over the Poor; for though they dance with the
Devil all Day, yet for a little Money they may sup with Christ at Night; or do
the Devil's Work, and receive Christ's Wages; but a wonder then that so many
Woes are denounced against the Rich, and so many Blessings to the Poor: And
sure the Rich Glutton did not understand this Doctrine, nay, not in Hell, for
then he would have sent Lazarus to have told his Brethren which way to have
prevented Hell, and Purgatory also, by Pardons, Indulgences, Masses, etc. But
this Doctrine was brewed and broached long after this, or else Christ would not
have let his Apostles want Money to bring them out of Purgatory, for doubtless
they had some Venial Sins as well as others. Besides this, Men want many things
to make them happy, which are not sold in the World's Shop, Gold tried in the
fire, white Raiment, spiritual Eye Salve, Rev. 3.18. The World deals not in
such Merchandise, they must be bought of Christ, for whoever thinks they are to
be had elsewhere, will find his mistake. The Image of God we have lost in the
Fall, the World cannot restore it; we are by Nature Enemies to God, the World
cannot reconcile us; it is not thousands of Rams, nor ten thousand rivers of Oil
will do it, Micah 6.7. The World is too thin a Garment to keep off the showers
of Divine Vengeance; we have sins to Pardon, and none can forgive sins but God,
let the Pope say what he will to the contrary. The Question at last will not
be, What Gold we have, but what Grace we have? It Is not a Purple Robe, but the
Robes of Christ's Righteousness; it is not every Spot, but the Spot of God's
People; not a spotted Face, but Christ's Sheep-mark will procure us a station
on the right hand of Christ. We have many Spiritual Maladies, and Christ alone
must be our Physician, and his Blood the only Potion; none but he can bind up
the broken Heart, and speak Peace to the troubled Conscience. We are by Nature
Slaves to Satan, and the World, were it sold to the worth of it, cannot Redeem
one Soul out of his Bondage; the World indeed are the Fetters that fasten us to
him, but cannot loose us, and these are the Toys he allures us with, as
Children are with Rattles, to be content in our Slavery. We are by Nature
strangers to God, and it is by the Blood of Christ, not the World's Wealth, we
are brought home, Ephesians. 2.13. We want Comfort, and it is the Spirit that is the
Comforter. In our Spiritual wants we can have no supply, in our Distempers of
Soul no help, at our Death no comfort from the World; it never did us much
good, but at Death and Judgment can do us none, as many have too sadly
experienced. When we are lanching forth into the infinite Ocean of Eternity,
and look back upon the World which we have loved and trusted in for help, we
shall find our selves miserably cheated; the thoughts then of former Enjoyments
will bring us little Delight, especially if we think of the after-reckoning,
and that our eaten Bread is not forgotten, and our Silks and Sattins unpaid
for. When the Bridegroom comes, the World cannot supply us with Oil, it is not
to be Sold in this Market; neither with a Wedding Garment: It must be the Oil
of Grace, and the Robes of Christ's Righteousness, and the Jewels of his Graces
must do our work; and this is our Misery, all our Riches then will not pay the
Debts it has contracted, nor undo the Bonds it has tied. The World always
shows most love where there is least need, and yields us no help at the
greatest necessity. This may suppress our over-eager desire after it; for if we
would moil and toil, let it be in a more Fruitful Soil. Do not the Poor pass
through this Life as comfortably as the Rich, and sometimes with more content?
And think with Galeacius, All the Wealth in the World is not worth one day's
Communion with God, and that may be had in the Cottage as well as in the Court.
Many Treasure up Riches, and it proves like Snow-drifts, the Sun shines upon
it, and it melts away, and reaches not to Eternity. But there are durable
Riches, other Riches before the cold Grave have their Bodies, hot Tophet has
their Souls, and their Wealth cannot save them; and those that could never have
enough, have there Fire enough. It Is a sad mistake to think Riches, Honors,
and Carnal Delights, are the only Happiness, for then Christ and his Apostles
and followers had been most unhappy; for Silver and Gold they had none, no, not
to pay Tribute. The Scripture measures not a Man's Happiness by the multitude
of his Riches, for such may be destitute of Grace, and so is still Poor in the
midst of Plenty. Who is it that would have a filthy Itch upon him for the
pleasure he takes in scratching? Such is an immoderate desire after the World.
Yet consider, it is not the having an Estate, but the over-greedy desire of it,
and the over-loving it, makes it dangerous; for a Man may make friends with the
Mammon of unrighteousness for his own advantage, if he improve it well, and lay
it not too near his Heart. It Is bad putting the Poor's part into a Child's
Portion, it is better leave a Child a Bag to beg with, than ill-gotten Goods to
make up his Portion.

5. As the Benefit the World affords here or hereafter is not great, so the
Danger it exposes us to here and hereafter, is not small; which, did our
greedy Misers well consider, they would not so greedily grasp after it: For
Riches are like Thorns, the faster they are hugged, the deeper they wound; yea,
many times pierce to the very Heart. Of these Worldly things the Devil makes
his choicest Baits when he fishes for Souls, and most Men will be nibling at
them. He is like a cunning Fowler, he stands behind the Bush when he exposes
his Baits to our view, but it is hard sometimes to see the Hand that holds it;
he suits his Baits to the inclination of every Person; he has a Companion for
the Drunkard, a Delilah for Samson, a wedge of Gold for Achan, Honor for
Haman, the World for Demas, and Money for Judas; yea, so confident is he that
those Baits will take, that All this will I give thee, he thought sufficient to
take with Christ himself; and there is but a very few escape him, the most are
lulled asleep with those Siren Songs, and it had need be a cunning Ulysses that
escapes the dangers. Very many Professors of Religion are led Captive, and
their Affections growing warm upon the World, they grow cold upon God, for they
cannot serve two such Masters. Who almost can escape blinding, when the dust of
Gold is blown into their Eyes? But if these Promises succeed not, the Devil and
the World have other Weapons at hand; Threatenings, Menaces, Mocks, Scorns,
Persecutions, Prisons, Gallows, Fire, and Faggot, or if need be, more horrible
Tortures and Torments, and were it in their power, Hell it self should not be
wanting, (but God keeps the Keys of Heaven and Hell in his own hands, let the
Pope say what he will to the contrary.) If Nebuchadnezzar's Music will not
allure, he has a fiery Furnace to terrify. Oh, vain World! how great an Enemy
have thou been to those that loved thee best, and trusted thee most? How many
have bewailed upon their Deathbed, the time they have wasted in thy Service,
and how they neglected their great Concerns to hunt Butter-flies, and mistook
Earth for Heaven, and the Creature for God, and all this while sought Honey in
a Wasp's Nest, and Content where it never yet was found? A Kingdom cannot
content Ahab without the addition of Naboth's Vineyard, nor that neither. Many
think their Burden is never heavy enough. Ministers that have two Steeples upon
their backs, would have an addition; and one Kingdom is not enough for one Man:
But one abused Talent will be found heavy enough in the Reckoning, and will
sink him down into outward Darkness, Matthew. 25.30. It will be a sad thought in
Hell to think what a bad Bargain they made, when they sold their Souls, their
God, their Heaven, and their Happiness, for those transitory, deceitful,
fading, gilded Nothings, which they had in the exchange.

The World deals by the Soul, as by the Body; Riches often makes the Body so
Nice, it cannot endure Hardship, but it takes Cold; and it is much ado to
converse with the World, and not have our Affections cool as to Heaven. Frost
and Snow are good for the Seed, though the Flowers like it not. The Devil lays
so many Snares in the way, that he prevails with the most to abuse their
Talents, to future their Repentance, and fool away their Salvation; and such
dust-heaps are in every corner. The World may and must be used; but abuse it we
must not, and abused it is when it promotes Pride, Luxury, Gluttony, or
Drunkenness, Sloth or Idleness, Chambering or Wantonness, Cruelty or
Oppression, or any other Lust of the Flesh; but of such Servants that abuse
their Talents the World is full, and Hell also; but their Glass will be run
out, when they think it is but newly turned; and their Master will come before
they expect him, and give them a Reward. Prosperity does not at all facilitate
the work of Conversion, but frequently does retard it. It Is hard for Rich Men
to be crucified to the World, and the World to them; and therefore Christ in
his time observed that it were the Poor that received the Gospel; and the
Apostle tells us, not many great men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble are called. And many woes are denounced against the Rich upon this
Account; they lie under more Temptations than others do, and had need of a
great measure of Grace to withstand them, and Self-denial to resist them. Many
in a low Condition have strained at Gnats, who, when Promotion comes, have
swallowed Camels: See this in Hazael. I know Poverty has its Temptations also,
and therefore Agur prays against Poverty and Riches. An Estate too big is as
troublesome as one too little, as a Shoe too big is uneasy. A small Ship in a
Storm can thrust into a little Creek or Harbor, where a great one cannot ride.
He that is on the top of the Ladder of Promotion, will have a worse fall if his
Foot slip, than he that stands on the Ground. It Is not the greatness of the
Cage that makes the Bird sing, nor the greatest Estate that makes a Man always
most content; but the Piece that God cuts us, and the Portion he gives us, is
doubtless best for us, whatever our ^urmuring Hearts say to the contrary. The
Grain of Riches often breeds the Vermin of Pride, Luxury, and Sensuality; those
that are full fed, often wax wanton, and are often dipping in the Devil's Sauce.
Riches are such blocks in Heaven's way, that many oft-times stumble at them,
and never rise again. The Ruler, Luke 8.18. cheapen Heaven, but when he knew
the rate, he went away without it. Hence it is Rich Men hardly go to Heaven,
they have a Clog at their heels. Self-denial to great Persons is not easy, and
where it is, the Cross is not difficult. Rich Men's shoulders are too tender to
bear a heavy Burden; but there is seldom any passage a deliciis ad delicias, a
Coeno ad Coelum, we cannot receive Christ's Wages for doing the Devil's Work;
no leaping out of Delilah's Lap into Abraham's Bosom; there are but a few Stars
of the First Magnitude shine in this Hemisphere, yet some there are. It Is not
the having Riches, but the loving them, that is dangerous; not the using the
World, but the abusing it, that is forbidden; it is he that makes have to be
rich, that cannot be innocent, Prove. 28.20. Many Rich Men are like Children,
that having both their Hands and their Mouths full of Meat, yet will part with
none; but the Poor Man's Box would be their safest Repository, for that is not
given but lent to the Lord, when what is kept will be lost. The Vertigo is not
so dangerous to those that stand low, as to those that climb high. Many Men
have their Heads turned by too much Drink, never by too little; and many a Man
sells his Soul for Riches, never for Poverty; Riches are the thorns that choke
the Word, and it is hard handling those Thorns, and not be pricked by them. Now,
if they are so uncertain, and of so little use, why should our Affections run
out so immoderately upon them? Great Men it is true, make a great stir and
bluster in the World for a season, and then their Place shall know them no
more, and their Wealth and Honors shall be left behind, Sic transit gloria
mundi. Time with his Sith moweth down as well the Lillies of the Crown, as the
Grass of the Field: Every days Experience checketh the fond conceit of
Immortality, when many of our Youthful Gallants drop into their Graves before
they are aware, as Men in a Snow drop into a Pit before they see it; and except
Repentance prevent it, their Souls will lie in Hell, as Grapes in a Wine Press,
or Pickled Herrings in a Barrel, (as one says) or as Lime-stones or Tiles in a
Kiln to be burnt. The greatest Men are but as Passengers in an Inn, the Goods
they enjoy are but lent them for a Night, and they may say of them, as the
Prophet of his Ax, Alas, Master, for it is borrowed. We should use these things
as a Traveller does his Staff, which he keeps or throws away, as it proves a
help or an hindrance to him. When we go to Bed, we know not but we may wake in
Eternity next Morning, and then whose are these? We should think never the
better of our selves, neither think we are the safer for them, for they cannot
better or secure us; for what World we shall be in to Morrow we know not, and
then it will not be much to us whether we leave Poverty or Riches behind us.
Riches may make us more unwilling, often more unfit to dye: They are like to
Winter Weather, variable and uncertain; or like the Sea, ebbing and flowing; a
double uncertainty always accompanies them; they may be taken from us, or we
from them; sometimes our hopes are great, and then soon dashed: Yet how soon
can the Devil blow up the bubble of Pride with the wind of Vainglory? It Is
observed that a Covetous Man, a Sick Man, and a Discontented Man, though they
possess much, yet can enjoy nothing; when a Believer, though he possess little,
yet he enjoys all things, 2 Cor. 6.10. A Covetous Man cannot be Rich, nor a
contented Man Poor; those that have God for their Portion, want nothing; and
those that have not, have nothing that is truly necessary. If we search the
World from end to end, we cannot find Happiness in it; and therefore in the
loss of all Job was content, as knowing his Redeemer lived, and then his
Happiness was not lost. In the World we find a little Honey, and many Stings; a
little bitter-sweet Pleasure, and much Pain; but in Heaven there is Treasure
worth the enjoying, And rivers of pleasures at God's right hand for evermore.
And a Heart in Heaven would be a good Evidence for Heaven; if we love Pleasure,
we shall enter into our Master's Joy; here Pleasure will be without mixture,
measure, or end; if Riches be desirable, here are true Treasures; if we sell
all to buy this Pearl, we make a good Bargain; here we may have Wine and Milk
without money, and without price; here is no danger of coveting too much, the
more we covet, the more we shall have; a true desire is the required condition
of Enjoyment; the better we love Heaven, the better God loves us: We are in
continual danger of losing the the things of the World, but Heaven cannot be
lost if once made sure. In a word, the World daily exposes us to the wrath of
God, and the pains of Hell, and the loss of Heaven. See then, all these things
considered, whether the World be of so much worth, as it is usually taken to be,
and whether it be worth the Care, Industry, Pains, and Diligence we usually
bestow upon it.

Lesson 3. The shortness of your Daughter's Life, the suddenness and
unexpectedness of her Death, teach us also the worth of Grace, and the
necessity of a good Conscience; for these are the necessary Qualifications to
fit us for Death, and to give us an Interest in Glory: We know neither the day
nor the hour when our Lord and Master comes, and woe to us if we are found
unprepared. This Oil must not be wanting when the Bridegroom comes, nor the
Wedding Garment at the Marriage-Supper. If a bare Profession of Religion would
serve turn for Salvation, then Christ's Flock would not be a little one; but
many are called, but few are chosen. There are many in the World, that, like
Uriah, carry Letters with them of their own Condemnation. For if Religion be
not good, why do they Profess it? If it be, why do they not Practice it? The
Lamps of Profession without the Oil of Grace, will not serve turn; it is but
sparks of their own kindling, and notwithstanding these, they will lie down in
sorrow, Isa. 50.11. Christ must be apprehended by Faith, and honored by a Holy
Life, by all those that shall enjoy him: He came to save us from sin, as well
as from Hell, and never changes the Relation, but he changes the Nature and
Disposition also; and is the Author of Sanctification, as well as of
Justification, Romans 8.30. For this Golden Chain cannot be broken: There is
nothing but the Life of Grace, and the Death of Sin, can make us fit for the
Life of Glory; for if Sin dye not before us, we must dye eternally. Now, we
know not whether we have a day to live, or what may be in the Womb of the next
Morning; and is it not then time to look about us, whether we are prepared to
dye or no? We usually prepare for a Journey before hand, especially if it be
long; and for a Fair or Market, before it comes. The Soldier will not
Encounter his Enemy without his Armor; and dare we grapple with Death
unprepared, who is the King of Terrors, and a Terror to Kings? We have not
Flesh and Blood to wrestle with, but Principalities and Powers, and spiritual
wickednesses in high places, Ephesians. 6.11, 12. And it is a thousand times better
to meet an Enemy without Armor, than Death without Grace. Now, this is our
time to get Grace, and we know not how soon the Market will be over, and Night
come, when no man can work. Upon this little Inch of Time depends Eternity, our
Everlasting well as ill Being. The greatest Weights hang upon the smallest
Wyers. Grace, though it cannot p^event Death, yet it sweetens it, and steels
the Heart against the dint of it; this made Old Simeon sing that Swan-like
Song, Luke 2.29. Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. And
Paul, desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. And though Grace now be
disrespected, it will prove the best Flower in the Garland, and the most Orient
Pearl in the Crown. This is the Key that must let us into Heaven, when the
World will prove a Bar to keep us out; it will prove a Comfort at Death, when
the World will prove but Vexation. Grace and Peace were the choicest Jewels the
Apostle could wish to those he loved, Heb. 3.25. 1 Pet. 1.2. Riches, Honors,
and Pleasures are not of so great a value, but others are not of this mind. The
pleased Face of God cannot be seen but in this Mirror; when all other things
vanish into smoke, this will endure; this fetches Water from the Fountain,
Light and Heat from the Sun, and all that good is comes in at this Door. Sin is
the only Makebate between God and the Soul, and Grace the Reconciler. Now,
that I may show you something of the worth of Grace, and the Necessity of it, I
beseech you observe well these following Considerations.

1. Consid. Grace and a good Conscience are abundantly useful and necessary
even in the Affairs of this Life, as well as hereafter, to carry us through the
World with comfort and content, which cannot otherwise be had, and miserable
are those that want it, however they may dream they are happy. Many are the
Troubles we meet with here, and it is Grace that keeps the Heart from sinking
under them: The most pinching Calamity, and the most smart (...) Rod are by
Grace cheerfully endured. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the
Lord will deliver them out of all; but It Is Faith must suck sweetness from this
and the like Promises: But what Comfort flows hence to those that have not
Faith? A Godly Man knows, Through many tribulations he must enter into heaven.
What is this to wicked Men, when they shall be violently thrown through these
Briars and Thorns into the Pit of Hell. David could say, It is well for me that
I was afflicted, Psalm. 119.71. It was a Furnace to refine him, and purge away
his Dross, but where it meets with nothing but Dross, it will consume. Fish
will live and grow best in cold and salt Waters; and it is said of the
Wallnut-tree, the more it is beaten, the better it bears; and of the Camomile,
that it spreads best, when it is most trod upon; so do God's Vines, the more
they are pruned and pricked, and made to bleed, quae nocent docent, a Lesson set
on with whipping, is best remembered. But observe, there must be Life in the
Fish, before they can grow; and in the Trees, before they can bear; and in
Christians, before they can thrive by Affliction: Hewing may make a Tree fitter
for the Fire, but not more fruitful, if it have no Life. Affliction makes a
good Man better, but a bad Man worse, who are under the Rod like wild Bulls in
a net, Isa. 51.20. Impatient, and Turbulent, Swearing, Ranting, and
Blaspheming, Rev. 16.9, 10.21. Clear Water, when it is shaken in a Glass,
remains clear, but if there be Mud at the bottom, shaking discovers it; the
rottenness of the Lungs discovers it self by the breath, and if there be
rottenness at the Heart, it will appear by the unsavory belches at the Mouth.
Holy Job was not of this Humor, he is the same in Prosperity and Adversity; on
the Throne, and on the Dunghill; for he blessed God for taking away, as well as
for giving, Job 1.21. A Believer is satisfied Affliction cannot separate him
from God, and then he fears not any other separation. Paul and Silas can sing
in a Prison, when many a Man trembles in a Palace. Philpot and his fellows can
be as merry in the Bishop of London's Cole-house, as the Bishop can be in his
Bed of Down. God and a good Conscience are good Companions in a P^ison, and a
guilty Conscience is a bad Companion in a Palace, as Nero and many others have
experienced. Grace made Daniel venture boldly on the Lion's Den, and the three
Worthies upon the Fiery Furnace, and was David's Comfort at Ziklag, when Saul
in his Troubles went to the Witch, or rather to the Devil for help. And as
Grace and a good Conscience bear up the Head above Water in Affliction, when
others sink, so also it bears up the Heart against Reproaches, and is a special
Antidote against the Poison of Venomous Tongues, and indeed nothing but
Sincerity can do it; this beats back the Reproaches into the Reproacher's Face,
and helps to cast this Burden on the Lord, as knowing in due time he will clear
the Innocent, and will not let the Guilty go free. Now, Reproaches is a Burden,
that those of whom the World was not worthy, had a share, Heb. 11.36. and the
best of Men had a portion; and some drink very deep of this Cup, as David,
Jeremy, Amos, Elisha, Isaiah, yea, and Christ himself, Luke 16.14. And none on
this side Hell have suffered more of this kind than the Godly have done, and
none on this side Heaven have born it better, and it is Grace that enables them
so to do. Innocence is no Target against Calumny, Contra Sycophanti morsum non
est remediam, no Shield against the back-bitings of a slanderous Tongue, but
Grace it is that keeps the Poison from the heart. In the Primitive Times, and
in later days, none have been more reproached than true Christians, that
Machiavilian Principle has been exactly imitated, Calumniare audactis aliquid
saltem adhaerebit, Reproach freely, something will stick; if the Wound be
cured, the Scar will remain: But Believers Innocence Triumphs in the Conscience
of their greatest Accusers, and they can say as Job, Till I dye, I will not
leave my Integrity, Job 27.5, 6. If there be fair Weather within, no matter
what Storms are without; if the Bird in the bosom sing sweetly, no matter what
others say or swear. Christ himself, though free from Sin, yet was not free
from Reproach; he was called a Drunkard, a Glutton, a Companion of Publicans
and Sinners, an Enemy to Caesar, a Blasphemer, one that was a Samaritan, and
had a Devil, and cast out Devils by Beelzebub, the Prince of the Devils; they
buffered him, spit in his Face, and mocked him. But a good Conscience wipes off
all these Reproaches, and casts them back into the Reproacher's Face, and it is
better than a Thousand Witnesses, either in accusing, or excusing; if
Conscience Accuse, the World cannot Justify; and if it be clear, no matter
though all the World condemn us. In this case of false Accusation, Christ bids
us rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great will be our reward in heaven, Mat.
5.11, 12. When the Apostles were beaten before the Counsel, they went away
rejoicing, that they were accounted worthy to suffer for Christ, Acts 5.41.
They knew this would add weight to their Crown of Glory; and would not accept
of Deliverance, like those, Heb. 11.35, etc. But Ahithophel, for want of Grace,
under far easier Trials, hanged himself: Grace makes Men trust God when
Deliverance is out of sight, when others cannot; for while their chiefest
Treasure is safe, they are well enough; they know if they lose all for Christ,
they shall lose nothing by him; but shall have in heaven a more enduring
substance. They can live upon their Faith, and upon their Hope, when all things
else fails them, like the Church, Heb. 3.17, 18. Though all outward things
fail, yet the Heart established with Grace will not down; they know there is
Balm enough in Gilead, and Oil enough in the Horn of their Salvation. And
though the Pipes are cut, there is Water enough in the Fountain; though the
Creature cannot help, the Creator can; His hand is not shortened, that he
cannot save, nor his ear heavy, that ^t cannot hear. If God (said the Martyr)
take away my Meat, he will take away my Hunger; one Meals-meat will suffice a
Moses, an Elijah forty days; for God has promised, and he will perform it,
that the Righteous shall want nothing that is good; The just shall live by
Faith; and the Prayer of Faith is the Key of God's Treasury; those that have
it, and know how to use it, may fetch out what they please. Job will trust God,
though he kill him, though by Affliction he crush ^he very breath out of his
Body, yet will he not ^oose his hold, he shall not be so short of him. Dum
spiro spero (says a Believer) nay, Dum ex^iro spero, The Righteous Man has
hope in his Death. The Woman of Canaan would not be beaten off with two or
three repulses; like Jacob, she wrastled with God, till she got the Blessing.
Grace ^s to the Soul, as Ballast is to the Ship, it makes ^t more steady, when
otherwise it would be ^luctuating, and wavering. A Gracious Man, like Caleb,
follows God fully, and keeps himself unspotted in the World; Grace keeps the
Heart from desponding under the darkest Dispensations of Providence, though
Trouble hang long on; ^et he that believes, will not make have. This, ^^ke a
Skilful Physician, will extract Sovereign Antidotes out of the rankest Poison.
David got good by Affliction. If there be no help in the World, Faith will make
a Journey to Heaven, and fetch help thence, and engage God himself in the
Quarrel, or sue him on his own Bond. Thou have said (says Jacob) thou will do
me good; deny it if thou can, therefore I expect thou should make good thy
Promise. Grace is the whole Armor of God, wherewith we grapple with Sin, the
World, and the Devil, Ephesians. 6.13. The Shield that beats back the fiery darts
of Satan: A Catholicon, an Universal Medicine against all Maladies, of Soul, or
Body: And as it helps us to bear all Burdens, so it is a qualification, without
which we are fit for no Relations, no Offices or Places, in Church, or
Commonwealth; nor to perform any Duty to God, or Man: Though Grace cannot fit
every Man for every Office, Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius, yet it is such an
Ingredient, without which a Man is fit for no Place, neither can he perform the
Relative Duties of any; such an O^ye, cannot Preach, nor Pray, Read, nor
Meditate, as he ought, or perform any Ministerial Function; he is neither fit
to be Magistrate, Minister, Husband, Wife, Parent, or Child, Master, or
Servant; for without Grace he can never do the Duties of these Relations, for
all these Relations require Grace. Now, Grace being so necessary in the whole
course of our Lives, let us above all gettings, get Grace.

2. Consider, if Grace be so necessary in the Affairs of this Life, then
doubtless it is much more useful in the concerns of another, when nothing else
can stand us in stead. If it will fit us to live, it will much more fit us to
dye, and to leave the World; it will bear up the heart under the direful
Apprehensions of Death it self, it will defend the heart against the venomous
Darts thereof, and keep the heart from desponding under the apprehensions of
it. When Gold and Silver, Gemms and Jewels will do little good, a Man armed and
fortified with Grace, will dare to meet this Enemy in the Field, and treat him
as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 15.55. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where
is thy victory? etc. The bravest Challenge (says one) that ever rang in
Death's Ear; for when the Heart is defended with this Shield of Grace, no
venomous Dart can ever pierce it; the sting is to such taken out, and they may
put the Serpent into their Bosom; it is a conquered Enemy, lying prostrate at
their Feet; or rather an Enemy to Nature, but a Friend to Grace; the same blow
that kills the Body, sets the Soul at Liberty. Now, he that has his Soul
garnished with Grace, and his Conscience purged from dead works. He that has
assurance of the Pardon of his Sin, and an Interest in Christ, in Heaven, and
Glory, he will not be dashed out of Countenance with the rugged looks of Death.
He that has on the Wedding Garment, needs not fear when he is called to the
Supper. He that has Oil in his Vessel, as well as a Lamp in his Hand, needs
not fear the coming of the Bridegroom, nor the Servant that is watching, when
his Lord comes home. Death may kill a Godly Man, but cannot hurt him; the worst
it can do, is but to send him to his Father's House the sooner. Then Baca shall
be turned to Baracha, Sighs into Songs, and Misery into Majesty; then shall the
singing of Birds be come, then shall they take Possession of their Purchased
Inheritance, and those Mansions of Glory prepared for them, John 14.2. Then
they come to Age, and shall receive their Kingdom; the thoughts of this will
comfort the heart of a dying Man, and make him say, with Old Simeon, Lord, now
let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. Luke 2.29. And with Paul, Phil.
1.23. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. He that had been in the
third Heaven, no wonder if nothing would content him on Earth. Some clusters of
Canaan's Grapes we meet with in the Wilderness, which makes us long to go over
Jordan. It Is true, no Man loves Death for its own sake, neither can he, it is
an Enemy to Nature; but when a Believer knows the only way to Paradise is under
Death's Flaming Sword, and the only way to be freed from all Sorrow, is to
suffer a little Pain; that one blow will free him from Sin and Sorrow, the
Devil's Temptations, and the World's Allurements, and set him out of the reach
of all his Enemies, even in the Bosom of Christ himself. Who would be afraid of
such a blow? Or who would fear the time when his loving Father should send a
Messenger for him, out of a troublesome World into Eternal Happiness, to wipe
all Tears from his Eyes, and drive all Sorrow from his Heart? Can those that
really believe there is a reward for the righteous, and that they are of that
number, fear the time when they shall enjoy it? Can the Mariner after a
dangerous Storm fear to enter into the desired Port, or a Prisoner to enjoy his
Liberty, or a Sick Man his Health, or a Weary Man his Rest? Let those that
enjoy their Pleasures, Treasure, and Promotions only for term of Life, fear the
Expiration of their Lease, whose Lives do only defer their Torments: Let those,
I say, fear Death, and well they may, and did they but know the sequel, it
would send them trembling to their Graves. But I fear many that yet have honest
Hearts, yet live at such uncertainty, that they would willingly spin out the
thread of their lives to a great length, before they were willing to dye,
though it were accompanied with many Troubles, many of them under pretense they
are not yet prepared, the more shame for them; is not their main Work done? Why
then do they not set about it? What have they done all this while? If God
should add Twenty Years more yet to their days, will not this be their Excuse
then also? And think you, God will be thus put off? And is it not a sad thing,
that the main Concern should be neglected, and time found for every thing else?
But for wicked Men, there is no cause why they should desire Death, nay, great
reason why they should dread it, as the worst of Evils; they leap but out of
the Drying Pan into the Fire, out of a Temporal Misery, into Eternal Torments;
and by hastening their Death, outrun their Happiness, and fall into endless
Misery, which comes fast enough without hastening. But many of those mind no
more their Eternal Concerns, than the Ox that perishes: These Men either think
Repentance is not necessary, or else that they have time enough to repent in,
but ere long they will be sadly convinced of their mistake. Many hasten Death
by their Intemperance, which yet they fear more than God himself. But to let
these pass, I would have Believers be better acquainted with Death, than to
fear it, for it cannot separate them from the love of Christ; and those that
have the Riches of Assurance, cannot fear Death greatly, knowing when this
earthly tabernacle shall be dissolved, they have a building of God, a house not
made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. And who will not part with Rags,
for Robes, with a Cottage, for a Crown, and with a handful of Muck, for a
handful of Angels? Now, this Assurance is the Top-Gallant of Faith, the Triumph
of Trust, and the Sweet-meat of the Feast of a good Conscience, where there are
many dainty Dishes, but this is the Banquet; it is Heaven upon Earth, and such a
Jewel no wicked Man upon Earth can know the worth of it, any more than Aesop's
Cock did of the Precious Jewel. When the love of Christ warms the Heart, it
raises the desires of stricter Union and Communion with him, and a fuller
Enjoyment of him, which will never be satisfied till the full fruition in
Glory. He that loves God better than Father and Mother, etc. will part with
these for his sake. If we hate Hell, we shall not so earnestly desire to live
in the Suburbs of Hell. We complain of Sin, and well we may, it being the cause
of all our Misery; but did we hate it as we ought to do, we should be willing
to dye, that we might be rid of it; for when we enter through this strait
Passage, and narrow Way, we shall leave this and all other Burdens behind us.
We pretend we would serve God without Distraction, and shall we fear the time
and place, when and where it can only be done? But till Grace be in the Heart,
Heaven it self cannot be desirable; the Employment, the Company, and Society
cannot please a Wicked Man. But Grace enables a Man to see that Death it self
cannot break the Marriage-Contract between Christ and the Soul, but then the
Marriage will be fully consummate; and when the Soul is separated from the
Body, it shall by the Angels be carried into the Bosom of Christ, where sin and
sorrow shall be no more. Those that are sufficiently satisfied of the vanity of
the World, the emptiness of the Creature, the fullness of Christ, and the worth
of Heaven, we cannot rationally imagine but they will be willing to part with
one, to enjoy the other; in Earth we shall never meet with Content, or
Satisfaction; in Heaven we shall meet with no Disappointment, Troubles, or
Vexations; will a Wise Man choose a Prison, or a Pesthouse for his Habitation,
if he might have a Palace? Or any but a Madman dwell among the Tombs? The
World is all this, and much more: He that looks upon the World as an Enemy, and
the Body but a Skreen between God and the Soul, will not be unwilling to have
both removed: Will not a sick Man desire his Health, and an hungry Man his
Meat, a Captive his Liberty, and a Soldier the Victory, the Husbandman the
desired Harvest, and the Labourer his Wages? And why then should not Christians
long for the time when they shall receive at God's hand the promised Reward,
for all they have done, and suffered, for the sake of God? Shall those that
have done and suffered so much for Heaven, now be unwilling to have it when
offered? The Assurance of Eternal Life may make us willing to leave these our
Temporal Enjoyments. Well then, you see though a small measure of Grace cannot
overcome all Difficulties, yet there is nothing else but Grace can fit us for
Death, or enable us to grapple with it: And therefore above all gettings, get
Grace.

3. Consider, Grace is such a Qualification, that without it we can neither
please God, nor enjoy Him, who is our Chiefest Happiness. Heb. 11.8. Without
Faith it is impossible to please God. These are the Ornaments of a Christian,
the Gems and Jewels that make him lovely in the sight of God, the Gold tried in
the Fire, the white Raiment, the Spiritual Eye Salve, which God advises
Laodicea to buy of him, Rev. 3.17, 18. greater Riches than the Indies can
produce: Christ and Grace go together, he that has one will have the other
also; without Grace all our Duties are worse than nothing, abominable Sins; for
how can pure Water come from a polluted Fountain? The Heart by Nature is an
Augean Stable, full of Filthiness, but without Holiness we shall never see God,
Heb. 12.14. We may fast and pray, and give Alms with the Pharisee, Mat. 6.1,
etc. and offer Sacrifices, etc. with those Isa. 1.11, etc. and God will not
regard us; though it be commanded Duties, if they proceed from a rotten Heart,
or be performed for a by end, the Sacrifices of the Wicked are an abomination
to God: The Incense of the Wicked stinks of the Hand that holds it, their Good
Words are uttered with a stinking Breath, though they may be materially good,
they are formally evil; a good Motion cannot proceed from a soul Mouth, these
men deny in their Lives what they profess with their Lips; they are like the
Aethiopians, black all but the Mouth; some of them are fair Professors, but
foul Livers, dicta factis crubescunt, their Practice shames their Profession:
You may see how such Men's Sacrifices are accepted, Isa. 66.2, 3. The Fountain
must be cleansed, or the Streams cannot be sweet; the Tree must be good, or the
Fruit will be bad: Whatever proceeds from a Wicked Man, smells of the Cask. If
the Heart be right, God accepts of Pence for Pounds, Mites for Millions; and
esteems a Man as good as he truly desires to be, Dat been dat multum, qui dat
cum munere vultum, God loves a cheerful giver, and esteems the willingness of
the Mind, before the worth of the Work; the more of the heart is in the Sin,
the worse; but the more of it is in the Duty, the better, God loves no
heartless or grumbling Service; My son (says he) give me thy heart, Prove.
23.26. David's intention to build God an House, was accepted, as if he had done
it. So in Abraham's Offering his Son, the Widow's two Mites, were accepted, as
if it had been an Hundred Pounds. But if Grace be wanting, though a man give
all his goods to the poor, and his body to be burned, it is not accepted, 1
Cor. 13.3. Hypocrites blow their Gifts as Butchers do their Meat; yea, they are
Fly-blown till they stink again, but Grace is the Salt that makes it savoury;
Grace is the best Evidence we have for Heaven, and a sure sign of God's Favor,
for he will know them well he bestows it upon. He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be condemned, Mark
16.16. God gives Crowns and Kingdoms sometimes to the worst of Men, but the
Childrens Bread they shall not have, the rest is but Crumbs to feed the Dogs,
or rather the Cattle for the Slaughter; No man knows Love or Hatred by these
things. The Sun shines as hot upon the Bramble in the Desert, as on the Cedar
in Libanus; the Snow falls as well on the choicest Garden, as on the
Wilderness; yea, the lofty Pine meets with more Storms than the Shrub; the Sun
rises upon the Good and the Bad, and the Rain falls on the Just, and on the
Unjust; Wealth and Honor are handed out to the one, and to the other, and the
worst have of the best share, and no wonder it is their All: Sometimes the
Bramble is preferred before the Vine, the Olive, and the Fig Tree; but Grace is
the distinguishing Badge, Christ's Sheep-mark, which never any but his own
Sheep did ever wear: This makes a Man better, when the World makes him worse;
this makes the heart cheerful, when other things make it sad, or sordid; yet
the World contemns it, as Aesop's Cock did the Precious Stone. But at Death if
this be wanting, the Door will be shut against us; and when we are lanching out
into the infinite Ocean of Eternity, we shall be glad of such a Pilot. This
Garb I know is out of Fashion with our Gallants, but it is more durable than
their Silks and Sattins, and will better keep out a shower of Divine Vengeance
than those; it will prove the best Flower in the Garland, and the richest Jewel
in the Crown. The Rich Glutton would have changed his Garb with Poor Lazarus,
and been contented with his Bill of Fare. Were the Mountains Pearls, and the
Rocks Rubies, and the whole Globe of the Earth were a shining Chrysolite, yet
Grace excels it all; Crowns and Kingdoms, stately Buildings, Thousands of Rams,
and Ten Thousand Rivers of Oil, will not reach the worth of Grace; this it is
that opens the Door to the Pearl of great Price, Matthew. 13.45. To the
unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. It supports the Heart better than
the choicest Cordials, and those that now most despise it, will ere long most
earnestly desire it. When Death, like Belshazzar's Handwriting, enters their
Lodgings, and Summons them to Judgment; when they shall wish the mountains to
fall on them, and the hills to cover them, then Grace would be the best
Security. This is the only Ticket will open Heaven-gate, the Evidence for our
Title there: To a Gracious Man, though the way be rough, the Journey's end will
be easy; though the Battle be sore, the Conquest will be certain, and the
Spoils great; if they have a bad Dinner, they will have a joyful Supper; if
they lose their Estate, they are going to better Riches; they cannot want that
have God for their Father, Jerusalem which is above for their Mother, Christ
for their Head and Husband, the holy Angels and glorified Saints for their
Brethren and Companions, and Heaven for their Inheritance. God has set his
Seal, his Sheep-mark upon them, Holiness to the Lord, Zech. 14.20. Where God
changes the Relation, he changes the Nature and Disposition; a heart in
Heaven is one of the surest Evidences for Heaven; For where the treasure is,
there will the heart be also. The best Treasure the World affords, what is it
but the Guts and Garbage of the Earth, the greater load of it we carry, the
greater clog it oft-times proves in our Journey to Heaven, we cannot pass the
strait Gate till we unload it. Many make Gold their God, and their Wedge their
Confidence, but it failed Achan, his Wedge of Gold did serve to cleave his Soul
asunder, and his Babylonish Garment proved his Winding Sheet. Covetousness is
called Idolatry, because Men Idolize their Wealth; and Adultery, because they
Prostitute themselves to it, and lodge it in the room of God. Oh, how good is
that Counsel, that bids us provide bags that wax not old, a treasure in the
heavens, that fades not away, Luke 12.33. Other things we cannot keep, and if
we could, they would not avail us: But the true Treasure we cannot lose, it is
durable as the days of Heaven, and will run parallel with the longest line of
Eternity. When others therefore grasp for Gold, let us grasp for Grace; for
Godliness will be found great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. But those that make have to be
rich, shall not be innocent, Prove. 28.20. It Is not Gold; but Grace; not Money,
but Righteousness, makes the Soul Rich. A Gracious Man, though^ his Habitation
be below, his Conversation is above; and when Heaven is his Object, Earth will
be his Abject. But if many Men's Hearts were anatomized, we might find the
World there fairly Engraven, and nothing of Heaven would there be found. The
Devil holds his black Hand over most Men's Eyes, that they cannot see the way
to Heaven; and when they are blind-folded, he leads them, as the Prophet Elisha
did the Syrians to Samaria, when they think they are going to Dothan; they come
to Hell with hopes of Heaven in their mouths: They are like soft Wax, he can
turn them into any shape. But Grace is the Soul's Ballast, that keeps it
steady, and elevates it above the World, and gives it a Pisgah-sight of Glory;
it mounts it upon Mount Tabor, where it is transfigured with Christ, and its
Garments made white and shining. It gives the Soul those true Beauty-Spots,
which makes her lovely in the Eyes of her Husband; But these differ from the
Devil's Patches, whose spot is not the spot of God's people, Deuteronomy. 32.5. Grace
is the Oil that makes her Chariot-wheels move swiftly, and keeps her Lamp of
Profession burning. Many are the Promises God has made to Grace in general,
and to the several Graces in particular, both of things concerning this Life,
and that to come; and many are the Privileges gracious Souls have in
possession, and much more shall have in reversion; and many are the Love Tokens
her Husband sends her, and many a gracious Visit he affords her. It Is true,
sometimes to try her Love, he hides himself behind the Wall, but then every
sigh, and groan, and sorrowful complaint goes to his Heart; and when he has
tried her Affection, discovers himself again; he promises, and will make it
good, he will never leave her, nor forsake her; that she shall want nothing
that is good, and all things shall work together for her good. Sometimes indeed
Physic is as necessary as Food, and Affliction is the best Tutor, David found
it so; if they bear scars for his sake, he will change them into Beauty-spots;
if he frown upon them, it is but for a moment, but with everlasting kindness
will he remember them; weeping may continue for a night, but joy comes in the
morning. Grace makes both the Person and Performances pleasing to God, it is the
Incense he loves. It Is only the Gracious Soul that has Adoption,
Justification, Sanctification, Pardon of Sin, Communion with God, and that
shall enjoy him for ever: This is such a Chain of Pearl, that the World, were
it sold at the worth, cannot Purchase: Afflictions cause us to seek Promises,
they send us to seek Faith, it sends us to Prayer, Prayer goes to God for help;
Grace it is that differences between God's Children and the Devil's Brats, and
will difference between the Sheep and the Goats, and makes a man more excellent
than his neighbor; and therefore we cannot buy this Gold too dear.

4. Consider, Grace will not only bring us to Death, but will do us good after
Death, and here nothing else can do it; among other things it will qualify us
to leave a Good Name behind us, which will yield a sweet smelling savor in the
succeeding Generation. When the Name of the Wicked shall stink, the memory of
the Just shall be blessed, Prove. 10.7. If we be good, and do good, we need not
fear but our Name will survive us. Now, A good Name is better than precious
Ointment, Eccles. 7.1. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance,
when the Name of the Wicked shall rot, his Lamp shall be put out in obscurity,
and shall leave a stinking Snuff behind. The Names of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
David, Daniel, and Job, and such like, how sweet do they smell in the Church of
God? When Cain and Judas, Nero, Caligula, Domitian, and other such Persecuting
Tyrants, are mentioned with detestation, as the Burden of the Earth, and the
Plague Sore of the World; but with what Reverence do we mention the Martyrs
that suffered under them? The Scribes and Pharisees, which were bad enough
themselves, yet adorned the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and Righteous Men; and
however the Godly are slighted at present, in the Generation to come they will
be honored, when the Name of all their bloody Persecutors shall stink. But
this is not all that Grace will do for us after Death, for it will accompany us
to Judgment also, which the World will not, cannot do, for it shall be burnt
up, and if it could, would do us little good, it is Grace alone that can make
the Judge our Friend. When Death has left us, and we are rushing into the
infinite Ocean of Eternity, Grace is our Pilot to steer our Course, and land us
in the Haven of Bliss; and when we appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
this is his Sheep-mark, whoever bears it shall stand upon his right hand, when
all other wears the Devil's Brand, his Image and Portraiture, unmortified Sin,
and there shall be thrust and cro^ded together with the Devil and his Angels
upon the left. Grace is the Image of God renewed in the Soul, which he will own
wherever he sees it; and he that confesses Christ before Men, him will he
confess before his Father, and he that suffers with him, shall also reign with
him. There is a difference in this Life between the Righteous and the Wicked,
the one are called the Seed of the Woman, the other the Seed of the Serpent;
the Just and the Unjust, Believers and Unbelievers, Righteous and Wicked, the
Children of God, and the Children of the Devil, the Wheat and the Tares, the
good Fish and the bad, the foolish Virgins and the wise, etc. Now, it is Grace
that makes this difference, for by Nature we are all the children of wrath,
dug out of the same hole of the Pit, and hewn out of the same Rock. God
differenceth Men by these gracious Qualifications, and would have Ministers
difference them also in their Doctrine, and not give Holy things to dogs. And
as they are distinguished by God's Electing Love, and by the Operation of his
Spirit, so have they a different Portion, both in this World, and that to come:
The one feeds upon Heavenly Allowance, upon the sincere milk of the Word, and
the bread which came down from Heaven, the other finds no relish in it; and in
the World to come the one will have a Portion in Heaven, the other in Hell; but
there are many will not believe there is a Heaven or a Hell, but ere long
Experience will convince them. Now, the difference that there is, is God's own
work, for there was nothing in us, or that could be done by us, that could
deserve any thing at the hands of God, his Electing Love is the Spring and
Foundation of it; He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
h^rdeneth. He sent his Son to Redeem them out of the World, to pay their Debts,
to qualify their Souls with Grace, and after to bring them to Glory, when
others remain still under the Devil's Bondage. When Faith has knit that
Gordion-knot between Christ and the Soul, and she can say, My beloved is mine,
and I am his; when the Marriage is consummate between them, all that the
Husband has is hers, and what she has is his, then may she lay claim to his
Merits, his Righteousness, his Graces, and his Glory; and he partakes with her
in her Sins, and in her Sorrows, all her Debts are made over to him, and he
helps to bear her Sorrows; and upon this the Soul, though not Legally, yet is
Angelically Righteous; God changes both the Relation and also the Disposition.
By Grace Persecuting Saul becomes a Preaching Paul, and of Lions Men are made
Lambs. Now, God Adopts such for his Sons, and for his Daughters, and gives them
the Privilege of Children, calls them by his own Name, sets them about his own
Work, lists them under his own Banner, maintains them at his own Charges, and
at last will lodge them in his own Bosom; when all the rest of the World fight
under the Devil's Banner, and do his Drudgery. God has a Reward for the
Righteous, though happily they have little in hand, they have the more in
Reversion; they shall have Eternal Life, when the other shall have Everlasting
Torments. Hypocrites happily may counterfeit Christ's Sheep-mark, as some have
done the Broad Seal, but though they may deceive others, happily themselves, yet
can they not deceive God; the Lord knows who are his. The Inscription of his
Seal is, Holiness to the Lord; and they cannot put off their Bristow Stone for
a true Diamond. But as I told you, Grace will not leave a Man till it bring him
to Judgment, and speak for him to the Judge, who shall set him at his own right
hand, when all other shall stand at his left. Oh, what a Glorious Day will that
be, when so many Myriads of Angels and glorified Saints, each shining brighter
than the Sun in its splendor, shall attend upon the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall surpass them all in Glory? But what a dreadful Day will this be to Wicked
Men, when they shall see him whom they hated, to be their Judge; and they whom
they persecuted and wickedly murdered, to be their Accusers, yea, sitting upon
Thrones to Judge them also? Well may they call to the Mountains and Rocks to
cover them, Rev. 6.15, 16. but in vain, for the Mountains melt at his Presence,
and the Rocks are removed out of their places; Hell it self, that Dungeon of
Darkness, cannot hide from him; For Death and Hell must deliver up their dead:
But if they cannot stand before their self-condemning Consciences, much less
before their Judge, before whose face their secret sins are plain and manifest,
and then will they all say, they must hear that flaming Sentence of Go, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, etc. A
Sentence breathing out nothing but Fire and Brimstone, Thundering and Lightning,
Woe and Alas, Torment without end, and past imagination, Everlasting Fire,
Eternity of Extremity, which the Heart of Man cannot conceive, nor his Tongue
utter. To depart from God, is to depart from all that good is; into Everlasting
Fire, here is the pain of Sense; both these make up the Damned's Misery, but
the duration makes it complete. Here is the never-dying Worm, that continually
gnaws upon the Heart, and the Fire that never goes out, but continually burns
both the Soul and Body. Now Sirs, what say you to this? Is Grace worth having,
that prevents all this, and sets the Soul out of the reach of danger? Those,
and those alone that are adorned with Grace, shall be crowned with Glory; for
Grace is Glory begun, and Glory is Grace perfected. Is it now worth laboring
for? Doubtless those that now deride it as Foolishness, will then be derided
for their Folly. Set your selves in the posture you will certainly be in at
Death, and at Judgment, and then think whether you will make as light of it
then as now you do, and whether Cups and Queans will then give you better
content. No, no, the rudest Ruffian then would be the holiest Saint, and wish,
with Balaam, to dye the death of the Righteous. But a few feigned Desires,
faint Wishes, and short-winded Prayers, will not serve turn; God has linked
Holiness and Happiness together, and no Man can break the Chain; many would do
something for Heaven, if they might pick and choose their Duties; and leave
some Sins, if they might retain others; they would dance with the Devil all
Day, so they might sup with Christ at Night; they would do the Devil's Work,
but have God's Wages, and leap out of Delilah's Lap into Abraham's Bosom; they
would be Dives all Day, and Lazarus at Night. But those that deride Holiness
now, are not like to have the Reward of it hereafter, but then they shall see
those very Men that now are at the Bar, shall then be at the Bench, 1 Cor. 6.2.
and shall judge their Judges, and those that have been unjustly judged, shall
have their Cause called over again, and shall recover Costs and Damages; and
woe to those that have offended any of those Little Ones, that trust in God,
for their Avenger is strong. Wicked Men have no more forecast for their Souls,
than Fools have for their Bodies; but they will pay dear for their Folly, for
when the Saints shall shine in Glory, they shall be cast into a Dungeon of
Darkness; when God lays up his Jewels, he will throw out his Muck-heaps; when
he fans his Wheat, he will burn the Chaff; the one must go into Everlasting
Torment, the other into Life Eternal, Matthew. 25. last. Now, Reader, if thou
would know what Road thou art Traveling, or what Place thou art like to Land
in, consider whether Grace be thy Pilot, and God thy Polar Star, if not, thy
Condition is dangerous, and thy Course unsafe.

5. Consider, Grace will not leave us thus, for its work is not done when the
Judgment is over, and the Sentence past, for it is the only Treasure we take
with us to Heaven, and will not leave us, till the Crown of Glory is set upon
our heads, nor then neither, their work is not done. Indeed some Graces which
imply imperfection in us, as Faith and Hope, or in others, as Pity and Mercy,
may seem useless there; for how can we believe and hope for what we actually
enjoy, except it be for the continuance of it? These will be swallowed up in
the fruition of what we now believe, and hope for: And for Pity and Mercy, they
want their Objects, there being no Misery in Heaven, and those in Hell deserve
no Pity; here we have many wanting Brethren, whose Miseries call loud for
Mercy, but there they are supplied; but Love, and Joy, and Delight, Desire, and
Admiration, and such like, are not only continued, but much heightened in
Heaven; as also our Knowledge there will be perfected, and the Faculties of the
Soul enlarged. For as an enraged Conscience is one considerable part of Hell,
so a good Conscience augments Heaven's Glory; when all Earthly Enjoyments,
which made our Lives comfortable, forsake us, there will be a new Addition of
Pleasures and Delights given in, the duration of them will be for ever; when
others leave all that is comfortable behind, these will leave all that implies
Misery, or Imperfection; Grace will be a constant Companion to Eternity, the
Divine Love of God, of Holiness of the Saints and Servants of God, will never
abate, but be much more enlarged when our Understandings are enlightened to
know God better, for nothing but Ignorance can stave off our Affections from
loving him, who is the chiefest Good: That Marriage-knot between Christ and the
Soul is the Foundation of our Happiness, for from Union springs Communion, and
the perfect Enjoyment of him in Glory, which is the Beatifical Vision. Grace
here makes the Soul follow Christ through Good Report, and Evil Report, through
thick and thin, and makes her resolve to have him for her Husband, though she
have never a merry day with him; and is willing to run through Fire and Water
to come to him. Oh, that I might enjoy those Wild Beasts that are prepared for
my Torments, says Ignatius Phileas. The Italian Martyr was deaf at the
Persuasions of his Friends to forsake Christ, and blind at their Tears. True
Love is like unto Fire, the more you blow it, the faster it burns; or like
Lime, the more Water you pour on, the more it is enkindled; For many waters
cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it. Now, nothing but Grace can
bear up the Head and Heart under those Torments and Tortures, but a Gracious
Man can sing sweetly when it rains sadly, and trust God when Deliverance is out
of sight, Hic labor hoc opus est. To fetch Comfort from God, when the World
affords us none, is a Work of Grace, Hab. 3.17, 18. A spark of Divine Love once
kindled in the Breast, never goes out. Now, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.13.
there remains Faith, Hope, and Charity, but the greatest of these is Charity.
And why? Because it is longest lived. The Wisdom of the Saints, as also the
Folly of the World, is seen in this; the one respects Eternity, the other only
this Transitory Life; things subject to Vanity and Vexation, that vanish as a
curious Picture drawn upon the Ice in a Sunshine day, that soon dissolves into
Water. The World is like a Lottery, Men come to it with their Heads full of
Hope, and return with their Hands full of Blanks, and their Hearts full of
Sorrow, for there are twenty Blanks for one Prize: There are many fair Promises
made by the Devil and the World, but few performed; and our own hearts help to
cheat us. But he that Trades in Heavenly Riches, never meets with
disappointments, they will find it far beyond their highest conceptions. These
things it is true, are hardly gotten, but will prove well in the wearing, and
pay well for our pains. Heaven is not got so easily as the World imagines; when
they moil and toil for the Earth, they think Heaven may be had with a wet
finger, or into the bargain: They are like Timotheus, that dreamed that Towns
and Castles fell into his Toils while he slept; they think, a Lord have Mercy
upon us, will serve turn for Heaven, to wast them over, but they will find
their mistake; the Way is narrow they must walk in, and the Gate strait they
must enter, which they cannot do with a load upon their backs. We must work for
Heaven, as well as wish for it; yea, wrestle and strive to enter in at the
strait gate, it is the violent that take it by force; and if it be set to Sale,
all must go to buy this Pearl. I have read of a Christian, that beihg offered
great Riches and Preferments to change his Religion, he enquired whether it
were durable Riches they offered him; he would deal for no Treasures that were
not Eternal, nor sell his Immortal Soul for transitory Pelf; that Treasure that
is subject to Rust and Rapine, will not do our work, but that which is as
durable as the days of Heaven, and Eternity it self, which we may draw out a
Thousand Years hence, without Rust or Canker: These outward things may draw
Tears from our Eyes, but never will drive Sorrow from our Hearts; if we embrace
them, we hug a Cloud instead of Juno, it is but to hunt Butter-flies, to foul
our own Fingers. A Crown, which is esteemed the top of Humane Felicity, is
scarce worth (as one says, that had tried it) stooping for if it lay in the
street; for if we consider the Cares, Fears, Jealousies, Dangers, and Troubles
that accompany it, we should not envy them the Honor that bear the Burden.
It Is Wisdom therefore above all things to get Grace, and then we shall have
Christ and Glory. Men make a great dust and stir in the World, and all for the
Body, when there is not one day's Preparation for the Immortal Soul; many are
ashamed to be seen in this Fashion, but were the Body transparent, and could we
see their filthy, spotted, and leprous Souls through their Velvet Robes, they
had cause indeed to be ashamed to be seen in the streets. Now, they matter not
the Society of the Godly, but ere long they will never be troubled with it
again. Now they want time to Examine themselves, as to their future Estate, but
then they will have time enough to reflect upon their fore-past Follies, the
means they then had, the possibility, nay, the probability of their Conversion,
and how they lost Heaven for a Lust, how they have been warned of this a
thousand times, and that now it is too late, and the Door is shut, the Day of
Mercy is over, and will never dawn again. God has long expected Fruit, and
finding none, will lay down his Basket, and take up his Ax, and cut down these
fruitless Trees, and throw them into the Fire, and open the Floodgates of
Divine Vengeance, and pour in upon them: All Hopes will then be taken away, and
nothing but Despair left in the room. Now, where is the World, and what can it
do for thee? But Grace will shelter from all this, those that have this Oil,
shall go in, the other shall be shut out, Matthew. 25.11, 12. What will these Men
have to say for themselves then? Will they plead what Service they have done
for God? Alas, this will not serve their turn, Mat. 7.22. Will they desire the
Mountains to fall upon them, and the Hills co cover them? Alas, this cannot
benefit them, Rev. 6.16, 17. What will the Worldling by this time think of his
Portion? Will it prove current Coin in the other World? Is not Grace now the
better Portion, that will lodge a Man in the Bosom of Christ, and make him
drink of the Rivers of pleasures at his right hand for evermore, amongst those
Heavenly Quiristers, the Angels and glorified Saints, singing Hallelujahs
together, when all tears shall be wiped away, and sin and sorrow shall be no
more: Where they shall be freed from all Miseries, set out of the reach of all
Enemies, free from all Dangers, Temptations, Oppressions, and Troubles, in the
perfect Enjoyment of all Happiness, and lie in the Everlasting Embraces of
their dear Redeemer. Now, Reader, what do think of Grace? Is it worth having?
If yet to prevent the Furnace, thou fall down to the Idol, thy Blood will be
upon thy own Head.

Lesson 4. The Fourth Lesson this Providence teaches us, is this, That seeing
God has taken away one in the Prime and Flower of her Age, and thereby
manifests our Mortality, then it teaches us, that the Godly have not long to
suffer, for when Death comes, their Miseries are at an end, for Death will set
them out of the reach of Danger; this is the last Enemy they have to grapple
with, and this cannot hurt us, for Death does but lance the Ulcer (which
otherwise could never have been cured) and let out the Corruption; though it be
an Enemy to Nature, it is a Friend to Grace; that blow that kills the Body, sets
the Soul at liberty. Of all Men in the World, none are greater Sufferers than
the Godly, read Heb. 11.35, etc. But though their Afflictions are sharp, they
are but short; Heaviness may continue for a night, but joy comes in the
morning, Psalm. 30.5. Then their Sighing will be turned into Singing, and their
Musing into Melody; this World is their Purgatory, and can they expect
Pleasure? Nay, their Hell, all the Hell they shall ever have, and can they
expec^ Ease? But here is their Comfort, they can through it, and beyond it, In
the world they (...) meet with tribulation, it is in Christ they shall (...)
Peace, John 16.33. The World to Believ^ like the Streights of Megallan to the
Passenger, which way soever they bend their Course, the Wind is always against
them: Though Wicked Men, like Dogs, worry one another, yet like Herod and
Pilate, join both against Christ, and his Church; which ever is uppermost, they
are sure to be under, for while there is a Devil in Hell, or a Wicked Man upon
Earth, they can expect no Peace; Blessed are the dead therefore that dye in the
Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them, Rev. 14.3.
Here they are, with the Apostle, in Prisons often, but a Jail-delivery will
come, when they shall be freed, and their Enemies be sent to a worse Prison;
then shall all tears be wiped away from their eyes, and sin and sorrow shall be
no more. It Is here they have a Principle of Grace in them to direct their
Course aright, but Corruption, like a Byas to the Bowl, draws them aside; they
are like the Stars, whose Natural Course is from the West to the East, but by
force of the Primum Mobile they are hurried from East to West. Regenerate Men's
Course is Heavenward, but they are many times like the Stars, Stationary and
too often Retrograde: They are like the Bird of Paradise, with a Clog upon her
heels, her Nature is to mount up, but the Clog plucks her down again; when they
mount up in their Contemplations to get a view of Christ, they are like a Man
that looks at a Star through an Optick-Glass, held with a Palsy Hand,
sometimes, but it is seldom, they get a sight of him, but they shall have a
clearer Vision ere long. They cannot deal with their Corruptions, as Abraham
did with his Servants, leave them behind, when they go to Sacrifice; no, they
say, as Ruth did to Naomi, Whither thou go, we will go; and where thou
lodgest, we will lodge; and where thou art buried, we will be buried, and
nothing but Death shall part us, Ruth 1.16. But it is but a while, and a
Believer shall be everlastingly separated from his sin, and will triumph over
all his Enemies. Oh Death, where is thy sting? Oh Grave, where is thy victory?
etc. It Is true, here the best have no pure Beauty, they have their form
freckles, yet their spot is the spot of God's people, which will wash out, and
not like the Leopard, not only in the Skin, but in the Flesh also; but then
they shall appear without spot or wrinkle: Here all their Comforts are mixed,
and there is no fire, but there is some smoke; it is not so there: Here they lie
among the Pots, but there they shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. Then
shall they exchange Earth for Heaven, Misery for Majesty, and a Crown of Thorns
for a Crown of Glory, but what this Glory is, we know not, but shall then have
occasion to say of it, as the Queen of Sheba did of Solomon's Wisdom, Much I
have heard of it, but the one half was not told me. Paul, that had a Glimpse of
it, saw more than he was able to utter, for no word in Humane Language could
express it: We can no more set out Heaven's Happiness, than we can take the
Dimensions of it with our Span, or empty the Sea with a Spoon. All we can do to
get out of this Labyrinth is by a clue of Scripture-thread, and here it is but
shadowed out to us according to our Capacity, so much as may set us a longing
after the enjoyment of that, which eye never saw, ear never heard, neither can
the heart of man conceive what it is: Now, the Eye has seen much, the Ear
heard of more, but the Heart can conceive of more than that; as that the Earth
is a Globe of beaten Gold, the Sea of liquid Pearl, every Grass to be a
Diamond, and every Sand a Ruby; the Air to be Crystal, and every Star to be ten
thousand times bigger and brighter than the Sun, etc. for what can bound our
Fancy? Now, if all these were realities, alas, it falls short of Heaven's
Glory, these things fall under our Senses, but Heaven's Glory cannot; here is
Joy without Sorrow, Light without Darkness, and Grace is here without
Corruption: Here is a mixture of the one with the other, and many times an
Ounce of Joy has a Pound of Sorrow; we get sometimes a Pisgah-sight of Canaan,
and suddenly are hurried back into the Wilderness, if not into Egypt; now
Health, then Sickness; now Ease, then Pain; now Poverty, then Plenty: But in
Heaven it will not be so, our Wine there shall not be mixed with Water, the
Storm there will be over, and the Weather always calm and serene. But to come
nearer to our business, our Happiness there will be partly privative, partly
positive. I shall speak to those apart, and show you first what we leave behind
us, and then, what our Enjoyment shall be, and all but as in a Glass darkly.

1. At Death, and not before, we shall be freed from all our Sin and
Corruption, which is the greatest trouble a Believer has in this World, and
indeed the cause of all other troubles, but at Death it shall never trouble
them more; they may say of it, as Moses of the Egyptians in the Red Sea, Those
you see to day, you shall see no more for ever. And is not this cause of
Rejoicing? Sorrow follows Sin, as the Shadow follows the Substance, but the
Cause being removed, the Effect will cease. This it is that spoils all our
Duties, and makes them unsavory unto our God; for the Fountain being defiled,
the Streams cannot be pure; this is the Makebate between God and the Soul, and
this hides his face from us. We can never have Peace with God, or any assured
Peace with our selves, or the Creatures, till we break our Peace with Sin; for
when God is offended, our own Consciences, and all the Creatures wait but for a
Commission to molest us, or destroy us. The Waters of the Flood drowned the
whole World, the Red Sea Pharaoh and his Host, the Fire burnt up Sodom and
Gomorrha and the Cities adjacent; the Earth swallowed up Korah and his
Accomplices, the Walls of Aphek slew twenty seven thousand of God's Enemies, 1
Kings 20.30. The Stars fought in their Courses against Sisera, the very
inanimate Creatures take God's Part, so do the poor Insects; the Flies, the
Lice, the Caterpillars, what Plagues were they to Egypt? As also the Frogs, the
Hail, etc. And would have destroyed him, and all his Army, had not Moses
interceded. And Histories tell us, that sometimes a Fly, an Hair, a kernel of a
Grape, a prick with a Pin, have brought Great Men to their end. Hence it was
that Augustine says, he would not be in an unregenerate Man's condition for
one hour for all the World, lest God in that time should take him hence by some
Judgment, and send him to Hell. Now, though Sin have a Mortal Wound in the
Regenerate, which cannot be cured, yet it will have a Being in them while they
are in the Flesh, and these Sons of Zeruiah are sometimes too strong for them,
but at Death these Anakims shall be overcome, Death will give them their
Deaths-wound; the same stroke that separates the Soul from the Body, shall
divide between Sin and the Soul: Now it sticks as close to us as the Skin to
the Flesh, or as the Flesh to the Bones, or rather as one Bone to another, and
much closer; for these may be separated, but the other not: it is like as the
spots of the Leopard, not only in the Skin, but in the Flesh also, nay, it is in
the very Heart, and not only in the Body, but in the Soul also, yea, in the
very Power and Faculty of it, yet at Death a separation will be made; and this
must needs be good News to a Believer, when his deadly Wound is cured, which is
the cause of all his Maladies. Oh, happy day will it be to him, when he shall
shake hands with his Corruptions, and give them a Bill of Divorce, and bid them
an Everlasting Adieu; when he shall never have a proud, vain, sensual, or
ungodly thought more to trouble him, or any that shall be unbeseeming God, or
Godliness. Now he cannot serve God without distraction, but then it will be
otherwise; no sin shall stand then as a Cloud to Eclipse the Sun of
Righteousness, or cloud him from us. Now Sin makes a Godly Man a weary of his
Life, and causes many a sad and sorrowful Sigh, and many a Prayer it does cost
him, and many a struggling for the Victory; but then it will be had, and the
War will be ended, and the Triumph obtained, when all Tears shall be wiped
away, and Sin and Sorrow shall be no more; and for a Crown of Thorns, they
shall have a Crown of Glory. There is nothing now but sin that hides God's Face
from us, when these Clouds are removed, we shall see him as he is, and shall
never see one frown in his face, nor one wrinkle in his brow, for Sin and
Corruption, which are the only Make-bates, shall be left behind, for no unclean
thing shall ever enter into Heaven; for though the Serpent did wind himself
into Paradise, none of the Serpentine Race shall ever enter into Heaven, their
place shall no more be found there, Rev. 12.8. And if he be cast out, his Works
shall follow him; then the Saints will be Saints indeed, without spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27. Their robes will be washed in the
blood of the Lamb, and they shall no more delight to wallow in the Mire. Heaven
that spewed out the fallen Angels, will not admit of any unclean thing; sin to
the Godly is their greatest Trouble here, but what would it be should they be
troubled with it to Eternity? I have read of the Indians, that enquired, where
the Spaniards would go after their Death? And Answer being made, To Heaven;
protested they would not come there among so Blood-thirsty and Cruel a People.
This was their Ignorance; but this I say, should a Godly Man know his sin
should accompany him to Heaven, it would be great cause of sorrow. Anselm
affirms, he had rather go to Hell Innocent, than to Heaven with a Guilty
Conscience. It Is a greater Mercy to be freed from Sin, than to be born Heir to
a Kingdom, but at Death they shall have the Privilege of both; now it is their
daily Complaint, O this hard, this proud, this hypocritical Heart! how shall I
get it softened, humbled, and reformed? But then it will be done, it will then
be better than now we can desire, or expect; here the Understanding is clouded
with Ignorance, there the scales will fall from our Eyes. Many a Man would ride
a Thousand Miles, and give many Hundred of Pounds to have a clear insight into
some of the Mysteries held forth in the Scripture, as of the Trinity, the
Incarnation, Predestination, Redemption, Free Will, etc. And of some obscure
Passages, Prophesies, and Promises, recorded in the Scripture: But there all
shall lie open, and God's whole Contrivance in the work of our Redemption made
apparent, to his Glory, and our Eternal Admiration. In a word, there shall no
sin, or any thing that implies a defect, enter Heaven, for no such Weeds grow
in God's Garden; there will be no imperfection of our love to God, our desire
after him, or our delight in him; neither any distempered Passion, or
Affection, for the Affections that there shall remain, shall be set upon right
Objects, and agreeable to the Will of God. Oh, happy time! when shall it be,
when we shall be rid of all our sins, that now keep us so low, and God at such
a distance from us?

2. As at Death we shall be freed from all sin, so likewise from all the
Causes, Occasions, and Provocations to sin, from the Temptations of Satan and
Allurements of the World; for as there will be no Natural Inclination to it
within, so there will be no Provocation to it from without; for Temptation
without, now proves the Bellows to blow our Corruption up into a Flame, it
being as Tinder to the Fire, ready to catch upon all occasions. The Devil is a
Powerful, Politic, Subtle, and Malicious Enemy, lying upon his lurches to
betray us, 1 Pet. 3.8. He is always fishing for Souls, and suits his Baits
according to our Inclinations; he has such an Enmity against God, that he
hates his Image where ever he sees it; and though he cannot race it out, yet he
will always oppose it, and seek to deface it; he is like the Scorpion, his
sting is always out, and what Opposition either he or his Instruments can make
against it, they will be sure to do it; but at Death we shall be out of his
reach, and in a place of safety, where he cannot throw one Dart at us, nor
shake his Chain to affright us. Now he gives us many Alarms, and if he finds us
out of our Trenches, or neglecting our Watch, he is sure to surprise us, and to
make a Prey of us; and were we not kept by the mighty power of God to
Salvation, we could not escape being devoured by him. Now we have no quiet Day
nor Night, nay, in our very Addresses to God, but he molests us with his
Temptations, sometimes stops our Mouths, and oft-times steals away the Heart in
the time of Duty, and lays Snares for us where ever we go, or whatever we do;
but the more Spiritual the Duty is, so much the greater is his Opposition: He
spoils our Duties purposely to make God hate them, he takes great Advantage
indeed by our own Corruption, and we shall never be rid of the one, till we are
free from the other: Our Senses are the Cinque Ports that lets in the Occasions
and Provocations to sin into the Soul, and he sails in with the Tide of our
Corruptions; he throws in many times Pestilent Temptations, and horrid
Injections, which being resisted, become not our sins, yet are they matter of
sorrow to think that our hearts are the Soil where such wicked Seed is sown;
and it is matter of fear also, lest sometime or other the Temptation should be
owned, and the Soul become Mother to the Devils Brats. Christ indeed, though
free from Sin, was yet not free from Temptation; the Devil's Wildfire fell
upon wet Tinder, he had no Corruption as we have to give it Entertainment. He
seeks sometimes by his Temptations to make us have hard thoughts of God, yea,
sometimes to question whether there be a God, or whether the Scriptures be the
Word of God, or whether the Soul be Immortal, or dye not with the Body, or
whether there be hereafter a Life of retribution, etc. And many times injects
thoughts of Pride, Sensuality, Hypocrisy, Revenge, etc. Now these, though not
consented to, must needs be troublesome to think such Tares should be sown in
our Fields, though if we cry out with the Ravished Virgin, it will become his
sin, though our sorrow. He fits his Temptations, as the Fisher does his Baits,
to our Inclinations; if a Man be inclined to Drunkenness, he does not thrust
him by Head and Shoulders into the Alehouse, this would affright him, but
stands behind the Bush, and sets a Companion to call him; for the Adulterer he
has a Delilah, some Beautiful Strumpet; if she be not Beautiful, he teaches
her the Art to Paint, Spot, and use other Alluring Tricks: He has a Wedge for
Achan, and a Reward for Judas, and an All this will I give thee, for Christ
himself. Now, while we are on this side Heaven, we are in continual danger, and
great cause we have to dread these Snares, seeing so many are taken in them; if
we resist them, we are like to be undone also; they that will not howl with the
Wolves, are like to be devoured by the Wolves: If we escape with our Estates,
it is well; if with our Lives, it is better; if the Devil cannot prevail by fair
means, he will use foul. A Godly Man in this World is like an honest Matron
that is confined in a House with some lustful Letcher, who is always
soliciting her to Lewdness, and though she deny him with disdain, will yet
give her no rest: So, though the Devil have a thousand Repulses, he will not
desist; and if one Temptation sail, he will try another; though we cry out,
with the Ravished Virgin, Deuteronomy. 22.25. yet sometimes he makes a Rape upon us,
and injects his filthy Seed against our wills; but it is our Natural propensity
makes us fear a Surprisal, our Hearts being so deceitful, Jer. 17.9. and so
many tall Cedars so foully shaken in our days. But when Death comes, the Devil's
Work is done, and nothing remains but that he receive his Wages; and though he
and his Instruments trample upon us now, we shall then trample them under foot,
Romans 16.22. His Horn will be broken, and become a Trumpet for our Triumph. But
suppose as much liberty were granted him in Heaven, as he has upon Earth, to
use as many Temptations, and spread as many Snares as now he does, what would
it avail? There will be no Corruption to work upon, neither any Bait that would
be taking; suppose he should say to the Saints, All this will I give you, as he
did to Christ, and a stronger Bait I know not of, any he has. Suppose he
should offer and really give them Crowns and Kingdoms to leave Heaven's Glory,
and follow him, who would leave an Eternal Kingdom of Glory, for a Transitory,
Earthly Dominion? Now indeed we live out of sight of this Heavenly Inheritance,
and the things he offers are sensibly perceived, and hence it is he prevails
with poor blind Creatures, that can see but under their Feet, but there the
scales will be dropped from our Eyes, and we shall see the worth of the one, and
the vanity of the other, one Glimpse whereof made Paul account all things here
below as dirt and dung. It must be a lovely Object that will draw a Believer
out of the Arms of Christ, and make him forsake the Glory of Heaven, something
that must be better, and more lovely, but that is not in the Devil s keeping;
no, no, his Work is done, and he will deceive the Nations no more. He works
here upon Men's Ignorance, but there it will be expelled; here we live in
danger, but there we are out of harms-way; we need not there fear his frowns,
nor regard his smiles; for as he cannot tempt us, so he cannot hurt us; neither
the World, which is his great Assistance, which here assists him in laying his
Snares, and is the Bait wherewith he baits his Hook, but then it will be no
Lodestone to a glorified Saint: Worldly Profit, Pleasure, and Honor, are here
things that take with Flesh and Blood, but not in Heaven, they are not indeed
here nec vero nec nostra; but then they will be mere non entities, and no such
thing in being, as we call so here, for all Earthly things will be burnt up:
Here we are in continual danger, lest some Sense or other suck in the Poison;
we can hardly open our Eyes but we let sin into the Soul, something or other to
provoke Pride, Passion, Covetousness, Uncleanness, or one hateful Lust or
other; the like we may say of our Ears, and other Senses: No wonder then that
Job made a covenant with his eyes, Job 31.1. And our Savior bids us, Take heed
how we hear. Almost all we converse with are infectious Persons, and have some
Plague Sore running upon them. And may we not say of most Families, as of the
Egyptians, there is not a House where some dead Person is not, nay, many whole
Families, yea, many Parishes, where there is scarce one alive; it is a very
Golgotha, a place of dead Men. Nay, our very Bodies prove Instrumental to
betray the Soul; nay, every Creature we are conversant with proves no better,
but prove Temptations to draw or drive away the Soul from Christ; and every
Enjoyment proves a Snare, every Estate and Condition, whether we are Rich or
Poor, in Honor or Disgrace, in Health or Sickness, in Pleasure or Pain, at
Liberty or in Prison, Bond or Free, every Estate has its peculiar Temptations;
every Calling, from the most Honorable, to the Base; every Relation,
Magistrate or Subject, Minister or People, Husband or Wife, Parents or
Children, Masters or Servants, have their Temptations; Male or Female, Fair or
Foul, Married or Unmarried, Young or Old, Poverty has its Temptations, and
Riches more; Agur's wish, Neither Poverty nor Riches, but Food convenient,
seems the best Choice. Our Clothing oftentimes proves a Snare, if gay, to
Pride or Arrogance; if poor, to Repining and Discontent. Our Table also becomes
a Snare, if well furnished, to Gluttony, Drunkenness, and Excess; if not, to
envy others that have better: So that there is not an hour free from one Danger
or other, for Soul or Body, or both; our very sleep is not free, but pestered
with vain or sinful Dreams, or fearful Visions of the Night, our Corruption
disturbing our Fancy; nay, in our Lawful Enjoyments, Latet anguis in herbas,
for no Enjoyment we have, but the Devil will weave it into a Net for our Feet,
in licitis perimus omnes, we cannot look into the World, but one thing or other
is making suit for our Affections; so that many times I have thought an
Hermitage, or some secret Cell were to be chosen, free from the noise of the
World, but such places are not without their Temptations, as Experience
proves; when we open our Eyes, we see Vanity; and when we open our Ears, we
hear Folly; something that tends to provoke to some base Lust, Pride,
Vainglory, Lasciviousness, Envy, Malice, Revenge, or suchlike; or otherwise
we see or hear some Command of God broken, which should provoke our sorrow. So
bitter and malicious an Enemy the Devil is, if he cannot keep us out of Heaven,
he will make the way thither troublesome; and the World is such a sworn Enemy to
us also, not only in our Civil Enjoyments, but in our Spiritual Duties, in our
Addresses unto God it proves a hindrance, and our own Hearts prove treacherous;
these Fly-blow our Duties, yea, make us pride in our Graces; ^ea, to be proud
of our Humility, if we look not about us. Now, who would desire to live among
all these Snares and Temptations? but here is our comfort, Death will free us
from these and all others whatsoever, and set us out of the reach of danger;
for the actual Enjoyment of God, and Christ, and Heaven, and Glory, will wholly
take us up, that we shall have no time for, no mind to these things.

3. As at Death they are freed from Sin, and the Occasions of Sin, from the
Devil and his Temptations, so are they also from his Instruments, which Christ
calls his Children, John 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the works
of your Father ye will do. They have the same Nature and Disposition he has,
viz. a hatred to God and Godliness, for where ever they see the Image of God,
they pour Contempt upon it, and hence it is they Persecute the Righteous for
Righteousness-sake, whatever they pretend to the contrary. But in Heaven the
Saints shall hear no more of this grinning Language, but shall be free from not
only the violence of Hands, but the strife of Tongues; There the wicked shall
cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest; there the Prisoners rest
together, and hear not the voice of the oppressor; the small and the great are
there, and the servant is free from his master, etc. Job 3.17, etc. This Life
is the day of Temptation, and the hour of Darkness, but at Death it will be
over; the Enemy may, and oft-times does persecute the Godly to Death, but
cannot reach them after, except they Triumph over their dead Bodies, as they
did over the Witnesses that were slain, but when they arose again, their Sport
was spoiled; this was but over their Bodies, but their Souls they cannot reach,
no Torment can touch them; and though they burn their Bodies, or rend them into
a thousand pieces, yet the least Atome of them shall not be wanting at the
Resurrection: There are none in the World that carry themselves more
inoffensively than they do, yet never any meet with harder measures from the
World than they do, and the reason is because the World hates them for Christ's
sake, and no wonder, it hated him before it hated them. Jeremy wonders why
every one cursed him, that had neither given nor taken upon Usury, Jer. 15.10.
The Apostles that wronged none, but only labored the Conversion and Good of
all, met with hard dealing in the World, as we may see, 1 Cor. 4.9, etc. and 2
Cor. 11.23, etc. And from them we may know the World's Wages, and what to
expect from them: Their Persecutors were sharp and severe, Verberibus pluunt
colaphis grandinant, it is the practice of bloody Persecutors to endeavor to
effect that by Arms, they cannot do by Arguments; as when the Apostle had
confounded the Jews by the Scriptures at Damascus, they sought to kill him,
Acts 9.22. But it is Ignorance that breeds the Quarrel, they are Ignorant, and
will be so, for like Bats they shun the Light, and are like Barbarians, that
curse the Sun when it shines hot upon them, Believers dare not run into the
same excess of Riot, and hinc ille lachrymae, they hated Christ because he bore
Witness their deeds were evil; and all a Believer's Sufferings are but a Chip
of Christ's Cross; the seed of the Serpent will hate the seed of the Woman, for
though like Dogs they worry each other, yet all join together against the
Godly, as Herod and Pilate against Christ; Ephraim is against Manasseh, and
Manasseh against Ephraim, yet both against Judah. Whatever the pretense be, to
root out Holiness is the intent; they are instigated by the Devil, and they
must needs go when he drives them, but it is a comfort he cannot go beyond his
Chain, he cannot make a Louse, Exodus 8.18. nor drown a Pig, Mat. 8.32. nor
throw down a House, Job 1.19. without leave, and his Chain will never suffer
him to reach them in Heaven. Here they suffer by Hand and Tongue, but those
Hands and Tongues will suffer hereafter, as we see in the Rich Glutton; here
their Tongues are set on the fire of Hell, but then they shall be set on fire
in Hell, when the Godly for their Crown of Thorns shall have a Crown of Glory.
Here the Wicked whip their own faults upon the Saints backs, as Nero set Rome
on fire, and laid it upon the Christians, and others since have taken the same
course; but there will be a Resurrection of Names, as well as of Bodies; it is
the Evening crowns the Day, and the last Scene the Play; when the Game is up,
we shall know who loses. Christ tells us, we shall be hated of all men for his
sake. In Nero's time whoever professed himself a Christian, must dye without
further Trial, as an Enemy to Mankind; and in after-ages those that own
Religion in sincerity suffer by those that profess what they practice. The
Apostle bids us not to think it strange concerning the fiery trial, 1 Pet.
4.12. And Experience tells us, it is no strange thing; it is good to prepare for
it, it will not come the sooner, but will be better born; yea, we should
rejoice to be accounted worthy to suffer for Christ, 1 Pet. 4.13. I have read
of Vincentius the Martyr, that laughed at his Tormentors, and walked upon hot
burning Coals as upon Roses, and called Death and Tortures Jocularia and
ludicra, matters of Sport to Christians; but whatever Tortures they suffer now,
there will be none in Heaven; but the cry of the Souls under the Altar will be
heard, for Vengeance against those that shed their Blood, Rev. 6.9. and those
that shed it will have their bellies full of Blood; their Tyranny will be over,
and their Place shall no more be found in Heaven, Rev. 18.8. It was a mistake
of the poor Indians, that refused to go to Heaven, lest the Spaniards should
torment them there. Wicked Men may here take away their Lives, but not their
Graces; their Heads, but not their Crowns. Christianity is pretended by many,
practiced by few, when serious Holiness is loaded with many reproachful Titles;
when their Innocence triumphs in their Enemies Consciences, those that cast
them out say, Let the Lord be glorified, Isa. 66.5. They deal by them, as
Naboth was dealt with at Jezabels Fast, God's Glory pretended, Naboth's Death
intended for his Vineyard; but God that searches the Heart, knows the bottom
of the business: But those that really suffer for Christ, are truly blessed,
and have cause to rejoice, Mat. 5.11. for they serve the best Master, who will
not suffer them that either do or suffer for him, to go without a Reward; what
is wanting in Possession, shall be made up in Reversion an hundred fold: They
have something in hand, some of Canaan's Grapes to bear up their Heads and
Hearts, but the best is behind. The Primitive Christians were reproached, that
in their Meetings they used promiscuous Copulation, a Slander not yet
forgotten, which did the Reporters really believe, it would be the strongest
Argument to make them turn Phanaticks, as they style them, but their Innocence
triumphs in their Enemies Consciences; they are not able to prove against one
single Person, what they charge upon the whole Society; many are the
Reproachful Names they are loaded with, like the Primitive Christians, that
were put into Beast skins, and then thrown to wild Beasts to be baited, and
devoured; but God knows his own, though in a Disguise; the best of Saints have
been accounted the worst of Sinners, but wronged Saints shall to Heaven, when
railing Rabshakehs come not there; the vilest Sinners are sometimes dressed up in
the Garb of Saints, but these Garments fit them not, but God will undress them
ere long, and strip them of their borrowed Robes, then their Paint and Plaster
will not abide the fire, and the dirt they threw into other men's faces will
appear in their own. In this Life the Godly may have unlawful Edicts made to
force them to sin, and to drive them from their Duties, as Daniel and his
fellows had, and then they cry out, If thou let this man live, thou art not
Caesar 's friend; then those that dare not run with them into the same excess
of riot, are, with Peter, cast into Prison, or, with Jeremy, into the Dungeon,
or, with John, banished into some remote Country or corner of the World, or by
Torments end their Lives, whose Blood, like the Blood of Abel, will cry aloud
to Heaven for Vengeance, for precious in his sight is the death of his Saints,
Psalm. 116.15. What the Wit of Man, or the Policy of Hell could invent, has
been poured out upon the best of Men, as in the Primitive Times, and in
succeeding Ages, to this very day, none out of Hell have suffered more than
they; but in Heaven they have a resting place, when their Enemies shall be in
endless, easeless, and remediless Torments; then shall the Saints be set out of
the reach of danger, and all their Sufferings will be made up into a Crown of
Glory for them; for though they may (nay, it is odds they will) lose something
for Christ, they shall never lose any thing by him; hence the Apostle advises
us to rejoice when we fall into diverse temptations, James 1.2, etc. As their
Sufferings abound, so will their Comforts also, for God has Cordials against
fainting Fits. Now the Enemies Triumph when the Witnesses are slain, but when
they shall rise again their Mirth will be over; they are now but carrying
Faggots for their own burning, or like Haman, making Gallowses for their own
Execution: Now their Hands are full of Blood, and their Hearts of Cruelty, but
then they shall have Blood enough, even their own blood to drink, for they are
worthy. Now God's People cannot Pray in their Families, or sing forth God's
Praises, but one or other is offended; but then they shall Trumpet out his
Praise without control, when their Enemies shall wring their hands in the
dolor of their hearts. The thoughts of this Glorious Liberty made the Martyrs
suffer joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, yea, to kiss the Stake, and
embrace the Flames, and welcome Death as a Messenger of good News; then all the
Floods of Persecution will be dried up, and the Church called out of the
Wilderness, and the New Jerusalem shall come down from Heaven; then there shall
be no more Tortures or Torments for them to suffer, no Schismatic wounded, and
a Saint found bleeding; there will then be no more Divisions, but perpetual
Peace, Love, Unity, and Concord, Eternal Enjoyment of God in Glory. Oh, what a
happy Change will this be! who would not rejoice in the foresight of this, and
welcome Death it self, that must put us in the Possession of it?

4. At Death a Believer is not only freed from the Devil, the World, and Sin,
and all his other Enemies, but also from all the direful Fruits and Effects of
Sin, which he cannot be till Death sets him free, and this will be to no small
Advantage; for though Sin in a Believer has its Deaths-wound, yet so long as
it has a Being, (and that will be while he has a Being in the Flesh) it will
have its Fruits and Effects, such as these, Losses, Crosses, Sickness, Sorrows,
and Death it self; for these, or some of these we shall be sure to have a share
in while we live; but at Death, when Sin shall cease, the Effects will cease
also; Sin and Sorrow always attend one the other, as the Shadow does the
Substance, but neither Sin nor Sorrow shall have any Being in Heaven; all
Bodily Griefs, and Spiritual Maladies shall be removed, and Death must be the
Physician. Our Bodies here are subject to many Distempers, and each one will
have a snatch at us, as so many Angry Curs at a Passenger, but some bite harder
than others do; and by reason of these Maladies we spend our days inter
suspiria and lachrymas, between sighs and sobs, no day nor hour passes, but
something or other either does, or well may disturb our Peace, or spoil our
Sport. No perfect Consolation is here to be expected, in this Bochim, or place
of Lamentation; for there should be some proportion between our Sin and our
Sorrow, some storms of Sighs, if not a shower of Tears, for all Constitutions
are not prone to weep; one hour's sin may disturb many a night's sleep, as
doubtless it did in David, when he watered his couch with his tears, yea, made
his bed to swim, Psalm. 6.6. His Bed that was Witness of his Sin, was Witness of
his Sorrow also: But did our Lustful Gallants pay as dear for their stolen
Waters as he did, they would take more heed God has various ways to embitter
the World to his People, when they let out their Affections upon it, he whips
them home when they are playing in the Dirt. Some lie long languishing under
Bodily Distempers, yea, in much Tormenting Pain, as the Cholick, Stone,
Strangury, Gout, and such like; the best of Men, the choicest Ministers are not
always free, this makes them weary of their Lives, and, with Paul, desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, and to cry out, Come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly. How many may we hear crying out, Oh, my Head, Oh, my Heart, my Back,
my Bones, my Bowels, etc. These Bodies of ours are subject to a Thousand
Infirmities, Diseases, Distempers, and Casualties, and by which Door Death will
enter we know not: And some poor Creatures have few waking hours free from
pain, for Grace it self cannot prevent Bodily Distempers, though it enables Men
better to bear them: Yet all this is but a needful Potion, prescribed by a
loving Father and a tenderhearted Physician. Oh Sin! how dreadful a Distemper
art thou, that need such bitter Pills, and unsavory Potions? And how
bewitching a Hag is the World, that needs so much Gall and Wormwood to wean us
from it, and needs so much whipping before we are willing to leave it? These
dusty, crazy Bodies of ours are tender Pieces, soon out of Order, and like
curious Instruments, soon out of Tune, or like a Clock or Watch, if one Wheel
be out of Order, nothing is in; or like brittle Glasses, they are soon broken,
then the Water of Life runs out at any little hole. There are multitudes of
tender Veins, and tender Membranes, Fibers, Muscles, Arteries, Bones, and
Sinews in the Body of Man, and all obnoxious to Obstructions, Dislocations,
Extentions, Contractions, Hurts, or Dangers, all which will cause Pains, Aches,
Griefs, and Troubles to the whole Body; and were it not that these were
preserved every one in its proper place, and enabled to do their appointed
work, by an Omnipotent God, it is wonder that one day passes and not many of
them out of order; but however many are the wearisome Nights and Days many poor
Creatures endure, and are like to do, till Death put a period to their
Miseries. These Pains are but Death's Darts, and how soon he will hit us at the
Heart we know not, and then Death it self shall be swallowed up in victory. And
yet how loath are most Men to take Death's Receipts, though it be an Universal
Cure of all Maladies? Now, if we have some lucid intervals, it is but like as in
an Ague-Fit, to enable us to bear the next Fit. In these Earthly Tabernacles
there are so many Doors, that some of them will be left open to let in
Distempers, and Death it self, but in Heaven they can never enter: Here is a
mixture of Joy and Sorrow, like Chequer-work of black and white, but the most
part black; but there will be unmixed Joy, and pure Comforts. Heaven is an
Healthful place, and no Sickness; a Joyful place, and no Sorrow; a Happy place,
where will be no Cross; a Holy place, where will be no Sin; Holiness to the
Lord will be writ upon the meanest Subject. Death at his coming will cure the
Blind and the Lame; Mephibosheth shall not be lame, nor Leah blear-eyed: But
Death cures not only Bodily, but Spiritual Distempers also, which are much more
dangerous than the former; as Hardness of Heart, Blindness of Mind,
Stubbornness of Will, Disorder in the Affections, etc. These cost good Men many
a Prayer, and many a Tear, and many an aching Heart, these Sons of Zerviah are
too hard for them, and these Anakims dwell in their Land; these rise up and lie
down with them, and they cannot be quiet for them, they cannot go into God's
Presence, but they enter with them, and spoil their Duties: But in Heaven the
whole Soul and Body shall be made conformable unto God's Will, and no Distemper
shall be found in any of our Faculties. In this World also the sins of others,
as well as our own, are our Trouble, and help to add to our Grief; we can
neither open our Eyes, or our Ears, but we see or hear something that offends
God, and therefore should trouble us: We may daily see and hear God's Commands
broken, the Gospel slighted, his Messengers abused, his People persecuted, and
all manner of Wickedness committed. Here may we hear the Sacred Name of God
blasphemed, his Worship scorned, all manner of Ribald, Bawdy, Lascivious, and
Wanton Discourse promoted, Wickedness defended, pleaded for, tolerated, and
practiced; and is this no Trouble to a Gracious Soul? The Stews it self is
fuller of obscene Discourse than many Companies are, with whom yet we have
necessary Converse and Commerce. This made David's Eyes shed rivers of tears,
Psalm. 119.136. it clouded his Countenance, furrowed his Cheeks, and grieved his
Heart; and vexed Lot's righteous soul, 2 Pet. 2.7. every Wicked Man was an
Hazael to his Eyes, an Hadadrimmon to his Heart, cause of weeping and
lamentation, for Guilt and Grief are all we are like to get by such Company,
but the Lord will take notice of those that are mourners in Sion, Ezra 9.4. But
in Heaven there is no cause of Sorrow, because there is no Sin, the Laws of God
there are never broken. Here Relations sometimes prove Thorns in our Eyes, and
Goads in our Sides; some Yoak-fellows, that should prove Helps, prove
Hindrances, not only in Heaven's way, but as to the World also. Oh, what a
Grief it is to see a Wife or Husband prove a Drunkard, or a Debauched Person!
Yet many a Godly Person has been thus yoaked. The like I may say of Children,
or other Relations: Or were it but Bodily Pains and Tortures, which our dear
Relations groaned under, it must needs be a Corrosive to our Hearts, to see
them under Tormenting Distempers. Some also prove like Job's Wife, Tempters. So
Holy David may have a scoffing Michal, and a Wise Abigail a churlish Nabal.
Children oftentimes prove Crosses; good David may have an incestuous Amnon, or
a rebellious Absalom: Many good Children have bad Parents, and this is a
trouble to see them going out of the World, before they knew why they came into
it. Good Servants many times have bad Masters, and likewise good Masters bad
Servants; and all this administers cause of Sorrow: But in Heaven these Tears
will be dried up, for all the Inhabitants there will be perfectly Holy, and
Righteous, and no Wicked Man among them. Many in this World are pinched with
Poverty, and know not how to maintain their Families with Bread; their
continued labor, and daily pains, moiling, toiling, carking, caring, rising
early, and lying down late, is all too little to provide for a numerous Family,
and to satisfy an oppressing, cruel Landlord, ready to drink up not only their
Tears, and Sweat, but their very Blood; and much ado to get with hard Labor
Clothes to their backs, or Meat to their bellies, or to redeem a little Time
for their Souls good, this must needs be an uneasy Life; and many times all
their pains cannot keep them out of Prisons, or their Children from Beggary:
These Poor Men many times have when they go to Bed, a bundle of Cares to lay
under their Heads, not much easier than a bush of Thorns, and this is the
Portion of many Godly Men. But Death will take this Burden, from them, for in
Heaven there will be no racking of Rents, no grinding of the faces of the Poor;
there will be Rest without Labor, and Pleasure without Pain; there is no
domineering Tyrant, no oppressing Neighbor, these are gone another Road (if
Repentance prevent not) to pay back those Tears with Interest they have drunk
here so greedily. Here is no Bond-slave or Servant to live in subjection, no
naked back, nor hungry bellies to feed or cloth, here is Nectar and Ambrosia,
God himself to feed upon. Here in this World Fears and Cares keep Men working
by Day, and waking by Night; but it is not so in Heaven, there neither Pains nor
Cares are necessary; they praise God for their Enjoyments, not beg for a supply
to their Wants. Here the care of all the Churches are upon us, as upon Paul;
and we sympathize with others that are in Misery, as Nehemiah did; and hence we
can scarce open our Eyes or Ears, but we let some Grief into our Hearts, some
Persecution or other we hear of in one part of the World or other, some
suffering Saints, some Massacre, some Oppression or Persecution, which adds
still to our Trouble; some Friend or other in Prison, their Goods seized, or
they ruined, or those that have yet escaped are in continual fears and
expectations that it will be their condition. Wars, and Rumors of Wars fill us
with Distractions: But there are no such Disturbances in Heaven. Here sometimes
we fear God is removing our Candlestick, and taking away his Gospel from us,
and leaving us up to Egyptian Darkness; but this fear never troubles the
glorified Saints, they matter not the Pipe, that can go to the Fountain. The
consideration also of the Divisions, Rents, and Schisms, that are among
Christians, yea, the holiest Men, cause many sad thoughts of Heart, when
Ephraim is against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against
Judah; when one Godly Man Speaks, Disputes, and Writes so bitterly against
another, and are ready to dis-robe each other of their Graces. But in Heaven
Luther and Calvin, the like we may say of other Dissenting Parties, will agree;
one Heaven will hold that that now one Church cannot: There will be perfect
Love and Unity, and no disagreeing Person or Party. Here likewise loss in our
Estates, and disappointment in our Expectations, or in our Affairs, whether by
the immediate Hand of God, want of Foresight, the carelessness of Servants, or
the malice of Enemies, may disturb our Peace; Hardship and Trouble also in our
several Callings and Employments: This makes us think that Part we Act upon the
Theater of the World is the hardest, and most uneasy. The faithful Magistrate,
that sets himself against the sins of the Times, finds sad disappointments, and
the desired Reformation not attained, he is ready to despond under his Burden.
The faithful Minister, after all his hard Labor and Study to bring Souls to
Christ, finds not the wished Effect, is ready, with the Prophet, Isa. 49.4. to
despond. The like we may say of Parents, Masters of Families, and other
Governors, that do what they can to bring those under their Charge to Christ,
and cannot do it, are ready to faint under their Burden. But in Heaven all
these Troubles will be over, there will be no Contention in the State, nor
Trouble in the Church; no disorder in the Family, and nothing amiss in the
Soul. These things, and many more cause our Trouble here, and will do while we
live, but Death will prove the Funeral of our Troubles, and the Resurrection of
our Joys. It was the rejoicing of a good Woman, that was a Martyr, that her
Stake was put into the same hole that holy Mr. Philpot's was before her; and it
may be some comfort to us that we are going the same way to Heaven that our
betters have gone in before us, and we hope shortly to overtake them. But that
which makes our Lives uneasy is, when God hides his Face from the Soul, as
sometimes he does; but in Heaven we shall never fear losing him, we shall never
look into the Casket and miss the Jewel, we shall never see a frown in his
forehead, nor a wrinkle in his brow. Now we find it a hard matter to wind up
our Affections to God, then it will be impossible to draw them off him, then we
shall leave all these Clogs behind us, as Elijah did his Mantle, when he
ascended into Heaven. And this is the Lesson this Providence teaches us, That
our Troubles here may be sharp, they will be but short, the Righteous Man has
not long to suffer.

5. But the Saints Happiness at Death consists not only in freedom from Evil,
but in the enjoyment of Good also. What they are freed from you have heard,
what they shall meet with at Death rests to be spoken to; but who can sing the
Songs of Sion in a strange Land? Who can describe that which eye never saw, ear
never heard tell of, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive
of, viz. the Joys that are prepared for those that love God. Yet this I should
speak to, but seeing I have treated of this in another Book, I shall be the
briefer. Were their Happiness only in their freedom from Misery, it were no
other than what bruit Beasts shall have, whose Misery ends with their Life; but
Christ has promised the pure in heart shall see God, Mat. 5.8. which cannot be
in this Life, for no man can see his face, and live: Moses indeed by faith saw
him that is invisible; and some Glimpse of him a Believer may have, but a clear
Vision is only reserved for Heaven; and by seeing God, is meant enjoying him,
for without that the sight will bring little comfort; for ought we know the
Devils and the Damned may see him, as Dives did Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom, to
their greater Torment. But to see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. is to enjoy him,
and this is the Beatifical Vision, as Divines call it: Yea, we shall have as
much knowledge of him as finite Creatures are capable of, we shall apprehend
him, though not comprehend him, for we may as well think to comprehend all the
Water in the Sea in a Cockle-shell; for what is finite to infinite? Yet shall
our knowledge of him be much enlarged, for here, the Apostle says, we see but
in a glass, but then face to face. But how God will communicate himself to us
we know not, yet will he let us know as much of himself as is necessary to our
future Happiness, we shall be like unto the Angels that always behold the face
of God, Mat. 18.10. and for ought we know our Vision of him may be as clear as
theirs; then will he see no iniquity in Jacob, and they will see no indignation
in him. How we shall see God we know not, whether he will Spirituallize our
bodily Organs, and make them capable of such a sight, or whether he will only
present himself to the Eye of the Mind, is not much material to us, it is
sufficient we shall see him to satisfaction, and by seeing him enjoy him; we
shall then know him whom to know is eternal life, John 17.3. There are many
Mysteries, the perfect knowledge of them is reserved for Heaven, as the Mystery
of the Trinity in Unity, of the Incarnation, of the Hypostatical Union, of
God's Electing Love, the Mystery also of our Redemption, and many more, which
call rather for Faith to believe, than Demonstration to prove; but then they
will be fully unfolded, and we shall see infinite Wisdom in the contrivance,
and a sweet Harmony among them, and that which was to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness, will then be made manifest to
be perfect Wisdom. Indeed Knowledge in it self now is excellent, more bright
than the Morning, or the Evening-star, but what will it be when perfected, when
it is freed from all the dregs of Error, and refined from all the D^oss, Chaff,
and Bran that now accompanies it? which cannot be in this World. Here we are
hindered from the Enjoyment of God by our Corruptions, for he is of purer eyes
than to behold iniquity with approbation; but when those spots are washed away,
and those Blackamore skins changed, we shall walk in white, and follow the La^b
whithersoever he goes. We need then no Ministry, nor Ordinances, who are the
Pipes through which the Water of Life is conveyed, for then we shall go to the
Fountain. Here we have a taste of Canaan's Grapes, but there is the full
Vintage. When we pass this Jordan by the narrow Bridge of Death, we shall enjoy
the promised Land; for though we have little in Possession, we have much in
Reversion: We shall need no Ship when we are safely landed in the desired
Haven; we shall need no Armor when the War is over, nor need we run when the
Prize is won, no Creature Comforts, when we have in God a full Supply; we need
not pray for our selves, when we live in the actual possession of all good
things; nor for others, for the Wicked are past hopes, and the Godly past
fears; and we shall see so much reason for the Damnation of the Wicked, though
they be our Relations, that we shall rejoice in it, and glorify God for it,
and admire that Hell being ours by Birthright, we should have a better
Inheritance; but then we shall know more of God's Electing Love than now we do,
which now is a great depth, which no Man can Fathom; nothing shall then remain
that implies Imperfection, then shall our Sorrow be turned in^o Joy, and our
Sighing into Singing; but when the Joy it self is unconceivable, what
conceptions, much less adequate expressions can we have of it? We shall have
the full Enjoyment of God, but what that is, no word in Humane Language can
express: The Apostle John, who saw the Transfiguration, tells us, 1 John 3.2.
It does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when Christ shall
appear, we shall be like to him, and shall see him as he is. And Paul, when he
was caught up into the third Heaven, heard unutterable words, and such as are
not lawful for a man to speak, 2 Cor. 12.4. And we may as well comprehend all
the Water in the Sea in a Cockle-shell, or measure out Heaven with our Span, as
fully to describe Heaven's Happiness, or Hell's Misery. We are ignorant of many
things here below, yea, many things in our selves, of our Immortal Souls, how
little do we know, and many Secrets in Nature are hid from the most refined
Wits; what then is it like we should know of Angels, of God, of Heaven, and
Glory? Such strange conceits it is like we have of them, as a blind Man that
never saw, has of Colors, or of the Sun it self: What Description can we make
of it that shall reach their Understanding? Or what Conception do we imagine a
bruit Beast can have of a Rational Soul, which yet are at a far lesser
distance, than between us and the Creator, and therefore our apprehensions of
him must be far lower than the bruit Beasts are of us; yet this we know of him,
that all Good is eminently in him, and what is good in the Creatures flows from
him; and is a Drop out of this Ocean, a Ray of this Sun, a Spark of this Fire?
And if we enjoy God, we shall enjoy all that is really Good. That we should be
with him, was the Prayer of Christ, John 17.24. and doubtless the greatest
Blessing: But we may say of the Glory of Heaven, as the Queen of Sheba said of
the Wisdom of Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 9.2. the one half was never told us; it is true,
we read that the Walls are of Jasper, the City of pure Gold, the Foundations of
Precious Stones, the Gates of Pearls, the Street of Gold, etc. Rev. 21.18, etc.
These are the most precious things the World brags of, but there are no such
Corruptible things in this building not made with hands, these Materials are
too course and beggarly to build the City of the Great God; it is built of
Glory, but what that is we know not, or what that Bread of Life, and Water of
Life, hidden Manna, promised to those that overcome, will be best known in the
Enjoyment; Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart,
but the Harvest will be in Heaven: Here we may have a dark Night, and happily
darkest a little before Day, but there will be a Glorious Morning; now we are
under Clouds, and suffer many Sto^ms and Showers, but ere long we shall be
taken up above the middle Region, where no Clouds appear, there God will own us
for his Children, and Christ for his Spouse. Oh, what a change will then be!
here we can scarce have a Glimpse of Christ, there the full Enjoyment; here we
know little, but there we shall know all things, and be ignorant of nothing
that is necessary to be known; and as Knowledge does increase, so will our Love
both to God and our Brethren: The more Excellency we see in God, or them, the
more our Affections will be let out upon them, for nothing but Ignorance can
stave off our Affections from the chiefest Good. When these scales are fallen
from our Eyes, we shall love God above our selves, because he is better, and
love his People better than now we do, because they will be better than now
they are, refined from their Dross; Love will run in the right Channel, and be
set upon right Objects, God shall have all our Love, we shall love his
Creatures by a reflect act; we shall love God for himself, and his Creatures
for his sake, and where we see most of God, there we shall love most; now we
complain we cannot love him, but then we cannot choose but love him, for who
can be in a fire and not burn? Our Love to him here, though true in its kind,
yet is full of Imperfections, and like an Ague, has its heats and colds, but
there is no intermissions, it admits of no cooling. Ignorance here makes the
Pearl of great price undervalued, and most Swine rather delight in Swill, and
with Aesop's Cock, prefer a grain of Barley before it, but these will be better
acquainted with its worth. The Godly here have but a Viaticum, something to
animate them in the way, and to stay their stomach, but the Feast is for their
Journey's end, where they shall drink Wine with Christ in his Father's Kingdom.
It Is a Question with some, whether there are degrees of Glory in Heaven; a full
Answer will be best made by the Inhabitants themselves. Something may be spoken
to it, as to probability at least, there will be no difference as to the
duration, for Eternity admits not of addition or diminution; and as for
degrees, in general every one shall enjoy as much Happiness as they are capable
of, as much as their Vessels will hold, and there shall be no cause of
complaint or repining at others, nay, or of desiring more for themselves, for
this argues Imperfection of Happiness, which Heaven owns not. Yet it seems
probable there will be degrees, The righteous then will shine as the firmament,
but those that turn many to God, as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3.
Now, the Stars shine brighter than the Firmament, and some stars differ from
others in glory. There are degrees of Torment, For he that knew his Lord's
will, and did it not, was to have the more stripes, Luke 12.47. And Christ
tells us, It should be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, for Tire and
Sidon, in the day of Judgment, than for those Cities he preached to, and they
not repented, Mat. 11.21. And I wish England be not sick of this Disease, in
making light of Christ; the Beast, and the false Prophet were cast alive into
the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 19.20, etc. and this seems
to be a higher degree of Torment than others have. And again, the Scripture
speaks of a greater degree of Condemnation, and that every one shall receive a
Reward according to his Works; and some being greater sinners than others are,
Justice requires they should suffer more; and the unfaithful Servant, Mat.
24.51. has his Portion appointed with Hypocrites, which seems some peculiar
Punishment. Now, there being degrees of Torments in Hell, and he that deserves
most Punishment, shall have most, why not of Glory in Heaven, where he that
has done most Work, shall have most Wages: And although I dare not say there
are Nine Hierarchies of Angels in Heaven, as the Papists do, yet we read of
Angels, and Archangels, as well as of the Devil and his Angels, and why not
then degrees of glorified Saints? He that by his Pound gained ten Pounds, was
made Ruler over ten Cities, when he that had gained five Pounds, was Ruler only
over five Cities, and what this signifies but a higher degree of Glory I know
not, Luke 19.16. And Christ promises his Apostles, that followed him in the
regeneration, they should sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel, Mat. 19.28. which Honor is not promiscuously promised to all: And
those that have forsaken any thing for Christ, have greater Promises than
others have. Those therefore that desire a greater degree of Glory than others,
let them improve their Talents better than others do. Another Question may be,
Whether the Saints in Glory shall know each other? In Answer to it, I say, if
it make for their future Glory, doubtless they will, for they shall want
nothing of Perfection, and the Scripture looks very favorably upon the
Affirmative. Christ tells us, That many shall come from the East, and from the
West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of
Heaven; but the Children of the Kingdom shall be thrust out: And shall they sit
with them and not know them? In the Transfiguration the Apostle knew Moses and
Elias, and the Rich Glutton in Hell knew Abraham, and Lazarus in his Bosom. And
is it probable that Men living here on Earth some few Years, when the
Understanding is clouded with Ignorance, and the Memory with Forgetfulness,
know one another, that they should not know one another through Eternity, when
those Mists are blown over? Some also question whether the Souls of Believers
go immediately into Heaven at the Death of the Body; and this seems to me as
plain as the other, it is Christ's Promise to the Penitent Thief, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise. And this I judge was neither in Hell nor
Purgatory, for I know not where those are called Paradise. Lazarus when he dyed
was carried into Abraham's Bosom, where he was comforted, while the Rich Man
was tormented, Luke 16.25. But I suppose there is little comfort in
Purgatory-flames, this Fire is but newly kindled, and were it not to warm the
Pope's Kitchen, would be soon extinguished. In a word, the Scripture mentions
Heaven and Hell, as the Receptacles of separated Souls, but there is no mention
of another place. Some also enquire, if they go immediately into Glory, whether
they have at present the full degrees of Glory which they shall have hereafter.
I Answer, Secret things belong to God, but things revealed, to us. It seems
probable that though they have as much Glory as they Entitle them truly Happy,
yet there will be a further degree added at the Resurrection, when Soul and
Body shall be reunited, and the Sentence of Absolution past upon them, Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom, etc. Then, as the wicked go into
everlasting torments, so the righteous shall go into life eternal, Mat. 25.41.
And thus you have heard of the Happiness of Believers, but the duration of
their Happiness is the chiefest Flower in their Garland; for were it but to
continue a thousand thousand Years, it would be a Hell to them in the midst of
Heaven to think that an end would come, and it would make them they could
little rejoice in their Enjoyments: But the consideration that it will be for
ever, is a great addition to their Happiness; it is to be for ever, and for
ever, Dan. 12.2. And it is called eternal Glory, 2 Timothy 2. And Reason shows it
must be so, for the Soul is immortal, and the Reward promised is such; and this
Enjoyment is called Eternal Life. So then you see proved what before was
asserted, That seeing all must dye, the Righteous have not long to suffer, for
Death will set an end to all their Miseries, and enter them into their Eternal
Enjoyments of God and Glory, and put them into the possession of those Mansions
of Glory, prepared for them by God before the foundations of the world. And
then any Man may judge whether there be any great cause why they should fear
Death, which is the only Cure of all their Miseries, and the only Porter to
open Heaven-gates to them. It remains that we speak something of those whose
Happiness expires with their Life, and their Miseries commence at their Death.

Lesson 5. The Fifth Lesson this Providence teaches, is, That seeing Men and
Women may be taken away in the Flower of their Age, and Death can put a period
to their Lives, then what a miserable condition are Wicked Men in, when one day
may put an end to all their Happiness, and all their Hopes, for both their
Happiness and their Hopes is only in this Life, and shall expire at their
Death; for whether they are Noble or Base, Rich or Poor, Young or Old, by what
Names or Titles soever they are dignified or distinguished, if they have no
better a Portion than the World can bestow upon them, it is at the longest for
term of Life, and at Death their lease expires; Their Glory then will not
follow them, and their Pomp will take her leave. Oh, what a change Death will
make among many of our greatest Gallants! their Happiness depends upon a
ticklish point, and hangs but by the thread of their Lives; and there are a
thousand Diseases, Distempers, Casualties, and Accidents ready to cut the
thread, and every Creature waits but for a Divine Commission to stop their
breath, and they are not sure of one day to an end. The Experience of this very
Age proves this point fully, how many hundred thousands were in Ireland stripped
of all in a moment, and left as poor as Job, and many lost their Lives with
their Estates. The like may we hear of in other Countries, in London an hundred
thousand dyed in one Year; and what a change did Death make to them, that have
their Portion only in this Life? What the Wise Man says, Prove. 23.5. Rich's
take wings, and fly away. We see by Experience many rich at Night, and poor ere
Morning, b^t we also see many Rich Men snatched away from their Riches, who are
well over Night, and de^d in the Morning; yet many Men hunt and havk after
Riches, and never overtake them, and if they do, cannot hold them; many
purchase them too dear, even with the loss of their Souls, and the shipwreck of
a good Conscience, and these make a hard bargain, for the Soul is more worth
than all the World, Mat. 16.26. That a Wicked Man is not long to enjoy his
Happiness, is made out in the following Considerations.

1. Consider, at Death all Men, of what Degree soever, from the least to the
greatest, will leave behind them all these outward Enjoyments, viz. Riches,
that very many so much glory in, and trust to, and cannot take with them the
worth of a shoe-latchet. Woe then to them that have no other Portion, what will
their poor Souls do to Eternity, though now their Riches be their strong hold,
Prove. 18.11. yet can they not help in the evil day, Zeph. 1.18. Yet here they
are honored as Gods, but they are but Dunghill Deities, most Men dote upon
them as much as the Athenians did upon Diana's Temple, and Offer not only their
Children, but their Souls unto them: But let their Seize or Enjoyments be
what they will, at Death they must leave all behind them; Kings and Emperors
must leave their Crowns behind them, and the Bishop his Mitre, the Pope himself
not excepted; then those that have made a great hurly-burly in the World, could
not satisfy, their Dust will be contained in a little Urn. At Death the
Emperor must lay by his Robes, and the Beggar his Rags, for Death will lodge
them in the same Bed, and set them upon even ground. The griping Usurer must
leave his Gold, and cease to fill his Bags with Silver, when his own Mouth
shall be filled with Earth. Kings then must bid farewell to their Crowns and
Kingdoms, as Solomon to his Ivory Throne; and our great Gallants their
well-contrived Houses, though they call them after their own names, Psalm.
49.11, etc. Happily they may leave them to Fools, happily to Strangers, happily to
Enemies to enjoy. It was the Speech of a good Man to a great Lord, when he
showed him his sumptuous Buildings, pleasant Gardens, Walks, Orchards, and
other Rarities, Sir, (says he) you must make sure of Heaven, or you will never
be recompensed in the Earth for all the Pains and Cost you have bestowed here.
Yet many, like the Rich Man in the Gospel, Luke 12. sing a Requiem to their
Souls, and promise themselves long Life, when happily they have not a day to
live, They put the evil day far from them, and because they see not Death,
think Death heeds not them, when he is even staring them in the Face. They
lodge Riches nearest their Heart, and from it they expect their greatest
Security, but the Mortal Sith is too hard for the Royal Scepter, yet many
consider it not, but buy Faggots for their own burning, for the rust of their
Gold will eat their flesh as fire, James 5.3. Here they have their Summer and
their Winter Houses, curious Parlours, Banqueting-Houses, Rooms richly adorned,
soft Beds, and easy Couches; but if they have no better Portion, Death will
strip them of this, and lodge them in a stinking Dungeon, and darksom Cell,
full of deadly Horror, void of Light or Comfort, a noisome, sulphurous, stinking
Prison; here are no curious Gardens, or pleasant Walks for Recreation, neither
is there any thing to recreate the Eyes, the Ears, the Smell, the Taste, or the
Touch; the Object of Sight will be Infernal Devils, and Damned despairing
Wretches; the Melody the groans and sighs, the roaring, yelling, scrietching of
damned Souls; for the Taste, pinching Hunger, and parching Thirst, or something
that is worse; their Smell is burning Brimstone, and their Touch the scorching
Flames. Oh, the Pains, the Time, the Cost and Charges many Men are at in
adorning their Habitations, Gardens, Walks, Orchards, etc. when all this while
the poor Soul lies neglected, and slighted; no Tree in the Orchard must grow
disordered, but must be pruned, muck'd, and manured, when in the Soul nothing
is in order; no Weed must grow in the Garden, when no Vice must be weeded out
of the Soul. Here they have pleasant Walks, and Summer-shady Bowers, their Rich
Pastures, Pleasant Meadows, their Flocks and Herds, their numerous Cattle, both
small and great, and whatever their hearts can desire, that can be purchased
for Love or Money; but Death will strip them to the skin, and they shall carry
nothing hence, neither can they call ought their own, but Tortures and
Torments, Sighs and Groans, Anguish and Sorrows, Tears and Plaints. Here they
solace themselves, and like the Rich Glutton, go bravely clad, and fare
deliciously every day; but there they cannot command a Cup of cold Water, nay,
nor get it with begging, to cool their Tongue. Now they indulge their Flesh,
and please their Fancy, and like Solomon, Eccles. 2.4. deny nothing to
themselves, that can be attained, but ere long they will be forced, as he was,
to say, All is vanity and vexation of spirit, ver. 17. All these things must be
left behind, and were this the worst it were well, but their eaten Bread will
not be forgotten; well had it been for many of them had they begged their Bread
from Door to Door, or earned it in the sweat of their brows, for then so many
abused Talents had not been charged upon them, and so many abused Mercies to be
answered for. Here they have their Tables richly furnished, with what the
Earth, the Sea, the Air can afford, and many new-invented Dishes to allure the
Stomach, and provoke the Appetite, when their poor Brethren have not Bread to
eat: They have their great Attendants, Music of all sorts, their wanton Songs,
their Plays, and Interludes; but Sighs and Groans will then be their chiefest
Music, and finest Melody, their Mirth will then be changed into Mourning, and
their Joy into Heaviness. Oh Death, what a change will thou make among our
Lustful Gallants! Here they burn in Lust one to another, but there, though they
lie together in the same Bed of Horror, their Lusting will be over. Those that
now think the Ground not good enough to tread upon, and will not suffer the Sun
to shine upon them, nor the Wind to blow upon them, for spoiling their Beauty,
shall then be heated more rudely in the Flames. Those that think no Meat or
Drink good enough, nor any Attire fine enough, will then be put into a courser
Dress, Hell Fire will spoil their Paint and Plaster, and Beauty-spots, their
curled Locks, and powdered crisped Hair, then one drop of Water will be better
than all these; here are no Masks nor Fans to shelter them from the scorching
Flames, their Bags of Gold and Precious Jewels must then be left behind. H^r^
the Maid will not forget her Ornaments, nor the Bride her Attire, but those
things there are out of Fashion; Gold then is no current Coin, I am sure it
cannot bribe Death. It Is said of Pope John XXI. that he left above 200 Tun of
Gold behind him; and that another Pope, when he was plundered by the French,
lost more Treasure than all the Kings in the World could raise in one Year in
all their Revenues. We see Riches are uncertain here, and will certainly fail
when we have most need of them. Did griping Landlords, that drink the Sweat,
the Tears, if not the Blood of their Oppressed Tenants, and make Music of
their Groans, think of these Times, and of these Things, those Morsels they now
swallow so greedily, will have a poisonful Operation. Many there are, that
instead of feeding the Hungry, and clothing the Naked, pluck the Meat from
their mouths, and the Clothes from their backs, to maintain their own Pride and
Luxury; they put the Poor's Part into a Child's Portion, happily into a Whore's
Lap; but the Lord of such Servants will come at an hour they are not aware of,
and give them their Portion with Hypocrites, Mat. 24 last. Now they have their
Stage Plays, Morrice-Dances, Wakes, May-games, and such Revels, to drive Time
away, which alas, flies too fast of it self; but what Recreation have they
invented to make Eternity seem short? Death will dash all these Vanities out of
Countenance. Here sometimes a little of Hellfire flashed into the Conscience,
spoils the Sport; but there will be not only flashes, but flames. Here they
endeavor to drink away these Heart-qualms, and allay these Dumps, but in Hell
they cannot do it. The griping Usurer here has a dry Dropsy the more Riches
he drinks in, the more he thirsts; but there the Thirst will be allayed with
Fire and Brimstone. Here our Female Gallants spend their Time in their Glasses,
they must not have a Pin awry, or an Hair amiss, their naked Breasts, and
painted spotted Faces; Oh, what a change will Death make in their Garb and
Ornaments! And indeed could we but see the Deformity of the Soul through the
garish Habit of the Body, how leprous and deformed would many appear? They
would be ashamed to walk the streets. Here they are set out like Puppets for to
show, to allure unwary Youth; for if there be no Wine in the Cellar, why hangs
the Bush? But these gaudy Robes are too thin to keep off a shower of Divine
Vengeance. We may see how God approves of such, Isa. 3.18, etc. Now Ten
Thousand Pounds per Annum is thought too little, but ere long a poor Urn will
hold their Ashes, and a dark Dungeon their Souls; then they must be forced to
say of all these things, as the Prophet of his Ax, Alas, Master, for it was
borrowed. God has entrusted them with other men's Portions as well as their
own, but they have thought themselves sole Proprietors, and abused the Talents
given to another end, but they must pay back every Farthing. It Is said of the
Turk's Seraglio, that it is two Miles in compass, and his Territories are wide
and large, and his Incomes great; but Death can Scale these Walls, as well as
those of a poor Cottage. Could Great Men renew the Lease of their Lives, as Men
do of their Estates, doubtless there would be great Fines given, but it will
not be; they make a great bustle in the World, and seek to turn all topsy-turvy
for a while, and all to set themselves on high, till Death the Leveller comes,
and equals them with their poor Neighbors; for what is the difference now
between Alexander and his meanest Slave? And sometimes a Fool, sometimes a
Stranger, sometimes an Enemy enjoys the Estate that they leave behind, and
they take nothing with them but Guilt upon the Conscience, and Sin upon the
Soul, and the Rust of their Riches will eat their flesh like fire, James 5.1,
2, etc. But mistake not, it is not all Rich Men that I speak of, but those that
abuse their Riches, by loving them, trusting in them, employing them to
maintain Pride, Luxury, or some other filthy Lust, or withold good from the
owners thereof; those that mispend the Talents lent them for a better use, for
if the Servant that only hid his Talent, was cast into outer Darkness, what
will become of them that wilfully waste it? Pride is a Worm that often breeds
in Riches, and the never-dying Worm breeds in Pride: Riches in themselves are
great Blessings, and, if not abused, will prove helps in Heavens-way: Make
friends (says Christ) with the Mammon of unrighteousness. But to many they are
the greatest blocks in Heavens-way, and this makes it so difficult a thing for
Rich Men to enter into Heaven, Mat. 19.24. Heaven is a spacious Palace, but
it is a narrow Way, and strait Gate that leads to it, and Men cannot enter with
the World upon their backs, there must be stooping and stripping, to get in:
Hence the Apostle charges rich men not to be high minded, nor trust in
uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6.17. It Is much ado to look, and not to lust; to have
Riches, and not fall in love with them. When Pride breeds in Riches, as Worms
do in Apples, they suddenly corrupt, and will do the Owners no good; to use the
world, and not abuse it, is a Lesson not easily learned, and having only food
and raiment, therewith to be content. In Christ's time the poor received the
Gospel, when few of the Great Ones were called, 1 Cor. 12.20. Were there but
half so much spoken against Poverty, and half so many cautions given as against
Riches, there would be some Plea for the Covetous, but few see the danger of a
great Estate; but Death will equal the Poor with the Rich, the Emperor must
leave his Robes behind, and the Beggar his Rags; and great Saladine shall carry
nothing with him but his Shirt, nor that neither into the other World, Haud
ullas portabis opes Acherontis ad undas, Naked we came into the world, and
naked shall we return out of it, Job 1.21. 1 Timothy 6.7. The Jews were permitted
when they came into their Neighbor's Field, Orchard, or Vineyard, to pluck and
eat, but must carry none away; and so we may do in the World. Riches at last
will do us no more good, than they did the great Chaliph, that the Great Cham
of Tartary caused to be famished amidst his Treasures; then will their Sun set
under a Cloud, and no difference between them and their poor Neighbor; those
that have carried the greatest Burden, have the sorest Back; and those that
have received the most Talents, are to make the greatest Account. Oh that this
were well considered in time, then should we lay up our treasure where neither
moth nor rust corrupts, nor where thieves break not through, nor steal, Mat.
6.20. For all other Treasure will deceive them, that put their trust in it.
Thus you see at Death Wicked Men, whatever their Enjoyments now be, will be
stripped of all.

2. And as Wicked Men must leave their Riches behind ^h^n at Death, so likewise
their Pleasures will bid them ^dieu for ever. Now, Pleasure is one of the ^hree
Deities most Men adore; for Riches, Honors, and Pleasures share the World
between them; but at Death these Idols will disappear; many spend their days in
pleasure, and suddenly go down to Hell, Job 21.13. Many spend their Time in
Recreation, and follow no other Calling, and some cannot give a good Account of
one hour's Work in a whole Week, spent in any Lawful Labor; they think it is a
greater shame to be seen working, than to be seen drunken, or debauched; such
as these the Apostle calls lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, 2 Timothy
3.4. and well he may, for they spend more Time in, and are at more Cost about
their Pleasures than in God's Service, and thirst as greedily after them, as
ever Covetous Man did for Gold, or Ambitious Man for Honor. There a^e many in
our common Dialect are called Ladies of Pleasure, and the Name pleases them,
that both God and former Ages called common Whores, and it is like they will be
owned for such at the day of Judgment, and then woe be to them, for they are of
the Society that are appointed for Destruction, 1 Cor. 6.9, etc. Solomon tells
us, Prove. 21.17. He that loves pleasure, shall be a poor man; and we see many
times Luxury and Beggary succeed each other, and unlawful Lusts have ruined
many Ancient Families, and made them leave Marcus Livius his Portions to their
Children, Nihil praeter Coelum and Caenum, Air and Water. But if it go ill with
the Body, it will go much worse with the Soul; for those that can take no
Pleasure in God, God will take no Pleasure in them; these Men seem to think
they were sent into the World, as Leviathan into the Sea, to sport therein, and
that their Talents were given to no other end than to be consumed this way; and
then when God said to Man after the Fall, In the sweat of thy face thou shall
eat thy bread, that he spoke only to the Poor, and not to them; but they will
at Death find their mistake, and see it was a bad Bargain to sell their part in
Paradise for a part in Paris; to sell their Souls to satisfy their Lusts, to
part with Eternal Joy, for momentany Delights; they will find they parted with
a great deal in Reversion for a little in Possession, they will then have time
enough (if Eternity may be called Time) to repent the Bargain; they will see it
had been better to have been preserved in Brine, than to have rotted in Honey.
Now they can take the Timbrel and the Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the
Organ, and spend their days in mirth, (as the Holy Ghost says) and suddenly go
down to the pit, Job 21.12, 13. I will not say as Tully, Nemo Sobrius saltat;
nor as Diogenes, The better Dancer, the worse Man, or that these Recreations
are absolutely unlawful; yet I think Christians have not much time to spend
this way, from their more serious Business, and greater Concerns; and truly if
we consider the state of the Protestant Churches throughout the World, it might
take off much of the edge of our Affections from these Vanities. But at present
I am speaking of those to whom the satisfying of their Lusts is the main design
they aim at, and the Affliction of the Church is not so much as the loosing one
spot off their Faces, one Feather out of their Fan, or one Ribon out of their
Head-tire; let such read well Isa. 3.11, 12, etc. and see if God delight as
much in their Ornaments as they do; and what he says to such, Amos 6.3, etc.
They put far from them the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to draw
near. They lie upon their beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their
Couches; they eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the stall.
They chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves Instruments of
Music like David: They drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with chief
Ointment, but are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph, etc. And is not
this an exact Description of many in our times? Read further the Destruction
that God threatens to such, and they will find he spoke in earnest, what they
took in jest. Those that God curses, will be cursed, however they bless
themselves in their heart; those that are no mourners in Sion, shall not be
marked, and those that are not marked, shall be slain, Ezekiel. 9.1, 2, etc. Those
that Sympathize not with the Church, are none of the Church. Nehemiah, though
he was the King's Cup Bearer, and wanted nothing, was yet troubled at the
Desolation of Jerusalem, Neh. 1.1, 2, etc. The Rich Glutton, when he fared
deliciously every day, pitied not Lazarus; but little did he think how soon the
Tables would be turned, and Lazarus should have the better gain^ he little
thought a Reckoning-day was behind for all his sweet Morsels: Feasting
doubtless in its season is Lawful, but for some to keep a continual Feast, when
others are forced to keep a continual Fast, is not convenient; but many seem to
live only to eat, and drink, and rise up to play. Oh, how much good might many
of those do with their Estates, that now spend it all in Gormand^zing, in
Drunkenness, and Debauchery? How many of our Female Gallants are there, that
think the Morning short enough to sleep, and rise, and dress themselves before
Dinner, and perhaps have more than one to assist them in the work, when their
Devotion is shut up in a little room, if at all thought upon, and happily more
Curses than Prayers are put up, especially if their Tailor, Sempster,
Waiting-Maid, Painter, have not pleased them. And the Afternoon the time is
little enough for Diversion; some idle Visit, some wanton or obscene Discourse,
some Stage Play, Show, or Interlude, Cards, or Dice, or some such Recreations,
or some Exercise happily worse; and thus they pass one Day, Week, Year after
another, till Death snatches them hence, and they never have any time to be
serious, or think upon their Eternal Condition: But Christ never directed us in
such a pleasant way to Heaven, nor the Apostles never found it, neither can it
be the narrow way the Scripture speaks of; These put the evil day far from
them, and the thoughts of Death will put them out of Humor, but Death will
make them more serious. Now these Extravagant Courses put them on to rack their
Rents, and Oppress their Tenants, and poor Neighbors, and keep back the Poor's
Portion, and all little enough to maintain their Pride and Prodigality; thus
they spend their time in Drinking, Swearing, Ranting, and Blaspheming, in
Ramming, Damning, and in Persecuting those that make any show of Religion, or
Civility; in rioting, drunkenness, chambering, and wantonness, Romans 13.13.
These are they that make their bellies their God, Phil. 3.19. And many of both
Sexes there are that Sacrifice to these Dunghill-Deities, so that a Scavenger,
whose Office is to empty Jakes, is to be preferred before these, that only live
to fill them. They are like unto the Panphagi, a People of Aethiopia, whose
very Life was to eat, and to devour, from whence they had their Name, whom
these Men seem to succeed; and they may fitly be compared unto the Jerfe, a
Beast in the North of Suetia, which, having got his Prey, eats as long as his
Skin will hold, and then strains himself backward between two Trees that grow
near together, till he has evacuated his Meat, and then eats as before; a fit
Emblem of a Drunkard and Glutton, that when they have gormandized, use means
for Evacuation, and at it again. Of this Herd were Epicurus, Heliogabalus,
Sardanapalus, and many more Monsters in Nature. They are like Swine, for scarce
any other Creature will eat or drink more than suffices Nature; they are
(says the Prophet) like fed Horses, every one Neighing after his Neighbor's
Wife. I have read of one, that to satisfy all his Senses and sensual
Appetites, in three Years time spent Thirty Thousand Pounds, and swear that had
he ten times as much, he would spend it all to live like a God, in Pleasure,
for one Week, though he knew he should be damned for it the next day after. But
little did he know what Damnation signifies, but in Hell he will change his
Mind. And such desires I fear are too frequent in the World, and were not Men
bounded by their Estate, I fear their Desires would be as unbounded as his; and
were it but for the loss of the Soul, they would not stick at it. I doubt not
but it is Lawful to eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and partake of the good
things God has given us; but we must not Feast without fear, neither abuse h^s
Creatures to Gluttony, or Drunkenness. It Is said of a Town in Africa, called
Tombutum, that the Inhabitants spend their days in Dancing and Singing; and I
fear if other Recreations did not call them off, many of ours would follow
their Example. God for Sin did thrust Man out of Paradise, but many in our days
would wind themselves in again, they think it is only the Poor are enjoined to
Labor, but the Rich may live Idle; but those that have neither Head, nor Hand,
nor Heart at work for the common Good, are but the unprofitable Burdens of the
Commonwealth, and such as the Apostle commands should ^^t eat. These wax
wanton, and nourish themselves a^ for a day of slaughter, James 5.5. Pride,
fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness, were the sins of Sodom, from which
England cannot wash her Hands, for she is like Jeshurun, waxen fat, and
kicketh. Fullness breeds forgetfulness, not only of her self, but of her God
also. Alexander the Conqueror gloried as much in this as in any of his
Victories, that he could drink down any Man; and of such Champions we have more
than enough, and if Enemies were thus to be vanquished, we should not want
Soldiers. It Is said he provided a Crown for him that could drink most, of 180
pounds, but forty one of his Companions, striving for the Mastery, drank
themselves to Death; and were there but the like Prize offered, and the like
Liberty given in our time, there would be a far greater number to open the Door
to Death, yea, I suppose upon a far lesser Temptation, in a small Circuit of
Land, in a small compass of Time, (and many of them of the Gentry) a greater
number have ended their days in such a drunken Contest. The Lord grant it may
be a warning to the rest, let such beware they be not forced to drink up the
full Vials of God's wrath, which will be worse than boiling Lead, or burning
Brimstone; and lest they be forced to pledge those Healths of Damnation in
Hell, which they have drunk here in their Jollity; they may read their Portion,
1 Cor. 6.9, etc. For God speaks in earnest what they took in jest. Here our
Voluptuous Gallants will be forced to leave their Hawks, and Hounds, and
Whores; and our Swaggering, Roaring Gallants will become Roaring Boys indeed.
Now they stuff their Discourse, and bombast their Words with Oaths of the
greatest Magnitude, and Damn, and Ram, and Curse, and Swear, as if they
challenged God himself to a Duel; and drink Healths to the Devil himself, as if
they would make Peace with him; and drink Healths of Damnation: But in Hell
they shall have nothing to do but to pledge them. Had there been any other
Healths there, the Rich Glutton had not begged so earnestly for a drop of Water
to cool his Tongue. Here are no Ladies of Pleasure, for they will be found with
another Name. Here are no wanton Delilahs to sport with upon the Bed of Lust,
no changeable Suits of Apparel, no new Fashions for our mincing Minions, no
Recreations to drive away the weary hours; then they will have time enough (if
we may call Eternity Time) to think upon their past Folly, and Repent, though
too late, to think of the bad Bargain they made, when they sold their Souls,
their Heaven, and their Happiness for a little Temporary Pleasure, which perish
ere they were budded; which bear no more proportion to true Pleasure, than
painted Fire upon the Wall to true Fire, that has neither Light nor Heat; then
will their Garb be changed, and their Diet and Attendants; they will be stripped
of all their Costly Robes and Ornaments, which will be forgotten, or remembered
with sorrow; there will be neither Mirth nor Music, Singing nor Dancing, but
Weeping, Wailing, and wringing of Hands; no Curious Sights to please the Eye,
no Melody for the Ear, no delicious Taste for the Palate, or any thing else to
please the other Senses; those curious Bodies (to the pampering of whom the
Soul is neglected) will be exposed to Torture and Torments, were a man
condemned to lie one Year upon a red-hot Gridiron, upon a raging Fire, and his
Life could so long be continued, we should think him to be a miserable
Creature: But what is this to Hell Torments? Or, what is a Year to Eternity,
where they shall never dye, yet always endure the Pangs of Death? At Death
they will find an end of all their Pleasures, but Eternity will not end their
Miseries: Their Laughter here is not Mirth, but Madness, like a frantic man
that is going to Execution, and shrieks and bawls for others to bear him
company; yet these are the good things the rich Glutton had in this Life, and
for which he must pay so great a Reckoning at his Death: This was his Heaven,
his Hell came after. O Death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man
that lives at ease in his possessions, and has prosperity in all things,
Ecclus. 41.1. Now these delicate Bodies are so nice, that they cannot endure
the Summers heat, nor Winters cold, but the Flames will not regard their
Beauty, nor the Tormenter their Niceness: Then farewell all their
Merry-meetings, and drunken Matches; their Feasts, their Plays, their wanton
Dalliance, all those Toys will be laid aside: Now Pleasure is the God they
worship, and sacrifice their Souls unto, but the Name of it then will never
more sound in their Ears, nor any thing that bears the least resemblance of it
be presented to them; their witty Jests and merry Jokes will then be left, and
well it were for them if they could forget them; and it will be their Trouble
to think, how this way they drive away their Time, that was too swift of it
self. The Thought of Death is troublesome to them, and they think it is
unseasonable for a (...) but Poor Folks, Old People, or Ministers; but for the
Young, the Rich, the Strong, it will but indispose them, and dispirit them, and
put them out of Humor; they will not see Death, and then they think Death will
forget them, but it steals upon them tacito pede with a silent Foot, and enters
their Lodging before they are aware; and however they now esteem highly of
their Carnal Delights, ere long they will find that one grain of Godly Sorrow
is worth a pound of Frantic Mirth; for the one ends in Eternal Pleasure, the
other in endless Misery, when their Sport will be spoiled. Oh, what alteration
will Death make when it comes! no time will then be spent in Wanton Embraces,
Amorous Songs, or Lascivious Discourse; the Adulterer and Adulteress will take
no delight in each others Company; nay, they will curse the time they ever saw
the Face each of other. When Fire from Heaven fell upon Sodom, it quenched
their heat of Lust: O that these Sons and Daughters of Pleasure would think of
the time when their Pleasures will vanish, but the Sting remain! for certainly
this will be the case of every one that dies in an unregenerate condition, let
them be High or Low, Rich or Poor, Noble or Base, for God is no excepter of
Persons.

3. The Third thing that Wicked Men must leave at their Death, is all their
Honor, and their Glory, for this will not follow them then, though they
greedily hunt after it now, Psalm. 49.12.16, 17. For though the Memory of the
godly i^ blessed, the name of the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10.7. How Odoriferous
do the Names of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and other Saints smell in
all Ages? And how fulsomly do the Names of Wicked, Debauched, and Bloody
Persecutors stink? Such as Cain, Pharaoh, Haman, Jeroboam, Judas, Herod, and
suchlike: Those whose Names have survived them, have such a blot upon them,
that will never be wiped off. But what they now Glory so much in must ere long
be left behind; those proud aspiring Nimrods, those Babel-builders, their Dust
ere long will be mingled with the Dust of their meanest Slaves and Servants;
for those who are hewn out of the same Rock, why should they not be buried in
the same hole of the Pit? These External Advantages make no real difference in
the Eyes of God, or Wise Men; for who values a Horse for his Trappings? But
however these will be taken away, and then they will stand upon even ground;
and although many Men now do Worship a Golden Calf, they will then perceive it
was but a dumb Idol. All those lofty Titles, which now they load themselves
with; as Worshipful, Right Worshipful, Honorable, Right Honorable, Reverend,
Right Reverend, Majesty, Holiness, etc. must then descend with them into the
Dust, for great Saladine can carry nothing with him but his Shirt. Indeed
Holiness will go with us into another World, as it is an inherent Quality, not
as it is a Title unjustly attributed to some Men, in that Kings and Emperors,
nay, the Pope himself will speed never the better for their Crowns, nor the
Beggar the worse for his Rags; for as Death, so God accepts of no Man's
Person for outward Advantages; it is Internal Qualifications he regards, Acts
10.35. External Splendor dazles not his Eyes, Titles of Honor signify
naught; these of themselves neither please nor displease, neither help nor
hinder, though the abuse may hinder; these are given to good and bad, and no
man knows love or hatred by them. The Rich Glutton had Plenty, when Poor
Lazarus was in want; Crowns and Kingdoms are but the Crumbs which the great
Householder throws to the Dogs, that shall not taste of the Childrens Bread. But
now Dives has none to wait at his Table, or any to receive his Scraps; none
new to bow the knee before him, or to be uncovered, these days are over: Now
many Men's greatest design is to get Honor, and whether it be by hook or by
crook, by fair means, or by soul, by Flattery, Bribery, Extortion, sucking the
Blood of Innocents, treading upon other men's backs, etc. so they can ascend the
steps of Honor, they matter not; when it proves oft-times a slippery standing,
and many break their Necks before they attain their end, witness Haman,
Achitophel, Herod, and others. Many like Diostrophes in Church and State love
the Pre-eminence, and some that are not fit for it, they will be aut Caesar aut
nullus, they would rather be the Chief in a Town, than the Second in a Kingdom.
Ambition is like the Crocodile, of whom it is said he grows as long as he lives,
and should he live longer, he would grow bigger: Nay, do we not see the
Successors take up Arms, and espouse the Quarrel, as we see between the Bishops
of Rome, Alexandria, and Constantinople, for the Pre-eminence; and with us
formerly between Canterbury and York. Yea, the chiefest Quarrels in the World
has been about Domination, what horrible Wars, Bloodshed, and Devastations
has this caused? The Bishops themselves have proved many times the troublers
of Israel; and were the Spirit of Pride and Tyranny once cast out, what Happy
Times might we promise to our selves? Many seek to ascend to the top of
Promotion, that are not fit to stand upon the lowest Round of the Ladder; and
will rather set the Church and State on fire, than be frustrated in their
Hopes: They care not whose back they tread upon, so they may rise; Honor is
the Idol they worship, the Shrine they bow unto, which indeed is the emptiest
of all Bubbles; yet is it courted by many, though enjoyed by few, and never
pays the Cost and Pains bestowed in the Attainment: He that can avoid the
Temptation of, All this will I give thee, and the Temptation of Rule and
Domination, is a rare Man, like a black Swan. Good Men are not free from this
Itch, the Apostles contended who should be greatest, and the Sons of Zebedee
would sit one on Christ's right hand, the other on his left in his Kingdom; few
there be, though meanly qualified, but think themselves fit for higher Places.
I have read of some, that lying upon their Deathbeds, gave large Money for
Cardinals Hats, that it might be engraven upon their Tombs, for Posterity to
read; like unto Caninius the Roman, when Maximus dyed the last day of his
Consul-ship, made suit to be made Consul for the rest of the day; hence Tully
calls him a vigilant Consul, that never slept while he was in Office. The Itch
of Honor has undone the World, and made many a Man smart for it; for were
Princes content with their Paternal Inheritance, what need so many Wars and
Jars, as are at this day? How many Hundred Thousand Men lost their Lives before
Alexander was settled in his Throne, and the Contention ended between Caesar and
Pompey, and ere they were well warm in their Seats, they were thrust out again;
one killed with Bodkins, and the other not without suspicion of Poison. And
alas, what had these for all their Labor but only a blast of Honor, which, if
they miscarry, will not cool their Tongues in Torment? Did Men but see Pride
and Ambition in its own Colors, it would seem loathsome and dangerous; the
lowest degree sets it self against God, being discontented with the Station
wherein God has placed them; but the highest degree sets it self above God,
Pharaoh cries out, Who is the Lord, that I should obey him? I know not the
Lord, neither will I let Israel go. Sennacherib boasted no God could deliver
out of his Hand, but he was mistaken, and 185000 of his Soldiers were slain in
one Night by an invisible Hand. Herod, one of the Gang, assuming to himself the
Honor due to God, was stricken by an Angel, and devoured by Worms, Lice, as
Josephus says, as his Grandfather was; as also Maximus the Emperor, and
Philip King of Spain, great Persecutors; and that man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
that exalts himself above all that is called God, will have a fearful
downfall; Prosperity begets Pride, and Pride feeds upon it, and between them the
Worm of Conscience, that never-dying Worm, is engendered. The Ambitious Man has
commonly too high thoughts of himself, and too low of others, and thinks the
World takes not sufficient notice of his Worth. The Pharisee thanks God he was
not such a one as the Publican, when he was much worse; these Men look upon
themselves in a Magnifying-Glass, and wonder at their own bigness, but when
they look upon others they turn the Glass, and look upon them to be far less
than they are; but the best way is to look in God's Glass, which will not
deceive us. Many think what others have, whether of Riches or Honor, is too
much; but what they have, is always too little; they are like the Rich Man in
Nathan's Parable, ready to spare their numerous Flocks, and make use of the
Poor Man's only Lamb; but sometimes overgreedy griping gets little. Xerxes,
though he had 127 Provinces, not being content, seeking to enlarge his
Territories, was slain, and lost what he had (like Aesop's Dog, that lost his
Meat by catching at the shadow) and was contented with his length and breadth
of Ground. Great Pompey had scarce so much allotted him; and our William the
Conqueror was three days unburied, before the Controversy was ended whose the
Land was where he should be laid. In this Life these things are uncertain, but
at Death they will be certainly taken from us, and how short our Life is, we
little know; a little Spider, an Hair in Milk, the Kernel of a Grape, the prick
of a Pin, have put a period to the Life of some of our greatest Heroes, and
sent them packing into another World, and then whose are those things that they
leave behind? Yet Domination is so sweet, many will venture Neck and all to
attain it. Nero's Mother, when she was told that if her Son were Emperor, he
would take away here Life, made Answer, She mattered not, so her Son might
Reign: Which Prediction after fell out, her Son ripped up her Bowels, that he
might see the place of his Conception. How many Hundred Thousand lost their
Lives before Alexander was established on his Throne, and the Controversy was
ended between Caesar and Pompey, as I have noted, who should be greatest? And
when they came into their Thrones, they were scarce warm before they were
thrown out again, one by Bodkins, and the other not without suspicion of
Poison. We may well see the aspiring thoughts of Ambitious Men, for when our
Captain Drake had taken Domingo from the Spaniard, in the Town Hall he found
the King of Spain's Arms, and this Motto, Totus non sufficet orbis, signifying,
the World it self was not enough to suffice him, but the greatest part has not
yet fallen to his share. Ambition, like a Serpent, creeps into the Heart at a
little hole, but is hardly got out: It crept into Heaven among the Angels, for
some conceive they affected the Deity: It crept into Paradise, and made our
first Parents desire to know as God: The Babel-Builders they would fain dwell
as God, and Antichrist sets himself above all that is called God, or is
worshipped. Every proud man is tainted with this Lunacy, and are discontent
with the Station in which God has placed them. Many have a great Shadow, that
have little Substance; the worser the Wi^^ the fairer the Bush; the empty
Vessel makes the greatest sound, and the shallow Waters the greatest noise; and
worthless men make the greatest brags. Babel had high towering Thoughts, she
must needs be like God himself, Isa. 14.12. but God brought her down. Ambitious
men are like unto the Ivy, though it have a contemptible Root, and cannot rise
without the assistance of the Oak or Elm, yet it never rests till it overtop
them.

When Zeuxes had finished his Picture of Atalanta, he wrote under it, Painters
may rather envy this, than imitate it. Demosthenes loves to hear as he passed
along the Street that pleasing word, This is that Demosthenes; Hoc ego primus
vidi, says another. So fond are men of their own Brats, they are like
Peacocks, proud of their own Feathers, when they forget their black Feet.

When Dionysius commanded Zeuxes to draw the Picture of Envy, he brought him a
Looking-glass, and bid him behold his own Face in it: And may we not as easily
draw the Picture of Ambition as much to the life in many men's Faces? Alexander,
when he was offered Darius's Daughter, and a great part of his Dominions with
her, answered, As the Heavens could not contain two Sons, no more could the
Earth two Alexanders. See the large extent of an ambitious Mind. But whatever
the World says to the contrary, Virtue will prove the fairest Escutcheon, and
that is the best Honor, where God is the top of the Kin, and Holiness lies at
the bottom.

It Is storied of Julia the Daughter of Augustus, Tha^ being reproved for her
Prodigality, and cautioned of her Father's Frugality, answered, If her Father
forgot that he was Caesar, she would not forget that she was Caesar's Daughter.
It Is hard for a Maid to forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her Attire, it is a
great deal easier to forget the Soul: Most live above their Estate, few under
it. Some say Pride and the Gout are alike, that is, both incurable. Ambition
and desire of Rule makes many Subjects murder their Prince, many Children
their Parents, and many Wives their Husbands, and one Brother to kill another,
Absalom to rebel against his Father; yea, it makes Princes tyrannize over their
Subjects, and Landlords over their Tenants, the Rich to oppress the Poor, and
the Stronger to wrong the Weaker, and make Men-like the Fishes in the Sea,
where the great ones devour the lesser: But when Pride rides in the Saddle,
Shame sits upon the Crupper; Pride goes before Destruction, and a haughty
Spirit before a Fall. The more Gold Pride eats, the more Blood it sucketh:
The higher and faster a man climbs, the more danger of breaking his Neck, for
God resists the Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble, 1 Pet. 5.5.

King Philip glorying after his Victory, Archimedes persuaded him to measure
his Shadow, to see how much bigger it was grown by the Conquest: If Promotion
should make men bigger, yet it makes few men better. Of all the Roman Emperors,
only Vespasion is said to be better by his advancement: But did men well
consider, that all their Ancestors Glory lies in the Dust, and very shortly
theirs must do so likewise, it might make them veil their Peacock's Plumes.
It Is a Sin and Shame for an Angel to be proud, much more for a Muck-he^p Sack
of Dust, an Earth-worm, that has no Breath to breathe, but what God puts into
him. Yet many there are, that think God loves them best, because he gives them
most; then Pharaoh, Sennacherib, Jeroboam, Herod, the Great Turk, and
suchlike, are much in favor: But here is a Mistake in the Reckoning; God made
Nebuchadnezzar to know and acknowledge, That the Most High rules in the
Kingdoms of Men, and gives them to whomsoever he will, and sets up over
them the basest of men, Dan. 4.17. Pharaoh was advanced on high for his greater
Fall; For this cause (says God) I have raised thee up, etc. And, no doubt,
Haman's Promotion was upon the same account. Riches and Honors many times
prove Blocks in Heavens way, not in themselves, but by their abuse they are
like the fine Feathers of the Ostrich, fine to gaze on, but of little use to
help them to mount aloft; when the Lark or Swallow are swift of Wing, and mount
easily. It Is hard for a Rich man to mount upward, or to enter in at the
straight Gate, yea, as hard as for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle;
the reason is, they have such a Burden upon their Backs, and they have such a
Loadstone here on Earth, which they love and trust to, which draws their
Affection from Heaven to Earth, this hinders their flight, as it is Fabled the
Golden Apples did Atalantas Race. Those that stand upon the top of Pinacles are
in Danger, and had need look to their footing: Those that attract Guilt in
attaining Promotion, are in the greatest danger when it is gotten, for at utmost
Death will be^^ave them of it. It Is a sad Fall from the highest Pinnacle to the
Depth of Hell, their Glory then will not follow them, their Pomp will take its
leave. O what a sad day will this be, when all these things wherein they
gloried will be gone, and when Riches, Honor, and Pleasures, as to them, shall
be no more; which as Micah said of his Ephod and Teraphim, These are gone, and
what have I more? Judge. 18.23. Now, when these their Gods are gone, what have
they more? And these they have not long to enjoy; and this will be a further
aggravation of wicked men's Misery at Death.

4. That wicked men at Death lose all their Worldly Felicity, such as Riches,
Honors, and Pleasures, I have already showed you; yet these are not all the
Losses they shall then sustain, the worst are behind, though happily at present
not so much regarded, for then they shall lose their God, which will prove the
greatest Loss by far.

The Torments of Hell are either privative or positive, Pain of Loss, or Pain
of Sense; the former is judged by Divines to be the greatest and most grievous;
for God being our chiefest Happiness, to lose him will be our chiefest Misery;
In his presence is fullness of Joy, and at his right hand Pleasures for
evermore: But at Death there will be an eternal separation from him, which Loss
will more affect the Soul, when the Understanding, Conscience, and other
Faculties shall be enlarged; a Thousand thousand rentings of the Soul from the
Body will not be so much as One renting of the Soul from God; then the Soul
will know the worth of the things she has lost, and what a foolish bargain she
made, when God, and Heaven, and Happiness were parted with for a Lust; this
will be a bitter Corazine, and an eternal Torment to a miscarrying Soul, when
she knows (and know she will) what it is to enjoy those Rivers of pleasures
which are at the righthand of God, ou^ sight of Christ, ou^ glimps of Heaven,
one hours converse with Angels and glorified Saints, would dash the Glory of
Ten thousand Worlds out of countenance; this Beatifical Vision, this enjoyment
of God in Glory, is a Saints greatest Happiness, and well it may: We mourn and
overmourn for little petty Crosses or Losses in our temporal Estate, but the
loss of a thousand Worlds will not equal this, a glimps of whose Face in Glory
would make amends for all the Losses, Crosses, Pains and Torments which here we
can suffer for his sake: It Is His Presence that makes Heaven to be Heaven, and
his Absence is Hell it self; the enjoyment of him here in a small measure is
Heaven upon Earth, and when he withdraws himself from the Soul, it is a very
Hell; but the blinded World is not sensible of his worth, ignotis nulla cupida,
nothing but Ignorance could stave off our Affections from him, yet many, though
they cannot live without him, yet value him not; they have not Bread to eat, or
Clothes to put on, nor a Breath to breathe, but what he gives them, yet dare
they abuse their Meat to Gluttony, their Drink to Drunkenness, their Breath to
blaspheme his holy Name: But what will those do, when there shall be an
everlasting separation between God and them? The loss of a Jewel is not much to
one that values it but as a common Stone, but when they come to know its worth,
it will more trouble them.

I have read of a Diamond taken from the Duke of Burgundy, slain by the
Switzers, that was sold for a crown, by the Soldier that took it, and so passed
from one, to one, ^^ll at last it was bought for 20000 Ducats, which, as some
value it, was above 7000 Pound, and put into the Pope's triple Crown.

See what Ignorance may do: But Ignorance of God will prove the most dangerous
mistake. There are many in our Age like David's Fool, that say in their Hearts,
there is no God; nay, too many that proclaim it with their Tongues, but e're
long they will be fain to eat their words: There is not one of them, but e're
long will be fully convinced; for there is no Atheist in Hell, the Devil,
though full of other Sins, is not guilty of this. Many here have Souls to
little purpose, but like Salt, to keep their Bodies from Putrefaction; for as
they think there is no God, so they live as if there were none. Many of these
have been convinced of their Error, even in this Life, by the Judgments of God,
the rest will soon after; but these men, I suppose, rather desire there were no
God, than believe it: Many that own a God, fancy to themselves one of their own
making, a God all of Mercy and no Justice; they think he that made them must
save them; but the Devils find it to the contrary. It Is true, he was merciful
when he drowned the old World, burnt Sodom and Gomorrah with Fire, overthrew
Pharaoh and his Army in the Red Sea, slew in one night in the Camp of
Sennacherib 185000, and will be so at the day of Judgment, when he throws the
Devil and his Angels, and all unrepenting Sinners, into Hell: And they will
find him just, as well as merciful, and one that will make good his Threats, as
well as his Promises; He has Power in his Hand to do both, and will be no
respecter of Persons, for if they are wicked, by what Name or Titles soever
they are dignified or distinguished, suffer they must. Tophet is ordained of
old, even for the King it is prepared: He has made it deep and large, the pile
thereof is fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord, as a river of
Brimstone, does kindle it, Isa. 30.33. Now they say to God, Depart from us, we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14. But e're long God will say to
them, Depart from me ye wicked, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, etc. Mat. 25.41. Now they will not know God, and then God will
nor know them, Mal. 7.22. Now the rottenness of their Hearts blisters out in
their Lips and Tongues, and they belch out their unsavory Breath into the very
Face of God himself. Now they will none of his counsel, but set as naught his
reproofs; but he will laugh at their destruction, and mock when their fear
comes, Prove. 1.24. But how light soever they value him now, they shall know
his Worth to their eternal Torment, for they shall for ever lose him, and all
comfortable Relations to him, and with him all that good is, the Joys of
Heaven, the Society of Angels and glorified Saints; these indeed they little
regard here, but they will know their Worth better hereafter.

It has been the Speech of some of that Fraternity, That if they thought the
Puritans (and such they called all holy, sober, serious men) were in Heaven,
and their own Good-fellows and Pot-companions were in Hell, they would choose
Hell before Heaven: And they are like enough to have their Choice, but e're
long they would willingly eat those words of theirs: Now they hate, persecute,
and revile them, and glad they are to be rid of them; then they shall be far
enough out of their company, and out of their reach: They think they are not
worthy to live in the World, whom God thinks the World is not worthy of, Heb.
11.35, etc. They are cutting off the Bough they stand upon, and taking away the
Pillars that uphold the Building; they laugh at their own Misery, and sport
themselves with their own Folly; they rejoice to see their own Houses on Fire,
and to see their own Wickedness prosper, which will be their Ruin; but when
the mad Fit is over, (and over it will be e're long) when they consider what
they have been doing, their Note will be changed, and their Sport spoiled, they
will find time enough for Repentance, and for every dram of Mirth they will
have a pound of Sorrow. When God forsakes them, (and forsa^e them he will, if
they forsake not their Sins) whither will they go for help? Their
Pot-Companions cannot help them, for they are under the same Condemnation; the
World cannot help them, for the Earth, and all the Works therein, shall be
burnt up, their Riches, Honors, and Pleasures shall be left behind, the Rocks
and Mountains cannot cover them, these melt at the presence of the Lord; their
Companions can do them no good, they will curse the time that ever they saw the
Face each of other; the Ordinances which they slighted are then ceased; the
Ambassadors of Peace called home, Hearing, Reading, Praying, Meditating, which
were of use, and now our Duty, can then do us no good, no Petition now can be
accepted, the Spirit has now done striving; here the worst of Sinners call God
Father, and would fain adopt the Devil's Brats to be God's Children, but it
will then appear, these profligate Wretches are none of the Offspring of
Heaven, for God will own no such Children; here they are not perswadable, but
then their Consciences will inform them, and their Torments instruct them that
their courses were not good; now Heavens Glory, though never so lively set
forth, does not much affect them, their Eyes are not opened to behold it, but
had they but a glimpse of it, as the Apostles had in the Transfiguration, or
such a sight as Paul had in the third Heaven, it would convince them.

It Is storied of Nicostratus that cunning Artist, That seeing an admirable
Piece of Work, looked at it with admiration; being observed, he was asked by
one, why he looked so intent upon it, replied, Oh Sir, had you my Eyes, you
would wonder as well as I at this inimitable Piece of Work. And had the men of
the World their Eyes open, or had they ever tasted one dram of the Rivers of
Pleasure which are at the right hand of God for evermore, they would be of
another mind, they would see the Riches, Honor, Carnal Delights, Friends, and
Favorites, yea, whatever the World affords we can spare, but God we cannot
spare: And to miscarrying Souls, the consideration that the Time was, the
enjoyment of these celestial things was possible for us, as well as for
others; we were set upon the Stage of the World to play our part; we had the
same Means, Ministers, Ordinances, Helps, and Furtherances as others had, the
motions of the Spirit, and the Checks of our own Consciences, as they, but the
Devil blinded our Eyes, and hardened our Hearts, and the World bewitched us,
but all these Means and Helps are gone, and it is too late, alas! too late to
repent; we indulged our Flesh, we satisfied our Lusts, we contented our carnal
Companions, and we deluded one another: Nay, we had not only a possibility of
Glory, but a fair probability: We had many Convictions upon our Spirits, that
our way was not good, and that the way of Holiness was to be chosen; hence we
had many Resolutions to alter our Courses; yea, especially in our Sickness and
Distress, we made many Promises, yea, Vows and Covenants, to amend; yea, set
upon the performances of some Duties, and refrained from some Sins, and made
some Profession of Religion, and were almost Christians, and yet suffered the
Temptations of Satan, the Alurements of the World, and the Enticements of our
own Corruptions, and the Persuasions of our wicked Companions, to stifle these
hopeful Beginnings; these persuaded us there was time enough for Repentance,
and that we had many a fair day yet to live; and now Death has taken us away
in our Sins, cursed be the time that ever we listened to these Siren Songs,
which lulled us asleep in the Cradle of Security; we were not far from the
Kingdom of Heaven, but for want of a little more, we shall never come there;
and now our Sun is set, and will never rise again, our day is over that will
never dawn, and the night is come that no man can work; our golden hours are
over, and our Opportunities are lost, and that sweet Gale of Mercy that once we
had, will never blow upon us more: Oh that we were entrusted with one Year
more, the World should see what Reformed persons we would be, we would live as
mortified a Life as ever Saint did upon the Earth, and scorn with the highest
Disdain the Pleasures, Profit, and Honors of the World; how exactly would we
live! how painfully would we work out our Salvation! how would we watch our
Hearts and our Tongues, and order our Actions! but, alas! these are vain
Wishes, our Time is gone, our Glass is run out, our Opportunity lost, and our
Hopes are perished; God has forsaken us, and become our Enemy; a Crown of
Glory was once offered upon easy Terms, but the Market Day is over, and will
never come again; it was under our Feet, and we would not stoop for it; Life
and Death were set before us, and we had our Choice; Heaven was offered, and we
refused it, and chose the World before it, and lodged it in the best Room of
our Hearts, and now it has deceived us; we should have forsaken all for
Christ, but we forsake Christ and all for a Lust; we indulged the Flesh,
yielded to the Temptation, and made a woeful Choice, for a few vanishing
Pleasures, we parted with Heavenly Joys, and in the room had endless, easeless,
and remediless Torments; it had been better for us, that we had been torn in
pieces with wild Horses, than to have yielded to the Temptations of Sin, as we
have done: Now we find our Minister's Words true, which warned us of the bitter
Fruits of Sin, but, alas! too late, our time is gone, and will not be recalled;
cursed be the time we fell into such lewd Company: How did we delude each other
to Destruction; now I see the Fruits, the Effects and Ends of all our merry
Meetings, drunken Matches, of our merry Songs and wanton Catches, and all our
effeminate Dalliance; how much better might the time have been spent in Prayer,
Hearing, and Meditation? Taverns, Alehouses, and Whore-houses have been our
Ruin.

These, or suchlike, will be the sad Complaints of miscarrying Souls; for when
God forsakes them, all that Good is will leave them, then must they bid farewell
to the Saints and Angels for ever, for they will be in the presence of God to
Eternity, and had they but enjoyed them one day in Heaven, now all their
Corruptions are done away, they would better know their worth and their own
loss; but Heaven and Hell, as they are out of sight, so they are out of mind;
but those that mind them of it, are like Elijah, accounted the Troublers of
Israel, and like Paul, Pestilent Fellows; for they at present scorn the Society
of the Godly, and then the Godly will scorn them; they shall then reap the
Fruit of their own Folly, which will be a large Harvest. But, among all their
Losses, they shall lose their Souls also, which Loss is considerable, the Soul
being of more value than the World, Mat. 16.26. and this will be an aggravation
to them, they sold them for nothing: Yet this Loss signifies not the
annihilation of the Soul, or that it shall be made nothing, this would be
joyful News to them, for upon that Condition they would be willing the Devil
should tear it into a thousand pieces, (supposing it divisible) so he would
tear it into nothing: But this cannot be, the Soul will run parallel with the
longest Line of Eternity; neither can the Faculties thereof be lost, the
Understanding, Memory, Conscience will remain, and be much heightened; the
Understanding should better know the Vanity of Earthly Enjoyments, and the
Worth of Heavenly; the Memory shall never forget one Sin, nor any one
Circumstance of it, and the Conscience shall torment them for it, and will
prove a never-dying Worm to torment; but the Soul is said to be lost, when God,
which is the Life of the Soul, is lost; and when made a Bond-slave to Satan,
and under God's Wrath and Curse, and sentenced to everlasting Torments; when
all her Hopes are extinct, and nothing but Desperation is left her, all their
misgrounded misguided Hope will then fail, and prove but like a Spider's Web,
and at Death all possibility will be taken away, Salvation and Hopes will
vanish together. The foolish Virgins Hope, as it was groundless, so was it
fruitless; such Hope may light a man to Death, never to the Grave. In a word,
whatever they account good, or that tends to their Happiness in this World, or
that to come, Death will strip them of it. Oh that Sinners in the fear of God
would think of these things e're it be too late, then would they not for a
little Pleasure, vain Honor, or deceitful Riches, run thus upon the Pikes of
Danger, and lose God, Blessed for ever, and those celestial Enjoyments at his
right hand, for evermore, and incur those Hellish Flames, which can never be
quenched, Oh that men with a full Resolution would set themselves against the
Temptations of Satan, the Alurements of the World, and the Enticements of their
own Corruptions, and would give up not only their Names but their Hearts to
Christ, then would they never feel what now they have just cause to fear.

5. These are the Losses that wicked men will sustain at Death, even all that
good is; but this will not be all their Misery, but there will be added to it
the Pain of Sense, which is no inconsi^erable part of Hell, for they will be
cast into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second
Death; they shall not only have the Talents which were lent them taken from
them, but they shall be cast into Prison for not improving them, yea, into
endless, easeless, and remediless Torments, Mat. 25.46.

Now this place of Torment, whereinto miscarrying Souls shall be cast, has
various Appellations in Scripture; sometimes it is called a Prison, Mat. 5.25.
Agree with thine Adversary quickly, etc. lest thou be cast into Prison. This
denotes the want of Liberty, and other comfortable Enjoyments: Sometimes it is
called the bottomless Pit, Rev. 9.1. where the Dragon the old Serpent was cast,
Rev. 20.3. It Is also called Everlasting Punishment, where all ungodly Sinners
must go, Mat. 25.46. this also shows the duration. It Is called also
Unquenchable Fire, which must consume the Chaff, which are the Wicked, Luke
3.17. this shows the extremity of Torments. It Is called also a Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, where the Beast and the false Prophet shall be cast, Rev. 19.20.
It Is also called a Furnace of Fire, where the Tares must be burnt, Mat. 13.41,
etc. It Is also called Outer Darkness, where those that want their
Wedding Garment, when they are bound Hand and Foot, must be cast, Mat. 22.13.
It Is called sometimes the blackness of Darkness, which is reserved for the
Devil and his Angels, Jude 6.13. It Is called also the Place of Torment, in
which the rich Glutton was, when he saw Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.28.
It Is called the Wrath to come, from which Believers are delivered by Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. As also the Damnation of Hell, and many other Epithets, Mat.
23.33. and all to express the extremity of the Torment, and the duration
thereof, and in some measure to set forth that which the Heart of Man cannot
fully conceive of, nor his Tongue express. By this we may see it is a place of
Torment, a place of Horror and Darkness, a place provided on purpose for the
manifestation of God's vindictive Justice and just Judgment. This is that
Tophet provided of old, the pile thereof is Fire and much Wood, and the breath
of the Lord, as a River of Brimstone, does kindle it, Isa. 30. last. When a few
drops of this Wrath of God fell upon the old World, it drowned it, upon Sodom,
it burnt it, upon Egypt, it destroyed it, upon Sennacherib, it flew 185000 of
his Army in one night. But if a few drops make such a devastation, what will a
Torrent do? What will they do in the overflowing of Jordan? And what will those
poor Creatures do, that must be the Butt for all the Arrows of the Almighty to
be levelled at?

We read, that Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace was heat seven times hotter than
usually for Bread, but Hell is seventy times hotter than that, yet God will not
think the heat too great, or the duration too long for Wicked men to suffer for
a thousand millions of Ages: He will not repent of the Severity; He is not as
man, that he should lie, nor as the sons of men, that he should repent: Those
that now at his Command will not leave one sup, then shall not have one drop;
then will they have no Beds of Done to lie upon, no soft Couches to stretch
their wearied Limbs upon, nor curious Hangings, nor costly Furniture to adorn
their Rooms, only a Lake burning with Fire and Brimstone to bath them in; no
rich Wines, strong Drinks, or cordial Waters, to comfort them, to quench their
Thirst, or cool their parched Throats, no, cold Water would be held a Cordial.

Their Society also would breed Horror, the Devil and his instruments, these
will continually haunt them: Here if one should appear at least in an ugly
shape, they are frighted, sometimes out of their Wits, but there they are their
daily Companions, and they will be troubled not with Sight only, but with
Feeling also. As for the rest of their Companions, they are not much better,
for what Comfort can it be to live among wounded, sick, diseased, or frantic
persons, yelling, swearing, roaring, ranting, and blasphemous men? But this
falls short of the communion in Hell; for amidst all their hellish Dialect,
they must bea^ a part in this hellish Harmony; the thought of it may send them
trembling to their Graves; were the Tormenters like themselves, it were not so
much; and yet we have read of those that have been cruel enough, but to be
under the Lashes and Whips of Infernal Spirits, and these our Blood-thirsty
Enemies, and set on work by an Omnipotent God, as the Executioners of his
Infinite Wrath and Fiery Indignation, is terrible to think of. Those that in
their lifetime were drawn into the Devil's Snares, must now reap the Fruit of
their Folly, for whatever his Promises were, eternal Destruction of Soul and
Body is his Wages. But he is not the only Tormenter, but miscarrying Souls
carry about them the never-dying Worm, which like Prometheus's Vulture is
always gnawing: And this will prove no inconsiderate part of Hell, here
Conscience is God's Register, and records what is done, there it will be a
Witness, a Judge, and an Executioner. The Memory also will not be in vain, but
will bring to mind things by us long ago forgotten; the Sins committed, the
Duties omitted; the Time lost, the Opportunity let slip; the Understanding will
then know the worth of the things lost, the vanity of those we had in exchange,
and the woeful Bargain we have made, and for this Conscience will lash to all
Eternity. It Is one of the saddest Afflictions that can befall a Man in this
Life, to be under the Terrors of an enraged Conscience, witness Spira, that
wished he were in Hell to know the worst of his Torments: This was for one sin,
but when all their sins, with all the aggravations, shall stare them in the
Face, and when Conscience shall have an enlarged Commission, it will then speak
to purpose, and not hold its peace. Were a Man to grapple with the Creature, it
were not so much, but who can contend with the Almighty? Who can dwell with
consuming fire, or with everlasting burning? Hell is the place where the
Prisoner must pay the utmost farthing; and God's Vials of Vengeance shall be
poured out to the utmost, all the Talents lent shall then be required, and
every vain Thought, and every idle Word shall be answered for; and every sin of
Youth, and riper Age, of Ignorance and Knowledge, Weakness and Wilfulness; the
sins of every Relation, Calling, and Employment; of Omission, Commission, and
Participation, against the Law, and against the Gospel, with all their
Circumstances and Aggravations. Oh the numberless Number of bloody Bills will
be brought in, and fully proved! not a vain word, or thought, or wanton glance
of the Eye, or wicked or lascivious Gesture, or Action, will be then omitted or
forgiven; there they must stay till they have paid the utmost Farthing, for God
will be no loser by them: Those that have exceeded most in Sin, shall exceed
also in Torments, as God threatens Babylon, Rev. 18.15, 16. No Tongue can tell,
nor Heart conceive, how great their Torments will be, for they will be
inconceivable, and unutterable. If all the Tormenting Diseases that ever poor
Creature groaned under were inflicted upon one Man, and all the Racks and
Tortures that ever were invented by Man or Devil, were added to it, and this
Man's Life should be preserved under these Tortures for a Year, for a Hundred,
or a Thousand Years, sure it would be a miserable Spectacle: But what is this
to Hell Torments? This reaches only the Body, except by Sympathy, when Soul and
Body are tormented in Hell. Or what is a Thousand Years to Eternity? A thousand
thousand rentings of the Soul from the Body, is not so much as one renting of
Soul and Body from God. There are many now that cannot endure to hear the
Devil's Name in a Sermon, yet can they endure to lodge him in their Hearts; but
how will they lodge with him for ever? If he now appear in some horrid shape,
how are they affrighted out of their Wits, but how then will they dwell with
him for Eternity? Now if a Person be in pain, they have some intervals, some
mitigation, but there is none; or some parts of the Body free, when others are
tormented; but in Hell no Part, Power, or Faculty is free, yet happily those
Parts that sinned most, may suffer most, as the Rich Glutton's Tongue seemed to
do; their fire goes not out, neither does their worm dye: Every Sense there
will have its Torment, as every Sense here has its peculiar Sins. Whether the
Fire there be Material, as some imagine, or Metaphorical, as others more
probably conceive it, is not much material for us to know, and well if we never
know; if it be Material Fire, God adds strength to it, otherwise it could not
touch the Soul; if Metaphorical Fire, it is something more afflictive than our
Imaginations can reach; however Christ bids us not fear man, that can but kill
the body, (happily by Fire) but cannot kill the soul, but fear him that can cast
soul and body into Hell. Now our Fire consumes as well as torments, but Hell
Fire does not so; Wicked Men in Hell are like Moses's Bush, always burning, but
never consumed; would Hellfire consume them it would be happy News, but they
are like the Salamander, they live in it, and will do to Eternity; they never
leave sinning, and their sins are as Oil or Pitch to increase the Flames, and
God will not leave plaguing them for their sins. Jerome tells us, their Sins
are the Oil, and God's Wrath the Fire, and while the Oil is poured on, the Fire
will not out. Those Bodies that now are so tender they cannot endure Cold nor
Heat, that must not have the Sun or Wind to see them, for spoiling their
Beauty, will be now exposed to Fire and Flames; those that could not away with
an ill smell, what will they do to endure the smell of burning Brimstone, or
what is worse represented by it? Those that delighted in Pleasant Sights and
Shows, must here take up with the sight of Infernal Fiends, and Leprous Souls,
far more ugly than the foulest Toad that crawls under our Feet; and the
choicest Melody will be the Yellings, Roarings, and Blasphemings of damned
Devils, and miscarrying Souls, and nothing to be felt but Fire, or what more is
appointed for further Torment. How will they dwell with everlasting burning,
that now cannot away with Summer-heat? These Flames will neither regard Age,
Sex, nor Beauty, but like the Worms will feed upon one as soon as the other;
for as the Worms will make their Nests between those Breasts that now are
exposed to show, and sale, and eat out those wanton Windows of Love, and
Messengers of Lust, and seize upon the fairest Face, as on the most deformed
Piece; and rottenness will consume that Hair, that now is made the Nets and
Snares to catch our wanton Youth; and Prey upon the most Ambitious Nimrod, or
proudest Person, as soon as any other, making no difference between the Prince
and the Peasant, the Dust of both will ere long be mixed, and not known asunder;
so in like manner will they go undistinguished in the Infernal Pit, for God
will respect no Man's Person in the Judgment, nor the Flames in Hell, but as
their Work is, so will be their Reward. That there will be degrees in Torment,
I think is out of doubt, for there are degrees in Sin, and the Judge of all the
Earth will do Righteously; Those that know their masters will, and do it not,
shall be beaten with many stripes; those that have abused most Talents, have
most to answer for: It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
Judgment, than for Corazin and Bethsaida. Bloody Persecutors of Christ and his
Church, are like to have the hottest place in Hell, and those that commit that
Sin unto Death, shall speed worse than those that sin of frailty. Those that
now would be accounted Roaring Boys, will be such indeed, when they come there,
for Roaring and Yelling will be their best Music; and all shall dance after
this Pipe, and bear a share in this Consort. Oh, that Men would be wise before
it be too late, and Hell has shut her Mouth upon them, for then they will have
no rest day nor night, but it is the duration that makes up the Misery
complete: Did the Torments endure but a Hundred, or a Thousand Years, though it
were long, yet it would be some comfort, that an end would come, but the word
Never, is a Hell in the midst of Hell. Were a Man in perfect Health and
Strength adjudged to lie upon a soft Feather Bed, without stirring Hand or
Foot, for a Year's space, though he had the comfort of Friends, Meat, Drink,
and other Necessaries, it would be thought a great Punishment, much more if he
lay upon a red-hot Gridiron, and could be preserved with Life: But what is
either of these to Hell Torments, or a Year to Eternity? But their Torment must
run parallel with the Life of God, the days of Heaven, and the longest line of
Eternity; and when they have past as many Thousand Millions of Years as there
are Piles of Grass upon the Earth, Stars in Heaven, Hairs upon Man and Beasts,
Sands upon the Seashore, Feathers upon all Fowl, and Scales and Fins upon all
Fish, yet will their Misery be no whit abated, or any nearer to an end than the
first day they were cast into it; for were this innumerable Number taken from
Eternity, it is never the less. Oh, Eternity! Eternity! who can judge of thee,
or find thee out? If the Earth were converted into Paper, and the Sea into Ink,
and every Grass-pile into Pens, and every Sand upon the Seashore were a
skilful Arithmetician, and all of them with their conjoined Labors, when they
had cast up their greatest Sums, and added them together, yet would it not
reach Eternity: Nay, if the whole Firmament were written from end to end with
Arithmetical Figures, it would fall short. Oh, what then but Horror and Despair
will seize upon miscarrying Souls! when all their hopes are dashed, then will
they seek Death, but shall not find it: Oh, that these pains would break my
Heart, and end my Life, say they. Oh, that I might at last be extinct, or that
these Infernal Spirits would tear me in pieces, till they had rent me to
nothing. Oh, that I had never had a Being! cursed be my Father that begat me,
and the Womb that bare me; cursed be those Companions of mine, that helped to
undo me, and betray me into my Enemies hands. Such as these are like to be the
wishes that Eternity will extract from tormented Souls. O that the
consideration thereof would make Men wise before it be too late! But if Death
find us unprepared, this that I have described will be our condition for ever,
which God forbid.

Lesson 6. The Sixth Lesson that this Providence teaches us, is this, That
seeing this our Friend is taken away in the midst of her days, in her full
strength, while her breasts were full of milk, and her bones moistened with
marrow, Job 21.24. This teaches all, but especially us that are of greater
Age, that survive her, how necessary it is for us to make Preparation for our
own Death; for if God deal thus with the green Tree, what shall be done to the
dry? Young Men may dye, Old Men must dye; for we know neither the day, nor the
hour wherein our Lord and Master will come, It Is good therefore to watch every
day, and every hour; we know not when he will send his Messenger to us to
Command us to give an account of our Steward-ship, for we shall be no longer
Stewards. We usually say, That should be well done, that can be but once done;
but we can dye but once, it is appointed unto all men once to dye, and after
death the Judgment, Heb. 9.27. Here is no room for a second Error, as we say in
War. As the Tree falls, so it lies, whether to the North, or to the South; so,
as Death leaves us, so Judgment shall find us. Now, Death is no Fear-babe, it is
the King of Terrors, and a Terror to Kings. Hell is no Scarecrow, neither
Eternity a Jesting matter, the Soul that is in danger, is no Trifle, but our
chiefest Jewel, and Salvation and Damnation are matters of Moment, things of
great Concern. Now, a Man would think that in Matters of such Concern it were
not needful to use many words to make us mind it, when we are earnest enough in
lesser matters, but it is evident we are all faulty in some degree or other, and
the most altogether negligent. Were but our Houses on fire over our heads, we
need not many Arguments to seek to save our selves, and to quench the Fire.
Were we in danger of Drowning, we need not many Arguments to persuade us to lay
hold upon something or other to help us out. Were we pursued with an implacable
Enemy that sought our Lives, or with a roaring Lion, or ranging Bear, we should
double our Diligence, and amend our Pace, and use all means to escape the
Danger. And is the Soul so contemptible a thing, that we matter it so little?
It is (without our Diligence prevent it) in danger to be drowned in the Lake of
Perdition, and to be burnt in the Fire that never goes out, and is pursued with
those Infernal Furies, that seek to devour her; and yet we make but a little
have to rescue her: But are our Houses, our Estates, our Bodies, or our Lives
to be preferred before the Immortal Soul, the best part of Man? And is a Moment
of Time more to us than Eternity? Do we take so much care what to eat, and what
to drink, and wherewith to be clothed, and so little how the Soul is fed or
clothed, decked or adorned? This doubtlesly would bespeak our Folly. Whatever
the World dream or say to the contrary, Heaven will be found to the Possessors
of it a real Happiness; and whatever Cost or Charge, Pains or Labor we bestow,
a good Peny-worth; and Hell will be found a real Misery, and whatever we have
into the Bargain, we shall be losers; the Rich Glutton found it so, and many
more; here the worm dies not, and the fire never goes out. One day in Heaven
will make us forget all our Miseries on Earth; and one day in Hell will make us
forget all our fore-past Pleasures. Now, while we are unprepared for Death,
there is but the thread of our Lives between us and endless, easeless, and
remediless Torments; and this must needs be an uneasy condition to a
considerate Man. And which makes it the worse, Death is always gnawing at this
thread, which if once broken, all the World cannot piece it, or yield us any
relief. Now, in serious matters wise men should be serious; Beggars, when their
wants are serious, they will leave their Canting, and beg in earnest, as also a
Prisoner that begs for his Life, and is not the life of the Soul of greater
value? It Is the Immortal Soul that lies at the stake, while we are playing a
Game at Folly. God is in earnest, his Messengers are in earnest, and shall we,
who are most concerned, and who are like to be the greatest losers, be in jest?
Were it our Riches, Honors, Pleasures, or such like, that were in danger, the
matter were not much, but it is the Soul, and need not we be in earnest? But
seeing it is for Souls, I shall back this Exhortation with these following
Considerations.

1. Consider seriously that we must dye, but when we know not; it is our Wisdom
to have Death always in our Eye, and with the Apostle, to dye daily, 1 Cor.
15.31. Death comes never the sooner for our Preparation for it, neither stays
the longer if we expect it not; the frequent thoughts of it will put us on to
our Duty, when the putting far from us the evil day, Amos 6.3. will make us
neglect it. This cursed Security and hope of Impunity is the source of all the
Wickedness in the World, Because Sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is wholly set in them to do
wickedly, Eccles. 8.11. But this is not preservation, but a reservation to a
greater Evil; this Forbearance is no Acquittance, whatever we think of it,
Death is stealing upon us tacito pede with a silent foot, and how soon he will
enter our Lodgings we know not, and then the Play is ended, and we must march
off the Stage. This Motive happily may seem needless, to mind Men of what they
all know already, but I think it is not useless; for though all Men will easily
confess they must dye, yet it is not easy to make them consider of it, or
believe their Death is near; nay, if we look upon most men's Actions, and manner
of Living, it is easy to conclude, that neither God nor Death are in their
thoughts. Were we but sure that Christ would come to Judgment within a Month,
wh^t a Reformation should we see in the World? Our Time-wasting Gallants would
not then spend so much time in Hawking, Hunting, Drinking, Whoring, as now they
do; Holiness would not then be their scorn, nor Religion their reproach, and
yet who knows whether it may not be within a Week? Or could we be assured that
Death would then Summon us to render an account of our Steward-ship in so short
a time, it would make the proudest of us to vail our Peacocks Plumes, and
entertain other thoughts of Death and Judgment, and of Eternity, than at
present we have; and we should not be so prodigal of our time, as now we are;
but spend more of our time in hearing, reading, meditating, and other Religious
Exercises, than now we do. So that it is the vain hopes of long Life, which God
never promised to any, that encourages many in their wickedness, and makes the
Godly themselves the more secure; it is good therefore to view our Charter, and
see what time is granted us, and not like the unfaithful Servant, say, My Lord
deferreth his coming, etc. lest he come unawares, and give us a Reward of our
Folly; the Poet shows these men's Folly, that future their Repentance upon hopes
of long life.

Fleres si scires unum tua tempora mensem,
Rides cum non sit forsitan una dies.
Many would weep and lament did they know they had but a Month to live, that
now laugh and rejoice, not having a day to live; of this sort was the Rich Man,
mentioned Luke 12.16, etc. O vain World! how do thou cheat us? O cunning
Devil! how do thou delude us, and hide from our Eyes our latter end? How dare
any Poor Man, that has not made his Peace with his God, neither has any
assurance of his Love, spend an hour in an Alehouse, or a day in Vanity, and
not know but it is his last? We have many Spectacles of Mortality daily before
us, younger and stronger than we go to the Grave before us, and many Monitors
of Mortality within us, Pains and Aches, Griefs and Troubles, even gray Hairs,
to mind us of our Winding-sheets. The Lord grant we may know the voice of the
rod, and of him that sends it. The Rich Man, Luke 12.16. promises himself a
lasting Happiness in the World, when he had not a day to live; and no doubt we
have many such in our Times: But alas, one Month, or one Year, for ought we
know may make a great and considerable alteration in our Families, and happily
those may be taken away that thought they had many a fair Year to live, and
much Worldly Happiness to enjoy. Sometimes Death strikes the Child in the Womb,
when he spares them that stoop for Age; there is no Degree, Age, or Sex, that
is secure; neither Rich nor Poor, Noble nor Base, Young nor Old, Fair nor Foul,
Religious nor Profane, can plead an Exemption from the Arrest of Death, for all
of us are dust, and unto dust we must return, Genesis 3.19. Eccles. 12.7. Those
Houses of Clay wherein we live will ere long moulder into dust about our Ears,
2 Cor. 5.1. It Is our Wisdom therefore to look out for another Habitation, a
building, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens, whose
foundation and builder is God. This Life of ours, for the shortness and
uncertainty of it, is compared unto the most fleeting, fading, perishing things
we can name; as to Grass, to the Flower of the Field, a Bubble, a Post, a
Weaver's Shuttle, a Thought, a Shadow, the dream of a Shadow, or if any thing
be more vain, and what manner of men then ought we to be? 1 Pet. 3.11. The
dimness of our Eyes, the deafness of our Ears, the rottenness of our Teeth, the
wrinkles in our Cheeks, the feebleness of our Limbs, and every decay in Nature,
warns us of our approaching ends; Death shoots many Darts at us, and at length
will hit us to the heart. It was Jerusalem's fault and folly, and I wish it be
not ours, to forget our latter end, Lam. 1.9.

2. Consid. Let us further consider that we have a great deal of Work to do
before we can be fit to dye, and but a little, short, uncertain time to do it
in, and therefore more Diligence is required, and it is work of the greatest
Concernment; if our time were in our own power, and at our own dispose, sure
and certain; or were our Work but a little, or of little concern whether it
were or no, it might be some excuse to us for our Idleness, and Time-wasting;
but this is not our case. Were Pleasures the end why we were sent into the
World, as many of our Gallants of both Sexes seem to suppose, then many in our
times take an effectual course, but endless Pleasures they mind not, the way to
Heaven will prove a little rougher. God sent us into the World upon an higher
Errand; our lives, and the life of our Souls, yea, our Eternal weal or woe
depends upon the well or ill spending of this little Inch of Time: And are not
those mad, or worse, that consume it in Folly and Vanity? Most Men live as if
they had no concerns of another World to mind, as if their Work were done, and
nothing remained but to receive their Wages, but I fear this is few men's case.
Had we a blood-thirsty Enemy to encounter, that nothing but our Blood would
satisfy, we should be more concerned to keep us out of his hands; but the
Devil is such a one, that walks about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. Were we in a Journey for our Lives, or in a Race, that if we won not,
we must dye, how diligently should we run, and take all advantages, and cast
our ground? This is our case, we were sent to run a Race, Heaven is the Prize
we run for, our Souls lie at the stake, if we run not so as to obtain, they
will be lost, and lodge in the Infernal Pit for ever; and shall we leave our
way, and hunt after Butter-flies, especially setting out so late? And our day
is almost spent, and the shadows of the evening are stretched out. There is
much out of order in the Soul, which must of necessity be rectified; our stony
Hearts must be changed for Hearts of flesh, and this is no easy work; the Soul
must be regenerated and born again, or we cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Corruptions must be mortified, and the power of Sin abated, and the
Soul sanctified, or no coming to Heaven; for no unclean thing shall ever enter
there. There must be Oil in the Vessel, Grace in the Heart, as well as the
Lamps of Profession in the Hand, or the Door will be shut against us, as it was
against the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.10, etc. It will be in vain for us to
thrust into the Bride-chamber if we have not on a Wedding Garment, for we shall
he discovered, Mat. 22.12. The Graces of God's Spirit must be had, for these
are the Gems and Jewels that adorn the Soul, and make it comely in the Eyes of
God; for no unrighteous man shall ever enter Heaven. Holiness is Christ's
Sheep-mark, and whosoever wants it shall stand at Christ's left hand: The Old
Man must be crucified with his deeds, and the New Man put on, and the body of
Sin must be destroyed. Faith, Hope, and Charity must not be wanting, neither
Repentance, new Obedience, Self-denial, Humility, and other Soul-adorning
Graces, which God has made necessary to Salvation. The Combat of the Spirit
against the Flesh must be maintained, and no Peace or Truce had with the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil; for when we make Peace with those, we break our Peace
with God, we cannot serve two such Masters. We must be crucified to the world,
and the world to us. Religion must be practiced as well as professed, or our
Profession will do us little good; the most gainful, pleasureful, and best
beloved sins, though as dear as a right Hand, or right Eye, must not only be
left, but hated, though Custom, Education, or Carnal Interest has endeared
them to us; and the most painful, difficult, dangerous, costly Duties must be
done when God requires them, and that in a Spiritual manner. All God's Commands
must be obeyed, how cross soever they are to Flesh and Blood. A constant Watch
must be kept over the Heart, to keep the Thoughts in subjection, and the
Affections in order, as also over our Lips, that we offend not with our
tongues. We must live so uprightly to Men, and so holily to God, that our
Enemies may have nothing to object against us, but concerning the Law of our
God. Our Thoughts, Words, and Actions must be regulated by the Word of God.
Christ must be loved with a prevailing degree of Love, yea, above either
Mother, Wife, and Children, and our own Lives. Our Wills must be made
conformable to the Will of God, and we must deny our selves for his sake, and
forsake all if he requires it. Our greatest Enemies we must love, forgive, and
pray for; and nothing must possess the best Room in our Hearts but Christ. Our
Evidences for Heaven must b^ cleared up, or we cannot dye cheerfully. Now, this
is some of the Work we have to do; in a word, constant Communion with Christ in
the several Duties he Commands in public, private, and in secret, must be
maintained, if we would be fit to dye; and can we think then we have any time
to spare to throw away upon needless Recreations? A bare Profession of Religion
will not serve turn for Salvation, Mat. 25.10. and 7.22.

3. Confid. Let us further Consider, That many have, do, and will miscarry, for
want of Preparation; yea, the greatest part of Mankind, for there is but a few
that shall be saved; yea, many professed Christians future their Repentance,
and send it before Ten or Twenty Years, and never over-take it, till it be too
late. That servant that said in his heart, my Lord deserieth his coming, and
began to beat his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken, the
Lord of that servant shall come in a day he looks not for him, and in an hour
he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with
hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 24.48, etc. And
of such Dust heaps we may find in every corner. It Is the Devil's Language to
persuade Men they have yet long to live, many fair Summers to see, and that
there is time enough yet, and if the worst come to the worst, a few good words
at last will waft them over safe to Heaven; but these, e're long, will hear the
Doom of the foolish Rich man, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required
of thee, and then whose are these? Luke 12.19, 20. He was shot with the Bolt
while he gazed at the Bow.

It Is the Devil's Policy to persuade us we have some time yet to spend in his
Service, and enough for God beside; but let us beware of such Conclusions, till
we have better assurance than the Devil can give us. Many that have done more
for Heaven, and can say more for it than most of us, have had Heaven Gates
barred against them. Mat. 7.22. and 25.12, etc. Many will say in that day, Have
we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils, and in thy name
done many wonderful works? yet he shall say, Depart, I know you not. Many speak
like Saints, live like Devils, they have Jacob's smooth Tongue, but Esau's
rough Hands. Many live and dye in a Self-delusion, and go to Hell with Hopes of
Heaven in their Mouths. Many young men are in Hell, that thought to repent when
they were old; and many old men, that supposed they should live longer; but
many bear themselves in hand, they can do as the Thief did, do the Devil's Work
all day, and receive Wages of Christ at night; but this is a desperate Venture,
the Judge happily saves one Malefactor of an hundred, and every man thinks it
will be he. Legi and perlegi scripturam, etc. says Austin, I have read the
Scripture over and over, yet did I never read but of one that was saved upon
late Repentance, when an Hundred thousand hare miscarried. And says another,
We may as rationally expect our Ass to speak, because Balaam's Ass did once
speak, as to imagine to follow this singular Example. To put off Repeneance
upon such an account, is, says a third, as bold a Venture as for a man to go a
great Journey without Money, because another did so, and found a Purse of Money
in his way. If a way be difficult, and scarce one of an hundred find it, is it
not presumption for us, if we travail that Road without Enquiry?

The greatest Politicians, and those that have been able to deceive and put a
Cheat upon others, have in this business been deceived; as Haman, Achitophel,
and many others. The most learned and profound Scholars have here been
mistaken, as the Scribes and Pharisees, the greatest Philosophers, Jesuits,
and many learned Doctors in our Age; And shall we think our selves secure? Yea,
those that have directed others in the way, and put them on to prepare, yea, to
make haste in their Journey, have for want of Preparation and Haste, fallen
short of their desired Journeys end. Thus the Scribes and Pharisees, and
Doctors of the Law, that bound heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and laid
them on men's shoulders, yet would not touch them with one of their fingers.
Many of those that have lived under the searching means of Grace, and have had
many a rouzing Sermon, many a Direction, Exhortation, and Reproof, have yet
miscarried. Thus Judas, Ananias, and Saphira, Demas and others, that fell
short; yea, those that had Christ himself and his Disciples for their Teachers,
as Capernaum, Chorasin, and Bethsaida. Many Ministers are like the Signs at the
Ale-house-door, they show others where they may have shelter, but they
themselves abide in the Rain; or like the Builders of Noah's Ark, make a Ship
to save others, when they themselves perish in the Flood. It Is good therefore
to look about us, lest this be our condition.

4 Cons. Let us farther consider the daily danger we are in while we remain in
an unprepared condition to dye, for if Death find us thus unprepared, we are
undone for ever, past hopes of help or means of recovery, for we shall
inevitably lose the Soul, which is the most precious Jewel we have, which in
Christ's Account is more worth than the World it self, Mat. 16 26. What is a
man profited if he gain the whole world and lest his own soul? Or, what shall a
man give in exchange for his soul? Intimating, that the loss is both
irrecoverable and irreparable. And is it nothing to lose an immortal Soul, and
to purchase an ever-living Death? Those that are sensible of Losses and Crosses
in the World, shall they be insensible of the great Loss? A thousand thousand
rendings of the Soul from the Body is not equivalent to one rending of the Soul
and Body from God; other Losses may be supplied, or at least suffered, but this
Loss is insupportable and unsufferable: Riches, Honors, Friends, and other
Earthly Enjoyments may be lost, and yet recovered, or at least the Loss more
easily born, but the Loss of the Soul is incomparable. Oh, what dreadful
Thoughts and Apprehensions will surprise a miscarrying Soul, when she
apprehends her self lanching forth into an infinite Ocean of Eternity, yea, an
infinite Ocean of boiling Lead and burning Brimstone, or what is far more
formidable, there to swim to all Eternity in endless, easeless, and remediless
Torments! then farewell all Earthly Delights, all comfortable Relations, all
true Friends, all Recreations and Pleasures, all Friends and Favorites, yea,
God himself, the Chief of all, which will then prove an invincible
irreconcilable Enemy; then the Devil, who has long looked for his Prey, shall
have it, and here that dreadful Sentence, Take him Jailer; the poor Soul must
receive then her due deserved Wages, for her faithful Service to her Infernal
Master, even everlasting Torments World without end. Oh, what amazing thoughts
will then meet the Soul in Hell, to think that God, and Heaven, and Happiness
are irrecoverably lost, and all her other Hopes, Comforts, and Support gone,
and her self undone for ever, and that she must everlastingly lie in those
eternal Flames, without hope of Redemption! This word [Ever] will be a Hell in
the midst of Hell, to think that Pain and Anguish, Weeping and Wailing, will be
her Portion as long as God is God, even for ever and for ever, and that Weeping
it self will now be in vain.

Now this is the present condition of an unprepared Soul, and the Lord knows,
this is most men's case, however the Devil and their own Hearts persuade them to
the contrary. If we are in this condition, there is but a Thread between us and
infernal Flames, even the Thread of our Lives, and how soon Death may cut it we
know not; a thousand Darts Death throws at us, even every Disease, Pain, Ach,
Grief, and Trouble, and when he will hit us to the Heart the Lord only knows,
and then the Soul will be in a stated condition, which Eternity it self cannot
alter: Our Glass is always running, and when the last Sand drops we know not;
the Ephah of our Sins is always filling, and when it will be full, and our
Iniquities ripe, we know not; if it be before our Repentance prevent it, we are
in a worse case than the Beasts that perish, whose Miseries end with their
Lives, when ours begin at out Death; they only pay that Debt of Nature, but we
must pay the utmost farthing; they go to their Grave, but we to Prison, then
shall we also lose our God with our Souls, or at least all comfortable relation
to him, for we shall still have him as an irreconcilable Enemy; all our
Earthly Enjoyments, all which now we take for our Happiness, will then be gone,
and the Portion which we chose will be snatched from us, and in room of this, a
Portion in Hell will be assigned us, where fiery whips of fiercest Fiends will
eternally torment us, who being tormented themselves, have no other Pleasure
but in tormenting others; and if all the Torments that ever were invented by
Man or Devil, were compared with this, it would fall far short: But the
Duration of these Torments is that which makes them complete; for if a Thousand
thousand millions of Years were subtracted, the Sum is never the less. Oh, how
much then does it behove us to look about us, lest that day come upon us at
unawares.

5 Cons. Let us further consider, that Preparation for Death, that is, getting
those Qualifications necessary for dying persons: An Interest in Christ, and a
Title to Glory, cleared up to us, can do us no hurt, but will do us good, and
is worth all the Pains and Cost we can be at about it; but the neglect of it
is, as you have heard, dangerous and deadly: Our Pains and Cost which we are at
about it will not be lost, but well recompensed, and never any one was made
miserable by it; when Ten thousand times ten thousand have been undone by the
neglect. Death comes never the sooner when it is expected, or to those that with
the Apostle dye daily, 1 Cor. 15:31. neither will it spare men the more because
they put it out of their sight, And they put far off the evil day, Amos 6.3.
no, no, the Lord of such servants shall come in a day they know not of, and in
an hour they are not aware of. Death is not blind, though we wink; he that is
fit to dye, is fit to live, and truly no other, for the same Qualifications
serve for the one and for the other: He that is prepared for Death needs not to
fear it, and he that fears not Death, needs fear no Enemy, no, though the whole
Creation were turned into Lions and Bears, yea, incarnate Devils about him,
kill him they may, hurt him they cannot, the worst they can do, is to send him
to his Father's House the sooner: If we are prepared, Death may strike us, but
cannot sting us, for the sting is taken out, 1 Cor. 15.55. and if it take us
away by the Hand of Violence, Twenty years in Heaven will make amends for
Twenty years upon Earth, which we might possibly have lived; and if we receive
as much Wages for half a day, as other for the whole, what cause is there of
Complaint? When our Debt to Nature is paid, our Work is done, and our Rest
follows; when we have been threshed, fifted, and winnowed, and the Chaff blown
away, we shall be laid up as good Corn in our Father's Grainary; when the Tares
shall be bundl'd up, Swearers with Swearers, Drunkards with Drunkards, and one
Adulterer with another, and cast into unquenchable fire; when we have Oil in
our Vessels, as well as Lamps in our Hands, then we shall enter in with the
Bridegroom, when the rest shall be shut out, Mat. 25.10, etc. but he that comes
in without a Wedding Garment on his Back, shall not go out without Bolts on his
Heels, Mat. 22.12. Take him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outward
darkness: He must go from the Table to the Tormentor.

But many other are the Benefits that flow from a right Preparation for Death,
yea, more than can be numbered, for our Evidences cleared up, will be a Heaven
upon Earth, and will sweeten every Condition, how bitter soever in it self, and
hold up the Head above Water, and the Heart from fainting under the saddest
Providence that can befall us, and makes a Christian see Light in the darkest
Cloud, and read Love in God's Face in his saddest Frowns; for Grace in the
Heart, and unblurred Evidences thereof, without which we cannot be prepared to
dye, will be such an Antidote to keep the Heart from sinking, that the World it
self cannot make up such a Cordial; nothing can come amiss to such a Soul, for
he knows the same Love that elected him, and sent Christ into the World to
redeem him, is now on work for his good: If he meet with Afflictions, he can
suck Sweetness thence, and gather Arguments of God's Love from it, and conclude
thence, that he is not a Bastard, but a Son, for God corrects those he loves,
and scourges every son that he receives and those that are without correction
are bastards, and not sons, Heb. 12.7, 8. Afflictions are the Gemms and Jewels
that God adorneth his best Friends with: He had one Son without Sin, but none
without Sorrow, and it be those that suffer with him that must reign with him.
If a prepared Christian meet with Prosperity, he can read Love in this also,
and take every Mercy as a Love-token, and admire the Goodness of God to such a
poor Wretch. If he read or hear the Word of God, he can suck Sweetness from
every Passage, whether Precepts, Promises or Threats; his Meditation of God, of
Christ, of Heaven, of Glory, will be sweet; his Morning Thoughts and Evening
Meditations also; many a Cordial can he fetch from the meditation of those
invisible things, which others have no Converse with, no Desire after; and this
bears up the Heart from sinking in the worst of Times, as it did the Martyrs
Hearts in Prisons, Losses, yea, at the Stake it self; for how can it be but a
serious thought of God, and Christ, and Heaven, and Glory, and a firm believing
that he has an Interest in them, but it must cheer up the Heart? And will not
the reading the precious Promises of God, and knowing also that they are their
Father's Legacy to them, chose but warm the Heart? Yea, the thoughts of Death,
as it is a Messenger sent from God, to bring us to Glory, and set an end to all
our Miseries, will hardly be much sweetened, for many dismal Apprehensions may
an unprepared Soul well have of Death, but to the other the Sting is taken out,
1 Cor. 15.55.

In a word, happy is the condition of a prepared Soul, and therefore it is our
Interest to prepare for it.

Thus, Madam, having shown what improvement we may and ought to make of such
sad Providence as are now under our consideration, the last I mentioned was,
preparing for our own Death: And, oh that my self were effectually persuaded so
to do, by the convincing Motive I have laid down: I shall add some Directions
in reference to Preparation.

1 Direct. If we design and desire to dye happily and comfortably, let us get
an Interest in Christ, and a Title to Glory, cleared up to the Soul, for those
that must cheerfully and willingly leave all their Earthly Enjoyments,
Comforts, and Relations, had need of assurance of something better than the
World is; for who would leave a certain Good for an uncertainty? one Bird in
the Hand, they say, is worth two in the Bush.

It Is true, a man may have a Title to Glory when Assurance is wanting; and this
man may dye happily, though not comfortably, for Death to him must needs look
ghastly. Till a man can look upon Christ the Rich Pearl as his own, how can he
part with all for him? But when he has Christ, and Heaven, and Glory in his
Eyes, he matters not what he parts with for them; he knows it is a good Bargain,
who will not part with Pebbles for Pearls, with Earth for Heaven, and the
Creature for God; such, and such alone can look Death undauntedly in the Face.
Till a man find the Condition of the Covenant within him, what Comfort can he
have in the Covenant it self? Though the King grant Pardon to a thousand
Malefactors, if I be a Malefactor, and cannot prove that I am of this number,
what Comfort can I take from the Grant? But when the Qualifications are found
in the Soul, which God has made necessary to Salvation, and to which Heaven
and Happiness is promised, when the sanctifying, regenerating, and adopting
Works of the Spirit appears there, and the Graces of it are found, when God's
Sheep-mark of Holiness is there impressed, this must needs be refreshing to the
Soul. I know that full Assurance, so as to set a man above all doubting, the
highest Pinnacle of Assurance, that maximum quod sic, beyond which nothing but
celestial Enjoyment can be expected, is so rare a Jewel, that it adorns the
Head or Heart of few. Many in the World, David himself was sometimes to seek,
and God's best Servants at a loss, but yet through Mercy, a comfortable
Assurance, to keep the Heart from despairing or desponding, has been and is
given unto many of the Godly, yet not without great Pains and Diligence, much
Examination, and fervent Prayer. We are not in this case to look into God's
secret Cabinet of his Decrees and Councils, to know whether we are elected or
no, for if we can find the effects of Electing Love, and the Graces of the
Spirit of God, which none wear, but the Spouse of Christ, we may conclude the
Marriage is consummate, and we may say, My beloved is mine, and I am his, Cant.
6.3. I am sure he is mine, and I can boldly speak it, her Faith is unfeigned,
and her Love unfailable, she had got a full gripe of of Christ, and is sure
nothing can separate them; Christ lays hold upon her by his Spirit, and she
lays hold of Christ by Faith; she has made a total resignation of her self to
him, and I accept of him in all his Offices and Efficacies; (says she) he has
given me that which he bestows upon no other, and therefore I am sure he loves
me.

The like may we say when we find the like Tokens of his Love; and when we find
the first Steps of the Spirit in the Soul, we may conclude he has been there.

Now, this Assurance, however some men value it not, is more comfortable both
in Life and Death than the World can procure, it is Heaven upon Earth, and a
Cordial against the Fear of Death. It Is an Encouragement to work, when we know
we shall have good Wages, and to suffer Loss, when we know we shall gain by our
Losses; but without some comfortable Assurance we cannot look upon Death
without Horror, and may say of it as Ahab of Elijah, Have thou found me, O my
Enemy? When a man apprehends himself lanching forth into an infinite Ocean of
Eternity, and knows not but it may be endless, who in his right Wits would not
tremble? Though Grace be present, Comfort will be absent, if Assurance be
wanting. What good did Hagar's Well of Water do her when she saw it not; or
Marys Discourse with Christ, when she knew him not? What Comfort will a Pardon
give to a Malefactor at the place of Execution, if it be concealed? In Worldly
Business we are not so careless to leave all at Uncertainty, and must the Soul
only be neglected? Shall we lie in Debt, and not know of any Surety to
discharge it, and have Souls and not know what will come of them to Eternity?

2 Dir. If ever we intend to dye happily, we must see Sin dead before us, for
the Soul and Sin cannot live together, but they will be the death of the one,
or of the other. Now Sin is never killed till it be hated, and looked upon as
the most deadly Enemy, for who will kill one that he loves? It Is Sin that is
the Sting of Death, which otherwise would be hurtless and harmless, 1 Cor.
15.55. Oh death, where is thy sting? oh grave, where is thy victory? The sting
of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law, etc. Here is the boldest
and bravest Challenge that ever rung in Death's Ear, wherein the Apostle bids
him do his worst, for when Sin is dead, his Poison is gone; he may buz about
our Ears as a drove Be, and happily fright us, but cannot hurt us; he may strike
us, but cannot sting us; he may, like Sampson when his Locks were shorn, go
forth as at other times, and shake himself, but his strength is gone, the worst
he can do, is but to send us to our Father's House the sooner. Sin, in stinging
Christ, lost his Sting, Christ overcame him, and took from him the Weapons he
trusted in, and now we may hug the Serpent in our Bosom. Sin, when it is alive,
sets a Bar in Heaven-gate against us, and makes it impossible for us to enter;
for no unrighteous person, nor unclean thing, nothing that defiles or works
abomination shall ever enter, Rev. 21.27. no dirty Dog shall ever tread upon
the Pavement. And as it shuts Heaven-gates, so it opens Hell-gates for us, and
Death, as a Porter, will let us in. Sin is the only Weapon with which the Devil
can hurt us, and this Weapon we our selves put into his Hands; they are Snares
of our own making, with which he entangles us; Cords of our own twisting he
leads us Captive in, for there is nothing else in the World that can make the
Soul miscarry; and this is our Misery, we naturally delight in those Fetters in
which he holds us, and glory in our own Slavery. The Devil shows us Sin through
his own Spectacles, and by his Paint and Plaster that seems amiable which
really is the most loathsome and deformed thing, which really makes the Soul
the most ugly, deformed, leprous thing in the World; but did we see our selves
in this Dress, we should come trembling into the Presence of God, with Tears in
our Eyes, Shame in our Faces, Sorrow in our Hearts, and Confession in our
Mouths; and if Sin look not with such an Aspect upon us, it is a sign it is
living, and not dead in us, for a dead Carcass cannot be lovely. When a
Believer's Sin is mortified, he behaves himself to it as Ahasuerus the King
toward Haman, who had been his greatest Favorite, and whom he had advanced
next to himself in the Kingdom, he hates the sight of him, and cannot endure
him in his presence, Esth. 7.7. it troubled him that he had lost his Love upon
so unworthy a Wretch: Even so a Believer mourns, that ever he entertained such
a treacherous Companion as Sin in his Bosom; he deals by Sin as the Father of a
rebellious Son was commanded to do, Dan. 21.18. lays the first Hand upon it,
and throws the first Stone at it; he bears so an irreconcilable a Hatred to it,
that nothing will satisfy him but its Hearts Blood; he is not satisfied, as
too many are, to lay it asleep, but dye it must, he does not lop off here a
Bough, and there a Branch, but stocks up the very Root; he is not raking at the
Channel, but cleansing the very Fountain; he knows Sin is his greatest Enemy,
and therefore he will make no Peace or Truce with it; it is his greatest Trouble
he meets with in the World, that he cannot be quite rid of it, that he cannot
give it a Bill of Divorce, and put it away; he deals with it as Amnon did by
Tamar, whom before he so lustfully loved, yet after hated her much more: So
deals he by Sin, what he had lustfully, wickedly loved, now he unfeignedly
hates; he hates Sin in all, but especially in himself, and flees the very
appearance of Evil, and resists it in the first motion, and as the Babylon
Children, while they are young, and the Cockatrice Egg e're it be hatched,
resists the Temptation, and first Notion of Sin: and if the Devil foist in a
Temptation, he like the ravished Virgin cries out for Help, suppresseth Sin in
the Thoughts, before ever it appear in the Word or Action; as Joseph, that
would not hearken to his Mistress, nor he in the House with her. Now this is
the course that we must take, if we would kill Sin; and we must be sure to
begin Reformation at the right end, purge the Fountain, that the Streams may be
clear, stock up the Root of Sin, that the Tree may dye, Make clean the inside,
that the outside may be clean also, Mat. 15.19. and 12.34. The Heart is the
Source of Sin, and the Fountain of Folly, and swarms with Lusts as a Carrion
with Vermin; inward Bleeding will kill as well as outward, and from within
Wickedness proceeds, but a man is never fit to dye, till Sin be killed and the
Heart cleansed.

3 Dir. The World also is an Enemy that must be subdued, if we would dye well
or willingly; for the love of the World breaks many a Match between Christ and
the Soul, and it is the usual Bait the Devil lays, to keep us in his Snares; All
this I will give thee; and it is a rare man that is not hereby alured: And
therefore it was not in vain that the Apostle gives us this Caution, 1 John
2.15. Love not the world, nor the things of the world: if any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. And another Apostle tells us, That
the friendship of the world is enmity with God; whosoever therefore will be a
friend of the world, is the enemy of God. Can a Woman love two Husbands, or a
Man serve two Masters, God and Mammon? And Paul tells us, The world is
crucified to him, and he to the world: It cares not a Pin for me, and I care
not a Rush for it; there is no more delight in it in my account, than there is
in a dead Carcass, have it we may, use it we must, but love it we may not. It
hangs out her two Breasts, Strumpet like, of Profit and Pleasure, but the
Apostle had no mind to suck at these Botches; and if we would dye well, let us
imitate him that had learnt to dye daily, and get our Affections as much weaned
from the World as possibly may be, and set upon Heavenly things, or it is ten to
one it will speak to us in the Words of Peter to Christ, Save thy self.
Whenever we should come to suffer any thing for Christ, we may find what a
snare it will be to us, as to the young man, Mat. 19.22. that bid fair for
Christ, till the World came and broke the Bargain; he came to Christ hastily,
and departs heavily; when he must part with his Riches, he chooses rather to
part with Christ, and if Heaven will be had upon no cheaper terms, let him keep
it to himself.

Those that have the God of this World lively po^trayed upon the Soul, are not
fit for another World; such as these will say with Cardinal Bembus, they will
not leave their part in Paris for their part in Parad^ce; Judas and Demas may
witness this Truth. When the Affections are forestalled and set upon other
Lovers, it is hard rending them off, or making them willing to p^rt with what
they love; what a man loves best, he would keep longest; Where the treasure is,
there will the heart be also, Mat. 6.20, 21. If they are set upon this white
and yellow Earth, upon Pearls and precious Stones, which are but the Guts and
Garbage of the Earth, and load themselves with thick Clay, it is as hard for
them to enter in at the straight Gate, as for a Camel (...) go through the eye
of a Needle. Paul c^lls such a one an Idolater, Ephesians. 5.5. and St. James, an
Adulterer, Jam. 4.4. Such as these are not ready for Death, though Death may
happily be ready for them; but he that has laid up his Treasure in Heaven, and
is at a point with all things under the Sun, and wears the World about him, as
a loose Garment, ready to cast off upon all occasions; he that has made ready,
packed up all, and sent before him to his desired Port, needs wait but for a
Wind to waft him over; Where the treasure is, there will the heart be also.
When a man imagines he must leave better behind than he is like to find there,
it is no wonder if he dye unwillingly, and depart with a reluctance; but when
better things are in view, it is no hard matter to dye.

The Devil puts a Cheat upon us, when he shows us the World through his
Spectacles, and the Glory of it through his Magnifying-glasses, there every
Little seems Great, and every Molehill a Mountain, but when we view it in the
clear Crystal of God's Word, it appears in its Colors.

It Is an easy thing to make a man exchange Rags for Robes, and a Cottage for a
Castle; and is it not as easy to persuade a wise man to exchange Pebbles for
Pearls, Earth for Heaven, and the Creature for God? When a Man is satisfied,
that there is enough in Christ, in Heaven and Glory, to give the Soul Content,
yea, to make up all the Losses sustained upon the account, what should make him
afraid to venture upon it? But while the World seems a Pearl in our Eyes, the
Pearl of great price is not heeded. The Splendour of the World seems greater
than it is, when the Devil has adorned it in his Paint and Colors, but when
it is stripped of that Varnish, it appears an old, withered, and deformed
Strumpet, and it is wonder that any fall in love with her.

Till we can look upon the World with Contempt, we are neither fit to live, nor
fit to dye; not to live, for we shall place the love upon her that is only due
to God; not to dye, for we shall then lose all our Portion, and what a
condition will such a departing Soul then be in? Till we can see with Moses the
Vanity of Kings Courts, we shall never make his choice, as, the Afflictions of
the people of God, rather than these Vanities, Heb. 11.25. Till we can with
Galeacius see more Worth in one days Communion with God, than all the Wealth in
the World, we shall not leave all as he did, for Christ's sake; till Christ be
better to us than our Company and Relations, as it was to Abraham, we shall
never leave all these for him; the Martyrs loved not their Lives to the Death,
Rev. 12.11. and till we can look upon all these things with a self-denying Eye,
and hang loose to Creature-comsorts, and can say of God as the Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none on Earth that I desire
besides thee: Then, and not till then, we are in a fit posture to live and to
dye.

4 Dir. If we desire to dye well, we must be sure to live well, for a good Life
always ends in a happy Death, and a wicked Life presages an ill End: Those
that dance with the Devil all day, seldom come to sup with Christ at night. The
Example of the penitent Thief I have already spoke to; one Swallow proves not a
Summer; he that sails in the Road to Hell, and changes not his Course, is never
like to land in the Port of Heaven; he that runs down the Hill is not like to
come to the top; and he that swims down the Stream, will not come to the
Fountain Head.

By Nature we are born with our Backs upon Heaven, and our Face toward Hell,
and till we repent we never change our Course. A sinful Life will have a
T^agical End; for he that walks in the broad way is not like to find the narrow
Gate, and that alone leads to Eternal Life. Mat. 7.13, 14. Strive to enter in
at the straight gate, for many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able: Wide
is the gate, broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be
that go in thereat: straight is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads
unto life, and few there be that find it. Yea, the Wicked, let them be never so
many, go down to Hell, and all the nations that forget God, Psalm. 9.17. It Is
our Duty, whatever others do, to be holy, and, like the Moon, hold on our
Course, though Dogs bark at us, and run our Race like the Sun, though the
Planters curse him at his rising, for scorching them with his Beams. Let us not
swim down the Stream of the Sinner, like dead Fish, nor follow a multitude to
do Evil: The worse the Places are we live in, the better let us be; the more
outrageous they are in Wickedness, the more courageous in Good let us be. It
matters not how small our Company is, if good, nor how great, if bad: It Is
better be with Noah in the Ark, than with the whole World in the Flood. The Way
to Heaven, no doubt, will be rough and craggy, like that of Jonathan and his
Armor-bearer, 1 Samuel 14.4, 13. Sic petitur coelum, Pains and Patience are
necessary to those that travel this Road; those that will to Heaven, must sail
by the Gates of Hell; Strive (says Christ) to enter; yea, strive to an Agony,
as the word imports. The way to Heaven is up Hill, to Hell down the Bank; we
may easily go down, facilis descensus averin, the other will cost much Pains
and Sweat; and when we come to the straight Gate, there must be stooping and
stripping: He that walks the broad way will readily find the wide Gate, he may
go Hood-winckt to Hell, and need not lose his way.

Now, that the Life be good, it is necessary that the Heart be good, for from
this Fountain good or bad Water flows; but naturally this is corrupt, it is not
a few good Words or Wishes will serve the turn, without Heart-reformation, all
other Reformation begins at the wrong end. Where the Heart is neglected, a
corrupt Fountain cannot send forth sweet Water, the Tree must be good, or the
Fruit will be bad; Men gather not grapes off thorns, nor fig off thistles, Mat.
7.16.

By Nature we are dead in trespasses and sins, and we cannot act from a
Principle of Life; if we have it not till the Heart be seasoned with Grace, all
we do will savor of the Cask, and till it be purged by Faith, no good thing
can thence proceed, for without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.
And when the Heart is reformed, the Work is not done, Heaven will not be had
without Pains and Patience, but Hell may be had with a wet ^inger; it is much
ado to find Heaven-gate, (...) a man may find the way to Hell blindfold. By
Nature we bring forth sour grapes, even grapes of Sodom, and of the fields of
Gomorrah, Dan. 32.32. We hatch cockatrice eggs, and weave spiders webs, but we
must be engrafted into that Noble Vine Christ, before our Fruit will be good:
There must be Knowledge in the Soul before there can be Obedience to the Will
of God, for without knowledge the mind cannot be good, but ignorant persons do
the Devil the best service, but neither the Blind nor the Lame must be offered
in Sacrifice to God; ignorant persons spoil all they take in hand; we must know
the Rule before we can work by it, and when we know it, we must not go aside to
the right hand, nor to the left, and have respect to all God's Commands; no,
Sin, though never so dear to us, must be forborne; no Duty, though never so
difficult, must be neglected; all our Actions, as to the Matter of them, must
be agreeable to God's word, and to the Manner of them, they must be performed
as he requires, sincerely, and without Hypocrisy, universally and constantly;
our Ends also must be Gods Glory, the good of our own Souls, and the Souls of
others. In short, all our time must be spent in our general and particular
Callings, or some way or other in reference to it, to fit us for the one or for
the other, and there must be a wise division of it between them, neither must
run away with the others share; our relative Duties must be minded, and we must
live and act like Christians in such and such Relations, the Trade of Holiness
must go on, we must treasure up Grace against a dying time, when some treasure
up Wealth, and many wrath against the day of wrath. This course may seem harsh
to some, but it is the only safe way to Glory, and the only way to a happy Death.

5. Direct. If we would dye well, it is our Wisdom, with the Apostle, 1 Cor.
15.31. to learn to dye daily, to have Death always in our Eye, and always be in
a dying posture, that Death may not sind us unprepared, that we may not look
upon Death as a stranger when he comes, but as an expected Guest: The frequent
Meditations of Death will put us on to put our House, or rather our Hearts in
order, with Hezekiah, Isa. 38.1. Death gives us many warnings to provide a new
Habitation, and we are unwise if we take it not for warning; he is always eying
us, and it is our Wisdom to be eying him, that we be not surprised ere we are
aware. Those are most like to neglect their Work that cast it out of sight, and
out of mind; and those are likest to be surprised by an Enemy that neglect
their Watch: When the evil servant said in his heart, my Lord deferreth his
coming, etc. he was soon surprised, and paid for his Folly, Mat. 24.48, etc. In
the Psalmist's days there were many of whom he says, God is not in all their
thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. And are there not many in our days, of whom it may be
said, Death is not in all their thoughts? Do not the show of their countenance,
the course of their lives testify against them, and they declare their sin
(...) Sodom, and hide it not. The course of their Lives cannot consist with a
believing Meditation of God, of Heaven and Hell, Death and Judgment; no, no,
they put far from them the evil day, Amos 6.3. This cursed Security is the
source of all manner of sin and wickedness; for God is neither in their Head
nor Heart, and therefore they sin boldly. I have heard of some foolish
Creatures that will thrust their Heads into a Bush, and then because they see
no body, they think no body sees them; such apprehension many Men seem to have
of Death, they think themselves secure, because they have got Death out of
their minds, but misreckoning proves no Payment: Many like the Rich Man, Luke
12.16, etc. promised himself a longer Lease than God had sealed him, but Christ
calls him Fool for his labor. Many men's Glasses are almost run out, when they
thought they were but new turned; but those that reckon without their Host,
must reckon twice. It Is folly in a Tenant to forget his Rent-day, and then
imagine his Landlord forgets it also; or for a Malefactor to forget the day of
his Execution, and think others forget it as well as he. This was Jerusalem's
fault, and it proved her ruin, Lam. 1.9. She remembered not her last end,
therefore she came down wonderfully; and this proves many a man's ruin. It was
not in vain therefore that Moses prays, Psalm. 90.12. So teach us to number our
days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. We are apt to make some
Preparation for the Body, what to eat, and what to drink, and wherewithal we
shall be clothed; and neglect not Fairs nor Markets, where wanted Necessaries
may be had; many prepare in the Day for the Night, in the Summer for Winter, in
Health for Sickness, in Youth for Age, yea, and for their Posterity after them.
And what stupid Madness is it not to provide in time for Eternity, and remember
not the days of darkness, for they are many? Eccles. 11.8. It Is the greatest
folly to mind trifles, and neglect the main. The thoughts of Death will not
hasten it the sooner, but it may hasten our Preparation for it; it can do us no
harm, but much good: Let no day therefore pass without some serious thoughts,
and meditation of it; this will make it less formidable. It Is fabled of the
Fox, that when he first saw a Lion he trembled; but in process of time he grew
bolder: Thus by better Acquaintance we should do with Death, that is most
amazing, that comes unexpectedly. Let us put the Question to our selves, Did I
know I should dye the next Week, or Month, how should I spend this time? And
let us live so, seeing for ought we know we may not live so long. Sure our
Time-wasting Gallants would then find something else to do, than to divide
their Time, as many do, between Swearing, Roaring, Drinking, and Whoring. Death
will make a wonderful change both in the good, and in the bad. In the good it is
an outlet to all their Misery, and an inlet to Heaven and Glory: In the bad
it is an end of all their Felicity, and the date of their Misery; and can this
on either side be such a contemptible change, as not worth thinking of? Should
a poor Woman upon a fixed day be to be married to some Mighty Prince, could she
forget the day, or neglect to prepare for it? Can a Maid forget her ornaments,
or a Bride her attire? etc. Or were a Man upon an appointed day to go to
Prison, to Banishment, or to Execution, would it signify nothing to him? Were
our Houses on fi^e over our Heads, or were we pursued by a Lion, or Bear, or
other ravenous Beast, or some deadly Enemy that sought our Lives, should we be
so unconcerned? And is not the Soul in a thousand times greater danger of
Eternal Death, than the Body can be of Temporal? and yet shall this be
slighted? Is it not high time for us when the Sergeant waits to Arrest us, to
take Christ's Counsel, and agree with our Adversary before we are cast into
Prison, Mat. 5.25. And not as ill Husbands do, stay till we are arrested, and
cast into Prison. I know there are too many that think God and Devil, Heaven
and Hell, are but Fables, these will know to their sorrow they are Realities,
and deserve our serious thoughts. And it is not enough to think of Death, for
many do so against their wills, but they must prepare for it also; let us
consider every Evening what we have done in reference to Preparation the day
past, and whether we are a days Journey nearer Heaven, as we are nearer our
Graves: This course is likely to fit us for Death and Judgment.

Lesson 7. The Seventh Lesson we may learn from this sad and unexpected
Providence, is, Seeing all are under a necessity of dying, to bring our minds
to be willing to dye, how and when God in his Providence shall think fit. It is
appointed unto all men once to dye, and after death the Judgment, Heb. 9.27.
Now, it is our Duty to subscribe our consent to this Law. He that hates not his
father, mother, wife and children, brethren and sisters, and his own life also,
he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14.26. These are Love Tokens God has given us,
to win our Love, and when he requires them again, it is to try whether we love
Him, or his Gifts better. It Is, as I showed before, our Duty to submit, as
Aaron, patiently to the death of our Relations, and sometimes the Lesson proves
hard enough; but here is a further trial, we shall be put upon to submit to our
own Death. When Job bore the loss of his Estate and Relations so well, the
Devil would try him, by afflicting him in his Body and Mind, Skin for skin, and
all that a man has will he give for his life, Job 2.4. As if he should say,
Any thing for his own Life; Cattle, Servants, Children, all shall go, so he may
sleep in a whole Skin. I know the Lesson, to be willing to dye, seems hard to
Flesh and Blood, but we must have something more, or we cannot dye well; the
same Reason that makes us submit to another's Death, is good here. I know there
are greater Temptations lying at some men's doors than others; it is easier to
part with Poverty than Plenty, Pain than Pleasure, Sickness than Health, and a
Prison than Liberty; but these Blessings were never given us to cross our
Maker's Will. Oh Death! how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that
lives at ease in his Possessions, and has prospered in all things? And yet the
thoughts of Heaven may sweeten this also. And that I may add some Sugar to this
bitter Pill, I add these Considerations.

1. Consider, our Life is not at our own dispose, neither indeed is it fit it
should be; for God is absolute Lord of all the Works of his Hands; he is the
Potter, we are the Clay; if he dash us with his Foot, who can call him to an
Account? For whose is the Pot but the Pot-makers? And he made us for his own
use, and may do with his own as he pleases, and we must hold our Tongues and
say nothing, if he do it. Never had any Man such absolute Dominion over any
thing he called his own, as God has over us; yet we imagine those Beasts we
call ours, though we have but a subordinate Right to them, yet we do them no
wrong, if we take away their Life, we neither did, nor can give it to them; and
has not God a greater Propriety in us? We let him alone with greater matters
than our Lives, and contradict him not. He upholds the whole frame of Nature in
Being, the whole Fabric of Heaven and Earth from returning to its Primitive
Nothing, and we seek not to take the Work out of his hands. He maintains the
Sun, Moon, and Stars in their incessant and unerring Motions, who pour their
Influences upon the Earth; he hangs this huge and massy Globe upon nothing, and
we let him alone with this work; he made those Glorious Lamps of Heaven for
times, and for seasons, and for days, and for years, and the Sun knows his
going down. He it is that sets Bounds to this great and wide Sea, yea, Bars and
Doors, and says, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further, and here shall thy
proud waves cease, Job 38.10, 11. He forms the Light, and he creates Darkness,
and he it is that has the Keys of Life and Death at his Girdle: He kills, and
he makes alive, and does whatever pleases him in Heaven, and in the Earth. Can
all the Kings of the Earth, with all their united Force, repel the Universal
Darkness that over-spreads the face of the World when the Sun is set, or retain
the Light while they have it? And should they attempt it, would they not
proclaim their Folly? Is it not he that provides Food for every living thing,
yea, for thousand thousand of living Creatures Man takes no care of? And shall
we leave all these things at his dispose? And why? because we cannot take them
out of his hand. And are we exempt, and must not our Lives be in his Hand, or
Power? Shall he that Governs the whole World by his Power and Wisdom, not be
best able, and fittest to dispose of us, and of our Lives, as well as others?
We have not a bit of Bread to eat, but he gives it, nor a Breath to breathe,
but he puts it into us; and are we like to maintain our Lives without him, or
keep them against his will? Is it not he that pulls down Kings, and sets up
Kings, and disposes of Kingdoms to whomsoever he will, even to the worst of
men, Dan. 4.17. And does not he best know when our Work is done, and when it is
the fittest time to take us hence, without advising with us, or asking our
Counsel? Or would we only be excluded? Or would we have all others have the
like Privilege? If the first, how came we from under the Law? It is appointed
unto all men once to dye, and after death the Judgment. If all Men must have
the Privilege of dying when they please, the World will be too numerous to
subsist, Hell will be empty, and Heaven will have few in it; for most Men will
live a miserable Life, before they will dye, though to go to Glory. And is not
it best to refer all this to Divine Wisdom, that only knows the best time? Were
our Lives in our Enemies hands, we should dye too soon; if in our own, we
should live too long; it is best as it is in God's hand, who best knows when our
Work is done, and when his Flowers are ripe, and when we are fit for Glory. Let
us then with such Considerations as these, quiet our selves under Divine
Dispensations, and with Paul, say, I am willing, not only to be bound, but to
dye at Jerusalem, for Christ. And let us breathe out, Come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly. Even so Amen.

2. Consider also the several Evils, that Death frees a Believer from, which
none else can; the thoughts of this may make a Christian more willing to dye,
yea, with the Apostle, to desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil.
1.23. There is in every Man and Woman by Nature a Principle which cannot be
obliterated, to desire to be Happy, and a cessation of Misery; and though every
Man living desire it, yet few attain it; for the greatest number, whether
through Ignorance, mistake the way to it, or through prevailing Corruption,
will not walk in the way that leads to it, but grope after it where it never
was, nor can be found, and seek it where it never grew, and ten thousand times
ten thousand have been thus deceived, and undone, in embracing a Cloud instead
of Juno, and adoring Riches, Honors, and Pleasures instead of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; and these have run themselves out of breath, but all in vain, and
at Death have found they had mistaken their way, when it was too late. Some few
indeed have sought after Happiness in a way of Holiness, and these have it in
sight, and these meet with a Viaticum, something to stay their Stomach in the
way, but their Feast, their Wedding-Supper, is prepared for their Journey's
end, even the Marriage of the Lamb. For whatever conceit may possess the Heart
of Man to the contrary, true and complete Happiness was never enjoyed by mere
Man, on this side Death; for here we are Pilgrims and Strangers, and this is
not our Rest; we are under Age, and our Inheritance elsewhere: This Life is
cumbred with a thousand Miseries, which cannot consist with complete Happiness,
which cannot be found on this side the Grave, and few find it beyond. Now, one
part of our Happiness is to be freed from Misery, for while we are under
Affliction our Happiness is not complete; but till Death we cannot be freed
from Suffering; this alone must ease us of our Burden: the thoughts of this
might make us have gentler thoughts of it, and look upon it through other
Spectacles: For that Messenger be unwelcome to a Prisoner, that comes to knock
off his Shackles, and restore his Liberty? Death is sent to tell us our Warfare
is accomplished, the Field is won, the Enemies are fled, the Victory is ours,
and the Crown is ready; it tells us our Work is done in the Vineyard, and we
must come to receive our Wages. It tells us all our Pains, Aches, Miseries, and
Sufferings are at an end, and God has sent for us in his Triumphant Chariot to
the Marriage of the Lamb, and to lie for ever in his Bosom, and inhabit those
Mansions of Glory provided for us; that for a Cottage we shall have a Crown,
and Robes instead of Rags, and that a period is put to all that we call
Trouble; and will such a Messenger displease us? This is the time that all
tears shall be wiped away, and sin and sorrow shall be no more, Rev. 7.17. and
21.4. God shall wipe all their tears from their eyes, and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain.
See also Isa. 53.10. Their Bacha shall be turned into Barachah, their Misery
into Melody, the Sighing into Singing, and the Misery into Majesty, and
Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life; whatever it is that makes our Life
uneasy, shall be done away; all that is called Trouble, shall then vanish, for
sin and sorrow shall be no more. Who would not bear one Fit of Sickness for
Everlasting Health, a little Pain for Eternal Ease, a little Trouble for
Eternal Freedom. In this Life we are always under the Hatches, sometimes
pestered with a sickly, weakly Body, subject to a thousand Infirmities,
languishing under Pains, and Aches, and Distempers, hardly a day free; but
Death is the Physician that will Cure us of all this. At other times we are
full of ^^^rs and doubts concerning our Spiritual Estate, questioning whether
we have any Interest in Christ, or Title to Glory; whether the Soul be
regenerate, whether the Match were ever made up between Christ and us, and
whether all we have done be not in Hypocrisy, and so lost labor; whether God
love us or not, seeing he oft-times hides his Face from us. Holy Men, even
David himself, have sometimes such desponding thoughts, upon God's
with-drawings; but Death will put all this out of question, they need not then
fear their Evidences when they are put into actual Possession, nor God's Love
when they enjoy the Beatifical Vision, where they shall never see one wrinkle
more in the Face of God. Here they are pestered with the Devil's Temptations,
and it is their trouble and grief that he foists in such foul Suggestions; he
lays Snares in their ways to entrap them, Snares in all their Enjoyments, in
all their Duties, in all their Actions, in all their Relations, in all they see
or hear, or come to know; but then he shall never throw Dart more at us: Here
his Instruments do molest us, some by cruel mocks and taunts, scoffs and
scorns; some by Wrongs, Persecutions, and Trials; there we shall be out of
their reach. We can hardly open any Sense, but we let in either sin or sorrow.
Our own Corruptions bring us no little trouble, this makes us such strangers to
God, spoils our Duties, and makes us scarce to have a glimpse of God in an
Ordinance. These and a thousand more troubles, Death frees us from, and yet
shall we run from him as an Enemy, and rather endure all this than feel his
Dart? We may stand amazed at our own Folly.

3. Let us Consider how unbeseeming and uncomely a thing it is for a Christian
to be unwilling to dye, when God and his Cause requires it, yea, not to carry
his Life in his hand, and resign it up to him that gave it, whenever he shall
require it of him; for he that laid down his life for us, shall we deny our
lives for him, if he require it? We have listed our selves Soldiers under him,
our General, and when danger is near, shall we run from our Colors? We have
made a Profession of our Faith, and Trust and Confidence in him, boasted of his
Love to us, of Power and Ability to save us, and of the Reward we expected for
o^r Faithful Service; and now shall we let the World know there is no such
matter, that we dare not trust him with our Lives, or Estates? We find this was
an Argument with those that returned out of Babylon, Ezra 8.22. I was ashamed
to require of the King a band of Soldiers and Horsemen to help us against the
Enemy in the way, because we had spok^n to the King, saying, The hand of our
God is upon all them for good that seek him, but his power, and his wrath is
against all them that forsake him. He durst not do it, lest the Name of God
should have been dishonored by it, and how dare we proclaim our fears and
diffidence in the like case, to God's dishonor? It Is a discredit to a Master
when his own Servants dare not trust him: Shall we that have had more
Experiences of God's Power, Mercy, Goodness, and Truth, now forsake him, or
distrust him? God has communicated himself more to his People than to others,
and done more for them than for others, and so laid a greater Obligation upon
them than on the rest of the World, and after all shall they prove treacherous?
It was a great aggravation to Solomon's sin, that it was after God had appeared
twice to him, 1 Kin. 11.9. God may say to his revolting People as Christ did to
the Jews, Many good works have I done among you, for which of these do you
stone me? John 10.32. It Is not so much for others to be afraid of the Journey,
that are strangers in the Country, but we that have had so many to direct us in
the way; we that pretend there our Father keeps his Court, that Jerusalem that
is above is the Mother of us all; that Christ is our Head, our Husband, and our
elder Brother, and shall be our Judge; that the Saints departed are our
Brethren and Sisters in Christ; that Heaven is our Inheritance, and those
Mansions of Glory provided for us; and shall we be afraid or unwilling of the
Journey? It Is no wonder that others hang back, that have their Portion in their
hands at present, for who will willingly lose what they have, and are assured
of no more? It Is no wonder that a Malefactor, that has deserved Death, and is
in expectation of it, is loath to go before the Judge; but it is wonder an
Innocent Man is not willing to be freed out of Prison. The Grave it self is but
a resting place, in Job's account, Job 3.13. Now should I have been still, and
have been quiet, I should have slept, then had I been at rest. Ver. 17. There
the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest; there the
Prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the Oppressor; the small
and the great are there, and the servant is free from his master, etc. Yea,
some of the Heathen, upon the consideration of the troubles of Man's Life,
thought Mortality a Mercy, and like Solomon, praised the day of Death before
the Birthday, Eccles. 4.2. Optimum non nasci proximum mori, says the Heathen,
but little knew what the result would be: But a Christian doubtless called out
by God, should not go unwillingly. Philpot the Martyr, returns thanks to God he
was so near the Gate of Eternal Life; and who is it, that being tossed with the
Waves of Trouble, would not land in a Haven of Rest? It Is a shame for a
Christian, when God gives a clear Call, to linger, with Lot, in Sodom, much
more to look back, with Lot's Wife, till the Lord pluck them away by force, and
deliver them whether they will or no. Those that are weary of Sin or Suffering,
should say, as Samuel, Speak, Lord, for thy servant hears. Mistake not, I say
not that Death is eligible, or any should desire it for its own sake; no, we
should use all Lawful means to preserve Life; but I reprove those, that when
the Will of God is manifest, that they should dye, submit so unwillingly. Has
the World been so kind to us, that now we cannot part? Or is our Portion here
so good, that Heaven it self cannot make us satisfaction? If we part with it,
doubtless we have then had better dealing than our dear Redeemer met with. Are
our Temptations so strong, that we are ready, with the Young Man Demas, Judas,
and many others, to break with Christ upon that account? It Is best to consider
well before hand, lest we Repent too late. Has God been training us up so
long, and have we not yet learnt this ^esson, to be willing to dye? Are we
content to take this for our Portion? And will we rather stay in the
Wilderness, than venture over this Jordan? Will the Fleshpots of Egypt give
satisfaction as well as the Land of Canaan? If God were not more willing of us,
than many of us are to go to him, we might be long absent; we should live long
on this side Jordan, if he did not force us over. But though Death be not
desirable, is not the Presence of God desirable? Is not Heaven worth having?
And is there any other way to it? We profess we believe there is a reward for
the righteous, and a God that judges the earth; but do we not in our works
deny it? The fear of Death discovers our Infidelity, and as our little Faith,
so our little Love; either we proclaim that we question whether there be a
Reward, or whether we have any Interest in it, or it shows we have little love
to it. If we believe it, and our Interest in it, is it not a wonder we are not
impatient of enjoying it, and rather seek to shorten our Lives than prolong
them by unlawful means? Did we love our Husband as we should, we should long
for the time when he would fetch us. He may well say, as Delilah did to Samson,
How can you say you love me, when your hearts are not with me?

4. Consider, If we cheerfully submit our Wills to the Will of God, and let him
dispose of us as he pleases for Life or Death; and make a resignation of our
selves to God, and be willing to part with Life it self, if he and his Cause
require it, whether by a Natural or violent Death, we shall then part with it
to the most Advantage imaginable; nay, it is the only way to save it, and to
deny it unto God, is the way to lose it, Mark 8.35. Whosoever will save his
life, shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the
Gospel, shall save it: For what is a man profited if he gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? We
may read of many, that refusing to lay down their Lives for Christ, have had
their Lives taken from them, but lost their Reward.

We read in the Book of Martyrs, of one Denton a Smith, that had made
profession of Religion, but being called to suffer, cried, The Fire is hot, I
cannot burn; but within a short time he was burnt in his own House, and lost
both his Life and his Reward: And so shall those that deny their Lives to God
when he requires them. We may resign our Lives into the hands of God, and so
engage him to look to them, and take care of them, but we cannot rescue them
out of his Hands, or live longer than he determines, for we cannot breathe
without him; and then what madness is it to stand in contention with him? If we
lose our Souls to save our Lives, we shall make a bad Bargain, for a Life saved
by unlawful means will do us little good, for a Life in God's displeasure is
worse than Death it self, and a Death in his favor is the beginning of Eternal
Life, and ushers us into Eternal Happiness. The Martyrs in the flames were
aware of this, they cried out, None but Christ, none but Christ! It Is a dear
Life that is bought with the loss of Christ; he that exchanges his Soul for the
World, will with the Rich man, Luke 16. dye a Beggar, but will not be able to
purchase one drop of Water; he that loses an immortal Soul purchases an
everliving Death; and is it not our Interest to look to the main Jewel? Where
Self is renounced, the Cross is easily born, for it is Self-love that makes it
pinch us. When God bids us Yoke, it is our best way to submit our Necks, for
there is no struggling out of his hands. God will not require our Lives to our
hurt or damage, neither will it prove any Advantage to us if we deny them, for
if we lose them for his sake, we shall find them; and if we would hide them
from him, we shall lose them, and Heaven to boot. He that lays down his Life
when God requires it, will gain by the bargain; when Death strips him of his
Rags, it is to cloth him with Robes, and pulls down his Cottage to bring him to
a Palace, 2 Pet. 1.14. 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know that if this earthly house of
this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens. This (says Latimer) is the Sweetmeats of
the Feast of a good Conscience; there are other dainty Dishes, but this is the
Banquet: The Soul wears the Body as a Garment, which when it is worn out, shall
be clothed with a better Suit. There is no passing into Paradise, but under
Death's flaming Sword; no coming to the City of God, but through his dark Vault
and strait Gate; no wiping all Tears from our Eyes, but with our Winding Sheet.
Our life is hid, says the Apostle, with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. and therefore
not lost. And again he tells us, 2 Timothy 1, 2. I know whom I have believed, and
I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him
against that day. Let him that died for my Soul (says Luther) look to the
Salvation of it. A Child that has a precious Jewel cannot put it safer, than
in his Father's hands; the like we may say of our Lives and Souls, if we will have
the keeping and disposing of them our selves, the Devil will rook us out of
them; but what is committed to God cannot be lost; our Lives, though laid down
for Christ, cannot be lost in him, it is but as the Seed sown, Life eternal will
spring up in the turn; when temporal Life expires, eternal Life begins. My
Father (says Christ) is greater than all, and none can pluck them out of my
Fathers hands, Joh. 10.29. There is nothing we can expend in God's Service, but
he can make satisfaction; we may lose all we have for him, but shall lose
nothing by him; if we deny to honor God, in letting God dispose of our Lives,
as to the time and manner of our Death, we shall lose them for nothing. To live
(says Paul) is Christ, and to die is gain; he was in a strait, whether to
choose life or death, yet he knew to die was best for him, Phil. 1.21, etc.
Janua vitae est porta coeli, (says Bernard) Christians should be so
indifferent whether they lived or died, as to submit their wills wholly to
God's will; to die for Christ is the way to a Crown of Martyrdom, and the way
to reign with Christ is, to suffer with him; a Self-resignation can do us no
hurt, but much good, for if we are never called to suffer, we shall not lose
our Reward, God takes the will for the deed; as in Abraham's case; And if we do
suffer for him, we shall reign with him, and have white robes, with palms in
our hands, and follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, Rev. 12.11. and 7.9. And
shall not we suffer something for this Honor? or shall we after all this
Profession of Religion, declare to the World, that all was but Hypocrisy, and
that we have more love to Sin and the World than we have to God? Is not this
the way to dishonor God, discredit Religion, harden Wicked men in Sin, and
endanger our own Souls?

5 Cons. In the last place, to make us more willing to dye, or to submit to
God's Will, whether for Life or Death, are the Joys, and Delights, and
Pleasures which believing Souls shall have in the Presence of God, for ever and
for ever, and that immediately after Death, for as then all tears shall be
wiped away, and sin and sorrow shall be no more; so our Joys and Pleasures
shall then commence. 1 John 3.2. Now we are the sons of God, but it does not
yet appear what we shall be, but we know when he shall appear, we shall be like
him, for we shall see him as he is. Great things we have in Hand, but greater
in Hope; much in Possession, more in Reversion; our Happiness then will be in
seeing and enjoying him, which we cannot do on this side Death, but what our
Enjoyments shall be there, no mortal man can come to know, not the Apostle, who
was caught up into the third Heaven, and heard unspeakable words, that it was
not lawful for a man to utter, 2 Cor. 12.4. Yet he tells us, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye
has not seen, ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of
man to conceive the things that God has prepared for those that love him. Yet
he reserves not all for the Life to come; some clusters of Canaans Grapes are
bestowed in the Wilderness, some Pisgah-sights of Glory on this side Jordan:
But it is no wonder we cannot describe the Joys of Heaven, when we are such
strangers to many Secrets in Nature. In the World Believers have such joy as no
stranger shall meddle with, Prove. 14.10. The Cock on the Dunghill knows not the
Worth of these Jewels, they are unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.
they are a Har^^el of Heaven, and a Fore-taste of Eternal Life, yea, such as
passes all Understanding, fitter to be believed than to be expressed, to which
all the Comforts which the World affords signify nothing; for what shall we
compare with the Peace of a good Conscience, and Joy in the Holy Ghost? And yet
this is but a small taste, a branch of Canaans Grapes, and nothing compared with
what is behind, to be eternally enjoyed: But if the Saints Enjoyments so darkly
resemble Heavens Glory, what will the Epicure's Delights do, which they chose
for their Portion? Not so much resemble it as a Muckhil does the Sun in his
Splendour. The Drunkard delights in his Cups, the Adulterer in his Queans, and
this they look upon to be the chiefest Happiness; the covetous man makes Gold
his God; the ambitious man makes choice of that empty Bubble Honor, and the
voluptuous man contents himself with Pleasure; these are the Siren Songs the
Devil lulls them asleep with, while he ruins their Souls; these are the
Circe's Charms, which transforms them into Swine, and makes them take up with
Husks and Swill, and to neglect that Nectar and Ambrosia which the Saints feed
upon. Have I need to show, that Happinese consists not in these things? Is any
so blind, upon consideration, as to affirm it? Where is their Happiness then,
when their Cups and Queans are snatched, and all other their Enjoyment leave
them? It Is true, Meat is delightful to the Hungry, and Drink to the Thirsty,
Health to the Sick, and Strength to the Weak, but what is this to an hungring,
thirsting, panting, weary Soul? Christ is better to it than all the World.
Stately Buildings, curious Gardens, pleasant Walks, and the rest of the
Delights of the Sons of Men, mentioned by Solomon, Eccl. 2.8, etc. how little
satisfaction can they yield! they will prove but empty Husks, if we feed upon
them, what are those to those Mansions of Glory provided for the Saints, and
the Rivers of Pleasures which are at the right hand of God for evermore. Yea, I
dare say, many a poor Believer has more solid Joy, more Hearts Content, more
true Satisfaction, in his poor Cell, than many of those in the midst of all
their Enjoyments: What then will their Enjoyments be in Heaven, when they shall
receive their Portion? Human Learning also is desirable, and more beautiful
(says Aeneas Sylvius) than the Morning or the Evening-Star. What hard Labor
and Pains have many a man taken to find out Nature's Secret, and at best have
but groaped in the dark! And many all (...) Mystery there is in the Book of
God, which no man living understands, the Scripture being like the Waters of
the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47.2, etc. where a Lamb might wade, and an Elephant might
swim; but there our Ignorance shall vanish, and all those difficulties
disappear, and we shall know as much of God himself as finite Capacities can
comprehend: Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; now we
know but in part, but then shall know as we are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. and 2 Cor.
3.18. Here we can see but by reflection, for how can our Eyes behold God, that
cannot view the Sun in its splendour? Moses himself could but view his
Backside, and Paul was blinded with the Sight, but the Beatifical Vision will
not disturb us. Now we behold the Works of God with admiration, the Sun, Moon
and Stars, and all the Host of Heaven, the Earth also hanged upon nothing,
beautified with all Varieties, the Sea bounden and barred by him, and generally
the whole Creation, these are beautiful Objects, and many inscrurable Mysteries
we understand not, but there we shall see and know far greater Mysteries in the
Fabric of Heaven it self: His Works of Providence many times puts us to a
puzzle, how he governs all the World, and preserves Peace among so many
disagreeing Creatures, especially how he preserves his own Church amidst their
numerous Enemies, and makes Provision for all the works of his Hands; but when
we are better acquainted with his Wisdom and Power, these Wonders will cease:
The Work of Redemption, and the manner of contriving it, that he let fall the
Angels irrecoverably, without hope of Redemption, the reason of his Electing
Love, and why he made a difference, the Price that was paid the Blood of his
only Son, may cause admiration, but when we know the whole Contrivance, we
shall admire his Wisdom. Oh, who would not long to be in that estate of
Blessedness, where these and all things else shall be made known to us; which
cannot be till Death?

Thus, Madam, I have made bold, happily too bold, to communicate to you my own
Experiences, and with what Arguments I have quieted my self under such sad
Dispensations of Providence, as at present you lie under; and to show you what
improvement I have made, or at leastwise desire to make of them; and I hope I
may truly say, it was good for me that I was afflicted; and I wish you may
experimentally say the same. I think I have learned more in the School of Affl
ction, of the sinfulness of Sin, of the Vanity of the Creature, of Worth of
Grace, the Miseries of the Wicked, and the Happiness of the Godly, than ever I
did in any other School whatsoever: And I wish you, and all your Relations,
that are concerned in this Providence, may gain as much as I, yea, terque
quaterque, manifold more. I do not write these things to you as if you were
ignorant of them; no, I am too well acquainted with you, to be guilty of this
Error; but the best of us, especially when under a Cloud, and overpowered with
Grief, have need of a Remembrancer, to put (...) in mind of what before we
knew. My humble Desire is, and my Prayer shall be, that you and your Relations,
by this Providence, and these O^servations upon it, may be brought nearer to
GOD, weaned more from the World, and your selves fitter to live, and fitter to
dye, that when you come to dye, you may have nothing to do but to dye, and
resign up your Souls into the Hands of God. These are the unfeigned Desires of,

Madam, your humble Servant, Edward Bury.
Eaton, Apr. 16. 16^5.

