THE CASE OF Exeter-Colledge, IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD. Related and
Vindicated.

LONDON; Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall,
1691.

TO THE READER.
THe late Proceedings of the Bishop of Exeter, as Visitor of Exeter-Colledge in
Oxford, were so directly contrary both to the Statutes of the College, and the
Laws of this Realm, that the Rector and Fellows, who opposed his Lordship
therein, little thought there would have been any cause to publish a
Vindication of their conduct in that Affair, especially when they found that
his Lordship had no other grounds for his Porceedings, then what have been
published in a late Pamphlet, Entitled An Account of the Proceedings of the
Right Reverend Father in God Jonathan etc. It was hoped the weakness of that
Pamphlet would be obvious to all judicious and intelligent Readers; and that
the badness of his cause was sufficiently detected by the weakness of his
defense.

But since it appears that some persons, who know no better, or are willing to
be deceived, are imposed upon either by the Bishop's Character, or the credit
of two Civilians, and perhaps some bold dashes in the late Pamphlet (as
Greatness and Reputation are apt to give a color to things, that in themselves
have none) They began to conceive it might not be improper to let the
unthinking part of their adversaries understand, that they had much more to
allege in their own Vindication, then had been said to run them down. Yet was
this design retarded, because one part of their Cause, to wit the Visitor's
Power as Ordinary, was in contest betwixt him and the Rector in the Court of
King's Bench. But that having been since decided in favor of the Rector, its
hoped the judgment of the Court upon that part of the Cause may facilitate the
belief that the rest of his Lordships Proceedings have been all of a piece with
that.

The design of the ensuing discourse, is to satisfy all that are concerned, or
will concern themselves in this Controversy, that there was just cause for Mr.
Colmer's first and second Expulsion; that his Appeal to the Visitor, was not
only not warranted by, but directly against the very letter of the Statutes of
the College, that Dr. Master's his executing a Commission from the Bishop, was
a Visitation, within the intention of the Statutes, and that the Visitor has no
Episcopal jurisdiction over the College or any of its Members. Which
particulars, if they be cleared, we are not concerned to give a superfluous
answer to little and insignificant suggestions that trench nothing at all on
the merits of the Cause. The Author of the Account has that province left
entirely to himself, of urging immaterial passages, and misrepresenting them
too; Our design is peace, which to obtain, all expressions of rancour and harsh
reflections are abstained from, nor is any thing here set down, but what tends
to the justification of the College in point of Right: Even the displaying of
Mr. Colmer's personal guilt had been forborne, had it not given the first rise
to the present disorders, and if his own obstinacy had not put his Judges upon
a necessity of vindicating the Justice of their Sentence.

But the main stress of this whole Affair centring in the Visitor's
Jurisdiction, the Rector and Fellows are heartily sorry, that his Lordship did
not meet with a more creditable occasion of asserting his pretended
Jurisdiction, then that, which does in the nature of the thing (tho not in his
Lordships intentions) tend to the encouragement of Vice and Debauchery, and
that in a Society instituted to be a Seminary of Learning and Virtue.

And they cannot but take notice, because they hope it will make an impression
in favor of them upon unprejudiced minds, in what manner the illegality of his
Lordships proceedings is backed by those who abett him; to wit, with force and
violence, riots and disturbances even at the performance of God's public
Worship, the particulars whereof are not thought fit to be here inserted. A
good Cause is always best maintained by proper and legal methods; whereas
passion and force are generally signs of a bad cause as well as of ill men.

The CASE of Exeter-Colledge, in the University of Oxford, Related and
Vindicated.
WIthin the compass of three quarters of a year two Bastard Children were born
of young Women then in the Service of Bed-makers belonging to Exeter-Colledge.
One Anne Aris appeared to be with Child about Mich. 1688. and toward the
latter end of the next Summer, one Anne Sparrow was in the same condition.

The Rector, and Senior Fellows thought (as well they might) that it highly
behoved them for the Reputation of the College to endeavor the wiping off
such a double scandal. Which could no otherwise be done then by a discovery who
were the true Fathers of the said Bastard-children; and if upon Examination,
and Proof, it should appear that any Member of the College had been faulty
therein, then to proceed against such Member, as the Statutes of the College
direct.

Upon enquiring into the matter there appeared violent presumptions of Mr.
Colmer's Guilt.

As First, Anne Sparrow confesttoh er Dame Thomasin Smith (who was Mr. Colmer's
Bed-maker) that Mr. Colmer was the Father of her Child.

Secondly, Thomasin Smith confessed, that after the said Anne Sparrow was
disabled from working, Mr. Colmer was at the charge of maintaining her.

These two particulars, the said Thomasin Smith disclosed upon her Examination
before the Rector.

Thirdly, Ferdinand Smith, Thomasin's husband, being Examined by the Rector,
said that the Father of one of the Children was Father of both, but refused to
confess who that was, or from whom he had money for keeping Anne Sparrow,
because a Gentleman (he said) would be expelled, and he should lose his Friends.

Fourthly, The other young woman Anne Aris had laid her Child to the said
Ferdinand Smith, who Fled into the West, and was furnished with money by Mr.
Colmer for his Journey; by whom about three months after he was taken into his
Service and brought back to the College.

Fifthly, Ferdinand Smith gave bond to the Overseers of the Poor to save the
Parish harmless, penalty 40. l. One of the Overseers, being Cook to the
College, and charged by the Rector for unfaithfulness in his Office in taking
bond of a man that was not solvent, replied that he should not have taken it,
if he had not been bid to do it by a Gentleman, who promised the Parish should
come to no damage: This Gentleman upon farther Examination appeared to be Mr.
Colmer, who afterward did not deny it.

Sixthly, Presently after Anne Sparrow's delivery, viz. about a weeks end, it
being noised about that Mr. Colmer was the Father, she was removed and hid by
Mr. Colmer, or by some of his friends; which upon his own Examination before
the Rector he could not deny.

Seventhly, The then Vice Chancellor, now Lord Bishop of Bristol, being applied
to by the Rector to Examine Ferdinand Smith as a Justice upon the whole matter,
in order to the finding out the truth; Ferdinand Smith confessed to him that
the Girl had named Mr. Colmer for the Father.

Eighthly, The Midwife being sent for, gave this Account, that when she pressed
Anne Sparrow at the time of her travail to name the true Father, Thomasin Smith
her Dame desired that she would not urge her, saying she had told her already;
and Thomasin, when afterward examined by the Rector, confessed that she had
hindered the Midwife's urging a confession at that time, because she was loath
to have Mr. Colmer disgraced before the company then present.

These grounds to suspect Mr. Colmer's Guilt, the Rector thought sufficient for
bringing the Matter to a hearing before the Senior Fellows; And accordingly
fixed a day, giving Mr. Colmer notice about a fort-night before, that he might
have time to prepare his defense.

The day being come, which was the 10 th. of October 1689. The Rector and
Senior Fellows met together, Mr. Colmer being present. And the substance of the
Evidence of Mr. Colmer's having been guilty of Incontinence, and in particular
of his being the Father of Anne Sparrow's Bastard child, as disclosed upon a
long hearing of several hours, appeared to be as follows; viz.

First, Anne Sparrow had acknowledged that Mr. Colmer was the Father of her
Child. That she had so acknowledged, Note, Ann. Sparrow could not be then
produced in person, because removed out of the way to prevent her disclosing
the truth; and that by Mr Colmer's friends,
was confessed by Thomasin Smith her Dame then present, and her Husband Ferdinand
had owned the same before the Vice Choncellor; as was then attested by the
Rectors Oath.

Secondly, The Overseer of the Poor then attested, (and has since deposed upon
Oath) that Mr. Colmer bid him take the security of Ferdinand Smith,
Scrape-trencher of the College for the Child that Anne Sparrow, single woman,
then went with, and told him the Parish should not be damnified.

Thirdly, That Thomasin Smith had acknowledged, that the money for Anne
Sparrow's maintenance, whilst she was at Ferdinand Smith's house, and big with
Child, was paid by Mr. Colmer.

Fourthly, That by Ferdinand's saying (as before, and as himself acknowledged
upon the hearing that he had said, viz.) that a Gentleman would be expelled, it
appeared he had some knowledge who was the Father; nor would name any other
then Mr. Colmer, who might be liable to Expulsion for the same, and yet refused
then to name him, though he was told, that unless he charged some body, what he
had said already, joined with what othor proofs had been made, would fasten it
upon Mr. Colmer; whom he had all along favored in the whole affair. ( Note,
that this Smith finding himself afterward laughed at for some weak
tergiversations and contradictions in what he said at the hearing, has confessed
that by the Gentleman liable to be expelled, he meant Mr. Colmer.)

Fifthly, That Anne Sparrow some time before she was known to be with Child,
was heard to say, that she had reason to curse Mr. Colmer, for he had undone
her. Of this one of the Fellows gave information; to whom it had been told by
Joyce Aris, who heard the words, and she being called in and Examined, did her
self confirm it.

Sixthly, That of the Midwife mentioned before.

Seventhly, That though Mr. Colmer had sufficient time given him to make his
defense, and might have cleared himself in a great measure from being guilty in
the main charge against him, if Ann Sparrow had been brought in, and would have
acquitted him; yet he forbore (as must be presumed out of a conscience of
guilt) to bring her forth, as he might easily have done; she having been lately
removed out of the way by some of his friends, as himself could not deny. (And,
as it has appeared since by her own deposition, she was then but at one John
Wakeland's house in Oxford, whether she had been persuaded to remove by Mr.
Cleveland and Mr. Maundrel both Fellows of Exeter-Colledge, and intimate
friends of Mr. Colmer; who likewise paid for her keeping, whilst she was
there.)

These Evidences appeared to the Rector and Fellows so full and pregnant, that
they conceived no rational man could entertain a just doubt of Mr. Colmer's
crime; and the Caution that was used by the Rector in making what enquiry he
could into the fact, though a public scandal to the whole College, before he
would bring Mr. Colmer's Reputation in question by a public charge of this
nature, is a great argument, how candid the proceedings of the College have
been in this affair. Yet were not the Rector and Fellows willing upon the
hearing to proceed to a sentence of Expulsion, tho upon such violent proofs, as
nothing but a positive Testimony upon Oath of the very committing the Act
(which in a crime of this nature is very difficult to be had) could be more
convincing; without enquiry into Mr. Colmer's former behavior and course of
Life. Which, if it were innocent and free from imputations of such like
immoralities, ought to raise a tenderness in receiving such an accusation, and
might perhaps entitle him to insist upon stricter proof, then a man who is
known to be of a loose life can reasonably be thought to have a Just claim to.

It was made appear to them by the Attestation of a Scholar, that Anne Aris had
confessed to him some rude importunities used to her by Mr. Colmer: Vid. infr.
Deposit. Let. B. And the Rector's Wife declared that one Mary Lawrence
sometime servant to the said Ferdinand Smith, had declared to her that Mr.
Colmer had made some uncivil attempts upon her, when she was making his Bed,
insomuch that she was afraid to go into his Room alone, Vid. Dep. Let. C.
Other lascivious offers made by Mr. Colmer to one Alice Gigge were attested at
the hearing, by a person who had it from her self. And she has since made Oath
of it, Vid. infr. Dep. Let. D.

Mr. Colmer's Defense consisted of nothing but confident denials of all that
was charged and proved, and the Evidence of the two Fellows above mentioned,
who took their voluntary Oaths, that Anne Sparrow had in their hearing cleared
Mr. Colmer of having been concerned with her. But as this Testimony of theirs
was not then thought considerable enough to counterpoize so many Evidences of
her having confessed it to others, backed with so many other circumstances of Mr.
Colmer's guilt, as have been mentioned and were fully attested; especially
those two Fellows being known to be Mr. Colmer's Intimate Friends, and upon
that score suspected to have gained some words of that kind from her in Mr.
Colmer's behalf, so it has been made appear since by Anne Sparrow's own
Affidavits made before Justices of Peace, that Mr. Cleaveland and Mr.
Maundrell, who were the two Fellows that gave this Testimony, had advised her
to lay her Child to a Gentleman of Christ-Church, for that if she laid it to
Mr. Colmer he would be expelled, and that it was pursuant to their persuasions
that she owned before Alderman Fyfield, that another man was tho Father. But
withal she swore that none had ever persuaded her to lay it to Mr. Colmer, who
was the true Father, for that no other man but Mr. Colmer had ever had carnal
knowledge of her, Vid. infr. Depos. let. E. and L.

Upon a full hearing of all the Allegations and Proofs on both sides, the
Rector and Fellows were convinced in their Consciences of Mr. Colmer's guilt,
and proceeded to a sentence, whereby according to the Statute De causis propter
quas Scholar. etc. they pronounced him ipso facto expelled.

Mr. Colmer rested to appearance satisfied with the Justice of his sentence for
some time; and desired of the Rector a license under his hand in order to his
Admission into some other College; and confessed that he had no reason to
complain of his Judges, for that himself upon the like Evidence would have
found any other person guilty; but he pretended to find fault with the
Witnesses, and laid the whole blame upon them. But he continued not long in
this submissive mind: A design was laid to contest the matter again, and clear
Mr. Colmer's Innocence.

It has been said that Anne Sparrow was removed shortly after her lying in to
John Wakeland's House in Oxford, from thence after some Weeks stay, she was
brought back to Ferdinand Smith's (where she was before) and there a Justice of
Peace, Alderman Fyfield, came to her, being conducted by the aforesaid Mr.
Mandrell who had Christened the Child; and examined her concerning the
Bastard-child, that she had had. To him she declared that she had been got with
Child by a Gentleman of Christ-Church; and cleared Mr. Colmer. The Rector
hearing that Anne Sparrow had retracted what she had formerly acknowledged to
so many, went to Alderman Fyfield to enquire into the matter: But could receive
from him no other Account than this: viz. That he had Examined her, but had
taken no deposition; and at what house it was he knew not; that she had cleared
Mr. Colmer, and said she had lain with one of Christ-Church, but knew neither
his name nor his Chamber.

Now this retractation of here is before Alderman Fyfield, as it is the less to
be credited, because contrary to what she had frequently declared before, and
because she was not upon her Oath for any thing that appears by the Alderman's
Certificate, so it is to be considered that at the time when Alderman Fyfield
examined her, she was kept private in Oxford by the procurement of Mr. Colmer's
Friends, who had paid for maintenance since her great Belly disabled her from
working, and consequently may well be supposed to have a great influence and
design upon her: And further it must be observed that Alderman Fyfield, tho he
was a Justice of Peace, did not in taking this Examination act as such; he did
not send for the Wench before him, but very officiously waited upon her; and at
such a house as he knew not how to find again, he took no Deposition upon Oath,
made but a very superficial enquiry after the true Father, took no care to
secure the Parish, but being Mr. Colmer's friends, and their Pupils Mercer, was
acted apparently by him and his friends to gain an acquittal of Mr. Colmer from
Anne Sparrow's mouth, which should have the credit of being attested before a
Magistrate; and yet should be ordered in such a manner, as not to be capable of
being contradicted.

The next step taken by Mr. Colmer and his Managers was to convey Anne Sparrow
quite away, to prevent her being examined in another manner, than the Alderman
had done; whereby the truth with respect to Mr. Colmer might come out, and the
indirect carriage of Alderman Fyfield in this matter be made public. She was
therefore conveyed by John Wakeland, in whose House she had lodged, to one
Green's House at Dorchester seven miles from Oxford; there she made some stay,
and discovered the whole matter to Green and his Wife, as appears by their
Deposit. Let. M and Let. N. From Dorchester the same Wakeland, who had agreed
and paid for her Lodging, etc. at Dorchester, conveyed her to Farrington, and
from thence to London.

The day after she came to London, looking out at a Window she spied passing by
one of the Fellows of Exeter-Colledge, and calling to him, gave him an account
of all that had passed. Which he imparted to the Rector by Letter: And shortly
after by the Rector's order went to a Justice of Peace in order to have her
Examined, but she was removed, and the Woman of the House refused to tell the
Justice whither; but being threatened to be sent to Bridewell, confessed that Anne
Sparrow was about Islington, whither she went with the Constable, and brought
her before the Justice of Peace, before whom she deposed, That Mr. Colmer was
the only man that ever had lain with her, and that he was Father of her Child,
that after her delivery she was advised by Mr. Cleaveland and Mr. Mandrel to
say that a Gentleman of Christ-church was the Father, which by their persuasion
she did to Alderman Fyfield, who was brought to her by Mr. Maundrel: that the
reason which they urged to her to lay her Child to another, was because else
Mr. Colmer would be expelled: And that no person ever persuaded her to lay her
Child to Mr. Colmer.

She deposed likewise at the same time (as the Justice has since certified to
the Rector by Letter) that she had never taken an Oath before a Magistrate
before.

So that after all, the sentence against Mr. Colmer was both just in it self,
being pronounced upon a full hearing and sufficient proof; it was acknowledged
by himself to be just with respect to his Judges; but he found fault with the
Witnesses. And now the Testimony of the Witnesses is made appear to have been
true by subsequent proofs; and the whole management of the Affair in keeping
Anne Sparrow private at first, and afterward conveying her away by Mr.
Colmer's Friends; and in persuading her to favor Mr. Colmer, and lay the Child
to another, is made so clear and undeniable by what has been said, and the
following proofs; that thus far at least the Rector and Fellows have acted
nothing irregular, but have discharged their duty.

The Depositions referred to in the precedent Discourse, or confirming the
Particulars thereof, are as follows, viz.

The Examination of Richard Hedges taken upon Oath be-Sir William Walker, one
of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace etc. June 30 th. 1690.
THis Deponent having taken his Oath before Sir William Walker Oxon, says as
follows, that Mr. James Colmer late Fellow of Exon-Colledge, did bid the said
Deponent, Richard Hedges, being Overseer of the poor of St. Mary Magdalen
Parish, take the security of Fardinand Smith, Scrape-Trencher of the said
College, for the Child which Anne Sparrow single Woman then went with, and the
Parish should not be Damnified.

Concordat cum Originali facta debita collatione per me. Ben. Cooper Notarum
publicum.

ANne Aris said in the presence of us John Freek, and John Clase that Mr.
Colmer desired the said Anne Aris to let him catch her by the Belly, whilst she
was rubbing his Room, but she refused it: in Witness whereof we have set our
hands

John Freek. John Clase.
July 2d. 1690:
The Information of Mary the wife of Thomas Lawrence taken upon Oath by Sir.
William Walker Knight, one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
City of Oxford, this second day of July 1690.
Ferdinand Smith, whose wife was Bed maker at Exeter-Colledge, she the said
Deponent coming into the Chamber of Mr. Colmer to make his Bed, he the said Mr.
Colmer took her violently by both her hands, and threw her upon his Bed, and
endeavored to lie with her biding her lie still, which she refused, and did
not yield to him, but went out of the Room, and left one of the Beds unmade,
and then she went to the Trencher Room, and told her Dames Mother what Mr.
Colmer had endeavored to do (as is aforesaid) and declared she would never go
again to Mr. Colmer's Room unless some body went with her.

The Mark of Mary) Lawrence. Concordat cum originali facta debita collatione
per me Ben. Cooper, Notarum Publicum.

The Contents of this Deposition are what the Rector's Wife declared when Mr.
Colmer's Cause was heard. She having received it from the Woman her self, who
gives this confirmation; though the Author of the Account, tells the world it
was then disowned by the party who spoke it, and sets it off thus pleasantly,
It was said that the Rector 's Wife said that a certain Maid said to her that
she had formerly said to another Woman, that Mr. Colmer had been uncivil to
her. This may be thought wit by some, but by none fair dealing.

The Oath of Alice Gigger, etc.
ALice Gigger at present of London, Spinster, makes Oath that she Halls a
Coffee-house in the City of Oxon was several times tempted by Mr. James Colmer
Fellow of Exeter-Colledge in Oxford, to have been naught with him, and at
sundry times offering her this Deponent money to become his Whore, and
particularly at one time about two years and an half since he took out a
handful of Money out of his Pocket, and showed it her, telling her this
Deponent that if she would comply with him, she should have what she would of
it, or to that effect. And another time he would have had this Deponent gone
out Town with him, who asked him where? He told her to the Rose and Crown in
Hincksey, about two Miles out of Town: She asked how? He told her on Horseback
behind him; and withal said she had a good Excuse to ask leave of her Master
and Mistress, being a Holliday, Saint Luke's day; and he then told her that
they would take Horse at Mr. Crowders in Holywell Parish, where his Horse then
stood, which this Deponent totally declined; He intimating his intention of
making her a Whore. Another time he would have had this Deponent have left her
Service and gone into the Country, and he would have maintained her as a
Gentlewoman, if she would yield to him; which this Deponent refusing, he said
again to her, A Plague damn your fools-head. And at another time he said before
a Stranger in this Deponents presence, That he would several times have had to
do with this Deponent, but she would not consent. And this Deponent further
says, That about a Month since, this Deponent received a Letter from her
Brother, who writ to this Deponent (at the Instigation of Mr. Colmer's Lawyer
of New College (as her Brother writes to her) that if any of Exeter College
came to her, she should not discover any thing, for if she did, she should take
care of her self, for Colmer would do her a mischief, besides the College
would have her down upon her own charge into the Country, and put her to great
trouble, or to that effect.

Jurat, 27. die Junii Annoque; Dom. 1690. coram me Rog, Meredith.

Middl. and West. sc.
The Examination of Anne Sparrow taken upon Oath before John Ward, Esquire, one
of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said Country and Liberty.
James Colmer, Fellow of Exeter College in the University of Oxford, was the
only man in the world that ever had carnal knowledge of her Body, and that the
said James Colmer, and no body else, is the only and true Father of the Bastard
child, that she was delivered of about Michaelmas last past, at the House of
Ferdinando Smith, in the Parish of St. Mary Magdalen in the City of Oxford.
This Deponent further faith, That some time after she was delivered, Mr.
Maundrel and Mr. Cleaveland did advise her to say that a Gentleman of
Christ-Church was the Father of her Child, which by their persuasion she did to
Alderman Fyfield, who was brought to her by Mr. Maundrel only to take her
Examination. That the Reason they urged to persuade this Deponent to lay her
Child to one of Christ-Church, was she should not do Mr. Colmer an injury, who
would be expelled if she laid the Child to him. And she further deposes that
no person living ever persuaded her to lay her Child, to Mr. Colmer. And
further says not.

The Mark of An. Sparrow.
Jurat. Coram me, Jan. 21. 1689. John Ward.
The Constable's and Beadle's Certificates.
Pearse (who Lodged Anne Sparrow in London, and had carried her about three
Miles off) could be persuaded to own where she was, but at last went along with
me, and brought Anne Sparrow to London, before Justice Ward, which said Anne
Sparrow drank not any thing (that I know of) in the House from whence she came,
and walked to London a foot, none of us drinking any thing by the way; neither
did Mr. Kingston of Exeter College in Oxon see the said Anne Sparrow all that
day, till he saw her in the Room before Justice Ward, all which I am ready to
testify upon Oath; as also that the said Anne Sparrow had a fair and just
Examination before John Ward, Esquire at which I was present all that time with the
Beadle, and others.

Witness my Hand and Seal this 22d. of March 1689/90. And that the said Anne
Sparrow freely and of her own accord said most of those things to me, which she
after confessed upon Oath.

Edward Warburton, Constable.


I Am also ready to testify upon Oath, That the said Anne Sparrow was Ward,
before whom she had a just and fair Examination, there being several persons
present, and I my self being present all the time, and that Mr. Kingston had
not seen the said Anne Sparrow until such time, as I did fetch Mr. Kingston to
the Justice, where Anne Sparrow was; as also that Mr. Warburton being sick in
bed, did desire that the above written should be drawn for him, and does own
his Hand and Seal.

Witness my Hand and Seal this Twenty second of this Instant March, 1689.

William Gunter, Beadle.


The Examination of Anne Sparrow taken upon Oath before Sir William Walker,
Knight, one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of Oxon, May
5th. 1690.
THis Informant says, That Mr. Colmer Fellow of Exeter College Oxford, has
had carnal knowledge of her Body once in his Study, and several other times
afterward; and that Alice Wats, Servant to Ferdinando Smith, told her that Mr.
Colmer had lain with her also several times: She also says, That Mr.
Cleaveland and Mr. Maundrel Fellows of Exeter College, on the next day after
the birth of her Child, desired her to lay her Child to a Gentleman of
Christ-Church College; and that they persuaded her to remove to a place
provided for her, where she should want nothing: Whereupon she went with John
Wakeland and his Wife to their House, where she tarried about three Weeks, in
which time Mr. Cleaveland and Mr. Maundrel came thither, and paid the aforesaid
John Wakeland for her Keeping; and that John Wakeland carried her from her
Master's House on a Horse to Dorchester, to the House of Francis Green, where
she tarried about two Months, and from thence to Farrington, where she tarried
about a Month, and from thence she went in a Wagon to London, where she was
placed by John Wakeland, and she also says, That no other person had carnal
knowledge of her Body besides the aforesaid Mr. Colmer: And before her delivery
she told her Dame, That Mr. Colmer was the Father of her Child.

This is a true Copy of the Examination of Anne Sparrow, taken before Sir
William Walker, Knight.

William Walker.

Note. Mr. Cleaveland was present when this Examination was taken.

The Examination of Vrsula Green, taken upon Oath, before Sir William Walker
Knight, one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the City of Oxferd.
May the 6 th. 1690.
Anne Sparrow was brought to her house at the Black boy in Dorchester, by John
Wakeland Bargeman of this City, which Wakeland came to her House the day before
he brought the said Anne Sparrow, and told this Informant, and her Husband
Francis Green, that he would have them take the said Anne, for that a Gentleman
had got her with Child, and was willing to have her out of the way, that he
might not be disgraced, and that they might put the said Anne in an outward
room so as she might not appear much, least she should be found out; That they
should take care of her, and should be well and truly paid, and then made a
bargain with them for one month, and paid the money (which was sixteen
shillings) as soon as he brought the said Anne Sparrow, who came with him on
Horse back before Eight of the Clock in the morning: This Informant says, that
asking the said Anne who was the Father of her Child, she said a Gentleman, and
being asked who, she said she must not tell, for fear she should be undone, but
being farther pressed earnestly, she said one Mr. Colmer Fellow of
Exeter-Colledge was the real Father, and the only man in the world, that ever
had any thing to do with her, and that Ferdinand Smith and others, had
persuaded, and encouraged her always to say, that a Gentleman of Christ-Church
was the Father of it, and that John Wakeland took the said Anne Sparrow from
her House on foot, and carried her away, whither he would not tell, And this
Informant further says, that the said Anne Sparrow came to her house (and
stayed some time) after the said Sparrow had been at London, and then told her,
that Wakeland carried her to Farrington, and came back with her after she had
stayed sometime there (she riding in a Wagon) and that they lay one night at
Dorchester at the Crown, and that Anne desired then to call on the said Green,
but Wakeland told her, No, They must not know whither she went, for fear they
should make Proclamations, and that the said Anne told her, that John Wakeland
said he had thirty shillings to carry the said Anne to London, and this
Informant says, that John Wakeland came to her house since the said Anne came
from London, and saw the said Anne there, and desired this Informant, to go out
of the Room, for he had something to say to Anne Sparrow in private, which this
Informant accordingly did, who further says, that when Wakeland paid her the
last money for the keeping the said Anne Sparrow, she asked him who 'twas that
paid him the money, and where he had it, he answered of a Gentleman who always
brought it to him, but he whold not say he knew him; and this Informant does
declare, that the said Anne told her, she seeing Mr. Kingston Fellow of Exeter
College pass by a place in London, as she was looking out at a Window, held
out her hand and called to the said Mr. Kingston, and this Informant says
further, that the said Mr. Kingston saw Anne Sparrow 'twice at her House on May
the 3d. and 5th. but was never alone, or in private with the said Anne Sparrow,
but did several times exhort her to speak nothing but the truth, and to do the
least wrong to no one, whatsoever might be asked her.

This is a true Copy of the Examination of Ursula Green, taken before Sir
William Walker Knight.

William Walker.

The Examination of Francis Green, taken upon Oath before Sir William Walker
Knight, one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of Oxon, May
the 10 th. 1690.
THis Informant says that one John Wakeland of Oxon Bargeman Black boy at
Dorchester, and desired him to keep a Wench, who had a By-blow by a Gentleman
who was able to maintain her, and had money enough, and that if four shillings
a Week would not do, he should have five, and bargained at last for sixteen
shillings the Month, which he paid before hand, as soon as she was brought to
his House, and that John Wakeland did desire to have her kept private, that she
might not be seen, that the said John Wakeland after Anne Sparrow (which was
the said Woman) came from London, and it was known at Oxon, that she was at the
said Greens House, came over to him and earnestly desired the said Green, not
to bring the said Sparrow over to Oxford, for that he should be ruined and
undone if he did, and that if he gave the Wench any diet, he would pay for it:
This Informant further says, that the abovenamed Anne Sparrow, while at his
House the first time, said frequently, that one Mr. Colmer was the Father of
her Child, and the only man that had to do with her, and that the said Sparrow
also said, that Mr. Maundrel and Mr. Cleaveland overperswaded her to lay it to
a Gentleman of Christ-Church, telling her that she should be maintained and
well provided for, and that she should want for nothing, and this Informant
further says, that he came to Exeter-Colledge to Goody Smith, to ask of her
something for Sparrow, and that she bid him make no noise, and carried him into
a Room, desiring him to say nothing to any Body, and that what he did for her,
he should be sure to be paid for.

This is a true Copy of the Examination of Francis Green, taken before Sir
William Walker Knight.

William Walker.

The Deposition of Elizabeth Roberts Widow, taken before Sir William Walker
Knight, one of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the City of Oxford,
upon Oath, October 9. 1690.
THis Deponent says that she did never use any means for persuading Anne
Sparrow to lay her Child to Mr. Colmer or any other man; and she farther Exeter
at the time of his late Visitation in Exeter-Colledge, there was nothing
objected against her concerning Anne Sparrow, nor any question put about her.
But that this Deponent was then asked whether she knew any harm (or words to
that effect) of the Rectors house, to which this Deponent answered that she did
not, and was thereupon dismissed. And this Deponent says further, that when Anne
Sparrow was in Oxford, she asked her the said Anne Sparrow, if ever she had
persuaded her to lay her Child to Mr. Colmer, to which she answered that she
never did, nor did she ever say so.

The Mark of Elizabeth Roberts.

The next part of the History of this Affair consists of Mr. Colmer's Appeal to
the Bishop of Exeter, and what ensued thereupon.
Mr. Colmer having now by the close management of his Friends, Mr. Cleaveland
and Mr. Maundrel got a verbal acquittal of his guilt from Anne Sparrow before a
Magistrate, and secured her, as he presumed, from telling School-tales, by
causing her to be conveyed far enough off, thought his Reputation would stand
fair, notwithstanding what had been proved at the hearing. The next thing was
to get his Sentence of Expulsion taken off; In order to which he gets an Appeal
drawn up, and carries it to the Lord Bishop of Exeter, visitor of the College,
then at London. The Bishop received the Appeal; and granted two Instruments,
the one an Inhibition, by which all farther proceedings against Mr. Colmer are
forbid, (but the ultimate Act, which the College could do, was already past)
The other an Order requiring the Rector and Fellows to give an account of their
proceedings sub poena juris and contemptus, in order to a new determination.
And together with these two Instruments came his Lordships Letter to the
Rector, mentioning the two Instruments, that were sent to be served upon
himself and the Senior-Fellows, and that his Lordship expected to be attended,
and particularly that Mr. Cleaveland and Mr. Maundrel should be of them that
were to come.

The Rector and Fellows had no notice of this till the two Instruments were
served upon them, whereby they were deprived of having opportunity to represent
the matter so to his Lordship, as would, in all likelihood, have prevented his
Lordship's interposing in this Affair. It was resolved therefore that an answer
should be sent to his Lordship with all due Reverence, with a true State of the
case, both as it related to Mr. Colmer and themselves. This the Rector did in a
Letter, which was presented to his Lordship by three of the Fellows. It was
said therein that Mr. Colmer had by his Appealing added a new crime to his
former, and a crime, for which by the same Statute he had incurred the same
penalty, and that he had so far justified the persons concerned in his
conviction, as to tell the Rector in the presence of Witnesses, that upon the
Evidence disclosed against himself, he himself would have judged any other
person guilty: The Letter proceeded, My Lord, We willingly acknowledge your
Lordship our Visitor and Patron, and shall upon all occasions pay your Lordship
all possible Reverence and all due obedience, and what is due our Statutes do
express, which that your Lordship at this distance from your own Copy may
infallibly discover, I have transcribed the whole Statute.

And having then represented that the Statutes do not give his Lordship any
jurisdiction to receive and determine an Appeal; then these words follow; viz.

The answers therefore which I make to your Lordships two Instruments, can be
no other then these; 1. Whereas your Lordship inhibiteth us from proceeding any
farther in the cause, the Statute is already executed: Mr. Colmer is ipso facto
expelled, and we need do no more, and we could do no less. 2. Whereas your
Lordship requires us to send an extract of proceedings; this we cannot do; for
that we proceeded in the same form that the Statute prescribes in case the
Rector be expelled, summane, de plano, extra strepitum Judicialem. He added how
much it was a trouble to him, to do or say any thing, that might displease a
person to whom he owed so much honor and reverence, but comforted himself with
the hopes that his Lordship would ere long justify him in the performance of
his duty.

There is reason to believe that this decent Letter of the Rector, and the
Reasons therein contained had some influence upon his Lordship, for that he
forbear any farther proceedings for some months: But at last Dr. Masters is
Commissionated to receive and determine Mr. Colmer's appeal in a formal
visitation.

On the 20 th. day of March 1688/9 being Thursday, the Doctor came to the
Rector's lodgings, and told him he had a Commission from the Bishop of Exeter,
which he would execute on Saturday following, and then a farther day would be
appointed for proceeding. And when he went away from the house, he caused to be
hung up at the Chapel door a Citation, requiring the Rector and the
Senior-Fellows by name, to appear on Saturday in the Chapel, and a time in the
forenoon was assigned.

The Rector and Senior Fellows attended at the time and place, where the Rector
acknowledged the Obedience due to the Visitor both in person, and by Deputy,
submitted to his Authority, and spoke otherwise respectively of the Bishop, and
suitably to the occasion.

The Commissioner then was for adjourning till Wednesday, but being informed
that the Statute of Visitation allowed but three days at most, and those
proxime sequentes, he adjourned to the Afternoon; where the Commissary took
care to have the Doors open contrary to the intent of the Statutes. When he was
proceeding to Mr. Colmer's case the Rector and Major part of the seven Seniors
tendered him a Protestation against his proceeding therein. Which he accepted,
and ordered to be entered: and promised, if they thought fit to make any
additions, that they should be inserted. Some debates then arose and the Rector
prayed another day because he had sent for two other Senior Fellows, v. These
two Protestations Printed at the end of the Book.
who were then absent: upon which there was an Adjournment to Tuesday. At which
meeting the Rector and five of the seven Seniors tendered another Protestation,
which included the former, with an addition in which they complained of, and
protested against making the Visitation so public by keeping open the Door,
and admitting a promiscuous crowd of people to be present. But notwithstanding
both Protestations were admitted, the Commissary proceeded; gave sentence for
Mr. Colmer to be restored, awarded him twenty Marks for Costs, and wrote his
name in the Book with his own hand. At the Commissary's going off, the Rector
tendered him the Visitation-fee of twenty shillings, which the Statutes allow,
but he refused it.

Though the Rector and Fellows did not acknowledge Mr. Colmer to be a Rightful
Fellow of the College, having been legally expelled, and no otherwise restored
then as aforesaid, yet after the Visitation was over, they did not presently
strike his name out of the Book, nor was he disturbed in his possession. But
the Rector having understood that he had been guilty of another Crime of the
same kind with the former, resolved to bring that too under Examination, 13th.
Febr. An. Regni Secundo.
and the rather because of his Majesty's late Order for the punishment of Vice
and Debauchery.

This second accusation, though for a fact precedent to the former, was for
incontinence with one Anne Aris, who had been a Bed-maker's Daughter belonging
to the College: She had formerly laid her Child to Ferdinand Smith, but had
confessed privately to her Mother Elizabeth Buckland, and in the hearing of her
Sister Joyce Aris, that Mr. Colmer had lain with her as well as Smith; they two
told it to Francis Buckland the Father-in-law. But the Mother having a
Dependence upon the College, took care not to have it go out of the Family,
for fear of losing her Employment; and when her Daughters time drew near,
strictly charged her, and so did her Sister, to be sure she said nothing of Mr.
Colmer, when under the Midwife's hands: She took their counsel, and named Smith
only. Her Mother was afterward troubled that she had prevented her Daughter
from telling the truth, and especially when she saw what disturbance had been
occasioned in the College through Mr. Colmer's means, which might have been
prevented, if she had let the truth come out at first; she therefore took
occasion to discharge her mind, and confessed the whole matter. Upon which Ann
Aris was Examined before a Justice of Peace, and declared as in her Deposition.
Her Mother and Sister likewise deposed that she had told them two Months before
her lying in, according to the contents of her Oath, and that they had
persuaded her as aforesaid.

The Rector having these Proofs, Convened the Seven Senior Fellows, and
summoned Mr. Colmer, who appeared. At the beginning of the meeting a Notary was
present; and least a President should remain of any allowed to be a Fellow, who
had been restored, as Mr. Colmer, upon an Appeal, the Rector declared he did
not look upon Mr. Colmer as a Rightful, but as a pretended Fellow, and that he
proceeded against him as such. The matter being then opened, Mr. Colmer
insisted to have the Sentence of Dr. Master's owned and submitted to, and the
Money paid that was awarded him for Costs; otherwise he refused to answer, and
after some Discourse withdrew. But the Rector proceeded, and afrer the
Depositions, he was by the judgment of the Rector and the Senior Fellows again
convicted; and his Name struck out of the Book.

The Depositions upon which Mr. Colmer was the second time convicted of
Incontinence, and expelled the College, are as follow.

The Examination of Ann Aris taken the 11 th. day of January 1689, before Sir
William Walker, Knight, one of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
City of Oxford.
Exeter-Colledge.
THis Examinant says upon her Oath, That Ferdinando Smith had two times the
carnal knowledge of her Body, in a little Room in the College, called the
Trencher-house, and once in Mr. Crabb's Chamber, who is one of the Fellows.

And this Examinant further says, That since one Mr. Colmer, one of the
Fellows of Exeter College, had the carnal knowledge of her Body in his own
Chamber in the said College at two several times.

The said Ann Aris also says, That she was brought to Bed on New Years day at
Twelve of the Clock in the Night, in the year 1688, in her Mother's house, one
Goodwife Buckland, in the Parish of St. Michael, in the City of Oxford.

This is a true Copy of the Examination of Ann Aris, taken before Sir William
Walker, Knight, one of Their Majesty's Justices of the said City of Oxford.

William Walker.

The Certificate of Francis Buckland of the City of Oxford given the second day
of July, 1690.
I Francis Buckland do certify whom it may concern, That my Wife Elizabeth
Buckland, and Daugheer-in law Joyce Aris, did acquaint me sometime before Ann
Aris was brought to Bed, that Mr. Colmer, Fellow of Exeter College, and
Ferdinando Smith, Scrape-Trencher of the same College, had lain with her, and
my Wife said she designed strictly to forbid her mentioning Mr. Colmer at her
Labor, for fear she should be turned out of the College, and so lose her
place of Bed-maker.

Francis Buckland.

The Deposition of Francis Buckland of the City of Oxford, taken before Sir
William Walker, Knight, one of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
City of Oxford, the 15 th. of Oxford, 1690.

THis Deponent upon the Oath that he has taken does declare, That the Contents
of the foregoing Certificates, given by him the 2d. day of July last, were and
are true.

Francis Buckland.

The Examination of Elizabeth Buckland, taken upon Oath, March 26. 1690. before
Sir William Walker, Knight.
THis Deponent says, That her Daughter Anne Aris about two Months before she
was delivered of her Child, told her and her Daughter Joyce, that Ferdinando
Smith and Mr. Colmer Fellow of Exeter College had lain with her: And this
Deponent further says, that the day before, and the same day her Daughter was
delivered of her Child, she persuaded her said Daughter Ann Aris not to name
Mr. Colmer, because she was unwilling to lose her Employment in the College.

William Walker.

The Examination of Joyce Aris the Daughter of the aforesaid Elizabeth
Buckland, taken upon Oath at the same time before Sir William Walker, Knight.
THis Deponent being by at the same time when her Mother examined her Daughter,
the aforesaid Ann Aris, deposes that she heard her Sister say, That Ferdinando
Smith and Mr. Colmer had lain with her, and also the said Joyce further
deposes, That she and her Mother both did persuade her Sister, the said Ann
Aris, not to name Mr. Colmer, for fear her Mother should lose her Employ of
Bed-making in Exeter College.

William Walker.

Upon this Mr. Colmer takes the same course that he had done before and Appeals
to the Bishop: Goes to Exeter with it, and threatens at his departure that the
College should know the Effects of his Journey: The Appeal being tendered, his
Lordship receives it, and resolves upon a New Visitation in his own person; and
in order to it sends his Citation to the College dated May 16. 1690. giving
notice of his intention to Visit the 16 of the next Month: When his Lordship
came to Oxford, the Rector and three of the Seniors waited upon him at his
Lodgings in Christ-Church, presented him with the Respects of the College, but
desired that he would not visit; informing him that they had provided a
Protestation under their Common Seal against it; because if they submitted to
it (he having Visited so lately by his Commissary, and being allowed by the
Statutes to Visit but once in Five years) they should betray the Privileges of
their College, which by Oath they were bound to defend.

When his Lordship came to the College, the Rector and Majority of the Fellows
attended him, and tendered him a Protestation with all imaginable Respect, and
appointed a Public Notary to read it. But his Lordship plucked it out of the
Notary's hand, and trod it under foot: then the Rector and Fellows withdrew.
Afterward their Names were called over; and Mr. Colmer amongst the rest. His
Lordship then made some Reflections upon most of the Seniors, and without
adjourning to another time or place, went out of the College.

After this his Lordship Petitioned Their Majesty's in Council; and an Order of
Council being sent down to the Rector and Fellows to give in their Answer in
Writing, they did so; and a day being appointed to hear the matter his
Lordship's Petition was dismissed.

Not discouraged with his ill success in this attempt, he comes again to Visit
sooner then he had declared he would; and the occasion was this; viz. The
Statutes of the College require upon pain of expulsion, that every Fellow that
shall be present at any Election, shall name some certain person to supply the
Vacancy: And because several who complied with the Visitor, had refused in the
late Election, to name another person to succeed in Mr. Colmer's place, then
vacant by his Expulsion, tho the Bishop had moved in Council, to have an
Inhibition to stay the Election, and could not prevail; the Rector told them
that as many as had so refused, had incurred the penalty of Expulsion, but not
being obliged to inflict it, he would only Register them as Obnoxious, without
proceeding any farther, unless by their future ill carriage, they should
deserve it. The clause of the Stat. de Electione Rectoris, etc. which was the
ground of what the Rector said and did, runs thus; viz. In quam etiam paenam
(sc. perpetuae amotionis a Collegio) omnes and singulos Scholares in
nominationibus electionibus, admissionibus, aliisve negotiis utilitatem
Collegii concernentibus, etc. ac rite and legitime secundum consuetudinem
vocatos and requisitos, ac deinde personaliter interesse aut effectualiter
nominatim and absolute nominare and eligere renuentes incurrere volumus ipso
facto.

They being alarmed at this, represent the matter so to the Bishop, that to
secure them, he resolves upon a present Visitation. And sends a Citation in
order to it. They that thought themselves concerned to oppose it, resolve to
shut the Colledge-gates, but before the hour appointed for the Visitation was
come, three Senior-Fellows were sent to his Lordship with a Petitionary-Letter,
humbly praying him not to come. These not being admitted to speak with him,
sent in the substance of their message by a Servant, by whom they received this
Answer, that the Bishop expected to meet with all possible opposition, but was
resolved to come. And shortly after came, the Gates being violently broken open
to make way for him, he went to the Hall, where there was a great crowd of
people: Yet the Rector and Fellows got in with much a do as their names were
reading, and as they had don before, tendered their Protestation; which one of
the Senior-Fellows began to read, but was not suffered to go on: Whereupon the
Rector delivered it in at the Table, and he and his party withdrew. The
Fellows, who sided with the Rector, being the Major part, not answering to
their names, were suspended ab Officio and beneficio. Amongst them were five of
the seven Seniors, and all the Officers of the College Then the Visitor
restored Mr. Colmer, who consequently became one of the Senior-Fellows, which
if it had not been done, he must have been forced to take in an under Graduate
to make up the number of seven.

Here it is to be observed that the Fellows, who submitted, tho then sworn to
present (amongst other things) any that was but suspected of in continency, yet
did not present Mr. Colmer, tho it was notoriously known, that he had been
twice expelled for that crime, upon the Grounds and Evidence abovementioned.

His Lordship having cleared his way by removing those Fellows, whom the
Statutes make the proper Judges in the Rector's case, proceeds with his new
party to deprive the Rector; (vide, The Sentence of Deprivation.
and accordingly did so: and yet of them two dissented, and all the rest had
been Registered as Obnoxious to Expulsion. Then Dr. H's place was declared void
by Cession. And Mr. Vivian put out, as having been Elected into Mr. Colmer's
place, which his Lordship judged not vacant, Mr. Kingston for reading Prayers
after his Suspension was the very next day Excommunicated without the least
admonition; And the Rector admonished to leave his lodgings, within seven days
sub paena Excommunicationis Majoris; i. e. A conditional sentence of the
greater Excommunication is denounced against him, if he does not and the time
being expired and he not obeying, is was actually executed in the Chapel
accordingly. The Rector kept his lodgings notwithstanding, being advised by his
Council, that the Visitor had not the power of an Ordinary within the College;
and that if he had, he could not make use of it in that case, viz. to enforce
obedience to what he did as Visitor. That if his Deprivation were legal, he
must be turned out by due course of Law; and not frighted from his freehold by
the thunder of Excommunication. That for a Bishop to give sentence against a
man in a matter of Temporal right, and to Excommunicate him for not submitting
to it, was never practiced Legally, during the Pope's Usurpation here, nor
perhaps ever attempted since the Abrogation of his pretended Supremacy.

Upon these severe and unstatutable proceedings the Rector and Fellows,
(according to the president the Bishop had given them in his one case) humbly
represented their grievances to her Majesty in Council, whereupon the
Honorable Board caused an Order to be sent to him, to give his answer in
writing, which was served accordingly. But his Lordship has not thought fit to
appear and answer as yet.

The very same day in which this Order of Council came out, Seven or Eight of
the Senior-Fellows (all the rest with the Officers to the number of Eleven
being suspended) broke open the Chapel door contrary to the Statutes, and
proceeded to the Election of a new Rector.

. 1. THis being a true History of the whole Affair, how far these proceedings
of the Bishop are justifiable, and whether the Rector and Fellows have at all
been irregular, or have acted contrary to the Statutes of the College, their
own Oaths and Duty, is next to be considered.

As for Mr. Colmer's Expulsion, that he was really guilty of the crimes laid to
his charge, and that the Rector and Fellows had upon the hearing sufficient
grounds to believe it, cannot but seem very evident to unprejudiced persons by
the allegations and depositions abovementioned. And when there is sufficient
cause for inflicting a sentence, it is very weak to ascribe it to a distaste
conceived against the person, the secret springs whereof are not fit to be
published. Page 5.


What the Author means by secret Springs of intimacy the Rector understands
not: But the causes of his distaste against him since are notorious, and must
be made more so, that the proceedings against him abovementioned, may appear to
have been no contrivance of passion or prejudice, Page 5.
as the Author of the Account would suggest where he tells us that upon Mr.
Colmer's opposing Sir Kingston's Election the Rector openly declared, that he
would upon that account compass his Expulsion. For as no such thing was ever
said by the Rector, nor any thing to that effect; the allegation being utterly
false and a malicious invention of a person, who throughout this whole
proceedure has been forced to make lies his refuge; so the contrary does in
some measure appear by the Rector's consenting, after this Affair of Sir
Kingston's, to Mr. Colmer's proceeding Master of Art, when it was in his power
by the Statutes to deny him that degree two years longer. vid. Stat. de temp.
Assum. grad.

In order to this (viz. his Expulsion) some months after he charges him
privately with incontinence and endeavors to frighten him into a Resignation
of his Fellowship. Page 5.
That the Rector had good cause to believe him guilty of incontinence, does
sufficiently appear by the preceding Narrative; and if upon information of his
guilt in that kind he privately admonished him to quit the College, it was an
Act of friendship and charity to persuade him, if he were conscious of his
guilt, rather to resign voluntarily, than to expose his Reputation by being
publicly accused; And in the Stat. de causis propter quas Rector priv. etc. it
is appointed, that if the Sub Rector, and five of the Seniors understand him to
be guilty of an offense, meriting deprivation, they shall persuade him ad
voluntary cedendum Officio.

I pass by the Relation that the Author gives, pages 6 and 7 of Mr. Colmer's
conviction before the Rector and Senior Fellows, and shall not take any notice
of some scurrilous reflections, and the several false allegations that I find
there. For answer to them I refer to the former Narrative, which has been drawn
with all the fairness and impartiality imaginable. I shall only take notice of
what he says Page 7. that on Mr. Colmer's side two of the Fellows attested upon
Oath, that the party which was with Child, not only acquitted Mr. Colmer before
them, but owned that she had been dealt with to accuse him. This the Author
calls a plain and express Evidence. This Evidence, such as it was, was given by
Mr. Colmer's friends, which might justly render it then suspected, and by
persons who managed the whole Affair on Mr. Colmer's behalf; But as it stood
then before the Rector and Fellows upon the hearing, it amounted to no more
then this; viz. the woman her self acquitted Mr. Colmer in the hearing of some
of his friends, and owned that she had been dealt with to accuse him. And what
then? Because she had said such words to some of Mr. Colmer's friends in
private, when she was removed out of the way by his means, and maintained at
his charge; shall this be thought sufficient to counterpoise what she had
confessed to her Dame long before? the truth of which Confession appeared by so
many concomitant proofs, as that of Mr. Colmer's putting the Overseer of the
Parish upon taking Ferdinand Smith's security, and promising the Parish should
not be damnified; that of Mr. Colmer's maintaining her when she was big with
Child? that of Ferdinand Smith's refusing to name who was the Father, because a
Gentleman would be expelled; which by all circumstances appeared to be Mr.
Colmer, and not so much as denying that it was he? that of the Midwife's
declaring that when Anne Sparrow was in Labor, her Dame Thomasin Smith desired
her not to urge her to name the Father; because she had named him to her; who
was no other then Mr. Colmer? with diverse other Proofs and Circumstances
aforementioned; of which it is far from being the least, that Mr. Colmer did
not produce Anne Sparrow at the hearing to clear his innocence, which he had
time enough to have done, and would unquestionably have done it, if he had not
been guilty? Not to mention over again the character of his Life and
conversation, which strengthened the evidence that was brought against him.

From this Sentence Mr. Colmer appealed to the Visitor. The legality of which
Appeal is now to be enquired into; I shall endeavor, 1. To prove that no
Appeal lies from a Sentence of Expulsion pronounced as aforesaid, and then
shall give an Answer to what is urged by the Author of the Account, etc. to
prove that Mr. Colmer might lawfully appeal.

First, Let us consider what the Rector is sworn to for the good Government of
the College, Omnia and singula statuta decreta ordinationes and consuetudines
ejusdem Collegii firmiter observabo, and a scholaribus singulis, quantum in me
fuerit, etc. observari faciam, etc. Quodque quanttum in me fuerit, and in
conscientia mea and Judicio putabo, correctiones, punitiones and reformationes,
debitas, rationales atque justas de quibuscunque criminibus delictis and
excessibus scholarium, etc. pro qualitate delicti, ubi poenae and punitiones
non exprimuntur, expressasque juxta formam and effectum statutorum and
decretorum dicti Collegii indifferenter and diligenter faciam and execrebo, seu
per alios vel alium fieri and exerceri faciam and procurabo; This was a pious
and charitable disposition in the Founder, to leave a Discretionary power in
the Rector of not proceeding to the extremity of the Statutes in case he should
see great hopes of amendment, which lenity how far Mr. Colmer was entitled to,
needs not be repeated.
nisi forsitan aliquando lenitatis, comitatis, charitatis, fraternitatis,
misericordiae vel clementiae causa alicui, in quo magna vitae emendandae spes
videatur, favero.

Now by the Statute de causis propter quas scholares privari debeant, etc. it
is provided, Quod si quis scholarium vel Electorum, adulterii, incontinentiae,
haeresis pervicacis, homicidii voluntarii, perjurii manifesti, crebrae
ebrietatis, alteriusve publicae turpitudinis, coram Rectore, sub Rectore,
Decano, and quinque aliis scholaribus maxim senioribus vel majore part
eorundem, cum dicti Rectoris Assensu legirime convictus fuerit, ipsum perpetuo
exclusum and privatum a dicto Collegio, nulla alia monitione premissa, virtute
praesentis Statuti decernimus.

And by the Statute de Admissione eorum qui electi sunt in perpetuos Scholares,
etc. Part of their Oath is in these words: Viz. Item si contingat me posthac
per Rectorem, aut in hujusmodi habentes interesse corrigi and puniri aut a
dicti Collegii sustentatione Ejici and expelli, excludi, privari vel a moveri
propter mea forsan demerita, ipsum Rectorem, seu alias personas, seu eorum
aliquam, occasion expulsionis, vel correctionis hujusmodi, nunquam persequar,
molestabo vel inquietabo per me, alium vel alios, seu ab aliis persequi,
molestari seu inquietari ea de causa, quantum in me fuerit permittam, sed pure,
sponte, simpliciter and absolute omni actioni contra Rectorem, aut alios dicti
Collegii Scholares, quomodolibet appellationi and querelae in ea part
faciendis ac quarumcunque litterarum impetrationi, precibus Principum,
Prelatorum, Procerum, Magnatum, and aliorum quorumcunque, quibus possem ad jus
titulum and possessionem vendicandam reconciliari, ac quibuslibet juris vel
facti remediis, per quae me petere possem in integrum restitui, quantumcunque
alias mihi probitatis and vitae merita suffragentur, in vim pacti renuncio.

That the Statutes of a College are the local Laws of the Society, and binding
to all Members thereof, as such, cannot be denied; and that the Power and
Authority of all such as have any share in the Government of such a Society,
must be warranted by those local Laws, is so evident that there needs nothing
to be alleged in proof of it; and that if any person who by the Statutes has
authority within the College, accroaches to himself a Jurisdiction not only
not warranted by the Statutes, but directly contrary to them, he invades the
Rights and Privileges of a College over which he usurpes such pretended
Jurisdiction, and both may and must be opposed therein by such of the College,
who have any regard to the solemn Oath they have taken, to observe faithfully,
themselves, and as far as in them lies to cause to be observed by others, Omnia
and singula Statuta, decreta and consuetudines Collegii. vid. The Fellows Oath
in sine.

Now that one Statute of the College provides there shall be no Appeal at all
from a Sentence of Expulsion pronounced by the Rector, etc. for Incontinency
appears by the last mentioned Statute de Admissione eorum, etc. and the Oath
thereby prescribed, as plain as words can make a thing. The words are universal
and comprehensive, and such as will admit of no exception; nunquam persequar,
molestabo nec inquietale, per me vel per alios. How does this consist with
carrying a complaint against the Rector and Senior Follows, and getting them
cited and arraigned as Criminals, and fined for their Sentence? How does a
renouncing Quomodolibet appellationi consist with appealing to the Bishop of
Exeter, unless an Appeal to him as Visitor had been excepted out of the Oath?
May a Fellow that is expelled as aforesaid, and has sworn not to procure
quascunque litteras Principum, Prelatorum, etc. procure Letters and Instruments
from the Bishop of Exeter notwithstanding? Are not the words, quibuslibet Juris
and facti remediis, as full and comprehensive as the wit of man could invent to
impose an acquiescence in the Sentence, without having recourse to a superior
Judge to obtain a rehearing? Is it not a Reflection on the Founder's
understanding to suppose that he would make use of so many general and
emphatical phrases to exclude seeking relief against a Sentence pronounced as
aforesaid, and not add a word to except an Appeal to the Visitor, if at the
same time it was not his intention to exclude such Appeals?

Now this being the plain and obvious sense of the words to exclude an Appeal
to the Visitor, as well as to any foreign Jurisdiction whatsoever; nay the
words importing it so violently that without adding an imaginary Exception, or
supposing the Founder not able to express his mind in proper terms, they cannot
be otherwise understood; V. Stat. de Electione Rectoris and ejus Jur. Stat. de
qualitate eligendorum Scholarium, and de Jur. and Stat. Guil. Petrei.
the College is bound to take them so, and to observe them accordingly, and
are bound by Oath under pain of Deprivation so to do; viz. Secundum planum,
litteralem and Grammaticalem sensum. Nor can the Visitor affix any
Interpretation of his own to them, unless requested by the Rector and the major
part of the Scholars.

And that it was his intention and the design of enjoining this Oath, to
exclude the Visitor's Jurisdiction as well as that of any other person, or
Court, as far as it was possible for him to do, will appear farther by taking
notice what provision is made in other Statutes for the final ending of
Controversies arising within the College. By the Stat. de causis propter quas
Scholares, etc. it is appointed that in case differences arise betwixt the
Scholars or any other residing within the College, and that the parties at
variance do not agree within a day, nor that the Rector, or in his absence the
Sub-Rector, and three of the maxim Seniores determine it within two days, then
the Rector together with the Sub Rector, the Dean, and five Seniors, shall
within three days next after Summarie and de plano eam (discordiam, etc.)
examinare, etc. Et quicquid Rector cum predictis, etc. duxerit ordinandum,
executioni absque contradictione cujuscunque demandetur. Nec liceat alicui de
dicto Collegio, cujuscunque status aut gradus extiterit, occasion rixae,
jurgii aut dissensionis intra dictum Collegium, aut extra inter eosdem ortae
vel motae, prosecutionem facere, aut litem aliquam movere, vel aliquem
impetere, aut in Judicium trahere coram aliquo Judice Extrinseco Ecclesiastico
vel seculari. But it may be the Visitor's power may be let in notwithstanding
these words, for he will pretend to be no Judex Extrinsecus. No, it appears by
what follows that every person whatsoever, who is neither Rector, Sub-Rector,
Dean, nor one of the Senior Fellows is a Judex extrinsecus, within the meaning
of this Statute, Sed volumus omnino, quod hujusmodi jurgia, irae, rixae,
discordiae, and dissensiones, etc. per personas praedictas, etc. terminentur
and finiantur.

In like manner differences arising betwixt the Rector and the Scholars, if not
determined within twenty days by the Sub-Rector, the Dean, and three of the
Maxim Seniores, are to be determined by the Chancellor of the University, or
the Vice Chancellor, or his Commissary, to whose determination the Rector is to
stand, Et eidem sine contradictione parere. Stat. de Jur. Rectoris.

If the Rector be Statutably expelled, he is bound by his Oath, in like manner,
as the Fellows are, not to seek any remedy by Appeal or otherwise; Vid. Stat.
de Elect. and Juram. Rector. Nor is it possible for him to appeal to the
Visitor, for that by the Stat. Propter quas causas Rector, etc. the Bishop of
Exeter must be a party to his amotion. And it may seem hard and unreasonable,
that the Founder should have utterly cut off the Rector from appealing, and yet
leave a door open for every Fellow in the College to have the benefit of an
Appeal.

Besides these proofs that Appeals are excluded, which are grounded upon the
words of the Statutes themselves, we have a subsequent proof of what we assert,
which though it be a negative one, yet in this case is as forcible as any
affirmative proof whatsoever; and that is, that till this late Appeal in Mr.
Colmer's case, there never was any Appeal to the Visitor from the sentence of
the Rector and Fellows. Subsequent practice is always held to be the truest
Expositor of the meaning of a Law; they that lived nearest to the time when it
was made, are reasonably supposed to have understood the intention of the
Lawgiver best.

Littleton argues, That no action can be brought upon the Stat. of Merton, 1st.
Inst. fol. 81. b.
because it was never seen or heard that any such action had been brought: And
if any action might have been brought, it shall be intended, that at one time
or other it would have been put in ure. Upon which Lord Cook says, Littl. Sect.
108.
Though an Act of Parliament cannot by non-user be antiquated or lose his
force, yet non-user may expound or declare how the Act is to be understood. So
we find in Dyer 376. a. that a Writ of Error lies not of a Judgment given in
the Cinque Ports, Pro eo quod nullum tale breve in Registro, nec in aliquibus
Praesidentibus Curiarum inveniri potuerat. Since therefore no President of such
an Appeal as is now contended for, can be shown, it must be understood to have
been the common construction upon the Statutes ever since they were made, that
no such Appeals should be commenced.

I shall add one Observation more grounded upon the Probationer's Oath, which
with respect to the matter in hand differs very little in words, and I suppose
not at all in sense from this of the Fellows. There are these words in it, Omni
actioni seculari, canonicae and civili, appellationique and querelae in ea
part faciendae, etc. Et quibus libet Juris and facti remediis, etc. in vim
pacti renuncio express in praesenti, and renunciabo in Scriptis, si exactus
fuero in mea expulsione. Although this promise to renounce in writing, if
required, be not inserted into the Fellows Oath, yet I presume it will not be
denied but a renunciation by a promissory Oath in vim pacti, is and was
designed by the Founder to be a renunciation, so far forth as a man can
renounce by Oath, of all the remedies that such a renunciation in scriptis
would have precluded him from. And then if Mr. Colmer could not have had his
Appeal, in case he had renounced in scriptis; no more could he prosecute it
now, without breaking his Oath.

Thus far from the Letter of the Statute, taken in that plain Grammatical sense
in which they direct themselves to be understood, from the design of the
Founder collected from some Observations upon other Statutes, and from
subsequent usage, it has been shown that Appeals to the Visitor are excluded in
the case in question.

The reason and policy of his confining the Government of the College, and the
determining of all Controversies that should arise within the same, to the
Jurisdiction of the Rector, Sub-Rector, the Dean, and the Senior Fellows,
excepting where the Power of the Visitor, or of the Chancellor,
Vice Chancellor, etc. is expressly let in, may be reasonably supposed to have
been for the peace and quiet of the House: Which being a Society of persons
bred up to study, and professing Divinity, ought in both respects to have their
Government managed with as little noise and clamor, and as free from
disturbances, as the nature of the thing will permit. It was therefore made
part of the Probationer's Oath, Quod tranquillitatem, pacem, concordiam, etc.
dicti Collegii and Scholarium unitatem, quantum in me fuerit and ad me
pertinuerit, viis and modis quibus potero, observabo. And therefore it was,
that differences arising within the College, are to be determined by the
persons authorized by the Statutes to take cognizance of them, Summarie and de
plano and sine strepitu Judiciali. But what a disturbance would it be to such a
Society of men, devoted to their Studies, to be subjected upon the complaint of
every vexatious person, to the noise and clutter of a Court of Appeals? Appeals
may he brought from any other Censures, though never so small, as well as from
a Sentence of Expulsion; and if such a door be left open, what encouragement it
might give to feuds and dissentions, is obvious enough. Persons really
criminal, and duly censured, might however by friends and interest sometimes
prevail so as to give great trouble to the Society, and procure a reversal of
their most legal and just Acts. And in all likelihood the Members of the
Society will be the more careful to avoid the committing of such crimes as are
punishable by the Statutes, when they know before hand that they can have no
redress elsewhere, if censured at home. And those of the Society must needs be
discouraged from doing their duty, and keeping a strict Discipline, if they
find themselves in danger to be called to an account for every Act of
Jurisdiction that they exert, and punished for it themselves.

But notwithstanding all this the Author of the Account will have it that Mr.
Colmer might lawfully Appeal, and the Bishop of Exeter receive and proceed
thereupon as he has done.

The next thing therefore to be done, is to examine what is alleged to justify
a thing that appears so directly contrary to the words of the Statutes, and to
the Founder's intention. Why, the opinion of Dr. Bouchier is delivered to us,
and the reasons upon which he grounded it.

First, The Oath being accessory to the Statutes did only restrain those
persons from vexatious appeals, Page 8.
who were expelled according to the appointment and direction of the Statute,
and according to the form therein laid down and prescribed.

What he means by the Oath being accessory to the Statute, I shall leave it to
himself to explain. I take the Oath it self, since the very words of it are
inserted into a Statute, to be as much part of the Statutes of Exeter-Colledge,
as any thing else in them is. An Oath imposed by an Act of Parliament is part
of the Act, and the words of it disclose the mind of the Legislators as much as
any thing contained in the body of the Act, or of any other Act, to which the
Oath (to use the Author's expression) may be said to be accessory, can do. But
that which imposed upon the Author was this; viz. the Stat. de causis propter
quas Scholares, etc. impowers the Rector etc. to expel a Fellow that is
legitime convictus, etc. And this Oath (says he) is accessory to that Statute,
and therefore does not tie up the person expelled from Appealing, unless he be
legitime convictus. Whether Mr. Colmer was legitime convictus or no within the
intention of the Founder, we shall enquire by and by. But this fallacy, of the
Oath being accessory (as he calls it) to this Statute, must not escape without
a detection. When an Oath is imposed by a Law upon such as Act by Virtue
thereof, or are bound by it, to put it in execution or to obey accordingly,
there the Oath is relative to the Law, and the Obligation of it reaches no
farther then the Law carries it. But where an Oath is imposed by a separate
distinct Law, without any such relation, there the Law that imposes the Oath
creates a duty of performing it in the genuine sense, that the words import,
and in this case of ours, in the plain, litteral and Grammatical sense. If
there were a Statute of the College concerning Appeals, allowing them in some
cases, and restraining them in others; and an Oath enjoined to observe the
Statutes, or that Statute in particular, there the Oath would be what the
Author calls accessory. But in this case, there is no provision made by any
clause in any Statute for Appeals at all; but particular directions for the
final ending of controversies and punishing offenses within the College; and
an Oath imposed to acquiesce in such determination.

To prove that one may appeal, if not expelled according to the appointment and
direction of the Statute, he quotes a clause out of the Probationer's Oath; si
contingat me (quod absit) juxta formam and exigentiam statutorum a praedicto
Collegio expelli seu amoveri, etc. Nunquam, etc. Whereas the question is upon
the Fellow's Oath, in which those words secundum formam and exigentiam
Statutorum do not occur. Tho if they were there, it would not alter the case
much, unless it was made appear that Mr. Colmer was not Statutably Expelled. He
was Expelled by the Persons, that have authority by the Statutes to Expel, and
for a crime that by the Statutes deserves Expulsion, so that the forma and
exigentia was at least so far observed. And if it were screwed farther and made
to extend to the merits of the cause; then it were impertinent to impose an
Oath not to Appeal, and at the same time to leave men at liberty to Appeal when
ever they find or think themselves aggrieved.

His second Argument is, that the Statute requires a legal conviction. legitime
convictus, etc.

If the Founder had required what we call a legal conviction, he would I
presume have used the word legaliter or secundum legem terrae or the like;
legitime not being a word that enforces a reference to the Common Law. If he
had required a legal conviction, he would not have directed the prosecution to
be before persons that cannot in a strict acceptance of the word, legally
convict, A legal conviction is upon Oath, which the Rector and Senior-Fellows
have no power to administer, and some of the crimes mentioned in the Stat. de
causis propter quas Scholares, etc. are such as a man cannot be legally
convicted of but by Jury; as willful manslaughter, manifest perjury, etc. and
yet of these a Scholar may be legitime convictus within the intention of the
Statute Coram Rectore, etc. who cannot impannel a Jury. So that the word
legitime convictus cannot in the nature of the thing import the strictness and
formality of a legal conviction; But (says he) the proofs were so far from
making a legal conviction, etc. Proofs making a conviction is another of his
Expressions, that no body else would have used.

It is the Verdict of a Jury or the Sentence of a Judge that makes the
conviction; Proofs are but Evidence; and a man may be legally convict without
them, as when a Jury finds a Verdict upon their own knowledge. But according to
this Gentleman's interpretation of the Statute the word legitime convictus must
signify convicted upon such proof, as would upon a Trial at Law be sufficient
legal proof to convict, and every man that is not so convicted, may appeal.
Which as it is a newfangled Interpretatton, and scarce deserves an answer; So
it is contrary to the common acceptance of words. A legal conviction (which he
would have the words of the Statute Import) may be, tho the Evidence be
deficient, and the Jury corrupt, as a judgment of a Court in a cause depending
before them judicially, is a legal judgment, tho there be error in it. Every
Verdict in a criminal cause is legale judicium parium; and is so true in the
eye of the Law, that the party convicted has no remedy, tho he be wronged, for
there lies no Attaint in criminal matters. So the Sentence of the Rector and
Fellows in Mr. Colmer's case was, legitima convictio, because they had
conusance of his cause; and as the Law of the Realm cuts off Appeals from the
Verdict of a Jury in criminal causes, so do the Statutes of the College bar
all Appeals from such a Sentence.

Words are to be understood secundum subjectam materiam; the word proof
generally speaking is understood of proof by Jury, which is the Common Law
trial; but how many Cases have we in our Books in which that word is otherwise
taken, because determined so by the subject matter? Legitime convictus in the
Statutes of a College must of necessity be understood of such a Conviction as
the Statutes direct. But the Statutes neither do require, nor can prescribe
what we call a Legal Conviction, because they cannot invest the Rector, etc.
with authority to hold a Court, and administer Justice according to Law.

But for a full and clear answer (if what has been said do not suffice) let us
examine how the word Legitime is applied in other Statutes; and hear the
Founder explaining himself.

In the Statute de Elect. Rector. and ejus juramento, we find the word Legitime
twice used; 1. Where all Scholars in nominationibus, electionibus,
admissionibus, aliisve negotiis utilitatem Collegii concernentibus, etc.
interesse habentes, ac rite and legitime secundum consuetudinem vocati and
requisiti, and then refusing to give their Votes for the Election of a new
Rector, are subjected to a penalty. Here the word legitime is explained by per
consuetudinem, the custom of the College.

2 dly. Before they proceed to Election the Statute must be read per
Subrectorem, aut eo absente vel legitime impedito, per Scholarem maxim
Seniorem, etc. here legitime impediri imports a reasonable cause of absence.

3 dly. In the Statute de sedendo ad mensam; Battellarii nec in aula nec alibi
intra Collegium absque causa legitima and approbata, alium quam Latinum aut
Grecum exercitent sermonem sub paena pro arbitrio Rectoris injungenda. Here
causa legitima is such a cause as the Rector shall allow to be a reasonable
cause.

4 thly. In the Statute de ordinationibus bis in Anno ad minis legendis, it is
provided, That if any of the Scholars be absent from the Reading of the
Statutes, impedimento legitimo cessante, per eum qui convocavit approbando,
such absent Scholar shall be turned out of Commons for fifteen days. Here
impedimentum legitimum, is such hindrance as the Rector, or in his absence the
Sub-Rector shall allow to be a reasonable cause of Excuse.

5. By the Statute de Pernoctatione, if a Scholar offend the fourth time in
that kind and be thereof, Legitime convictus Judicio Rectoris and quinque
aliorum maxim Seniorum vel majoris partis eorundem, etc. he is to be expelled.
Here a lawful conviction is a conviction upon such a proof of his guilt as
shall satisfy the judgment of the Rector, and the more part of the five Senior
Fellows. And in the common acceptance of words, Coram Rectore, etc. and
quinque aliis Scholaribus maxim Senioribus in the Stat. de causis propter quas
Scholares, etc. is the same there with Judicio Rectoris and quinque aliorum,
etc. here.

Now since it appears by these Instances, that the word legitime had not in the
Founder's intention any relation to what in strictness of speech we call legal;
why should we tie it up to that sense in the case in question? Especially since
in the Statute for the Expulsion of the Rector, sufficientes informationes are
all that are required, and the sufficiency of them must rest in the judgment of
the persons that are empowered to expel him, because he is debarred of any
Appeal.

His third Argument is, That in the Oath it self, the word mea shows plainly,
that the demerita must be in a true, and not in an imputed sense. The English
of which I take to be, if the Author would deliver himself in such words as
other men use, That if a man be expelled for a Crime, of which he is really not
guilty, he may appeal, notwithstanding his Oath, because of the words propter
mea demerita; and a man that is innocent, is not expelled for his demerits.

Yes, a man that is indicted of Felony, and convicted and executed, tho
innocent, suffers for his Crime. When a man has undergone such a Trial as the
Law requires, and is convicted, in the eye of the Law he is guilty, and must
undergo whatever the Law inflicts, for a Crime that the Law says is his. But it
is a foolish and childish quibble to catch at the word mea, and apply it as the
Doctor has done: If the words propter mea demerita had been left out, yet all
men would have understood the Expulsion spoken of to be meant of an Expulsion
for an Offense; and then expressio eorum quae tacit insunt nibil operatur. Nor
does he act fairly, in quoting the words mea demerita, without the word forsan:
The Oath runs, propter mea forsan demerita; so that the Founder considered,
that tho a person ought not to be expelled but for his demerits, yet so it
might fall out, that a person expelled might be innocent* and otherwise of good
worth and fame; quantum cunque alias mihi probitatis and vitae merita
suffragentur: in which case, for peace and quiet sake, he requires an Oath to
submit to the Sentence, so far forth as not to call the persons that pronounced
it, in question for it before any Court or Judge whatsoever.

But this mischief would follow, Page 9.
if a person that is innocent of the Crime objected, might not appeal; viz. He
must be forced to own That by virtue of his Oath, whereof he is not guilty;
which were great impiety.

But I can see no such Consequence as that: If I am bound or sworn to submit to
an Award, as I am equally concluded by it, whether it be just or unjust, so my
submitting to it is no confession or acknowledgment on my part, that it is
just, but proceeds from the obligation that I have put my self under, to be
concluded by it, right or wrong. Mr. Colmer (upon a supposition of his
innocence) was under no obligation by his Oath to acknowledge the Sentence
just, or to own himself guilty; he might have taken all prudential methods of
clearing his Reputation, without impeaching or molesting the Persons who
pronounced Sentence against him: he might have had the Woman solemnly examined
before a Magistrate, in his own presence, where by many circumstances the true
Father might have been found out, and his innocence cleared: he might have had
an Action at Law against any of the Witnesses; and upon the Trial the truth
would, in all likelihood, have come out: he might, if injured, by discovering
and acquainting the Rector and Fellows who expelled him, with such Evidences of
his innocence as did not appear upon his Trial, have entitled himself to a
Readmission, which would have restored him in Reputation to all intents and
purposes. But this reason drawn from the word mea, etc. (if there were any
weight in it) would do Mr. Colmer no service, unless he were really innocent;
which that he is not, I appeal to the Depositions and Allegations aforesaid.

The fourth Reason is, That the plain design of the Oath is to secure the
College from any Action at Law, or Disturbance from abroad; That an Appeal to
the Visitor is not expressly forbidden; That, in an equitable sense, those
general words may be intended to restrain the Party from Appeal to an
extraneous, not a domestic Court; to a foreign Judge, not to the Visitor, who
is a part, and the first Member of the College.

It is true, that the design of the Oath was to secure the College from any
Action at Law, or disturbance from abroad; and as true, that the disturbance
given lately to the College, was a disturbance from abroad: The Bishop is not a
Member of the College; he has no Name in the Book, nor Seat in the Chapel, nor
any Lodging in the House, not so much as when he comes to Visit. All Judges,
but the Rector and seven senior Fellows, are Judices extranei, within the
intention of the Founder, as has been observed already from the Statute, De
causis, propter quas scholares, etc. where aliquis Judex extrinsecus
Ecclesiasticus vel Saecularis, is directly opposed to the Rector and senior
Fellows.

That an Appeal to the Visitor is not expressly mentioned, is true; that is, it
is not mentioned by name: but it is as expressly forbidden, as if it had been
named; as expressly as the Command, Thou shall do no Murder, forbids John a
Styles to commit Murder. The Author had read a Rule in Law, That the
Jurisdiction of the King's Courts at Westminster, is not excluded by an Act of
Parliament, unless they be named; and this he applies to the Power of a
Visitor. Whereas those Courts are of Ancient and General Jurisdiction, which
therefore is not supposed to be excluded, unless by name: But the Power of a
Visitor is created and limited by the Statutes of the College, and can
therefore claim no such exemption from the general words, whereby all Appeals
are renounced. Whereas he urges, That an Appeal to the Visitor was most obvious
to be thought on, and would therefore have been mentioned, if designed to be
precluded: I may with better reason turn it upon himself; If it was so obvious
to be thought on, it would have been excepted, if not designed to be
restrained, as well as other foreign Remedies.

The fifth Argument is, Because these Interpretations of the Oath are most
consonant to Law, and least tending to establish Arbitrary Power, and to
exclude legal Remedies.

It has been said already, That the Oath is to be taked in the plain, literal,
and grammatical sense, from which the Rector and Fellows are sworn not to
depart; and therefore it is in vain in this Case to urge specious pretenses of
what may seem in the Author's Opinion consonant to Law. The urging of
inconveniences, is quarrelling with the Oath it self, as if it needed mending.
We must now take it as it is, and it must and ought to be observed according to
the literal and grammatical sense, unless that sense be directly contrary to
Law; which it is not. It is not against the Law for a man to wave his right of
Appealing, no more than it is against Law for a man to give a release of
Errors. A man may cedere Jure suo. Quilibet potest renunciare Juri pro se
introducto. If an Appeal would lie to the Visitor, in case this Oath had not
been enjoined, then a renunciation quomodolibet appellationi in vim pacti, is a
renunciation of that remedy. The Founder must be allowed to grant his
Benefaction on his own terms: Cujus est dare ejus est disponere. And now this
is the true state of the present Case. A Fellow is admitted upon this
Condition, amongst others, That in case he shall be expelled by the Rector and
seven Seniors, he shall never give them nor the College any trouble, by seeking
remedy elsewhere. His accepting a Fellowship with this promise, is therefore
called a Pactum in the very Oath; quomodolibet appellationi in vim pacti
renuncio. I cannot but observe how these words are concealed by an etc. in the
late Pamphlet: they seemed to carry such a force along with them, as the Author
was not willing a Reader should take notice of. Tho if it should be admitted
that a person expelled as aforesaid, is not precluded from seeking remedy by
Law; and that so private a Constitution as that of a particular College, does
not, nor can exclude the Jurisdiction of the King's Courts: yet it cannot in
this Case but exclude an Appeal to the Visitor, whose Authority is grounded
upon, and created by the Statutes themselves. And can it be conceived, that a
Founder would invest the Visitor with a Power to receive Appeals, and at the
same time lay an Obligation by Oath upon all of his Foundation not to bring any?

What is said concerning Arbitrary Power, is ridiculous: Arbitrary Power is
power exercised without or against Law; but the Rector and Fellows have Power
by their Statutes, and those confirmed by Letters Patent; and they are under
an Oath to observe their Statutes, and to act according to the direction and
intent of them. And why should it be thought, that the Judgment of eight
Divines, and under an Oath, should be more arbitrary than that of a single
Commissary, not sworn at all?

As for the exclusion of legal Remedies, a man may, to be sure, preclude
himself of them; and if a renunciation quibuslibet Juris remediis, does not
preclude him as far as words can do it, I know not what words can. This
Constitution, perhaps, does not restrain the Jurisdiction of the Courts of Law;
but it certainly makes him perjured, that having taken this Oath, shall apply
himself to them for redress. And where is the Justice in allowing a man legal
remedies against wrong-doing, when he has quitted them of his own accord? When
a man has submitted to a Rule of Court not to bring a Writ of Error, or a Bill
in Equity; does he undergo any hardship by being bound to obey it, tho there be
Error in the Judgment, or tho he might have had relief in Equity, had he not
tied himself up from seeking it? Tho there is little reason from the
Constitution to apprehend that wrong will be done. And it is every whit as
reasonable, and perhaps much more so, that one Fellow should acquiesce in the
Sentence of the College, than that the Rector and Seniors should, upon his
Complaint, be called before another Judge, to whom they must submit without
Appeal.

It must be remembered too, That tho the Founder has taken good care that none
of the Fellows may receive wrong, yet he was concerned to do it in such a
manner, as that no Grievance, Prejudice, or Disturbance might accrue to the
Society, in case any such wrong should happen. The Common Good and Interest of
the Whole was the chief End of his Legislation: and for a Private Interest to
give place to a Public Good, is not only reasonable in it self, but absolutely
necessary for the support of all Communities.

Thus I have endeavored to give an Answer to the Doctor's five Reasons why an
Appeal should lie.

The next thing our Author does, is to acquaint us with the Arguments upon
which his Lordship grounded his Opinion, That an Appeal lay to himself; and
that, as Ordinary, He was the proper Judge of Appeals.

Page 12.
The first is, Since a Fellow may appeal, there must be a competent Judge of the
Appeal; and not only no other intermediate Judge can be assigned, but all other
Judges are, in Causes relating to the College, expressly excluded.

If it be not contrary to the Statutes for a Fellow to appeal, there must be a
competent Judge of the Appeal: But I have endeavored to prove, and hope I have
made it clear, That a Fellow may not appeal. And a farther Argument may be
drawn for it, from the Founder's not having appointed a Judge to receive and
determine an Appeal; which without question he would have done, if he had not
intended there should be no Appeals; for he is very particular in directing how
and by whom the several Controversies and Differences, that may arise within
the Society, shall be composed.

All other Judges are excluded by Statute. What are they excluded from? Why,
from receiving Appeals. If all other Judges besides the Bishop of Exeter had
been expressly by Statute excluded from receiving Appeals, it would be very
strong on his Lordship's side, that he might receive them: But the Statute that
is quoted for this, is the Statute de Visitatione, which commits to the Bishop
of Exeter, and his Deputy, a^ praeterea nemini, Power to come and Visit. Which
if it makes at all for his purpose, it proves too much; for if Visiting and
receiving Appeals be one and the same thing, then Dr. Masters his coming as he
did, was a Visitation; and his Lordship could not justify his own coming again
till five years after. But this Statute has nothing in it concerning Appeals;
and it is observable how hard his Lordship was put to it to find out a
colorable pretense for his Jurisdiction.

His second Reason is: The force of the word Ordinarius does necessarily import
Universality of Jurisdiction: and therefore, Page 12.
where no intermediate Jurisdiction is placed any where else, this, to prevent
the defect of Justice, must be let in.

This is such a Reason, as that Respect to his Lordship's Character tempts me
to believe the Author has imposed it upon him, and that his Lordship never
entertained so weak a thought himself. The word Ordinarius is not in the
Statute Substantive; the Bishop is constituted Ordinarius Visitator, which in
English signifies the Visitor of course. To dream of Universality of
Jurisdiction, and of Episcopal Jurisdiction, because of the sound of a word, is
a Conceit that needs no other refutation than the mentioning of it.

The third Reason is: Because the words in the beginning of the Statute are
general, and apt for an universal Provision; and therefore, tho the Visitation
of the whole College be restrained to Requisition, or five years, the general
words cannot be satisfied therewith; for there may be a Combination of the
Majority of the Seniors, who only have power to desire it.

But those general words that the Author urges, are but by way of Introduction
to the particular Provision that is made afterward for the obviating and
redressing those inconveniences that are recited in the Preamble of the
Statute. The Founder takes notice; That it is impossible to make Laws and
Statutes, which may not by some invented fraud be defeated of their due
execution; and eam ob causam reposes a confidence in the Bishops of Exeter for
the time being, ut ad hoc alvearium conservandum invigilent, ut Statuta and
Ordinationes dicti Collegii firmiter observentur, etc. Jura, libertates and
privilegia defendantur and protegantur. And in order to the effecting of all
this, what particular provision is made? Why, Ea de causa lieeat Domino
Episcopo, etc. and nulli alii nec aliis, quoties per Rectorem etc. fuerit
requisitus, nec non absque requisitione ulla de quinquennio in quinquennium
semel, ad dictum Collegium per se vel suum Commissarium, etc. libere accedere.
And then directs how the Visitation shall be proceeded in. To argue, That
because some general words in the Preamble may seem not sufficiently answered
by the Provision made in the Body of the Statute, is to find fault with the
Founder, as not having provided a Plaster broad enough for the Sore, which
must therefore be stretched by Construction. When an Act of Parliament recites
a general inconvenience, and proceeds to Enact how it shall be redressed, the
Judges in Westminster Hall do not use to extend the Purview farther than the
Lawmakers have done; but leave that to the Wisdom of future Parliaments. It
was not for nothing, that the word semel was inserted. Can it be rationally
supposed, that he who gave the Bishop leave to have free access to the College
once in five years, ea de causa, that the Statutes and Ordinances thereof might
be duly observed, would, if he had been asked the question, Whether he might
come oftener? have answered, Yes, he may come as often as he pleases? He that
tied up the requisition to be made by the Rector, or, in his absence, by the
Subrector, and four other senior Fellows at least, (and quatuor alios ad minus
ex septem maxim senioribus) would he, if he had been asked, Whether he might
come upon the complaint of any particular Scholar? have answered, Yes, upon
application made to him by any Member of the College; or without such
application, if he please himself? The Author would make a distinction betwixt
a Visitation of the whole College, and some other more particular Visitation,
or the Bishop's coming to set some one Controversy straight: But the Statute
de Visitatione, which is the Law that empowers him to come at all, gives him no
other Authority than to come and Visit the College; and that no oftener than as
aforesaid.

If his coming upon a particular occasion, without making what the Author calls
a general and solemn Visitation, shall not bar him from coming again within
five years, then he may come when he pleases, Visit as often as he list; and
whereas the General Visitation is tied up to three days, he may make his
particular Visitations hold five years apiece, and the College at that rate
might never be rid of him. At that rate, the word semel, and the request of
quatuor ad minus, etc. were vainly inserted.

The supposed Combination of the Majority of the Seniors, is but a supposition,
and will therefore be best answered by another supposition; viz. If the Visitor
come oftener than the Statutes direct, and when he is not requested by the
persons who only have Authority to request him; he may combine with some
restless and turbulent Spirits in the College, with Criminals, and such as
cannot be safe under a good Discipline, to break in upon the Statutes; he may
assume an Authority to undo whatever the Rector and senior Fellows have done
for the good of the House; instead of taking care that the Statutes and
Ordinances be firmly observed, he may listen to the Advice of a Civilian, who
may furnish him with Distinctions to overthrow them; and these Proceedings of
his may come to be justified by a young Lawyer in Print, which may work in some
unwary Heads a belief that all is well and statutable, when by this means the
College is brought into Confusion.

The fourth Reason is; The Visitor was upon like reasons limited to a
Quinquennial, as a Bishop to a Triennial Visitation; viz. to prevent the Charge
of Proxies and Sportulage: and therefore as a Bishop, when barred from solemn
and costly Visitations, is not restrained from exercising the Ordinary Acts of
Jurisdiction; so neither during the Quinquennial Term does the Visitor's Power
cease.

That the Visitor was limited upon like reasons that a Bishop was, is gratis
dictum; but the difference is this, and it is very plain: The Bishop has an
Ordinary Jurisdiction by Law all over his Diocese, and had before the Canon
concerning Triennial Visitations was made. But the Visitor has no Jurisdiction
nor Power at all, but by the Statutes of the College; They create his
Authority, and antecedent to them he has none; and therefore what degree of
Power they invest him with, that he has, and no more. And therefore his Power
during the quinquennial Term, is a Chimaera, a fancy: the Government of the
College during all that time is lodged elsewhere; and any application made to
him to concern himself in it, is null and void, unless made by the Rector and
Four at least of the seven senior Fellows.

Upon the whole then, I hope, it appears by what has been said, That Mr. Colmer
had no grievance done him; That if he had, he had no liberty of Appealing; That
the Bishop of Exeter, neither as Ordinary nor otherwise, is Judge of Appeals:
and ought not in Justice to have received his.

The Author of the Account, entitles his Second Section, 2
Concerning the proceeding of the Bishop and his Commissary upon the Appeal.

Upon which Subject, I shall not much insist: for if the Appeal it self was
unlawful, All that was done pursuant to it, is so too. He takes some pains to
free the Bishop from any imputation of partiality to Mr. Colmer. I Charge him
with none. I only argue against his Jurisdiction. He quarrels with the Rector
for denying the Jurisdiction of the Court; when all that the Rector and Fellows
did, was only to tender a Protestation against the Commissaries intermedling
with Mr. Colmer's Case. They submitted to him as the Visitors Commissary, and
desired him to proceed ad alia Visitationis negotia. He relates some
extravagant Expressions of the Rectors, which were never said by him; all that
he said like it, amounting to no more than this, That from censures inflicted
within the College, no Redress was to be sought elsewhere.

The two Protestations tendered at that time, are transcribed and inserted at
the end of this Discourse, to rectify some mistakes that the Author has
committed, relating to this business.

I pass by also what he says concerning the Vice-Chancellor's having no Title
to the Cognizance of this cause; the Question not being here, whether the
Vice Chancellor have, or no? But whether the Visitor?

What follows, is declamation.

3.
The third Section concerns the Offenses of the Rector and others, which obliged
the Visitor to make his Solemn and General Visitation.

The first Offense that he alleges, is, That as soon as Mr. Colmer was
reinstated by the Commissary, he was, immediately after his departure, again
Expelled, or rather Disowned by the Rector. For the Justice of this second
Sentence, I refer to the Relation given of it before, and the Depositions that
were taken in the Cause.

The only Objection made against this Second Sentence of Expulsion, is, Page 12.
that either Mr. Colmer was now a Fellow or not; If a Fellow, why disavowed? If
not, how could he fall under the Rector's Jurisdiction? He was not a Rightful
Fellow, because expelled by those that had power to expel him, and for an
Offense that merits Expulsion by the Statute. But he was a Pretended Fellow,
because restored by the Commissary, who exercised a pretended Authority
therein. His Name was writ in the Book again, he kept his Chamber and his Place
in the Hall and Chapel. He pretended himself to be a Fellow, and consequently
subjected himself to the Government of the College. The Rector would not have
claimed any Jurisdiction over him, if he would have laid no claim to his
Fellowship: But by so doing, he subjected himself to the Jurisdiction of the
Statute; so that Mr. Colmer, at least by his own admittance, must be bound by
this Second Sentence, because by claiming his Fellowship, he owned the Rector's
Authority.

Page 12.
But there is no Statute provided for the Expulsion of Intruders and pretended
Fellows. There is a Statute provided for the Expulsion of Fellows; and a man
may be a Fellow, that has not a good Title to his Fellowship. Officers de Facto
are liable to the same Penalties for undue executing of their Offices; Cr.
Eliz. 775. Hales Plac. Cor. 114. Moor 112. n. 252.
that Officers de Jure are. If a mere Layman be inducted into a Benefice, he
is, whilst he continues in possession, a Parson de Facto; he is equally subject
to his Ordinary, as if he were a Clerk. A Jailer de facto shall answer for
Escapes. Nay, and we find a difference made betwixt an Officer that has a
color of Right, and one that has not so much as that. Mr. Colmer had a color
to claim his Fellowship, because reinstated by the Visitor's Commissary, who
had a Jurisdiction in the College by the Statute, and claimed the Cognizance of
Mr. Colmer's Cause: So that he was at least a pretended Fellow, or a Fellow de
facto, and therefore subject to the Laws of the Society.

The other Crimes that he reckons up, are personal to the Rector; with which
the world has, or will receive satisfaction, that he is unworthily aspersed.

The fourth Section concerns the Visitation it self, 4.
the Evidence there given, and the Sentences there pronounced.

In this Part, the first particular to be discoursed of, is, the ground upon
which the Rector and Fellows protested against the Bishop's Visiting at that
time; viz. because Dr. Masters, by a Commission from the Bishop, had lately
exercised Acts of Jurisdiction and Visitation in the College; and that
therefore within the Term of five years, which was not yet expired, his
Lordship was barred from any other Visitation.

The Question then is, Whether Dr. Masters's coming and acting as he did, was a
Visitation within the intention of the Statute de Visitatione, or not?

That it was, may be argued, 1. Because the Grant of License to the Bishop of
Exeter to Visit the College, is expressed in these words; viz. Liceat Domino
Episcopo, etc. absque requisitione ulla de quinquennio in quinquennium, semel
ad dictum Collegium, per se, vel suum Commissarium, etc. libere accedere, etc.
It Is not mentioned, whether to Visit the Whole, or a Part; whether to make a
general Enquiry of matters relating to the Statutes, or only some one or more.
Only the Visitor is empowered to come in person, or send his Commissary, upon
what occasion soever, once in five years, and must have liberum accessum. They
may freely come, and exercise their Power of Visiting. The Bishop has
Authority, when he so comes or sends, super omnibus and singulis particulis and
Articulis in dictis Statutis contentis, etc. Rectorem, Scholares and Electos
interrogare and inquirere, etc. But if he does not think fit, or find no
occasion to make a general Visitation, may he not confine himself, or restrain
his Commissary to some particulars? Cui licet quod majus est, ei licet and quod
minus. Et Omne majus continet in se minus. But whatever Power he exerts,
whether generally, or but in a particular Case, proceeds from him as Visitor,
because he has no Authority within or over the College, in any other capacity;
nor can exercise any act of Jurisdiction, but at the times appointed by the
Statutes for his Visitation. Now, Dr. Masters did libere accedere, and made use
of the Visitor's Authority in several Acts. He set up a Citation, summoned the
Rector and Fellows, called over their Names, adjourned from time to time, and
from one place in the College to another; sentenced a Fellow to be restored,
awarded him Costs, and wrote his Name in the Book.

And what tho his Proceedings, in taking cognizance of Mr. Colmer's Cause, were
illegal, and therefore protested against by the College? Does a Visitor's
stretching his Authority beyond its bounds, make his Visitation therefore stand
for nothing? At that rate, he may do as many Illegal Acts as he will; and the
Wisdom of the Founder, in composing this Statute of Visitation, consists only
in tying him up from doing the College any good, and looking to the due
execution of their Statutes oftener than once in five years.

2. The Commission by which Dr. Masters acted, was granted by the Bishop, by
virtue of that Clause in the Statute that gives him leave to come or send his
Deputy to Visit.

3. The Bishop styles himself in the Commission, Jonathan Providentia Divina
Exon Episcopus, Collegii Exon in Academia Oxon Patronus and Visitator: So that
he conceived himself entitled to make out such a Commission no otherwise than
as he was Visitor. And as such, Mr. Colmer had appealed to him. Ad nos Exon.
Episcopum praedictum and Collegii Exoniensis memorati Visitatorem legitimum
rite and legitime appellaverit.

4. That the Commissary did visit, may be inferred from the Notion of a
Visitation, which the Author himself has given us; and we may presume it comes
from Dr. Bouchier: The Nature of a Visitation, says he, is a voluntary Enquiry
into matters Criminal, and Correction thereupon. Now, Dr. Masters's coming was
voluntary; he came at no request: (unless Mr. Colmer's Appeal must stand for a
Request). And he was to enquire into matters Criminal; viz. Whether Mr. Colmer
were guilty of Incontinence? Ad cognoscendum and discutiendum hujusmodi causam
appellationis, totumque negotium principale cum suis incidentibus,
emergentibus, dependentibus, annexis and connexis quibuscunque. Et ad audiendum
hinc inde proposita and proponenda and ad probationes admittendum. He was
likewise to enquire, Whether the Rector and Fellows had done Injustice in
expelling him? And that Correction was to follow upon this Enquiry, is
manifest: For if the person that had been censured, should have been found a
Criminal, the Punishment of Expulsion was to have been entirely inflicted. For
upon Mr. Colmer's Appeal, the Bishop had granted an Inhibition, by which it was
intended he should remain in possession till the re-hearing of his Cause.

That Dr. Masters's coming was really a Visitation, is so clear, that the
Author is forced to have recourse to a distinction betwixt a general and a
particular Visitation; and therefore calls that of the Bishop in person, a
solemn and general Visitation. But all we desire is, to have Dr. Masters his
coming, and acting as he did, stand for a Visitation; be it general or
particular, it is all one to us; The Statutes make no difference; they give way
to no Visitation at all, without requisition, more than once in five years.

And that a Visitor's exerting any act of Jurisdiction within a College, when
he has no Authority but as Visitor, has been accounted a Visitation, may appear
by what happened in another College in Oxford not many years since, where Dr.
Morley, late Bishop of Winchester, was their Visitor, and confined, as the
Bishops of Exeter are in our Case, to a quinquennial Visitation. That Bishop
must be allowed to understand the extent of his Authority as well as another,
and equally concerned to support it: yet when a Member of the College, that had
been debarred of a Fellowship, carried a complaint to him as Visitor, he
refused to take cognizance of it, because five years were not elapsed since his
last Visitation. And tho he did it afterward, he was empowered by a Royal
Commission; so that he was not sensible of any Jurisdiction that he had, as
Ordinary, to receive the Appeal; and conceived his coming or sending to
determine it by his own Authority, as Visitor, to be as much a Visitation, as
what the Author calls a solemn and general Visitation; or at least concluded,
that the Statutes by which he was empowered to Visit but once in five years,
debarred him from taking any Judicial Cognizance of the Affairs of the College
at other times.

But the Bishop of Exeter had power to receive and determine this Appeal, as
Ordinary. Obj. p. 28.


This is a new Doctrine, never heard of in the College before, nor perhaps ever
thought on till of late. That he was applied to by Mr. Colmer, as Visitor, and
granted Dr. Masters his Commission as such, and that Dr. Masters was received
by the College as the Visitor's Commissary, has been observed already; to which
may be added, that the word Ordinarius is not so much as in the Commission:
nay, and that he acted as such, by complying with the Statute de Visitatione,
in not adjourning his Commission beyond the three days limited by the Statute,
has been opened in the Narrative. But when the Bishop was resolved, upon Mr.
Colmer's second Expulsion, to come himself, then was this Invention set on
foot, Ibid.
That the determining an Appeal, was no Visitation, because the Commission was
restrained to the hearing and determining that Cause only: and he might receive
an Appeal, as Ordinary.

This is the next fallacy that the Author goes upon; and which has as little
appearance of Law and Reason, as any of the rest. For how comes the Bishop of
Exeter to have Episcopal Jurisdiction over the Members of Exeter College? The
Jurisdictions of Bishops are circumscribed within the limits of their several
Dioceses; which bounds are set to them, either by positive Laws in being, or by
immemorial Custom, which presupposes a Law. And they are not only bounded as
to Place, but with respect to the subject matter of their Jurisdiction; viz.
the Causes that fall under their Cognizance. Where an Act of Parliament or a
Canon, received and submitted to as a Law of this Nation, does not empower a
Bishop to hold Plea, there he has no Authority; and if a Bishop breaks this
boundary, and invades the conusance of Causes that are not what the Law calls
Spiritual, because submitted to the Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Courts,
he incurs the Penalty of an old Statute, that of Praemuniri.

The College being a College of Divines, and the Visitor an Ecclesiastical
Person, has, it seems, with the help of some misapplied words in the Statutes,
Ordinarius Visitator, and per censuras, helped the Doctor and the Author to
dress up a Notion of Episcopal Jurisdiction in this Case: whereas the Bishop's
Authority is wholly conferred upon him by the Statutes, and as Visitor only;
and the Visitation of a College, by virtue of a Right derived from the Founder,
let who will be entitled to it, is an act of Temporal Jurisdiction, because the
Founding of a College, and giving them Laws for the good Government of the
Society, is a mere Temporal Act, which a Temporal Lord is as capable of, as a
Spiritual: and such Temporal Lord, or other Lay person, may equally exercise
all Jurisdictions whatsoever that a Founder may reserve to himself, or confer
upon another.

This invading of Temporal Rights, under a pretense of Ecclesiastical
Authority, and particularly invading and encroaching upon the Temporal Rights
of Founders, occasioned that remarkable Statute of Provisions made in the 25th
year of the Reign of K. Edward III. in which the King, Lords and Commons
entitle themselves to their Temporal Rights, such as the Custody of Voidances,
Presentiments, Collations, etc. as Lords and Advowees; and declare against
disturbances of free Elections, etc. as being against the good disposition and
will of the first Founders. The same will appear by perusing the other Statutes
against Provisors. All the Rights of a Founder, belonging to him as such, are
recoverable by the Common Law of the Realm; and, if controverted, are
determinable by That, and That only. The Right of Visitation is one of them,
when reserved to the Founder, or by him settled upon, or invested in any other
person: whoever is entitled to it, derives his Title from him; and it is a
Temporal Right. For a Visitor, because himself falls out to be an
Ecclesiastical Person, to apply Ecclesiastical Censures upon such an occasion,
is as proper, as if a Bishop should Excommunicate his Tenant for not paying his
Rent, or his Servant for not performing the Duty of his place.

Ann. 3 and 4 Eliz. Coveney President of Magdalen-College in Oxford, appealed
to the Queen in Chancery, from a Sentence of Deprivation given by the Bishop of
Winchester, Founder and Visitor of that College: The discussing of which Appeal
was committed to Justice Brown and Justice Weston; who, after diverse
Conferences with the Civilians, resolved, That the Appeal did not lie; for that
this Cause was out of the Statutes of 24 and 25 Hen. 8. Nor did he observe the
Order of the Statutes, ( i. e. he ought not to have appealed to the Queen from
the Sentence of the Bishop, but (if the Cause had belonged to Ecclesiastical
Conuzance) the Appeal ought to have been from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and
from Him to the Queen). And this matter of Deprivation was merely Temporal, and
as by a Lay-Patron. Ex hoc sequitur (says the Book) That if the President be
Expelled, he may have an Assize, or other Action at Common Law; per que, etc.
Dyer fol. 209. a. This is an Authority in point, That the Visitation of a
College, by a Founder or his Successor, is a matter of mere Temporal Right.

Nor do the words in the Statutes that are laid hold on, warrant any such
Inference as is made from them. That of Ordinarius Visitator does not deserve
an Answer. Nor must the words per Censuras needs be understood so as to give
the Visitor the Jurisdiction of an Ordinary. It is not said, per Censuras
Ecclesiasticas; nor if it had been expressed so, would it have proved the
Point; since an Archdeacon may inflict Ecclesiastical Censures. The word
Censura signifies no more than a Penalty, and sometimes less, a Rebuke, a
Reprehension. The late Act of Convocation at Oxford is called Censura, tho it
proceeded from no Ecclesiastical Authority. When a man is said to have been
censured in the Star Chamber, no body understands the meaning to be, That that
Court Excommunicated him: It may with as much reason be pretended, That where
ever the word Judex is used, Judex Ecclesiasticus must be understood, as that
the word Censura must of necessity import Ecclesiastical Censures. But if the
Statute had been full in it, and that Ecclesiastical Censures had been
expressed, yet the Bishop's Title to his Episcopal Jurisdiction there, would
have been never a whit the better. For how can the private Statutes of a
College bring any Crime whatsoever within the lash of Excommunication, for
which a person is not by the Law of the Realm liable to that Censure? A Found^r
of a College may direct, That if I will enjoy the fruit of his Benefaction, I
shall conform to the Orders, and submit to the Discipline of the Society: But
he can no more subject me to Excommunication for breaking his Statutes, than to
loss of Life or Limb, or of my private Estate. I hold not them of him, nor
enjoy them by any Right or Title derived from him.

So that if this College were situate within the Diocese of Exeter, yet the
Members thereof would not, as such, be subject to him, as Bishop; nor would
Offenses against their Statutes bring them under his Episcopal Power, because
his Jurisdiction over them, as Visitor, is a Temporal Jurisdiction; and his
general Jurisdiction over the whole Diocese, as Ordinary, is of quite another
nature. And quando duo Jura concurrunt in una persona, aequum est ac si essent
in diversis.

Besides all this, no Instance can be found by traditionary Report, or the
Monuments of the College, that ever any former Bishop of Exeter exercised a
Spiritual Jurisdiction over Exeter-College, or any Member of it; or did ever,
in any Instruments of theirs to the College, assume that Name, or in any wise
claim the Authority implied in it: and yet the College is of near 400 years
standing.

But whereas the Author tells us, p. 37. That this, as all other Colleges in
Oxford, being exempt from Episcopal and Metropolitical Jurisdiction, is
immediately subject to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Visitor, if he be
a Person competent and fit to exercise such Authority: he must mean, if he mean
any thing, That whatever Authority a Bishop has, the Persons that are subject
to such Authority, are subject to his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and then if
a Bishop be Lord of a Manor within his Diocese, or, at least, in a place
exempt, he, being a Person competent and fit to exercise such Authority, may
Excommunicate his Tenants for not appearing at his Court, and performing the
Services incident to their Tenures. A Bishop that is Chancellor, for Example,
or Justice of Peace, may Excommunicate Suitors and Offenders, and enforce his
Orders by Ecclesiastical Censures. This is every whit as rational, as that a
Bishop, being a Visitor of a College, etc. should take his Episcopal Authority
along with him when he goes to Visit; the Visitation of a College being an act
of Temporal Jurisdiction, as much as any of the rest.

But the Colleges in Oxford are exempt from Episcopal and Metropolitical
Jurisdiction, and therefore they must be subject to the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdicton of their Visitor, if a Person competent, etc. What will become then
of those Colleges, whose Visitors are of the Laity? must they be subject to no
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction at all? Yes; both are subject to the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction belonging to the University; which belng now legally exempted from
the Jurisdiction of any Bishop or Archbishop, the Chancellor of the University,
who was formerly always an Ecclesiastic, had the Jurisdiction transferred to
him. And since of later-times Laymen of higher Rank have been elected into
that Office, the Statutes have provided, That the Vice Chancellor, who is to
execute the Powers, be a Person in Holy Orders. So that there is no necessity
to invest the Visitor with Episcopal Jurisdiction, because the University is
exempt from that of the Bishop of the Diocese, or Archbishop of the Province.

Nor was this College, for ought we can be informed of, ever reputed to be
within the Diocese, or belonging to the Diocese of Exeter. It was anciently
within that of Lincoln, and has since been exempted, together with the rest of
the University; but not subjected to that of Exeter, nor of any other Bishop
whatsoever. It is set free ab omni Jurisdictione, Dominio vel Potestate
quorumcunque Archiepiscoporum, neenon Episcoporum and aliorum Ordinariorum:
These are the words. And this Exemption reaches to every particular College,
and every Member of every College; and has been always maintained accordingly,
and strictly insisted upon by the University: particularly, in that famous
Controversy, Temp. Rich. 2. when Archbishop Arundel pretended a Right of
Visitation there; and again in K. Charles I.'s time, when Laud was Archbishop.
But yet we cannot think we are beholden to this Exemption, for our being free
from the Episcopal Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Exeter; forasmuch as the
College was never subject to them as Ordinaries, and cannot therefore properly
be said to be exempted from a Jurisdiction that never had a being.

Nor can the Founder be supposed to have had it in his thoughts to cloth the
Visitor with such an Universality of Jurisdiction as is contended for: If that
had been his intention, or if he had thought it implied in the word Ordinarius,
he would not have restrained him as he has done; He can exercise no
Jurisdiction, but at times of Visitation; he cannot Visit, but once in five
years, unless requested by the College; and when he comes, his Visitation can
last no longer than two or three days at most. He cannot expel a Scholar,
without the consent of the Rector and Three of the seven senior Fellows, tune
in Vniversitate praesentium; nor the Rector, without the consent quatuor ex
septem maxim senioribus supradictis; that is, tune in Vniversitate
praesentibus; nor can he inflict any Punishment at all, but secundum exigentiam
Statutorum. To which may be added, That the Visitor can put no sense of his own
upon the Statutes that shall be binding, but upon request made to him by the
Rector and the major part of the Fellows. Vid. Stat. de Admiss. Scholar. Item,
interpretationibus, injunctionibus, declarationibus and expositionibus per
Reverendos in Christo Patres Successores primi and originalis Fundatoris nostri
Episcopos, super dubiis Statutorum emergentibus, ad eosdem Episcopos ex
consensu Rectoris and majoris partis Scholarium delatis, faciendis, obediam.

Since therefore the Bishop of Exeter has no Jurisdicton, as Ordinary,. 2.
within Exeter-College, and has really incurred a Praemunire for acting as
such, it is consequential thereupon, That whatever he has done as such, is
illegal, and, the cause arising out of his Diocese, void in Law. There is an
end then of his Excommunications, and of his Suspension ab Officio and
Beneficio. And his declaring Dr. H.'s place void, (which is, in effect, an
Amotion) and depriving the Rector, without the concurrence of such of the
Society as the Statute requires ^o consent to such Acts of the Visitor, was
such a Declaration and Deprivation as the Statutes do not warrant: For these he
did as Visitor. And the Rector and five at least of the Seven maxim seniorum
were present in the University, so that their Concurrence might have been had:
But the Concurrence of Seniors to all Public Acts, Acc. p. 36.
is always understood to mean the consent of those that are the most senior of
those that are present (true present in the University, as these were) and he
that by his own Crime incapacitates himself from performing any Acts of his
place, is by the Rules of Law and Reason reputed as absent. And it would be
absurd in expelling a Rector, to require the consent of those Fellows that are
participes Criminis, and are by the Visitor himself for that Contempt suspended
ab Officio, etc. This is begging the Question. And, whether it were a Crime or
Contempt to oppose and protest against the Bishop's Visiting at that time, is
yet sub Judice. And if it were a contempt, the Bishop, at least, was no proper
Judge of it. For since he could not exert all the Powers of Visitation without
their Concurrence, and they protested against his power to visit then, and
insisted upon it, as a matter of Right that they were not obliged to appear;
the Bishop ought not to have proceeded in his Visitation till this Difference
between him and them had been determined. He petitioned the Council indeed, and
they left him to the Usual course of Law. But instead of taking that Course, he
makes himself Judge in his own Cause; and since he could not amove them one by
one as Visitor, because that could not be done without the Concurrence of the
Rector, he having two strings to his Bow, betakes himself to his Episcopal
Jurisdiction, and suspends them ab Officio and Beneficio by wholesale.

The course of Law, which he might have taken, and would have done, if the
Peace and Quiet of the College had been so much his care, as the asserting his
own double-fac'd Jurisdiction, and perhaps revenging some pretended Affronts,
is this; He might have had a Mandamus out of the Court of King's Bench,
directed to the Rector, etc. of Exeter College, to command them to receive him
as Visitor, and to submit to him as such. Upon the return of which Writ, the
College might have shown cause why they did not. By this means the matter would
have been fairly and judicially determined by a proper Court; in whose judgment
all parties would have been compellable to acquiesce. But instead of this, the
Bishop, who in this Controversy concerning his Right to Visit at that time, was
but a party, makes himself a Judge in his own Cause: Which is so contrary to
common sense, that we read in our Books, that even an Act of Parliament made
against natural Equity, as to make a man Judge in his own Cause, would be void
in it self, for Jura naturae sunt immutabilia. Hob. 87. 8 Co. 118.

This Suspension therefore of the Seniors ab Officio and Beneficio being done
by the Bishop as Ordinary, where he had not the least pretense to the
Jurisdiction of an Ordinary, and he in pronouncing it, having made himself a
Judge in his own Cause, was in it self a Nullity, and the Rector and Fellows so
Suspended were not in the least incapacitated thereby; and consequently his
declaring Dr. H's place void [without the Concurrence of the Rector and Three
of the maxim Seniores, then present in the Vniversity] was a void Declaration,
and not warranted by the Statutes. And his Deprivation of the Rector
afterward, without the consent of Four of those Seniors, was void in like
manner.

I must take notice here by the by, That this Suspension of a Fellow ab
Officio, is a thing not warranted by the Statutes at all; Expulsion and
College-Censures ( viz. turning out of Commons, and withholding their Profits
for a time) we know, and admit of: but a Suspension ab Officio is intended to
disable them from performing their Duty, as Fellows; which they being sworn to,
how can the Visitor suspend them, unless he could dispense with their Oaths? or
that he were expressly empowered by some Statutes of the College so to suspend
them? And then indeed the Obligaiion of their Oaths would consequentially cease
during such Suspension.

Again, as they are sworn to officiate, so they are liable to Expulsion if they
do not give their Votes, etc. when required; Vid. Stat. de Electione Rector',
etc. and consequently, they cannot submit to this Suspension, without hazarding
Expulsion.

A Bishop's suspending ab Officio within his Diocese, cannot be argued from in
this Case: For there he suspends from that Office or Cure which Himself or his
Predecessors conferred; and it is his own Cure, as well as the Incumbent's; and
he has Power, and does accordingly appoint another to supply it: whereas this
Suspension is from an Office that he neither did nor could confer; nor has he
Power to appoint another. And therefore his suspending the Fellows ab Officio,
and not having Power to substitute others in their rooms, has actually put the
College into a state of Distraction and Confusion; nor is there, in effect, or
indeed can be, any such thing as good Government in it, till these
Irregularities are redressed.

But besides this, there are several other things, both in Dr. H.'s and the
Rector's Case, that show the Injustice of his Lordship's Proceedings against
them.

Page 34.
As for Dr. H. it is pretended, That his Benefice is wholly incompatible with
his Fellowship. The Condition of his Parsonage is, That he shall reside upon it
four parts in five in the year; and the Condition of his Fellowship is, That he
shall not be absent from his College above fifty days. All Livings rated above
8 l. per Annum, in any public Records, are inconsistent with a Fellowship; and
upon this, 100l. are settled by Act of Parliament, etc.

This is what is urged. In the first place, this very Question, Whether Dr. H.
by accepting St. Anne's Living, had lost his Fellowship, was Statutably
determined two years before? The Rector, in the year 1688. declared, That he
thought himself bound to pronounce the Doctor's place void by Cession, as
inconsistent with his Benefice, on the Statute de Promotione, etc. and that he
would do it, if it were not forthwith Statutably decided. The Doctor hereupon
desired, That (by consent of the Society) it might be referred to the Visitor.
But the Rector thought it more agreeable to the Statutes, and more easy to
refer it to the Vice Chancellor. And the Doctor's Who was no other than Dr.
Bouchier.
Council being consulted, declared likewise, That the Vice Chancellor was the
sole proper Judge in that Case. Whereupon the matter was brought before him,
who upon a full hearing of both sides, declared his Judgment, That the said
Benefice and Fellowship were consistent, according to the plain, literal sense
of the Statutes, which (as has been said) the Rector and Fellows are sworn to
observe; and therefore that the Rector could not declare the Doctor's Place
void. Upon which, the Rector desisted and acquiesced, being sworn to stand to
the Vice-Chancellor's determination in that Case; vid. Stat. de Jurament.
Rectoris. This is the Scandal which the Bishop thought fit to take off from the
College, as the Author terms it. And indeed there needs no more be said upon
this matter, but that having once been Statutably determined, it ought not to
have been moved again.

But to take off the false Glosses, whereby the Author has imposed upon
himself, and may upon others in this matter, I will endeavor to set the Case
in its true light.

By the Statute de Promotione, etc. it is provided, That si aliquis Scholaris,
etc. uxorem duxerit, aut Matrimonium vel sponsalia contraxerit, aut alicui
obsequio, officio aut exrcitio, per quod a Studio in Vniversitate Oxon' ultra
unum mensem in Anno, preter quinquaginta dies, superius in Statuto de Exitu ab
Vniversitate, etc. pre-exceptos, impediatur, se commiserit: That then immediate
postquam aliquod istorum Rectori, etc. cognitum fuerit, omnes jus and Titulum,
etc. amittat.

Now the acceptance of an Ecclesiastical Benefice cannot be supposed to be
comprehended within this clause; 1. Because it is not in propriety of speech,
either an Obsequium, Officium, or Exercitium: There are many other Employments
that fall naturally under those denominations; and therefore the words of the
Stat. abundantly satisfied without taking in Ecclesiastical Benefices. 2.
Because the accepting of an Ecclesiastical Benefice cannot hinder a Fellow of a
College from abiding in the University, and following his Study there;
forasmuch as Scholars in either University abiding there for their Study, are
expressly excepted out of the Stat. of 21 Hen. 8. against Non-residents. 3.
Because although absence from the College for longer than a Month, and Fifty
days make a Cession, in case of acceptance of an Officium, Obsequium, etc. yet
in case of an Ecclesiastical Benefice, a years absence is allowed by the same
Statute. And 4. Because when the Statute provides in what case the Acceptance
of an Ecclesiastical Benefice shall be a Cession, and in what not, regard is
had to the value only, nor barely to the true intrinsic value neither, but to
an estimated value, as taxed in publicis Regiisve menumentis. Which the Author
very unfaithfully translates in any Public Records: Whereas, if the words were
so to be understood, it would make strange havoc in both Universities; for
whereas there are now many Benefices always reputed consistent with
Fellowships, because under 8 l. per Annum in the King's Books, though to the
extended value of 100 l. per Annum, and so rated and returned upon the Act of
Twelve pence per Pound; all these would, according to the Author's novel
Interpretation, be inconsistent with Fellowships; and the Statutes of
Exeter-College, as well as many others, would very imprudently have made that
distinction betwixt Benefices consistent and inconsistent; since, at this rate,
hardly a Benefice in England would be found to be consistent. I call it a novel
Intepretation, because it really is so; the words publicis Regiisve having
always, both in this and other Colleges been taken to be synonymous, and the
one explanatory of the other; both having been understood of the Records of the
Taxation of Benefices in the First Fruits Office; which are publica, because
all persons may have resort to them; and Regia, because they were made for
ascertaining the First Fruits and Tenths, which were then vested in the Crown,
when these Records were compiled, and are therefore called the King's Books.
And to enforce this meaning, than which none but Cavillers would have thought
of any other; it may be further observed, that the word of the Statute is
Taxatum; which looks backward, and can have no reference to a Private Act of
Parliament made above a Hundred years afterward. Besides that, St. Ann's
Living cannot be said to be taxed at a Hundred pounds a year; for it is the
Parish that by the Act of Parliament, is taxed to make it 100 l. a year.

The words must the rather be understood of the King's Books, because of the
subject matter; which is the consistency or inconsistency of a Fellowship and a
Benefice. In ascertaining which, the Statute conforms it self to the Law of the
Land, by which there is a difference betwixt Livings under and over 8 l. per
annum, as to their compatibility. And the 8 l. which the Law takes notice of to
this pupose, is 8 l. in the King's Books, and no where else.

But (says the Author) the Condition of his Parsonage is, That he shall reside
upon it four parts in five of the year; and the Condition of his Fellowship is,
That he shall not be absent from the College above fifty days.

The Stat. de Exitu Scholar. ab Vniversitate, etc. does indeed mention Fifty
days, as the utmost time allowed to be absent from the College upon ordinary
occasions: But this clause follows, Illis, qui propter negotii Collegii aut ex
speciali causa and gratia inferius in hoc statuto annotanda absentes fuerint,
in numero absentium minime computatis.

Now the Gratia inferius annotanda is this; Non prohibemus tamen quin
scholaribus and electis quibuscunque ex causis promotionis ipsorum, mortis, vel
gravis infirmitatis parentum, seu precipuorum amicorum vel causis consimilibus
urgentibus, per Juramentum, si opus fuerit, petentium hujusmodi licentiam in
presentia Rectoris vel eo absente subrectoris, and majoris partis Scholarium
domi existentium, affirmandis and approbandis, per eosdem concedatur certum
tempus, quo abesse possint. Here no time of absence is limited, but the Rector
and Fellows are at liberty for a cause to be approved of by themselves, to give
leave for absence as long as they please, Habito respectu ad causas, personas,
intervalla locorum and circumstantias hujusmodi.

So that a Fellowship has no such condition annexed to it, as the Author tells
us it has. A Fellow indeed must not be absent above Fifty days without leave;
but with leave he may be absent Five Hundred.

It is to be observed too, That causa Promotionis is one of the weighty Causes
for which the Statute allows a License for absence to be obtained, without
restraining it to any certain time. Which word I understand not, if this be not
its meaning, Where a Fellow is in hopes of, or is advanced to a preferment,
that does not make a Cession expressly within the Statute de Promotione and
causis deserendi, etc. In such case he may have leave from the House to be
absent as long as they think fit to give leave.

To which may be added, another consideration, which perhaps is peculiar to
this case of Dr. H. and has a considerable influence upon the merits of it.

(Says the Author) The Condition of his Parsonage is, That he shall reside upon
it four parts in five of the year: There is such a Clause in the Stat. of 30
Car. 2. But the Author ought likewise to have considered, that by the Act of 1
Jac. 2. The Rector is to have a House built at the charge of the Parish.

And be it further enacted, That the said Commissioners, or any Seven of them,
shall within thirty Days after their Constitution make, or cause to be made an
estimate in Writing under the Hands of some sufficient Person or Persons,
qualified for the same, of the Charge of Building and Finishing the said Church
and Steeple, and a House for the Rector, etc. and equally Assess, and cause the
said to be Assessed and Levied, etc. So that Provision is made for the
Building, as of a Church, so of a Parsonage-house at the Charge of the Parish.
And since there cannot be Legal Residence without a Parsonage or
Vicaridge-house, the Duty o^ Residence enjoined by the Act, cannot be supposed
to take place till there be a House built for the Rector to reside in: Till
then, not being obliged to Residence, his living is not inconsistent with his
Fellowship, according to the Authors own Interpretation of the Statutes.
Involuntary Non-residence, is not Non-residence within the Stat. of Hen. 8. or
13. Eliz. as when a Parson is absent by reason of an Inhibition from the
Bishop. And consequently, Dr. H's Non-residence not being voluntary, cannot be
a Breach of the Proviso in the late Statute. The Law is very clear, Moor, 447
Number. 609.
That when there is no Parsonage-house upon the Glebe, the Incumbent is excused
for Non-residence till there be one; Godolph. Repertor. Ecclesiasticum page
319, 320. Number. 9. and so it was resolved, Co. 6. Rept. in Butler and Goodale's
Case. And in this Case the Parish being to build the Parsonage-house, there is
no Default nor Lachess in the Doctor, which might have been imputed to him, if
himself were by the Law to build it. Now the late Statute cannot be supposed to
enjoin any other Residence than the Law requires; and consequently, not till
there be a House built to reside in. For the end of the Law in obliging Parsons
to Residence, is maintaining of Hospitality, and preventing Dilapidations, as
well as serving the Cure; neither of which can be performed where there is not
a Parsonage-house to live in

So that upon the whole matter, Dr. H's accepting of St. Ann's Living, is not a
Cession within the Statute de Promotione, etc. because it is not a Benefice
taxed in the Kings Books at 8 l. per Annum.

Nor is it within the first Clause, because it is not Obsequium, Officium, nor
Exercitium, within the meaning of that Clause.

Nor, if it were, is he obliged to be Absent from the College by reason of it,
till the Parsonage-house be built, because the Proviso in the Statute cannot
take place, but from that time.

What follows, is either Raillery, or a plain Justification of the Doctor, in
resigning his former Living about eight or ten years ago. For if, as he
acknowledges, he kept himself therein to the Letter of the Statute, then he did
not Elude, but fully comply with the Design of the Legislator; which was, that
his Statutes should be observed in the plain, literal Sense; and that if he did
not like his Preferment, he should have Liberty to Resign it within that time,
and keep his Fellowship, which was accordingly done, sine fraud ulla and
absque pensione aliqua.

This Remark, I shall only add, (tho the Cause needs it not) That Grants of
Privileges, as well as Pardons and Restitutions, are always to be taken in the
most benign and beneficial Sense; but according to the Interpretation that this
Gentleman would put upon the Statutes, the privilege in Question would dwindle
into just nothing at all; and consequently, this Gentleman does very well
defend the Privileges of the University, which yet he once Swore to maintain.

Mr. Vivian's Case has little in it. His Right to his Fellowship, depends upon
his Election into Mr. Colmer's place, who having been statutably expelled, as
we insist, and hope we have proved, Mr. Vivian was duly Elected into it.

The Deprivation of the Rector is the next and last thing to be considered.

P. 36.
The Author tells us, The Visitor resolved to confine himself strictly to the
methods which the Statutes direct in the Deprivation of a Rector. A good
Resolution! but how far the Bishop deviated from it, may appear in these
following Particulars.

1. Whereas by the Statutes, the Consent of Four of the Seven Senior Fellows,
is necessary to the Deprivation of a Rector, his Lordship took upon him to
Suspend all the Seven but Two, that he might incapacitate them to dissent from
his design to Deprive him. Which is the more apparent by this, That the Rector
was deprived for Contumacy in not appearing at, and owning him as having a
Right then to Visit; which if it were a Crime, the rest of the Fellows, who
opposed and protested against his Visitation, were equally guilty, and yet they
are only Suspended. I say, The Rector was deprived for Contumacy, because no
other cause of Deprivation is alleged in the Sentence, a few other
Bombast-words being only mentioned in a Parenthesis, and supposed to express
the cause of his Contumacious Absence.

2. He takes in Mr. Colmer, who had been expelled, and whose Expulsion
occasioned all this trouble, to be one of the Seven Seniors, who were to sit in
Judgment upon the Rector that Expelled him.

3. To make it yet more Statutable, he takes in Four more of the Juniors, (who
were Registered by the Rector, as obnoxious to Expulsion) and by their Votes,
(the two Seniors of the Seven dissenting, and other two being present in the
Hall, and not asked their Consent) he proceeded to pass Sentence of Deprivation
against the Rector. And this exactness was observed (says the Author) because
the Statute expressly requires the Consent of four, E septem maxim senioribus
tunc in Vniversitate presentibus.

No, this exactness was declined, because if the Visitor had confined himself
to the Statutes, he could not have compast the Rector's Deprivation, because he
could not have the Majority of the Seniors of his side; and therefore it was
necessary for him to lay them aside, whereby he deprived the Rector of the
benefit of having his proper Judges.

So that the Objection remains: They that did consent, were not Four of the
Seven maxim seniores. But that is all one: The Bishop was satisfied, that the
Statutes were sufficiently observed in the concurrence of those that subscribed
to the Deprivation, though not the Seniors. If the Bishop were satisfied, all is
well.. The Reasons of the Bishop's satisfaction, have been answered already.

But supposing there had not been these Irregularities in the Manner and Method
of his Deprivation, what was he deprived for? Why, the Sentence expresses it,
Propter ejus manifestam and multiplicem contumaciam, and circumstantiis variis
aggravatam in non submittendo se Visitationi nostrae Ordinariae, sed
contumaciter se absentantem, etc. So that he was deprived for Contumacy. And
herein the Bishop confined himself strictly to the Statutes, because among all
the Causes mentioned in the Statute, Propter quas causas Rector privari Officio
debeat, Contumacy is not reckoned up as one. Nor if it had, can the Rector's
nonappearance in the Case in question be reputed a contumacious absence,
because he insisted upon it as a Right not to appear. Nor was it his own single
Act, but that of the College, the Protestation having been tendered under the
Seal of the College.

The Rector having been thus Illegally deprived, and his Excommunication,
whereby the Visitor enforced his Sentence, having by the Court of King's Bench
been declared to have been pronounced Illegally, let the New pretended Rector,
at his peril, make use of any violent methods to gain Possession. To legal
Remedies, if he thinks he has any, the Law is open; which whether it be of his
side or no, neither the Visitor, nor Civilians, nor his own Set of Junior
Fellows, are to be Judges.

Thus we have gone through the merits of the Controversy now depending between
the Bishop of Exeter and the Rector and Senior Fellows of Exeter-College; and
it is hoped, that notwithstanding the vain Allegations, and mistaken Inferences
of the Author of the Account, it is plainly proved, That Mr. Colmer was
lawfully expelled both the first and the second time; That he could not by the
Statutes Appeal any where; That the Visitor had no Right to receive his Appeal,
as Visitor, by the Statutes of the College; and that, as Ordinary, he had no
Right either to receive the Appeal, or to do any thing else relating to the
College, or any Member of it; That Dr. Masters his coming was a Visitation
within the intention of the Statutes; and therefore that the Bishop could not
Visit again till five years were expired; That being opposed in his second
Visitation, by those without whose concurrence he could not exert the Power of
a Visitor, he ought not to have proceeded, till that Controversy had been
settled; That he had no Authority to suspend any of the Fellows; That the
voidance of Dr. H.'s place, was Illegal, both as to Matter and Form; and the
Rector's Deprivation no better.

Copies of Mr. Colmer's Appeal, of the several Protestations of the College,
both against the receiving it, and against the Bishop's Second Visitation; and
some Petitions to, and Orders of Council relating to this Cause, are here
inserted, and are as follows:
IN Dei Nomine Amen! Coram vobis Notario Publico publicaque and Authentica
Persona ac testibus fide dignis hic praesentibus, Ego Jacobus Colmer Collegii
Exoniensis infra Vniversitatem Oxon. A. M. Dico, allego and in his scriptis
animo appellandi deque Nullitatibus, iniquitatibus and injustitiis omnibus and
singulis infra scriptis aeque principaliter querelando omnibus melioribus via,
modo and juris forma quibus possim efficacius aut debeo, and ad omnem and
quemcunque juris effectum exinde quovismodo sequi valentem, Quod licet inter
caetera In Statutis Collegii Exoniensis praedicti specialiter Statutum,
provisum and ordinatum est in Rubrica De Causis propter quas Scholares privari
debeant in hac quae sequitur verborum forma aut consimili in effectu, viz.
[Quod si quis Scholarium vel Electorum, Adulterii, Incontinentiae, Haeresis
pertinacis, Homidicii voluntarii, Perjurii manifesti, crebrae Ebrietatis,
alteriusve Publicae Turpitudinis coram Rectore, Sub-Rectore, Decano and quinque
aliis Scholaribus maxim Senioribus vel majore part eorundem, cum dicti
Rectoris consensu, Legitime Convictus fuerit ipsum, perpetuo Exclusum and
privatum ipso facto a Dicto Collegio nulla alia monitione praemissa virtute
praesentis Statuti decernimus.] Nihilominus Arthurus Bury, S. T. P. and
Collegii Exoniensis supra dicti Rector, Georgius Verman, S. T. Bacc.
Sub-Rector, Ezra Cleaveland, A. M. Decanus, Thomas Lethbridge, S. T. B.
Richardus Hutchins, S. T. B. Benjaminus Archer, S.T.B. Samuel Adams, A. M.
Philippus Thorn, A.M. quinque socii maxim Seniores in dicto Collegio aut eorum
saltem pars major, in omnibus minus just, nulliter, and inique (eorum
Reverentia semper salva) pracedentes, objecto mihi Incontinentiae Reatu cum
quadam Anna -- ancilia nuper puerpera nullis autem editis desuper Probationibus
saltem legitimis aut de jure sufficientibus de facto quantum in illis fuit cum
de jure non potuerint, me Jacobum Colmer nullatenus legitime Convictum a Dicto
Collegio excluserunt and amoverunt. Vnde ego antedictus Jacobus Colmer,
Sentiens me ex praemissis nullitatibus and injustitiis enormiter laedi and
praegravari ab eisdem and eorum quolibet ad Reverendissimum in Christo Patrem
ac Dominum, Dominum Jonathanem Divina permissione Exoniensem Episcopum and
Collegii Exoniensis memorati Visitatorem Legitimum Appello, ac jus and
justitiam peto; protestando quod libenter appellassem, in praesentia dicti
Rectoris, sub-Rectoris, Decani and quinque sociorum praedictorum maxim
Seniorum, si hoc commode facere potuissem; protestorque insuper de emendando,
corrigendo, and reformando hanc meam Appellationem and Querelam juxta
Juris-peritorum consilia, prout Moris est and Juris: Super quibus peto
Instrumentum publicum mihi confici.

Lecta erat retro scripta Appellatio per Magistrum Jacobum Colmer A. M. in
Cubiculo Magistri Thomae Wood L. L. Bacc. apud Collegium Novum in Universitate
Oxon 24 Die Octobris inter horas Secundam and Tertiam pomerid. Anno Domini
1689. coram me Roberto Loggan Notario Publico ac testibus ad hoc specialiter
rogatis and requisitis

Lecta Haec Appellatio in praesentia, Tho. Wood. Ard. Adderley.

Ita Testor

Robertus Loggan Notarius Publicus Auctoritate Regia ad hoc specialiter rogatus
and requisitus.

Exhibit' etc. 25 die Martii 1690. per Thomam Wood L L. Bac. in Visitatione per
Venerabilem Virum Edvard. Master L L. Doctorem Domini Episcopi Exon.
Commissarium habita pro Copia vera In praesentia mei


Ben. Cooper Notarii Publici.

In Visitatione Colleg. Exon. 25o. die Martii, An. Dom. 1690. Per Venerabilem
Virum D. Edvardum Master, L. L. Doctorem, Reverendi admodum in Christo Patris
Domini Jonathanis Exon Episcopi, ejusdem Coll. Visitatoris Commissarium habita,
Ad Appellationem Jacobi Colmer, A. M. Collegii praedicti nuper Scholaris
Responsio, sive Protestatio Arthuri Bury ejusdem Collegii Rectoris, and septem
Scholarium maxim Seniorum aut saltem majoris partis eorundem.
NOS Rector and Scholares praedicti ad Libertates Collegii nostri pro Viribus
defendendas juramento obligati Protestamur non licere Nobis praefato Reverendo
Visitatoris Commissario e Tribunali illud exigenti amotionis Magistri Colmer
rationem reddere, idque ob has potissimum rations.

I. Quia per juramentum a quolibet Scholari in Admissione sua praestitum
Cavetur ne quis Appellationem ullam faciat, si per Rectorem, aut in hujusmodi
interesse habentes amoveatur.

II. Quia istaec Appellatio facta est ad Judicem non competentem, Cum per
Statuta nostra in qualibet lite inter Rectorem and Socios, ubi querelae locus
fuerit, Sententiae and Judicio D. Cancellarii Oxoniensis, si in Vniversitate
tunc fuerit, and illo absente, Vicecancellarii parendum sit. Et secundum eam
formam Lites per Vicecancellarium, non autem per Episcopum Exon. terminatas
fuisse e Registro nostro patet.

Protestamur insuper Visitationem sub istiusmodi forma, qua nunc proceditur,
procedere non oportere; scilicet, apertis foribus, admissa turba caeteroque cum
strepitu judiciali.

I. Quia ideo potestas Visitandi conceditur, ut liceat Reverendo Visitatori,
aut ejus Commissario, de delictis inquirere, eademque corrigere: non autem
liceat cuiquam qui accusatus vel detectus fuerit, petere ut Copia compertorum,
vel Nomina detegentium sibi exponantur; sed statim personaliter Respondere and
Correctionem subire omnes delinquentes tenentur.

II. Cavetur ne sumptus Visitationis summam adeo exiguam excedat ut Officiariis
inde pro laboribus suis compensatio exhiberi non possit.

III. Quia non Sententia e Tribunali lata, sed post finitam Visitationem
scriptis Rectori traditis, and ne id quidem, nisi cum prae brevitate temporum
Correctio ore tenus fieri non potest, Corrigenda Rectori demandantur.

Supplicamus proinde Venerabili Commissario, ne in futuris Visitationibus adeo
public procedatur, nec in praesenti quicquam Statuatur in hac Causa
Appellationis, Protestants irritum fore quicquid contra Acta nostra Statutum
fuerit.

Concordat cum Originali facta debita Collatione, per me Ben. Cooper, Notar.
Publ. A. Bury, Rector. Geo. Verman, Sub-Rector. Tho. Lethbridge. Ben. Archer.
Sam. Adams. Phil. Thorn.

Die Martis 25. viz. Die Mensis Martii, Anno Domini 1690. inter horas secundam
and quintam pomeridianas ejusdem diei, in Camera communi Colgii Exon. coram
Venerabili Viro Edvardo Master, L. L. Doctore, etc. Reverendus Vir Arthurus
Bury, Sacrae Theologiae Professor. and Collegii praedicti Rector,
Protestationem pagina superiori descriptam recitavit, and nomine tam suo quam
eorum Scholarium, quorum Nomina suscripta sunt admitti petiit, eandemque
praefatus Edvardus Master admisit, and Actorum in hac part scribae
custodiendam tradidit.

In praesentia mei, Ben. Cooper, Not. Publ.



Salva Protestatione nostra nos Rector and Scholares Collegii Exoniensis e
septem Senioribus pars major Jacobum Colmer, A. M. incontinentiae legitime
convictum his praecipue probationibus censuimus.
I. PRaedictum Magistrum Colmer diversarum Puellarum pudicitias attentasse
comperimus.

II. Quod A. Sparrow nondum impraegnationis suspecta questa sit, se a Magistro
Colmer perditam, quod debito inde intervallo, appropinquante puerperio,
professa sit, se ab eodem impraegnatam a diversis testibus indicatum; quae
testimonia per coincidentiam se mutuo ita confirmarunt, ut de veritate
dubitandum non videretur.

Cum praedicto Magistro Colmer dies dictus esset, A. Sparrow nondum satis
valida, abscondita est, ne ex ejus examinatione eliceretur Veritas.

Post latam Sententiam Magister Colmer professus est non habere se quod de
Judicibus suis quereretur; se enim ex eisdem testimoniis quemlibet alium
condemnaturum, sed in testes totam culpam rejecit.

Tandem A. Sparrow mira providentia Londini reperta, and per Juramentum
examinata, dixit se ab omnibus aliis viris incorruptam, a solo Magistro Colmer
compressam and impraegnatam.

In Visitatione Collegii Exon 22o. die Martii An. Dom. 1689/90. Per Venerabilem
virum D. Edv. Master L L. Doctorem Reverendi admodum in Christo Patris
Jonathanis Exon. Episcopi ejusdem Collegii Visitatoris Commissarium habita ad
Appellationem Jacobi Colmer A. M. Responsio and Protestatio Arth. Bury S. T. P.
ejusdem Collegii Rectoris and Septem e Scholaribus maxim Senioribus aut saltem
majoris partis eorundem domi existentium.
NOS Rector and Scholares praedicti ad Libertates hujus Collegii pro Viribas
nostris defendendas juramento obligati, Protestamur, non licere Nobis de
Expulsione praedicti Magistri Colmer rationem praefato Reverendi Patris
praedicti Commissario reddere ob rations sequentes.

I. Per juramentum ab omnibus Scholaribus in Admissione sua praestitum Cavetur
ne quam Appellationem aut Querelam faciat si per Rectorem aut in ejusmodi
interesse habentes expellatur. Quumque Rector eidem juramento teneatur, irrita
Statuitur omnimoda illius Appellatio.

II. Quia in Statutis nostris Legitima Causa idem significat ac Rationabilis
Causa, and penes Nos est judicare quae nam Causa pro tali habenda sit, ut patet
e Rubrica de Ordinationibus legendis cum alia Rubrica de qualitate, and Officio
Rectoris collata.

III. Quia alius querelarum Arbiter Statuitur, nempe D. Cancellarius
Vniversitatis Oxon. si in Vniversitate tunc fuerit, and illo absente
Vice-Cancellarius, ut ex juramento Rectoris patet.

IV. Quia post latam Sententiam Mr. Colmer confessus est, se ex eisdem
probationibus judicaturum fuisse quemlibet alium satis convictum; and licentiam
a Rectore petiit ut in aliud Collegium admitteretur.

Proinde humiliter a Venerabili Commssario petimus, ut ad alia Visitationis
negotia procedat, relictis Nobis Privilegiis nostris hac ex part intemeratis.

A. Bury Rector. Geo. Verman Sub Rector. Tho. Lethbridge. Phil. Thorn.


A Protestation of the Rector and Senior Fellows, against the Bishop's
Visitation.
IN Dei nomine, Amen. Coram vobis Reverendo in Christo Patre ac Domino, Domino
Jonathan' permissione Divina Exon' Episcopo, ac Patrono and Visitatori Collegii
Exon' infra Universitatem Oxon Nos Rector and Scholares Collegii Exon.
praedict' cum omni qua debet Reverentia dicimus, allegamus and in his Scriptis
ad omnem Juris effectum qui exinde sequi potest aut poterit, atque omnibus via,
modo and juris forma melioribus quibus melius and efficacius de jure possumus
and debemus animo Protestandi proponimus. Quod cum per Literas Vestras
Citatoriales geren. Dat. decimo sexto dei Mensis Maii, Anno Domini 1690. Nobis
intimari feceritis, Quod Vos Collegium hoc decimo sexto Die Instantis Mensis
Junii inter Horas nonam and undecimam antemeridianas ejusdem diei Visitare
decreveritis in hunc tenorem; viz. Jonathan Providentia Divina Exon. Episcopus
Collegii Exoniensis in Academia Oxon. Patronus and Visitator, Dilectis Nobis in
Christo Venerabili Viro Arthuro Bury, Sacrae Theologiae Professori, Collegii
Exoniensis in Academia Oxoniensi praedict' Rectori, and ejusdem Collegii
Subrectori pro tempore existenti Salutem, Gratiam and Benedictionem. Quum Nos
pro debita Statutorum dicti Collegii Observatione, Ad honorem Dei, and animarum
Salutem Collegium praedictum (favente Deo) propediem Visitare proponimus and
intendimus: Vobis igitur conjunctim and divisim committimus and firmiter
injungendo Mandamus; Quatenus moneatis and citetis, seu moneri and citari
faciatis peremptory Omnes and Singulos dicti Collegii Socios, Scholares and
Ministros quoscunque quocunque nomine censeantur (quos Nos etiam tenore
praesentium sic monemus) Quod ipsi cum vobis compareant, and quilibet eorum
compareat coram Nobis, aut Vicario nostro in Spiritualibus Generali sive
Commissario vel Commissariis nostris, In Capella dicti Collegii Die Lunae, viz.
Decimo Sexto Die Mensis Junii prox. futur. inter horas nonam and undecimam
antemeridianas ejusdem diei, Visitationem nostram hujusmodi subitur' and juri
per omnia paritur. Et quid in praemissis feceritis Nos dictis Die and loco una
cum praesentibus debite Certificetis. In Cujus rei testimonium sigillum nostrum
Episcopale praesentibus apponi fecimus. Dat. in Palatio nostro Exon. decimo
sexto die Mensis Maii, Anno Dom. 1690. Nostraeque Consecrationis Anno quinto,
and Translationis Secundo.

Cumque vi cujusdam Commissionis Venerabili Viro Edvardo Master, L. L. Doctori
Commissario Vestro in hac part constituto concessae, praedictus Edvardus
Master die Martii Vicesimo secundo proxime Elaps. ad Collegium Exon. praedict.
accesserit, idemque Visitaverit; cumque per Statuta hujus Collegii Exon
praedict. ad quae observanda juramento astringimur (...) Liceat Domino Episcopo
Exoniensi qui pro tempore fuerit, and nulli alii, nec aliis, quoties per
Rectorem dicti Collegii, and in ejus absentia Subrectorem and quatuor alios ad
minus ex septem maxim Senioribus Scholaribus fuerit requisitus; nec non absque
requisitione ulla de quinquennio in quinquennium, Semel, ad dictum Collegium
per se, vel per suum Commissarium, quem duxerit deputandum libere accedere,
etc. nec aliter neque alio modo. Cumque Spatium quinquennii minime affluxerit,
juxta Statuta praedicta, citra Visitationem (ut praefertur) in hoc Collegio
Oxoniensi per dictum Venerabilem Virum Edvardum Master Commissarium Vestrum in
hac part constitutum, obitam. Quamobrem primo and ante omnia protestamur de
non consentiendo in Vestram Visitationem, (Reverende Pater ac Domine) nobis,
sic ut praefertur, intimatam, hac sola ratione ducti, ne quid fiat, quantum in
Nobis est, in praejudicium Libertatum, Jurium, Privilegiorum and Statutorum
dicti Collegii, ad quae omnia servanda juramenti Vinculo omnes and singuli
tenemur. In oujus rei Testimonium Sigillum nostrum Commune praesentibus
apposuimus. Datum decimo tertio Die Mensis Junii, Anno Dom. 1690.

Concordat cum Originali facta debita Collatione, per Me Ben. Cooper, Notarium
publicum.
Die Lunae 16. viz. Die Mensis Junii Anno Dom. 1690. Inter horas 10 and 11.
antemeridianas ejusdem diei infra Collegium Exon. praedict. Coram Reverendo in
Christo Patre ac Dom. Dom. Jonathan permissione Divina Exon. Episcopo ac
ejusdem Collegii Patrono and Visitatore, Reverendus Vir Arthurus Bury S. Theol.
Professor and Rector Collegii Exon. praedict. (una cum Sociis dicti Collegii)
cum omni qua debuit Reverentia comparuit; and eidem Reverendo in Christo Patri
Protestationem supra scriptam Rectoris and Scholarium Coll. Exon. praedict. in
Pergamena exaratam, and communi Sigillo dicti Collegii sigillatam, contra
praetensam Visitationem Reverendi Patris praedict. nuper eis intimatam,
praesentavit; sed Domino Episcopo Exon. dictam Protestationem admittere
recusante, praefatus Reverendus Vir Dr. Bury dictam Protestationem mihi Ben.
Cooper Notario Publico palam legendam tradidit, quam Dominus Episcopus Exon. e
manibus meis inter legendum eripuit, quo minus dictam Protestationem perlegere
potuerim

Acta fuerunt haec omnia prout suprascribuntur, In presentia Mei Ben. Cooper,
Notarii Publici.



In Dei nomine Amen. Coram vobis Reverendo in Christo Patre ac Dom. Dom.
Jonathan permissione Divina Exon Episcopo ac Patrono and Visitatore Collegii
Exon infra Vniversitatem Oxon. Nos Rector and Scholares Collegii Exon praedict.
cum omni qua debet Reverentia dicimus allegamus and his Scriptis ad omnem juris
effectum qui exinde sequi potest aut poterit, atque omnibus via modo and juris
forma melioribus quibus melius and efficacius de jure possumus and dobemus
animo protestandi proponimus; Quod cum per Literas vestras Citatoriales gerent.
Dat. Vicesimo primo Die Mensis Julii Anno Dom. Millesimo Sexcentesimo
Nonagesimo, Nobis intimari feceritis quod Vos Collegium hoc Die Jovis, viz.
Vicesimo Quarto Die instantis Mensis Julii inter horas Septimam and Duodecimam
ante meridiem ejusdem Dici Visitare decreveritis in hunc tenorem ( viz.)
Jonathan permissione Divina Dioec' Exon' Episcopus and Collegii Exon in
Universitate Oxon' Patronus, and Visitator Ordinarius. Cum Nos Collegium Exon'
praedict' die hor' and loco subscript' juxta Statuta dict.' Collegii (Deo
favent' altissimo) tam in Capite quam in Membris Visitare intenderimus and
Statuerimus. Vobis igitur Petro Cox and Andreae Skinner Litteratis Mandatar'
nostris a nobis in hac part constitut' committimus ac firmiter injungendo
mandamus quatenus Citetis seu citari faciatis peremptory. Venerabilem Virum
Arthurum Bury Sacrae Theologiae Professorem Collegii Exon praedict' Rectorem,
Georgium Verman, Sacrae Theologiae Bacc' Ejusdem Collegii Sub-Rectorem,
Johannem Hearn, Sacrae Theologiae Professorem, Thomam Lethbridge, Ricardum
Hutchins, and Benjaminum Archer, Sacrae Theologiae Bacc', Samuelem Adams,
Robertum Ratcliffe, Ezram Cleeveland, Gulielmum Read, Johannem Harris,
Philippum Thorn, Jacobum Colmer, Johannem Bagnell, Henricum Maundrell,
Johannem Crab, and Thomam Vivian, in Artibus respective Magistros, Johannem
Bonamy, and Thomam Kingston, in Artibus Bacc', Franciscum Webber, Henricum
Levett, Henricum Northcote, Henricum Huthnance dicti Collegii Exon' respective
Scholares, Johannem Snell, ejusdem Collegii Electum, Gulielmum New Promum,
Richardum Hedges Coquum, Henricum Edwards Obsonatorem, and Richardum Parker,
Bibl. Lectorem dict' Collegii Ministros. Ac preterea famulos quoscunque ejusdem
Collegii personaliter si ita apprehendi seu citari poterint, alioquin per
publicum Citationis Edictum presentibus (viz.) super valvis seu foribus
exterioribus Collegii Exon' predict' affixis and ibidem aliquandiu dimissis and
relictis aliisque mediis viis ac modis quibuscunque legitimis ac de jure
permissis ita quod Citatio hujusmodi ad aures and notitiam eorum saltem de
verisimili pervenire poterit. Quos Nos etiam tenore praesentium sic citamus
quod compareant and eorum quilibet compareat coram nobis in Aula communi dicti
Collegii die Jovis (viz.) Vicesimo quarto die Julii prox' sequen' inter horas
septimam and Duodecimam ante Meridiem ejusdem Diei Visitationem nostram
Ordinariam quam tunc and ibidem quoad eos celebrare and Exercere proponimus and
intendimus juxta juris in ea part exigentiam subitur' and ad Interrogatoria
recipiend. iisdem respondend. ad Detegend' objici vidend' ad probationes (si
opus fuerit) de super fieri etiam vidend. ad defensiones si quas habuerint
quatenus Statuta admittunt faciend. ad poenas juxta cujusque demerita (si opus
fuerit) infligi vidend' singulis Denique Sessionibus ad interessend. dicta
Visitatione nostra pendent. Ulteriusque factur' and receptur' quod justum
fuerit in hac part. Intimamus in super omnibus and singulis superius Citatis,
Quod sive ipsi seu eorum aliquis comparuerint sive non in praemissis procedere
intendimus quatenus rerum ratio patiatur absentiis seu potius Contumaciis
ipsorum sic (ut praemittitur) Citatorum and Intimatorum in aliquo non obstan.
Et quid in praemissis feceritis nos dictis die boris and loco debite
Certificetis Dat' sub Sigillo nostro Episcopali Vicesimo primo die Mensis Julii
An. Dom. Millesimo Sexcentesimo Nonagesimo.

Cumque vi cujusdam Commissionis Venerabili Viro Edvardo Master LL. Doctori
Commissario vestro in hac part Constituto concessae, praedictus Edvardus
Master die Martii Vicesimo secundo proxime elapsi ad Collegium Exon' praedict'
accesserit idemque visitaverit; Cumque per Statuta hujus Collegii Exon'
praedict', ad quae observanda juramento astringimur; Liceat Domino Episcopo
Exoniensi, qui pro tempore fuerit, and nulli alii, nec aliis, quoties per
Rectorem dicti Collegii, and in ejus absentia Sub-Rectorem and quatuor alios ad
minus ex septem maxim Senioribus Scholaribus fuerit requisitus, nec non absque
requisitione ulla, de quinquennio in quinquennium, semel, ad dictum Collegium,
per se, vel per suum Commissarium, quem duxerit deputandum, libere accedere,
etc. nec aliter neque alio modo; cumque Spatium Quinquennii minime effluxerit,
juxta Statuta praedicta, citra Visitationem (ut praefertur) in hoc Collegio
Exoniensi per dictum Venerabilem Virum Edvardum Master Commissarium vestrum in
hac part constitutum, obitam; Quamobrem primo and ante omnia protestamur de
non consentiendo in vestram Visitationem (Reverende Pater ac Domine) nobis sic
(ut praefertur) intimatam, hac sola ratione ducti, ne quid fiat, quantum in
nobis est, in praejudicium Libertatum Jurium, Privilegiorum and Statutorum
dicti Collegii, ad quae omnia servanda Juramenti vinculo omnes and singuli
tenemur. In cujus rei testimonium Sigillum nostrum commune praesentibus
apposuimus. Datum Vicesimo tertio die Mensis Julii Anno Dom. Millesimo
Sexcentesimo Nonagesimo.

Concordat cum Originali facta debita Collatione per Me, Ben. Cooper, Notarium
Publicum.

The Answer of the Rector and Fellows of Exeter College in Oxon to the
Petition of the Right Reverend Father in God Jonathan Lord Bishop of Exeter.
Exhibited to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's.
THese Respondants do admit that the Bishop of Exeter for the time being, is by
the Statutes of the said College appointed Patron and Ordinary visitor
thereof, but these Respondents are advised and do insist that the Visitors
power of Visitation, or Exercising any Act of jurisdiction within the College,
is not general, nor as often as he pleases, but by the said Statutes is
restrained and limited to be but once in five years, and not oftener, unless
requested by the Rector or Sub Rector, and four of the seven Senior Fellows.
And these Respondents further say, that a certain Fellow of that College being
proceeded against before the said Rector and the seven Senior Fellows for
incontinence, and for that crime upon conviction Expelled the College in
October last, pursuant to the power given to the Rector and said Fellows for
that purpose, by the Statutes of the said College, Dr. Edward Masters
Chancellor to the Bishop of Exeter, by virtue of a Commission or Power of the
said Lord Bishop did in March last, come to the said College, and Excercised
Acts of Visitation, and jurisdiction, relating to the said College, and the
said Follows Expulsion confining himself to the time and Circumstances
prescribed by the Statutes for Visitation, and the said Fellows name being by
the aforesaid Commissary inserted into the College Buttery-Book, and he
claiming the privileges of a Fellow, notwithstanding such his Expulsion. A
fresh Complaint of the same crime of Incontinence with another Woman was made
against him, and he Convicted thereof, and as a pretended Fellow again Expelled
by the Rector and Major part of the Senior Fellows pursuant to the Statutes of
the said College, whereupon application by the said Fellows being again made
to his Lordship, his Lordship was pleased by a Citation to signify his pleasure
that he intended to visit the College, and thereupon these Respondents being
informed that his Lordship was come to Oxford for that purpose, humbly waited
on him, to pay him the Respects of the College, but withal signified to his
Lordship that that intended Visitation not being requested by the Rector or Sub
Rector and four of the Senior Fellows, in regard of the above mentioned
Visitation in the Month of March precedeing was against the Statutes of the
College, and that therefore they could not submit to it, but had drawn up a
Protestation under the Common Seal of the College, which Protestation was
afterward tendered to his Lordship and rejected by him, and these Respondents
do believe that their Chappel-Doors were kept Locked as they usually were at
that time of the day, but these Respondents do deny that they intended any
contempt or disobedience toward his Lordship, for whom they have a Dutiful
regard as their Visitor, yet what was done by them was merely and only by way
of asserting their Legal Rights, and as they conceived and were advised in
Observance of their Statutes to which they were all Sworn. The said Rector and
Fellows do therefore humbly pray that under their Majesty's gracious
Protection, they may quietly enjoy the Rights and Privileges which have been
granted to them, by the gracious Charters of their Majesty's Royal Predecessors.

At the Court of Whitehall the 25th. of June, 1690.
By the Right Honorable the Lords of their Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
IN pursuance of an Order of the 19th. instant, the Rector and Fellows of
Exeter-Colledge in Oxon, having this day presented to the Board, their Answer
to the Petition of the Right Reverend Father in God Jonathan Lord Bishop of
Exeter, and the same being read, it was thereupon ordered by their Lordships,
that a Copy of the said Answer be given to the Lord Bishop of Exeter, and that
the whole matter be heard at this Board on Wednesday the 2d. of July next, when
the parties concerned are to give their attendance.

Jo. Nicholas.

At the Court at Whitehal the 5th. of July, 1690.
By the Lords of their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
THe matter in difference between the Lord Bishop of Exeter, and the Rector and
Fellows of Exeter-Colledge, upon the Petition of the said Lord Bishop, and
Answer of the said Rector and Fellows, concerning a Visitation of the said
College, having according to Order of the 26th. of June last, been this day
heard at the Board, and Counsel learned having been heard on both sides.

It is Ordered in Council, that the same be Dismissed, as it is hereby Dismissed
this Board accordingly.

William Blathwayt.

To the Queens most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of Arthur Bury Rector, Professor in Divinity, George
Verman Sub-Rector, B.D. John Hern Professor in Divinity, Thomas Lethbridge,
Benjamin Archer, Samuel Adams Bs. D. Philip Thorn, John Crab, Thomas Vivian,
Master of Arts, John Bonony, Tho. Kingston Batchelours of Arts, and Henry
Huthnance Fellows of Exeter-Colledge in Oxford, and John Vivian Fellow Elect of
the same.
Humbly shows
THat Jonathan Lord Bishop of Exeter having given notice that he intended to
Visit the said College on the 24th. of July last three of the Fellows deputed
by the Rector and Major part of the Fellows did on that day in the Morning,
wait on the said Bishop to acquaint him that as they humbly conceived by the
Statutes of their College, his Lordship could not Visit them at that time,
being also the rather induced to believe themselves not mistaken in the sense
of the Statutes for that after a full hearing before your Majesty's Privy
Council, upon that subject the said Bishops Petition had been lately dismissed.
But his Lordship was pleased to send them word that tho he expected to meet
with Opposition, yet he was resolved to come, and a little after the return of
the Fellows, the College gates were broken open by force and violence, by
those that took upon them to oppose the College to assist the Bishops
pretense, and a great multitude of rude People rushing in tore down and much
abused the said Rector and Fellows; By which means the said Bishop found an
entrance into the College, and went into the Hall, and did there hold a
pretended Court or Assembly under color of a Visitation. Whereupon the said
Rector and major part of the Fellows came, and humbly tendered to his Lordship a
Protestation under the College Seal against his Proceedings, which they were
not suffered to read out. The pretended Court being adjourned to the afternoon,
eleven of the Fellows, being your Petitioners, amongst whom are five of the
seven Senior Follows of the College, and all the Officers of the College had
Sentence of Suspension ab Officio and Beneficio pronounced against them, by or
in the presence of the Bishop, and your Petitioner Hernes Fellowship was
Unstatutably declared void, and your Petitioner Thomas Kingston was pronounced
Excommunicated for having read Prayers in the Chapel after the pretended
Suspension of him as Fellow, and the name of your Petitioner John Vivian was
ordered to be left out of the College Book as no Fellow: And although by the
said Satutes the Rector of the said olledge, if accused of any the Crimes
expressed in the said Statute is to be judged by the Visitor, and seven of the
most senior Fellows, yet the said Bishop, attended with Seven others, amongst
whom was one Mr. Colmer, who then stood expelled the said College for
Fornication, Two of the Seven (being the only real Seniors) dissenting, and the
others being obnoxious) did pronounce Sentence of Expulsion against the said
Rector for certain pretended Crimes, the particulars whereof your Petitioners
cannot set forth, having not been able to obtain any authentic Copy of that
or other the pretended Sentences or proceeding, tho they have endeavored to
procure the same, and the said Bishop did then also pronounce Sentence of
Excommunication against the said Rector, in case he should not recede from the
College, and deliver up his Charge by the first of this instant August, nor
were the Statutes of the College, concerning the Expulsion of the Rector,
observed in the said Proceedings.

Now forasmuch as your Petitioners are advised that the said proceedings and
Sentences, are irregular and not well founded, nor warranted in Law, nor
justified by the Statutes of the College. Yet nevertheless by means thereof,
and other the force and violent disturbances aforesaid your Petitioners are
interrupted in their Rights, and the said College put into extreme confusion
and disorder, to the great danger, if not of the utter ruin of the same, and
the discipline of the Youth therein Educated, but also to the great disturbance
of your Majesty's peace, and the quiet of the whole University.

In tender consideration whereof, and for that your Petitioners are advised
that it is their Duty humbly to represent the said proceedings to your
Majesty's, to whose Royal Pleasure and Prerogative, it appertains to Examine
and Determine in matters of this nature,

Your Petitioners do therefore most humbly pray that your Majesty would be
pleased to interpose your Royal Authority, to put some stop to those disorders,
and to restore to your Petitioners, and the College, the Peace and Quiet they
have before enjoyed, under your Majesty's most happy Reign, and to grant your
Petitioners such other Relief in the premises as to Justice and in your
Majesty's Royal Wisdom shall be thought meet And they shall Pray, etc.

A Copy of the Writ directed by the Court of Kings Bench to the Bishop of
Exeter, upon occasion of the Rector's Excommunication.
GUlielmus and Maria Dei Gratia Angliae and Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex
and Regina Fidei defensores, etc. Reverendo in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino
Jonathano Exon' Episcopo salutem cum ostens est nobis in Curia nostra coram
nobis apud Westm' ex part Arthuri Bury Sacrae Theologiae Professoris, quod cum
Colleg' Exon' in Universitate Oxon est antiquum Collegium and ad sustentation
unius Rector' and vigint' and trium Scholarium in bona litteratur and liberis
artibus proficiend and studiosor' ibidem confluend' in eisdem instruend' and
erudiend' totum in temporalibus and nichil in spiritualibus fundat' and de
laica fundatione exist'. Cumque vos praefat' Episcopus qui Visitator esse and
quinquennem habere Visitation' ejusdem Collegii clamat' in Visitation' vestram
seu aliter nullam habetis Spiritualem Jurisdictionem de in vel super Rector'
sive aliquem vel aliquos Scholar' ejusdem Collegii seu de in vel concernent.
eliqua materia clausa sive re tangent' seu spectant ad idem Collegium neque
eosdem Rector' and Scholar' seu eorum aliquos sive aliquem per Ecclesiasticas
Censur' in aliquo compellere debeatis seu unquam hactenus consuevistis ac licet
praedict' Collegium Exon' in Universitat' Oxon' and Rector' and Scholar'
ejusdem sunt and semper fuissent extra Diocese. vestram and omnem Episcopal'
and Ecclesiastic. Jurisdictionem vestram. Tamen vos Episcopus Exon' permissor'
non ignar' machinant. and intendent. eund' Arthurum Bury, qui ad officium
Rectoris Collegii praed' rite and legitime elect' and in eod' collocat' and
praefect' fuisset, contra debitam legis hujus regni Angliae formam per
Ecclesiasticas Censur' praegravare opprimere and fatigare necnon nos exheredare
cognitionemque materiae mere laicae and quae ad temporal' cognition' spectat
and pertinet ad aliud examen in Cur' Christianitatis trahere, ipsum Arthurum in
Curia Christianitatis coram vobis pretextu Visitation' vestr' ejusdem Collegii
traxistis in placit' and in ipsum Arthurum pretextu contumaciae in non parendo
mandat' vestris in dict' Visitatione vestr' sententiam excommunication'
fulminaveritis and ei diversa gravam and oppression' per citation' and ali'
censur' Ecclesiasticas ex causa praedict' diversi modo intuleritis and in dies
infer intulitis, In lesion' Coron' and dignitat' nostrar' ac prefat' Arthuri
damnum non modicum and gravamen and prejudicium manifest ac contra formam legis
terrae hujus regni nostrae Angliae, Nos Jura dictae coronae nostrae ac legem
and consuetud' perdict' prout per vinculum Juram astringimur manutenere volent
nostrosque ligeos suspencion contra easdem violari nolent, vobis mandamus ac
firmit' injungendo prohibemus ne placit' coram vobis versus praedict' Arthurum
super permiss. teneatis, nec quicquam in ea part per Censuras Ecclesiasticas
attentari presumatis seu per alios attentari faciatis quae in ipsius Arthuri ac
in nostri damn' and prejudicium seu legum and consuetudinem regni nostri Angli
derogation' sive contempt' cedere valeat quovismodo, and omnia quae per vos in
ea part minus rite attent' fuerint sine dilatione revocari faciatis sub
violator' legum nostarum penam periculo incurrendi, Ipsumque Arthurum si quam
sentent' in eum ea occasion fulumina veritis penit. absolvatis ab eadem, etc.
J. Holt mil. apud Westm' xxviii. die Novembris, Anno regni nostri secundo.

Edward Jevon of London, Gent. makes Oath, That he this Deponent did on the
ninth day of this Instant December 1690. serve the now Bishop of Exeter with
their Majesty's Writ of Prohibition by leaving with him the said Writ under the
Seal of Their Majesty's Court of King's Bench a Copy of which Writ is above
written.

Jur' 22. die December. 1690. Coram Edw. Jevon.
The same Writ was served at the Suit of Sir K. mutatis mutandis.



FINIS.
At the Court at Whitehal the 15th. of August, 1690.
Present: The Queens most Excellent Majesty in Council.
WHereas it has been Represented to Her Majesty in Council, that there has
lately happened a disturbance in Exeter-Colledge in Oxford which may endanger
the Peace in the University; Her Majesty in Council, is pleased to order that
Doctor Jonathan Edwards, Vice Chancellor of the said University, do take
special care for keeping of the Peace in the said University, and particularly
in that College.

Rich. Colinge.

At the Court at Whitehal the 15th. of August, 1690.
Present: The Queens most Excellent Majesty in Council.
UPon Reading the Petition of Arthur Bury Rector, Professor in Divinity, George
Verman, Sub-Rector, John Hern, Thomas Lethbridge, Benjamin Archer, Samuel
Adams, Philip Thorn, John Crab, Thomas Vivian, John Bonany, Thomas Kingston,
and Henry Huthnance Fellows of Exeter-Colledge in Oxford, and John Vivian
Fellow Elect of the same, concerning some proceedings and sentences of the
Right Reverend Father in God Jonathan Lord Bishop of Exeter relating to the
said College; It is this day ordered by Her Majesty in Council, that the Lord
Bishop of Exeter do return his Answer in writing to this Board to the said
Petition annexed, with all convedient speed. Whereupon this Board will appoint a
day for the hearing thereof.

Rich. Colinge.

A Copy of the Writ directed by the Court of Kings Bench to the Bishop of
Exeter, upon occasion of the Rector's Excommunication.
GUlielmus and Maria Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex
and Regina Fidei defensores, etc. Reverendo in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino
Jonathano Exon' Episcopo salutem cum ostens' est nobis in Curia nostra coram
nobis apud Westm' ex part Arthuri Bury Sacrae Theologiae Professoris, quod cum
Colleg' Exon' in Universitate Oxon' est antiquum Collegium and ad sustentation
unius Rector' and vigint' and trium Scholarium in bona litteratur' and liberis
artibus proficiend' and studiosor' ibidem confluend' in eisdem instruend' and
erudiend' totum in temporalibus and nichil in spiritualibus fundat' and de
laica fundatione exist'. Cumque vos praefat' Episcopus qui Visitator esse and
quinquennem habere Visitation' ejusdem Collegii clamat' in Visitation' vestra,
seu aliter nullam habetis Spiritualem Jurisdictionem de in vel super Rector'
sive aliquem vel aliquos Scholar' ejusdem Collegii, seu de in vel concernent.
aliqua materia clausa sive re tangent' seu spectant ad idem Collegium neque
eosdem Rector' and Scholar' seu eorum aliquos sive aliquem per Ecclesiasticas
Censur' in aliquo compellere debeatis seu unquam hactenus consuevistis, ac
licet praedict' Collegium Exon' in Universitat' Oxon' and Rector' and Scholar'
ejusdem sunt and semper fuissent extra Diocese. vestram and omnem Episcopal'
and Ecclesiastic. Jurisdictionem vestram. Tamen vos Episcopus Exon' permissor'
non ignar' machinant. and intendent. eund' Arthurum Bury, qui ad officium
Rectoris Collegii praed' rite and legitime elect' and in eod' collocat' and
praefect' fuisset, contra debitam legis hujus regni Angliae formam per
Ecclesiasticas Censur' praegravare opprimere and fatigare, necnon nos
exheredare cognitionemque materiae mere laicae and quae ad temporal' cognition'
spectat and pertinet ad aliud examen in Cur' Christianitatis trahere, ipsum
Arthurum in Curia Christianitatis coram vobis pretextu Visitation' vestr'
ejusdem Collegii traxistis in placit' and in ipsum Arthurum pretextu
contumaciae in non parendo mandat' vestris in dict' Visitatione vestr'
sententiam excommunication' fulminaveritis and ei diversa gravam' and
oppression' per citation' and ali' censur' Ecclesiasticas ex causa praedict'
diversi modo intuleritis and in dies infer intulitis, In lesion' Coron' and
dignitat' nostrar' ac prefat' Arthuri damnum non modicum and gravamen and
prejudicium manifest' ac contra formam legis terrae hujus regni nostrae
Angliae, Nos Jura dictae coronae nostrae ac legem and consuetud' superdict'
prout per vinculum Juram' astringimur, manutenere volent' nostrosque ligeos
suspencion contra easdem violari nolent', vobis mandamus ac firmit' injungendo
prohibemus ne placit' coram vobis versus praedict' Arthurum super permiss.
teneatis, nec quicquam in ea part per Censuras Ecclesiasticas attentari
presumatis seu per alios attentari faciatis quae in ipsius Arthuri ac in nostri
damn' and prejudicium seu legum and consuetudinum regni nostri Angliae
derogation' sive contempt' cedere valeat quovismodo, and omnia quae per vos in
ea part minus rite attent' fuerint sine dilatione revocari faciatis sub
violator' legum nostarum penam periculo incurrendi, Ipsumque Arthurum si quam
sentent' in eum ea occasion fuluminaveritis penit. absolvatis ab eadem, Test
J. Holt mil. apud Westm' xxviii. die Novembris, Anno regni nostri secundo.

Edward Jevon of London, Gent. makes Oath, That he this Deponent did on the
ninth day of this Instant December 1690. serve the now Bishop of Exeter with
their Majesty's Writ of Prohibition by leaving with him the said Writ under the
Seal of Their Majesty's Court of King's Bench: A Copy of which Writ is above
written.

The same Writ was served at the Suit of Sir K. mutatis mutandis.

Edw. Jevon.
Jur' 22. die December. 1690. Coram
POSTSCRIPT.
SInce these Papers were finished, Mr. Painter, the new pretended Rector and
his party, have set on foot another practice, as little warranted by the
Statutes of the College, as the rest of the proceedings above mentioned: They
have assumed a power to themselves of Electing New Officers out of their own
party in the room of the old ones, whom the Visitor had as Arbitrarily
suspended, and with the assistance of the Youth of the College have placed
these New Officers by force and violence both in the Hall and the Chapel, and
that whilst the matter of Right is depending judicially before a proper Court,
and at their own Suit; and they dare to confront the Court of King's Bench,
which has already declared the pretended Sentence of Excommunication against
the Rector to be null and void, by opposing forcibly his entrance into the
Chapel under the pretense of his being an Excommunicated person.

The particulars of these disorders are not here intended to be made public;
but their unstatutable proceeding in choosing New Officers as aforesaid, must be
taken notice of, and the Authors of these confusions put in mind of the
Statutes, which they seem to have forgotten.

It is provided by the Statute De Electione Subrectoris and Decani, etc: that
their Election shall be, Tricesimo die Junii annuatim modo and forma
subsequentibus, videlicet quod convocatis per Rectorem quinque maxim
senioribus scholaribus perpetuis tunc in Universitate praesentibus, inquirat
dictus Rector palam ac publie suffragia singulorum, quibus suum duplex
suffragium addat, and ille Subrector habeatur, in quem plura suffragia
praedictorum consenserint. Quae similiter forma eligendi Decani semper
observetur. So that by the Statute the Election is appointed to be upon a
certain day of the year, viz. on the 30 th. of June; and so strict was the
College formerly in observing their Statutes, and of their Oaths, that they
conceived a just doubt whether or no in any case whatsoever they could proceed
to an Election upon any other day: And therefore they proposed it as a question
to their Visitor in Queen Elizabeth's time, Si forte Subrector, Decanus, etc.
Quoquo tempore ante Crastinum Petri fato vel sodalitio cesserit, vel amotus
fuerit a Collegio, quum ipso crastino Petri nec alias praedictorum Electiones
fieri Statuta praescribant, quid interim faciendum? To which the Answer is,
Quum quid tale evenerit, alius idoneus in cedentis vel amoti officium vacuum a
solitis Electoribus juxta Statuta intra septem dies usque ad crastinum Petri
sequentis, nec ultra ex ea Electione substituatur and eligatur. By this
Question and Answer it appears that the College in those days had not the
least apprehension of an Officer's place becoming void otherwise than by Death,
Cession or Expulsion; and none of the Officers are either dead, or have made a
Cession, or are Expelled: suspended taliter qualiter they are. But as the
Statutes do no where warrant any such thing; so if they did, there could be no
ground to choose new ones in their room, because new ones are not to be chosen
but in one of the three cases a forementioned; and if Suspension did warrant a
new Election, it ought to be made within seven days after the Suspension: so
that all is wrong. Nor can any pretense of necessity justify what is done; for
if there be any such necessity, it is a necessity that their own illegal and
unstatuable procedeings have occasioned.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4. lin. 31. leg. Gigger, Page 7. lin. 30. leg. before. Page 15. lin. leg.
Summarie. Page 22. lin. 17. dele Senior. Page 22. lin. 11. leg. own. Page 24.
lin. 28. leg. excercebo. Page 25. lin. 38, and 39. leg. inquietabo. Page 32.
lin. 17. leg. minus. Page 36. lin. 4. del. S^^^r. Page 63. del. Senior. Page
64. lin. 8. leg. effluxerit ibid. lin. 6. leg. Exoniensi. Page 67. lin. 30. for
Fellows leg. Fellow. Page 69. lin. 28. leg. ^ore.


