Imprimatur,

November 23, 1677.

Guil. Jane, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris domest.

Organum Vetus and Novum: OR, A DISCOURSE OF REASON AND TRUTH.

WHERE IN The Natural Logic common to Mankind is briefly and plainly
described.

By RICHARD BURTHOGGE M. D. In a Letter to the most Honored Andrew Trevill
Esquire. of Ethe in the County of Cornwall.

Marc. Ant. (...). l. 7. 1. 12. (...).

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Crouch, at the Princes Arms a Corner-shop of
Popeshead ally in Cornhil. 1678.

FOR The most Honored ANDREW TREVILL Esquire AT Ethe in the County of Cornwall.
SIR,
THat of making many Books is no End, was truly said by the wisest man that
ever was: Not in this sense only, that multitudes of Books, begetting in the
minds of those that read them infinite Distractions, deprive them of the
Benefits they might receive from fewer; but in another, that there is a
Prolifickness in Books, that one produces another, and this a third, and so on
without End; and consequently that the labor men are at in making them, is not
only Useless, but Endless.

You will have reason to believe this second Sense to be as just and true as
the first, when you consider that I, who lately wrote an Apology for the Deity,
am obliged by the Reflections made upon it, now to write Another to defend it;
and no question (but) the Latter may be as obnoxious to Unjust Exceptions as
the Former: So that if Occasion given, be also taken, there will never be an
End of writing, but by what gives End to the Writer.

However, having received an Invitation to add something to the former Essay,
I am (at last) resolved, both in justice to my self and to my Book, to comply
with it, and to enter into thoughts of the Causes that not irrationally may be
presumed to have had an Influence on the Objectors, and into most of the
Objections; and then to offer to them (by way of Obviation) such Considerations
as (it may be) will not prove unuseful to Rectify Mistakes in other Matters,
as well as in this.

And the main Causes I intend to touch on (not to mention Envy, etc.) are
Three: Proud Ignorance, Ignorant Zeal, and Impertinent Reasoning.

1. Proud Ignorance consists in a man's presumption of his own Omniscience, (for
the Sciolist is ever most conceited) so that he presently and peremptorily
condemns that for Error, which himself has never learnt for Truth; as if
there were no growth in Knowledge, or that any Humane Understanding were
adequate to Verity: Whereas Capacities of the largest size are yet but narrow;
and they that know most, do but the better know how little it is they know, and
how much they are to seek. The most the Wisest know, is, that their own and
others Ignorance is the surest Object of Knowledge. True Knowledge is not
conceited; it is humble, and aspireth after more. If any man think that he
knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know.

2. Ignorant Zeal, (a cause of very general influence into many Mistakes, not
only in matters of Religion, but also in points of Philosophy) what is it but
a Horse of high metal without eyes? Indeed, nothing is more commendable in
Religion, or administers a better Argument of Sincerity in its Professors, than
fervency of Zeal; but then it must be Zeal according to Knowledge, and managed
with discretion, or else it is but Rage and Fury, not Zeal. Zeal regulated by
the Holy Scriptures, that is, Zeal according to Knowledge, and governed with
Wisdom, is Fire from the Altar: but then Irregular Zeal, Zeal without
Knowledge, Zeal without Wisdom, is Wildfire, which (as the corruption of the
best is worst) has nothing more pernicious than it self to Church or State.

Zeal without Knowledge may be styled Blind Zeal, and is that when men are
passionately concerned for or against an Opinion and Practice, from a strong,
but groundless and unwarranted persuasion, that what they do, and what they are
for, is highly to the honor and glory of God, and what they oppose, is against
it: as if they knew abstractly of themselves, and by their own discoursings,
what is for God's Glory, or what is otherwise, further than it has pleased God
himself in his Word to reveal it. That only is for God's Glory, which is
grounded on God's Word. The Word of God is able to make the Man of God perfect.
The Corinthians had a Zeal for God, but not according to Knowledge: and so had
the Jews, who persecuted and murdered the Christians, but thought they did God
good service. What manner of men they were, who among them called themselves
the Zealous, Josephus has left on Record. Yes, the Disciples of Christ, in
Zeal too, they would have Fire from Heaven, and cite an Example; but our meek
and blessed Savior tells them, they knew not the Spirit they were of. They
took it to be a Spirit of Zeal, but He knew it to be a Spirit of Passion. A
persecuting furious Spirit is none of Christ's; it is Antichrist's. The Wrath
of man works not the Righteousness of God.

Zeal without Wisdom may be called Imprudent Zeal, and is Zeal unseasonably and
unsitly shown in circumstances of time, place, and persons that will not bear
it; as when men shall take their Pearls, their Reprehensions, Counsels,
Instructions, or whatever other instances a Zeal is shown in, and cast them
before the Swine; and that though they have a Prospect themselves, or an
Advertisement from others, of the probable ill success, both that the Pearls
shall betrodden under foot, and they themselves be rented; This is not to
employ and use Zeal, but to lose it. There is a time for every Purpose, and
every thing is beautiful only in that time. Pearls so cast, are cast away.

3. Impertinent Reasoning, (the third Cause I mentioned, and a Cause of all
others of most general influence into Errors and Mistakes) I call not only
that which of the Logicians is named (...), a passing and arguing from one
thing to another, when yet there is no Agreement, no Connection between them; but
that also which is bottomed on single Mediums, and runs on in a long, but
simple line and train of Consequences, from thing to thing; or else is founded
but on second Notions, and inlaid with them: which way of Reasoning must be
showed to be Impertinent, and that by showing a better, pertinent one.

Thus, Sir, I am arrived to what I principally designed; and I crave your
pardon if, for my Readers satisfaction as well as for mine own, I now enlarge,
and take the boldness to let him understand my apprehensions of Reason, both as
to its nature, and the interest it has in Religion, and how (I think) it must
be circumstanced and conditioned, to assure us of Truth. By which Performance
if I gain no more, I shall this; that as well the persons that approve my
former Essay, as those that cavil it, will know the Rule and Method I proceeded
by (in framing it;) which, to the former will afford a greater Confirmation, if
it be Right; and to the latter, a fairer rise of Assaulting (me) if it be not.

1. Before I can proceed to show what Reason is, I am first to show the many
senses the Word is taken in; which, not done by most, is one occasion of the
great Confusion in their talks about it. And Reason (to omit some other senses
not so necessary here) is in ordinary Language taken either largely, or
strictly, or appropriately and most strictly.

2. Reason largely taken, is the same with Mind or Understanding, and so is
commonly affirmed to exert it self in three Acts; the Apprehension of simple
Terms, the Composition of those Terms by way of Affirmation and Negation, and
Discourse, or illation of one thing from another. Reason strictly taken, is the
Understanding as it issues out in its third Act, not in the Apprehension of
simple Terms, nor in the Composition of them, but in Discourse and Illation;
and so Reason is the Understanding as it argues, discourses, infers. But Reason
is appropriately taken, or most strictly, as it is opposed to Faith and
Revelation, of which hereafter.

3. Reason taken for the Mind or Understanding, is that Faculty whereby a man
is said to be Reasonable, Intelligent, Understanding; as Sight is that Faculty
whereby an Animal is said to be Seeing: or it is that Faculty whereby a man is
said to Elicite Acts of Reason, or to Understand; as Sight is that Faculty
whereby an Animal is said to See. I so define it by the Act, for that the Act
is better known than the Faculty. To Understand (as well as to see) is a first
Notion, and he must be very simple that understands not what is meant by it;
nor are there any Notions more intelligible, whereby to mark Faculties, than
those of their Acts. Acts we see, being conscious of them when we exert them;
but Faculties we see not, we know not but by their Acts.

4. The Acts of Reason in this large sense (as the same with Mind or
Understanding) to speak of them as they offer and present themselves to mine
(without confining of my self to Notions of the Schools, or common Logicians)
are Two; Apprehension and Judgment.

5. Apprehension is that Act of Understanding whereby it is said to See or
Perceive things, and is the same in relation to the Mind, that Seeing is in
relation to the Eye.

6. Apprehension is Conversant with things either as in themselves, or as they
are noted; and they are noted either by simple words, or else by Propositions,
which are words joined by way of Affirmation or Negation; both which the Mind
sees or apprehends but as it has the Sense of them. Sense or Meaning is the
Motive and immediate Object of Apprehension, as Color is of Seeing. The Eye
sees nothing but under Color; the Mind apprehends nothing but under Sense.

7. I know well that Truth is usually affirmed the proper, adequate, immediate,
formal Object of the Intellect; but (it) is not so. Not Truth, but Sense or
Meaning is the proper, adequate, immediate Object of the Mind, as to its first
Act [that of Apprehension;] Truth is only the proper, adequate, immediate
Object of it as to another, which is called Assent, and is a kind of Judgment.
I understand and apprehend a Proposition which is false, that is, I have a
Sense and Meaning of it, though when I Understand or Apprehend it, I refuse my
Assent. So that it is not Verity that is the Motive and immediate Object of
Understanding in its Acts of Apprehension, but Sense or Meaning.

8. Sense or Meaning is that Conception or Notion that is formed in the Mind,
on a proposal to it of an Object, a Word, or Proposition; as Color is that
Sentiment begotten, and caused in the Eye, upon the impression of its Object on
it.

9. To understand this, we are to consider, That to us men, things are nothing
but as they stand in our Analogy; that is, are nothing to us but as they are
known by us; and they are not known by us but as they are in the Sense,
Imagination, or Mind; in a word, as they are in our Faculties; and they are in
our Faculties not in their Realities as they be without them, no nor so much as
by Picture and proper Representation, but only by certain Appearances and
Phenomenon, which their impressions on the Faculties do either cause or
occasion in them.

10. Every Faculty has a hand, though not the sole hand, in making its
immediate Object; as the Eye makes the Colors it is said to see, the Ear the
Sounds, the Fancy the Idols, and so the Understanding the Conceptions or
Notions under which it apprehends and sees things. So that all the immediate
Objects of Humane Cogitation (to use the word in its largest sense) are Entia
Cogitationis, All Appearances; which are not properly and (may I use a
School-term) formally in the things themselves conceived under them, and
consequently conceived as if they had them, but so only in the cogitative
Faculties. No such thing as Color but in the Eye, nor as Sound but in the Ear,
nor as Notion, Sense, or Meaning, but in the Mind. These, though they seem in
the Objects, and without the cogitative Powers, yet are no more in them than
the Image that seems in the Glass is there indeed.

11. So that all immediately cogitable beings (that is, all immediate Objects
of Humane Cogitation) are either Entities of Sense, as the immediate Objects of
Sense, Color, Sound, etc. or of Imagination, as the Images therein, the Idols
it frames; or of Reason and Understanding, Mental Entities, the Meanings or
Notions under which the Understanding apprehends its Objects; which (Notions)
though they seem to the Understanding to be without it, and to be in the things
understood, yet (as I said before) are no more without it or in the things
themselves, than Colors are without the Eye, or Sounds without the Ear, or
Sapours without the Tongue, although they seem so to Sense.

12. Faculties and Powers, Good, Evil, Virtue, Vice, Verity, Falsity,
Relations, Order, Similitude, Whole, Part, Cause, Effect, etc. are Notions; as
Whiteness, Blackness, Bitterness, Sweetness, etc. are Sentiments: and the
former own no other kind of Existence than the latter, namely, an Objective
(one.) A Notion that will free the Mind of much Intanglement in framing
Notions. We generally conceive Faculties, Good, Evil, and other Notions (under
which the Mind apprehends things) to be Realities, and to have an Existence of
their own without the Mind, and though there were no Mind to think of them,
when indeed they are but Noemata, Conceptions, and all the formal being any of
them have, is only in it. And no wonder if he that takes Noemata to be
Realities finds himself confounded by that mistake, in forming his Conceptions
about them. Notions therefore are very aptly, though somewhat barbarously,
styled by the Schoolmen, Conceptus Objectivi; Notions of the Mind, but yet
seeming to be in the Object. He that looks for Notions in Things, looks behind
the Glass for the Image he sees in it.

13. Such Cogitable Beings a have no foundation, no ground in Realities, that
is, in things without the Cogitative Faculties, but are mere effects of the
Faculties, are called Chimerical (Entities;) and in the Imagination are
Fictions, in the Understanding mere Notions; as in the former a Golden Tree, in
the latter a Philosophical Romance, or Groundless Hypothesis. But such as have
Foundation in Realities, are called Real, [Real Notions] not that in their own
nature they are in Realities themselves, but that they have their Grounds in
those that are; they are real (as a School-man would express it) not formally,
but fundamentally; they are inchoately and occasionally in the things, but not
consummately and formally but in the Faculties; not in the things, but as the
things relate to our Faculties; that is, not in the things as they are Things,
but as they are Objects.

14. Those Words or Propositions any one has a sense of, those things to which
the Words or Propositions relate, he has a Notion of. Sense is Notion; only
it is called Sense as it relates to the Words or Propositions, and Notion as it
relates to the Things; but indeed Sense is Notion, and to have the sense of a
Word or Proposition, is to frame a Notion of it, or of the thing signified by
it.

15. It Is as impossible to apprehend a Word or Proposition one has no notion,
no sense of, as to see an Object that makes no impression of Color on the
Eye; for what Color is to the Eye, that Sense, Meaning, or Notion is to the
Mind.

16. Sense, Meaning, or Notion arises from a Congruity in the Object to the
Faculty; so that to enquire why one cannot understand or apprehend a
Non-sensical Proposition or Word, is to enquire why he cannot see or hear
Tastes, or taste and smell Sounds, or taste, hear, and smell Colors, or see an
Object has none.

17. That Congruity in the Object to the Faculty, whereby it either actually
moves it, or is capable to move it to frame a Notion or Sense, ought to be
distinguished from that Congruity which is in the Object within it self, or
with other Objects: The former (for distinction sake) I call a Congruity to the
Faculty; the latter a Congruity in Things. The harmony of Objects to their
Faculties, and that of them within themselves, or one to another, are distinct
Harmonies. I can make sense of a Proposition that is not true, so that it is
Congruous to the Faculty, it moves that; when yet (it being false) the Parts of
it are Incongruous one with another.

18. To understand and apprehend a Proposition or Discourse, it suffices not
to have a Perception of the sense and meaning of the words; those words as in
Conjunction, and tied together, ought to make such an impression on the Mind,
as moves it to make a Notion of them in that Relation. One may have a sense of
the words in a Discourse, when yet he cannot make any of the Discourse it self,
because he cannot frame a Conception, a Notion of them in the Composition that
is given them in it. He cannot see how they are joined.

19. There are a thousand Instances of Discourses of this kind in Jacob
Behmen, but I need not go so far as Germany to seek some; I might have many
nearer home within the compass of our own time and observation; but I decline
them as Invidious; I will only point to one in Dr. Fludd, a person that could
speak as good Sense (if he listed) as another, but I could never make any of
many Passages I find in him, and of one particularly, namely, that in his
Mosaic Philosophy, Book 3. sect. 1. Chap. 4.

20. Those Discourses in which nor Words nor Propositions are sensible, or
wherein the Words are sensible but not the Propositions, and yet are taken by
those that make them for High Sense, may be called Enthusiasm. Of the former
sort I apprehend the Whims of Basilides, of Valentinus, and the Gnostics; and
of the latter, those of the Familists, and of others of late.

21. Enthusiasm either may proceed from a spirit, or from Complexion and a
certain temper of Mind; the former I call Demoniacal, the latter Complexional;
and not unlikely but in most Enthusiasts it comes from both: whereof an Upstart
Sect among us, in its first appearing, afforded strong Evin^cments.

22. That there are Philosophical Enthusiasts, is as certain as that there are
Theological; Enthusiasts in matters of Philosophy, as well as Enthusiasts in
matters of Divinity. Paracelsus, Helmont, and many other Chemists, are Examples
of the first sort; as H. Nicolls the Father of the Familists, and others, are
of the second: Jacob Behmen and Dr. Fludd may pass for Examples of both.

23. When Enthusiasts think they understand one another, (as they All pretend
to do, and that seriously, and therefore must have some impression to justify
that Pretension, whereas yet no sober man can understand Any of them;) I
conceive it not to be by Apprehension, but Sympathy; not Intellectually, by
Apprehending, that is, by framing just, steady, distinct Notions of what is
said; but Sympathetically, by having excited in their mind on such
Expressions, Motions, conformable to theirs that use them; for they all being
of the same frame and temper of Mind or of Imagination, whatever touches One
agreeably, also moves the Rest; as in Unison-Lutes, or other Instruments fitly
tuned, but to strike One, is (at once) to move All.

24. Notions of the Mind are bottomed on Sentiments of Sense; so that as
Realities are Grounds to Sentiments, so Sentiments are Grounds to Notions: the
impressions of things without upon the Sensories, produce or occasion in them
the Cogitations which we call Sentiments, as Colors, Sounds, Sapours, etc. And
Sentiments (again) impressing of the Fancy, and so the Mind and Understanding,
beget or occasion in it those higher Cogitations which we call Notions,
Apprehensions of Reason, or Ideas. Idols or Fantoms are in the Fancy, Ideas in
the Mind.

25. The nearer our Sensories are unto the Objects impressing them, (if not too
near) the clearer and distincter is the Sensation made by them; as we more
clearly and distinctly see an Object at a nearer than a remoter distance: so
the nearer the Mind and Understanding is to Sentiments, the more clear,
distinct, and evident its Perceptions are; I mean, the more sensible Notions
are, and the nearer to their Grounds, the more effective, more impressive, and
consequently clearer and more evident they be.

26. Hence Knowledge and Apprehension of things is better both acquired and
conveyed by first Notions, which are next to Sentiments, than by second which
are more remote: The Knowledge which is had of things by first Notions, is more
real, evident, clear, distinct, than that which is by the second. First Notions
are founded immediately on things; Second Notions are Notions concerning
Notions: These are not so impressive and effective as the first. By first and
Second Notions, I both understand Terms or Words, and the Notions signified by
them.

27. So much for the Object of Apprehension, which is Sense and Notion; and for
the Grounds of that Object, which is Sentiment: Now for the Affections of
Apprehension (if a good one) and they are two, namely, Cleerness and
Distinctness.

28. Cleerness of Apprehension, which is in the Mind the same that Cleerness
of Seeing is in the Eye, is opposed to Obscurity and Darkness, and presupposes
Light.

29. Light is that which manifests, and consequently Intellectual Light is that
means whereby the Understanding comes to See and Apprehend its Objects; or that
which manifests them to it: and is either Light of Revelation, which is also
called Light of Faith; or Light of Nature, which is also called Light of
Reason; where Reason is Appropriately taken, and most strictly.

30. The Light of Revelation is that Discovery or Manifestation God himself is
pleased to make of things by his Spirit, and is chiefly in the Holy Scriptures.
The Light of Nature is All other Light whatever but that of Revelation, whereby
we See and Apprehend things, and is that we have by Sense and Discourse.

31. Some things there are that may be seen in both Lights, in that of Nature,
and that of Revelation, though more clearly in the latter than in the former;
as that God is Good, and that he is the Maker and Conserver, and supreme
Director of All things: Other things are only to be seen in the Light of
Revelation, being of a nature not to be discovered but in and by it; as the
Mysteries of Christian Religion, the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Incarnation
of God, etc.

32. The Lights of Faith and Nature, of Revelation and Reason, though they be
not the same, yet are not contrary; I mean, that what is shown or seen to be
true in one Light, can never be shown or seen to be false in the other: What is
Apprehended by Sense rightly circumstanced and conditioned, to be This, or to
be That, or else by Reason rightly acting to be so, or so, it is never
contradicted by Revelation. Things are nothing to a man but as they stand in
his Analogy: for him to believe against his Faculties, is to believe a
Contradiction. If in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the Elements
first and last are Bread and Wine to Sense, and to Reason judging according to
Sense, I cannot hold my self obliged by (any) Revelation to believe them Flesh
and Blood, but in a Notion consistent with the judgment Sense and Reason make
of them; that is, not flesh and blood substantially, but sacramentally; not
flesh and blood really, but only by signification. Else Truth might be
Incongruity, Inconsistency. Transubstantiation is to me a Mystery; I am so far
from making truth of it, that I cannot make any sense of it; I might as well
believe that two and two make not four, or three and three six, as that it is
not Bread, or Wine, which to my Eye, my Taste, my Touch, in a word, which being
an Object of Sense, to all Examinations of my Sense is so. What is against
Sense, is against Knowledge.

33. An Object only to be seen by the Light of Faith, may be said to be seen
by Reason above Reason, by Reason assisted with the Light of Revelation, above
Reason not so assisted, but acting only by the Aids of Nature; but still it is
Reason sees in both: As I can see an Object with a Tube, that with my naked and
unarmed Eye I cannot: or see in the Sun-light an Object that I cannot by
Moonlight; but still it is the Eye that sees in both; the Organ is the same,
although the Lights be not. It is the same Reason and Understanding, the same
Faculty that sees in the Light of Revelation, as it is that sees by the Light
of Nature; and the same that Argues and Discourses in the one, as by the other.

34. The great Design of God in all the Doctrines, and even in the highest and
most sublime Mysteries of our Religion, is to affect the hearts of men: and
therefore as (1.) He represents and reveals them in first Notions; so (2.) He
also does it in sensible and comparative ones; and usually (3.) He represents
one thing by many Notions. (1.) To make it more Affective; and withal (2.) to
signify, that no one Notion he represents the thing in, is adequate and just
to it. Thus he represents the great Mystery of our Union unto Christ, and our
Communion with him, by that between the Vine and Branches, between the Husband
and Wife, between the Head and Members: As also the great work of Conversion
that passes upon Men in the change he makes on them, from their Darkness into
his most mavelous Light, He compares it to Generation, to Adoption, to
Creation: In fine, the New Covenant is not only styled a Covenant, but also a
Testament, and a Promise. All which resembling and comparative expressions may
and ought to be employed and used for the apprehending of the things they are
designed to signify, and the making of them more affective; but neither of
them so (to be insisted on) as if it were adequate, or just.

35. The Light of Faith and Revelation, must not be confounded with that of
Reason and Nature; I mean, we ought not to consider points of mere Revelation
in the light of mere natural Reason: Spiritual things cannot be discerned but
spiritually, and therefore must not be compared but with Spirituals. In Points
of (mere) Revelation, we ought entirely to confine our selves to the Notions,
Comparisons, Similitudes and Representations God himself has made of them,
without pretending to be wise above what is written, and to say or understand
just how in themselves the things are, abstractly from the Dresses Revelation
puts them in.

36. He that pretends to understand the Mysteries of Christian Religion, or any
Point of mere Revelation stripped of those Notions, Resemblances, and
Comparisons, when they be not revealed or discovered but in them; as he looks
not on these things in the Light of Faith and Revelation, but in that of Reason
or Nature; so not looking on them in their own Genuine and Proper Light, no
wonder if he either err or trifle about them.

37. Justly liable to this Reproof I judge them that are not content to think
and speak of God (the proper Object as well as Author of Revelation) in that
manner that he speaks of himself; who Reveals himself to us men in Analogous
and Comparative Notions, not in such as adequate and adjust him, but such as do
proportion and suit with us; as if he had an Understanding, Will, and
Affections; and did purpose Ends, and elected Means to compass them; did
consult and decree, and were touched with the Affections of Joy, Grief, Love,
Hatred, Anger, Revenge, etc.

38. They that tell us that he is not angry, that Revenge is an Imperfection
not to be imputed to him, and pretend to tell us just what is meant by it, they
might as well tell us that he does not love nor hate; that he does not propose
Ends to himself, nor design Means; that he does not consult nor decree; that
he has no Providence, no Foresight, there being Imperfection in all those
Notions; and yet without them, and the like, you can nor Think, nor Speak of
God. Abstract the Deity from these and other Comparative Notions, Notions of
Him, which are not in Him, and yet wherein He pleases to Reveal Himself, and
you will soon make Him such an one as Epicurus fancied, an Infinite Excellency,
but unknown, not concerned, nor concerning of Himself with things below Him.

39. It seems to me, that he that would abstract God, or any matter of
Religion, from the Notions or Comparisons which He or That is represented in,
would do like one that would consider the World only in its Realities of
Matter, Figure, Texture, and Motion, abstractly from those Phenomenon and
Appearances occasioned by them in our Senses and Minds: And if the latter may
be thought to have but an Empty, Dry, and Barren Notion of the World, the
former would not have a much better of God (whom now we cannot know as He is)
or of any Subject of Revelation, that should so consider it.

40. Whoever well attends, will find that all the Notions under which we
apprehend God, are Notions of Him, like those we have of the World, not as He
is in Himself (for so we know him not;) but as He stands in our Analogy, and in
that of the World; which Notions are very fitly styled Attributes, not
Accidents, as not speaking things Inherent Really in Him, but things ascribed
by the Mind, or attributed to Him; as Colors, which but in the Eye, are yet
ascribed to the Object; and Sounds, that indeed exist but in the Ear, are
attributed to the Air: For we regarding God in that Relation that He bears to
the world, and to our selves, and so considering Him, have excited in us such
Notions by the impressions the things we look on, and God himself as interested
in them, make upon us. The Attributes of God are but (as) so many Aspects. Much
Obscurity and many Errors in forming Notions about God and his Attributes, are
owing to an Unacquaintance with this Truth.

41. Having spoken of Clearness of Apprehension, and of the Lights that make
it, I will only add a Consideration, which though obvious enough, is not
reflected on as it should; namely, that the Lights are gradual; [even that of
Revelation] and that all things are not equally clear (in them:) so that we
ought to put a difference, as between Philosophical and Theological Points, and
Points unrevealed and revealed; so in those revealed between Fundamental Points
(which are but few and plain) and Superstructures upon them; between what is in
Scripture in express Terms, and what is there but by Consequence; and in
Consequences, between those that are immediate and next to Principles, and
those that are remote and further off. As there are weighty Points of the Law,
so there are Tythe-mint, Anise, and Cummin; he that makes no difference, takes
not his measures by Jesus Christ's. As it is inept and foolish, so it is
inhumane and bloody, not to distinguish Errors from Heresies. Heresy in
Religion, is as Treason in the Law, a subversion of Fundamentals; and it must
be plainly and directly so, and not by Consequences and farfetcht Deductions:
For Heresy, it must be eradicated; but as for Errors, he that is exempt from
them, let him throw the first stone at the guilty. But this is not intended as
a Plea for Error, God forbid! but for Humanity.

42. I proceed to the second Affection of Apprehension, which is Distinctness.
And to apprehend a thing distinctly, is to form such a Notion and Conception of
it, and to have such a sense as does distinguish it from all things else.

43. Distinctness of Apprehension is acquired by Distinction, and by
Definition. Distinction, as I take it, is of Words; Definition of Things. To
make a Distinction is, when a Word has many Significations, to determine, fix,
or define the Sense it is taken or used in, and by certain Marks and Tokens to
distinguish it and circumscribe it from all the others (it has.) Definitions
of things are properly Descriptions. To describe, is to notify, mark, and
represent a thing in and by its Attributes, that is, according to the
impressions that it makes upon our Faculties, and Conceptions it occasions in
them. Essential Definitions are Nonsense. Things are not Explicable, but as
they are to us in our Faculties.

44. The more particularly any thing is marked, the more distinct is the
knowledge we have of that thing.

45. Most Errors in Divinity as well as in Philosophy, owe their being to
confused Apprehensions, and confused Apprehensions their's to the Ambiguity of
words, and the uncertainty of their Signification. He that uses words of many
Significations without distinctly marking them, and without particularly noting
what Sense he takes the word in when he uses it, may easily be apprehended to
take it sometimes in one Sense, sometimes in another, that is, to take one
Sense for another; and he that takes one Sense of a word for another, mistakes,
and confounds things. To confound things, is to take one for another. Confusion
of things comes from Ambiguity of words. A Word in one of its Senses may belong
to a thing, when in all it cannot.

46. Caution. Take heed of being abused with the Agreement of Words, into a
belief of answerable Agreement in Things.

47. Direction. To avoid confusion of Apprehension, the best way is to look
beyond the words we hear or read, or have in our minds, unto their Senses and
Meanings: for Words may be uncertain and equivocal, whereas Sense and Notion is
not so, but certain and fixed.

48. Having treated of Apprehension in the general, of its Object, and of its
two Affections, Clearness and Distinctness, it remains to speak of those
Conditions which are requisite to the forming of a clear and distinct
Apprehension; and they are four: a Due Illumination or Illustration of the
Object; a Right Disposition of the Faculty; a Due Distance from the Object; and
a Due Attention to it. The same Conditions in Apprehension as in Vision.

49. A Due Illumination of the Object; by which I mean here but Perspicuity of
Expression: a Representation of things unto the Mind in plain, apt, and
significant Words, and in a plain and instructive order and method. Plainness
of Expression and Method is the Light of a Discourse; he that uses it is
Didactical, [apt to teach,] but he that will clearly and methodically express
his Thoughts to others, must first conceive them so himself: so that here I
might say over again what I have already about Clearness and Distinctness of
Apprehension.

50. A Right Disposition of the Faculty; a Right Temper of Mind, [Rectitude of
Minde] consists in a full and perfect Exemption of it from all the prejudices
that either Education, Custom, Passion, or false Reasoning have imbibed it
with. Prejudices are erroneous (or false) Anticipations, and are in the Mind
as Tinctures in the Eye, which falsisie its Vision. Other Diseases of the Mind
there are besides Prejudice, as Levity, Curiosity, Skepticism, etc. in an
Exemption, from which also Sanity of Mind consists; but the principal is
Prejudice. And besides Sanity of Mind, there is (for the apprehending of some
particular Objects) necessary also a Sanctity of Mind. The pure in heart
[onely] see God.

51. A Due Distance from the Object; not to look too near, nor at too Remote a
Distance.

52. Not too near. Too near looking is a cause of much entanglement and error,
both in forming of Philosophical and Theological Notions; he that looks too
near, does either see nothing at all, or but confusedly: he looks too near to
things, that not contented with common Notions of them, wherein all the world
agrees, will have more exact ones; or that not contented with the knowledge of
things according to appearances, as he may see them, is always attempting to
know them in their Realities, in which he cannot; As in Quantity the common
Notion of it, how evident is it! It Is evident to all men, and none but knows
what is meant by it; and he that looks on Quantity but so, observes a due
distance; but whosoever looks nearer, looks too near, and is confounded with
the composition of the Continuum [and well he may that takes a Phenomenon, a
Spectrum, an Appearance for a Reality.]

53. Not at too remote a distance. He considers Objects at too remote a
distance, that looks on them but in second Notions, or contents himself with
general ones, which at best are but confused and uncertain; and being so, no
wonder if they cause mistakes: the more particular and distinct, the surer the
knowledge is: we are often deceived with appearances, and take one thing and
person for another, when we only see them afar off.

54. Due attention is a fixed and steady beholding of the Object, in order to a
framing clear and distinct conceptions about it; and it is opposed to
Inadvertency, or a precipitate and hasty skipping from thing to thing, without
a due considering of any: A Distemper of Mind, to which Youth and warm
Complexions are subject, which though they may be more ingenious and witty, and
more prompt and ready, are yet for that reason seldom so judicious, prudent and
weighty, as those of cooler Tempers and of more Age.

55. So much for Apprehension, the first Act of Understanding; I now pass on to
the second, which is Judgment.

56. Judgment is that Act of the Understanding whereby it having compared and
considered things (presented to it, and apprehended by it,) comes in the end
and upshot, either to Assent, or Dissent. So that Judgment is a compounded
Act, and (as it were) made up of two; one of which is Mediate and Inchoate, the
other Ultimate and Complete; the first is Comparing and Considering; the
second, Resolving and Decreeing: That the Premises; this, the Conclusion. The
former properly is Reasoning; the later, Resolving according to Reason.

57. Reasoning is (a) producing or showing of (a) Reason. (A) Reason is the
Ground of Intellectual Judgment; or the Cause why the Understanding either
assents, or dissents. Assent is the Approving Judgment of the Understanding;
Dissent is the Disproving Judgment of the Understanding. To show Reason for a
thing, is to prove it: to show Reason against a thing, is to disprove it. Plain
Reason is that which convinces: Forced Reason is that which only confutes. To
confute is, so to entangle a person that he cannot answer: To convince is, so
to show him Reason, that he cannot deny it to be so. A man is often confuted,
when yet he is not convinced.

58. Method of Reasoning is called Logic; and is either Artificial or Natural.
Artificial is the Logic of Schools, of which the chiefest is Aristotle's: and
is useful many ways, but among others, mainly (as a Whetstone) to acute and
sharpen the Wit; and to render it more sagacious, circumspect and wary, both in
making and admitting Deductions and Consequences. Natural Logic, that of plain
and illiterate men, of which I design to discourse, is the natural method of
Reasoning; in relation whereunto the Scots are said to have a Proverb, That an
Ounce of Mother-wit is worth a Pound of Clergy.

59. Natural Logic is universal, a Logic of the whole kind; so that what in
Natural Logic is reason to one man, is so to all; for all having the same
Faculties, and using them in the same Method, must needs come to the same
issue, and by the same Principles arrive to the same Conclusion.

60. As one naturally by often seeing and attending to his own acts, acquires a
method how to look to see to the best advantage, as also Optical Rules by which
he judges of Objects; which Method and which Rules are [to speak generally] the
same among all men: So may he by frequent reasoning, and attending to his own
and others reasonings, easily and insensibly acquire a Method [which as
reasoning itself will for the general be the same with all men] how to use his
Reason to the best advantage, to reason out things. This common method of
Reasoning, (which because common, and in some measure acquired without
assistances of Art, I call natural) is natural Logic.

61. All Reasoning is either Speculative or Practical. Speculative Reasoning is
showing a thing is true or false: Practical Reasoning is showing a thing is to
be done, or not to be done. (A) Speculative Reason is the ground of Speculative
Judgment. (A) Practical Reason, the ground of Practical Judgment. Speculative
Judgment is judgment that a thing is true or false: Judgment that it is true,
is Speculative Assent; that it is false, Speculative Dissent. Practical Judgment
is Judgment or Decree that a thing is to be done, or not to be done. Judgment
that a thing is to be done, is Judgment for it, or practical Assent: Judgment
that a thing is not to be done, is Judgment against it, or practical Dissent.

62. Speculative Reasoning is either Proving or Disproving. To prove, is to
show a thing to be true; to disprove, is to show a thing to be false. So that
in natural Logic, [as to speculative Reasoning,] there are but two Topics, or
principal places of Arguments, and those are Verity and Falsity: The one
affords us a medium of Proving, the other a medium of Disproving: I prove what
I say, by showing the Truth; I disprove what another says, by showing the
Falsity of it.

63. Truth and Falsity are to the Mind, as white and black to the Eye; as
these are kinds of Colors, and so the objects of the Eye; so the former are
kinds of Sense, and consequently objects of the Mind: And as the Eye rightly
circumstanced and conditioned sees white to be white, and black to be black; so
the Understanding sees Truth rightly shown to be Truth, and Falsity to be
Falsity.

64. Wherefore to prove a Truth to be one, is but in a right method to show it
to the Mind, the Understanding apprehending a thing to be true when rightly
showed, as the Eye does see the show to be white that is duly held before it.
A Notion may be true, yet not acknowledged to be so, because not rightly
apprehended, or seen; and it is not rightly seen or apprehended, because not
rightly showed: Then Truth is rightly showed, or showed to be Truth, when it is
showed Systomatically, or Harmonically. The like is to be said of Falsity. But
to enlighten this Point, I am to show at large what Truth, and consequently,
what Falsity is.

65. Truth, in the apprehensions of some of the Schoolmen and of others, is
that conformity which is in things to their original Ideas in the Divine
Intellect. All second Beings are but Copies of the Mind of the first, in which
they have their Exemplars: and wherein does the verity, the truth of Copies
consist, but in a conformity to their Originals?

66. But this notion of Truth (however true it may be) is not pertinent to us;
it is Metaphysical Truth that it relates unto; a Truth of things as standing in
the Analogy of God: but the Truth we treat of, and whose notion we are
enquiring after, is Logical, a Truth of things as standing in our Analogy, and
which is the ground of Assent. Certain it is, this notion that the Schools
afford us, is not (nor can it be to us) a Medium of Reasoning; since we cannot
say what is conformable or what is not unto the divine Exemplars. He must see
the Original, and compare the Copy with it, that on knowledge will affirm this
to be true.

67. Of late the old Catalepsis has seen the light again, that comprehension
discoursed of by Cicero in his Lucullus. The meaning of which is, that there is
no other Criterium, no other judicial note of Truth, no other Rule, Mark, or
Measure whereby to know a thing to be true, than clear and distinct Perception.
And thus also the Cartesians.

68. But on the contrary, clear and distinct Perception is not the Cause and
Ground of Assent, but only a Condition of causing; Truth is the only Adequate
and effectual Motive or Reason of Assent; but to be so, it must be clearly and
distinctly perceived. Truth (as whiteness) is something in the Object that
invites Assent: clear and distinct Perception is not in the Object, but of it;
and consequently is not Truth, but conversant about Truth. Sight is not Color,
but of Color; so neither is Perception Truth, but of Truth. Besides, that
cannot be a certain mark of Truth, which may be affirmed as well of Error as
of Truth. I may as clearly and distinctly perceive a thing to be false, as to
be true. A thing may be evidently false, as well as evidently true.

69. If any say (as doubtless some will) that by clear and distinct Perception,
they mean nothing but a clear and evident apprehension of the truth of things;
I answer, That then either they know what Truth is by its mark and definition,
and by the impression that it makes on the Mind, as well as what Whiteness
(is) by the impression made thereby on the Eye; or they do not. If they do not,
how can they say they clearly and distinctly perceive a thing to be true, who
know not Truth? They might as well say, they clearly and distinctly see a thing
to be white, when they know not whiteness. Or if they know what Truth is, then
that Impression, that Form, that Notion of Truth they have, ought rather to be
insisted on, and not the (bare) Perception. They should say, The thing is true,
we see clearly the Form and Notion of Truth in it. For indeed, nothing makes a
thing true, but the Form and Notion of Truth therein: For did I apprehend a
thing to be true never so clearly and distinctly, yet if I did but apprehend it
so (as I may, and many do) and that the Notion and Form of Truth were no wise
in it, it were not true by virtue of the Apprehension I had of it, but only
seemed so. As I clearly and distinctly see an Image in the Glass, when indeed
it is not there; or an Oar in the Water bowed and crooked, when indeed it is
not so. It is an Error (and a most dangerous one too) to assert, that seeming
or intellectual sense (for clear and distinct Perception signifies no more) is
the measure of Truth: There are so many ways wherein a thing may be seen
clearly and distinctly, that is, may seem true, and yet not be so. No
convincing Heretics, or opinionate Philosophers, if Seeming be the mark of
Truth.

70. To this Opinion, I am now to add another much of kin to it; That of the
truly-Noble and Learned the late Lord Herbert, namely, That Truth consists in
the Analogy, Agreement, Harmony of things to our Faculties, inviting a most
free and full Assent: Or, in his own Terms; Veritas est Harmonia inter object a
and Facultates, habens sensum gratissime and lubentissime sine ulla
haesttatione Respondentem.

71. All the difference between the Former and the Latter Opinion is, that in
the former Apprehension clear and distinct, in the latter Assent Free and Full,
is made the Mark and Measure of Truth. Of this (Latter) Opinion, as that
eminent Person (last mentioned) among the Moderns; so among the Ancients were a
many noble Philosophers; in Tully it is called (...). and as described by him,
it has the same Foundation that his Lordship builds on, namely the (...) of
Truth. That Truth is so Domestical and Congruous to the Faculty, so Analogous
and fit to it, that the Inclination of the Mind thereto, in Nature and
Necessity, resembles that of a Stone, or whatever or other heavy Body you will
imagine, to the Center.

72. But (1) a bare Congruity between the Object and the Understanding is not
the ground of Truth, but of Sense or Intelligibility; and though there be a
Congruity in all Truth, because there is a sense in it, and happily more
Congruity because a more agreeable Sense; Yet since that Congruity is
unobservable, unremarkable but by Assent, and Assent (of it self) is no
sufficient Evincement of Truth; I lay it by as Illogical and useless. (2) Nor
does the Understanding blindly incline to Truth, and as it were by Sympathy, or
a natural Motion of Aggregation; its Assent is (an act of) Judgment: The Mind
proceeds therein judicially upon Allegations and Proof; judging a thing to be
true, that is, assenting to it, only because it sees therein the Form, Notion,
and Mark of Truth, as it judges a thing to be white wherein the Eye assures it
there is the form of Whiteness. And (3) one may readily and cheerfully assent
to Falsities and Errors, and mistake them for Truths; and therefore free and
full Assent is no sufficient evincement of Truth. Not to urge that cheerfulness
of Assent, that readiness and promptness we many times observe in it, is oftener
an effect of a Passion bribing of the Understanding, than of a pure clear
impartial Reason.

73. Wherefore, others of the Ancients, as well as of the Moderns, abundantly
convinced of the insufficiency both of Perception clear and distinct, and of
Assent free and full to ascertain them of Truth, and yet unwilling to have
Nature (so liberal in other matters) exposed to the reproach of Deficiency in
One so important as intellectual Judgment; They have conceited humane
understanding furnished by her with certain [(...)] Anticipations, that is,
with Connatural and Ingrafted Notions; Principles designedly implanted in the
Mind, to be a rule to it to direct it. Thus in the speculative Understanding
they have set up a habit, which they call Intelligence; in the Practical
another which is called Synteresis; in both, a Constellation of Principles,
shining with their own Light, and imparting it to others that want it; not much
unlike to what is affirmed of Dionysius in his Celestial Hierarchy concerning
Spirits, that those of superior Orders enlighten all beneath them in the
inferior.

74. But were there really such a System of Notions and first Principles
ingrafted in the Mind by Nature, in whose Light all others were to shine and
to be seen, it would follow that Contemplation of our own minds, acquainting
us with the Chain, Concatenation, and Sorites of the Principles therein, and
Propositions deducible therefrom, would more import to the rendering us
Philosophers (not to say Divines also) than observation of the World and
Experience; and so the greatest Schoolmen (those Metaphysical Alchymists) that
insisted much on this Method, and spun out all their notions of their own
Bowels, should have been the wisest and most fruitful of men. Whereas we know
the men, and the manner of their Communication; all their Discourses are indeed
subtle and acute; but also empty and barren, and no more agreeing with
Realities (and in our Analogy) than Light with Darkness.

Again, the Soul in its state of Union and Conjunction with the Body, is so
dependent on it in all its Operations, that it exercises none without the Aids
of it. Ratiocination it self it is an Animal act; not an abstract Action of the
Soul, but a (Concrete) act of the Animal; it is the Man reasons. And in the
ordinary method of Nature, we receive into our Minds no Impressions, no
Images, but what are handed to them by our Senses. I am apt to think that
person who should never have seen, nor heard, nor tasted, nor smelt, nor felt
any thing, would have his mind as little furnished with Idea's or Notions, as
his Memory with Images, and would understand as little as he had sensed.
Besides, those very Principles themselves we call First ones, or Anticipations
shining with their own luster and light, Propositions which we cannot but
assent to as soon as we hear them, or mind them; It will appear, if we reflect
warily on what does pass in our Minds, that even these are not assented to,
but on the Evidence they bring; I mean not assented to naturally, but (as other
Propositions are) judicially. For instance, that the whole is greater than the
part, we assented not unto it on the first hearing, but first considering what
was meant by Whole, what by Part, what by Greater, what by Lesser; and then
having sensibly, either by Eyesight, or by Imagination, compared one unto the
other, we evidently saw it to be so; that the Notion of Greater, even to Sense,
ever agreed to the whole; and that of Less, to the Parts. The like that Two and
Two make Four. This is the way we first admitted to belief the Propositions
which are called Principles; and it is no other than that wherein we admit all
others. Only the Propositions (which are) called Anticipations, or first
Principles, are Propositions of so easy, sensible, and plain an evidence, and
so obvious, that we early admitted them, so early, that we cannot well remember
when we first did so; and therefore they are styled Anticipations, or
proleptick Notions: for being of so early an admission and existence in our
Minds, they preceded all our (after) knowledges, whose acquirement we well
remember.

Further, Beings are not to be multiplied without Necessity, and there is none
of faigning such Anticipations and Habits of Principles to direct the Mind in
inquisitions after Truth, since all acknowledge there are no such principles in
the Eye, the Ear, the Nose, the Tongue to direct them, and why then in the
Mind? Besides, Reflection on our ordinary reasonings, evinces that in them we
seldom attend to such Principles, but to the Object discoursed of; nor need we
to do otherwise, if it can be evidenced that there is a certain Notion, Form,
Ground of Truth that runs through all things true; which Form or Notion of
Truth, as soon as the Understanding rightly circumstanced and conditioned,
apprehends in an Object, it cannot but acknowledge it to be true, as it would
another to be white or black, wherein it is assured by the Eye rightly
circumstanced and conditioned, that there is the Form of Whiteness or
Blackness. As for Anticipations, they are too particular, and not of a nature
so large and comprehensive as to be the Rules and Measures of Truth, which is
infinite. Let those Anticipations be reckoned, and then Experiment be made upon
comparison with the immense Latitude of Questions, and of Truth relating to
them.

75. Thus I have shown the Indications, Marks, and Notions of Truth that (in my
judgment) are not proper, adequate, or useful; it now remains that I show
one (that) is. And Truth, as it is the Ground, Motive, and Reason of Assent, is
objective Harmony, or the Harmony, Congruity, Even-lying, Answerableness,
Consistence, Proportion, and Coherence of things each with other, in the Frame
and Scheme of them in our Minds. Truth is universal and exact Agreement or
Harmony.

76. On the other hand, Falsity (as the ground, motive, and reason of Dissent)
is Objective Disharmony, or the disharmony, incongruity, inequality,
unanswerableness, inconsistence, disproportion, and incoherence of things, in
the Frame and Scheme of them in our Minds. Any Disagreement or Disharmony is
Falsity.

77. Probability or Likelihood of Truth, is an appearance of Congruity. A thing
is probable, when it has some consistence and agreement; it Quadrates and lies
even with what we do know; but in regard there are particulars relating to the
same Systemes and Frames of Thoughts which yet we do not know, therefore we
know not if it will lie even and square with them. Improbability is apparent
Incongruity.

78. That Truth is Harmony and Proportion, and consequently that Probability is
apparent Harmony, apparent Proportion; and Falsity, Disharmony, Disproportion
cannot be but very evident to him that shall consult with Nature and common
sense.

79. In Nature it is plain: For Harmony, it is the Reason of the World; the
World was made by it, cannot be known but by it. The rule of Proportion is the
King-Key, unlocking all the Mysteries of Nature. The Great Creator framed all
things in the Universe in Number, Weight, and Measure: Extremes in it are
united by participating Middles; and in the whole System there is so admirable
Uniformity as ravishes every one that beholds it: every thing in its place is
aptly knit with what is next it; and all together into one most regular Frame
of most exact Proportions. Every thing we look on affords Examples; and Galen
in his Books of the use of Parts, has a Thousand, to whom (if in so plain a
matter it be necessary) I remit the Learned Reader.

80. And it is a common sense, that what is congruous is true, and what is true
is congruous; so common, that none ever fancied any notion of Truth but in
Congruity: some Schoolmen, in Congruity to the Divine Intellect; Others in
Congruity to our Faculties; and all men (though they speak not out, and it may
be mind not that they do so) in Consistence and Congruity of things with one
another; all generally concluding that Narration (for instance) to be probable,
which seems consistent; and Probability being appearance of Truth, if what
seems consistent be probable, what is so is true. But to give a Mechanical
instance; one that would repair a broken China-dish, or make up a Watch or
other Engine taken abroad, what Measures does he naturally take to do so? what
Rule proceeds he by? None verily, but by that of Congruity; he makes no
question but that when he has found a place for every part wherein it lies
consistently and aptly with others, so that in the whole there is exact
Coherence and Congruity, no Flaw, no Unanswerableness, it is truly set
together, and every part in its place. Truth is Harmony.

81. And seeing Truth is Harmony, and the Universe it self, as it consists in
our Analogy, is but one System; it follows that properly there is but one
Science (which some will call Pansophy) one Globe of Knowledge, as there is of
Things: As also that the partition of Sciences, or rather the crumbling of them
into so many, has been a great impediment of Science; the dependency of
Things, and their Relations one to another, thereby becoming unobserved and
unconsidered. And in fine, that the more large, general, and comprehensive our
Knowledge is, the more assured and evident it is. It is in Science as it is in
Arch-work, the Parts uphold one another, and mutually contribute strength and
beauty. The consinement of the Understanding to particular Knowledges, as also
the limiting of it in any unto certain Methods and Terms of Art, is like too
straight a swathing of the Child, and spoils its growth.

82. So much for the two Topics of natural speculative Reasoning, namely,
Truth and Falsity. It now lies on me more expressly to describe How Reasoning is
performed in reference to them, and so what the Nature of it is. And natural
speculative Reasoning is Systematical, and Harmonical; it is a showing, an
evincing the Truth or Falsity of a thing, by conferring and comparing thing
with thing; it is a showing a Notion to be true or not true, by representing of
it in a Frame, a Scheme of real Notions, with all its Relations in it; and so
by Comparing, Evidencing how it squares, agrees, and harmonizes, or otherwise.

83. That Natural Reasoning is Harmonical, Systematical, that it is conferring,
comparing, is evident in the Natural Reasonings of Plain and Illiterate, but
Understanding men; who not having other Logic but that of kind, to verify
their Tales, desire but to have them heard out from end to end; and who no
otherwise confute their Adversaries, than by telling over again in their own
way the whole Relation, that so both may be compared. Besides, the comparative
method of Reasoning, used by the Mind in intelligible Objects, is no other
than that we naturally use in those that are sensible: For, be it a visible
Object we enqure into, and examine the truth of, we turn it every way, and into
all postures, so to make a certain judgment of it; and Circumspection, (which
is Cicero's word for it) or the Minds comparing and conferring of things is no
other. And if Truth indeed be Harmony, Proportion, Congruity, an Object cannot
be evinced true, but by being evinced Harmonical, Congruous, Proportionable;
and it cannot be evinced Harmonical, Congruous, Proportionable, but by being
conferred and compared, and upon collation and comparison shown to be so.

84. To prove Harmonically, is in a Scheme and Frame of Notions bottomed on
things, to show the thing to be proved, to quadrate, lie even, and to be
entirely congruous and answerable. To disprove a thing Harmonically, is in a
Frame and Scheme of Notions bottomed on things, to show it not to quadrate, but
to be incongruous, unanswerable, and unadequate.

85. The best way of Confuting Error, is to do it by showing the Truth: There
is so great a delicacy in Proportions, that a Scheme of Thoughts may seem
congruous and agreeing by it self, which compared with another, is observed no
longer so; as two pieces of fine Cloth looked on at a distance, and not
compared together, may be judged equally fine, and one no better than the
other; whereas when put together and felt, and so compared, the difference is
plain and discernible.

86. The Effect of Reasoning, (and as it were the Conclusion) is Assent, or
Dissent, according to evidence. Evidence is the Assurance we have a thing is
true or false, and so is either of Truth or of Falsity, and answerably bottomes
either Assent or Dissent.

87. Assent is the judgment of the Mind upon evidence of Truth, that the
thing is true. Dissent is the judgment of the Mind upon evidence of Falsity,
that the thing is false.

88. Evidence of Truth is either certain or probable. Certain Evidence is full
Assurance. Probable Evidence is good Assurance, but not full. Certain Evidence
is evidence of certain Truth. Probable Evidence is evidence of probability.
Probable Evidence is now adays termed a Motive of Credibility.

89. In Proportion, as the Evidence is, so is the Assent. If the Evidence be
certain, that is, indubitable and unquestionable, [and that is to be understood
to be so, of which there is no cause to doubt, or make any Question] then the
Assent is firm and certain, and without doubting; (but) if the Evidence be but
probable, the Assent then is infirm, and with doubting more or less, as the
Evidence is lesser or greater. To Doubt, is to fear lest the thing to which
Assent is given should not be true.

90. Evidence of Certainty, is to the Mind (as to its Assent) all as much as
Evidence of Infallibility: For the Mind as firmly adheres to what it has all
reason for, and no reason against; all reason to believe it to be so or so, and
no reason to believe it to be otherwise, as to what it apprehends impossible to
be otherwise; seeing it were unreasonable and contradictious for Reason any
wise to doubt, when it has no reason at all to do so. I am as sure that once
there were such persons as William the Conqueror and Henry the Eight, and that
there are or lately were such Cities as Rome and Constantinople, as I am that
Two and Two make Four, or that the Whole is greater than the Parts.

91. Firm Assent in matters in themselves mutable and of a contingent nature,
may be called Confidence; but in matters of a necessary, firm, and immutable
nature, it is Science. Infirm Assent, or Assent with Dubitation, is called
Opinion. Suspicion is a beginning Assent, or an inclination to believe a thing,
and is short of Opinion. Suspicion on grounds is called just suspicion.
Suspicion on no grounds is mere suspicion. Probability is appearance of Truth:
And ground of Suspicion is Appearance of Probability. Suspicion is also called
Presumption.

92. Assent on Evidence by the testimony of our own Senses rightly
circumstanced and conditioned, is as firm as firm can be, and is called
Knowledge. Assent to a thing upon another knowledge and not our own, is called
Belief. To Believe, is to take a thing upon another word; and if that word be
divine, the belief is called Faith; or if but humane, it is called simply
Belief or Credit. Belief is grounded on the wisdom and veracity of the person
believed: for he that believes another, believes him to have wisdom enough not
to be imposed upon or deceived himself; and Veracity or Truth (which among men
is called Honesty) enough not to impose upon or to deceive him. The Word of God
therefore is the most proper object of belief, God being so wise he cannot be
deceived, and so true he cannot deceive. Notoreity of a thing [of a fact] is
the certainty of it on Common Knowledge: It is not Presumption, nor
Probability, but Certainty.

93. Assent to Falsity under the notion of Truth, if it be firm, is called
Error: If infirm, and with dubitation, it is erroneous Opinion.

94. Ratiocination Speculative, is either Euretick or Hermeneutick, Inventive
or Interpretative; and this latter again is either interpretative of the World,
the Book of Nature; or of the Scriptures, the Book of God. But of these
perhaps, another time, as also of the method of Reasoning which I called
Practical, and is either that of Prudence (1. Humane, or 2. Christian) or of
Conscience.

Now on the whole Matter, who sees not the share and interest (that) Reason
has in matters of Religion? Men are reasonable Creatures, and therefore their
Religion must be reasonable: Every Tree must bring forth Fruit in its kind.
Faith it self it is a rational Act [If I have any reason to believe Men, I have
all reason to believe God] and Ratiocination is as much employed in points of
Revelation, as in points of mere Reason. Truth is the immediate reason of
Assent in matters of Revelation as well as in others; and there is an Analogy
of Faith as well as of Nature; the Mediums are different; but Ratiocination is
the same in both: We are as well obliged to compare Spiritual things with
Spiritual in the one, as Natural things with Natural in the other. Thus are the
Bereans applauded as persons of nobler and more generous Minds than those of
Thessalonica, because they took not all on trust as these did, but examined the
things were told them, and compared them with the Scriptures.

It is easy also to infer, that if any person shall give himself the trouble
of disproving what in my Apology I presented to the World; to do it to
Conviction, he must produce a frame and Scheme of Thoughts more Congruous and
Harmonical than mine, and must account for those Phenomenon which I therein
essayed to solve, in a method more perspicuous and natural, and with more
agreeableness and uniformity of Notions than I have; or else he will not
Confute, but confirm it.

I say this, to show the fairer play to those that undertake to answer me, if
after I have said it any shall resolve to do so; and I say no more, to show the
Opinion I yet avow to be mine of all the Objections whispered up and down, that
in themselves they have as little force and evidence, and as little conviction,
as those that make them have yet had either Courage to own them to the world,
or Candor to own them to me.

Thus, Sir, I have performed what I principally designed. I have showed the
nature of Reason: I have showed the true method of Reasoning; as also the
nature of Truth, and (up and down my Discourse dispersedly) the causes of
Error: and I have showed the extent of Reason. In which performance,
whatsoever other Incongruity or Error I may have been guilty of, sure I am I
have committed none in dedicating it: For to whom could I address a Discourse
of Reason and of Truth more properly, than to a Person who is so great a Lover
and owner of both? and withal who is so perfectly honored as you are by all
that have the happiness to know you: But by none more than

Sir, Bowdon, Aug. 14. 1677. Your most humble Servant and Son, Richard
Burthogge.

BOOKS Printed for, and sold by Samuel Crouch in Popes-head-ally.
FEltham's Resolves, Divine, Moral, Political, with new Additions.

Clark's Martyrologie.

-- His Lives of the Fathers.

The Sabbath of Rest, to be kept by the Saints here. By N. Smith Master of Arts.

Cole's English Dictionary.

Dr. Thomson's method of Curing.

-- His Epilogismi Chymici.

Sleepy spouse of Christ alarmed; in several Sermons. By J. B. Recommended in a
Preface, by Mr. Nath. Vincent.

Purchasers Pattern, much enlarged.

The English Tutor: or the plain Pathway to the English Tongue; with examples
of most Words from one to six Syllables, both in whole Words, and also divided:
with Rules how to spell them, by way of Question and Answers.


