THE NATURE OF Church Government, Freely Discussed and set out. IN THREE
LETTERS.

LONDON, Printed for S. G. in the Year MDCXCI.

To My Noble Friends, SVV. Y.B. T.R. EN ME.
SIRS,
I Present you in the following Letters, the true Idea (as I take it) of
Church Government; which could it be received by all others, with the same
degree of Candor I assure my self it shall by you, would be of infinite
Advantage to end those fatal Controversies that for many Ages have perplexed,
and, in this last, almost destroyed the Church.

I prefer the way of Letters to set out the Notion, for two Reasons: One,
because it is the more Insinuative, and a way that is much taken, at this Time;
The other, because really there were Letters sent by a Non-con. to a Conf. in
which most of the things were said that are in these; only now they come
refined from all the Reflections that were Personal, and from some Mistakes.

For my own part, I have nothing of Fondness in me for any Opinions; nor do I
hold my self obliged unto these in the Letters, further than as they shall
endure the Tests of Truth: I am very willing they should undergo them all, by
strict Examination; though, I confess, I am as loath they should be put to
Torture. If upon the severest Enquiry any thing can be found in them, or duly
inferred from them, as to the Main, that will not stand with good Authority,
sound Reason, good Order of Policy, or Christian Piety, I shall soon shake
Hands with them: But till then I cannot believe it any Crime to own what I am
fully persuaded of, and what I am sure is no Popery, That Ecclesiastical
Government is a Prudential thing and Alterabl^; and that the only True English
of [ Jure Divino] in the present Case, is [ by Law Established.] I am,

June 8th. 1690. SIRS, Your most Humble and Obliged Servant.

THE FIRST LETTER.
SIR,
IT must be acknowledged that you took a very right Method in the Business of
Church Government, to search, (as you say you did) into its very Original; and
had not some of the Prejudices of your Education, or of your Circumstances;
stuck too fast to you, I suppose that way you would at least have discovered
the Institution of the twelve Apostles at first, before our Lord's Passion, and
of the seventy Disciples to have been only Temporary; as well as in
Accommodation to the Mosaical Policy, in which were twelve Philarchs or Heads
of Tribes, and seventy Elders.

After our Lords Passion, when he was risen again from the Dead, and about to
Ascend into Heaven, concerning himself no further with the seventy (of whom
under that Denomination, we read nothing afterward in the Christian Church) he
gives a new and large Commission to the twelve Apostles, and assigns them two
Works. The First, the making of Disciples or Christians all the World over, by
declaring and publishing every where, what, upon their own Knowledge, they were
certain of, in reference to Christ, that so, by being Witnesses unto him, they
might both aver the Truth of Christianity, and (being many) even compel Belief
of it. And after they had made Christians, to put them under Orders, according
to the Rules which Christ had given them, Acts 1. 3. In two Words the Apostles
were first to make Christians, and then to frame them into Churches.

In this properly the nature of an Apostle consisted, that he was a Person
authorized to preach the Gospel of Christ upon his own Knowledge, as being
himself a Witness of him; and in this his Office differed from that of an
Evangelist; for though an Evangelist, as such, did preach the Gospel where it
was not heard of before, and consequently made Christians and planted Churches,
in which his Office agrees with that of an Apostle; yet herein it differs, That
to be an Evangelist* it was not necessary (as it was to be an Apostle) that he
should be a Witness to Christ; it was enough to qualify an Evangelist, for
Evangelizing that he had certain Tradition; but to be qualified for an Apostle,
he must, by the Evidences of his own Senses have had certain Knowledge of
Christ. This Notion of the Apostleship is not only couched by our Savior in
what he tells the Apostles, John 14. 26. and at his Ascension, Acts. 1. 8. but
is intimated also in the History of the Election of Matthias unto the
Apostleship, Acts 1. from 15 to the 26. and most plainly set out in all of them
taken together in conjunction, for so they make it demonstrable. Judas was once
numbered with the Apostles, as being one of the twelve, but he fell from that
Degree and Honor by his Transgressions, and therefore that the Scripture might
be fulfilled, which had said another should succeed him, Peter at an Assembly
of the Believers proposes the Ordination of one in his Room. And the better to
regulate the Election, he first instructs them in the Nature of the Office, and
Work of the Apostleship, to which that Ordination was to be made, and this he
says, is, with the rest of the Apostles, to be a Witness unto Christ, and
particularly to his Resurrection; and then informs them, how a person must be
qualified to become capable of being ordained to this Office, to wit, that he
must be one of those that had accompanied with them, all the while the Lord
Jesus went in and out among them, even from beginning to end, from first to
last, Beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken
up from them; He must, it seems, be such an one as had always been with the
Lord, or else he could not be qualified to be one of the twelve (...), says
Peter, therefore must one of these Men that have accompanied with us, etc. And
why must one of these? but that it was the proper Business and Work of such an
Apostle, as was one of the twelve, to be a Witness of Christ to all that he had
said, and done, and suffered; and none could be such a Witness but one that had
been always with him, from first to last.

And if the former is the true Idea of an Apostle (as you may plainly see it
is) then no Diocesan Bishop or any Body else indeed can be one now, for whoever
is an Apostle must be a Witness to Christ, and must have seen him, and that too
after his Resurrection: And to be one of the twelve, must also have been always
with him from first to last, even to S. Paul himself, who having not conversed
with Christ upon the Earth, and therefore could not properly be one of the
twelve, our Lord appeared in an extraordinary manner to qualify him for the
Apostleship; so that as all the Apostles were Extraordinary Officers, it might
be said of Paul, that he was an extraordinary superadded Apostle.

It is true the Apostles were called Bishops by S. Cyprian, but it had been
more (though even then not much) to your purpose if he had called Bishops
Apostles (as somewhere he does:) Christ is called a Bishop, and that by a
greater Man than Cyprian, and yet I believe you will not infer from thence,
that the Bishops are Christ's, or are the Successors of Christ. I acknowledge
also, That the Apostleship is styled an Episcopacy or a Bishopric, Acts 1. But
then it is called in the same Chapter a Deaconry too, verse 25. and therefore I
hope you will no more infer, That an Apostleship and a Bishopric are the same
thing from the communication of the Names, than for the same Reason, That the
Apostleship and a Deaconry are so.

The Apostleship was an Episcopacy, but not such an Episcopacy as that is which
you contend for, any more than because it was called a Deaconry, it was such a
Deaconry as that which was not instituted till some time after, Acts 6.
Episcopacy is a word of ample Signification; for, not to mention profane
Authors, as Homer, Plutarch, Cicero, etc. in which we read the word: It is
certain Basil applies it often unto God; Basil in Romans in Plat. 32. and alibi.
Peter in his first Epistle applies it unto the Elders, and here in the Acts 1.
it is applied unto the Apostles; and therefore being a word of so general
signification, nothing is deducible from it, as to the special nature of any
Office, except by way of Analogy.

To be plain with you, the Writers of the First Century ( Cyprian was in the
Third) had no thoughts that appear of any such Succession of Bishops in the
Office of the Apostleship, Ignat. in Epist. ad Smyrn. and alibi.
as you imagine; even that Ignatius you so much admire and who pleads so much
for the Prelacy of Bishops, though he compares them sometimes to God, and other
times to Christ (which I believe you insist not upon, because you thought it a
little too much), yet he never that I can find compares them to the Apostles:
Their College, if you will believe Ignatius, was imitated, not to say succeeded
by the Presbytery. I add, That Eutichius in his Annals of Alexander tells us,
as Hierom also does, That St. Mark ordained, that the Presbytery of the Church
of Alexandria should consist of 12. and no doubt in Imitation of the College of
the Apostles, the Presbytery of that Church did very early consist of that
number, though possibly not so early as to be an Institution of the Evangelist
Mark. Clem. Epist. ad Corinth.
In fine, not one word in Clemens Romanus; a Writer of the First Age, of any
such Succession of Bishops distinct from Presbyters, in the Office of the
Apostleship; He knew but Two Orders of Apostolical Institution, to wit, the
Bishops and Deacons; of which more hereafter.

Now if the proper Work and Office of the Apostles consisted in their being, by
Office, the first Preachers, and Witnesses of Christ, by whom they were
immediately sent for that purpose, then certainly that Work and Office, as well
as their Mission to it, was extraordinary, and but Temporary. And if after they
had made Christians by their Preaching, and had framed them under perpetual
standing Orders, they did on some occasions interpose their own Authority,
either by way of Direction upon new Emergences, or else for Reformation of
Abuses and Miscarriages; That was extraordinary too, and by virtue of a
Jurisdiction naturally arising, and remaining in them, (as also in the
Evangelists) as they were the Fathers and Founders of Churches.

But that this Authority which was paramount and extraordinary, is devolved
upon any other Persons, as Successors of the Apostles, lies on you to evince;
and I think it is an hard Province: For either the Apostles instituted such
Successors which you call Bishops, (and I for distinction-sake will call
Prelates) while themselves were living; or else they did not Institute and
Induct them while themselves were living, but only ordained, That after their
Decease there should be such Prelates in the Church, as their Successors, but
not before. If you say the Apostles instituted and inducted Prelates as their
Successors while themselves were living, I demand how that could be? Can any
come into the places of others, even while these others possess them? And again
I demand, whether there were, or could be any Officers instituted by the
Apostles over whom themselves retained not Jurisdiction? for if the Apostles
retained their Jurisdiction (which I suppose you will not deny) over the
Prelates they instituted (if they instituted any;) Then they trans^erred not
their Jurisdiction to these Prelates, that is, the Prelat^s were not such
Successors of the Apostles as you conceit them; for none does give that which
he keeps. I believe therefore you will say, the Apostles did not Institute and
Induct the Prelates while themselves were living, but ordained, that after
their Decease there should be such in the Churches, as their Successors. But
where I pray you is the ordinance recorded? In what Scripture, In what Fathers
of the First Age? or how came you to know of such an Order? if no Tradition
either of the Holy Scripture, or of the most Ancient and Primitive Fathers
transmits it?

All of any Aspect this way, in any Father of the First Age, is in Clemens
Romanus, and he is against you; Clem. Ep. ad Corinth.
for having premised what is very remarkable, and much to our purpose, That the
Apostles knowing through our Lord Jesus Christ the strife that would one day be
about the business or name of Episcopacy, (...), he adds, that for that Cause
(to wit, to end such strife) they ordained Bishops and Deacons, (...), They
appointed the forementioned Officers, and the Officers forementioned were only
Bishops and Deacons, of whom he had said before, (...) they, (namely the
Apostles) appointed the first fruits (of those Cities and Countries where they
had preached) approving of them by the Spirit for the Bishops and Deacons of
those that should afterward believe.

This is a plain Testimony (so plain, that I see not how it can be evaded) that
the Holy Apostles instituted only Two Orders of Officers in the Church, of
which one indeed was that of the Bishops: But this Order of Bishops being the
Order that is Contradistinguisht unto that of the Deacons as well in this
Father and in others, Cipryan Ep. l. 3. Ep. 9.
as in the sacred Scriptures, it must be understood of the Presbyterian, and
not of the Prelatical Orders.

And when Intimated that the two Orders of Bishops and Deacons were the fixed
standing Orders, which the Apostles had instituted, to continue in the Church
from time to time, I did it with good Authority; for Clement having asserted
that the Apostles instituted Bishops and Deacons, to put an end to all
Contentions about the Office of Episcopacy (which would have been endless had
not the Apostles thus provided against it: Clem, ^bi supra.
) He adds, And moreover they gave it in direction, That as often as it should
happen that those Persons whom they had appointed should decease, others that
were approved and worthy should receive their Charges.

By this time you may see how little that transaction about the Incestuous
Corinthian on which you insist so much, does serve your purpose: For S. Paul
his Interposition in that business was purely Apostolical and Extraordinary,
from beginning to end, the Cognizance he took was Extraordinary, by his
Apostolical Spirit or Revelation, Hierom. Com. in Ep. 1. ad Cor.
as Hierome interprets it (absent in Body, but present in Spirit;) The Censure
Extraordinary, which was to give the Incestuous up unto Satan, as to a
Tormentor: So Hierome carries this also; and the manner of the Execution
extraordinary too, to wit, by delegation of his Apostolical Spirit, to the
Church of Corinth, (when you come together and my Spirit.) So that the whole
Proceeding was extraordinary; and though you are pleased to call it an Act of
Episcopal or Prelatical Authority, and to make an Argument of it for Diocesan
Jurisdiction; yet, unless you can find Diocesans now that have the Spirit, that
can have a Cognizance of things at Distance by Revelation, that can give up
Persons to Satan as to a Tormentor, and that can delegate their Spirit to a
Congregation, the Exception lying against it will still continue in Force.

Wherefore as yet I see no other Prelacy instituted by the Apostles, but that
of the Presbyters over the People; nor are there any Officers now of any
Denomination, which ought to have (though you seem to intimate that some ought)
a Mission like to that of the Apostles; for as they were Ambassadors, that
were sent immediately by Christ, as he was by God, and brought their
Credentials with them, sealed by the Holy Ghost; so I will not scruple to call
them Extraordinary upon this Account too, any more than to call the Presbyters
and Deacons ordinary, even though the Papists and the Socinians do so: The
first Missions were extraordinary, whiles the Church was to be constituted; but
in a constituted settled Church, in which the Officers are ordinary, their
Calling is so likewise.

But to let you know what Standard there is of Extraordinaries, (for this you
demand) I believe I have no more to do but to remind you of what you already
know, that the use of speaking or common Language is that Standard; for
certain, you that have read so often in Cicero (not to mention Livy, Suetonius
and others) of Honores Extraordinarii, Praesidium Extraordinarium, Potestas
Extraordinaria, cannot be ignorant that that is Extraordinary, which being not
the settled standing perpetual order and use, is only for some certain time, and
on some particular special Occasion or Accident. And it is in this sense of the
word that the Roman Magistrates, in respect of time, are distributed by Lipsius
into Extraordinary and Ordinary, Lips. tract. de Magist. Vet. Pop. Romans c. 2.
when he says, Aut enim (Magistratus) a tempo^ibus dividuntur, ut Ordina ii
Extraordina^ii. Illi dicti qui statis Temporibus, and semper in Republica
essent, u^ Consul^s, Praetores, Ediles, Tribuni, Quaestores; isti qui nec eodem
tempore, nec semper, ut Dictatores, Censores, Inter-Reges, etc.

It is true you tell me, that the Commission, Matthew. 28. is not peculiar to the
Apostles, and that therefore it does not Evidence, they were Extraordinary
Officers; for (say you) There is indeed a Charge given them to Baptize and
Teach, but it seems a wonderful way of proving them to be Extraordinary
Officers, from the Authority they had to do that which any Ordinary Minister
may do: and that by virtue of this Commission.

By virtue of this Commission! Excuse me as to that, every Body will not yield
it; some think, that this Commission was personal, given only unto the
Apostles. Go ye; and enforced with a promise that related only to them
directly, Lo I am with you to the end of the world; That is, to the
Consummation of the Mosaical Seculum; for so they understand that Phrase, and
apprehend, they have sufficient Reason to do so, upon comparing it with Matthew.
24. 3, 14.

But let that be as it will. Indeed! Is the Commission given to the Apostles,
Matthew. 28. not peculiar to them? Are they Empowered by it to do no more than
every ordinary Minister may? I had thought that ordinary Ministers had been
limited and local, not unlimited and ecumenical Officers; and that, by their
Institution, they were confined to Teach and Rule the particular Churches over
which they were appointed, and not to Teach and Rule the whole World, or (as
the Apostles had) to have care of all the Churches. I pray tell me, is a
Parish Priest of as great Authority, as a Diocesan? and yet a Diocesan compared
with an Apostle, is less than a Parish Priest: The whole World was the Diocese
of the Apostles. Go ye, teach all Nations.

I profess I am much surprised to find you deny, without Distinction, that the
Apostles were Extraordinary Officers; especially after Dr. Cave in his History
of the Lives of the Apostles (which I believe you have read) distinguishes
their work, and shows what was Extraordinary in it, and what was Ordinary. But
possibly you foresaw, that should you have spoken plainly, and have said as he
does, that their ordinary work [the standing and perpetual part of it, was to
Teach and Instruct the People in the Duties and Principles of Religion; to
Administer the Sacraments; to Institute Guides and Officers, and to Exercise
the Discipline and Government of the Church.] I would easily reply, That the
Apostles had provided themselves of Successors, as to all this work, but that
these Successors were the Presbyters which they Instituted in every Church, to
feed and govern it; and that having ordained no others, it looks as if they saw
no need of others.

But having this Occasion, I beg your pardon if I use it, to set out more fully
the Institution which the Apostles made, for the Government and Edification of
the Churches, and how that Institution came to be altered, and by what steps.

First then the Apostles instituted a Senate, (...), a College of Presbyters in
every Church, to Feed and Govern it; and this is evident from Acts 14. 23, 25.
where Paul and Barnabas are said not (...), in the Churches but (...), -- in
every Church to have ordained Elders; a College of Elders, not a single Elder
or Bishop. And as they are not said to have ordained a single Bishop or Elder
in any Church, so much less are they (said) to have ordained any Prelate or
Intendant over many Churches; every Church, as a Body Politic Complete, had
sufficient power within it self, for all its Ends: They ordained Elders in
every Church.

And to me it is plain that Clement had regard to this practice of the
Apostles, when, in the place I cited before upon another occasion, he says of
them, That going through Countries and Cities preaching the Gospel, they
appointed the first Fruits of them to be Bishops and Deacons, having approved
or Confirmed them by the Spirit.

That the Apostles instituted many Presbyters, and not a single Presbyter, in
every Church, is further confirmed, not only from the frequent mention of a
Presbytery found in Ignatius, which (as I shall show hereafter) was
Congregational, but by the Express Testimony of Clement, Clem. epist. ad.
Corinth.
who blames the Church of Corinth for raising a Sedition and Stir against their
Presbyters, (and therefore there were many in that Church) only upon the
Account of one or two Persons; so that it is plain, there was a College of
Presbyters in the Ancient Apostolical Church of Corinth

Again, in the Presbytery or College, which was ordained in every Church,
though all the Presbyters were equal, the Institution making no Difference; for
Paul and Barnabas are said to Constitute Elders, but not to Constitute Elders
and a Bishop, as a Superior over them; yet it being requisite for Order-sake,
that some one in every Assembly should have the Direction, and that Honor
naturally falling on the Eldest Presbyter unless some other Course be resolved;
it is most probable, that at first, the Eldest Presbyter as he had the first
Place, so he had the first Direction of Matters: But afterward, it being found
by Experience, that the Eldest was not always the Worthiest and Fittest for
that purpose, it came to pass, that the place devolved not any longer by
Seniority, but was conferred by Election: And in this S. Ambrose (if it be he,
and not rather Hillary) in his Comment on the fourth to the Ephesians is plain.
Vid. Sixth. Senens. Bibl. Sanct. l. 6. annot. 324.

And admitting that all the Presbyters were called Bishops, as undoubtedly at
first they were, it is easy to conceive how the first Presbyter came to be
called the Bishop, and at last, for Distinction-sake, to have the Name of
Bishop so appropriated to him, that the rest retained only the Denomination of
Presbyters. But all this while the Bishop was but the first Presbyter, and had
no more Authority in the College of Presbyters, than is allowed to S. Peter in
the College of the Apostles, by all Protestants. Even Epiphanius himself (if we
may believe Danaeus) was at last compelled to confess, Dan. Com. in August. de
haeres. c. 53.
That in the Time and Age of the Apostles, no such Distinction [as that is
which you contend for,] was to be found between the Bishops and Presbyters.

Again, though all the Presbyters in every Church had like Authority to Preach
and Rule, (both Functions being comprehended in the Episcopacy assigned to
them, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.) yet some of them being better qualifyed for the one, and
some for the other, it is probable, that they exercised their different Talents
accordingly; some of them more in the one, and some more in the other. This (as
strange as you may make it) seems plainly intimated in that Injunction of the
Apostles, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well be accounted worthy of
double honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine: For here is
a plain Distinction of Elders, of which some being better at Ruling, and some
at preaching, they exercised themselves according to the Talent they had; those
that were better at Ruling, in Ruling, and those that were better at Preaching,
in laboring in the Word and Doctrine.

And since Laboring in the Word and Doctrine had the special Honor, no
Question but the first Presbyter, as most honorable, was always of the number
of those that labored that way; so that the Bishop was the Pastor also, or
Preaching Elder, that is, the Preaching Spiritual Work became appropriated to
him, at first Eminently, but afterward entirely; and then nothing lay in
Common between him and the Presbyters but only Rule. And this is what I can
gather from Scripture of the Apostolical Settlement.

Upon the whole it is evident, That a Diocesan Bishop was unknown in the first
Age of the Church, and the only Bishop to be found then, was the Presbyter;
which is further confirm^d, in that the Scot^, who received the Knowledge of
Christianity very early, Spotiswood Hist. b. 1. f. 4.
even in that Age, had not any Knowledge for many Ages after, that appears, o^
any but Presbyterian Jurisdiction. Even Bishop Spotiswood, in his History of
the Church of Scotland, tells us out of Boethius, and Boethius from Ancient
Annals, of the Culdees, or Ancient Scottish Priests and Monks (who, he
believes, were called Culdees, not because Culteres Dei, as most think, but
because they lived in Cells, their Names, as he says, being Kele-Dei and not
Culdei, in old Bulls and Rescripts.) He says of these Culdees, That they were
wont for their better Government to elect one of their Number by common
Suffrage to be the Chief and Princip^l among them, without whose Knowledge and
Consent nothing was done in any Matter of Importance, and the Person so Elected
was called Scotorum Episcopus, a Scots Bishop; and this was all the Bishop that
he could find in the first Times: But B^cha^an is plainer, who tells us, That
no Bishop (to wit an Order superior to that of the Presbyters) ever presided
in the Church of Scotland before Paliadius his Time; the Church (says he) unto
that Time was Governed by Monks, without Bishops, with less Pride, and outward
Pomp but greater Simplicity and Holiness

Thus I have E^idenced what the S^a^e of Things was in the first Times of the
Christian Churches, to wit, that those were governed by Presbyteries, in which
all the Presbyters were equal, and all Bishops, only, for Order-sake, there was
a first Presbyter, who having more Care and more Work, had yet no more
Authority and Power than any other; but as the best Men are but Flesh and
Blood, and the best Institutions liable to Rust and Canker, so these were not
exempted; there was a Diotrephes in the Apostles own Times, and those that
followed him improved upon the Example: The first Presbyter soon became
advanced into another Order, and from being First, commenced Prince of the
Presbyters.

We are told by D^naeus, Dan. com^men; ad August. de aeres.
who cites Epiphanius (and he might have cited others) that this Departure
from the Primitive Institution began in Alexand^ia; and it is very probable,
That the Appointment of twelve Presbyters, besides a President (for so
Eutichius assures us it was there) did give occasion to the President, who
easily took the Hint, to challenge to himself the Place and Authority of
Christ, when the very Number of Presbyters, over whom he presided, made it
manifest that they were an Imitation of the Apostles. But whether other
Churches took their Pattern from that of Alexandria or no, it is easy to
conceive in what manner, and by what means the Mistake might gain upon them:
For after the first Presbyter became elected, and consequently was separate by
Prayer and Imposition of Hands, no wonder he was ^oon taken for an Officer of
another Order, much Superior unto that of the Presbyters, who was
distinguished from them by that Token of a new Ordination, and was in place
above them. Ay, it is highly probable, That the first Recess from the Primitive
Institution, even in Alexandria, began this way, Gr^^. Epist. 154. ad Gall.
if that be true that Grotius has observed, That the Election of the President
Presbyter came not in use there but after the Death of Mark: So that it was not
(as Eu^ichius reports it,) an Institution of this Evangelist.

But what way soever this Alteration had its beginning, one may be tempted (if
the Epistles going under the name of Ignatius be indeed his) to think that it
had it very early; for this Father does every where speak of the Bishop in
respect of the Presbyters, as of God in respect of Christ, and of Good or
Christ in respect of the College of the Apostles; and these are such
Magnificent Expressions of Superiority, that though they proceeded not from any
Elation of mind in him that used them at first, and used them perhaps but as
Rhetoric, yet they could not but occasion other Sentiments in others, viz. as
of the Bishops being of a Superior Order, so, of something of Domination and
Lordship in his Office.

And yet how great soever the Degeneracy was in the Time of Ignatius, or very
near it, it was not so great then as in the following Ages; Ignatius his Bishop
for all the Gawdiness in which he dresses him, was only a Congregational, not a
Diocesan Bishop; those first Times knew nothing of the Diocesan Princely
Prelate, even the President, that Justin Martyr mentions, was but a
Congregational Pastor.

That Ignatius his Bishop was only Pastor of a single Congregation is evident
in many Passages, but I will cite but two or three to evince it. The first is
in his Epistle to the Ephesians, where he speaks of the Prayer of the Bishop,
and the whole Church, ascending in Consort unto God; so that the Bishop was the
Mouth of the Congregation. And afterward, in the same Epistle, in an
Exhortation to these Ephesians, when he presses them to obey their Bishop, he
speaks of them, as of a single Congregation, that could meet together for Acts
of Worship. Again, in his Epistle to the Magnesians, whom he also presses to
obey their Bishop (for this indeed is the Burden of all his Epistles,) he
plainly speaks of them as of a single Congregation; Do you all assemble and
meet (says he) (...), together, for so that Expression is rendered 1 Cor. 14 23.

I have showed what the Primitive Institution was, as to Church-Orders, and
have showed also how and how early, the Alteration that was made in
Congregations came on; It was first a Presbytery, and the Senior Presbyter the
President; then a Presbytery, and the President elected, but still a Presbyter;
afterward a President and no Presbyter, not an Ab Beth din, but a Nasi; not a
Senior Presbyter, but a Prince, or chief over the Presbytery. And certainly one
need to have but a little Experience, in the Course of things, to make a clear
and distinct Conception of what has been said upon this Subject. That which
remains to complete the Discourse, is to show the same way, from Common
Principles, how the Ecclesiastical Prelate, (or that Bishop over several
Congregations) of the better fort, such as Cyprian, Augustine, etc. (if indeed
they were such) did first spring up.

I conceive (with submission to better Judgments) that this Bishop (of whom we
read nothing that I know of in the first Age, or till toward the end [if then]
of the second,) arose from the large Progression, and spreading of
Christianity; for then in great Cities, and their Appendages, the number of
Professors grew so great, that all could no longer meet together in one place,
to Celebrate Divine Offices, so that necessity compelled them to divide into
several Congregations; which, if settled, must have several Officers, as
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons; yet still the Bishop of the Mother
Congregation as he had the main hand (which is to be presumed) in forming and
settling the Daughter Churches, so he still pretended to keep an Authority and
Jurisdiction over them.

And this indeed had something of a Resemblance unto the Apostles; who as they
planted many Churches, so they had always a Care of them; but how far the
Analogy will hold, or where it strikes out, I shall not trouble you now to say;
It is enough for the present to have showed, that Ecclesiastical Prelates had
not Apostolical Institution, and that, at best, they arose but by Occasions,
and Prudentially only, upon the Increase of Believers.

What confirms this Notion is, That we never read in the first Age, and but
rarely (if ever) in the second, of Bishops that pretended it of themselves, or
that were affirmed by others, to be the Successors of the Apostles. In those
first times, no such Pretentions had place; but afterward, when necessity
arose in the Churches of sending out their Colonies, then the Bishops of those
Churches, that sent them out, soon found, in the Jurisdiction of the Apostles,
something, that by way of Analogy, and with a little stretching might serve to
countenance theirs, over those that they had settled.

These are the Sentiments I have as to the Ius Divinum of Episcopacy; in which
I have made evident what Episcopacy it is I do believe is ^ure Divino, and what
not: But I intend not to Discourse now of the Ius Ecclesiasticum, by which only
a Diocesan Bishop, or of the Ius Civil, by which the Lord Bishop is
Constituted. My Province now, is only to show, what I have showed, that the
Presbyter is the only Bishop Iure Divino and Apostolico; and that Prudential
Considerations only made the Prelate, first the Congregational, and afterward
the Diocesan Prelate, of the better sort. And in these Assertions I have my
Vouchers, and those Fathers, and Fathers as learned, and as Pious as any
Churches ever owned, and cited too by Bishop Jewel.

Verily (says he) Chrysostom says, Inter Episcopum and Presbyterum interest
ferme nihil, Between a Bishop and a Priest* in a manner, there is no
difference. S. Hierom says somewhat in a rougher sort: Audio quendam in tantam
erupisse vecordiam, ut Diaconos, Presbyteris, id est, Episcopis anteferret, cum
Apostolus perspicue doceat, ^osdem esse Presbyteros quos Episcopos. I hear say
there is one become so peevish, that he sets Deacons before Priests, that is
to say, before Bishops: whereas the Apostle plainly teaches us, that Priests
and Bishops are all one.

S. Augustine says, Quid est Episcopus nisi primus Prepbyter, hoc est, summus
Sacerdos? What is a Bishop but the first Priest, that is to say, the High
Priest? So says S. Ambrose, Episcopi and Presbyteri una ordinatio est: Vterque
enim Sacerdos est, sed Episcopus primus est. There is but one Consecration of
Prie^^, and Bishop, for both of them are Priests, but the Bishop is the first.

And to what these Fat^ers say, we may add the Testimony of Learned Grotius,
who, for the Reputation he has justly gained in the World, o^ great Knowledge,
and exact Criticism, may possibly signify somewhat with you. He in his Epistle
to Bigno^ius commending that of Cl^ment, which I have often cited; among other
Considerations that induced him to approve thereof, as Genuine, notes this as a
main one, Quid ^us^qu^m me^^nit exortis iliius Episcoporum auctoritais quae
Ecclesiae Consuetudine post Marci mortem Alex n^^iae, atque ^o Exemplo alibi
introduci coepit, sed-pla^e ut Paulus Apostolus, ostendit Ecclesias Communi
Prisbytero^um, qui iidem omnes and Episcopi ipsi Pauloque dicuntur Consi^io
^uisse Gubenatas. That Clement no where makes any mention in his Epistle, of
that Eminent Authority of Bishops, that by the Custom of the Church, began when
Mark was dead, to be introduced at Alexa^d^ia, and after that Example in other
places; but he plainly shows, as the Apostle Paul also does, that the Churches
were [then] governed by the Common Council of the Elders, all of which are
styled Bishops by him, as well as by S Paul.

By what I have said you may see how little Satisfaction I received in the
Proofs you gave me of the early distinction between Bishops and Presbyters, for
none of them do reach home unto the First Age, and to the D^ocesan Prelatical
Bishop; and if they did, would move me but little. For as for Tertullian, he
more than seems to be on my side, when speaking of the Christian Congregations,
both as to their Discipline and Government, and to their Worship, he says,
Praesident probati quique seniores, Hon remistum non pretio, sed Testimonio
adepti; That the Presbyters have the Rule and Government in them.

As for Clemens Alexandrinus his Imitations of the Angelical Glory [(...)], in
which you do imagine you have found the orders of the Celestial Hierarchy,
imitated in the Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon; this is but a Flourish of
Rhetoric in that Father; who though in his Pedagogue he speaks of Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons, as also of Widows; yet in his Stromata (Lib. 6. and 7.)
where he treats of the Ecclesiastical Orders more at large, he mentions but
Two, the Presbyters, and Deacons, and plainly intimates, that the Bishop was
only a Presbyter honored with the first Seat.

But I am much surprised at your Citation of the Emperor Adrian his Epistle to
Servianus recorded by Phlegon, and related by Vopiscus; for certainly it
appears by that Epistle that Adrian had but little Acquaintance with the
Egyptian Christians, and then, his Authority is of as little moment; or else,
these Christians were of the worst of Men; for he represents them, as well as
the other Inhabitants of Egypt, to be a most seditious, vain, and most
Injurious sort of Men, and particularly says, That those which Worship Serapis
were Christians, and that the Bishops of Christ were devoted unto Serapis: He
adds, That the very Patriarch ( Ipse ille Patriarcha) coming into Egypt, was
constrained of some to Worship Serapis, and others (to Worship) Christ. Was
ever any thing more virulently said of Christians? and indeed more mistakingly?
for as for the Devotion of their Bishops to Serapis, I cannot imagine any
occasion that these Christians should give, which, with any Color, should
render them suspected of that Idolatry, but their Signing with the Sign of the
Cross; and this might, it being a way of professing Christianity, that at that
Time was newly become the Mode, and probably it had the Fate of New Modes,
which is, to be approved of by some, and be rejected and nicknamed of others.

I am the more inclined to think that this Story of Serapis had some relation
to the Christian Bishops, who signed with the Sign of the Cross, because I find
in Pignorius, in his Exposition of the Mensa Isaica, that Serapis was used to
be denoted by a Cross, Vrceo (says he) superne infixa Crux Serapidem notat. And
says Rhodiginus, Lect. ant. l. 10. c. 8, 9. figuram ejusmodi; (speaking of the
Cross) Serapidis pectori insculp^bant Egyp^ii: Adding, out of Suidas, That in
the time of the Emperor Theodosius, when the Temples of the Greeks were
destroyed, there were found in the Sacrary of Serapis certain Hieroglyphic
Letters which resembled a Cross. But to let this pass, I see no cogency in the
Citation you make from the Emperor Adrian to evidence any such Distinction
between a Bishop and a Presbyter to have been in that time as is in ours, and
as you do plead for; for in that Epistle there is only the Name of Bishop and
Presbyter, without any specification of Office signified by it, either as to
its Nature or Limits; and possibly some will tell you, That by the Coherence of
the Epistle, it is not so clear, but that Adrian might intend the same Officers
by Bishop and Presbyter. But I have no list to engage in such a Dispute; and
therefore hasten to tell you what is above any, that I am,

SIR, Your Humble Servant.

THE SECOND LETTER.
SIR,
I Expected, that as I had essayed to set out a Scheme of Church Government,
and such a one as I believed and do still believe, to have been the Primitive
and Original, and of Apostolical Institution; so you likewise would have given
a Scheme according to your Sentiments; and then, by Comparing Scheme with
Scheme, and each with the Account of the Scriptures, and other undoubted
Accounts of the first Century, we might at last come to have made a surer
Judgment, which was the Right and which the Wrong, than now, in the parcelling
and retailing way you take, it is possible to do.

Indeed, to gain a true Light into the Nature and Frame of Church Government,
in the whole extent of it, one ought to distinguish the several States and
Circumstances in which the Church has been, and accordingly consider the
several Orders, which were in it, in those several States, and the Grounds and
Reasons of those several Orders. Now the Church (I speak of the Catholic or
Evangelical Church) may be considered, either as it was a Constituting, before
it had received External Form and Shape, as to Orders: Or after it was
Constituted; and that the Apostles, who had not only received Instructions from
their Master what to do in things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, but were
likewise invited by the concidence of Events, had put their last Hand unto it.

Again, the Church, after its being Constituted and Clothed with Orders,
undergoes a Double Consideration, for it may be considered, either as it
subsisted and stood alone, singly, in a State of Separation from Secular
Governments of the World, or as it is united to them by the Laws and Ordinances
(that in several Countries are several) which they have enacted and established
about it.

Whosoever considers the Church whilst constituting, before it had received its
external Form and Orders, ought at the same time to acknowledge, That of
necessity there must be persons to constitute it, and cloth it with these
Orders; which persons, if vested with Authority so to do, are properly
Officers: but yet, in that performance, cannot be conceived to be or act as
ordinary Officers, these being permanent and standing, and belonging to the
Church as constituted; whereas that Office had its place before the
Constitution of the Church, as being ordained to constitute it.

This Office (as I evinced in my former Paper) appertained to the Apostles, it
being their Work to lay the Foundation of the Christian Church, by preaching
the Doctrine of Christ, as true upon their own Knowledge, and consequently making
Believers or Disciples, which was to gather the Church; as also by instituting
of Officers, and giving Rules about them; which was to put the Church under
Orders, and to settle its Government.

On this Account the Church is said to be built upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and the New Jerusalem, the City of God, (or the Evangelical Church in
its most reformed State) is described in the Revelations to have twelve
Foundations, answering to the twelve Apostles; who by the Doctrine which they
preached and witnessed, and the Order which they settled, did indeed lay the
Foundation of the Christian Church, and set it on foot.

It is true, the Evangelists as well as the Apostles were (in part at least)
the Founders of particular Churches; But the Apostles only (with the Prophets)
have the Honor of being styled Founders of the Church; these being the only
persons that were commissioned by our Lord Christ for that end: He immediately
sending and directing his Apostles, but these sending and directing the
Evangelists, who are therefore called by some (and not unfitly) Apostoli
Secondarii, Apostles of the Second Order: So that I do distinguish between the
Founding of the Church which was done by the Apostles only; and that of
particular Churches, which was performed by the Evangelists as well as by the
Apostles.

By the Church, which for distinction sake I call Essential, to discriminate it
from particular Constituted Churches, I mean nothing but the whole Multitude or
Company of the Faithful, as they are united to Christ, and hold Communion with
him, as well as one with another, by one Common Faith, and by the participation
of the Holy Spirit. And of this Church all that do believe in, and make a true
Profession of Christ (though as yet they are not ranked in any particular one)
are Members, and have their several Uses, according to the Measure of the
Dispensation given them; from which Measure some are Principal and some are
less Principal Members; He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, etc.

This Essential Church, though it is a kind of a Body, Society and City, yet it
is not a Secular Politic Body; I mean not a Body, united in it self, under one
External Visible Head, by any Universal Politic Orders and Dependencies that
run throughout it, such as are in Secular Governments, whether Monarchical,
Aristocratical or Democratical, to make them one. But it is a Spiritual
Mystical Body, a Body united unto Christ the Head by the Spirit of Faith and
Love, under the Laws and Rules of Christianity; a Religion which obliges all
its Members to Communion one with another (as much as is possible) for mutual
Edification and Comfort.

Could all the Members of the Christian Church have held Communion one with
another, and ordinarily have met together for the Discharge of Common Duties
and Offices; and all have been subject unto one External Government, common to
them, there would still have been but one Congregation of them, as there was at
first, and consequently but one Church, as to External Orders.

But the Christian Church, in the nature of it, being Catholic and Univers^,
that is, not walled in and confined by distinguishing Rites and Customs, as the
Jewish was, unto a particular People, but lying in common to all Nations, as
much as unto any; so that such External Communion and Government was absolutely
impracticable in the whole, as taken together; therefore it was necessary that
it should be practiced (as indeed it was) only by Parts, each of which Parts
was to bear the Denomination of the Whole, as being the whole in Little. This
is the Original of particular Churches; in reference to which Churches it may
be observed, That as the Jewish Church (which some call the Synagogue) was
founded in a Nation, so the Christian Church, eminently styled the Church, was
founded in a particular Assembly; the Mother Church at Jerusalem was only a
single Congregation. It was for the former Reason, as well as for others, that
the Apostles, when they instituted Church Government, did not give any General
Scheme that should relate to the Catholic Church, as to an External Body, or
to Provincial, or to National Churches; but they only settled Particular
Churches, as Homogenecal Parts of the Whole: And these in this Order, That as
the whole Church was a free People that had not one only, but many Apostles,
who, by the Original Institution, were to take the Care of it; so in every
particular Church (which was to be a Vicinage under Orders, or a Company of
Professing People, that could conveniently meet together for the Discharge of
Christian Offices) there should be not one only, but many Presbyters (a College
of Presbyters answering to the College of the Apostles,) who should Rule and
Govern, but as over a Free People, and therefore, in all material Businesses,
with their Approbation and Suffrage.

Thus in the Mother Church at Jerusalem, besides the Apostles, which were
Extraordinary, there was a Senate or College of Elders, as the ordinary
standing Officers; and these, with the whole Church, or Body of the People and
Brethren, are convented upon the Business of Antioch,

And thus the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, every where, in every Church or
Congregation, are said to have established a Senate or Presbyters, and that too
by the Suffrage or (...) of the People.

So that the Original Government of the Church, of Apostolical Institution, was
only Congregational; which Congregational Government consisted of the People or
Brethren, and of the Presbyters or Senate; in which Senate he that presided,
though in process of Time he was called Bishop, by appropriation of the Name
which all the Presbyters enjoyed at first in Common, yet, in the Original
Institution (he) was no more than the first-named Presbyter, and so no
otherwise distinguished in it, than as Peter (was) in the Institution of the
College of the Apostles, who is still first named in it. And such a Bishop I do
acknowledge to have been from great Antiquity, namely, a Congregational Bishop,
that had the first Direction of Matters, a Person that was Primus, Presbyter, a
Presbyter only in Order, and the first of that Order in the College of
Presbyters: But a Diocesan Bishop invested with the Power of sole Ordination
and Jurisdiction, and he a Suffragan too (for this is the Bishop that is in
Controversy between us,) this Bishop you must prove, if you can, and nothing
is done if you do not prove him to be Apostolical.

Sure I am that S. Cyprian considered himself but as a first Presbyter; and
therefore as his Name for the Bishop is always prepositus, in respect of the
People: So he calls the Presbyters his Compresbyters, Ep. l. 4. ep. 8. [ Ques
ed primitivum Compresbyterum nostrum: Et l. 4. ep. 6. Literae tuae per Quintum
Compresbyterum missae. Ay! the 25th Epistle of the 3d Book is directed to (his)
Compresbyters. And in the 24th Epistle of the same Book he calls Rogatianus
his Compresbyter; but he no where calls the Deacous ^^s Condeacors; clearly
implying by that Denomination, that when he was made Bishop he ceased not to be
a Presbyter, as not become of another Order, only he was now a President in it,
and possessed of the first Chair. I do not find you deny the Institution of the
Presbytery (the which I have abundantly evinced,) or so much, that in the first
Times, the Bishop was only the President of it, or the first Presbyter, which
yet is the main of the Cause: And you can as little deny, if you will be just,
the Power and Interest of the People, who are called in Scripture sometimes the
Church and sometimes the Brethren, and in Tertullian and Cyprian the Phbs. Thus
you find in the Acts of the Apostles, the People concerned in the Election of
Matihias [Peter spoke to the whole Assembly, Men and Brethren, etc.] So in that
of the Deacons [ Wherefore Brethren look you cut among you seven men of honest
report, etc.] And in the Ordination of the Presbyters, for Paul and Barn^bas,
ordained with the (...) of the People, Acts 14. 23. Again, they are concerned
in the Censure of the Incestuous Corinthian, not only by way of Approbation, as
where it is said, When you are gathered together, etc. 1 Cor. 5. 4. but by way
of Judgment and Ex^cution, verfe 12, 13. In fine, even in the Debate and
Decision of Controversies; for the brethren were together with the apostles and
elders, and there was much disputing, (which, I should think, was rather among
the People than among the Apostles and Elders:) And the Decretal Epistle goes
as well in the name of the brethren as in that of the apostles and elders,,
Acts 15. 1, 7, 22, 23.

Nor were the People entirely deprived and outed of their Original Power or
Interest in Elections and Censures, Cyp. Ep. l. 1. ep. 4. vid. and ep. l. 1.
ep. ep. 3. 9. l. 4. ep. 2.
even in the Time of S. Cyprian; for he plainly asserts to them the chief
Share, both in the Election of the Praeposii, or Bishops that are worthy, and
in the rejection of the unworthy; and this he does both by the Congruity of the
Old Testamet, and the Practice recorded in the New; not only allowing to them
(as some would have it) a presence in all Transactions, but affirming their
Power ( Cypri n's Word is potestas) and their Suffrage. Propter quod, plebs
obsequens Praecepiis dominicis and Deum metnens, a pectore praeposio SEPARARE
se debet, cum ipsa maxim habeat potestatem v^l eligendi dignos Sacirdotes, vel
indignos recusardi. For which reason a people that observes the Lord's Commands
and fears God, ought to separate themselves from a Bishop that is wicked, in as
much as they, principally, have the power both of electing worthy Priests, and
of rejecting the unworthy.

This is further evident in the Resolve, Cypr. Epist. l. 3. Ep. 10.
that Cyprian (as himself professes) assumed at his coming first to the
Bishopric, which was, That he would do nothing of business by himself, and
singly without the Counsel of the Elders, and Deacons, nor without the Consent
of the People: Solus rescribere nil potui, cum a primordio Episcopatus mei
statu rim nil sine concilio vestro, (writing unto the Elders, and Deacons) and
sine Consensu plebis, mea privatim sententia gerere.

In fine, in Clemins Romanus, who preceded Cyprian, as living in the Age of the
very Apostles themselves, we have a plain Intimation of the Interest and Right
of the People, in the Election of Presbyters, and in their Rejection; from
which also we may conclude the share they had in other matters; for in his
Epistle to the Corinthians, he says, Those who were appointed by the Apostles,
or by other Excellent Men (...), with the Consent and Approbation of the whole
Church, and who lived worthily, ought not to be (injuriously) deprived of their
Ministration. [And, by the way, this Te^imony of Clement shows in what senfe it
is said, that Paul and Barnabas did Chirotonize Elders, it being evident that
it relates to that which stands upon Record in the Acts of the Apostles, of
what was done by those Two in that kind of business.] After the former
evidences, I do not see how it can be questioned, that the Government of
particular Churches was at first (what I have affirmed it) Popular and
Democratical, as consisting of the Authority of a Senate, and of the power of a
People, or in S. Cyprian's Language, of the Majesty of the People, and the
Authority of Priesthood: Thus resembling the Greek Republics and their
Ecclesiae, or popular Assemblies, which, at Athens, were composed of Proedri,
who directed and ordered matters, and of the People who voted. And even Origin
against Celsus, L. 7. as Mr. Thorndike tells me (for I have not Origin at
present by me) compares the Government of the Churches of Christ, as I have, to
the Republics of the Cities of Greece.

But possibly you will grant me, that Congregational Government was of
Apostolical Institution; but it will be a matter of too hard a Digestion to
yield, there was no other Government that was likewise so: And yet, if you
cannot give me an Apostolical Draught of any other Church Government, nor one
Instance (as I believe you cannot) of any Church in the First Century, or till
toward the end of the Second, (if then) but what was Congregational, nor of any
Officers (besides the Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets,) which were not
local, and limited to particular Congregations: It must then be acknowledged,
that no other Government (intended for after times) but the Congregational was
absolutely primitive, and of Apostolical Original; say not, it might be, though
not recorded; for Eadem est ratio non apparen^^um and non existentium; to us it
was not, if it appears not; perhaps but one Church in one City or Town at
first; but no Instance can be given of one Pastor over diverse Cities and Towns.

The former ^truth is so great a one, that even in the time of S. Cyprian (when
yet too many Novelties, not to say Corruptions, had invaded the Church) the
Usurpation that was then begun upon the Rights of the People, had not prevailed
so far, but that as the Bishop of that time was Congregational only, and local,
(to speak generally;) so he was not ordained at large, but to a certain People,
Cypr. Ep. l. 1. Ep. 4.
and Cure. Thus, says S. Cyprian, was Sabinus ordained. The Passage is very
remarkable, and since it not only evidences the Point I have asserted, but does
also vindicate the Presbyterian way of Ordination used now, as a way that was
used at that time, to wit, by the Concurrence of preaching Ministers,
Prepositi, or Bishops of several Congregations, and the laying on of their, or
one of their hands, for this reason I will cite it at large.

Propter quod (says he) diligenter de Traditione divina and Apostolica
servandum est and tenendum, quod apud nos quoque, and fere per provincias
universas tene^ur, ut ad ordinationes rise celebrandas, ad eam plebem cui
Praepos^us ordinatur, Episcopi ejusdem provinciae proximi quique conveniant,
and Episcopus delegatur plebe praesente, quae singulorum vitam plenissime novit
and uniuscujusque actum de ejus conversatione perspexit; quod and apud vos
factum videmus in Sabini Collegae nostii ordinatione, ut de universae
fraternitatis Suffragio, and de Episcoporum qui in praesentia Convenerant,
quique de eo ad vos Litteras fecerant Iudicio, Episcopatus is deferretur, and
manus ei in Locum Basilidis imponeretur [or imponerentur.] Wherefore it ought
diligently to be observed, and maintained as a thing of Divine Tradition, and
of Apostolical practice, the which also is observed by us, and almost in all
the Provinces, that to the end Ordinations may be rightly made, the Bishops of
the same Province, which are nearest to that People for whom, a Minister is
ordained, do all meet, and that the Bishop be chosen, the People being present,
who have a perfect Knowledge of the Life that every one has led, and also do
thoroughly understand his ability by his Conversation. And this we see you also
have observed in the Ordination of Sabinus, our Colleague, on whom, as well by
the Suffrage of the Brotherhood, as the Judgment of all the Bishops, both those
that were then present, and those that sent you their Letters about him, the
Bishopric was conferred, and hands imposed in place of Basilides.

Those learned Men that have told us that the Christian Church was formed after
the Fashion of the Synagogues and not of the Temple, or rather the Tabernacle,
did certainly own a true Idea of this business: There was but one Temple in all
Judea, as but one Church, and one High Priest, to whom the other Priests, Bact.
Lex c. Rab. advoc. (...) Mark 5. 22. Acts 13. 15.
as also the Levites, in severel orders, were subordinated, as well as one to
another, in a certain line of Dependence. But the Synagogues were many, and
many in one City, even some Hundreds in Jerusalem, and in every Synagogue, (if
all had one form) there were many Rulers: Now particular Churches are unto the
Catholic Church, the same, in proportion, that Synagogues were to the Jewish.

To be sure, this is manifest to whosoever considers it, That Christ and his
Apostles did carefully avoid the Imitation and Similitude of the Tabernacle in
all their Institutions, and all their Orders: The Apostles were never called
Chief Priests, nor the Presbyters Priests, the Ministers the Clergy, nor the
People the Laity; no National Form of Church Government was ever Established,
no Consecration of Officers; no Garments or Holy days, or other such like
Observances, were ever appointed by them, in Conformity to those of the
Tabernacle. But when the Judaizing Opinion, which prevailed mightily even in
the days of the Apostles, had, after their decease, diffused and spread it self
farther, so that Christians came into an Admiration of the Orders, Beauty and
Pomp of the Temple, which was but a fixed Tabernacle, and Christianity it self
became considered (as by some it is this day) but as another kind of Judaism,
then Ministers were turned into Priests, Deacons to Levites, and Ordination to
Consecration; the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was turned into a Sacrifice,
the Table to an Altar. The Tabernacle, Times and Seasons of Easter and
Whitsuntide, became generally observed, (only with some little Bowing, and
bending of themselves to Christianity,) and the Tabernacle Maintenance in time
became insisted upon also, as well as the Tabernacle Title.

Thus began the Defection, which upon the Tabernacle Grounds, and by pretenses
of some Analogy unto the Orders of that Fabric, did afterward grow up to a
great height in most Countries, in a National Form and Dependence, but in none
to that Perfection, as under the Papacy; which as it does divide its Rites and
Observances (almost all) from the Tabernacle, so it can pretend to very little
Authority for them, but what conceited Analogies, and some Congruities of
Reason, taken from the Tabernacle Orders, and the Tabernacle Worship, do afford
unto them; but Christ and his Apostles appointed not any National Forms, as
that under the Tabernacle was. Indeed, had the Apostles owned any Pretentions
of a Design to erect a National (much more an Universal) Hierarchy, or Form of
External Government in the Church, or had they done any thing to Occasion a
Just Suspicion of such a Design, it would have much obstructed the true Design
and End of their Mission, which was the planting and spreading of Christianity.
For then, Magistrates and Rulers, in their own Defense, and for Preservation of
their own Inherent Prerogatives and Rights, must have always opposed it; since
the Permission of such an Authority, such a Power over their Subjects, that
would not only possess an Interest in their Consciences, but be strengthened,
as a Secular Empire, by a close Connection of all the parts of it, and an exact
Dependence and Subordination, would render their own precarious; such a
pretense must needs have awakened the Jealousy of Kings, as indeed it did,
when Christ but spoke of a Kingdom, though Spiritual, and but in Hearts; much
more then, had it been an External and Visible Kingdom, for then, Reason of
State, would for ever oppose Christianity.

But notwithstanding all that I have said, I doubt not but you will tell me,
That the Government of the Church is Universal, and that there is a Catholic
Hierarchy; that the Apostles were ordinary standing Officers, and that, as
Apostles, they were the very same in the Primitive Church, that Diocesan
Bishops are now; and Dioccsan Bishops, the same now the Apostles were then;
that the Apostles exercised Juridiction over the Particular Churches which they
instituted; And that Timothy and Titus, who were Bishops (not Congregational,
but Diocesan Bishops) were ordained such by S. Paul. And as you will tell me
these and the like, very plausible things, of Bishops; so I make no question
but others will tell me as plausible of the Council at Jerusalem, and of the
Government of the Catholic Church by Councils and Synods of Bishops, in
Correspondence to that; That the Apostles, as Apostles, should be Diocesan
Bishops, and that Diocesan Bishops, as such, should be Apostles, seems so
strange an Assertion, and so much against the Common Sense of most Believers,
Nil. l. de Papa primatu.
that I would rest the Controversy on that Issue. Sure I am, Nilus Archbishop
of Thessalonica tells us expre^ly, (...). etc. The Pope is no Apostle, for the
Apestles did not make or ordain Apostles, but Pastors or Teachers; much less
the Chief of the Apostles: Thus he.

And indeed there were but twelve Apostles originally, which number was so
stated that it gave Denomination to their Order, they were called the Twelve.
As for Paul, who also was an Apostle, and not of the Twelve, he was the
Minister of the Gentiles; and as these were a kind of Proselytes to the Jewish
Church, so he was a kind of Proselyte or super added Apostle: Himself expresses
it, That he was one born out of due season, 1 Cor. 15. 18. And for the Offices
of Apostleship and Episcopacy, I have showed in my former Letter how much they
differ.

It Is true, you say, that Bishops are sometimes called Apostles, and that too
by the Fathers; but, you may remember, I acquainted you they were not styled so
by any Fathers of the first Century, or till toward the latter end (if then)
of the Second: Else, that Bishops are sometimes called Apostles I know, and Dr.
Cave has many Citations to that purpose, to which you have added some, and
might have added more: but the Sense in which they were called Apostles, is
that only which is of any concern to us: And certainly, notwithstanding all
that you have said to the contrary, it does not as yet appear, that those
Bishops that were called by the Ancient Fathers, Apostles, were Diocesan
Bishops; for they might be, and really, for all that glorious Denomination,
they were but Congregational Prelates, who, because in a sense they were
Successors of the Apostles, and the same, in some Proportion, unto particular
Churches, that the Apostles themselves were to the general, even for that
reason they were called Apostles, and all as well as any Diocesans.

That the Bishops compared to the Apostles by S. Cyprian (who is one of the
first that compares them so,) were only Presbyterical and Congregational
Bishops, is evident, in that, even there where he so compares them, he does
plainly Contradistinguish them to the Deacons; for even there he mentions but
Two Orders, as S. Paul to Timothy does; and therefore must be understood to
mean as he does, the one of the Bishops, and Praepositi, which he compares to
Apostles, and the other of the Deacons, who, he says, were appointed by the
Apostles, as indeed they were, Acts 6. to be their, and the Churches Servants,
Meminisse autem Diaconi debent, quoniam Apostolos, id est, Episcopos and
praeposi^os Dominus eligit, Di^conos autem post assensum domini in Coelos,
Apostoli sibi constituerunt Episcopatus sui and Ecclesiae ministres. And it is
plain in that Citation, which I made before from S. Cyprian, that his Bishop or
Praepositus (for both in him are Expressions of one and the same Office) was a
Preaching Minister, ordained unto a certain People [ ed eam plebem cui
Praeposi^us ordinatur, etc.]

Again, that the preaching Ministers or Pastors of Congregations were
considered, as in a Sense, Successors of the Apostles, and compared to them on
that Account, is farther evidenced from the Testimony of Nilus, who, in his
Book of the Primacy of the Pope of Rome, has these Words, (...), and what then
may one say? is not the Pope entirely the Successor of Peter? Yes he is, but
it is as he is a Bishop, and is no more than what every Bishop that was ordained
by Peter may easily challenge. But there were may that by his (namely Peter's)
Hand received this Grace of Episcopacy; Ay, every Priest this way is a
Successor of that Apostle, from whom, by Tradition, he received Priesthood, and
thus there are many Successors as well of Peter as of other Apostles; but in
other Respects they have no Successors.

Thus he speaks plainly, That Bishops and Pastors succeeded the Apostles,
but not in the Apostleship; of this there is no Succession: and Dr. Reinolds is
fully of the same Opinion, and speaks home.

Indeed it is a Point (says he) well worth the noting, Riensid's Conf. with
Har^. f. 230, 231.
that as you do notoriously abuse the Church of Christ (speaking to Heart) for
you persuade the Simple, and chiefly young Scholars, who trust your
Commonplace Books, that Chrysostom spoke of Peter and Peter's Successors, in
the same meaning, That the Pope does, when he says, That Peter and Peter's
Suceessor is the Head of the Church, and binds by solemn Oath to be obedient
to the Bishop of Rome, the Successor of Peter, whereas S. Chrysostom meant by
Peter's Successors them whom Christ does put in Trust to seed his Sheep, as the
Master of the Sentences and Thomas of Aquin do give the Name of Peter's
Successors to all Priests and Prelates (as they term them) that is, to all
Pastors and Doctors of the Church; as S. Augustine teaches, That it is said to
all when it is said to Peter, Do thou love me? feed my sheep. As S. Ambrose
writes, That he and all Bishops have received the Charge of the Sheep with
Peter; as the Roman Clergy apply it to the rest of the Disciples of Christ, and
the Clergy of Carthage too. Thus Dr. Reinolds.

But I stay too long on a matter that in no degree deserves it; for to infer,
that all Bishops are properly Apostles, because they have the Name of Apostles,
is to imply, That Identity of Names, will infer an Identy of Offices, at which
Rate Joseph the Mittendary in Epiphanius, whom he calls an Apostle, would
have the Honor of being a Bishop, and indeed, on that Account his Title is all
as good as Bishop Epaphroditus's.

It Is true, you tell me, you believe as S. Hierome likewise did, That
Epaphroditus was really the Bishop, because he is called the Apostle of the
Philippians, Phi. 2. 25. But as it is true, that in the Greek it is [(...)]
your Apostle, so it may well be acknowledged, That our English Translators do
render that Expression very well [ your messenger] since nothing is more
evident than this, That the Coherence and Connection of the Text will carry it
to that Sense. I suppose it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus my brother
and companion in labor, and fellow soldier; but, your messenger [(...)] and
minster of my necessities; Which indeed he was, as appears by Chap. 4. 15, 18.
Now the Philippians know that no Church communicated with me, as concerning
giving and receiving, but ye only; I am full, having received of Epaphroditus
the things (which were sent from you,) but my God shall supply all your need,
etc. to wit, as you by him have supplied mine.

That the Apostles exercised a Jurisdiction over particular formed Churches,
and over those particularly, which themselves had founded, is as little to your
purpose, if Bishops are not (which they are not) either of the Order of the
Apostles, or else Founders of Churches, as these were; as in it self it is a
Truth, and not to be questioned.

The Jurisdiction of the Apostles over particular Churches undergoes a Double
Consideration, in neither of which it symbolizeth with the Diocesan or
Episcopal; for it may be considered, either as it was an Appurtenance and
Incident to the Office of the Apostleship, to wit, as the Apostles were
Founders of the Church Essential and thus all the Apostles, as they had one
Commission, so they had equal Authority, equal Jurisdiction over all the
Churches. Or it may be considered as accruing to the Apostles from more
particular Respects, to wit, as they were the Fathers and Founders of
particular Churches: The former I call Essential, the latter Accidental
Jurisdiction of the Apostles.

Take the Jurisdiction of the Apostles in the first Consideration, and then
Diocesan Bishops can no more pretend thereto, than they can to the Office of
the Apostleship [which was oecumeuical for its extent, as well as Infallible
for its Execution,] it being an Appurtenance and Incident only unto this, and
dyed with their Persons; Or, take it more particularly, for that Authority
which they assumed, and were understood to have, in a more particular manner,
over the Persons they had converted, and the Churches they founded, (between
which and themselves on that foot, there was a more particular Relation than
between others and them) although in this Consideration the Jurisdiction of the
Apostles was no other than what was common to them, with the Evangelists or any
other Persons that planted Christianity, made Conversions and settled Churches
in any particular Regions or Places; yet even this is as far from being
Diocesan as from being ordinary.

A Founder that institutes a College, settles Orders and makes Statutes, though
he does not constitute himself (as rarely any does) a Visitor, yet, on
extraordinary Occasions, and in Difficulties arising about the Meaning of
Statutes, or their Application, upon incident Emergencies he would think it but
a Duty, while himself lived, and the Founded should think it theirs, to have
recourse unto him and to take his Directions; but he dying, that Authority, as
being incident only unto his Person, dies with him; Founders, as such, have no
Successors.

I touched in my former Letter on this latter Jurisdiction, in respect whereof,
in a right sense, one Apostle may well be affirmed to have had an Authority and
Power, in some places, and over some Persons, more than another; for thus, in a
particular manner, Paul was styled the Apostle of the Uncircumcision, as Peter
was of the Circumcision.

The Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 4. Expostulates with the Corinthions on this Account;
he assereth the Authority he had over them, and shows the ground of that
Authority; for he affirms, That as he was their Father in Christ, so he had an
Authority over them, as a Father over his Children, ver. 14, 15, 16. I write
not these things to shame you, but as my beloved Sons I warn you; for though
you have ten thousand Instructors in Christ, yet have you no: many Fathers; for
in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. Thus he claims an
Authority over them as being their Father, or one that had Converted them,
which Authority he plainly distinguishes from theirs, who were only
Instructors. Now Bishops as such, are but Instructors of Churches, not Fathers;
they may Convert and Proselite single Persons, but as Bishops they do not Found
Churches, but only Feed the Churches already founded.

In virtue of this Authority, as he was their Father and Founder, the Apostle
Exercised that Jurisdiction over the Church at Corinth, which you call
Episcopal; a thing so evident, that nothing can be more, to one that observes
the Connection: for in the latter end of the Fourth Chapter, he evinced (as I
said) that he had a paternal Authority over them, as well as Care for them; and
immediately in the beginning of the 5th. as an Instance of that Authority, he
gives them that Direction about the Incestuous Person, upon which you i^ sist.

So that in this Transaction (with the Corinthians) the Apostle acted not as an
ordinary Bishop, but acting by virtue of that Authority which he had over them,
as he was the Person that had Converted them, and was their Father and Founder.
The Quality he acted in was Extraordinary, and particular. Again, the
Cognizance he took was Extraordinary too, he was present in Spirit, and not in
Care and Affection only, [ affectu et sollicitudine] as, by a supposed Parallel
in the Expression, Coloss. 2. 5. you would have me believe; for he makes his
presence the ground of his proceeding in the Censure or Judgment which he
pronounced, for I verily as absent in Body, but present in Spirit, have Judged
already, and all Judgment must proceed upon Evidence, by View, or Proof, not
Affection, and therefore his presence, which is the Ground of his proceeding,
must be a Spiritual view. The Report or general Scandal, which is mentioned
ver. 1. on which you insist, was but a Motive (to the Apostle) to invite him to
consider the matter, it was not the Ground on which he proceeded in his
Censure: this, as he plainly affirms, was his Spiritual view, or presence in
Spirit. And what Spirit? but that same Spirit mentioned afterward in the same
Text; (which Spirit you must yield to be Extraordinary, and Apostolical;) when
you come together, and Mr SPIRIT; it being but reason, that the same Spirit
which gave in Evidence, should also assist at the Execution.

But this latter Spirit (you say) was but a Letter, or Authority, conveyed by
the Apostles Letter; and why (say I) the latter Spirit not the same with the
former? and where, I pray you, is (Spirit) taken for a Letter, or for Anthority
conveyed by it? I am sure this same Apostle distinguishes Letter, Word, and
Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. and therefore, [and my Spirit] should not be [and my
Letter,] especially when joined in the manner it is here with the (...), the
mighty power of our Lord Jesus Christ; which, what it is, may more particularly
be understood by Act. 1. 8. But you shall receive the POWER of the Holy Ghost
coming upon you.

And the Sentence passed by S. Paul, was as Extraordinary as the Cognizance
whereon he grounded it: for [ To deliver to Satan] was not to Excommunicate,
either with the lesser Excommunication, which is Suspension from the Sacrament,
or with the greater, which is a solemn Excision from the Church. Some will tell
you it was a Censure wholly unknown unto the Jews, who yet had all the Forms of
Excommunication, Nidui, Cberem and Maranatha; and that in the whole New
Testament, nothing in the least is said to support this thought, that Tradition
to Satan is Excommunication. The delivery to Satan (as many of the the Ancient
Fathers believed, some of whom your self do cite) was certainly a Judiciary
giving the Dilinquent to the Devil, as to a Tormentor, for so the Apostles
Phrase does carry it, when he says it. It was done (...), for the Destruction
of the Flesh; and it was practiced only by the Apostles, by their Apostolical
Power, of which see Petrus Molineus in his Vates, l. 2. c. 11.

You do indeed acknowledge at last, that Corporal Asfliction, or Pains inflicted
by the Devil as by a Tormentor, had Place in the first Times, and by virtue too
of Apostolical Censure; but then, by way of Qualification, you say also, That
it was a Consequent of Excommunication: But this is a thing that will not be
received mee^ly upon your Authority, or upon the Authority of any Men, that
lived in Times remote from the first; for it requires a Proof, either from some
Text of the Holy Scriptures, or from some other Record of that same Time. It is
clear to me, Vid. Bu^t. Lexis. Rab. ad voc. Nidui. Seldom de jur. uat. and
gent. l. 4. ^. 9.
That the Exaresis, the separation or taking away from among them, is the only
Excommunication that is mentioned by the Apostles in 1 Cor. 5. and yet I fancy,
since it answered to the Jewish Nidui which excluded not from the Temple, it is
not that which you intend. However, it is plain that this Exeresis was not a
Delivery unto Satan; for the Apostle speaks of the Separation or taking away of
the Man from among them, as of a thing they ought to have done of themselves,
without any Interposition of his, Verse 2. And you are puffed up, and have not
rather mourned, that he that has done this deed night be taken away from among
you; to wit, according to the purport of a former Epistle v. 9. whereas the
delivery unto Satan was the Apostle's own proper Act, effected by his
Apostolical Spirit, and by the mighty Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, verse 3,
4, 5.

Again, it is plain that this Exaresis was nothing but their Noncommunicating
and Nonconversing with the Incestuous, the Corinthians being obliged in point
of Duty, to have excluded him from their Society, so as ordinarily not to keep
him Company; for such a Direction had bin given to them by the Apostle in a
former Epistle, v. 9. as a Rule of their Deportment toward the Ungodly, which
Rule he yet found himself obliged to Explain and Qualify in thy, as which was
only to be understood of their Demeauour toward Professou^s, and indeed,
(unless they would go out of the World) practicable only toward these, and so,
not to be understood absolutely and unlimitedly, of all, verse 11. And having
touched their Remisness, verse 2. and reinscrced his Direction with its due
Limitation and Qualification verse 10, 11. ^e presses them to follow it in
their Carriage toward this incestuous Person, verse 13. THEREFORE put away
from among your selves, that wicked person; THEREFORE, to wit, because I did
write unto you in a former Epistle, not to accompany with Fornicators, which
now I tell you must be understood of Professors that are such, therefore put
away from among your selves that wicked Fornicator (and so purge out the old
Leaven) by avoiding Conversation and Society with him, as much as is posfible.
The connection shows, That not accompanying with this Wicked one, is the same
with purging out the Old Leaven; and not accompanying with him was their
putting him away from among themselves: Not accompanying with him was their
Judgment upon him, but the Delivery of him unto Satan was the Apostle's; no
Instance can be given of any Persons that gave up any unto Satan but the
Apostles.

Thus, if you please to take the Trouble of reviewing the Text, a second time,
with its entire Coherence, you cannot but observe, That it shows, that
something must be done by the Apostle's own Power, and something by the
People's: in what relates unto the Apostle's, there is first the Motive or
Inducement he had to consider the Matter, and this was the general Scandal of
it, verse 1. Secondly, The Evidence whereupon he did proceed to pass this
Sentence, which was his own Spiritual View, though he was absent in body, yet
he was present in spirit (the Antithesis must be marked) and therefore he
judges, verse 2. Thirdly, The Sentence which he passed, and that was, That the
Criminal should be delivered to Satan, verse 5. Fourthly, The manner how this
Sentence was to be executed, and that was, in a full congregation, in the name
of Christ, with the apostolical Spirit, and by the mighty Power of the Lord
Jesus Christ, verse^. And show me the Diocesan that can do all this. What
follows in the Chapter relates to the Judgment of the People, and their putting
of the Incestuous away; which (as I have showed, and that by the Reference and
Coherence) is quite another thing than the delivery of him to Satan.

By this Time I believe it is very manifest, That Diocesan Jurisdiction cannot
be founded with any clearness of Title upon the Instance alleged, this being
plainly Apostolical, and grounded on that Authority which S. Paul had in a
particular manner over the Church of Corinth, both as he was an Apostle, and as
their Apostle and Founder; and no Example must be pressed further than the
Ground and Reason thereof will carry it.

As for Timothy and Titus, who are honored by you (as well as by other.) with
the Title of Bishops, there is for much said toward the unbishoping of them by
Mr. Prinne and by Smectymnuus, etc. that I need say nothing; wherefore I will
only offer, that neither of them is styled a Bishop in the Holy Scripture (for
the Epistolary Postscripts are none) whenever it mentions the being of them at
their reputed Bishoprics; the one at Ephisus, the other at Crete. Again,
Timothy in effect is styled an Evangelist by S. Paul; for when this Apostle
exhorts Timothy to make a faithful Discharge of the Office committed to him,
his Expression is, do the work of an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4. 5. And indeed as an
Evangelist was a Secondary Apostle, that is, not a settled standing Officer,
fixed in any one planted constituted Church, but an Assistant to the Apostles
in planting and settling Churches; so we find Timothy, as an Itinerant Officer,
often going from Place to Place upon occasion, as he was Invited or Employed by
Paul. The Stay he makes even at Ephesus, was only upon the Desire of that
Apostle, and not from any Obligation arising from the Duty of his Place, as had
he been a Bishop it would certainly have been; for 1 Timothy 1. 3. Paul is said to
request Timothy to stay at Ephesus, but is not said to have ordained him Bishop
there. In short, the Tenor of the Epistle, that mentions the being of Timothy
at Ephesus, as it directs him in the Choice of Officers, and gives him
Disciplinary Rules, so it shows plainly, that his Business there was to
perfect the Work of the Settlement of the Church begun by Paul; and this is the
more probable, because his Stay and Business is limited to that Apostle's
Return, 1 Timothy 1. 3. compared with Chap. 3. 14, 15. Chap. 4. 13.

And for Titus, it is as evident that all his Business at Crete was that of an
Evangelist as that Timothy's was so at Ephesus, for he was left at Crete (that
is the Expression) he is not said to be ordained Bishop or Metropolitan there,
no more than Timothy is said to be ordained the Bishop of Ephesus, but as the
latter is affirmed to be requested to stay, and not to have been settled as
Bishop there, fo the former is only said to be left at Crete. And what for? but
to do the Work of an Evangelist, for so it was, to assist and help the Apostles
in the Work of founding and settling the Churches; for this cause left I there
in Crete, that thou should set in order the things that are wanting, or left
undone (to wit, by Paul) and ordain Elders in every City, Tit 1. 5. In the Acts
of the Apostles Paul and Barnabas are said to ordain Elders in every Church,
and here Titus is said to be left in Crete to do it.

Indeed both Timothy and Titus in what they did, the one at Ephesus the other
at Crete, were only Deputies that acted as by Delegation of S. Paul, according
to the Instructions which he gave them; for this Apostle says to Titus, I left
thee in Crete to ordain Elders, AS I HAD APPOINTED, and sets out the
Qualifications that Titus must observe in the Elders he ordained, Tit. 1. verse
6, 7, 8 etc. In like manner he instructs Timothy, how he was to behave himself
in the House of God, in settling Elders and Deacons, 1 Timothy from 1, to 15. so
that if Bishops be not Evangelists, as well as Apostles, I do not see of what
Advantage Timothy and Titus their Business at Ephesus and at Crete can be to
your Cause.

(...) of our Lord was Bishop of Jerusalem, (...) and that he is styled Bishop
by S. Luke, who yet had a fair Occasion (...) it in his Acts of the Apostles,
had James been indeed such a Bishop; nor is he so styled by any other of the
Sacred Writers; and if we except the R^^ Clement (in an Epistle said to be his)
the first that styled him so was Hegesippus, who lived at least a whole Century
after. Theod. Motech (...) R m. p. 61.
Another Clement, he of Alexandria, is also cited by Theodorus Mitochita and by
others, to prove it; but really the Story as Clement tells it, (if they
represent him right) carries its own Confutation; for they make him say, That
James, by Divine Appointment, was ordained to be the first Bishop of Jerusalem,
to prevent any Emulation and Dispute, that Peter, John and the other James
might otherwise have had for that honor.

But however that was, I do acknowledge for my own part, that James was Bishop
of Jerusalem, but I acknowledge it only in the sense in which he was Bishop of
all the other Churches, and he was no more in the Opinion of the first Clement,
if we credit Bishop Jewel; for this Bishop in the Defense of his Apology, Part
2. Page 98. brings in Clement speaking thus, I send greeting unto James the
Brother of our Lord, and the Bishop of Bishops, Governor of the Holy Church of
the Jews at Jerusalem, and also of all the Churches, that by Gods Providence
are every where founded; here, faith Bishop Jewel, James is the Head of all
Churches whatsoever.

By this Testimony it plainly appears, that James the reputed Bishop of
Jerusalem, as he was James the Apostle, so he was no otherwise Bishop of that
City, than as Peter was of Rome, and how that was, Dr. Reinolds has told us in
his Conference with Heart, where he says, But whether Eusebius, or Hierom, or
Damasus, or whosoever have said that Peter was a Bishop, either they use the
name of [Bishop] generally, and so it proves not your purpose, or if they meant
it, as commonly we do, they missed the Truth: for generally a Bishop is an
Overseer, in which Signification it reaches to all who are put in Trust with
Oversight and Charge of any thing, as Eliazer is called Bishop of the
Tabernacle, and Christ the Bishop of our Souls. But in our common use of speech
it notes him to whom the oversight and charge of a particular Church is
committed, such as were the Bishops of Ephesus, Philippi, and they whom Christ
calls the Angels of the Churches: Now Peter was not Bishop after this latter
sort: for he was an Apostle, and the Apostles were sent to Preach to all the
World; wherefore when the Fathers said he was a Bishop, either they meant it in
the former sense, or ought to have meant it.

In fine, it may not be amiss on this occasion to take notice of an Observation
made by a learned Man (and he too a Bishop) in reference to the Testimony of
Fathers, to wit, That they wrote things they saw not, and so fram^ matters
according to their own Conceits; and many of them were taint^ with Partial
Humours]: which another, more softly, expresses thus; T^^ they, (namely the
Fathers) finding the name of Bishop continued in the (...) cession of one
Paster after another, judged (...) according to them that lived in their times]
An Observa^ (...) use, with respect to the Fathers, that lived at a greater
distance than (...) be of Clement did, from the Apostolical time.

Thus I have briefly touched the Arguments offered by you in affirmance of
Diocesan Episcopacy; only to that, which is taken from the Angels of the
Churches in the Revelation, I have said nothing, because I do not think it
worthy of a particular Consideration: for since these Angels, for ought we
know, might be only so many several Presidents of the Presbyteries in
Congregational Churches, the instancing of them makes but little for your
purpose, who do affirm Diocesan Prelacy.

But as you have argued for Diocesan Authority, which you would have of
Apostolical Institution, so others do for the Synodical, which (as they
apprehend) is grounded upon the Synod (so they call the Assembly) at Jerusalem,
that was convened upon the appeal made by the Believers at Antioch. For, say
they, this Controversy was absolutely and finally decided by that0 Synod, and
a Decree or Canon made, and this sent not only to the Church at Anticch, but to
all the Churches besides, of Syria and Cilicia.

I deny not that the former Practice was the Occasion of Synods, or Assemblies
of Bishops; but I affirm that that Assembly, though it had something in it of
more resemblance to a Synod properly so called, than is in mere Convocations,
of the Clergy, the Brethren (as well as the Apostles and Elders) being in that
Assembly, who generally are Excluded from Convocations; yet it was not properly
a Synod. A Synod properly, whether Diocesan, Provincial or National, being but
an Ecclesiastical Parliament, of the one sort, or of the other; in which all
that are obliged by the Determinations and Resolutions of it, must be
understood to be in Person, or by Representation; as either being there
themselves, or else electing those that do Compose it, to represent and stand
for them.

The Controversy at Antioch was about a Doctrinal Subject, of great
Concernment, whether Circumcision and Obedience to all the Mosaical Laws was
necessary to Salvation; for This some of Judea taught the Brethren, and were
opposed for it by S. Paul and Barnabas; but the Contention running high, and
neither side yielding, all agreed to send to Ierus^lem to the Apostles and
Elders, ^ to the Original Deliverers of the Christian Doctrine, which being a
Doctrine ^f Faith, and not of Discourse and Ratiocination, they rightly judged
that it ^ust be resolved at last, into the Testimony and Witness of those who
had re^ived it from Christ, and those particularly, whose Office it was to
transmit it ^to others, and to Vouch it. So that in this respect the Case is
particular, the ^peal was made unto the Apostles and Elders, or old Disciples,
as those ^o having conversed with our Lord, had immediately received the
Christian ^trin from him; which Reason for the Appeal was Peculiar to those
Persons ^made and received it, and therefore can be none for others, taken
either in the private, or in representative Capacities.

Further, there is something else in this business that was very peculiar; I
know it is affirmed, That the Holy Ghost did assist in this Assembly in a
special manner, and that the same Assistance and Guidance is promised to all
others that convene in Christ's Name, either for the Decision of Controversies,
or for Government of the Church; and that any Synod lawfully called, and
proceeding lawfully, may say in their Decrees, as the Apostles, and Elders, and
Church do hear, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us.

I acknowledge them very learned and worthy Men that think so, but I must beg
their Pardon if I differ from them; for, with Submission, I conceive that the
Phrase [ It seemed good to the Holy Ghost] has no Relation to any Assistance
and Guidance of the Holy Ghost that was afforded by any Extraordlnary
Illumination of Mind, to them that met on that occasion, and so it makes
nothing for Infallible Direction in Council; Rather, it relates unto the
Decision which the Holy Ghost in Effect had already made of that Controversy,
by his Descending upon some of the Gentiles, who had believed in Christ as
Peter preached him, without any mention of Moses, or of his Law, Acts 10. from
34. to 45. For it was the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon the believing
Gentiles, who were Strangers to the Law [A Descent that was not transacted
immediately by the laying on of the Hands of any Apostles, but was an Immediate
Descent, such an one as that was which had been made before upon the Apostles
themselves on the day of Pentecost,] It was this Descent that (being a sealing
of them by the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 1. 13.) was urged by the Apostle Peter as an
Argument against the Imposition of the Mosaical Yoke, which Argument was
confirmed and strengthened by Barnabas and Paul, and at last by James, (who
does not give a Difinitive Sentence as the Translation carries it, and you
somewhere say, but only gives his Judgment.) And this, in fine, did carry the
matter; so that it is evident, that no Council, Synod, or Assembly of Men may
say, [ It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us] in their Decisions, as the
Apostles and Elders did, and because they did, if that Council, Synod, or
Assembly has not such a particular Manifestation of the Holy Ghost, to bottom
their Decisions, as the Apostles and Elders had; when the Apostles and Elders
said [ It seems good to the Holy Ghost, and to us,] they meant, it seemed
good to the Holy Ghost by his Descent, and to themselves upon full Debate.

But to return; The Church wilest it stood in its State of Separation from
Secular Government, must be considered to have been in a Double Condition; the
first while the Apostles were living, who as they had an Extraordinary Charge,
so they had a proportionable power over all the Church; the second, after the
decease or other removal of the Apostles, when the Church was left to it self:
for in these different Circumstances, the proceedings were very different, both
as to the punishing of Offenders, and to the ending of Controversies.

Whilst the Apostles (who had an Extraordinary and Supernatural Rod) were
living, and in a Condition to use that Rod, as there needed no other Discipline
but that, to terrify flagitious and great Offenders; so I find no other used,
and that too, but rarely; the greater Excommunication had no place, that I can
find, (unless where Diotrephes ruled) in that State of the Church: Besides the
Apostolical Rod, it was only Non conversing with, or abstaining from the
Society of Offenders, that was used as a Remedy for the Reducing of them; and
this by Apostolical Order. Indeed, the Apostles were not so much for cutting
off from the Church, as for inviting and calling Men into it: The Kingdom of
Heaven is compared to a Dragnet.

But after the Decease or other removal of the Apostles, when the terror of
their Rod was vanished, and when God himself did no longer (as at first he
seemed to have done) in Extraordinary manner, particularly punish for
particular Sins, as in the Case of the Corinthians, [For this cause many are
sick and weak among you, etc.] and no Assistance could be had from the Sword of
the Magistrate without Scandal; in that State, necessity grew upon the Church
to make its Discipline straighter and more awful, that so, having something in
it of severe and rigorous, the Terror (of it) might restrain, and the
Execution reform.

Hence came the Church Covenant or voluntary Subjection, which (says Lewis du
Moulin) is intimated by Pliny in his Epistle to Trajan, Lud. Molin. in Paraen.
c. 13.
in his Sacramento obstricti; and (says Mr. Seldom) by Origin contra Celsum,
when he spoke of the (...) of the Christians. And hence, by degrees, and as
occasions obliged, it came to pass, that Excommunications, the greater and the
lesser, grew into use; the former not so much by a positive Institution, as by
the Common Law of Society; and the latter by Congruity to the Apostles
Direction, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Both which though they carried terror in themselves,
yet, to add, to it (as the Estimate of the Privation ever does depend upon that
of the Possession) Admission into the Church, and consequently to the Lord's
Table, were practiced with more Formality than in the Apostles times. Now comes
in a solemn Distinction of Chatechuneti and Fideles, and the Candidates of
Christianity must take time before them, must (...), must pass through many
Degrees before they can attain to the happiness of being admitted to a
participation of the privileges and rights of the Faithful.

It was now also that the Notion of a Catholic Unity obtained, which was not
understood at that time to be Internal and Spiritual, an Unity of Faith and
Charity only. But to consist in something External, relating unto Order and
Discipline; as being an Unity that was to be maintained by Communicatory, and
other Letters, and by Orders, and (that) was intended to support the Notion of
but one Bishopric in the Church, and that every Bishop participated of that
one Bishopric in Solidum. A Notion, that was of great use to make their
Dicipline and Power the more pointed; for if but one Church, then to be cast
out of any part of the Church, was indeed to be ejected out of the whole; and
if but one Bishopric to be participated by all the Bishops, what was done by
one, was done by All; All did censure, if one did; the Expulsion made by one
Bishop, out of any Church, was in effect, an Expulsion from all the Churches;
and so a cutting off entirely from Christianity, and all Communion of Saints.
Thus they aimed in a General Bishopric, at what the Church of Rome does in a
personal; in affirming which I do not impose upon you; for S. Cyprian is plain,
Vid. Cypria. ep. l. 3. ep. 11.
Hoc ^rant utique (says he in his Tractate de simplicitate Praelatorum) and
caeteri Apostoli quid fuit Petrus, pariconsoriio praediti, and honoris and
potestatis; sed Exordium ab unitate proficiscitur, ut Ecclesia una monstretur,
etc. quam unitatem firmiter tenere and vindic^re debemus, maxim Episcopi qui
in Ecclesia praesidemus, ut Episcopatum, quoque ipsum unum utque Indivisum
probemus.

Thence also came the Rails about the Table, I mean, the Differences of
Communions, Clerical and Laical, (to wit) to raise the Reputation and Credit of
the Clergy, and withal to make their Ceusures the more solemn and awful; as
also that the Clergy, who were obliged to a stricter and more exemplary life,
if they did not live it, might have a peculiar Punishment; which was to be
thrust from the Clerical Communion, and be degraded to that of the Laity. In
fine, hence Public Confessions and rigorous shaming Penances in all the
Decrees of them [ Fletus, Auditio, Substractio, Consistentia] had their
beginning; and also solemn Absolutions, by the Imposition of the Hands of the
Bishop and of the Presbyters; Which things, as being only Human and Politic,
though not unnecessary for the Time, are all of them alterable, and some actually
altered.

Again, as Controversies arose in the Churches, either about Matters of Doctrine
or of Discipline, the Apostles, while they lived and were in a Condition (those
especially which founded such particular Churches where they arose) did take
care to end such Differences, and were accordingly repaired unto for that
purpose. Thus, in the Business of Antioch Appeal is made unto all the Apostles,
and for the Corinthians, Galatian, etc. S. Paul particularly cared.

But after the Decease of the Apostles, or a Failure of the Apostolical
Infallible Guidance by other means, the Controversies that arose in any Church,
became determined by the Common Counsel and Advice of other Churches, either by
their Letters, or by a solemn Discussion and Debate in an Assembly of Bishops
and Elders in Provincial Councils. We do not read indeed of any Rule for this
Practice; but the Light of Nature or Common Reason directed it; and there was
something too that did lead unto it in the first Assembly at Jerusalem: For as
the Apostles and Elders were appealed unto by them of Antioch, so the whole
Church was convented, and the Business considered and debated by the whole, and
by the whole resolved.

In sum, the Churches of Christ in this separate State subsisted by themselves,
like so many little Republics, as being only in the World, but not of it, and
therefore concerned not themselves in any Business with the Secular Powers: And
yet seeing their Members were Men as well as others, and in the World as well
as others, and consequently liable to Passions and Misgovernment, to Common
Accidents of Providence, and to Differences too, arising in Worldly Matters, it
was absolutely necessary that some Provision should be made, in all these
Respects, in the Church it self, by Officers on purpose, or else (since there
was no other Remedy) all would run to Confusion. Hence, as the Ancient
Christians had Deacons for the Poor, so they had Wisemen (as the Apostle calls
them) or Elders, who, to prevent the Scandal of their going to Law before the
Heathen, determined Matters by way of Arbitration; and likewise restrained and
suppressed exorbitant and evil Manners, by censuring them: Out of the Church,
to provide for the Poor, to end Controversies between Man and Man, and to
punish evil doing, was the Business of the Magistrate.

And this reminds me of the Third State of the Church, when Magistrates and
Powers becoming Christians, the Christian Religion was taken by them into Civil
Protection, and became incorporated into the Laws, as that of Israel was into
theirs, so that now States became Churches; a State professing Christianity
being a National Church, and a National Church nothing but a Christian Nation;
in a Word, a Holy Commonwealth.

Great was the Alteration that was made in the Government and Face of the
Church in this Condition, from what it was before; for after the time that
Emperors became Christian, and that they showed Kindness to the Church, the
Hierarchy became a Secular thing, it being in this State, that That and the
Power of Councils attained to their full Growth; but yet, in several Countries,
by several Steps and Occasions. Loz. com. reip. Romans l. 1. f. 141, etc.
Lavius in his Commentary of the Roman Commonwealth, lib. 1. fol. 22. tells us,
That the Episcopal Diocesses of the Christian Religion, do, by many very great
Tokens represent the Roman Antiquity; and well he might, for it is plain the
Form of Civil Administration after the Roman Empire became Christian (and in
some degrees before,) was imitated in the Church, and that both in the
Provinces and Bounds of the Empire, and in the City it self.

For as the Roman Empire was divided into several Pretories, which Pretories
were called Pretorian Diocesses or Sees, and these Pretories again (were)
subdivided into Provinces; and that in every Pretory there was a Prefect (of
the Pretory) who resided in the Metropolis, called Seeds prima, to administer
and rule the Diocese; and under the Prefect, in the several Provinces, there
were other Principal Officers, called Presidents, to rule and govern them; So
in the Church there were the Metropolitan Primates, or Archbishops, who were
seated in the Metropolis or Capital Cities, and answered to the Prefects of the
Pretories; and there were Bishops that resided in the Inferious City, who were
called Suffragan Bishops, and those resembled the Presidents of the Provinces:
l, and the Parallel holds out further, Ios. Scal. ep. l. 4. ep. 345.
since a Person (as Joseph Scaliger observes) might be a Bishop with
Archiepiscopal Ornaments, and yet not be an Archbishop, in like manner as one
might be an Officer with Consular Ornaments and yet not be a Consul. The same
Scaliger, in his Epistles, hb. 2. ep. 184. also acquaints us, That, in the Time
of Constantine the Great, there were four Prefects, of pretories, the Prefect
of the Pretorium of Constantionople, the Illirian Prefect, the Prefect of the
Pretorium of Rome, and the Prefect of the Pretorium in the Gallia; Adding, that
seeing the Prefect of the Pretorium was of the same Degree that at this Day a
Viceroy is, he had under him Vicars, and the Vicar, he says, was the
Governor of a Diocese, or one that had under him a whole Diocese, and a
Diocese was a Government that contained under it several Metropolies or Capital
Cities, as a Metropolis had under it several Cities. He further adds, That the
Ecclesiastical Bishop of a Diocese, who was in the same degree with an Imperial
Vicar, was called by the Greeks a Patriarch, and among the Latins was a
Primate of Primates, as the Bishop of Vienna, who had under him two Primates,
the Primate of Aquitain and the Primate of Narbona; Igitur (says Scaliger)
codem ordine and gradu Patriarchs, quo and Vicarius praefectus, Imperatoris,
uterque enim Diaecosios est (...), ut Canones loquintur, ille (...); And (says
Barlaam, and indeed the whole Greek Church) the Deference and Respect that was
rendered to the Sea of Rome, Barlaem de Papae princip. c. 5.
by the Fathers, was so, in this regard (and only in this,) because that City
was the principal Seat of the Empire.

Mr. Thorndick, in his Book De rat. and jure fin. controv. c. 22. agrees in
this Sentiment, and is very particular. Regiminis forma (says he) quam in
Imperium a Constantino introductam diximus, in praefectorum praetorio potestate
Iuris dicundi supremo loco a principali, sita fuit. Nam praefecto praetorio
Galliarum suber at Galliarum Vicarius, qui Treviris sedebat. Vicarius
Hispaniarum, qui ut videtur Tarracone: Vicarius Britannarum, qui Eboraci;
proprerea enim concilio Arelatensi primus subscribit Eboracensis, etc. The
sense of which I find in Dr. Stilling fleet, (now Bishop of Worcester) when he
says, in his Rational Account, part 2. chapter 5. f. 394, 395. For our better
understanding the Force and Effect of this Nicene Canon, we must cast our Eye a
little upon the Civil Disposition of the Roman Empire by Constantine, then
lately altered from the former Disposition of it under Augustus and Adrian. He
therefore distributed the Administration of the Government of the Roman Empire
under four Praefecti Praetorio, but for the more convenient Management of it,
the whole Body of the Empire was cast into several Jurisdictions, containing
many Provinces within them, which were in the Law called Diocesses, over every
one of which there was appointed a Vicarius or Lieutenant, to one of the
Praefecti Praetorio, whose Residence was in the chief City of the Diocese,
where the Pretorium was, and Justice was administered to all within that
Diocese, and thither Appeals were made; under these were those Pro-consuls or
Correctores, who ruled in the particular Provinces, and had their Residence in
the Metropolis of it, under whom were the particular Magistrates of every City:
Now, according to this Disposition of the Empire, the Western Parts of it
contained in it seven of these Diocesses, as, under the Praefectus Praetorio
Galliarum, was the Diocese of Gaul, which contained seventeen Provinces, The
Diocese of Britain, which contained five (afterward but three, in
Constantine's Time;) the Diocese of Spain seven. Under the Praefectus Praetorio
Italiae, was the Diocese of Africa, which had six Provinces; the Diocese of
Italy, whose seat was Millain, seven; the Diocese of Rome ten. Under the
Praefectus Praetorio Illyrici, was the Diocese of Illyricum, in which were
seventeen Provinces. In the Eastern Division were the Ciocess of Thrace, which
had six Provinces, the Diocese of Pontus eleven, and so the Diocese of Afia,
the Oriental, (properly so called) wherein Antioch was, fifteen: All which were
under the Praefectus Praetorio Orientis. The Egyptian Diocese, which had six
Provinces, was under the Praefectus Augustalis; in the time of Theodosius the
elder: Illyricum was divided into two Diocesses; the Eastern, whose Metropolis
was Thessalonica, and had eleven Provinces; the Western, whose Metropolis was
Sy^mium, and had six Provinces According to this Division of the Empire, we may
better understand the Affairs and Government of the Church, which was modelled
much after the same way, unless where Ancient Custom or the Emperor's Edict
did cause any variation. For as the Cities had their Bishops, so the Provinces
had their Archbishops, and the Diocesses their Primates, whose Jurisdiction
extended as far as the Diocese did; and as the Convenius Iuridici were kept in
the Chief City of the Diocese for Matters of Civil Judicature, so the Chief
Ecclesiastical Councils for the Affairs of the Church, were to be kept there
too; for which there is an express Passage in the Codex of Theodosius, whereby
Care is taken that the same Course should be used in Ecclesiastical which was
in Civil Matters; so that such things which concerned them should be heard in
the Synod of the Diocese.

This Adjustment of the Church to the Civil State in those times, might happily
be furthered by a Consideration, That even in the first and best there was
something that resembled it; for what the Apostles Paul and Barnabas are said
to do (...), in every Church, Titus, when he did the same, is said to do it
(...), in every City; as if to ordain Presbyters in every Church, and to do it
in every City, was but one thing, and that Churches, at that Time, were only
settled in Cities, and but one Church in one City; as indeed at first before
the enlarging and spreading of Christianity, See Dr. Burnel's Abridgment of the
Hist. of the Reformation B. l. f. 107. And his Hist. of the Rights of Princes
Spain Gl^ssat. ad v. c. bomag. Vid. Albert. Cra^zia. metrop. l. 1. c. 25, and
30. l. 2. c. 2, 19. and 21. 1. 3. c. 1, 5 etc. (...) schel. bist. (...) l. 1.
^. 20.
it seems to have been ord^narily.

But whatever induced it, it is certain that Christian Emperors and Kings
(particularly the famous Constantine and Charles the Great) did out of a pious
Zeal incorporate the Church into the State, strengthen it with Laws, and
accomodate it and conform it; but yet so, that notwithstanding that
Incorporation, the two Jurisdictions were still kept too much divided; the
Church had Officers of its own linked each to other by a mutual Dependence,
Courts of its own, and Councils of its own too, as well as the State.

I say too much divided, for as it is true, That the Church at first did hold
its Politic Administration in some subordination unto Emperors and Kings;
that these both called and directed Councils, gave Investiture to Bishops, and
at last claimed Homage from them. And that Archbishops that received their
Palls from the Pope, did yet receive their Ferulae. (the Ensigns of their
Jurisdiction) from the Emperors: so, though this were something, it seems
however to have been an Error in the first Projectors, that they made not this
Subordination and Dependence greater, since by this Omission Empires and
Kingdoms were in a manner put into a State of War, by setting up in them
divided separate Jurisdictions.

I acknowledge the Error though great, and pardonable only to the Zeal and
unexperience of the Times, remained undiscovered for a while, to wit, till the
Church had found its own Legs; but then, changing Tenure, and claiming Iure
Divim, the Hierarchy began to strike at the Heads of those who had raised and
exalted it, and then Emperors and Kings themselves must be bearded, and
threatened too on all Occasions with the Spiritual Sword, by Men, who, but for
the Temporal, might still have lived upon Alms. In fine, the Kingdom and
Priesthood every where contended for Superiority, and not a Government but had
its Guelfs, and its Gibellines, and then no wonder if Iure divino for the most
part did carry the point, especially before the Reformation. This Error was the
less Excusable, because it was a departure from the great, and in truth, the
only Example of a Holy Kingdom, which such pious Politicians could propose to
themselves, I mean, that of the Hebrews, in which, though matters that were
purely mattes of Religion, were distinguished from matters purely Civil; the
matters of God, from the matters of the King; yet the Jurisdictions that
related to them were not Divided; the same Senate (only in distinct Capacities)
as it was composed of Fathers, as well as of Priests and Levites, so it had the
Cognizance of all matters; nothing distinguished the Court in respect of the
Two kinds of Causes, Religious, and Secular, but that it had two Presidents,
(which possibly were to take the Chair as the nature of the Cause required,
Vid. Buat. Lexie. Rab. ad voc. (...) 2 Chronicles. 19. 8, etc.
) Am^ziah was over them in matters of the Lord, and Zebadiah in matters of the
King, and all by an Authority and Power derived from the King as Sovereign, and
Supreme in all, Moreover in Jerusalem did Iehosaphat set, etc.

In truth, the Church having submitted to receive Incorporation into the Civil
State, or being favored with it, (for you may take it either way), it was no
longer obliged to continue a Divided Separate Jurisdiction; Socrat. in Proem l.
5. Hist. Ecel.
for the Reason of the Churches separate Jurisdiction now failing, (the
Magistrate being become Christian, and consequently Ayding,) the Jurisdiction
that it had before must fail with it, and so revert to the Magistrate. And
Reason good it should, and that by a reason taken even from the nature of
Government; for there ought to be, and indeed there can be, but one Spring and
Fountain of Jurisdiction, in one Kingdom and Government. Besides,
Ecclesiastical Government cannot reach but to the External Actions of Men, and
therefore is very improperly called Spiritual, since it is not Internal; and
the External Actions of Men, as such, do properly come under the Cognizance of
the Magistrate, [he being ordained to be the Avenger of all evil doing, as well
as for the praise of them that do well;] and then nothing can remain for the
Church to do, unless the same Actions must be subjected to the Cognizance of
divided unsubordinate Jurisdictions; which should they be, would breed a great
Confusion, (which I must insist upon;) and be a great Injustice. Breed great
Confusion, for that a Person in the same Cause, should be absolved by one
Jurisdiction, and be condemned by another, and this without any means of
Composure; for Example, that he should be acquitted at the Assizes by Twelve of
the Neighborhood, and yet be Convicted in the Bishops Court, (which may well
happen where the Jurisdictions are divided, and then no means is left neither
of any Composure, if they are also unsubordinated,) this is Confusion: As, that
he should be twice Condemned, and punished twice for one Fact, would be great
Injustice.

As for single Congregations, they are only as so many little Fraternities,
Gilds, or Corporations, and consequently may have Constitutions and Bylaws of
their own, as these have, without the least danger or other prejudice that can
be thought of to the States that permit, or protect them.

Certainly the Kingdom of Christ, the true Hierarchy, is a Kingdom that is not
Secular, or of this World, that is, it is not an External but a Spiritual
Kingdom, a Power erected in the Hearts and Consciences of Men, in which he
Rules and Governs by his Word and Spirit; and therefore it does not, it cannot
as such, pretend to any Jurisdiction (properly so called), there being no
Jurisdiction (properly so called) without Coercion and Compulsion, and Coercion
and Compulsion is a way that is not used by Christ. All the Subjects of Christ
are Volunteers and Freemen, whom as he brings into his Kingdom, so he keeps in
it, only by Persuasions, Exhortations, Counsels, and such like Methods. And
this Tertullian believed, who, in L. ad Scap. says, Humani Iuris and naturalis
est unicuique quod put averit colere, nec aliis aut obest aut predest alterius
religio: sed nec religonis est cogere religionem, quae Sponte suscipi debeat,
non vi, etc. It is the first and chief right of humane nature, for every man to
worship what he thinks he ought; nor does the Religion of one, either hurt, or
profit another, nor can it be any Religion to Compel Religion; Religion ought
to be taken up of Choice, and not by force or constraint, etc.] So far gone was
that Father for Liberty of Conscience; However, it must be confessed, That if
any Persons refuse to observe the Rules of Christian Society (and particularly
the Rules of that Society of which they are Members) it is but reason that they
should leave it; and if otherwise they will not, that they be constrained to
leave it: But this by the by.

To be sure, the Essential Church has no one Form of External Government
assigned to it in the whole; and it was as great wisdom not to settle any in
particular, for National Churches: for seeing the Church must be Extended into
all Nations, the Government and Policy of it must be of a nature either
Ambulatory, so as to be accommodated upon Occasion, or (it must be) such an one
as without interfering with them, can consist with all the several Forms of
Civil and Secular Government. In my Judgment the Lord Bacon speaks excellently
well to this matter, when he says, I for my part do confess, That in revolving
the Scriptures, I could never find any such thing [as one Form of Discipline in
all Churches, and that imposed by necessity of a Commandment and Prescript out
of the Word of God,] but that God had left the like liberty to the
Church Government, as he had done to the Civil Government, to be varied
according to Time, and Place, and Accidents, which nevertheless his high and
Divine Providence does order and dispose: for all Civil Governments are
restrained from God to the several Grounds of Justice and Manners, but the
Policies and Forms of them are left free; so that Monarchies and Kingdoms,
Senates and Signories, Popular States, and Communalties are lawful, and where
they are planted, ought to be maintained inviolate. So likewise in Church
matters, the substance of Doctrine is immutable, and so are the General Rules of
Government; but for Rites and Ceremonies, and for the particular Hierarchies,
Policies, and Discipline of Churches, they be left at large; and therefore it
is good, we return unto the Ancient bounds of Unity, in the Church of God,
which was one Faith, one Baptism, and not one Hierarchy, one Discipline; and
that we observe the League of Christians, as it is penned by our Savior, which
is in substance of Doctrine, thus: He that is not with us is against us; but of
things indifferent, and of Circumstance, he that is not against us is with us.
Bacon's Considerations touching Pacification, in Resuscit. fol. 237, 238

This Sentiment of that Excellent Person will be much confirmed, if we consider
Church Policy but in one Important Instance, the calling of Bishops; for this
as it has received frequent Alteration, and been very different in different
times and Countries, so it was All upon prudential regards: In Cyprian's time,
as in that of the Apostles, it was as it were Iussu populi, Authoritate
Senatus; by Choice of the People, and appointment of other Bishops; How it is
now, All know; and in the intermediate times it has not always been after one
manner but various, according unto various times and occasions.

In short, the business of Pastors and Teachers, who are permanent and standing
Officers in the Church of Christ, is to feed the Flock, by preaching and
administering the Sacraments, and, on occasion, to denounce Eternal Torments
(the true Spiritual Censure;) And this will be their business to the Worlds
end^* But for External Rule and Jurisdiction, this being but accidental to
their Office, and arising only from the particular Circumstance in which the
Church was, while separate from the State, now that the Magistrate is
Christian, it does entirely devolve upon him; the Christian Magistrate is the
Ruling Presbyter, and whom he appoints as Overseers of the Poor, may be called
the Deacons.

It is certain, that in our English Constitution, (not to speak of the French,
and that of other Foreign Kingdoms,) however some may talk of Iure divino, all
Government or Jurisdiction, the Spiritual (as they call it,) as well as the
Temporal, is derived from the King; who, in this sense, is supreme Ordinary,
Bishop, and Governor, in all Causes, and therefore in all Courts and
Jurisdictions. This is evident both as to the Legislative part of the
Government, Nath. Bacon, Histor. Disccurs. Part. 1. ^. 1.
and to the strictly Jurisdictive; for, as my Author tells me, out of the
British Councils, All the Church Laws in the time of the Saxons were made in
the Micklemote: And indeed it were easy to evince, that most of the Ancient
Synods and Councils in England, as well as in other Countries, were mere
Parliaments. As for the Consistory Court, which every Archbishop and the Bishop
of the Diocese has, as holden before his Chancellor or Commissary, this seems
not to have been divided from the Hundred or County Court, See Dugdale's
Antiquities of Warwickshire in the Preface.
before a Mandate was given to that purpose by William the Conqueror, the
Exemplification of which Mandate is in Mr. Dugdale, in his Appendix ad Hist.
Eccles. Cathol. St. Pauli, f. 196. Before the Normans entrance, says Mr.
Dugdale, from Sir H. Spelman, the Bishops sat in the Hundred Court with the
Lord of the Hundred, as he did in the County Court with the Earls, in the
Sheriffs Turn, with the Sheriff.

But to set out the matter by more Authentic Records; In the Statute of
Provisors it is affirmed, That the Church of England was founded in the State
of Prelacy by Edward the First, (Grandfather to Edward the Third) and his
Progenitors. And in 25th of Henry the Eighth, Chap. 19. in the Submission of
the Clergy, these acknowledge, (as they say) according to Truth, That the
Convocation of the same Clergy is, always has been, and ought to be Assembled,
only by the King's Writ, and farther promise in Verbo Sacerdo^is, that they
will never from henceforth presume to attempt, allege, claim or put in ure,
enact, promulge, or exact any new Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances,
Provincial, or other, or by whatsoever name they shall be called in the
Convocation, unless the King's most Royal Assent and License may to them be
had, to make, promulge, and exact the same, and that his Majesty do give his
most Royal Assent and Authority in that behalf. And it was then enacted, That
the King should at his pleasure assign and nominate 32 Persons of his Subjects,
whereof 16. to be of the Clergy, and 16 of the Temporality, of the upper and
lower House of Parliament, who should have Power and Authority to view, search
and examine the Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances Provincial and Synodal
heretofore made, and with his Majesty's Assent under his Great Seal, to
continue such as they judge worthy to be kept, and to abolish, and abrogate the
residue, which they shall Judge and Deem worthy to be abolished. It was also
provided in the same Act, That no Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances shall be
made or put in Execution within this Realm by Authority of the Convocation of
the Clergy, which shall be contrary to the King's Prerogative Royal, or to the
Customs, Laws or Statutes of this Realm; [there the Ecclesiastical Legislation
is subjected to the King.] And enacted, That it shall be lawful for any Party
grieved in any of the Courts of the Archbishops of this Realm to appeal to the
King's Majesty in the Court of Chancery, upon which Appeal a Commission is to
be directed under the Great Seal, to Persons named by the King, his Heirs or
Successors, which Commissioners have full power to hear, and finally determine
upon such Appeal; [And here the Jurisdiction of the Church is acknowledged to
be originally in the King, and derived from him; for there the Sovereign
Supreme Power lodges, where the last appeal, the last Resort is.]

Add, that in the first Year of Edward VI. in an Act entitled An Act for
Election of Bishops, it was enacted, That none but the King by his Letters
Patents shall collate to any Archbishopric, or Bishopric. It was also
declared, That the use of Archbishops, and Bishops, and other Spiritual Persons
to make, and send out Summons in their own names, was contrary to the form, and
order of the Summons and Process of the Common Law used in this Realm, seeing
that All Authority of Jurisdiction, Spiritual and Temporal, is derived, and
deducted from the King's Majesty, as Supreme Head of these Churches and Realms
of England and Ireland, and so Justly acknowledged by the Clergy of the said
Realms. It was therefore enacted, That all Courts Ecclesiastical, within the
said Two Realms, be kept by no other Power or Authority either Foreign, or
within this Realm, but by the Authority of the King's Majesty, and that all
Summons and Citations, and other Process Ecclesiastical be made in the name,
and with the Style of the King, as it is in his Writs Original and Judicial at
the Common Law. And it is further enacted, That all manner of Persons that have
the Exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall have the King's Arms in
their Seals of Office, etc.

This Act was passed in a Parliament of the Profession of the Church of England
in 1 Eward 6th. and though it were repealed by one of another Character in 1
Mariae; yet this repealing Statue being again repealed in 1st of James 1. 25.
it seems plain that that of the first Year of Edward the Sixth is revived: But
supposing it is not; yet, in that case, though, the Constitutive part remain
void, the Declarative will still stand good, as showing the Common Law. Nor
does the late Act of 13 Car. 2. chapter 12. that restored the Bishops only to their
ordinary and lawful Jurisdiction, Invest them in any new, or any that is
unlawful at the Common Law, or that is contrary to the Prerogative of our Kings.

All that I have said on this Occasion might receive a further Confirmation
(were there need of more) by the famed Character of King Kenulphus made to the
Abbot of Abington, in which was a grant of Exemption from Episcopal
Jurisdiction; as there also was in that of King Off a made to the Monastry of
S. Albans; by the Title of King Edgar, who styled himself Vicar of God in
Ecclesiasticals, by the Offering that Wolstan made of his Staff and Ring (the
Ensigns of his Episcopacy) at the Tomb of Edward the Confessor; by the Petition
of the Archbishop and Clergy at the Coronation of our Kings; by the form of the
King's Writ for Summoning a Convocation, and of the Royal License that is
commonly granted before the Clergy and Convocation can go upon any particular
Debates. In fine, by the Statutes relating to Excommunication, that do both
direct and limit the Execution of that Censure, and the proceedings upon it, as
to Capias's, etc.

And thus much for Church Government, in the Third State of the Church, as it
is become incorporated by Civil Powers: In discoursing of which I have made it
plain, That as no National Draught is of our Lord Christ's, or his Apostles
designing; so that National Churches are all of Human Institution, and their
Government Ambulatory, that is, Alterable according as Times and Occasions, and
as the Forms of Civil Governments in States, that do incorporate the Church,
oblige it to be, to make it fit and suitable. I am,

SIR, Your Humble Servant.

THE THIRD LETTER.
SIR,
I Have always acknowledged some Episcopacy to be of Primitive Antiquity; but
you will please to remember, I have likewise showed, that that Episco pacy was
Presbyterial not Prelatical; Congregational not Diocesan; And that the
Primitive Bishop was only a first Presbyter, that is, a Chairman in the College
of Presbyters, and not (as in the Diocesan Hierarchy,) a Prelate of a superior
Order that presided over several Congregational Churches, and was invested with
the Power of sole Ordination and Jurisdiction; much less was he an Officer that
kept Courts, that had under him Chancellours, Commissaries, Officials,
Registers, Apparitors, etc. and that judged [ per se aut per alium] in certain
reserved Cases.

To make this out, I presented to you a Scheme of the Government of the Church,
both as it was established and settled by the Apostles, and as it was
afterward: I showed, That the Apostles in all their Institutions did carefully
avoid any Imitation of the Temple-Orders, to which Orders the Prelatical
Hierarchy does plainly conform. I showed also, That the Government settled by
the Apostles was only Congregational, the Apostles in planting of Churches
proceeding only after the Model and Way of the Synagogues. Ay! all the Churches
that we read of in Scripture, that were constituted by the Apostles, were only
Congregational, not National or Provincial; that is, they were as so many
little Republics, each consisting of a Senate or Eldership, with the
Authority, and of a People with the Power; but all independent one of another,
and all possessed of all that Jurisdiction and Authority over their Members,
that was to be standing and ordinary. For this Reason, though every Congregation
was but a part, and a small one, yet it had the Denomination of the whole,
every particular Congregation was styled a Church.

This will appear more evident, if we consider, That the Interest of the People
had at first, and long after, (for above 150 Years) in the Ordination of
Officers, was very great. It is true, the Word [ Ordination] or that which
answers to it in the Greek, is never used throughout the whole New Testament,
for the making of Evangelical Officers, nor did it, in this Sense, come into
use among Christians till after the Christian Church began to accommodate to
the Language, as well as to the Orders of the Jewish. But then, as the People
was called Laity and Plebs, so the Clergy was called Ordo, and this in the same
Sense of the Word, as when we read of the Order of Aaron, and of that of
Melchisedeck; and then too, the calling of any Person to the Ministry, as it
was a calling of him to be of the Clergy or Order, so it was styled an
Ordination, Ordination being nothing but the placing of a Person in the Order
of the Clergy.

But though the Word [ Ordination] was not as yet in use, in the first Times, the
Thing was, which is the Creation of Officers in the Church; and in this the
People possessed so great a share (which is a very good Argument of the
Church's being framed at first after the Model and Way of Republics) that even
the Action it self is called Chirotonia by S. Luke in the Acts of the
Apostles,, and ever since by the Greek Fath^rs. Ay, the Creation of Officers is
not usually called Chirothesia; for this with the Greek Fathers was the Word
that was mostly, if not always, used for Confirmation, not for Ordination, though
Imposition of Hands, the Ceremony signified by that Word, was the Rite which
was used by the Jews in creating of Rabbis and Doctors: the Act of Ordination
is usually, if not always denominated Chirotonia, or Extension of Hands, which,
in the Greek Republics, was the Name or Word for the Popular Suffrage.

Indeed Paul and Barnabas are said to Chirotonize, or, as our Translators
render the Word, Acts 14. 23. To ordain them Elders in every Church. But (says
Mr. Harrington) they are said to do so, but in the same Sense that the Proedri,
who were Magistrates, to whom it belonged to put the Question in the
Representative of the People of Athens, are, in Demosthenes, said (...), Vb.
Em^. in descr. reip. Athen. Plut. in vit. P^oc.
to make the Suffrage; and the Thesmothetae, who were Presidents in the
Creation of Magistrates, are in Pollux said (...), to chirotonize the Strategi,
who yet, ever since the Institution of Cliethenes, that distributed the People
into ten Tribes, were always used to be elected and made by the Popular
Suffrage.

Nor was this manner of Speaking peculiar unto the Greeks, but, as Calvin, in
his Institutions l. 4. c. 4. f. 15. observes, it was a common Form used also by
the Roman Historians, who say, That the Consul created Officers, when he only
presided at the Election, and gathered the Votes [of the People.] Et c'est
uniforme commune de parler: comme les Historiens disent quun Consul creoit des
Officiers, quand il recevoit le voix du peuple, and presedoit sur l' election.

So plain it is that S. Luke, in saying that Paul and Barnabas did chirotonize
the Elders, intended to signify no more, but that the Elders were made by the
Suffrage of the People, Paul and Barnabas presiding at the Election, and
declaring or making the Crisis: and so the New Latin Translation in Beza and
Piscator renders the Text,, Qu^mque ipsis per suffragia creassent, etc.

I know that some have told us, That Josephus uses the Word with reference unto
God, he saying, that God did chrirotonize Aaron thrice, and therefore to
chirotonize is not always to be taken for the Popular Suffrage; Nor is
chirotonizing always taken so. But supposing that the Word [ Chirotonize] was
used by Josephus, as afterward it came to be by others, in a second Sense, for
any Creation of Officers in general, yet in the primary and proper use it
signifies the Popular Suffrage; for Chirotonia in Suidas is (...). Election,
Ratification made by All. And this also was the common Use of the Word at that
time when, and in the Places (most of them Republics) where the Apostles are
said to chirotonize: And certainly no Man can imagine with Reason, That the
making of Elders in its first Institution should be called Chirotonia, and bear
the Name of the Suffrage of the People, especially in that time, and in such
places, had these Elders been made in any other manner than by the popular
Suffrage; for then the name of the Action would have been distinctive or
proper, as all Original Names of things are used to be.

Besides, what if it should be said, (as indeed it is by Mr. Harrington) that
when the Congregation or People of Israel, upon the several miraculous
Appearances in favor of Aaron, did recognize him again and again for High
Priest, this Chirotonia of the People was the Chirotonia of God? Why might not
God as President of the Congregation in that Theocracy, as well be said (as he
is by Josephus) to chirotonize when the People did, as the Proedri who presided
in the Assembly of the People at Athens, be said, by Demosthenes to make the
Diachirotonia; the Thesmothetae by Pollux, to Chirotonize the Strategi; and the
Consul who presided at the Election of Officers at Rome, be said by the Roman
Historians, to create these Officers?

As for the Diachirotonia, though you think it the Act only of the Magistrates,
not of the People, because Hesychius says, (...), you will give me leave to
acquaint you, that the Diachirotonia was as much the Act of the People, or of
those suffrage^, as the Chirotonia it self (was.) For those that suffraged or
made the Chirotonia, are said, in cases of competition, to Diachirotanize,
because then, by their Suffrages, they did distinguish one of the Competitors
from the other, and he of the Competitors that was distinguished to his
Advantage, as carrying the Office by most Voices, was said to be
Diachirotonized; and a Declaration was made, That he was elected, which
Declaration was called Crisis. All this is evident from Plato, who treating (
l. 6. de leg.) concerning the Election of the Strategi, in case of Competition,
says, (...). whoever appears to be Diachirotonized, [or to have most Voices] be
it declared [let the Crisis be] that he is elected. Here he distinguishes very
plainly between the Diachirotonia, which he attributes to those that suffraged,
and the Crisis or declarative Judgment, which was the Act of those that
presided: But he does it afterward more plainly, when ordaining that the same
Rule that was observed in the making of the Strategi, should be also observed
in that of the Taxiarchi, he says, Let the same be observed both as to the
Epichirotonia and the Crisis; that is, as to the Suffrage and to the Resolve:
So that Hesychius his (...), must be interpreted a Discrimination, or
preference made by Suffrage.

As for the Jurisdiction of the Apostles, I make no doubt but that the
Apostles, who were Elders as well as Apostles, 2 Pet. 5. 1. acted in settled
Congregations, where any of them happened to be or to reside, with the Elders
of such Congregations, in that Capacity of Elders; but as this Authority was
not properly or purely Apostolical, so that which was, both that I call the
Essential, that was incident to the Apostles, as they founded the Church, and
the Accidental, that was incident to them, as they founded particular Churches,
was Extraordinany and peculiar, as being only for that emergent Occasion, and
not for Continuance. To speak generally, governing the Churches was as much an
ordinary Work as ^reaching, and was common to all the Elders, whether Apostles
or not; but to do it in such a particular manner, with such a Rod, and with so
large a Superintendence, as, in some cases, the Apostles did, was extraordinary
and peculiar to them. No Officers that are now can pretend to a Rod like that
of the Apostles, Acts 5. 3, 4, 5, etc. 1 Cor. 4. 21: and therefore none that
are now can exercise such a Discipline as they did. Those that will truly
evidence that the Prelatical Hierarchy is Apostolical, ought to demonstrate,
that besides the Officers settled in all particular Churches, to feed and govern
them, the Apostles and Evangelists settled others, as a kind of Visitors
General, over all, or over many Churches together, with the same Authority that
themselves had exercised, and this for continuance; without this nothing is
done to any purpose.

As for the Transaction 1 Cor. 5. I am still of the mind it was wholly
extraordinary, and that it cannot be drawn into Example. The Apostle says, When
you are gathered together, and my Spirit, (...), [not with the Authority, but]
with the (mighty) power of the Lord Christ, [to the end] to deliver such an one
unto Satan. Whence it follows very clearly, That without the Apostles Spirit,
and the mighty Power of Christ, the Corinthians were unable to deliver that
Incestuous to Satan; for else I see no Reason why they should have the
Conjunction and Assistance of these, [the Apostles Spirit and Christ's Power]
for that end, since then there would be no need of it. And if they could not
deliver the Incestuous to Satan without the Assistance of the Apostolical
Spirit, and the mighty Power of Christ, it also follows, that to deliver to
Satan, was not merely to excommunicate, eject or suspend him, since this was so
much in their own Power, that they might have done it of themselves, without
such Extraordinary and Miraculous Aids. To be sure, this Effect, whatever it
was, if it bore (as every Effect must do) proportion unto its cause, it must be
something that was Extraordinary; for it came not only from the Spirit of the
Apostle, but also from the Miraculous Power of Christ, for such a Power that
is, which (...) signifies, as is evident, Acts 1. 8.

It Is true, you infer from 1 Cor. 5. 2. That the Corinthians could not put away
the Incestuous without a new Commission from the Apostle, who was their Bishop,
and consequently you understand the Power was given to them, only of a
Commission or Authority. But on the contrary, the Word used for Power is (as I
have said before) (...) (not (...),) a Word that commonly signifies Strength,
not Authority. Besides, if this putting away v. 2. must be understood (as
certainly it must) of the same putting away with that v. 13. nothing can be
plainer than that it was a Censure the People could and ought to have made of
themselves, without expecting any new Commission; as being in a matter that by
the Apostles own Concession, they had a proper Cognizance of, and over a Person
too, whose competent Judges they were; as the same Apostle tells them, Do not
you judge them that are within, therefore put away, etc. putting away is
grounded on the Peoples Judgment, but delivery unto Satan upon the Apostles.
And yet however putting away may well be called an (...) or Rebuke, and be a
kind of Punishment; for to be excluded from the Common Society and Conversation
of the Faithful, cannot deserve a milder Expression.

You still insist, That there is and ought to be a Disparity of Ministers,
because there was a Disparity between the 12 Apostles and the 70 Disciples, and
with Blondel think, that the 70 continued in the same Office after the
Ascension of our Lord, that they had before; for you say, You cannot believe
they withdrew their Hands from the Plow, or that our Savior deposed them from
their Office, or depressed them into the Rank of private Men. But though you do
not believe (as I know no need you should) that the 70 withdrew their Hands
from the Plow, or that our Savior deposed them from their Office, or depressed
them into the Rank of private Men, yet, if their Office was only occasional,
that is, if they were sent by our Savior to the House of Israel, as Messengers
upon some particular Occasions, and about a particular Business; then their
Office ceased of Course at their Return, like that of a Prince's Envoy, whose
Office ends with his Business, that is, as soon as his Message is done, and he
returned with the Account of it. I know of no Jurisdiction the 12 Apostles had
over the 70, but am sure, the Office and Work of the 70 (whatever it was)
related but to the Jews, as being a Business only for that Time, a Time that
was the Crepusculum or Twilight between the Law and Gospel, Judaism and
Christianity, while as yet the Kingdom of Heaven was only at hand, but not
come, Luke 10. 9. I add, That the Office of the 70 is not reckoned in the
number of the Ascension Gifts, Ephesians. 4. 11. And, which is more, that the
Apostles themselves, had they not received another, a new Commission after the
Re^urrection of Christ, they, by their former old one (which confirmed them
unto Iudaea, as that of the 70 also did them, and which was only for a
preliminary Work, Matthew. 10. 7. as that of the 70 also was,) could not have had
an Authority to preach the Gospel unto the Gentiles, and so to lay the
Foundation of the Catholic Church And therefore the first Commission as it was
limited, so it was Temporary, and expired (at furthest) when a second was given
them, Matthew. 28, 18, 19. Acts 1. 8. Not but that the 70 as well as the 12 had
Business in the Kingdom of Heaven, or the Evangelical State; but they had it
not under the Denomination of the 70, or in virtue of their first Commission or
Mission, but only as they came to be Officers in this Kingdom, by being
constituted Evangelists, or Prophets, or Pastors and Teachers, or Deacons, etc.

You offer again in Confirmation of your Notion of the Apostleship of Bishops,
that Timothy and Titus, and the Angels of the Churches in the Revelation were
Bishops, constituted by the Apostles with the same Authority themselves had;
and that the Twelve Apostles and Paul were not all the Apostles that the
Scripture speaks of, for Barnabas and others were Apostles too as well as
they.] I acknowledge Barnabas to be an Apostle, but I cannot acknowledge that
he was an Apostle of the same Rank with the Twelve, and Paul; for as Paul
himself distinguishes, Gal. 1. 1. All Apostles were not of the same Rank, but
some were in the first, some in the second Order; that is, some were Apostles
sent immediately by Christ himself, and so were Legates a latere, and some were
sent, not immediately by Christ himself, but by Men. Now Paul insists, That
himself was an Apostle of the first Order, and in the same Rank with the
Twelve, Gal. 1. 17. whereas it is plain, that Barnabas and all the others who
are called Apostles, can pretend to be but of the second; they being sent, not
immediately by Christ himself, as those of the first were, but only by Man;
either by the Apostles that were of the first Order, as Timothy and Titus by
Paul, or by some Church, as Barnabas, Acts 11. 22. for here the Church is said
to send forth Barnabas as their Apostle; and not barely to dismiss him, as the
word Imports that is used, Acts 13 3.

Apostles of the second Order are called also Evangelists, and it was their
business to be Assistant unto those of the first, if not always to their
Persons, yet, at least, to their Work, which was to plant Churches, by making
of Conversions, and settling Orders: And of this sort of Apostles I again
acknowledge Timothy and Titus to have been.

I proved in my former Paper, that Timothy and Titus were Evangilists; but it
seems, the Argument I used loses all its force with you, because its strength,
like that of the Arch-work, lies in the Combination and Concurrence, and you
consider it only in pieces; not as a whole, and all its parts together and
United, but only separately, and part by part.

As for Timothy, methinks we do too often find him with S. Paul in his
Perambulations, to have any reason to conceive that he was resident Bishop of
Ephesus; and for Titus, his Diocese seems too large for any ordinary Bishop.
Crete is famed to have had an hundred Cities in old time, and Pliny assures us,
( L. 4. c. 12.) that in his there were forty, which were enough for so many
Bishoprics. Titus had it in Charge, Tit. 1. 5. to ordain Elders in every City,
and to ordain Elders in every City, was to settle a Church in every City; so
that if every Church must have a Bishop (as some are confident it must,) then
every City in Crete that had a Church, had also a Bishop, and so possibly there
were as many Bishops and Bishoprics in Crete, as there were Cities. This
Consideration, if well weighed, will much abate of the Authority of the
Postscript of the Epistle to Titus, in which this Evangelist is styled the
Ordained Bishop in the Church of the Cretians; for according to the Language of
that time, had Titus been indeed the Bishop of that whole Island, he ought to
have been styled Bishop of the Churches (and not of the Church) of the
Cretians. But it seems it is taken for granted, that a Bishop must have but one
Church, and therefore, that Titus may be a Bishop of the Cretians, all the
Churches of Crete must be Consolitated into one; else among all the Churches in
Crete, I would fain know, which was the Church of the Cretians, where Titus
resided. If Titus was Bishop over all the Churches in Crete, he was a Bishop of
Bishops, and at least a Metropolitan, which indeed would be most in favor of
the Hierarchy, could it be Evidenced. But this could not be the settlement that
was made in Crete. For it would be strange, that the Apostle should appoint a
Hierarchy in Crete, that should differ from the form of Government settled upon
the Continent by himself and Barnabas, who constituted Elders in every Church,
without appointing (that we read) of any Superior Bishop or Metropolitan that
should have a General Care and Inspection over the several Churches. For my
part, I could not see how Titus should understand his Commission, which was to
ordain Elders in every City, to carry any other Intention with reference to
Crete, than the very same words do, when they are used to signify what Paul
himself, who gave him this Commission, had done upon the Continent, where he
and Barnabas ordained Elders in every Church. And therefore as Paul and
Barnabas established single Congregations only, and Organized them with Elders,
and then left them to govern themselves by their own Intrinsic powers; So in
the like manner, Titus established Churches in every City, and Organized them
with Elders, which having done, it is very probable that he returned again unto
S. Paul, to give an account of his Commission. Thus Titus his business in
Crete, has the very Idea and Signature of that of an Evangelist, or a Secundary
Apostle, without the least Mark of an ordinary Bishop; nor is there any hint in
all the Authentic Scriptures, of his being ordained Bishop of Crete, or indeed
of any place else. And the like must be said of Timothy, with reference to
Ephesus, who was sent to the Church there as a Visitor only, with Apostolical
Authority, and so as S. Paul's Delegate. Nor it Titus his ordaining of Elders,
a good Argument for sole Ordination; for the word, Tit. 1. 5. is the same that
is used in Acts 6. 3. in the matter of the Deacons, who were appointed by the
Apostles (not one of the Apostles, but all) and chosen by the People. And one
might well admire that the same word which is Translated [appointed] in one
place, should be rendered [ordained] in another, but that Titus is said to
ordain, and not to appoint only, that it might look as if there were a plain
Text for sole Ordination.

But what if Timothy and Titus had a power of sole Jurisdiction? and a power
too of making Canons, for the Government of the Church? (which latter yet is an
Authority that every Bishop will not pretend unto, after their Example.) The
Church then, was in a State of Separation from Secular Government, and among
Heathen, just as the Jews are now, among Christians; so that all it could do at
that time, was to persuade; it could not compel: And therefore it will not
follow now that the Church is protected, and not only protected by, but
Incorporated into, the State, that the Officers of it must have the same
powers, and Exercise them in the same manner, as before, or (as Mr. Seldom
expresses it) That England must be Governed as Ephesus or Crete. It is certain
that Kings would gain but little by the Bargain, not to say, they must depart
with their Sovereignty to Incorporate the Christian Religion, should this be
admitted, that Church Authority, Church Power must be still the same after such
Incorporation, as before. For a separate National Jurisdiction Exercised by one
or many, is a Solecism in State, especially if it claim by the Title of Iure
divino, a Title that renders it Independent upon, as well as unboundable and
uncontrollable by all that is human. Such a Jurisdiction would weaken that of
Kings; and other States. All their Subjects would be but half Subjects, and
many none at all; and it is no more nor less but that very same thing, that
heretofore was found so inconvenient and burden some under the Papacy, and that
made the best and wisest, and greatest of our Kings so uneasy. A Clergy
imbodied within it self, and independent on the State, is in a Condition of
being made a powerful Faction upon any Occasion, and easy to be practiced
upon, as being united under one, or a few Heads, who can presently convey the
Malignity to all their Subordinates, and these to the People. So that I lay it
down as a Maxim, that nothing can be of greater danger to any Government than a
National Hierarchy, that does not depend upon it, or is not in the Measures and
Interests of it. Fresh Experience has learned us this.

I know not with what Design it was said by Padre Paulo Sarpio of Venice, but
his Words are very remarkable, as I find them cited from an Epistle of his to a
Counselor of Paris, in the Year 1609. [ I am afraid (says he) in the behalf of
the English, of that great power of Bishops, though under a King. I have it in
Suspicion when they shall meet with a King of that goodness, as they will think
it easy to work upon him, or shall have any Archbishop of an high Spirit, the
Royal Authority shall be wounded, and Bishops will aspire to an Absolute
Domination. Methinks I see a Horse Sadled in England, and I guess that the old
Rider will get on his Back: But all these things depend on the Divine
Providence.] Thus he, very prudently as to the main, though perhaps with some
mistake as to his Conjecture.

For my part, I think it but reason that such Persons as have the Benefit of
Human Laws, should in so much be guided by them; and that the Sword which owns
no other Edge but what the Magistrate gives it, should not be used but by his
Direction; As indeed the practice in England has always been. For as Mr. Seldom
observes, Whatever Bishops do otherwise than the Law permits, Westminster Hall
can control, or send them to absolve, etc. He also says very well, That
nothing has lost the Pope so much in his Supremacy, as not acknowledging what
Princes gave him; it is a scorn ( says he) on the Civil Power, and an
unthankfulness in the Priest. But, adds he, the Church runs to Iure divino,
lest if these should acknowledge what they have by positive Laws, it might be
as well taken from them, as given to them.] Ay, This excellent Person goes
further, so much further as to tell us, That a Bishop, as a Bishop had never
any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction [in England]; for as soon as he was Electus
Confirmatus, that is, after the Three Proclamations in Bow-Church, he might
Exercise Jurisdiction before he was Consecrated, and yet till then [that he was
Consecrated] he was no Bishop, neither could he give Orders. Besides, says he,
Suffragans were Bishops, and they never claimed any Jurisdiction.]

As for the Angels in the Revelation, I see no Evidence in what is said (though
much is said) to prove them to have been Diocesans. It will not follow they
were single persons, because they are called (...) not (...), as who would say
they are compared to Stars, and not to Constellations; for the Truth is, both
these Words are used promiscuously, as well for the Constellations as for the
single Stars, so that no stress is to be laid upon the Word that is used, for
either side. Besides, some are of the Opinion, That to the making of it clear
that these Angels were only single Persons, and for that cause compared but to
single Stars, and not to Constellations, sufficient Reason ought to be given
why the Holy Ghost, who expressly limits the Number of the Churches, does not in
like manner limit the Number of the Angels belonging to them: For, say they,
when the Holy Ghost said, The seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches, had he
intended to signify that the Angels were but seven, as the Churches were, he
would in like manner have said, the seven Stars are the seven Angels of those
seven Churches. But as I am not satisfied that any great Stress should be laid,
in things of Moment, upon such Critical Nicities, so, should I yield, without
granting that these Angels were Stars or single Persons, yet I should also
think it but equal to demand, What Reason there is to persuade, that these
Stars were other than the seven President Presbyters, who were Chair-men in the
several Presbyteries of those seven Churches? Which Churches I take to be
single Congregations. For I see as yet no Reason, but that as a Letter intended
for the Honorable House of Commons, may be directed to the Speaker, so these
Epistles intended for the seven Churches (for that they were, Rev. 2. 7, 11,
17, etc.) might be superscribed [for the Chief Pastor or President Presbyter]
who probably at that Time was styled the Bishop, by way of Appropriation.

In fine, what if by the Name of Angel, an Angel properly so called should be
understood? And that the Epistles intended for the Churches [Pastors and
People,] were sent to them under the Name of their Guardian Angels? Should this
^e so, then farewell to any Ground for Diocesan Bishops in the Directions of the
Epistles to the Angels. And that it should be so is very agreeable to the
Prophetical Spirit in the Revelation: For the Revelation goes much upon the
Hypothesis and Language of Daniel, and in Daniel we read of the Guardian Angels
of Nations, and in such a manner, that what refers to the Nations, or to their
Governors, is said of the Angels themselves, Dan. 10. 13, 20, 21. Which is
further confirmed, in that it seems to have been an Hypothesis, obtaining in
the first Age of Christianity, that the several Churches or Assemblies of
Christians had their Guardian Angels; for it is very probable that in Relation
and Aspect unto this Hypothesis, the Apostle Paul does tell Women, 1 Cor. 11.
10. That they ought to have power over their heads, Because of the ANGELS; the
Expression seems to imply, That there were Angels, Guardians of the Assemblies;
who observed the Demeanor of All, and therefore they ought to be Circumspect,
Modest and Decent in their Behavior and in their Fashions and Garbs, out of
Respect to those Guardians.

And indeed the former Account of the Title of Angels, is a more agreeable and
easy one than that which some others give, who by Angel understanding a Bishop
in the Modern Sense of that Word, believe the Denomination given with reference
to a Practice among the Jews, who (they say, as from Diodorus) attributed to
their High Priest the Title of Angel. But should it be yielded that the Jews
had any such Practice [to attribute the Title of Angel to their High-Priest]
what could this amount unto in our Case, since every Bishop is not an High
Priest, in the Sense of the Jews? For in their Sense there could be but one,
and then, that one among Christians must be a Pope, or a Sovereign Bishop over
all the Bishops; as, among the Jews, the High Priest was over all the Priests.
But in reality the Jews had no such Practice, nor does the alleged Diodorus
say they had, [to call their High Priest Angel] they called him High Priest
[(...),] that was his name; but indeed, he adds, That they had a Belief of him,
That he was (often) made a Messenger or Angel of God, [(...),] as really he
was, when he had the Urim on him; and this is all that Diodorus affirms.

Your other Argument (for Diocesan Episcopacy,) which you ground upon the
Traditional Succession of Bishops in several Sees, down from the Times of the
Apostles, and in the Seats of the Apostles, has no more of cogency in it than
the former. I know Tertullian l. de praescript. adv. Hae etieos, says, Precurre
Ecclesias Apostolicas apud quas ips^ adhus Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis
praesidentur, etc. And I acknowledge, the Apostles may well enough be said to
have sat in Chairs, and others to succeed in them, if the Chairs be understood
of Chairs of Doctrine, in the same Sense in which the Scribes and Pharisees are
said to sit in Moses's; for in this Sense, All those Churches were Apostolical,
and had Apostolical Succession, which being founded upon the Doctrine of the
Apostles, had such persons only in any Authority over them, as did continue
therein. But else, I cannot believe my self obliged to assent that the Apostles
had Chairs in Particular Churches, though Tertullian's Words at first Sight may
seem to sound that way, than to believe the Story of the Cells of the 70
Translators; a Story that S. Hierom not only confutes but Ridicules, though it
has this to be said for it, That Justin Martyr affirms he saw the Ruins of
those very Cells, and that they were in the Pharos of Alexandri, Tertullian
flourished but in the beginning of the third Century, by which Time many Fob
Traditions past Current; of which Truth too many Instances are obvious in the
Writings of that Father, as well as of other Fathers. Indeed Eusebius has given
us Catalogues of the Succession of Bishops in several Churches, but these
Catalogues are only Conjectural and Traditionary. Himself, in the Proem of his
Ecclesiastical History, tells us of a great Chasm that was in that kind of
History for the three first Centuries, and that being alone and solitary in
this kind of Performance, he had nothing but Fragments here and there to help
him, from any of those who preceeded (him.) Ay, in the third Book of that
History, Chap. 4. he says expressly, as to the Persons that succeeded the
Apostles in the Government of the Churches, that it is hard to tell
particularly and by name, who they were [quorum nomina non est facile explicare
per singulos.] And that in making his Catalogues he went by way of Collection
and Inference, from what is written by S. Paul; [Ex Apostoli tamen Pauli
sermonibus colligere possumus, etc.] so that the Catalogues of Bishops deduced
from the Apostles, for ought I see, deserve but little more of Credit, as being
but little better ascertained than the Catalogue of the British Kings, deduced
from Brute.

In truth, the Task is a little uneasy to make it clear, That the Apostles
were properly Bishops, in the Modern Sense of the Word, and that they had fixed
Seats, which yet is the Basis upon which such Catalogues must stand; sure I am,
Athanasius in his Comment upon the Epistle to the Romans, ad c. 2. v. 1.
affirms their Office to have been to go up and down and preach, circumvagari
(as his Translator renders him) and Evangelium praedicare; so that in the
Judgment of this so celebrated a Father, the Apostles (as such) were but
Itinerant Preachers, a sort of Officers that were unfixed.

As for Epaphroditus, I cannot be peswaded by the bare Authority of S. Hierom
(whom yet I take for a very Learned as well as Pious Father,) much less by that
of Walo Messalinus, to believe against the Analogy of the Text, That he was
Bishop of the Philippians, only because he is called by S. Paul their Apostle,
Phil. 2. 25. The Observation Walo has made of the Word [ Apostle,] that it is
never used by the Evangelists, by S. Paul in any other Place, or by the other
Apostles, but only De Sancto Ministerio, will hold no Water; for I take it that
John 13 16. in which Place the Word is used in a Common Promiscuous Sense, and
rendered so by our Translators, stands impregnable, as a plain, direct and
unavoidable Instance against him.

Irenaeus is also cited, to prove that such a superiority as the Apostles
themselves had in the Church, was transmitted by them unto Bishops; for, say
you, this Father, who distinguishes between the Bishops and Presbyters,
affirms, That the Apostles delivered to the Bishops, suum ipsorum locum
Magisterii, their own Place of Magisteriality or Government. Irenaeus
flourished toward the End of the 2d Century, and yet so near as he was to the
Apostles own Times, if he affirmed, as he is ageed by the most (though not by
all) to have done, That our Lord Christ did undergo his Passion in the fiftieth
Year of his Age, we shall have little Reason to be fond of his Authority, in
Matters which he takes upon Trust, and by mere Report. But admitting Irenaeus's
Authority (which I am unwilling to lessen) to be as unblemished and as tight as
one could wish it, yet on this occasion it will do you but small Service; for
the Force of the Testimony which you cite from him, depends on the Word
Magisterium; and Magisterium signifies not, as you understand it, [a Masterly
Authority] but [teaching and Doctrine;] for in this latter Sense the Word is
often used by other Fathers, and particularly by S. Cyprian, as you may see l.
1. ep. 3. and in other Places; but this is a Sense that makes nothing for you,
for then Irenaeus means no other than what Tertullian also affirms, and none
will deny, that the Apostles delivered over to the Bishops their own Chairs of
Doctrine; so that succeeding Bishops or Pastors were obliged to deliver no other
Doctrine unto their Flocks, but that same which themselves had first received
from those that were the Founders of Christianity.

In fine, as to what you mention (but somewhat invidiously) concerning the
Judgment of the Assembly of Divines, the Gangrene of Mr. Edwards, and the
overflow that was of Sects and Heresies in the Late Times (of the Interreign)
which you would insinuate to be occasioned by the Intermission of Episcopacy. I
answer, that there were Sects and Heresies even in the Times of the Apostles,
and that Irenaeus, S. Ausrin, Philastrius and Epiphanius have furnished the
Christian World with large Catalogues of them, and of some in their own times;
and yet I doubt not you will acknowledge, there were Bishops in the Church,
even in those times; So that Episcopacy, if it be not Coercive, is no such
Remedy against Sects and Heresies, as you would have us believe; and if it be
Coercive, it is not purely Christian and Spiritual, but, in so much, has
something in it of Secular and Worldly.

Thus I have reinforced my main Argument, and removed such Exceptions as you
take against it; and now I shall not make your trouble much longer, but to
elucidate some Incident and By Passages, which I will do with all the Brevity I
can, and without formality of Method, only as they come to my Mind

Peter is first named where ever the whole College of the Apostles is called
over; but I do not in^er, nor does it enforce, that any Primacy was due unto
him, other than that of Precedence, which All Protestants (generally speaking)
allow him.

It does not appear that James at the Council of Jerusalem, spoke with more
Authority than the other Apostles, as Bishop of the Place and President of the
Synod. Iesephus indeed takes notice of him under an eminent Character, for
Piety; but not a word in that Author of his eminent Dignity, as a Prelate. As
for Paul, he calls him but plain James, not Bishop James; And though he put him
before Peter and John, Gal. 2. 9. that preference might be only in respect of
his being the Lord's Brother, Gal. 1. 19. and consequently is no great Argument
of his Prelacy, in the modern sense of that word.

So Zomen's Censure of the practice of having more Bishops than one in one
City, does prove that practice; though he did not approve it* Epiphanius also
is cited by many to evidence that practice.

I yield not that 1 Cor. 14. 34. which may be translated [in the Assemblies,]
will demonstrate, that there were, at that time, several separate Meetings for
Christian Offices in one City or Town, where was but one Church; And yet I
grant it might happen to be so, upon Occasion; for our Experience Evinces it
has been so of late, in a time of Persecution, among the Dissenting Churches,
and what has been in our time, might on like Occasions have been before it.
However, this Accident would not prove, nor indeed do I find any other proof,
that there were in the first times of Christianity, Pastors who had the Care of
several Churches; or, that any Church at that time did take in several Cities
or Towns, which were remote; a Church properly being a Coagregation, and
consequently the People of a Vicinage or Neighborhood, under Orders. Cenchrea,
though one of the Ports of Corinth, had a Church of its own, distant from that
at Corinth; and none, I think, will say, That that Church was Diocesan. The
Council of Chalcedon prohibited absolute Ordinations.

That the end of the World, Matthew. 28. 20. is literally to be understood of the
end of the Jewish Policy, or the Mosaical seculum, seems evident, by comparing
that Text with the 24. Chapter of the same Evangelist, Ver* 2, 14, and 24. The
meaning of Mat. 1. 29. is, That Joseph did not know his Wife till she had
brought forth her Firstborn, and that it will not follow, that he knew her
afterward; And in this sense of [until] I make it parallel with Mat. 28. 20. So
that when Christ says, He would be with his Apostles, until the end of the
Jewish World, he is plain, he would be with them so long, but does not imply by
that [until] that he would be with them no longer. Without the favor that we
commonly allow to popular Expressions, what is said, Mat. 28. 20. will not hold
in the usual sense that is given it, as to the Apostles Successors, and with
that favor, I see no strength in any Arguments against mine, which carries it,
in the Letter unto the Apostles.

If the Apostles must not be understood to stand Personally, and only for
themselves in that Commission, Mat. 28. they must be understood to stand in it
Representatively, for the whole Church, or Body of Christian People, in that
same manner as they stood for them in the Istitution of the Lord's Supper, when
it was said to them [ Do this in remembrance of me.] these words being said to
them, not as they were Ministers, but as Communicants, Take ye, eat ye, take,
drink, do this in remembrance of me; For else there is no Canon of Communion
for the Common People, or Laity. Now I pray tell me, which of these Notions did
the Apostles stand in when they received that Commission, Mat. 28. was it given
to them as they stood Personally, for so many single Men, or as they
represented the whole Community and Body of Christians? in One of these Two,
they must necessarily stand; For the Apostles Collectively and all together, as
a Body are never taken but in one or the other sense; they no where
representing only the Ministers or Pastors; so that, by the Letter of the
Commission, which is directed to the Body of the Apostles, either all
Christians are empowered to Baptize and Preach, which I suppose you will not
say, or else only the Apostles.

I acknowledge that Cyprian, though he calls the Presbyters his Compresbyters,
yet never calls them his Colleagues; He does not call them fellow Bishops, tho
he calls them fellow Presbyters because tho every Bishop was a Presbyter, yet
every Presbyter was not a Bishop, in the appropriate sense of that word.
However, tho he does not say of Presbyters in so many words, that they are the
Colleagues of a Bishop, yet he comes very near it, when he tells them they are
Compresidents with him, which he does L. 1. Ep. 3. when writing to Cornelius
that was a Bishop, he has this Expression [ Florentissim^ CLEROTECVM
PRAESIDENTI]. To the most flourishing Clergy that presides together with thee.
And in truth, one must have read but little in S Cyprian, to be ignorant that
in his time the Presbyters or Clergy were joined with the Bishop in Acts of
Jurisdiction; and that not only the Clergy, but even the People too, had a
great share therein, as well as the Bishops. And this, as in other matters, so
even in those that related unto Bishops themselves. No (...) than all this is
employed in that Expostulation of Cyprian^: An ad hoc frater Carissime deponenda
Ecclesiae Catholicae Dignitas, and plebs int^s positae fidelis atque in
corrupta MAIESTAS, and Sacerdotalis queque AVTHORITAS, ac potestas, Iudicare
vell^ se dicant de Ecclesiae praeposito ex^^^ Ecclesiam constituti? What most
dear Brother, is the dignity of (a) (or the) Catholic Church, the faithful and
incorrupt Majesty of the People that is in it, and also Auhority and Power of
the Priesthood to be brought to this, that such must talk of Judging concerning
a Bishop of the Church, who themselves are out of the Church?

To conclude: That Alterations have been often made in the Church, both as to
Government and Discipline, is so great and plain a truth, that none that knows
the History can doubt of it some of these came in early, by several steps, and
others afterward upon occasions that could not be foreseen. Some things in the
Church are Fundamental, and of an Immutable nature. But there are (...) that
relate to Government, Discipline and Administration, which depending upon the
variable Circumstances of Times, Places, and Occasions, are, and must be, left
to Christian Prudence. The Grounds I go upon in my Scheme, in which I have set
out the principal Alterations that have been made, are owned by the Church of
England, as to one Instance, (and the Reason of that one will hold in more.)
when in its Canons and Constitutions, agreed An. Dom. 1640. Can. 1. It says,
The power to call and dissolve Councils both National and Provincial, is the
true right of all Christian Kings, within their own Realms, and Teritories; And
when in the first times of Christ's Church Prelates used this power; 'twas
therefore only, because in those days they had no Christian Kings] But it is
time to end your trouble, and therefore I will add no more but to own my self,

June 8th. 1690. SIR, Your Humble Servant.


