Not FEAR, but LOVE.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Governors of the Charity for Relief of poor
Widows and Orphans of Clergymen, at St. Mary le Bow, on the 7 th. day of
December. 1682.

By Ar. BVRY, DD. Rector of Exon. Coll. Oxon.

Ama, and fac quicquid vis. D. Aug. OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, Printer to
the University, in the year, 1683.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS following Sermon (dear Reader) I send to wait upon the foregoing
Treatise, as being thereto both very near of Kin, and very Serviceable.

Near of Kin, as being a Restorer of Communion with our Lord; for This laboreth
to Restore our Communion with the Father and the Son, to that Full joy which
St. John declares to be the Sum of his message; as That does, to Restore our
Communion with the Son in his Flesh and Blood, to that Constancy which himself
made due to it: And Serviceab'l, not only in casting out the spirit of Fear,
which is the common enemy; but particularly in caling to a more strict account
that Self-examination, which, as prescribed, and practiced by the best, is the
greatest discorager from the Lord's Supper. Here, tht Sermon advances beyond
the Treatise, denying it so much as adviseabl to a good person, either upon
That or any Other occasion.

I say, to a good person: For to others I acknowledge the Prophets admonition
always necessary, that they search and try their ways, and turn unto the Lord:
but for those who have already do'n this necessary work, I see no Reason to be
always repeting it. Many exhortations I find encoraging them to rejoice in the
Lord always, but not one to be always tormenting themselves, with examining their
interest in him.

This, and another (no less heterodox) assertion concerning Repentance, my
design invited me to Touch, but my time forbad me to Handl, in any proportion
to the need: which defect I have now endeavored to supply by additional
Annotations, wherein I have accounted for such texts as seem to discountenance
them.

More or Less than this cannot be required: A sound mind cannot acknowledge the
Scripture to be the adequate rule of faith and manners, yet fear to appeal to
it. But to manage the appeal is not every one's work: it requires good
acquaintance with the Original language, some Academical improvement of the
understanding, a Carefuley, a Free Heart, and a Good Key.

For the last of these we stand obliged to the great Erasmus, who has
furnished us with This, as the best key to understand mystical Scrpture, that
we observe what the speaker aims at.

With this key I have unlocked such texts as stood in my way: And I add this to
Erasmus's rule, That as every particular word must be unlocked by the Author's
aim, as by its proper key; so must every text, and its particular key; conform
to the Universal Aim of the Gospel, as their Common and Supreme King-key.

This then I say and inculcate, and wish the whole Christian world would hear
it. As sure as St. John has proclaimed, that this is the design of the Gospel,
that our joy may be full; as sure as St. Paul has determined, that the Kingdom
of Heaven is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, etc. so sure
it is, that the King-key, wherewith we must unlock every abstruse text of
Scripture; the Test, whereby we must try every Doctrine of Faith or Manners;
the Oracle, which we must consult in all doubts of Conscience; is this:
Whatever will most exalt the Joy of the Wise and Good, is most properly
Evangelical, and most certainly True.

Were this as generally believed, as throghout the whole New Testament it is
plainly declared, how great, how happy a change would it work in the Christian
world! How would it advance both the Honor and Power of the Gospel! How would
it promote both the Joy of the Godly, and the Conversion of the Profane! How
would it exalt the Glory of Gods love trward Us, and the Ardor of Ours toward
Him!

Whereas, not to know what spirit we ate of, is the most pernicios Ignorance:
It made our Lord's Apostls uncharitabl to the Samaritans, and it still makes
his best intentioned disciples Tormentors to Themselves, and Scare-crows to
Others.

How serviceabl the discovery may be, God grant Experience may verify, as much
as Reason promises, beyond what this poor Sermon can express; which that it
may contribute its mite, offers its self and its unvulgar assertions, to thy
most deliberate examination.

But remember, we appeal from All Human authority, to Divine.

Romans X. 15. How shall they preach except they be sent? as it is written, How
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad
tidings of good things!


WE shall not now consider these words as Part of an Argument, but as an Entire
one. And since an Argument moves more Gracefully (perhaps) from the Consequent
to the Antecedent, but more Strongly from the Antecedent to the Consequent; it
will be reasonab'l we should invert the Apostl's order: for so we find a
Sorites of three pieces: The Gospel is glad tidings, therefore the Messengers
feet are beautiful, therefore no man may preach except he be sent.

A Gospel! A Gospel of Peace! Glad tidings! Good things! How does the Apost'l
travel to bring forth an expression suitab'l? Such glad tidings of great joy,
an host of Angels found worth a jorny from Heaven to bring; and perhaps for
that reason its first Preachers were styled Angels of their Churches.

And their reception was suitab'l both to this title, and those tidings: You
received me, says our Apost'l to the Galatians, as an Angel of God, even as
Christ Jesus. -- If it had been possibl, you would have plucked out your own
eyes, and have given them unto me. And here he says not much less. How
beautiful are what? the Lips, the Eyes, the Countenances? yea, the very Feet!
the very feet of Messengers! the feet of Messengers in those countries, where
they must needs be Dirty, because naked. The charms of this beauty, like
Aaron's ointment, run down from the Face to the very Feet.

And for this reason no man may take this high honor to himself, but he that
is caled of God, as was Aaron. For as this encoraged our Apost'l in his work,
so did it temt popularly ambitios spirits to dubl his task: he must not only
Execute his commission, but Assert it: His next words speak him no less
troubled with Rivals, than with Persecutors; and This makes it necessary to
urge as in my Text, they must not preach except they be sent.

Thus may the order of my Text be inverted, thus may it make a weighty
argument, not perhaps so proper to the Apost'ls own design, as to that which
has brought us together.

If the beauty of the Preachers descend from their Heads to their very Feet,
needs must it descend from the head of the family to its nearest members: and
you may justly expect, that from this expression I should take occasion to
plead the right of those unhappy widows and orphans, who have nothing left them
by their deceased husbands and fathers but their merits to administer.

But oh the disappointment! Our Apost'l, after his so great boast of the
Galatians love, quickly complains, Where is the blessedness you spoak of? And
well may we demand, Where is this great beauty that so descends to the very
feet? Has age withered it to a deformity equal to its youthful loveliness? Our
very eyes are as loathsome as the primitive Preachers very feet were beatiful;
and the deformity descends to our posterity as their only sure inheritance: yea
some are so impios as to make God a party with themselves in the entayl,
pretending that Clergy-mens children are equally hated of God and Man, seldom
or never attaining, either worth in themselves, or prosperity in the world. God
be blessed, we are henceforth secured from that malicios slander; This
conspicuos, and perhaps matchless assembly, having for ever rooted that falls
tongue out of its dwelling.

Yet, though the Tongue be rooted out, the Heart is still the same; so void of
Love, so full of 'spite, against this once so honored caling. that we must
think it a great bargain if we can compound for ordinary charity, and depose my
Text to this poor plea, The Preachers of the Gospel bring no evil tidings;
therefore they deserv not to be hated.

And since it is better to Cure an evil than to Complain of it, I conceve I
cannot do better service to my Text, the Gospel, and its Preachers, than by
removing the cause of the hatred we sink under; which indeed is no other than
that Epidemical mistake, the root of all misery, the taking things by wrong
handl.

The Gospel has two handls, Threats, and Promises: its threats are Few, and
its promises Many: its Threats show us our danger, only that we may rejoice in
our escape; its Promises immediately raise our joys. Threats therefore, both in
quantity and design, sit upon the face of the Gospel, as beauty-spots do upon
that of a fair Lady; here one, and there another, to this only end, that by
their vanquished blackness they may set off the luster of the beauty which is
to adorn the very feet; but by the unhappy officiosness of melancholy
messengers, those spots have been enlarged to a visor, which so cover the face
of Religion, that we cannot see its Joys for its Fears; and the very grace of
God which brings salvation, appears like the inhumane Nero, saying, Let
them Hate me, so they Fear me.

This ugly visor shall I endeavor to pull off, as my Text directs me, by two
Propositions.

1. The Gospel does not design to bring us to God by Fear, but by Love: For it
is a Gospel of Peace, glad tidings of good things.

2. The mistake of this is the cause that the Gospel and its Preachers are so
hated by the world: For if Glad tidings make the messenger beautiful, Evil
tidings must make him loathsome.

I. THE Gospel does not draw men to God by Fear, but by Love.

This, as it is clearly expressed in my Text, so is it almost in every page of
the New Testament: I shall instance but in one or two places more, which
expressly offer one handle, and reject the other.

In this same Epistle chapter 8 v. 15. our Apost'l declares as clearly as
possib'l, You have not receved the spirit of bondage again fear, but the spirit
of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father: And no less clearly, 2 Timothy 1.7. God
has not given us the spirit of Fear, but of Power, of Love, and of a Sound
mind. In the former place he opposes the spirit of the Gospel to That of the
Law; and in the later, he vieth with the Philosophers, who pretend to exalt the
mind to the highest freedom and perfection.

If this can be yet more clear, St John has made it so: for with pomp
unmatched by any other pen, he ushereth his first Epistl with This
proclamation, These things we write unto you, that your joy may be full: and
throghout the whole body of the following Epistl exalts Love, as the only way
to this fullness of Joy; chapter 4. v. 18. There is no fear in Love, but Love when
it is perfected casts out fear, bicaus Fear has Torment.

It is impossib'l to find Plainer, and therefore needless to seek for More
declarations of this truth: Nothing can remain, but that we reconcile them with
such other words of Scripture as seem to contradict them. Two such especially
there are: One spoken by our Lord, and another by our same Apostl: See Annot. 1.
to which may be reduced all others of the same air. These two therefore if we
can reconcile, we shall both State and Clear the truth.

1. Our Apostl himself seems to contradict this: Phil. 2, 12. Work out your
salvation with fear and trembling. Does not this offer salvation by that handl
which but now he rejected?

That we may now or at any other time reconcile appearances of contradiction,
we must carefully consider which of the two Propositions may best be brought to
compliance.

It is plain, that what we have heard declared aagainst Fear, cannot be bent to
any other sense: we must therefore try whether the fear and trembling, which he
recommendeth to the Philippians, may agree both with his declaration in two
other Epistl's, that we have not receved the spirit of fear; or with his
exhortation in the same Epistl, chapter v. Rejoice in the Lord evermore, and again
I say rejoice.

To find out this, it is necessary we look about us, and see how he uses the
same phrase upon other occasions, possibly it may be an Idiom.

Twice more we find him at the same phrase, and in both places his meaning will
very well comply with Love and Joy. Ephesians, 6.5, Servants obey your Masters with
Fear and Trembling. What? does not a Servant please both God and his Master
better, if he Obey him with Love and Cheerfulness? And what shall we say to the
9 th. verse, And you Masters do the same things to Them. Must Masters also
treat their Servants with Fear and Trembling? Yes, but such as may circulate
between the best Masters, and the best Servants; even such as himself
explaineth by good will, v. 7.

This possibly will be plainer by 2 Cor. 7.15. His inward affection is more
abundant toward you, while he remembers the obedience of you all, how with
Fear and Trembling you receved him.

Titus came in kindness to visit them, and they welcomed him with such
endearing caresses, as made his (already great) inward affection more abundant
than before: Here certainly the Fear and Trembling which so welcomed and
heightened Love, must be so far from excluding it and Joy, that they import an
extraordinary mesure of them.

Yea, we need look no farther for a good light, whereby to see the meaning of
this phrase in That his exhortation to the Philippians, than the encoragement
wherewith he quickneth them in the words immediately following: For it is God
which works in you both to Will and to Do of his (...), good will. It is the
very same word wherewith the Angels brought their glad tidings of great joy, and
it were strange if out of the same breath should come Gladness and Fear, Joy
and Trembling.

That we may not seem bent wholely to pull down the obvios sense without
bringing a better in place, this we offer as the Apostl's meaning: It was only
the (...), the loving kindness of God, which wrought in you the desire of
salvation: and the same loving kindness will crown That desire with success, if
it be attended with endeavor: do you therefore your part with such affection, as
shall make you even Tremble again.

And that we may give account of the Idiom as well as of the Argument; we must
observe, that Any passion whatever, if vehement, will cause Trembling: But
bicaus this is most visib'l in Fear, therefore Fear is added to express the
certainuy of Trembling, as Trembling is used to express the vehemence of the
Passion.

2. HAVING Thus interpreted one saying of our Apost'ls by another, we com now
to do our Savior the same service, who also seems to contradict our position,
Lu. 12.4 I say unto you my friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body,
and after that have no more that they can do: but I will forwarn you whom you
shall fear: Fear Him, which after he has killed you, has power to cast into
hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear Him.

It is plain, that Fear in this place can signify no other than the Properest,
and no less than the Greatest; and is enforced by our Lord in the most pressing
manner; inculcated by sundry repetitions, and urged with a most dreadful
reason. This cannot be denied, but must be interpreted by our Lord's own
parab'l, Lu. 14.16. A certain man made a great supper, and bad many, and he
sent his servants at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Com, for all
things are now ready; and they all with one consent began to make excuse; and
the Lord said unto his servants, go out into the high ways and hedges, and
compel them to com in, that my house may be furnished with guests. This
parab'l will fully reconcile our Lord's threats with the spirit of Love: for it
declares, that the Lord's proper design was not to Troubl his neighbors, but
to Fest them. His first work was to provide a great supper, and then many
guests to enjoy it; to which end he secondeth his large provisions with kind
invitations: But when few or none can this way be prevailed with, to leav the
farms and cattle which they have boght, or the Lusts which they have espoused;
either all the provisions must be lost, or some other means used, more suitab'l
to the necessity than to the nature of a fest.

We must therefore distinguish the Principal End from the Subordinate Means,
who is whole buisiness is to serve That End: And since the End is chosen for its
own sake, and the Means only for the Ends sake; we must advance the spirit of
Love as much as is Possib'l; but That of Fear, only so much as is Necessary;
Comply with it so far as to follow it from the Hedge to the House, and then
dismiss it to exercise its kind rudeness upon others who need it.

And thus I hope I have fully accounted for my first position; The Gospel does
not design to draw us by Fear, but Love; and it is for Love's sake, if Fear be
at all employed. Com we now to our Secund.

II. THE mistake of this is the cause that the Gospel and its preachers are so
hated by the world.

What can we expect, but contrary causes must produce contrary effects? If
therefore our preaching be different from that of the Apostl's, our reception
must be so to: if glad tidings make the messengers feet beautiful, evil tidings
must needs make them loathsome. Ahab's inference is Natural, though scarce
Reasonab'l: I hate him, bicaus he prophesies not good of me, but evil: And
whatsoever Jehoshaphat can say to the contrary, such a Prophet shall be
sentenced to the bread and water of affliction. And hereof the proof is but too
evident, in all our enemies, which may be reduced to two regiments.

1. Those that hate All religion in general.

2. Those that hate Ours of the Church of England in particular.

1. Of those who hate All Religion in general, some are Atheists, and some are
Semi-atheists.

I. THE ATHEISTS are made such by the spirit of Fear. Upon This only ground did
Epicurus build his impudent pretense to that gracios title, which the Scripture
teaches us to pay our Lord THE SAVIOR OF THE WORLD. For he bosted, that he
delivered his disciples from the torment of Fear: But we now heard St. John
declare, that this is do'n by the spirit of Love: Love casts out Fear, and
for this reason too, bicaus Fear has torment.

The question therefore between Atheism and Religion, is not whether Fear shall
be cast out or no? but whether of the two does it most effectually? Christ, or
Epicurus? Should we insist upon the Weakness or Dangerosness of Atheism, we
might easily prove it both insufficient to give any settled peace to the
never-that-way secure conscience, and terribly dangeros if at last it prove
falls.

But my present work rather promts me to insist upon this, that it makes not
the least pretense to the Beauty admired in my Text, but wholely renegs all
glad tidings of good things: It Is utmost aim is to cast out Fear, without a
thought of making our joy full.

And this indeed is the proper ground whereon to fight out the quarrel. Whilst
we dispute whether there be a God and Providence, or no, we maintain but a
hedge fight, wherein the enemy may make a bad shift to skulk behind his bushes
and ditches: But if we dispute concerning our own Happiness, even our Present
happiness, whether it be greater in a Religios life or in a Sensual, then we
charge him home in his own ground, and leav him no shelter.

Colotes it seems was the first Epicurean, that ever appeared in this field:
For he wrote a Treatise professing to prove, that upon the principls of the
Religios, it is impossib'l to live pleasantly. Against this Plutarch opposes
another Treatise, proving that upon the principls of Epicurus a man cannot so
much as live; and thus bosteth of his work: This is to trampl upon their
bellies, and put them to fight for their very flesh; to take pleasure from men
that do nothing but cry, we are no good soldiers, nor scholars, nor
magistrates, but we love to make good cheer, to banquet, and fill our flesh
with all delights, until the pleasure mount to the very soul; to rob such men of
pleasure is to rob them of life.

Thus does he crow, and upon this ground comparing the plesures of the Spirit
in Religios Fests, with those of the Flesh in Sensual; apparently trampl the
Epicurean to dirt: yet with force how short of the Gospel! who is Joys are fed
with Hopes more glorios, and Evidences more incontestab'l, than could enter
into Plutarch's imagination.

Here then let us take our post: Let us not so much contend for the Truth of
the Gospel, as its Joys: Yea let us argue from its Joys, for its Truth; since
infinite goodness will not fail to make That truest which is Best. Let us
compare the Fruits of the Spirit with That of the Vine; the Beauty of Holiness
with That of a Whore; the Plesures of an Angel with those of a Beast; and he
cannot escape the evidence, that his choice is as foolish as impios.

True (says Plutarch) we must be careful to shun superstitios fear, as the
most pernicios error in the world: and herein he proceeds so far as to say,
that it is less impios to deny God to have Any being, than to character him
such as superstition apprehends him. Let the comparison pass for odios, our
Apost'l puts us above any need of it: When he says, Love casts out Fear,
he condemns it sufficiently, though he say not whether it be more or less
guilty than its daughter Atheism.

Objection. What then? must we not fear God as our Savior admonishes?

Answ. Yes, as our Savior admonishes, but no otherwise: For we must
distinguish Fear that has Torment, from fear that has only Caution. Love
casts not out That fear that keeps waking, but that which tormenteth; it
Therefore casts it out, BECAUSE it has torment; That is the Reason, and That
is the Mesure; Just the same Fear, and in the same Mesure, as That Reason
requires, but no more.

The Best and Greatest Subject so fears the Law of his Prince, as to beware
he run not upon its Punishments; yet is he not thereby hindered from living
cheerfully upon those honors and riches, which by the same Law he enjoys: A
good man may be very careful to avoid the Threats, yet cheerful in festing upon
the Promises of the Gospel. Yea, our Apost'l himself so far cherishes this
kind of Fear, as to say, I keep my body in subjection, lest possibly when I
have preached to others, I my self should be a cast away.

II. THE SEMIATHEISTS, who mount not the scorners chair, so as to oppose All
Religion; yet keep distance from a Religios life, and they are kept at that
distance by Fear: And under this character com not only the Worst, but the
Most: Not only those for whom the Apost'l declares the Law to have been made,
the lawless and disobedient, the ungodly and profane, etc. but the
unscandalously wicked; yea such moral men, of whom we may say as our Lord did
of the young man, they are not far from the Kingdom of God: Such as would pass
through the world with as litl guilt as possib'l, but with as litl troubl too; and
therefore put repentance as an evil day far from them, not in love to their
Lusts, but their Ease.

They hear an evil report of Repentance, which must be their entrance upon a
Religios life: Those who press it and its conditions, speak in a style opposite
to St. John, these things we write to you, that your grief may be full. Those
who adventure upon it, complain that such a grief is no more in their Power,
than it is for their Pleasure: And those who have long served under it, are as
far from freedom as at first; but live as much tormented with fear that their
repentance is insufficient, as at first they were with repentance it self.

For those who are brought to Repentance by Fear, are still to cherish That
fear, as their best security from relaps: They must ever and anon, but
specially when they are to receve the holy communion, be anxiosly examining
themselves, whether their repentance be sound, and themselves in the state of
grace, or no? and they are directed by Teachers as melancholy as themselves, and
marks, which rather multiply than remove their fears.

They are told of a twofold hypocrisy, open, and secret; and the bounds between
the Least that saving grace requires, and the Most that a hypocrite may
perform, are so undiscernab'l, that they cannot be sure whether they be in the
one state or the other: But still, the more they Examine, the less they Satisfy
themselves; they bate and flutter without End, or any other fruit but this, that
they entang'l themselves more; and perhaps at last sink into deep melancholy,
incurab'l either by Spiritual or Corporal Physician: and by so sad a spectacl
the bystanders take warning to shun the place of Torment, and hate their
Ministers as Tormentors: So the Christian World is almost all divided, between
such as are frighted from a Religios life, and such as live fearfully under it.

It is worth more time than I can allow, fully to convince either party of
their error: but it is of so great import, that I must (however briefly) avow
that it proceeds in Both from taking repentance by the wrong handl.

I. THOSE who are frighted from Religion by the hardship of Repentance. It
would not be so terribl if we receved it by the spirit of Love: because it
would be neither so Difficult to be obtained, nor so Troublesome in the
performance.

1. Not so difficult to be obtained: Observe the Love of God as proclaimed in the
Gospel, and answer that Love of God, so as to be able to say with the Apost'l,
We love God, because he loved us first; and forbear grieving for your sins, if
you can. I say again Love God, and forbear to griev for having offended him, if
you can. But be sure you cannot, for it is utterly impossib'l to forbear
grieving, when we have offended whom we love.

2. Yet fear not you that love your Ease; this grief will not disturb it: For
as I said of Fear, so say I of Grief; there is a grief that has Torment, and
there is a grief that has only Tenderness; a grief that has Bitterness, and a
grief that has only Sharpness: and That, such a sharpness, as shall not mar
your fest, but improve it with its poignance. This is that grata aciditas which
recommendeth bankets; it is so sweetened by the sense of God's pardoning
goodness, that it is none of the meanest part of the joys of the Spirit.

I pray you take notice, and remember it, I deny not but grief is necessary; I
confess it is impossib'l a penitent soul can be without it. But this grief as
it is Necessary, so it is Natural; as a gracios foul cannot be without it, so
can he not Wish to be so: it costs him no pain, either to obtein or exercise it.

But the grief that proceeds from the spirit of Fear is every way contrary.

I. It is hard to be obtained. To fear God's punishment, and for That reason to
griev for sin, and thence to love God for pardoning upon such repentance; This
is to go quite against the hair, both in grace and nature: In Grace, because
the Apost'l declares, that Love casts out Fear, and how can Fear bring in that
Love by which it self is cast out? In Nature, because That cannot but shun Fear
and Grief; and that, not only as it is corrupted, but in its whole integrity:

When we address our selves to Love, we shall not miss of the grief of
Tenderness, because it is Love's certain attendant; but if we address our selves
to Grief, we court the Handmaid, which we cannot obtein b^n by the Mistress;
and if we ad-dress to That grief which proceeds from Fear, we court a
Scoundrel, that is as coy as worthless; no less an enemy to Loving grief, than
to our own inclinations.

Obj. Is not Repentance the first step to Conversion? and is not Repentance,
Grief?

Answ. That duty which the Gospel prescribes as necessary to salvation, is not
only a Step to conversion, but Conversion it self; it is not only Grief for
what is past, but Change for the future.

We are miserably abused by a base Translation: I appeal to you that understand
the Greek and Latin Toungs, whether (...) or (...) be any kin to the Latin
words, Repentance, Penance, Attrition, or Contrition, by which the Latin
Priests ( Annot. 2.
with no less injury to the Gospel, than to the words; to their own great
advantage, but inestimab'l loss of souls,) have translated them; that so they
might translate the Duty it self, from Turning to Grieving-

And I appeal to your Annot. 3.
Bibles, whether in the whole New Testament you meet any word that declares
Grief necessary to salvation? I know St. James prescribes it to the insolent
wanton rich, as a specifik for That particular vice; but where do you find it
enjoined as universally necessary for All kinds of sinners?

No, the Spirit of God knew, that the Grief which issues from Love, needs not
be commanded, because it flows naturally from that fountain: and the other
grief, which proceeds from Fear, is not worth commanding, because it is not
worth accepting, as having nothing but Torment.

It is a great maim to the happiness of mankind, but a much greater to the
glory of God's goodness in Christ; that for That very reason it is enjoined,
for which it is to be cast out. For we are told, that Christ has not redeemed
us from Temporal punishment, tho he have from Eternal: but we must our selves
pay the temporal price, either in this life by voluntary grief and penances,
proportional to our guilt, or in the other life by the fire of Purgatory, etc.

Were this true, it would make one half of the Gospel: And as the story it self
is a great disparagement to the sufficiency, either of our Lord's Sufferings,
or his Love; if Those could not purchase, or This would not grant us a full
redemtion, as well from the one punishment as the other; so is it a greater to
his Faithfulness, if he would concele from us the knowledge of what he had left
necessary for us to do for our selves.

How many Souls must there now and in all ages ly frying in Purgatory, that had
never com'n thither, if our Lord had been as kind as himself charactered the
damned rich man, who did all his possib'l, that his brethren might have warning
of that place of Torment! And how can such poor souls escape the tentation, to
blaspheme that Neglect, that exposed them to such danger without warning; yea!
That Treachery, that deluded them with promises of Full and Free pardon,
without the Least intimation of any grief or penance, necessary to be suffered
either in the one life, or the other! Were this true, the sum of Christ's
benefits must upon due computation rise no higher than this, that he Redeemed
us from Hell, and Betrayed us to Purgatory.

Blessed be God, who has shown us a better escape than by Grief and Penance:
The Love that casts out Fear, for this reason because it has torment, will
for the same reason cast out such Grief too: In Christ Jesus nothing else is
Needful, because nothing else Avails, but Faith working by Love: Let That so
inflame our hearts, as to melt them with a genuine sorrow, purging them from
all their dross; and we need not fear any other Purgatory, nor seek any other
Grief.

II. THOSE who make, not Repentance only, but the whole course of a Religios
life a state of Torment, are no less abused by the same spirit of Fear; which
perpetually tormenteth them with doubts, and puts them upon enquiries,
whether they be in the state of salvation or no? This they call
Self-examination, and their Teachers prescribe it as a Spiritual duty
frequently to be used, but especially before the holy Communion. But if Fear
will hear reason, it may consider, That however Self-examination be by all wise
men of all Religions highly magnified, yet is it not to be exercised by All men
in the same manner.

1. To those that are Enemies or Strangers to Godliness, as it is most
necessary, so it is most easy: They need not much examining whether they be in
a good state or no? the first glance discovers the contrary; the Question
proper to Them is this, Whether it be better to continu in That state, or com
out of it? To which question more Seriosness than Time is required.

2, Those who have forsaken their sins, especially those who have for any
considerabl time do'n so, may with as great Fruit as Pleasure examine,

1. What progress they make? By comparing their present stature in Christ, with
that of the last month or year, they may increase it.

2. They may daily examine their daily actions, that they may beg pardon for
what they shall find ill do'n, and pay thanks for what they shall find well;
and take Warning from the One, and Courage from the Other, to do better the next
day.

3. But to question their whole interest in Christ, whether they be Children or
Enemies to God? to be anxiosly solicitos upon such a question as This, See
Annot. 4.
I am not so sure that it is a Religios, yea or a Safe exercise at all; as I am
that there are pernicios mistakes in the Rules prescribed for the performance;
particularly in this, that there is too much partiality shown for Fear against
Hope; whereas plain Reason would persuade us, to judge as favorably for our
selves as our evidences can permit, since severity can do very litl (if any)
good, but may do much hurt.

1. It can do but litl good, for it can only repete the lesson wherein we are
already perfect: Our Fear of the worst is the very Reason which puts us upon
examining our selves; when we severely censure our selves, this is no more but
that we fear the worst: so we end where we began: the whole exercise is running
a circle of Fear, without the least progress in Grace.

2. It is not only a Fruitless labor, but a Dangeros tentation, If we fear that
God hates Us, nature will promt us to hate God in our own defense; and so far
to turn Atheists, as to wish there were no God. Such fear as this, Love
certainly must cast out, and it cannot be our duty to help It to cast out Love;
but on the contrary to cherish the Antecedent of the Apost'ls argument for the
Consequent's sake: We love him, because he loved us first; and thence take
spurr to serve him by the mesures of thankfulness, i.e. without mesure.

II. WE HAVE seen what an enemy Fear is to Religion in general: Consider we now
how much it is so to our own in particular; and we shall soon discover that our
enemies on Both hands, the Papists, and Nonconformists, are made such by the
spirit of Fear.

I. THE PAPISTS (it is plain) have corrupted the Gospel from a doctrine
according to Godliness, to a doctrine according to Interest; especially in its
two great limbs, Faith, and Repentance. Articls of Faith they have multiplied,
and in every one multiplied difficulties, on purpose to make an infallib'l
guide necessary to determine them: and Conditions of Repentance they have
multiplied and imbittered, on purpose to fright men, not out of their Sins, but
out of their Reason and their Money: They drive men To Repentance by fear of
Damnation, and From Repentance by fear of its Torments, and allow them no quiet
but by the Priest's Absolution.

If now there be This only difference between Us and Them, that We Drive men to
Repentance by the same Fear, and Torment them in it with the same Grief, but do
not reliev them by the same Remedies; we have much less reason to wonder, that
some half-considering peop'l run from us to them, than that so many escape the
temtation; especially seeing how greedily Fear and Pain catch at any (however
improbab'l) offer of help.

II. That the NONCONFORMISTS on the other side are possessed by the same evil
spirit, needs no other evidence but this, That they are frighted from our
Communion, by such things as themselves acknowledge Indifferent. Fears and
Jealousies fill both pages, both in their Religion and Polity. Their whole
constitution is sowred by the melancholy humor; uneasy both to Themselves and
others, especially their Governors.

It is not possib'l in fewer and plainer words, both to Describe and Condemn
this unhappy spirit, than we have found do'n by our Apost'l: You have not
receved the spirit of Fear, but of Power, of Love, and of a Sound mind. Love is
opposed to Fear; Power, to Weakness; a Sound mind, to a Pained one.

I wish he had never spoken worse, who said, that to be much and long troubled
with any scruple, is a certain indication of a weak and cowardly spirit;
because if the weight be considerably greater in either scale, the suspens will
soon be ended; if not, the cause of doubt must be very light; and to be much
troubled about light matters, must needs signify great weakness.

Objection, What then? must we think any sin litl? or can we be too fearful of
the least?

Answ. Distinguish between Sin Known, and Sin Suspected. We must more fear the
least Known sin, than the most cruel death: But to fear that which we only
Suspect to be sin, as much as that which God has declared to be so; This is it
self a sin against God, because it makes our own Suspicion equal to his Laws;
and against our Selves, our Country, and our Governors; because we troubl them
without competent reason.

Our Lord's parab'l will illustrate this: The Gospel is a great Lord's Fest;
and at such a Tab'l you may easily discern the Welbred from the Clown, by the
frankness of his carriage. He pays all due deference to his great Inviter;
careful not to do or say any thing that may offer him the least disgust, nor to
neglect any thing that may in any degree please him, specially to carry himself
with such a decent mixture of Humility, and Cheerfulness, as may speak his joy
and thankfulness for the favor do'n him. In the Other, you find not the least
air of cheerfulness; but a Fear to mis-behave himself in every motion of hand
or ey, every bit that he brings To his mouth, and every word that he utters
Out of it; and thus by too much fear of misbehaving himself falls into it.

Thus differ the truly Religios and Superstitios; the One serves God with a
Careful, yet Cheerful spirit; will rather incurr the worst death, than the
least sin; yet despises litl scrupls as unworthy to discompose his frank
spirit: the Other disordereth the whole frame of his conversation, by
timorosnes in such matters as he Knows to be Indifferent, yet Suspecteth to be
evil: a mere Spiritual Clown!

Which of the two is best manners in the Kingdom of God, our Apost'l taght both
the Corinthians, and Romans. Both those Churches were troubled with a scruple
concerning meats offered to Idols; a scruple the more considerab'l, because
himself had taght them, that it is impossib'l to partake the Lord's tab'l, and
the tab'l of Devils: How does the Apost'l treat this great question? Why, he
spurns it, as no other way considerab'l, but in the mischief it might do to the
peace of the Churches: The Kingdom of Heaven (says he) is not meat and drink,
but Righteosness, and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost: for he that in these
things serves Christ, is accepted of God, and approved of men: Let us therefore
pursue the things that make for Peace, etc. Apply this decision of that Great
controversy, to those pety ones that troub'l our peace, it will Determine them
them the best way, by Destroying them.

The Kingdom of Heaven is no more Vesture and Gesture, than it is Meat and
Drink; Righteosness, and Peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost, are still the best
manners in sight of God and Man: and to pursue the things that make for peace,
is still the best course in such litl questions as endanger it.

We have therefore nothing to enquire but this, Who best conform to this Rule?
They who in such small matters submit to their Governors, or they who disturb
the peace of the Church? However obvios the answer be, it is more obvios what
the spirit is, that makes men in such things troublesome to themselves, and
their country: See Annoi. ult.
Nothing certainly but fearfulness can make a man so to fly his own shadow, as
to run into the ditch.

We see the Apost'l thinks no way better to preserv the peace, than by
settling our Fundamental Position: Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost are the best
manners in the Kingdom of Heaven, most pleasing to God and man, and the best
preservative both of Publik and Private quiet: which is in other words, The
Gospel designeth not our Fear, but our Love.

I HOPE I have now effectually performed the task I undertook, which was not to
exhaust all the contents of my Text, but to dig up that root of bitterness,
which so undeservedly troubles the world, and especially the Ministers of the
Gospel; and most especially those of our Own Church, who are of all others most
unhappy, because whether they they prevail or no, they are sure to create
themselves enemies.

If they prevail not, then are they treated by the impenitent, as our Lord was
by the Devils: What have we to do with thee? art thou com'n to torment us? If
they do prevail, they do no better than journy-work; either for the Papists, to
whom the Sanguin run for Anodynes of Absolution; or for the Nonconformists, to
whom the Melancholy run for food for their unsatisfiab'l scruples: So we are
hated on All hands; by our enemies in Religion, because we will not torment our
selves with Their fears; and by our enemies in Irreligion, because they suspect
we will betray them to that place of torment, which others hate us for
renouncing.

But in all that I have spoken to this too necessary purpose, how short am I
falen of the requires of my Text? I have not be'n able to display any of the
glad tidings of good things: cannot say, as St. John does, These things have I
spoken, that your joy may be full; or as St. Peter, We rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorios.

Yet have we made no slight advance toward all this, if we have cast out Fear:
For this visor once plucked off, holiness will so display its beauty, that we
shall soon find Plato's aphorism verified in its charms.

And now I have mentioned Plato, I shall vouch not only his Opinion, but his
Experience: He spoke so much, and so well of the excellences and powers of
Love, that the best Fathers of our Religion have not disdained to write after
his copy, stiling him the Christian Philosopher. Plutarch. in Dione.
Dion, the greatest Nobleman in Syracuse, went to Athens to hear him, and
afteward prevailed with him to take a voyage to Sicily, to convert his unhappy
Prince, miserably corrupted by ill education. He came, and his First labor was
to encorage his hearers, that they should not be afraid of virtue: This he
perpetually inculcated, and having removed that prejudice, he charmed the whole
Court, and especially the young Prince, into such a love of virtu and himself,
that never was Lover more fond or jelos: He would not endure that Plato should
go out of his Palace, hardly out of his sight; was impatient that any beside
himself should have any interest in Plato's love, made Plato Lord of all his
power and wealth; and had he not be'n countermined upon reasons of State, was
in a fair way to have resigned up to the love of Plato and virtue, that unjust
Kingdom, from which he was afterward banished.

For this Diogenes upbraided Plato, saying, he had flattered a Tyran; and I
doubt not, but some of the same Cynical humor will object against me, that I
would have the Clergy flatter the Peop'l.

Plato owned the charge, and so do I. It is our work to flatter our peop'l,
just as Plato did Dionysius; not In their lusts, but Out of them; not for our
Own benefit, but Theirs: We must out-flatter Epicurus, yea we must out-flater
Plato, we must flater like our Apost'l, the greatest flatterer in the world:
Read his Epistl's with application; see if you can match them for tenderness in
any of the Romances: He says in one of them, that he had espoused his
disciples to Christ; and in that and all the rest he courted them with all the
arts and insinuations of a wooer.

And he plainly tells us, that His and Our Commission require it: We are
(says he) Ambassadors for Christ: as if God did beseech you by us, we pray you
in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

Which is a great improvement of my Text, and gives us title to a nobler
welcome: We are not only Messengers, to bring Tidings of peace; but Ambassadors,
to Negotiate for its acceptance: to Negotiate as in the Person of Christ, yet
in the Posture of supplicants. Christ again deposes himself from his Majesty,
and creeps to his rebellios subjects like a petitioner, begging in most
humb'l manner (what? that they would not again destroy him? no, but) that they
would permit him to save them: and in this posture are we commissioned to
represent him.

True, Ambassadors, if they find it necessary, may sharpen their importunities
for peace, by displaying the terrib'lness and unavoidabl'ness of That
destruction, which is to be the portion of the irreconcileab'l; provided they
do it with such tenderness, as may speak their Master's goodness equal to his
power; more loath to destroy them, than themselves are to perish.

A preacher of the Gospel (sure) must not com short in kindness to a prophet
under the Law: yet in this posture does Ezekiel represent God: As I live faith
the Lord, I desire not the death of him that dies, but rather that he will
turn and live: turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die, ye house of Israel?

Do ye say, that he offers salvation only to a few Elect? Behold, he says,
yea he swears, that he desires not the death even of Him that dies.

The difference is very observab'l, which our Savior puts between the two
sentences. The blessed are invited to the Kingdom prepared for them from the
beginning of the world: but the cursed are dispatched to the fire that was
prepared (not for Them, but) for the Devil and his Angels.

There is therefore great difference between Election and Reprobation: The one
is a Positive act, the other a mere reterition, which does not deprive men of
Sufficient, yea Abundant means of salvation: The Reprobates are so far from
prepared for hellfire, that the fire is not prepared for Them, but only for the
Devil and his Angels. Many indeed will at last find it their portion, but by
their own carving: God uses all the means that a Wise and Good father can, to
hinder them from it: His Wisdom will not work miracl's except in cases
extraordinary; and in such cases (possibly) he may by irresistib'l grace
qualify some few chosen vessels for some extraordinary service; but in ordinary,
he offers no such violence to Nature, though he use all means suitab'l to it,
for the benefit of the creature whom he endeavoreth to make happy.

His Laws are far from grievos, he requires no Satisfaction for the past, but
Amendment for the futur; and That Amendment too, he requires for This only
reason, that we may be as happy both now and hereafter as we are capab'l- We
are fond of our hedg-fruit because we know no better, but he provideth for us
bankets infinitely more delicios; and he Inviteth, he Entreats; if this will
not prevail, he Drives us, to this purpose only that we may be happy in his
fellowship.

Plato brought the most dissolute to the love of virtue, though he had no other
motive but its mere beauty, unendowed with any other reward than its self.

But we have commission to promise you a dowry great as its beauty, and to
embellish that beauty with most glorios additions. The glory of God's love
shines infinitely brighter in the face of Jesus Christ, than in That of the
Sun, which was the best glass Plato had to see him in: The earnest of our
inheritance (never heard of by Plato) is infinitely more valuabl for the
inheritance it secureth; the joys of Hope being incomparably more ravishing,
than those which taste nothing but the present.

And is it not both very Sad and very Admirab'l, that Plato under such
disadvantages, should so inamor a dissolute company with naked virtue, and
himself its preacher; yet We with such great advantages, prevail no otherwise
than to drive our hearers into hatred both of our message and our selves? Can
any thing be more worth our Consideration?

When we have duly eonsidered, we shall find that Plato better deserved the
title of a preacher of the Gospel, than most have do'n for many ages: For his
preaching was in St. Paul's style; he preached not the spirit of Fear, but of
Love: But the modern way has be'n quite contrary; we have heard litl of Love,
but much of Fear, and our success has be'n as different as our message.

Now should I apply all this to the service both of the Gospel and its
Ministers: but as I have not Time, so (if what I have said be well considered)
there will be no Need: Not in behalf of the Gospel, because if it be once freed
from this vizor, its beauty will need no other persuasive to draw us to its
embraces: Not in behalf of its Ministers, because your very Presence upon this
occasion, deserves applaus, but supersedeth exhortation: I shall therefore say
no more, but pray, that as you have begun a good work, you may go on
prosperously in it; that your kindness to those who have at least a dubl titl
to it, may return a thousand fold in blessings upon you and yours, both in This
world and the better; that the peace of God which passes all understanding,
may keep your hearts and minds etc.

ANNOTATIONS.
ANnot. 1. To which may be reduced all others of the same air.] Such is that
which we meet in the close of Heb. 12. Serve God acceptably with reverence and
Godly fear: for our God is a consuming fire. This seems to contradict our
Position both in Plain terms, and with a potent Reason: but if we carefully
view the whole context, it will appear otherwise.

For the words immediately 'foregoing say, Wherefor we receiving a Kingdom
which cannot be moved, (...), let us be thankful, that we may serve God
acceptably: Where that we may reconcile Fear with Thankfulness, we must look
back to the premises, whence the inference is drawn, which is offered in the
word Wherefor: which are no less than a Rhetorical, or rather Poetical,
Amplification, of what we but now found plainly laid down We have not received
the spirit of bondage again to Fear, verse. 18, 19, 20, 21. but we have received
the spirit of Adoption. verse. 22, 23, 24. whence the 25th verse immediately
infers, See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if They escaped not
who refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not We escape if we turn
away from him that speaks from Heaven: which again is repeted with a threat,
which requires us to look much further back to Deuteronomy. 4.23. where Moses warns
his Israelites in these words, Take heed unto your selves lest ye forget the
Covenant of the Lord your God, for the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, even a
jelos God.

The words then being mesured by the proper design of the whole discourse, must
be a threatening of those that shall turn from Christ: mesured by the Premises
which they attend as a Conclusion; they must import so much greater punishment
to be due to those that desert the Gospel, by how much the Covenant is more
gratios: so that the Threat is not leveled against those that Profess the
Gospel, but against those that Forsake it; and it is so far from contradicting
our Position, that it is built upon its Amplification-

ANnot. 2.
We are miserably abused by a base Translation.] For upon no better ground than
this wretched Translation is built the whole doctrine of Penance among the
Papists, and the dread of Repentance among the Reformtd.

The Papists, having once taken the confidence to render the indispensab'l duty
(...) by Poenitentia, proceed to improve this their precious word, by straining
it as much beyond its constant signification, as That exceeds the import of
the word, which it pretends only to translate. For whereas [Poenitentia] in
no other case signifies any more than [Repentance] i. e. Grief of mind, they
have enlarged it to signify [Penance,] which signifies a further punishment
of Body or Purs: and upon this dubly falls ground they have thus built their
Sacrament.

He that is fallen into sin after Baptism, cannot be restored but by the
Sacrament of Penance, which consists of three parts, Contrition, Confession,
and Satisfaction.

1. Contrition is grief of mind in sense of guilt incurred. Guilt imports
obligation to Punishment; from which the sinner cannot be absolved, but by the
Priest, to whom Christ has given power to bind and loose: This power the
Priest cannot exercise without knowledge of the guilt, wherewith the Penitent
is bound: therefore

2. The Penitent must humb'l himself before the Priests Tribunal, (it is the
very expression of Trent) with full and particular Confession of every sin, and
every circumstance, submitting to such punishment as he shall prescribe, in
order to Absolution: and

3. The Priest must not grant Absolution, without such Penance as may bear some
proportion to the crime. For (says the Trent meeting) Christ has satisfied
for the Crime, but not for the Punishment; which the B. of Condom has made
easier to be Understood, but not easier to he Believed, by this explication:
That he has changed a greater punishment into a lesser, i. e. Eternal into
Temporal. If therefore the Penitent fail either of fully confessing every sin,
or of fully performing the penalty imposed; Either of These, or some other
desects, must be abundantly punished with the fire of Purgatory, which comes
short of Hell only in duration.

If we look for Reasons for all this, we shall find none in Scripture, but
abundanco in the world. All the Abbeys, Priories, Chantries, etc. in
Christendom, All the pomp and grandeur of the court of Rome etc. are so many
benefits of this Sacrament to the Clergy; and assurance of Absolution upon
easy Penance, to the Laity.

For can it be, but the Priest must be highly reverenced, to who is Tribunal the
greatest must creep, to who is ears they must communicate their most shameful
sins, and from who is mouth they must receiv their sentence? without who is help
they cannot hope for pardon, and by who is help they are secure of it? Or can
any person of bowels think any cost too much, to pay off the intolerabl
torments, wherein their own or their dearest friends souls may fry, they know
not how long, in the flames of Purgatory? It was but lately proved that a poor
Maid gave, not only all she was worth, but a Bond for a greater Sum, to a
greedy Priest, who refused on any cheaper terms to free her father's soul; and
how often they meet such bargains in the fears of dying persons, it is
impossibl to compute.

God be blessed we have reformed from all the base gains which are gotten by
the word Penance: but we still retain too strong a tincture of its first
princip'l, in point of Fear and consequent Grief, derived from the word
Repentance; the very sound whereof strikes so hard upon our minds, that we
cannot but believ, the great Duty which is expressed by That Word, must be
performed by That Passion.

We do (indeed) well to distinguish between two kinds of Grief; and we do well
to declare, that Grief which arises from Fear, is nothing worth, if it bring
us not to that which issues from Love: But still we stick to This, that
Repentance is Grief: and that however it be not accepted until it amount to
Contrition, yet does it ordinarily begin at Attrition, to which therefore we
must first apply our selves. But

1. What reason have we to believe that Attrition will bring us to Contrition?
Do we conclude them near of kin, bieause they wear the same surname? Let us not
look so much to the Name, as the Family. Fear (we know) is no friend to Love;
and why shall we believ that Grief which issues from the One, must be our best
mediator to the Other?

2. Why must we needs make our first addresses to Grief of either kind? Grief
is an Enemy, but Love is a Friend: It is the first mover in all our affections,
even those which seem most opposite to it: We neither Hate, nor Fear, nor Griev,
but by the dictates of Love: And the Love of God will constrain us to (do, what
without it we can hardly obtein of our selves) griev when we have offended him.
If we perform this great duty in the proper sense of the words, Turn to God
with all our heart; the weeping and mourning will not fail to follow; nor has
the Scripture been deficient, though it have not prescribed them.

This is not a bare contention about words, but the most practical
consideration in the world: Holiness of life is highly concerned in it, as
having suffered more by This than All other errors: For on One side, men are
Frighted by the apprehension of Grief, as an enemy to our quiet; and on the
Other side, they are encoraged to hope, that this may with more ease, and equal
safety be undergon, when the days com wherein we shall say, we have no pleasure
in them, or when that hour comes, when we ean do nothing else but griev.

This conceit, however discountenanced by Divines, yea by Experience, which
shows that generally men die as impenitent as they live; yet so partial are we
to our sins and sloth, that the word [Repent] shall carry it against all the
weight that can be laid against it.

And here I cannot but applaud the amendment our Church has made in the first
sentence of our Liturgy. Of old it was, At what time soever a Sinner shall
Repent from the bottom of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my
remembrance, says the Lord; which was wont to be pleaded in behalf of
deathbed repentance: But now the very words of the Prophet are set forth, When
the wicked man turns away from wickedness that he has committed, and does
that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive: which may infer,
that the promise is made, not to Grieving, but Turning; and to such Turning
too, as proceedenh to contrary actions. Were our Translation of the New
Testament so reformed, that in stead of Repentance we might read, Turning,
Changing, Amendment, or some such honest word, as would faithfully render the
Original; it would remove that unhappy tentation, which has so much
discountenanced Conversion, by representing it both Hard and Needless in Youth,
Easy and Safe on the Deathbed.

ANnot.3.
I appeal to your Bibles.] We find one text that seems to look That way, and
for That reason, as it makes much talk, so does it deserv our careful
consideration. It is in 2 Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow works repentance to
salvation not to be repented of; but the sorrow of the world works death.

These words separated from the Context, though they deny that Grief and
Repentance be the same thing (for if the One work the Other, they must differ
as the Workman does from his Work) yet because they seem to import a dependence
of One upon the Other, require our answer. And

1. Tho these words seem to look this way, they com short of the concept we
contend against. For the most they import is this; that the Apostl's reproof
had made them so sorry, that they amended their falt; which certainly falls
very short of making That Repentance which the Gospel requires of every
sinner, to be no more nor less but Sorrow.

2: Those words do not look this way, as we must needs perceiv if we look about
us: for

Such was the Apostl's Evangelical spirit, so unwilling to exercise Punishment
upon offenders, that he shunneth the very word, and expresses it by Grieving.
This appears most evident in the twelfth chapter of the same Epist'l, verse.
20. I fear lest when I com I shall not find you such as I would, and that I
shall be found unto you such as you would not; lest there be debates, wraths,
etc. and lest when I come again my God will humb'l me among you, and that I
shall BEWAIL many, which have sinned already, and have not repented etc. And
chap. 12.2. I told you before, and 'foretell you as if I were present the
secund time, and being absent now I write to them which heretofore have sinned,
and to all other, that if I com again, I will not spare.

He had in his former Epist'l reproved them for not censuring a most scandalous
person, 1 Cor. 5. It is reported commonly that there is fornication among you,
and such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one
should have his fathers wife; and ye are puffed up, and have not rather
mourned, that he that has do'n this deed might be taken away from among you,
i. e. in the sense now mentioned, you have encouraged him, and not punished him
by excommunication.

In this Epist'l he takes notice of that affair: in the seeond chapter he
justifies himself for having grieved them, approves of their obedience, and
advises them to absolve the criminal, now sufficiently punished. And in this
chapter takes occasion to resume it, as appears by v. 8. For tho I made you
sorry with a Letter, I do not repent though I did repent; and more plainly v. 12.
though I wrote unto you, I did it not for his cause that did the wrong, (i. e.
the incestuous Son,) nor for his cause that suffered wrong, (i. e. the injured
Faether,) but that our care for you in the sight of God might appear to you.

The eleventh verse, which sets forth the fruits of their sorrow, is closed
with this Epiphonema: In all things you have approved your selves to be clear in
this matter: which plainly shows that the sorrow which he so applaudeth, was
not sorrow for any crime of their Own, and consequently was not such Repentance
as is necessary for every sinner in respect to his Own sins; but an Idiom of
the Apost'l, whereby he expresses Ecclesiastical censures: which in the tenth
verse he compares with Civil punishments, saying that the one works the
greatest good without the least ill consequence, but the other works death.

This exposition seems more necessary to enlighten the Apostl's discourse,
than to answer what may be thence objected. For whether you accept it or no,
you cannot avoed acknowledging that the discourse is very obscure in many of its
clauses, and in its whole design: and This very Obscurity is sufficient to
disable it from stablishing a fundamental doctrine.

Heb. 12.12. We find Repentance from dead works Owned for a Foundation of the
Gospel: Had he said Repentance FOR dead works, Grief might have pleaded some
title; but the partic'l FROM imports more than a Passion, and no less than
Turning: to Turn from dead works is a good phrase in Grammar, as well as a good
work in Morality; but to Griev From an ill work, is a style unpractised in any
language that I know,

Yet this is a Foundation, and as such oght to be firmly laid: Can we then
justify our Lord as no less faithful than Moses in all his house, if nether by
himself nor any of his Apost ls, he left any One Precept, so clear as to be
above danger of mistake; but we must retein for all our knowledge of our
Fundamental duty, to an accidental word, occasionally dropped by our Apost'l, and
that so obscurely, that we cannot be secure of its meaning? Such a concept
certainly will it self need Repentance.

ANnot. 4.
I am not sure that it is a Religios exercise.] I Therefore cannot be sure that
it is a Religios exercise, much less that it is a necessary Duty, so to examine
my self as is vulgarly prescribed; because I neither find it Enjoined by any
Precept, nor Recommended by any Examp'l in holy Scripture.

I find indeed two words of St. Paul to the Corinthians, whereof the One
seems to Intimate it, the Other expressly to Require it.

The Former, 1 Cor. 17.27. Let a man Examine himself, and so let him eat of That
Bread, and drink of that Cup: Which is generally believed to signify, that we
must Examine, whether we be worthy to receiv the Lord's Supper or no? which is
not Less but More, than whether we be in the state of Grace, or no? But upon
full consideration we must find, that the Apost'l cannot mean such an
Examination as shall leav us in suspense, or forbid our Communicating, (for the
very same breath absolutely requires us to do it without any exception or
limitation,) but such as shall prevent the crime he there reproves, which was
their doing it in an unworthy Manner: To which end it is not necessary to
examine, what Right we have to the Lord's Supper, but what Reverence? not what
we have already do'n, but what we are about to do? And whatever
self-examination exceeds this end, will be Impertinent; whatever hinders the
Performance of the later clause of the Precept, ( so let him Eat,) will be
Opposite to the Apostl's intentions, as at large is proved in the foregoing
Treatise, and is now further confirmed; if the practice of such
self-examination be useless and prejudicial, not only in order to the
Sacrament, but to all other good purposes.

The other word, which seems expressly to require us to examine our interest in
Christ, we meet 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether you be in the says,
prove your own selves, know you not that Christ is in you except ye be
reprobates? But all the foregoing and following context will forbid us to
imagine, that the Apost'l should require them to examine themselves concerning
what was not then in question or mention. It is plain that his discourse
reflecteth upon the punishment which they had Formerly Neglected, and upon his
admonition Lately Inflicted, upon a most scandalous offender; yet so, that some
among them seemed to question His authority, and perhaps That of the Church,
for so doing, and therefore seek a proof of Christ speaking in him. Such persons
in the now-recited words he admonishes to examine themselves, not concerning
their interest in Christ by his saving grace, but concerning their relation to
him as a visib'l Church, and their consequent authority to judge those that are
within, as in the former Epist'l he expresses it.

Our Incomparab'l Dr. Hammond has to this sense paraphrased this text; wherein
he supposes that (...) signifies, not IN, but AMONG you; and that the Apost'l
thereby alludeth to Exodus 17.7. where the temting contumacios Israelites, after
all the signs and miracl's showed among them, ask in these very words, (...),
is the Lord among us or no? so that the meaning of the Apostl's question here
is; many miracl's of Christ and his Spirit have be'n wroght among you, so that
if you do not believ that I am an Apost'l, and so that Christ is among you, you
are (sure) of the number of those Israelites, who after so many mirac'ls still
required more signs. Thus our Excellent Doctor.

But if we will not look fo far, we shall find a fair occasion for the word IN,
and for his playing with the word Reprobate too, in the third verse. Whereas
you seek (...), a Proof of Christ speaking In me: Examine it well, and you shall
find him in your selves, when you censure such offenders as are within; if not,
you are (...): which word, that it cannot here signify Reprobates in that
strict sens, appears, because he immediately adds, I hope you shall find
that We are not Reprobate: but he descanteth upon their own word (...),
repeating it no less than five times in two verses, in a sense which must
therefore answer their own: You seek an Evidence of Christ speaking in Me, as in
his Apost'l: I have already pleaded, that If I be not an Apost'l to Others, yet
doubtless I am to You, for the seal of mine Apost'lship are ye in the Lord, and
I need no other evidence: Examine therefore your selves, whether ye be in the
faith which I preached among you: Do ye not know that Christ is in You, as in
his Church planted by my ministry, except ye be vile persons, which have no
((...)) appearance of Christianity?

This the context evidenceth to be the true meaning of those words, who is singl
voice must outvote a multitude of other express texts, and the fundamental
design of the Gospel, which invite us to rejoice in God.

WE are miserably mistaken in the rules and mesures,] as may appear, not only
by the Reason glanced at from their dangeros tendency, or by the Silence of
Scripture, which in matter of duty is equivalent to a Negative; but by the
contrary conduct of the Apost'l in governing this exercise. For however his
words seem to prescribe self-examination as every man's duty, yet does he
plainly direct it to a quite contrary purpose.

His words are, Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove his ownwork: Let Every man
without exception; Prove (...), examine, his own Work, in the most comprehensive
sense (as the French express a man's whole business by son fait) else will the
Plaster be too narrow for the Sore, which is discovered in the words immediately
'foregoing,; If a man think himself to be some thing when he is nothing, he
deceives himself: All this seems to amount to no less than Let every man
examine the state of his own soul, that he may not be deceived, but certainly
understand, whether he be a lively member of Christ or no.

I shall not fence with these words, by pleading that by Every man is meant
Every man Concerned in the advice, which is directed only to them which are
Spiritual; or that by (...) is meant not only Prove, but Approve: but, which is
much better, I shall mesure the Plaster by the Sore, the Meaning of the Words
by the Design of the Author; which the first verse discovers to be Charity to
offenders: the Means prescribed for this good end is Self-consideration: 1.
Consideration of human frailty, whereto while himself is subject, he is neither
above the Reach, nor secure against the Power of the tentation. 2.
Consideration of his own Experience, which if he examine, may inform him, that
himself has be'n guilty, perhaps of the Same, perhaps of Great^^ crimes.

This is the plain design of the precept: it is prescribed as a specifik
against a particular evil, to cauterize the proud flesh, to lance the swelling
apostem, to divert the sharp humor, from our neighbors to our own weakness or
wickedness; to pass from judging another to judging our selves; wherein we shall
have better Evidence, better Authority, and better Success.

And what success does the Apost'l promise? Is it, thou shall be frighted at
thy danger, and confounded with thy guilt? This (indeed) one would expect, as
most serviceab'l to the purpose in hand: but because it is least so, to the
general design of the Gospel, the Apost'l turns short to a quite contrary
inference, and then shall he have rejoicing. How careful, that no particular
precept should cross the Universal! that his Precepts should have no wors
consequent than his Reproofs! But may clear themselves, and say, as he did in
his Apology to the Corinthians, for having made them sorry, 2 Coo. 7.9. you have
received damage by us in nothing; which this exercise can hardly be able to
plead, if fear hold the scales, and we weigh our selves by grains and scruples,
and those authorized only by the precarios dictates of melancholy.

Our Apost'l has plainly enogh told us, that our adaequate mark is Faith
working by Love: If hereby we examine our selves, the work will be neither tedios
in the Performance, nor tormenting in the Issu.

Not tedios in the Performance: for it cannot (sure) require much skill, time,
or labor, to search whether I love or no? I look no further than mine own
bowels for assurance, whether I love this or that neighbor or kinsman; and why
may they not with the same ease and certainty secure me whether I love God or
no?

Nor tormenting in the Issu: for at worst I shall be put to no wors penance or
task, than to labor for a greater Mesure of Love; and all Love's tasks are full
of pleasure. To ly down and afflict my self with grief for want of Love, or (as
is prescribed in the second place) for want of grief, or with fear for want of
any kind of grief etc. is more likely to quench Love than to inflame it. But to
apply my affections to the original of all loveliness, the infinite beauties of
God in his own perfections, the glories of his goodness toward his creatures,
and to my self in particular, etc. is certainly of all exercises most proper
for this end, and most pleasant in the practice: This must needs be the fittest
ground for the fruits of the Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace.

ANnot. 5.
Nothing certainly but Fearfulness.] It may be worth observing, how the light
of Nature concurreth with that of the Gospel, to cast out this spirit. For as
in All Ages, Nations, and Religions, it has possessed and tormented the
Weakest; so has it in them All be'n exorcised by the Wisest.

The Greeks gave it a name which expresses its Nature, the Latins gave it one
that expresses its Operaetions, for (...) shows it in its Cause;
Superstition, in its Effects: That, signifies Fearfulness toward God; This,
signifies Overdoing our duty toward him: yet Both agree in the same
apprehensions. For when the Greeks describe its Operations, they paint them
with the very same colors as do the Latins, witness Theophrastus's Character:
and again, when the Latins define its Nature, they do it by the very name which
the Greeks have given it; witness Varro, who makes this the essential
difference between Religion and Superstition; that the Superstitios Fear the
Gods, while the Religios reverence them as Parents, but do not fear them as
Enemies: and what is this other than St Paul's doctrine? You have not received
the spirit of Fear, but you have received the spirit of Adoption. Seneca more
Laconically gives us account both of its Nature and Effects: Superstitio error
insanus, amandos timet, quos colit, violat: Superstition is a mad error; whom
it should love, it fears; whom it worshippeth, it slandereth. And more
largely in another place: Sicui intueri vacet, quae patiuntur superstitiosi,
invenies tam indecora honestis, tam indigna liberis, tam dissimilia sanis, ut
nemo fuerit dubitaturus furere eos, si cum paucioribus furerent. If any one be
at leisure to view what the superstitious suffer, you shall find things so
disgraceful for gentlemen, so unworthy of free men, so unsuitabl to sound men,
that no man would doubt but they were mad, were they mad with fewer companions.
Give us who can, a better explication of those words of St. Paul, which call
it, the spirit of bondage, and oppose it to the spirit of Power, of Love, and
of a Sound mind.

And all this St. Paul spoke of the Law of Moses, which had been nothing else
but Superstition, had not God authorized it: For as throughout the Old
Testament Fear is Godliness; so in all the ceremonies of the Law, Obedience
hallowed the exercises.

For as I said but now, Superstition, however exploded by the Wisest, ever
possessed the Weakest, that is, the Greatest part of mankind: And at That time,
the world was not capabl to have it Cured, but only Fomented.

And that upon That very account the Law imposed such exercises as the Gospel
forbids, we have a clear discourse of St, Paul, in the beginning of the fourth
chapter to the Galatians Now I say, that the heir, as long as he is a child,
differs nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all, but is under tutors
and governors, until the time appointed of the father; even so we, when we were
children, were in bondage under the Elements ((...) the a, b, c,) of the world.
But when the fullness of time was com, God sent forth his Son made of a woman
made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might
receiv the adoption of sons. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the
spirit of his son into your hearts, crying Abba, father. Wherefor thou art no
more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ.

In this discourse you have a full discovery of Superstition, its Nature, its
Operations, and its Abolition. 1. Its Nature, childishness, requiring the
discipline of Fear to govern it: 2. Its Exercises, childish, weak, and beggarly
Elements, the first letters that children learn. 3. Its Cure, the spirit of
Adoption, sent forth into the hearts of Gods children now grown up to manhood.

Upon this discourse how justly does he ground his expostulation, ver. 9. Now
after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to
the weak and beggarly elements, wherein you desire again to be in bondage? When
I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a
child, but when I became a man, I put away childish things. When mankind was
unripe in Age, it was so in Understanding, and no wonder its Exercises should
be suitabl. It was governed by the rod, and busied about ceremonies; but now it
is com to manhood, you are called to have fellowship with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Jo. 1.3. to be partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet.
1.4. and consequently of his Wisdom and Holiness, his Loves, and his Hates: and
therefore to approve things that are excellent. Phil. 1.10. How is it then,
that you still spend your time, your strength, and your labor in whipping of
topps, bandying of balls, and playing with nuts, no less childish in your
imaginations, than the law of Moses could either Find, or Make you?

Thus did the Apostl rebuke the Galatians, and what would he have said to this
and some preceding generations, which have outgo'n both Jews and Gentiles in
this childishness? and that especially in two great respects.

1. We find not that either Jews or Gentiles disquieted themselves about matters
of mere Belief, though they did about matters of Action.

2. Nor that they disturbed the peace of their Nations, though they did that of
their own Minds.

1. They disquieted not themselves with matters of mere belief, conceiving that
the true worship of God consisted not in Disputing, but Imitating his
Perfections. But we, in mere honor to the glorious promises which are made to
Believing, have multiplied Articls of Faith, and Questions upon every Articl,
and Doubts upon every Question; and every one of these we call matters of Faith,
and matter of Faith we take to be matter of Salvation, and if we mistake in the
One, we believ we shall miss of the Other. Hence is it that Catholic and
Heretik among the Romanists, Orthodox and Heterodox among the Beformed, sound
so terribly as to fray many a good man, if not quite out of his Wits, yet
(which is almost as bad) out of his Courage to use them.

Reason, we are told, must not presume to medl in matters of Faith, but we must
deny our selves, no less in our Rational faculties, than in our Sensual
appetites; for it is no less impious to Disbeliev God's word, than to Disobey
his command: And in This, they speak, not only Truth, but Reason, which
therefore they justify by exercising.

But, as it is in Moral virtues, so is it in Faith; it lies between two
extremes, Defect on One hand, and Excess on the Other. It is no less frequent
in matters of Faith than in Manners, to teach for Doctrines of God the
Commandments of Men; in the One tormenting the Mind with needless Mysteries, as
in the Other, the Body with needless Penances.

But to Faith what could have be'n more incongruos? Repentance, indeed, in its
very name carries a sower countenance, importing a mortification of our
Natural appetites, and consequently a pain to our hearts: But Faith, who is
proper object is Glad-tidings, might justly claim, not only freedom from Pain,
but such fullness of joy, as should cast out the grief even of Repentance;
whereas now it is made the harder taskmaster of the two. For however painful it
be, it is not impossibl, to cut off hands, or feet, or pull out eyes; but our
Reason is not only the Ey, but the Heart of our Soul, not to be cut or plucked
off: Tormented indeed it may be, and most in those who have most improved it,
as the clearest ey is always tenderest: and stupefied it may be, yet not to
such a privation, but that it will ever and anon feel anxios fits of
melancholy, doubting of the truth of some things which are received as matters
of Faith, and consequently of our title to Salvation for want of Faith.

Few can at all times bost with the Physician, there are not impossibilities
enogh in Religion, and fewer with the Father, credo quia impossible est. It is
hard to apprehend, how any thing can be at once True and Impossib'l; but to
make the very Impossibility, a reason why I should believ it, let St. Paul
judge, whether this be not cum ratione insanire. For when he would persuade a
belief of the Resurrection, he did not urge the impossibility but the contrary:
Why should it be thought a thing incredib'l that God should raise the dead? and
when hereupon Festus charged him with madness, he replied, I am not mad, but
speak the words of truth and soberness. What Soberness can there be in a quite
contrary argument, yea, what plainer madness, than to talk such extravagant
inconsistences, as infer credibility from impossibility?

What other spirit but that of Fear could thus confound men's understandings?
Fear, of all passions the most infatuating; Fear, which most frequently
blinds the most piercing judgments; Fear, which makes every shadow a man,
and every bush a thief, and every thief a murderer; Fear, and only fear, can
so disorder our minds, that we think it equally necessary to salvation, to
believ the niceties of Schoolmen, and the Doctrines of the Gospel; and distrust
our interest in Christ, if we can neither satisfy, nor destroy our reason,
when it cannot comply with contradictions, which he never enjoined us to believ.

2. Much less did they embroil the publik peace with controversies in Religion:
Whereas among Christians, there is not any question so nice in point of Belief,
or so slight in point of Worship; but has be'n able to engage whole Families
in the fiercest contentions, and whole Nations in most bloody wars; yea, for
two or three ages there has hardly b'en a rebellion, whereof Religion has not
be'n either the Real or Pretended cause.

And This, as it is more notoriosly scandalous than the now mentioned disquiets
of private persons, so is it (if possibl) more directly opposite to the most
earnest endeavors of the Gospel: which does indeed very frequently exhort us
to joy and comfort in our own spirits; but much more earnestly and solenly
provoke us to love and peace toward others: Yea, Love makes so great a figure
in almost every page of the New Testament, that it seems not only the
Supreme, but almost the Only grace: It looks like unlawful to fight upon Any
occasion whatsoever; but to fight for Religion, seems no less contradictious,
than to fight for Love: And that the Only Religion which commands to beat
swords into plow-shares, should be the only religion that forgeth plow-shares
to swords; is a fanaticism so irrational, as nothing but Fear could have
produced.

The sum therefore is This: The light of Nature agrees with that of the
Gospel, to declare, that we are not to serve God for Fear, but Love: What our
Apost'l opposes to a Sound mind, that our Philosopher caleth a mad error; but
the madness is incomparably greater in a Christian, than ever it was, or indeed
could possibly be, in a Heathen: For as it is the utmost extravagance of
frensy, to beat our selves, or our friends; so in this we exceed the Heathen,
that many among Us, but none among Them, disturb their own souls with anxios
doubts concerning Faith, or imbroil their Nation with bloody wars upon
difference of opinions in Doctrine or Worship; so is it more monstrosly mad in
a Christian, by how much more clearly and solenly the Gospel has labored to
prevent the one and the other, by declaring that we have not receved the
slavish and mad spirit of Fear, but of Power and Love, and of a sound mind. And
again, that The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteosness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, for he that in these things serves Christ,
is accepted of God, and approved of men: This upright and erect walking, this
frank and cheerful, this manly yea divine freedom of spirit, as it makes men
more Like God, so does it make them more Acceptabl to him; it will not only
vindicate religion from the obloquies of its enemies, who either despise or
fear it, as a curb to generosity and freedom; but recommend it to them as most
noble and pleasant: nor will it only silence our quarrels, but endear us in
mutual affection.

FINIS.

