The Danger of Delaying Repentance; Set forth in a SERMON PREACHED TO THE
UNIVERSITY AT St. Mary's Church in Oxford, ON NEW-YEARS-DAY, 1691/2.

By Ar. Bury, D. D. Rector of Exon College.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew at the Kings-Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

The Danger of Delaying Repentance; Set forth in a SERMON Preached to the
University of Oxford, etc.
EXODUS iv. 24, 25, 26. And it came to pass by the way in the Inn, that the Lord
met him, and fought to kill him.

And Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her Son, and
cast it at his feet and said, Surely a bloody husband art thou to me.

So he let him go. Then (or as the vulgar Latin, better, When) she said a
bloody husband thou art, because of the Circumcision.


MOses was now in a Journey, undertaken with great Reluctance in absolute
Obedience to God's repeated Commands: He made what shifts he could from the
unwelcome Employment. First, on the People's part, he pleaded that they would
not believe him; then on his own part, that he was not qualified; and when he
was answered in both, he fell from pleading to downright begging; Then was the
Lord's anger kindled against him. Now therefore, without delay or dispute, he
obeys the second Command, and by the way in his lodging (for Inns properly so
called, there were none in those Days) by some praeternatural Disease, which
spoke the immediate hand of God, he fell into imminent Danger of Death, and (by
what Revelation we know not) the neglect of Circumcising his newborn Son,
appeared to be the provocation: But the Disease which punished the neglect, now
hinders the performance; and he must have perished, had not his Wife with a
sharp Knife (for the word in the Hebrew is the same in Joshua 2.2. where it is
so translated) she circumcised the Child: And as the fore skin and blood fell
at his feet, she uttered those words which our Learned Mede probably believed
to have been the ritual Form in that Ceremony. For the word (...) does not
signify a Husband, but a Spouse not yet married, and was often used for the
nearest Allied: and in this Office might be used by the Circumciser to the
Child, pronouncing him Circumcised, and by the blood of Circumcision betrothed
to the Covenant: And this Opinion gives a fair Account of the 26 verse, not
otherwise easily proved worth mention.

So the sum of the Story is this, Moses had not circumcised his Son at the
time prescribed by the Law, which appointed the 8th. day upon pain of death; he
was about to suffer death as a punishment of That neglect; but escaped by his
Wife's care in Performing what he had Neglected.

This neglect of Moses, we may take as a Foil to illustrate that exact
obedience of our Lord, which we this day commemorate. Moses was the Mediator of
a Covenant whereof Circumcision was the Seal; our Lord was Mediator of a
Covenant, whereby it was abolished; yet did he submit to it: and not only to
Circumcision, which was commanded, but to Baptism too which, without any
command, was practiced by such as professed singular perfection. For we read,
Matthew. 3.13. Jesus came from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be baptized of him,
but John forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of Thee, and come
thou to me? and Jesus answering said unto him, suffer it to be so now, for thus
it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, then he suffered him, i. e. it is
not necessary, indeed, but it becomes me, to fulfill, i. e. to be perfect in
All Righteousness, i. e. in whatever is excellent.

Thus far the Letter: but the Collect for this day assures us, that we do not
thus solemnly celebrate the naked History, but the Mystery therein contained;
which we find thus displayed, Col. 2.10. Ye are complete in him which is the
head of all principality and power, in whom also ye are circumcised with the
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, by the circumcision of Christ.

Godliness is so adaequately the end of all our Lord's actions, that not only
his Moral, but even his Ritual Performances are thereto referred. Yea, not his
Obedience only, but his Sufferings and Exaltation, his Death, Burial and
Resurrection are made Engagements, Encouragements, and Emblems of it. For so
the Apostle goes on, Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen
with him through the faith of the operation of God, who raised him from the
dead. And you being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh,
has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses.

Nor is this the only Text wherein we find the Apostle at this holy Chemistry,
distilling the Spirit out of the Letter.

This, this is truly to apply Christ to our selves. Thus does our Church teach
us to commemorate our Lord's Circumcision, praying that God would grant us the
true circumcision of the spirit. Whereof to show the Necessity, and the Danger
of delaying it, I have thought it proper to view Moses's case, and apply it to
our own in his Sin and his Danger.

HIS SIN was his delaying the Circumcision of his Son beyond the time
prescribed by the Law. That this proceeded not from any compliance with his
Wife or her Father (as some imagine) appears from this, that Midian was one of
the Sons of Abraham by Keturah, and all Nations that came out of his Loins
celebrated circumcision; nor did Mahomet learn it of his Jew, but derive it
from his Ancestors. Besides, we hear of another Son of Moses, Gersom, whom we
therefore must believe to have been duly circumcised, because we find nothing
to the contrary. It was not therefore his neglect of the Law, but the Time,
which he delayed, not out of Contempt, but upon plausible Reason. He was in a
journey upon God's Errand, his Son so newly born as not to be able to undergo
such an operation, and then such a journey. Such an excuse God himself
afterward approved in the whole people, who were all Uncircumcised and
Blameless, during a journey of 40 Years, as appears, Jos. 2. I say not, that
Moses had Then God's approbation, but he might Then well judge That a competent
excuse, which God, in the like case, admitted for such. And that this was
Moses's reason, we may judge by his leaving his Wife and Child, to stay till
they might return to her Father; of whom we read in the 18th. Chapter, that he
brought them to Moses in the Wilderness.

So the proper weight of Moses's guilt seems to be this, That he took his
Wise and Child with him, and thereby cast himself into such circumstances, as
made it necessary for him to delay his duty, till the journey were ended, and
the Law transgressed. And what is such an Error in comparison of ours?

The Gospel makes the circumcision of the Heart no less necessary, than the
Law made that of the Foreskin. That allowed 8 days respite, but This, by fixing
no Future day, makes every day of Delay a day of Disobedience. God be blessed,
there are not many who deny the duty to be necessary, but too many who hope
they may safely delay it. And those hopes they build upon the unhappy
Translation of the Greek word, which imports A Change for the future, into a
Latin one which signifies only A Sorrow for what is past. For thence men
rashly, if not wilfully, infer that the Gospel promises pardon to every one
that repents, and That may be done at any time; but never more seasonably
than in the last scene of life, when they shall have nothing else to do. And
what is this but a defiance to the Apostle's caution, which the last time that
I appeared in this place, we heard him give the Galatians in these words, Be
not deceived, God is not mocked, for what a man sows, that shall be also reap.

I shall now repeat no more of what I then said, but this, That God has
established the same Rule for the other life, as for this; That the Harvest
shall answer the Seed in Kind, yet so as to multiply it; but at some distance
of time. For there is one time to sow, and another time to reap; and in this
spiritual husbandry the earliest season is always the best: for Two great
Reasons. First, Because delay multiplieth Difficulties, and, Secondly, Because
it multiplieth Dangers.

1. It multiplieth Difficulties, because by repeated Acts, the Habits will grow
to a second Nature, for so the Prophet declares as little hope that those who
are accustomed to do evil, should learn to do well, as there is that a
Bluck-a-moor should change his skin, or a Leopard his spots. And as
Difficulties increase, so do the Helps decay. The Light of Conscience, the Word
preached, and the Grace of God, by frequent baffles, lose their power, and in
time grieving the Spirit, comes to quenching the Spirit.

It is a dreadful Consideration, That the day of Grace is shorter than the day
of Life; that there is a measure of iniquity, beyond which God's Spirit will
not strive with man, but leave the Reprobate to his own ways, wherein he must
certainly perish. This is lively set forth in the latter half of the first
Chapter of the Proverbs of Solomon, wherein Wisdom is personated, first,
Wooing, then Threatening, and at last Deserting, the obstinate, and therefore,
perishing fool. This brought us to the Frontier of the other Argument against
Delay, it multiplieth Dangers; which it is my present business to survey,
taking our view from Moses's Case.

I. God sought not to slay Moses in the field, but in his lodgings; but we are
not sure we shall die in our Beds.

II. Moses knew his danger, but we know not when our disease is mortal.

III. When Moses was disabled, his Wife acted his part; but if our disease
disable us from Repentance, we cannot do it by Proxy.

IV. As soon as the Child was circumcised, the destroying Angel left Moses in
safety: but we have no certainty that God will pardon us in consideration of a
Deathbed Repentance.

I. THE first danger is, That we may not die in our Bed, and thereby have
opportunity to repent.

What, is there no other way to the Grave, but from the Bed? Or have thou any
Revelation, that however many other ways there be, and however many other men
pass those other ways, yet thou have a particular protection against them? What
creature so Mean or so Weak, as not to be able to destroy the Wisest and the
Mightiest man? Anacreon's Wit could not deliver him from a Grapestone; nor Pope
Adrian's triple Crown, from a Fly; nor Herod's joint Wit and Power, from Worms.
Zeuxis was strangled with a fit of Laughter, and many by a fit of Grief: Wine
engages one Man in a Quarrel, another in a Fever, a third in a Ditch, and
others in other destructive Accidents. How many every Year fall by some violent
Death? And what Year more fruitful than this in Apoplexies, which have knocked
down, one in the Court where Laws are Made, another in That where they are
Executed; one as he is about to sleep, another when he is about to eat. Sudden
Deaths are almost daily of those who depended upon Death-bed-Repentance, with
as much confidence as any of us, who survive, perhaps to be made the like
warnings to others.

From this slippery station let us view the fall.

In play, we allow men to hazard so much as they may reasonably spend upon one
pleasure; but those who put their whole Livelihood to the Mercy of a Die, are
Blamed though they prove Fortunate, and Scorned if they be Ruined. Yet have
they as much Hope of Gain as Danger of Loss: But the Impenitent staketh eternal
Life against a Lust, a Brutish Pleasure, which is overpurchased at the much
greater Loss of that, which a virtuous man enjoys.

If it be pleaded, that there is great odds against this danger, because those
who die in their Beds are many more than those who die otherwise; we ought to
reply, that a man ought not to stake his All against Nothing, though there were
but one bad Chance in the Dice. And we are further to consider, that if we were
secure from this, yet there are other dangers. For,

II. A second Danger is, that if we die in our Beds, we cannot Know, and are
loath to Believe, that we must die by This Disease. For, on the contrary, all
our worldly Friends and spiritual Enemies combine with our own Self-love to
flatter us. The Physicians, by their Art, are obliged to fortify their
Patients Spirits, the better (if possible) to resist the Disease; and by the
same rules, all that come near him, must speak Comfort, or Nothing concerning
his Condition. So fondness for his ease tempts him to continue his Inveterate
Practice of dismissing his Repentance to a more convenient season. Yea, so
powerful is this fondness, that it infatuateth those who have no hopes either
to Escape their present sickness, or to Continue any considerable time in it.
The Consumption which has devoured all the inward and outward Flesh, has not
consumed this Humor: And in old men, this Disease is no less incurable than
the natural Infirmities of Age. No man (says Seneca) is so old ut impie
alterum diem speret; he may well hope to live some days longer, and one of
those days he will do the Work: but for the present he cries with Solomon's
Sluggard, yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands
to sleep, and death comes upon the one, as want upon the other, like a
Traveller not Expected, and an armed man not to be Resisted. For the Bed comes
within that Petition in our Litany, from sudden death, good Lord, deliver us;
the Death that surpriseth us unprepared, is sudden in whatever circumstances it
seizes us, whether in Bed, or Field.

Nor can it now be pleaded as before, That the odds is great in favor of the
Impenitent; for the odds is come over to the other side. In the midst of
Doctors, and Nurses, and Languors, this is no less properly a sudden Death,
than that which strikes with Lightning. Yea, nor can it be denied to be in a
fatal sense Sudden, though Expected: For though the man know himself dying, yet

III. A third Danger is, that the same Disease which must shortly deprive the
Man of Life, has already deprived him of all Power, to do that which too late
appears both Necessary and Impossible.

Moses had a Zipporah to help him, but this spiritual Circumcision cannot be
performed by Proxy, nor so easily as the fleshly. There are indeed, that talk
as if it were much easier. It is no more but be Sorry and Absolved. The former,
Nature will perform; and the latter, the Priest: and the Deathbed is the most
proper Season for both. He that can do nothing else, can grieve for what is
past, nor can that more Naturally or more Passionately be done, than at sight
of approaching Judgment. Body and Mind are best disposed for this performance,
when disabled from all others. When old age shall stoop my back, then will my
head naturally hang like a Bulrush; when my head shall be full of Rheumatick
Clouds, then will my Eyes easily rain plentiful showers of Tears; when my
Palate can no longer relish Wine or Banquets, nor any other parts of my Body
feel pleasure; then will it be easy to be sick at remembrance of my surfeits.
Or if I die by an acute Disease, the pain will force me to howl upon my Bed.

But alas! What is all this to saving Repentance? The Psalmist promises that
they which sow in tears, shall reap in joy; and immediately explaineth it, he
that now goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed, shall shortly
return with joy, and bring his sheaves with him. It is the good seed, not the
showers without it, that produce the sheaves: he that sows nothing but Rain,
cannot hope to reap any thing but Dirt.

This Spiritual Circumcision is not like the Fleshly, one short act, but a
constant course of life, not performed by a few drops, though of blood. It is
no less than a Death unto Sin; but it is more, a Resurrection to Newness of
Life. Old habits are not easily destroyed, yet must this be done, and that by
new habits of contrary Virtues; the one and the other are works of time and
constant industry, they require the best of a man's powers, and the assistance
of greater.

We cannot be too frequently admonished, that this is the great design of the
Gospel, that all our Lords Actions and Sermons, Precepts and Promises, Death
and Resurrection relate to this, as Enconragements and as Emblems, and must be
answered by the Duties they represent. His Birth, by our Regeneration; his
Circumcision by our putting off the sins of the flesh; his Death, by our
mortifying our old man; his Baptism and Burial, by our spiritual burying deep
our mortified Lusts; and his Resurrection, by our New and better Life.

Let the malicious take notice, I deny not, with the Socinians, That Christ
died to purchase Pardon for penitent sinners: but I deny, and all the Apostles
deny it with me, That any shall have benefit of his Purchase without
participation of his Holiness. Yea, I may further add, That the Apostles are
more frequent in declaring that he redeemed us from the Dominion of sin, than
from its wages. And our Church Catechism teaches us, that by Baptism is
signified a death to sin, and a new birth to righteousness, whereby we are made
members of Christ: and this sure, is no easy or short Work, nor wrought in a
small or busy Time.

It requires a Chamber, but a Council Chamger, not a sick man's. The Psalmist
prosseth it with a Selah, Psalm. 4.6. Stand in awe and sin not, commune with
your own hearts, and in your Chamber, and be still. Selah. Here is a weighty
Affair to be settled, a long Account to be stated, and a steady Course to be
stablished. To this end, a solemn Conference to be held, all Parties heard, all
Objections debated, all Pleas fully heard, that final Sentence may be given
between God and Sin: Let therefore the Rabble be excluded, all Noise suppressed,
all Disturbances prevented.

And can no privater Chamber be had than the sick man's? No other wherein to be
still, but that which of all other is most troublesome? How many Diseases are
there, that make any Consult impracticable? The Fever by its Fires; the
Lethargy by its Waters, the Colic by its Gripes, and most other Diseases by
their proper Torments, give the Patient business enough to employ his whole
mind, and if he can bear them, he does all that is possible for humane nature.

And those Diseases which do not utterly disable the mind, do certainly
disorder it; If they do not make the Consult utterly Impossible, yet they make
it more Difficult than in the day of Health, when all Faculties are free, and
all Powers entire, yet shun the work as too hard to be undergone.

Let us now suppose the man so happy, as to enjoy the concurse of all the
circumstances of Death, which without warrant he promised himself. He dies not
a violent Death, but in his Bed. He is not deluded with vain hopes, but knows
his Disease to be mortal; It is not a disabling Disease, but a gentle,
lingering one, which allows him full exercise of his faculties; and he
employeth them all in the work which through the whole course of his life he
cut out for this time. He is upon due consideration so sensible of his past
Follies and present Danger, as to be firmly resolved that if God be pleased to
grant him longer life, he will make it a new one, no less industrious in his
service than he has formerly been in that of his lusts.

These are the weak and dying Man's Resolutions; And whether they be not weak
and dying like himself, at another time may be questioned. General Experience
tells us, that the Resolution which is brought by fear, departs with it,
and the former Life returns with the health of the sinner. But this Danger,
since it has no place in my Text, shall have none in my Discourse: but I pass
by it to

IV. The last, but not least Danger is, that God will not pardon the impenitent
upon his late Repentance, as he did Moses upon the late performance of his
neglected Duty.

What hope there is for a wicked Man's repenting upon his Deathbed, is a
question more disputeable and more worth disputing, than any, yea, than all of
those, wherein we weary our selves, and think them most Learned, that can speak
most of them to no purpose. Let me admonish and request you to be so kind to
your selves, as to allow some serious thoughts to this most important Question
which you cannot study in vain; and do not rashly take every thing for Orthodox
that is Vulgar.

The Question is not concerning God's secret but his declared Will: not how for
reasons to himself alone known, he will deal with some particulars. For who
dares pretend to such knowledge? Our business is to enquire for God's declared
Will, and that ordinary Rule whereby he professes to judge the World. Search
then the Scriptures, for in them ye hope and must hope to find the way to
eternal life clearly revealed. Search them, and if in them you find any one
word, I say not of positive Promise, but of probable Intimation, that God will
accept of a Deathbed Repentance in commutation for a Holy Life; then you may
boldly depend upon it: But if on the contrary you meet in every page of the New
Testament express and frequent Declarations, in all kinds of styles, that there
is no other way to Happiness, but by Holiness; that our Lord's Design in coming
into the World was to destroy the works of the Devil, and at his second coming
he will render to every one according to his works; then, to depend upon any
extraordinary Favor against his stablished Rule, cannot be the practice of any
wise or considering Person. This is a question of Fact, your Bibles are
Witnesses, your care must be to examine them.

And when you do, you must not hope to find equal Weight in your own
Deductions, and in clear Positions; nor equal Security in your own
Apprehensions of God's good Nature, and his own professed way of exercising it.

Indeed those hopes whereon men build so great a weight, are so weak that they
are easily overthrown, and so few that they are easily reckoned up.

1. Some depend upon God's natural Goodness, which we gladly acknowledge to be
Infinite: Otherwise, we should not have Pardon offered upon such easy
Conditions, nor such Rewards promised to such slight Services, nor such
Patience exercised amidst so many Provocations: But what hopes belong to the
impenitent from this Goodness, the Apostle proclaims aloud, Romans 2.4. (...);
Affrontest thou the riches of his Goodness, and Forbearance, and
Long-suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to
repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of
God, who will render to every man according to his works? Go now, and make the
Goodness of God thy pedestal for impenitence.

2. Some presume upon the Parable of the Laborers. He that came not till the
last hour, sped as well as those that bore the burden and heat of the day. But
consider, that when he was interrogated why he stood all day idle; he answered,
because no man has hired me: Can thou return the same Answer to the same
Question? Were thou never invited to Repentance? However, I now invite thee,
and thereby adjourn thee from this Parable, to the more pertinent one of the
ten Virgins, whereof five were wise, and five were foolish: yet not so foolish
neither, as to seek to supply their want of oil, with water, though drawn from
their own eyes.

3. But the main ground of hope is the late conversion of the good Thief: which
being a single Example against a stablish'd Rule, must be an exact Tally, to
our case in all material Circumstances; but fails in many, especially two most
considerable, the Person and the Performance.

1. The PERSON is precariously taken for a wicked Man. I say Precariously, for
we have no evidence of it. The Law made not the Cross a punishment for Theft;
the word in the Greek signifies no worse than a Soldier: that there had been a
Sedition, we find, and may probably believe these two to have been of
Barabbas's Party; To fight for the holy People against the Heathen, was
reckoned by the Jews, not only Innocent but Meritorious, and so the Man was not
a Thief, but (perhaps) a Zealot: and though he confessed he suffered justly, in
relation to the Government; yet his Zeal and good Intentions qualified him for
mercy, especially from a gracious Fellow-sufferer. At worst, if his Crime were
great, yet will not This prove him a wicked Man. A good Man may fall into one
great Fault, be taken in it, and die for it. That this therefore was a wicked
Man, where is your Evidence? If you have none, where is your Confidence?

2. The PERFORMANCE was Extraordinary. When all our Lord's Disciples and his
very Apostles had forsaken him, when all that passed by reviled him, When his
Fellow-sufferer mocked him, when he was covered with shame and hatred of all
the World, when in all Appearances and his own Apprehensions he was forsaken by
his Father himself; then did this happy Man, in defiance of all
Discouragements, plead his Cause, and pay him his Devotions. And such heroical
Performances may, by a Gracious God, be accepted as Equivalent to a whole Life
of Piety.

Here then is the Ground and Measure of the hopes that an Impenitent may depend
on from this Example. If he can match the good Thief's Performance, he may
expect the like Acceptance. But let him take this into the account, The Devils
and damned Souls have the same title, even in Hell: When any one of them can so
love God as the Gospel requires, he may obtain Eternal Life: Upon the same
account, there is just so much hope of Salvation by a Death-bed-Repentance, as
there is of such a Love. And how much that hope may amount to, is our great
Consideration.

Either the man is sensible of his Danger, or he is not. He that is not, must
die in his Impenitence. He that is sensible, must needs be tempted to hate God,
as the Malefactor does his Judge. For this reason has he always wished there
were no God, whom in his own Defense, were it possible, he would deprive of his
Being. However, he has by all means endeavored to destroy his own Sense of
him. He has labored to Drown it in strong Drink, to Stifle it with worldly
Care, or to Starve it by any kind of Diversion. He has always shunned the Fear
of God, and it has always Pursued him, and now at last it has Overtaken him,
it Terrifieth, it Tormenteth him, it Amazeth him.

What now can be expected, but the Reverse of St. John's Aphorism, Love when it
is perfected casts out fear, because fear has torment: the requital must be,
that Fear when it is perfected casts out Love; and when is Fear prefected
more than at the brink of Hell, when its Fires flash in the guilty Man's face?

Let us now give the dying Man a visit, the first time (probably) wherein a
Minister is welcome. It is no hard work to convince him of his past Follies at
sight of his present Danger: nor to rouse him to earnest Resolutions to Amend
his life if it may be Prolonged: Himself believes his Resolutions to be
unmovable, and the Minister, in Charity, believes so too. But is this more
than the Rich man in Hell Torments might equal? He that prayed to have some
Messenger sent to warn his Brethren, would he not gladly have had the
commission? and would he not have taken that warning to himself, that he was to
carry to others? Such good Resolutions then, may possibly be found in Hell; and
if they cannot deliver out of Hell, there is small hope that they can save any
from it.

However, Charity obliges the Minister to give him some quieting drops of
Spiritual Laudanum, which may (perhaps) give him some present ease, but can no
more save his Soul, than the best Opiate can cure a Body whose Vitals are
consumed: Nor can they give any other than sickly rest while the Disease
disturbs it. I appeal to your own hearts, whether, at such a time, you can hope
to be so confident of your own Resolutions and God's Pardon, as to have no
Fears of Condemnation, and consequently no Wishes, that there may be no God to
judge you: For if there be, Love will be thereby destroyed, since every such
Wish is an Act of Hate, and that a Mortal one; for he that wishes it, does his
most toward taking away God's Being, and were it in his power, would effect
it. On the other side, nothing is plainer, either in Scripture or Reason, than
this, that nothing less than the Love of God can make a Man capable of enjoying
him.

It is therefore absolutely necessary, that the Minister apply all his
Endeavors so to display the Goodness and other Perfections of God, as to
enamour the guilty and now terrified Soul, with such powerful Love, as to make
him Rejoice in him, and not retain the least Wish to have him other than he is.
And if he can, by the Assistance of God's Blessing upon his Endeavors, effect
this, he works a great Miracle; he kindles the flame of Heavenly Love from the
flashes of Hellfire; makes a Burning-Glass of Ice; enamours the Malefactor of
his Judge; and such a miraculous Conversion may well hope for a miraculous
Mercy. But a wise Man will not hang his Eternal Happiness upon such Miracles:
he will rather walk the safe way than trust to such a jump, as must bring him
from the Deepest Hate, to the Highest Love, and take its Rise from Fear, which
puts at the greatest distance from Love: Those that do this, and fall short
into the bottomless Pit, may curse God without End or Measure, but without
Cause too, since he was not wanting to them in warning, wooing, and waiting;
but They were wanting to themselves, in slighting all his Invitations to
Happiness.

Whatever has been said, is intended for a Discovery of that Ordinary,
Regular Course, which God has revealed to be That wherein he will deal with
all Mankind in general: How often or how far he will depart from it, in favor
of any particular Person, upon particular Considerations, is not for us to
enquire, nor to judge any Man, concerning whom we can know but Little, and that
the Worst.

Our Church has taught us to hope well of every departed Brother, without
excepting those who to us appear least capable of it: and the Minister is to
absolve, de been esse, those who profess Repentance though late, for Charity
hops all things: We have known some fall from great heights without hurt, and
when we see a Man so falling, we hope he also will escape. But will not upon
such hopes cast our selves down a Precipice: Charity hops all things for our
Brother, but it Fears all things for our Selves: And it is a monstrous kind
of Self-love, which, by keeping us in Impenitence, exposes us to such a
dreadful Gandelope of Dangers as we come now from discovering. We may not die
in the Bed, which we appoint for the place of Repentance. If we die in our Bed,
we may not believe it our Deathbed, and even then delay in hope of Recovery.
If we know it to be our last Sickness, we may be thereby disabled from thinking
of any thing but the present Pain. If it be a gentle Sickness, and we do all
that, in such Circumstances, is possible, we are not sure that God will accept
us. All this is practical, and needs no other Application, but to our
Memories.

AND there we shall meet another suitable Memento from the Wise Man, Eccles.
xii. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the evil days
come not, nor the years draw nigh when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in
them. This is another Caution. God will have no Pleasure, where the Votary has
none. He loves a cheerful Giver of the Heart, as of the Alms. Nature has
taught all Mankind to worship him in a festival manner, in so much as the chief
Pontif forbad a solemn annual Sacrifice, because the people was in grief for
their loss at Cannae; and we have less reason to hope that God, who forbad his
people to offer him any blemished or lean Beast, should be pleased with the
worst of our days, because we wilfully offer the best to his Enemies. Therefore
remember thy Creator in the best of thy days, while thy Spirits are brisk and
vigorous, while the Wine may pretend to the Character which Jotham gives, that
it cheers God and man, before it be soured to Vinegar by a sharp disease, or
sunk to Lees by the dullness of Age.

But the days of Youth are many, the Wise Man therefore calls for Now, a point
without latitude, a short point that passes away before you can speak the
Syllable.

Behold, Now is the time accepted, Now is the day of Salvation. For,

1. Now is the Present time, we have it in possession; but of to morrow we have
no certainty: and in a case of the highest import, the surest Course is the
Best.

2. Now is a Festival day; one of those few Festivals which our Church has
thought worthy to be honored with a Collect which may outlive the next Sunday.

3. It is the beginning of the New Year, and therefore seasonable for the
beginning of a New Life. On this day the Romans (and (for ought I know) all
civil Nations) used to send their New Years-Gifts to all those whom they
professed to Love and Honor, and this so constantly, that the Emperors (some
of them) required and exacted it as a Duty.

Let us therefore present to God the Strena which alone is worthy or capable of
his acceptance: A Circumcised Heart, lively representing his own Divine Nature,
and the performances of his only Son our Lord, dead and buried to sin, but
risen to newness of life, the old man put off with the old year, and the new
man put on with the new one. This, and only this New Years Gift, will God
accept, and what he Accepts will not fail to Reward. He is not like the Roman
Emperors now mentioned, who so claimed a right to the Strenae, or to reward the
Payment only with a Discharge. When Moses his Child was Circumcised, the Lord
left him (says the Text) but our Lord has declared and promised, If a man
love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come
unto him, and make our abode with him.

What this Abode in a Holy Soul imports, we cannot reach, but may conjecture
from what the Prophet says of their Meeting, Isai. 64.4. For since the
beginning of the world men have not heard nor perceived by the ear, neither
has the eye seen O God beside thee, what he has prepared for him that waits
for him. Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness. This the
Apostle cites, 1 Cor. 2. and in ver. 14. gives the reason. The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. The
(...), the sensual Man, cannot savor spiritual Joys: He must first put off the
old man, which is a Circumcision, Painful to Nature, and therefore shunned by
it, but Necessary to be undergone, and the sooner the better: nor did ever any
one undergo it so early as not to repent that he had not done it sooner, even
for this among other reasons, because he has lost as many Days of supreme
Pleasure as he has spent in impenitence: so that in all that I have spoken
concerning Dangers, I have acted as one of those Servants which were sent out
to the Hedges and Highways, to compel men to go in to a Wedding-Feast; whose
Dainties exceed the boldest Wishes of the most Voluptuous: which is Another, a
Better, a more Genuine, and Evangelical Motive against Delay, not now to be
insisted on: nor shall I detain you longer than to call upon God, as the Church
has taught us in the Collect appointed for this Day.

Almighty God, who made thy Blessed Son to be circumcised and obedient to the
Law for Man; grant us the true Circumcision of the Spirit, that our Hearts and
all our Members being mortified from all worldly and carnal Lusts, we may in
all things obey thy blessed Will, through the same thy Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere are newly Published, Discourses or Sermons on several Scriptures, 8vo.

An Exposition on the Ten Commandments, with other Sermons, 4to. Both written
by the Right Reverend Father in GOD, Ezekiel Hopkins, late Lord Bishop of
Londonderry.


