ADVICE TO THE COMMONS Within all His MAJESTY'S Realms and Dominions.

Written By Jacob Bury Esquire An old Indigent Officer for the County of Bedford,
as a Captain of Horse in the Royal Army, of King Charles the First.

Containing the perfect Harmony, Consent, and Agreement between Divinity and
Law, in defense of the Government Established by Law in Church and State. And
that Kingly Government is by Divine Right.

Nihil dictum, nec scriptum est, quod non dictum, and scriptum prius. LONDON,
Printed by Henry Hills, Jun. for Richard Northcott adjoining to St. Peter's
Alley in Cornhill, and at the Mariner and Anchor on Fishstreet hill near
London-Bridg. 1685.

To the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Ailesbury and Elgin, Vicount Bruce of
Ampthill, Baron Bruce of Wharlton, Skeleton, and Kinloss, Lord of the Honor of
Ampthill, High Steward of Leicester, Lord Lieutenant and Custos Rotulorum of
the Counties of Bedford, Huntington, and Cambridge, and one of the Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
Right Honorable,
HAving received some kindness from your Lordship, as also from the rest of His
Majesty's Commissioners of the Peace, for the County of Bedford; whereof, and
wherein, your Honor is deservedly (for your known and well approved Loyalty)
Summus procerum, and proximus a Rege, the Chiefest of the Governors, and the
very next under, and after the King; therefore I thought my self obliged to
show my thankfulness, by doing something that might tend to the good of the
whole Community. In order thereunto, I was principally moved to Write this
small ensuing Treatise, wherein is contained chiefly, The perfect Harmony,
Consent, and Agreement between Divinity and Law, in Defense of the Government
by Law established in Church and State; and is plainly demonstrated, That
Kingly Government is by Divine Right. And now, my Lord, I most humbly beg your
Pardon, that I presume to prefix your great Name before this Discourse: But
since there is nothing therein, but what has its Weight and Warrant from the
Holy Scriptures, or our Authentic, undeniable, and well approved of Books of
Law; I cannot but hope your kind Approbation and Acceptance, and am very well
pleased, I have the occasion offered me, to let your Honor know how much I am.

My Lord, Your most Humble and very Obedient Servant, Jacob Bury.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THis small ensuing Treatise (Entitled Advice to the Commons within all His
Majesty's Realms and Dominions) are confessed to be but the Gleanings of an Old
Indigent Officer of the Royal Army of King Charles the First; gathered from the
vintage, or the larger and more Fruitful Fields, of such Authentic Books of
Law, etc. as are cited by the Author for his Vouchers. It was Written in time a
little before, and is Published in short time after the Demise or Death of the
Natural Body of our late most Gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second,
who to his Glory and Honor in all after Ages to come, will be Chronicled
Miraculously to have excelled all his Royal Ancestors in Mercy, and Amnesty to
all his Subjects whatsoever that survive him: by whose Prudent Governance, and
Wise Management of all Public Affairs, the Public Peace of these Kingdoms,
was to a Miracle preserved ever since his long expected, and (for good reasons)
much wished for Restoration. Now (blessed be God for it) his rightful
Successor (whom God long preserve) has declared and promised, that as he is by
Right of Blood, and Act in Law, next and immediately to succeed his said dear
Royal Brother in the Station God has placed him (that is to say) in the
Governance of these his Realms and Dominions, as our Sovereign Lord and King,
so he shall always imitate his Predecessor in Clemency and Mercy to his
Subjects; that however he has before (by Wicked and foul Mouthed Detraction)
been misreported to have been for Arbitrary Government; that he always shall,
and will do his utmost endeavors, for the defense and preservation of the
Government (as it is Established by Law) in Church and State; that he will
invade no Man's property, etc. Now seeing that it has pleased God to take to
himself from us, our late Gracious Sovereign, let us all rest contented, and
fully satisfied that we have woefully experienced the Mouths of Slanderors to
have been always apt to call all things into question; but that always also
they have been unready to approve of any thing tending to the public Peace and
welfare of the whole Community. Therefore believe the Word and gracious Promise
of his Sacred Majesty; believe not every Idle report, neither be moved by vain
suggestions, least through light trust, thou bring thy self into danger, and
(which is more bad) be counted a fool. Let us all believe that (none sprung
from the Loins of King James the First) will ever alter the Protestant
Religion, or the Government Established by Law in Church and State. Remember
there was this Plea allowed in bar of an Action brought in the late times of
Rebellion, for that the Plantiff had not taken the engagement to be true and
faithful to the Commonwealth without King or House of Lords. Take into
consideration also, what the Impression and Charecter of the Money Coined at
Oxford was in these times; and also consider what was the Impression and
Charecter of the Money then Coined by the late Usurpers; these matters (duly
considered) will without further Arguments demonstrate, what the good Old Cause
Men aimed at; certainly they aimed at nothing less than the alteration of the
Government both in Church and State, and in order thereunto it may be said,
that at the last, they Fought neither against great nor small, but only against
King Charles the First, the blessed Martyr of ever blessed Memory. Now, though
it be in these his Majsties Realms and Dominions suffered to every one by
Lawful ways and means to desire to aspire to a better private Fortune; yet
withal it is an Office just in all inferior degrees, to bear without grudging
the Ordinance, and Sentence of their Lot, otherwise there would be confusion of
all Imperies and Governments, if it were suffered to every one to aspire to
such liberty as he lusts after, beyond the quality, State, and condition of a
Subject, wherein God has placed him. The late Plots proceeded (as it were) by
the public consent of the Dissenters to the present Government, and by
incitation of certain Seditious Heads, who (by their rashness) are wont to draw
the Commons into commotion, that by Poverty are assured they can lose nothing,
and by their Nature are always desirous of Innovation, and being easily filled
with vain errors, and false persuasions, are moved at the appetite of any that
will provoke them and be their leaders; as the Waves of the Sea are carried and
hurried hither and thither with the blasts of the Wind. Therefore every Law was
made at the first, to no other end, but to bridle such as would live without
Reason and Law, and to restrain and be a curb to such as will not Conform, and
be Obedient to those Rules the Law prescribes, requiring their Obedience to
the Magistrates Superior, Middle, and Inferior, and as all are to know, the
Superior is not, nor can be subject to the control of the Inferior. In pares
est nullum imperium, multo minus in eos, qui majus imperium habent, therefore
all Magistrates Subordinate, be they either of the Superior, Middle, or
Inferior Rank, and a fortiori, all other Subjects whatsoever, are to be
Obedient to their Sovereign Lord the King, as Supreme, qui majus imo maximum
imperium habet, that has the greater, yea the greatest Command, Power and
Supreme Sovereignty over all his Subjects in these his Majesty's Realms and
Dominions. But as to this matter of the Kings Supremacy, in Church and State.
Here I shall say no more, but shall leave all to be further informed as to
their bounden Duties therein, in this ensuing Treatise; wherein is more fully
and at large discoursed thereof. I remember in this ensuing Discourse also is
said, (citing Sir Edward Coke in 7th. Report 7. b. in Calvin's Case) that every
Subject is bound to go with the King in his Wars, infra and extra Regnum, but
he is there pleased to add, that the Subject is not compellable to go out of
the Kingdom without Wages: and cites many Statutes as 8th. Ed. the 3d. ca.
7th, etc. in defense of his opinion. I do not presume to contradict him, but am
satisfied that he shows good warrant for what he there Writes. Moreover, no
considerable Foreign War upon any occasion whatsoever is ever so rashly
undertaken, but first the King uses to Summon his great Council the
Parliament, and therein is the Honor, Interest, and safety of the King and
Kingdom considered; and Parliamentary Supplies are granted, for the defraying,
carrying on, and answering the necessary charges of the War: however Sir Ed.
Coke denies not, but infra regnum, within the Kingdom, all are compellable,
and bound by duty of their Allegiance, with or without Wages to serve the Lord
the King in his Wars; for then, if ever that saying is true, ad regem potestas
omnium pertinet, ad singulos proprietas, the Power of all Men and all Things
they have, enjoy or possess, belongs to the King: and yet every Man's single
property remains, and is continued: (but as may be seen in St. Jermin in his
Doct. and Stud. 64. b.) The Law does assign diverse conditions upon the
Property, and that, to alter the Property without consent of the Owner, if the
conditions are not contrary to the Law of God or Reason. And nothing is more
agreeing with the Law of God; nay, our Obedience to the King as Supreme, is
commanded in and by the Word of God; and nothing can be more agreeable to
Reason, unless we will simply and contrary to all Reason, admit of the Children
to give Laws to their Father, or Infants Males or Females to give Suck to their
Mothers. And it is a thing obvious and well known to every Man (that knows
any thing in our Law) that every Man's Property and Estates whatsoever by Act in
Law are Forfeit to the King for Treason, or Felony: for Treason (which all and
every Rebellion is) to the King for ever, of what mean Lord soever they are
holden: for Felony, to the King for a Year, Day, and Wast; and afterward to
the Lord of the Manor of whom they are holden for ever. In my ensuing
Discourse (to show what care was made for the preservation of the Royal Rights,
Privileges, Jurisdictions, and Prerogatives, and Person of the King) I make
mention of the Stat. made in the 12. Car. 2di. chap. 1. though in the first
clause thereof by me mentioned, is said, That if any during the Life of the
Kings Majesty, etc. I let this stand unaltered, though the death of the Natural
Body of the late King happened since, because that clause thereof was made but
in affirmance of the Common Law, and the Stat. of 25. Ed. 3. ca. 2. as to the
security of the Kings Person and the Government: as appears in Mr. Stanford's
Pleas of the Crown, the first chap. as to the Second and Third clauses thereof,
the offenders against the Second clause are not only made incapable of any
employment in Church or State, but are also made liable to such punishments, as
by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, are to be inflicted in such Cases. As
to the Third clause thereof every Person offending against the same shall incur
the danger and penalty of Praemunire mentioned in the Stat. of 16. Rich. 2. ca.
5. It appears by Bracton, Libro 3tio. Tract. 2do. cap. 15o. Fol. 134o. that
Canutus (the Danish King) having settled himself in this Kingdom in Peace, kept
notwitstanding (for the better continuance thereof) great Armies within this
Realm. The Peers and Nobles distasting the Government by Arms and Armies
(odimus accipitrem, quia semper vivit in armis) Wisely and Politickly persuaded
the King that they would provide for the safety of him and his People, and yet
his Armies (carrying with them many inconveniences) should be withdrawn:
hereupon Canutus presently withdrew his Armies, and within a while after lost
his Crown, and the same was restored to the right Owner. I mention this matter,
and have it from Sir Ed. Coke who cites Bracton for his voucher in his 7. rep.
16. b. and withal I desire all to take notice, that the Excise by Act of
Parliament, made in the first Parliament after his late Majesty's most happy
Restoration, was continued to be paid to the late King during his Life. Hearth
Money was settled upon the late King, his Heirs and Successors, and was in
recompense to the Crown for the dissolution of the Court of Wards and Liveries.
Customs upon Merchandises imported and exported (this little Book will tell
you) were all originally payable to the King, his Heirs and Successors; and
that Subsedies granted by Parliament, are but an improvement in the improvement
of time, and trade, of the Ancient Customs payable to the Crown, and were
granted to the late King for his Life; as they were from the time of King Henry
the 7th. granted to all his Royal Ancestors, Kings and Queens of this Realm,
except his Sacred Majesty's Royal Father King Charles the First. Now mark what
Sir Edward Coke more says in his 7th. rep. 10th b. Haereditas Principis, est
successio in universum jus, quod defunctus Antecessor suus habuit, The
Inheritance of the Prince is his Succession unto every Right that his deceased
Ancestor had. And suppose the Right Heir of the Crown had been attainted of
Treason, yet shall the Crown descend to him, and eo instante (without any
reversal) the attainder is utterly avoided; as it fell out in the case of King
Henry the 7th. as may be seen in 1 H. 7th. Fol. 4o. I have laid down before you
these matters, to let you know, that those Loyal Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament in the 12th. year of his late Sacred Majesty, well knew that he must
needs want the necessary supplies to maintain, defend, and uphold the
Government, as the late Usurpers had to offend, alter, and destroy the same.
The Kings Charges are great, as well for the security and safety of his own
Royal Person, as for the preservation of the public Peace of his Realms and
Dominions for the general good of the whole Community. A few Yeomen of the
Guard (before the late times of Rebellion called Beef-eaters) were not enough
for to, nor could rescue his Sacred Majesty King Charles the First, from that
impious Act, execrable Murder, and unparalleled Treason against his Sacred
Person, and Life, committed the 30th. of January 1648. neither was nor could
such a Guard have been sufficient to secure the late Vserpers (so ridiculous
was their Right to what they Usurped) from that time, to the time of his late
Majesty's Restoration. We see before, how in Ancient times, King Canutus was
served, so soon as he was (I grant Politickly, but how Wisely I know not)
persuaded to withdraw, and disband his Guards: it may be his Arms or Armies
might be attended with many inconveniences; but the present Guards of our
Sovereign Lord the King may be necessary to be continued, if ever in this our
present Age, which has been very changeable, and one Plot or other has been
too much threatening alteration of the Government in Church and State; and these
Guards of his Sacred Majesty are not attended with any inconveniences, nor are
chargeable to any but the King himself. Sir Edw. Coke says, That the Kings
Treasure is the sinews of War, and the Honor and safety of the King in times
of Peace; that it is firmamentum belli, and ornamentum pacis; It is so, but I
deny any War to be justifiable against the Lord our King within his Realms and
Dominions: and therefore every Rising, and Force raised within the Realm is
properly called a Rebellion, improperly a War. Nor do the Kings Laws Protect
any Subject to trade, get, and gain a great Estate, to the end to empower him
to ascend the Throne, and to stand in competition with, or to distaste the
Person or the Government of our rightful Sovereign Lord the King: but rather it
is the bounden duty of all in general, to Love, Honor and obey their Lord the
King, and proportionably according to their Estates, Qualities and Degrees to
give Aides and Supplies to his necessities, for the just defense and security
of his Royal Person, and the preservation of the Peace, and quietness of him
and all his People, in all his Realms and Dominions. We say quo ditior est
quisque eo nobilior, by so much as every Man is the more Rich, by so much he is
the more Noble, by so much he is the better respected, and the more Esteemed.
But I say, Principem habere ditiorem, confert ad dignitatem subditorum,
ditiores habere subditos confert ad nobillitatem principis, to have the Richer
Prince conduces to the dignity of the Subjects; and to have the Richer People
conduces to the dignity of the Prince. Now all here last mentioned is to this
end and purpose, that all old Animosities, Jealousies and Fears laid aside
(after his Gracious Majesty shall have convened his Parliament) unto him be
given quod defunctus Antecessor suus habuit, what his deceased Ancestor had.
Believe the word and promise of his Gracious Sovereign; he begins his Reign
with Clemency and Mercy to all his Subjects, and will certainly be so far from
invading your Properties, that having what was thought needful for his late
Royal and Dear Brother: nay, I say, the Richer you make him, the more he will
be respected at home, the more safe he and all his People will be; and the more
he will certainly be feared and dreaded abroad. But least with the Foolish
Architect, I make the Porch too big for the House, I say no more, only
recommend to you the reading of this ensuing Treatise: which was written for
the confirmation only of the more knowing and Loyal; and for the information of
the more Ignorant, and therefore less Loyal Subjects. So I commit every Man to
Gods protection, and rest

Every Man's well Wisher, J. B.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. Shows how things stood at the latter end of King James the First,
and something is said of the High Court of Parliament. p. 1. CHAP. II. Shows,
how King Charles the First found things at his first coming to these Crowns,
and there is also said something as to the learning of the Customs, the chief
Maintenance of the Crown in his time. p. 4. CHAP. III. Shows how the late
Rebellion broke out, and s^mething is said of the great Advantages the Rebels
had, with what Advantages only the Loyal Party had. p. 12. CHAP. IV. Shows
how the King, the Loyal party, and the Law suffered Violence. p. 14. CHAP. V.
Shows about what time the Kings Writs were first framed for the induction of
the Commons into the Parliaments of England. p. 16. CHAP. VI. Shows the
difference between Parliamentary Privileges, and the Prerogatives of the King;
and shows how at the first Kingly Government was constituted by God himself,
and that by Gods Law also the Legislative Power, and the Power of the Militia
was given to the King; and that in these highest Points of the Kings
Prerogative, the Law of England is agreeing with the Law of God, and that God
is vindex sui Ordinis, the avenger of his own Ordinance. p. 18. CHAP. VII.
Shows that vindictive Justice is also derived from God to the King as
supreme, and that all Subordinate Officers derive their Jurisdiction from the
King, and through his Mediation from God also, and that herein the Law of
England is also agreeing with the Law of God. p. 23. CHAP. VIII. Shows that
the Subjects of England are bound by their bond of Allegiance to serve the King
only in his Wars, and that the King is the Fountain of Honor: and by way of
Induction to the same, something is said of a Countee Palatine, David's
worthies, and good old Barzillai the Gileadite. p. 25. CHAP. IX. Herein you
have a Subject defined, you have Ligeance defined, and is showed that the King
has two Capacities, the one Natural and the other Politic, and that the Body
Politic cannot be separated from the Body Natural; that Ligeance is due to the
Natural Body of the King; that the Kingdom of England admits of no interregnum,
and that the Disherison of the Right Heir of a Kingdom is wont to be the
beginning of Civil Wars. p. 29. CHAP. X. Herein you have an Heir defined, and
divided, and is showed, that the Right Heir of the Crown ought not, nor can
Lawfully be Disinherited; that a Bastard ought not, nor can be Heir to to the
Crown; and further something is said to the late Bill for the Exclusion of the
late most Illustrious Prince James Duke of York, now our Sovereign Lord, King
James the Second. p. 31. CHAP. XI. Shows that Ignorance of the Law will
excuse none, and that therefore all Dissenters to the Government in Church and
State, are advised to Conformity. p. 36. CHAP. XII. Shows that all Subjects
owe true Ligeance to their Sovereign, though they never were, or ever shall be
Sworn to the same; and is showed the diversity between Enemies, and Rebels,
then all are advised from Rebellion, and is showed that the King has no Peer,
and therefore cannot be judged by his Subjects for his Actions. p. 38. CHAP.
XIII. Shows that no Action lies against the King, but in place thereof
Petition must be made unto him; and that (due circumstances observed) the
Subject shall have his remedy against the King by way of Petition, as readily
as one Subject may recover against another Subject by way of Action in any of
the Kings Courts: for that all his Majesty's Subordinate Officers are Sworn to
do Justice between the King and his Subjects, which if they do not, they are
Answerable for the injury, not the King. p. 41. CHAP. XIV. Shows what
inconveniences happen in the Realm of France, through Regal Government alone,
with the Commodities that proceed of the joint Government Politic and Regal in
the Realm of England. And all the Community are herein dissuaded by mutinous
and Rebellious practices to Disinfranchise themselves. p. 43. CHAP. XV. Shows
how tender this Government Politic and Regal conjoined is of the safety of the
Kings Person, and of all his Royal Rights and Prerogatives. And that our Law
does not reject Women or Infants in the high point of the Descent of the Crown;
and that our King holds immediately of God to himself, and acknowledges no
Prince on Earth his Superior. p. 46. CHAP. XVI. Shows that all Unlawful
Assemblies or Meetings for the Plotting of harm to the King, or the Alteration
of the Government, are Unlawful, and further shows what Misprision of Treason
is, and that it is the Duty of every good Subject presently to discover
Treason. p. 49. CHAP. XVII. Shows that all Writs, Process, Executions and
Commandments, are and ought to be in the Kings Name only. p. 51. CHAP. XVIII.
All Freeholders are advised as to what manner of Persons they are or ought to
Choose for future Parliaments. p. 52. CHAP. XIX. Shows that the King of
England is, and always has been, Supreme Head of the Church, not the Pope. p.
55. CHAP. XX. As to the Kings Supremacy is showed the difference between the
Primitive and more modern times, herein the Author advises all to be at Unity
within themselves, and since we are restored to our Ancient Government, to give
to our Sovereign Lord the King his Dues; and desires all to join with him (in
the conclusive Prayer, for the Morning Service in our Church Liturgy) for the
King. p. 58.
ADVICE TO THE Commons of England, etc.
CHAP. I. Shows how things stood at the latter end of King James the First,
and something is said of the High Court of Parliament.
AS Noah (rendered in the Word of God, Genesis 6. and 9. ver. to be a just and
perfect Man, and one that walked with God, and that with his Family after the
great deluge survived the whole World) is fictitiously said to have had two
Faces, the one looking backward, the other forward, the one looking upon the
World before the Flood, the other on the World after the Flood; so an old
indigent Officer of the Kings Majesty's Army, King Charles the First of ever
Blessed Memory, may not improperly be said to have two Faces, the one looking
backward, the other forward, the one looking on this Kingdom of England before
the late Civil War, the other on the same since the said War. Taking leave to
look backward and to examine how, and in what state of Affairs things stood in
the latter end of the Reign of King James the First, and how the said King
Charles the First found things upon the demise of the Kingdom to him, upon the
death of the natural Body of His said Royal Ancestor. I collect out of what I
have read long since, that about the Ninteenth year of the Reign of the said
King James the First, in a Speech to his House of Peers, he expressed himself,
that he intended not to derogate from, or Infringe any of the Liberties or
Priveledges of their House, but rather to fortify and strengthen them; for
never any King had done so much for the Nobility of England as he had done, and
ever would be ready to do, and whatever he should say, or deliver to them, as
his thought, yet when he had said what he thought, he would afterward freely
leave the judgment thereof wholly to their House; he knew they would do
nothing, but what the like had been done before, and prayed them not to be
jealous, that he would abridg them of any thing that had been used; for
whatsoever Presidents in good times of Government could warrant, he would
allow, acknowledging them to be the Supreme Court of Justice, wherein he was
ever present by Representation.

But his said Sacred Majesty then inferred, that the Privileges of the
Commons, which they claimed to be their natural Birthrights, were but the
favors of former Kings. Against which the Commons then protested, That the
Liberties, etc. o^ Parliament, are the Ancient and undoubted Birthright and
Inheritance of the Subjects of England; that the urgent Affairs concerning the
Kings State, and defense of the Realm, and the Church of England, and the
Maintenance and making of Laws, and redress of Mischiefs within the Realm, are
proper matter for Debate in Parliament, and that this Debate ought to be free,
etc. And no Member to be Imprisoned (other than by censure of the House it
self) for debating Parliament business; and if any Member is complained of for
any thing done or said in Parliament, the same is to be showed the King by
assent of the Commons, before the King is to give credence to any private
Information. In Counsel afterward this King expressed, that he never meant to
deny the House of Commons any Lawful Privilege they had enjoyed by any Law or
Statute, by Custom, or uncontrolled and lawful President. In the Protestation
some words (viz. arduis Regni) are cunningly mentioned, but the word
(quibusdam) which restrains the generality to such particular Cases, as his
Majesty pleases to consult with them upon, was purposely omitted. Now as to
what he is pleased to consult with them upon, it is Customary for the King, at
the first opening of every Parliament, in a short Speech, to declare to the
Three Estates, the certain Occasions urged him to convene them: on which or the
particular Heads thereof, the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal
of England, for the time being, more Copiously enlarges; observing those
measures the King his Master prescribes him, tho in fewer words, for
non-observance whereof, and for their omission of the word (quibusdam) in their
said protestation, the said Learned King James the First, did actually take the
said protestation out of the Journal Book propria sua manu; and on the sixth of
January Dissolved the Parliament; and some eminent Members of the Parliament
were committed to the Tower; and others to other Prisons; and some sent into
Ireland, rather for Punishment than to Enquire (as was pretended) of sundry
Matters concerning his Majesty's Service. There then appeared some Men of
Antimonarchial Spirits, and that insisted too highly upon Privileges, little
regarding or rightly considering the measures chalked out to them by the Kings
Writ, by which they are summoned and empowered to sit in Parliament. The
Members before spoken of remembered not what the said King James the First in
time before said, the Parliament is a thing composed of a Head and a Body, the
Monarchy and the Three Estates, it was first a Monarchy, then after a
Parliament, that there were no Parliaments but in Monarchical Governments, for
in Venice, the Netherlands, and other free Governments there are none; the Head
is to call the Body together; and for the Clergy, the Bishops are the Chief;
for Shires their Knights; for Towns and Cities their Burgesses and Citizens;
these are to treat of the certain difficult Matters, and to Counsel their King
with their best advice to make Laws for the Commonweal; and the Lower House is
also to Petition their King, and acquaint him with their Grievances, and not to
meddle with their Kings Prerogative, they are to offer supply for his
necessity, and he is to distribute in recompense thereof Justice and Mercy. If
this Head and Body, Monarch and Three Estates, be at unity within themselves,
they then make le treshault Court de Parliament, the Supreme, and in the
superlative Degree, the highest Court of Parliament. Their Privileges are so
great, that (whilst that Court is at unity within it self) I know not what it
may not do; and (as directed by Mr. Plowden) I shall not think, much less speak
any thing dishonorable of that Court, but as in Arithmetic Three Ciphers with
a Figure of One prefixed, makes the complete Number of one Thousand; so take
away the Number (or rather the beginning of Number) of One, and the Three
Ciphers that remain signify nothing. For when the Parliament is styled the
Supreme Court, it must be understood properly of the King sitting in the House
of Peers in Person, and improperly of the Lords or Commons without him; the
Consultive, Directive, or Deliberative Power is in the House of Peers, the
Performing and Consenting Power is in the House of Commons, but the Legislative
Power lodges in the Person of the King, yet altogether (that is to say) King,
Lords, and Commons make Parliamentary binding Laws and Statutes, 7. H. 7. 14.
it is said that there are many Statutes indicted, quod dominus Rex Statuit,
that our Lord the King has ordained, yet if they are in the Parliament Roll,
and have always been allowed as Statutes, it shall be intended that they were
made by Authority of Parliament. But if a Statute be made thus, the King with
the Assent of the Lords, or the King with the Assent of the Commons, It has
been held from about the time of H. 3. to the time of the late Rebellion, not
to be good, for all ought to Assent, Coke 8.20, 21. so that as Sir John
Fortescue says, Fol. 40. a. b. Statutes are made in England, not only by the
Princes pleasure (tho he says not that in England they can be made without the
Princes pleasure or Royal Assent) but by and with the Assent of the whole Realm
in Parliament assembled by their Representatives: so that of necessity they
must procure the Wealth of the People, and in no wise tend to their hindrance,
which well they cannot do, seeing they are ordained not by the device of one
Man alone, or of a Hundred wise Councelors only, but of more than three Hundred
chosen Men, much agreeing with the number of the Ancient Senators of Rome: and
if it chance, these Statutes (being devised with such great Solemnity and Wit)
not to fall out so effectually, as the intent of the makers did wish, they may
quickly be Reformed in a Subsequent Parliament; but not without the Assent of
all the Powers, by whose Authority they were first passed and devised.

CHAP. II. Shows, how King Charles the First found things at his first coming
to these Crowns, and there is also said something as to the learning of the
Customs, the chief Maintenance of the Crown in his time.
I Further observe, that at the first coming to the Crown of the said King
Charles the First, his first Parliament in the first Year of his Reign, or the
Major part of them, met not without being armed with some prejudice to his said
Sacred Majesty King Charles the First, for therein the Act for Tonnage and
Poundage passed not which in the first Parliaments from the time of H. 7. to
this time, (as it were accustomably and of course) had been granted and passed
to all his Royal Ancestors, Kings, and Queens of this Realm. The sudden
Dissolution of that Parliament, preventing the Act of Subsedies he was forced
to draw from his People, by borrowing of Persons able to lend, such competent
Sums of Money, as might discharge his present Occasions; and to that purpose,
directed Letters to the Lord Lieutenant of Counties, to return the Names of
Persons able to lend, omitting the Names of Noble Men and Clergymen, and (the
Names returned) the Comptroler of the Kings Household by the Councils order,
issued forth Letters in the Kings Name, under the Privy Seal, to the several
Persons returned for Loan of Money. Though this was not the first time that
ever such Loanes under the Privy Seal were had upon certain emergent Occasions,
and in cases of urgent necessity by failer of Parliamentary Supplies. Yet in
the Parliament next after, in tertio Caroli primi, many of the Members took the
occasion to strive as to their insisting upon their Privileges to outdo one
another. Then the modesty of the House of Commons (which was very great in
former times) was by them forgotten, and they began to arrogate more Power than
what the Kings Writ gave them; heretofore they evaded matters of State as much
as they could, and when their Advice has been desired, they have humbly
desired not to be put to consult of things of which they had no knowledge; and
at other times they have humbly desired, that the King would be advised in
matters of War or Peace, by the Lords, being of more Experience than themselves
in such Affairs; and have used modestly to excuse themselves, as too weak to
consult in so weighty Matters. But then several Speeches and Resolves made by
diverse Champions of the House of Commons (who were no friends to Prerogative)
put the Lords and Commons then Assembled in Parliament, upon their Petition
concerning diverse Rights and Liberties of the Subjects; to which the late Kings
answer was, That he willed that right be done according to the Laws and Customs
of the Realm, and that the Statutes be put in due Execution, that his Subjects
may have no cause to complain of any Wrong or Oppressions contrary to their
just Rights and Liberties, to the Preservation whereof, he held himself in
Conscience as well obliged as of his Prerogative. But this answer not giving
satisfaction, he was again Petitioned unto, that he would give a full and
satisfactory answer to their Petion in full Parliament, whereupon the late King
in Person, after their Petition was read by the Clerk of the Crown, the Kings
answer thereunto was read by the Clerk of the Parliament in these words, Soit
droit fait come est desire, Let right be done as is desired. And on the last
day of the Session of that Parliament, he declared his dislike of a
Remonstrance given him by the House of Commons, and since he was certainly
informed of a second Remonstrance was preparing to take away his profit of
Tonnage and Poundage, alleging that he had given away his right thereunto by
his Answer to their Petition: that therefore he was forced to put an end to
that Session before he meant it, being unwilling to receive any more
Remonstrances to which he must give a harsh answer. And as for Tonnage and
Poundage, it was a thing he could not want, and never meant by him to be
granted. As single Persons usually quarrel before they fight, so now began
there to be a kind of Logomachy, a contention in Words, Speeches,
Remonstrances, and Declarations began to be cried up and down the Streets, all
which in time after ushered in the late War. It will be material for a plainer
discovery of the injury intended to his said most excellent Majesty in the said
second Remonstrance, to take away his Profit of Tonnage and Poundage, to speak
something, for the explanation of this learning of the Customs, from our Books
of Law; from which it is observable, That the Duties payable to the King out of
Merchandises exported or imported, are of three kinds: 1. Customs, 2.
Subsidies, 3. Imposts or Impositions, all which admit of these Definitions and
Divisions.

1. Customs are Duties certain and perpetual, payable to the King as the
Inheritance of his Crown, for Merchandises imported and exported to, and from
parts over and beyond the Seas, from one Realm to another Realm. These Duties
called Customs are divided into three kinds: 1. Magna and antiqua Custuma, 2.
Parva and nova Custuma, 3. Prisage and Butlerage, and in all these the Crown
has a certain and perpetual Inheritance. 1. The great and ancient Custom, is
payable out of native or homebred Commodities of three sorts, to wit, Wool,
Woollfells, and Hides, and is in certainty, 6 s. 8 d. for a Sack of Wool, for
300. of Woolfells 6 s. 8 d. for a Last of Hides, 13 s. 4. d. 1 f. And every
Sack of Wool contains 26 Stone, and every Stone 14 Pounds. And the Last of
Hides is 20 Dickar, and every Dickar is 10 Hides; this is the Ancient Custom
payable by every Merchant Denizon for the exportation of the Commodities
aforesaid, but the Merchant Strangers paid a third part more, for remission of
Prizes, and other Privileges to them granted by the Charter of 31. Ed. 1.
Dyer. 1 Eliz. 165. b. 1.

2. The new and pettit Custom is 3 d. of the Pound payable by Merchant
Strangers only, for all Commodities by them imported, and exported, as is
expressed in the said Charter of 31. Ed. 1.

3. Prisage is a Custom taken of Wines of all sorts, and is in certainty, 2
Tuns of Wine out of every Ship laden with 20 Tun or more; the one Tun to be
taken before the Mast of the Ship, and the other behind the Mast, and because
that this Custom is part of the Merchandises imported and taken in specie, it
is called Prizeage; and this Custom of Prizeage, was payable in England by all
Merchants Denizons and Aliens, before the said Charter of 31 Ed. 1. for which
the King remitted to all Merchant strangers all Prizes. And in the same Charter
it is expressed, that in consideration thereof, the Merchants strangers had
granted to pay to the King and his Heirs by name of Custom 2 s. of every Tun of
Wine that they shall bring, or cause to be brought into the Kingdom, etc. which
Custom of 2 s. of the Tun is now in England called Buttlerage, and payable
there by all Merchant strangers. See the Stat. de Extra and ad Scaccar. 15th.
Ed. 2. And this is the nature of these several Duties for the Original of these
Customs.

1. The said Ancient and grand Custom is parcel of the Ancient Inheritance of
the Crown, and as Ancient as the Crown it self, Inhaeret sceptro; and is due of
common Right and by Prescription, and not by grant or benevolence of Merchants,
or by Act of Parliament Dyer 1. Eliz. 165. b. But because that every thing that
is due of common Right, and by Prescription, ought to have a reasonable cause
of beginning, it is to be Noted and Observed, that this Custom was paid to the
Crown for four principle Causes and Reasons.

1. For the better knowledge of such as depart the Realm, and of what
Commodities are carried out of the Realm. See Dyer 165. b. and the Statute of
18. Ed. 3. ca. 3.

2. For the Interest that the King has in the Sea, and in the Braches and Arms
of it, 22. Ass. Pl. 93.15. Eliz. Dyer 326. b. the Sea is of the Ligeance of the
King, as of his Crown, and is his proper Inheritance, Davyes rep. 56. a.

3. Because the King is Guardian of all the Ports and Havens of the Realm,
which are Ostia or januae Regni, and the King is Custos totius Regni.

4. For Waftage and Protection of Merchants upon the Sea against the Enemies of
the Realm, and against Pirates who are the common Enemies of all Nations.

2. The Pettit and new Custom payable by Merchant strangers only, had its
beginning in the time of Ed. 1. for before this time the duties payable by
Merchant strangers for all Commodities imported, (except Wines,) and for all
native Commodities exported (except the said staple wares of Wool, Woolfells,
and Hides) were uncertain. For the King by his Prerogative took to his use, and
at his own price, so many, and such portions of their Merchandises, as he had
need of by name of Prizes, which were always uncertain. But King Ed. 1. by his
said Charter dated the 1 of Febr. in the 31 year of his Reign, in favor of
Merchant strangers, and to invite and occasion their Commerce and Trade,
remitted to them all Prizes, and granted to them diverse other Privileges. In
consideration whereof, all and singular the said Merchant strangers for
themselves, and others of the same parts with them, and every of them beyond
the Seas, unanimously agreed to pay to the King and his Heirs 3 d. of the Pound
for all Merchandises imported or exported by them, as is expressed more
particularly in the said Charter, which is to be found in the Office of the
Chief Remembrancer in the Exchequer. And this Charter of Ed. 1. in all Points
was ratified and confirmed by Act of Parliament, 27 Ed. 3. ca. 26, and this is
the Original of Pettit Custom, so called because this Pettit Custom for
Foreign Commodities, was accepted by the King, when but a small quantity of
such Foreign Wares was imported into England, for in the time of Ed. 1. and
after that in the time of Ed. 3. the native Commodities of England exported,
were of greater quantity and value by two parts of three at the least, than the
Foreign Merchandises imported; but now it is quite contrary: for at this day
the Outgate is less than the Ingate, the Foreign Mercery and Grocery Wares,
etc. imported, are of far greater quantity and value than our Native
Commodities exported.

3. Prisage of Wines, is also a Custom due by Prescription, and parcel of the
Ancient Inheritance of the Crown, and that the King has Inheritance in the
Prisage of Wines, appears by the Charters granted to the Citizens of London,
and to those of the cinque Ports to be discharged of Prisage in all Ports for
ever. See the Stat. of 1 H. 8. ca. 5. And the Duke of Ormond has an Estate of
Inheritance in the Prisage of Wines in the Kingdom of Ireland by grant of the
King; and this is the Nature, Original and Difference, of the Ancient duties
payable for Merchandises, which are properly called Customs, and are the
Inheritance of the Crown.

2. Subsedies also are duties payable for Merchandises exported and imported,
but are granted by Act of Parliament, Dyer. 31 H. 8. 43. b. 1. Mar. Dyer 92. a.
and are of three diverse sorts, according to the diversity of the Commodities,
and are called.

1st. Aides or Subsedies, being granted out of the said Native Commodities, (to
wit) Wool, Woolfells, and Hides; over and above the Ancient Custom aforesaid.

2dly, Tonnage granted out of Wines of all sorts, over and above the Prizage,
and the said Custom of 2 s. on the Tun granted by the Charter of 31. Ed. 1. now
called Butlerage.

3dly, Poundage granted out of all Commodities imported and exported (except
Wines, and the staple Commodities aforesaid) and payable by the Merchant
strangers, over and above the said Pettit Custom.

1. These Aides or Subsedies, were not of a certain quantity or continuance,
till to the time of Ed. 6. to which King in the first Parliament of his Reign
was granted a Subsedy of 33 s. 4 d. of every Sack of Wool, 33 s. 4 d. for every
240. Woolfells, and 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. for every Last of Hides exported by Denizons
for every Sack of Wool exported by Aliens, 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. and for every 240.
Woolfells, 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. and for every Last of Hides, 3 l. 13 s. 4 d. And this
Subsedy was granted to continue during the Life Natural of that King. And after
his demise or death, all Kings and Queens (except King Charles the First) have
had the like grants for Life.

2. Tonnage which is a Subsedy out of Wines of all sorts, was first granted by
Parliament, 5th. R. 2. where 2 s. of every Tun of Wine, to be imported into
England, was granted to the King for Two years, and that was for Maintenance of
a Fleet upon the Sea to suppress the Pirates. But after by Parliament 3. Ed. 4.
Tonnage was granted to this King for Term of his Natural Life in this manner,
(viz.) 3 s. for every Tun of Wines, and (besides those 3 s.) for every Tun of
Sweet Wines 3 s. more: see the Statute of 12th. Ed. 4. ca. 3. And this Subsedy
was after granted to H. 8. and Ed. 6th. with this Addition in time of Ed. 6th.
that of every Awm of Rhenish Wine also 1 s. shall be paid, and after the time
of Ed. 6th. this Subsedy of Tonnage was as of course Granted in England, by
several Acts of Parliament to Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and King James,
during their several Natural Lives.

3. Poundage, which is a Subsedy granted out of all Commodities exported and
imported, except Wines, and the Ancient staple Wares, as above, and payable by
all Merchants Denizons and Aliens is the 20th: part of the value of
Merchandises, to wit, 12 d. of the Pound, and was first Granted by Parliament
in England, 31. H. 6. during the Life of this King, which Grant was immediately
resumed. But after that 3. Ed. 4. this Subsedy of Poundage was granted to the
said King: See the Stat. 12. Ed. 4. ca. 3. and after the same Subsedy was
Granted to H. 8. during his Life; and the same Grant was renewed to Ed. 6.
Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and King James, during their several Lives, by
several Acts of Parliament.

3ly, Imposts or Impositions, are the Third kind of Duties payable for
Merchandises, and are sometimes Rated and assessed by Parliament, and then are
in nature of Subsedies, and are sometimes imposed by Prerogative Royal to
support the necessary Charges of the Crown; and then Nihil magis justum est,
quam quod necessarium est: nothing is more just, than what is necessary as an
Ancient Senator of Rome was wont to say.

The Impost upon Wines in Ireland was first assessed by Parliaments, and
limited to be paid for a certain time of Years, which being expired, that is
now continued there by Prerogative of the King, Davyes rep. 12. a.

It is to be observed from what has been said, that Anciently the Outgate was
more than the Ingate; and that since or of latter times, it is otherwise: that
the Merchandises imported, do far surmount the value and quantity of our Native
Commodities exported; which caused the aforesaid Pettit and new Custom, to
exceed the said grand and Ancient Custom, for by continuance of time, all the
Kings Dominions were much better Peopled, and are more Populous at home, and in
all his Foreign Plantations of latter time acquired, and by reason thereof our
Lands and the Annual Rents thereof, within the Kings said Dominions are much
improved; and likewise trade by Sea is also much improved; as is easily made
manifest by the great disproportion of the Rent reserved to be paid for the
Customs by the Farmours thereof when last let to Farms, and the Rent paid for
the same (to go no higher) in the times of King James and Queen Elizabeth; and
that wise King Ed. 1. by his said Charter remitted Prizes, and by Privileges
Granted to Aliens, encouraged them to the more free Trade and Commerce; and by
consequence there was in after Ages the greater reason for an improvement of
the Customs, by the best, usual, and accustomed way of Granting Subsedies for
the Lives of our Kings Successively one after another by Act of Parliament.
Seeing Subsedies themselves are no more than an Improvement (in the Improvement
of time) of the Ancient Customs of common Right, and by Prescription, belonging
to the King his Heirs and Successors; and that we may Collect from what is
aforesaid, that (if not so granted) they may and have been imposed by
Prerogative Royal, for the Four principal Causes and Reasons aforesaid, and to
support the necessary Charges of the Crown. The Words of the King when he
Passes the Bill of Subsedies are observable, which are these, Le Roy remercye
ses Loyal Subjects, accept lour benevolence, and aussi ainsy le veult, The King
thanks his Loyal Subjects, accepts of their good will, and also will have it;
which last Words, make the Act of Subsedy a Law, and so binds every Man to the
payment of it, insomuch, that the Two Houses of Parliament, joint or separate,
cannot impose a Penny upon the Subject without the King, nor can the
Freeholders (whom they serve) invest any such power in them: But for the
Sovereign Prince himself, there are many Examples Old and New, how he has not
only raised pecuniary sums in specie, but laid Impositions upon Commodities
by mere Royal Authority; I shall instance only in Two, viz. in Queen Mary, and
Queen Elizabeth, the first laid an Imposition upon Cloth and Gascon Wines, the
other upon sweet Wines and Alloms, without Parliament. Therefore those
Parliaments of the First and Third years of King Charles the First, and the
Members of the same, that so highly insisted upon their Privileges, their meun
and tuum, Liberties, etc. (and that would have been unwilling to have abated
one of their Tennants of any their Manours or Farms a small matter of their
Rents, though it may be credited for truth, that Twenty Acres of their Lands
then let at 20 l. per ann. might in the time of Ed. 1. be let for 20 s. per
ann. were very injurious to the said King, in that they (contrary to their
bounden Duty) neglected to Grant to him, the usually Granted and Passed Act for
Tonnage and Poundage; being the chief Maintenance of the Crown in his time. The
first Parliaments of King Charles the First being Dissolved, in a short time
after, by Order of the said King and Council, the then Farmors of the Customs
were Commanded to receive the Customs, and all Duties payable for the same, as
in the time of his Royal Ancestor King James the First, and the first Seventeen
years of the said King Charles the First, were times of great Plenty, then
Trade was great, and good; and the Farmors of the Customs did very much augment
their Estates, insomuch that none of them did refuse to Obey the said Order.
But in time next subsequent, they were all great Sufferers, for the fatal
Parliament called in Noverber 1640. wanted Money for the work they had cut out,
and after they had Sat a few Months, they questioned the Farmers for
Intermeddling, Farming, and Receiving the Customs and Imposts, contrary (as
they said) to Law, contrary to a Declaration and Vote, 3o. Car. and contrary to
the Liberty of the Subject; they being Threatened and Timorous, tho there was no
Law to prohibit the Receipt, for Farming of the Customs, nor any Vote Passed
3o. Car. primi against it, suddenly submitted to a Composition of 165000 l. and
whilst, or a small time before these things were agitating, the Farmers
contracted for a new Farm of the Customs with his late Majesty for Four years,
from Christmas 1640. and Lady day 1641. upon the which Farm and the
Assignments of the Rents for the same the Sum of 200000 l. was Advanced for his
said Majesty King Charles the First, (by which the said King had made some
provisions for War, which the said pretended Parliament recovered, and made
great use of against himself) and the next day the said Composition was
reported, the Contract for the new Farm was Voted Void, the Assignments upon
the Rents were made Null, instead of Farmers many of them were made
Commissioners; and the said Parliament (resolving not to spare this Revenue)
Commanded them ( non obstante the Law lately passed by themselves to run into
the same Crime for which they had lately Punished them) to receive the Customs
which with the said Composition paid by them in the space of Two Months, was
made use of to raise and pay the pretended Parliaments Army: which said great
Sums of 165000 l. and 200000 l. (which the said Farmers may be said to have
been Fined, and to have advanced for his said Majesty King Charles the First)
reduced all of them to low Estates; and some of them were Prisoners for near
Twenty years before his late Majesty's most happy Restoration; who afterward
in the 16th. year of his Reign, was graciously pleased to take into
Consideration the great sufferings of the said old unhappy Farmers of his late
Majesty's Customs, and out of his special Grace and Favor, by his Letters,
Pattents under the Great Seal of England, and by Privy Seal, and Tallyes
thereupon Struck, Leavyed, and Allowed of, Granted unto Sir John Jacob and
other the said Farmers 200000 l. for the discharging and satisfying of the rest
and residue of the great Debts by them Contracted for his said Majesty King
Charles the First, and for their reimbursement and satisfaction of such Sums of
Money as they had lent to, or paid for the said King Charles the First, to be
Received and Deducted by them out of their Rents payable to his late Majesty
out of the Farm of the Customs, then, or lately before, made to Sir John
Wolstenholme, Sir John Jacob, Sir Nicholas Crisp, and Sir John Shaw in Five
years, being the Term of their then said Farm, which they, or some others of
them, or on their behalfs accordingly Received, and Disposed of in payment and
satissatisfaction of the said Debts, (which if his late Majesty had not been
pleased to do) the said Farmers, and many of their Creditors also, had been
utterly Ruined and undone.

CHAP. III. Shows how the late Rebellion broke out, and something is said of
the great Advantages the Rebels had, with what Advantages only the Loyal Party
had.
NOW in time King Charles the First had lately left White Hall, because of the
rude Insolency of Tumults, backed and abetted by those intended nothing less
than confusion upon Church and State: nothing in the World had more of horror
than these Tumults, Enormous and Detestable were their outrages, and no means
could take place for their Suppression; so that (to Redeem his Royal Person and
Conscience from violence) the said King withdrew himself, hoping thereby to
give time both for the Ebbing of their Tumultuous fury, and others their
Abettors regaining some degrees of modesty and more sober sense. But it is a
thing Common to Men High and Low, Noble and Ignoble, of all Qualities and
Conditions whatsoever, that when their Adversities approach, they lose chiefly
that Reason and Wisdom, with the which they might have hindered or avoided the
ills that happen: and it is common to Men and Kingdoms that draw toward their
destinies, that when their ill Fortunes comes, it blinds their Eyes that they
cannot discern it, and binds their Hands that they cannot help it, making them
Instruments against themselves in the Execution of their mishaps. His said
Majesty King Charles the First was brought into great Streights, he meaned
well, was much pleased in his Parliament, and thinking to have preserved the
Love of his Subjects thereby, he was not so Tenatious as he ought to have been;
but cared not to lessen himself in the greatest points of his wonted
Prerogative; thinking he might have been no looser, but that he might have
gained a Recompense in his Subjects Affections; he never bare any touch of
Conscience ^ith greater regret, than that Matter related to the Death of that
Noble, Learned, and Loyal Earl of Strafford, he passed the Bill for the
Triennial Parliaments, and withal settled that Parliament during the pleasure
of the Two Houses, then Mr. Lowry, one of the Burgesses for the Town of
Cambridge, writ word to his Wife for Newse, that the King had Passed an Act for
a Triennial Parliament every year; the Fishmonger spoke truer than he was aware
of, for such construction was made thereof by those who intended Ingratefully
and Wickedly to take Advantage of his large Concessions, that the one with the
other amounted to as much as to the Perpetuating that Parliament. Whereas he
hoped by this Act of high Confidence to have shut out, and locked the Door upon
all present Jealousies and future Mistakes; they intended no less, than to shut
their King out of Doors, and by Color thereof to Rob and Denude him of all his
Royal Power both in Church and State. Then the Press and the Pulpit joined to
make the King Odious, and all Artifices were used to raise Money for the
Raising and Maintenance of their Armies. After a Royal Subsedy of 400000 l.
they next had Poll Money, then after they hedged in an incredible Sum by way of
free Loanes and Contributions upon the Public Faith, then the Irish Adventures
for the Sale of Lands, and the general Collection for the relief of the
Distressed Protestants in Iroland, brought in vast Sums of Money, whereof the
Tweentieth part was not employed to the right use; then they had an Imposition
upon a Weekly Meal, and a Loan from the City after the rate of five Subsedies,
besides the Five and twentieth part; then there was an Assessment for bringing
in the Scots, besides several Weekly Assessments for their several Armies; then
they had the benefit of Kings, Queens, and Princes Revenues; Sequestrations,
and Plunder by Committees, and Compositions with Delinquents (as they were
pleased to call them) did arise to such Sums as passed all understanding;
besides the Excise, Fortification Money, and vast Sums made by Sale of Bishops,
Deans, and Chapters Lands: to be short, they Assumed to themselves all the
Regalias of the Crown, they Seized upon Sword, Great Seal, and Sovereignty,
upon the Customs, the Militia, and all the marks of Majesty, nay they did
Arrogate to themselves the Legislative and Supreme Power, and they wanted not
Commissioners of the Great Seal, Judges, Justices, Publicans, and all Officers
for all Offices whatsoever. That for the greatest part of them, forsook their
good Old Master, (as Demas is said to have forsaken St. Paul) to embrace this
present World. They wanted not other mighty Advantages, for they had all the
Tenable places, and Towns of Strength, both by Sea and Land, they had all the
Navy Royal, they had the Tower of London, with all the Ammunition and Arms of
the Crown, and one Advantage they had, exceeded all the rest, they had the City
of London, which may be called the great Magazine of Men and Money, where there
is a ready supply of all things, that may Cloth, and make Men Gay, and
Gallant, to put them in Heart and Resolution. We with the said King, had only
this Advantage, that we had the Word of God, and the Laws of the Land for our
Justification, together with the great Tie and Bond of our Allegiance; all
which required our Obedience to the said Kings just Commands; but to none other
without him, or against him, in the Point of raising Arms, Virgilii Aeneid.
jamque faces and saxa volant, furor Arma ministrat.

CHAP. IV. Shows, how the King, the Loyal Party, and the Law suffered
Violence.
GRievous were the various Effects, and sad Events of the late Civil War; Force
was repelled with Force, and the Public Polemical Sword, aggregate and made up
of all the Ammunition and Arms, and Military Strength of the Three Kingdoms
(the just Indubitable, and Inalienable Right of King Charles the First in all
his Dominions by virtue of his Royal Seigniory) was put into the Hands of the
People, for the Protection and Security of those then at Westminster from the
Law, who against Law Ruled not, but rather Overruled their fellow Subjects, at,
and after their own Wills and Pleasures, and did cut large Thongs out of others
Hides, to alter the Government in Church and State, for no other reason, but
that they themselves could not be safe under the same; they could not be Happy,
unless King Charles the First were Miserable; they could not enjoy their Lives,
Peace, and Liberties; but they must first destroy his Friends, and afterward
in cold Blood Barbarously Murder him. Imparallel'd and unheard of Cruelty!
Monstrous Impudence and Impiety! Killed their King? nay, their Good and Godly
King. It went not against their Consciences, because he made a Conscience to
Deny them, what according to good Conscience he could not Grant them. I
remember in time before the late War, above Forty years since, in an old
Obsolete Author I met with this passage, (Certant haec duo plerumque invicem
inter se, Rex and populus, quorum si vicerit unus, personam induit tyranni; si
vincitur, tot millia tyrannorum, quot capitum nascuntur; Crudelior autem semper
est tyrannis multorum, quam unius.) which Englished is, That these Two (that is
to say) the King and People do oftentimes Struggle, are in Conflict and Strife
between themselves; of whom, if one (that is to say) the King, do overcome,
then he becomes a Tyrant, but if he be overcome, thence proceed, rise up, or
take beginning to be, so many Thousand Tyrants, as there be Heads of Rebels, or
of single Individual Persons engaged in the Rebellion, and concludes, that more
Cruel is the Tyranny of many than of one. The whole truth of the Conclusion,
was lately seen in the Tyranny of a company of Men sitting at Westminster,
called Lords and Commons, who Arbitrarily Reigned and Ruled over their fellow
Subjects, according to their Wills and Pleasures, as if the Issue of the
Fightings of their Armies, had been centured only in the making of the People
of the Kingdom Slaves. Then followed the contempt and Oppression of the Clergy,
and sacrilegious Invasions were made upon the Rights of the Church, and Men of
the Church, injurious Diminutions and Persecutions of the Loyal Laiety by
Sequestrations, Decimations, and otherwise ensued, whereof we of the Loyal
Party were not only Witnesses and Spectators, but therein we were fellow
Sufferers. Now the Writs of the King suffered Violence, of which Mr.
Fitzherbert in his Preface to his Natura Brevium, says, that they be the
Foundations whereupon the whole Law does depend; of the which Writs and
Processes, as be appointed in the Law; it is said in St. Jermin, in his Book
Written by way of Dialogue, called Doctor and Student, Fol. 64. a. That the
King as Sovereign and Fountain of the Law, is bounden of Justice to Grant them
to every Person that will Complain, be his Surmise true, or false. Yet in stead
of Carolus Secundus Dei Gratia, etc. Vicecomiti, etc. was used, The Keepers of
the Liberties of England, by Authority of Parliament, To the Sheriff of, etc.
But those who had built this Babel, by their Divisions and Jealousies, one had
of another, were in time brought to strange Confusions. The Writs were to run
no longer in the Name of the Keepers, etc. But all Writs and Process were
issued forth in the Name of Oliver their General. The Independent, though the
Younger, now prevailed against the Presbyterian the Elder Brother, whath the
Elder had hunted after, the Younger now catched for himself. And now also it
may be observed, that a House of Commons singly Assumed to themselves the Title
of, and were styled the Parliament of England; though his Sacred Majesty King
Charles the First had before truly told them, in his Speech to them 3. Car.
that none of the Houses of Parliament joint or Separate, had any Power either
to Make or Declare a Law without his Consent.

CHAP. V. Shows about what time the Kings Writs were first framed for the
induction of the Commons into the Parliaments of England.
FRom the Norman Conquest until some time in the Reign of H. 3. Parliaments
were holden by the King and his Barons Spiritual and Temporal; in whose days
(it is thought) the Kings Writ for Election of Kinghts, etc. was first framed,
and that the Commons were reduced to a House by the Advice of the Bishops to
the King in the heat of the Barons Wars. It was thought expedient then to frame
a Writ for their Induction, that they might allay and lessen the Pride and
Power of the Peers, who had waged War so many years against the Crown. However
least they should arrogate too much Authority to themselves, they never could
so much as exhibit an Oath, nor impose a Fine, or inflict Punishment upon any
but their own Members, until the time of the late Usurpers, when they were
grown to that height of Impudence, that the King himself, and Lords Spiritual
and Temporal were Excluded by them: of whom (as well before the Norman Conquest
as since) the Ancient Parliaments of England consisted only, without them. For
it is true the People were wrought under by the Sword of the first William and
his followers to a Subjected Vassallage, Division and Power had Mastered them,
none of their old Nobility and Heads were left either of Credit or Fortunes,
what he Detained not in Providence (as the Demeans of the Crown) or reserved in
Piety (as for the Maintenance of the Church) he parted and divided amongst
those Strangers that Sailed along with him in the same Bark of his Adventure;
leaving the Natives for the most part (as may be seen by his Survey called
Domesday Book, now in the Exchequor) in no better a condition than Villenage.
To supply his Occasions of Men, Money, or Provisions, he Ordered, that all
those who enjoyed any fruit of his Conquest, should hold their Lands
(proportionably by so many Knights Fees) of the Crown. And permitted them to
Enfeofle their followers with such parts as they pleased of their own Portions:
which (to ease their charge) they did in his and his Sons time. This course
provided him the Body of his War, the Money and Provision was by Hidage
Assessed on the Common People, at and with the consent of their Lords, who held
in all their Seigniories such right of Royalty, that to their vassals (as Paris
says) they were quot domini, tot Tyranni, and in time provided to the Kings so
great a Curb and restraint of Power, that nothing fell into the Care of Majesty
after, more than to retrench the force of Aristocracy, that was like in time to
strangle the Monarchy. Though others foresaw the Mischief betimes, yet none
attempted the remedy until King John whose overhasty undertakings brought in
the mentioned broiles of the Barrons Wars: there needed not before this, Care
to Advise with the Commons in any Parliamentary or Public Assemblies, when
every Man in England by Tenure held himself to his great Lords Will, whose
Presence was ever required in their Parliaments, and in whose Assents, his
dependant Tennants consent was ever included; from what is aforesaid, the
Commons of England, or rather they (whom the Commons shall Elect to future
Parliaments, and are properly said in Parliament Assembled to be the
Representatives of all the Commons of England) may take notice, that Anciently
was in use only one Writ of Summons to Parliament, by which the King Summoned
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal separately to come to his Parliament, at a
certain Day and Place appointed in the Kings Writ. And of latter times (with
the reasons for the one, and the other) there has been an Additional Writ
framed which is sent to every Sheriff of England and Wales, for Election of
Kinghts, etc. for the Parliament in the Kings Name; and when sent it is called
the Kings Writ, and is directed to his Subordinate Officer the Kings Sheriff.
For the truth is, the King by his Writ, gives the very Essence and Form to the
Parliament: which is to be Summoned when he pleases, to be Adjourned,
Prorogued, and Dissolved, when he pleases. And in all good times of Government
(before and since the Conquest) it was ever in the Kings power, and was, and is
his Privilege, Royal Prerogative, and Regality, to Grant or Deny such
Petitions as he pleases, and all Acts of former times, and some of latter time
were, and are in form of Petitions.

CHAP. VI. Shows the difference between Parliamentary Privileges, and the
Privileges of the King; and shows how at first Kingly Government was
constituted by God himself, and that by Gods Law also the Legislative Power,
and the Power of the Militia was given to the King; and that in these highest
Points of the Kings Prerogative, the Law of England is agreeing with the Law of
God, and that God is vindex sui Ordinis, the avenger of his own Ordinance.
THE Speaker uf the House of Commons (on the first day of every Parliament) is
usually Presented to the King, and (in the Name of the Commons of England) he
humbly Prays, his Majesty would be Graciously Pleased to Grant them their
Liberties and Privileges; which is a strong Argument that their Privilege
(their pretended Birthright and Inheritance) flows only from the Kings
Primitive Grace and Favor; and that they would not pray that, de Gratia, of
Grace, if they had any Color to claim the same, de Jure, of Right. And the
renewing of this Petition every Parliament, proves the Grant to be but
Temporary. But the late Usurpers pretended they had Privilege granted to them
to sit by the Mentioned Act of Continuance, etc. And therefore all fair Offers
from his said Majesty for Public Good, and for the Preservation of the
Government in Church and State, were afterward interpreted a Breach of
Privilege. Though the soundest Lawyers of that time, were of Opinion, that the
said Act of Continuance was Void in it self; in regard that what Grants or
Concessions soever the King makes, the Law presupposes, they are always with
this Provisoe, Salvo jure regio, salvo jure Coronae; In the 20th. of Rich. the
Second, it may be seen in Mr. Howes Chronicle, that a Parliament holden at
Westminster was Ordained to endure Forty eight days; but it was Abridged, for
the King would not tarry there more than Five days, wherein he declared the
things pertaining to the Realm, especially such Matters as touched himself,
etc. One property of every good Law of Man, is that the Maker exceed not his
Authority, which certainly they did that framed that Bill for the Act of
Continuance, etc. And Coke 10th. rep. 57. b. it is agreed, that Parliamentum,
testamentum, and arbitramentum, are to be construed according to the intention
of the Makers; the said King certainly intended not thereby to Exclude himself,
because by the Laws of our Land, it cannot properly be said a Parliament,
unless it be consisting of King, Lords, and Commons. And if Kingly Government
be constituted by Divine Right, then St. Jermyn tells us, that Customs and
Statutes are void, that are against the Law of God, and so that Act was null in
its own Nature at the very first, and the proposal of it, was Treason in a high
degree. Parliamentary Privileges are but Temporary, and are not in them, till
asked by their Speaker Precario, and granted by their Sovereign. But Mr.
Plowden, Fol. 322. b. says, that every Prerogative of the King contains in
it self a Prescription, for it rests in usage. And Fol. 319. b. and 322. a.
he says, that the Prerogative of the King may not be said to be torcius, that
is consonant to reason, and has been used from time to time, in the time of
one King after another, for the Law is not known if not by usage, and usage
proves that it is Law. And Fol. 322. a. and 323. he says, all the
Prerogatives mentioned in the Statute of Prerogativa Regis made in 17o. Ed. 2
di. were in the King by the Common Law, before the said Statute, and many
others, and Fol. 318. a. he says, It is a commendable thing for the King to
abstain from the extremity of his Prerogative of his special grace in benefit
of his Subjects, but withal says, that the Law does not force him so to do.
And Sir Ed. Coke in the First part of his Institutes, Fol. 90. b. says, that
Praerogativa is derived of prae, id est, ante, and rogare, that is to ask, or
Demand before hand, whereof comes Prerogativa, and is denominated of the most
excellent part, because though an Act has passed both the Houses of the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, yet before it be a Law, the Royal Assent must be
asked or Demanded, and Obtained, Bracton li. jo. calls it libertatem, in
another place privilegium Regis. Britton Fol. 27. calls it droit le Roy, the
Right of the King: the Register of the Writs calls it, jus regium Coronae,
the Royal or Regal Right of the Crown. And Mr. Stanford in Praerog. Fol. 5. a.
b. says, Praerogativa, is as much to say, as a Privilege or Preeminence that
one person has before another, which as it is tolerable in some, so it is most
to be permitted and allowed in a Prince, or Sovereign Governor of a Realm, for
besides that, he is the most worthyest or excellent Part or Member of the body
of the Commonwealth, so is he also (through his good Governance) the preserver,
nourisher, and defender of all the People, being the rest of the same body, for
which cause the Laws do attribute unto him all Honor, Dignity, Prerogative and
Preeminence. It is said, Coke 7. 10. b. and 11. a. That the King is an absolute
Prince before his Coronation, which is but a Royal Ceremony, Ornament and
Solemnization of the Royal Descent, but no part of the Title, and that Rex, non
est Rex, quia Coronatur, sed Coronatur quia est Rex, The King is not a King,
hecause he is Crowned, but he is Crowned, because he is a King. And Coke 11.72.
a. The King is said to be sponsus Regni, and per annulum, by a Ring, is said to
be espoused to the Realm at his Coronation; which is a great Mark of
Sovereignty and Power in the King over his People; for admit the King to be
sponsus, the Bridegroom, or new Married Man, and the Realm to be sponsa, the
Bride or new Married Woman at this Solemnity of his Coronation, every Woman is
sub potestate viri sui, under the Power of ber Husband, and ipse dominabitur
ejus, and he shall Rule or Reign over her by Gods Law: Genesis 3.16. and our Law
does not estrange the Husband of any Interest, Prerogative, or thing that the
Wife has at the time of the intermarri^ge or after. But as in all Rebellions,
so in the late time of Rebellion, the Woman wore the Breeches, as is easily
proved by the Money Coined in those times. Also in Coke 7. 10. b. The King is
said to be pater patriae, the Father of his Country, which is another Mark of
his Sovereignty and Supreme Power; for at the beginning of Kingdoms, when all
the World consisted of a few Households, the Elder or Father of the Family
exercised Authority over his Meyney, and did distribute reward or punishment
amongst them after his own discretion: all which aforesaid is agreeing with
what the Poet says, Jura dant singuli natis, and uxoribus, every single
individual Person gives Laws to his Wife and Children. This was patria
potestas, Fatherly power, the fountain of Regia potestas, Kingly power; and so
Regia potestas is lege Naturae non arbitrio populi, and so Kingly Authority is
by the Law of Nature, not by the Will, Power, or Arbitrament of the People, and
leges Naturae perfectissimae sunt, and immutabil^s, and the Laws of Nature are
the most perfect, and not to be Altered or Changed. No sooner was there a
Household but there was a Sovereign; All regal Authority was then included in
the Office of Father. And therefore God Almighty in giving the Fifth
Commandment (called the Crown Commandment) Honor thy Father and thy Mother,
intended the Duty belonging to all Magistrates. Afterward when Households grew
to that greatness, that they were like to little Commonweales, so that Abram
out of his own Household could raise an Army of 318, Genesis 14.14. then being not
only patres familias, but in Title Kings, they were called by a mixed name of
both Patriarchae, which signifies Fathers and Kings: at length when by the
increase of the World, many Houses and Towns joined in subjection to some one
Sovereign Power; then was pater left out, and they were called by that name
they now have (...), Powers or Rulers, and thus we had Magistracy begun by God
himself in the very cradle of Nature. So that our Obedience to Princes, is a
very material, great and important Point of Religion; since the Scriptures
dictate to us, that the beginning of Kingdoms, was first lege Naturae, after
institutione Dei, lastly consensu and voto populi: for though the Israelites
demanded a King (1 Samuel 8th.) yet they asked him to be made by Samuel, as the
mouth of God; and after Samuel had told his Power and Prerogatives over them,
then (notwithstanding all) they gave their absolute Assent to yield to him (
ver. 19, and 20th.) to be their Judge in Peace, and Captain in War. Whence I
pray, with me observe that even at the very first settling and constituting
Kingly Government, the Legislative Power was given to the King, he was to be
their Judge in Peace, and the Militia and Power thereof was then also given to
the King, he was to be their Captain in War. Hence it is, that it was said by
Bracton, cited by Coke 7.11. b. Est Corona Regis facere justitiam, and tenere
pacem, etc. and again in Coke 7.25. b. that it belongs only to the King,
faedus percutere, and bellum indicere; so that to do Justice and preserve the
Peace, to put a suspention to War by making a League or Truce, and to proclaim
War, is jus Majestatis, and inter insignia est summa Regis potestas, amongst
all the signally highest Points of the Kings Prerogative; these are only the
Rights inherent to the Supreme Power of the King; and so you have a perfect
harmony between Divinity and Law, and our Law agrees with the Law of God. And
to show you further wherein it is not dissonant; but does quatuor pedibus
currere, run upon all four, and is fully agrreing with the Law of God, mark
what St. Peter commands, 1 Pet. 2 chap. 13, 14, verses, Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as
Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the
punishment of evil deers, and for the praise of them that do well, in which
words all Believers both Jews and Gentles, are dissuaded from Rebellion, and by
St. Peter are admonished and commanded to be obedient to Authority; for in
these words of the Apostle, the Authority of the Magistrate both Supreme and
Subordinate is fully Established and Justified, not by Humane only, but also by
Divine Right; not as a thing brought into the World by the Ambition of
Governors, that they may have a (prae esse) a precedence, or preeminence above
others only, but that they should afford their (prodesse) too: and be
instruments of good and welfare to the whole Community. It is true, Civil
Government or Magistracy is called by St. Peter, Man's Ordinance, or humana
ordinatio, the Ordinance of Man. And so it may be said to be, Subjectively, as
being joined or born by Man; or Objectively,, as employed amongst Men; or
Finalliter, in respect of the End, it is for the Good of all Men. But that
Kingly Government may plainly be demonstrated, not only to be (...), the
Creature or Creature of Man, but also (...), the Creation or Creature of God:
let us consult again, 1 Samuel 8th. ver. 21, 22. where we have the Prophet Samuel
rehearsing the words of the People in the Ears of the Lord. And the Lord saying
to Samuel, in the Imparative Mood altogether, hearken to their Voice, and make
them a King. So we have the word of God Almighty himself expressly for the
Constituting of Kingly Government. And let St. Paul be admitted to comment upon
St. Peter, who in the 13th. of the Romans 1, and 2. says, Let every Soul be
Subject to the Higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God: the Powers that
be are Ordained of God, whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and Denounces no less pain than Damnation to them that
resist. Therefore as St. Peter advises for the Lords sake, yea! and for our
own sakes, we are to submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man. For as St.
Jermin D. and Stud. 32. says, Laws made by Man, that has received Power from
God, to make Laws, are made by God. And again, Fol. 131. They that regard not
the Kings Laws, resist the Ordinance of God. And as Kingly Government is
derived from, so it is Defended and Preserved too by God himself. In time after
the late Usurpers had deprived his Sacred Majesty King Charles the First, of
Wife, Childern, Army, Friends, Freedom and Life, and that their Power seemed to
be above all Rule, Order, and Law; then it pleased God to still the rageing of
the Sea, and to put a stop or stay to the Madness of the People; and by his
secret Power to direct their Hearts to cry out, and in their extremities (for
the Reviving the Laws of the Land both in Church and State) to insist upon the
having of a free Parliament, which in Gods time opened the Door for the letting
in of his late Sacred Majesty to his most Miraculous and Happy Restoration.
God at length showed the People of this Nation, that King Charles the First
chose rather to suffer for them, than with them, for he happily might have
redeemed himself to some show of Liberty, if he would, or rather could have
consented to enslave us, he might have avoided that ruin that befell him, if
he could have been willing to have confirmed many Tyrants over us. He that said
Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; certainly (may we say) it
is he alone, that by some secret Power, upholds his own Ordinance, against the
Violence and Machinations of Rebels, and Thieves to; and from it we may say and
acknowledge, (giving the Praise and Glory to God alone for the same) that he is
columnarum columna, the Pillar that bears up the Pillars; he is scutorum,
scutum, the Shield of Protection, for the Shields of our Earth. And that
plainly appears by those Judgments, wherewith God has cut off those that have
Rebelled, with his own hand from Heaven. Korah and his Company ( Numb. 16th.)
for making Head against Moses and Aaron (those leaders of Gods People) that
died not the Common death of all Men, but the Earth (as weary of such a
burden) opened her Mouth, and swallowed them up, and they went quick into the
Pit. Absalom, for Rebelling against his Patriarcha, his Father and King, as one
that deserved no Favor, either from God in Heaven, or his Deputy on Earth, was
hung up between Heaven and Earth (as unworthy of either) and was Strangled by
the Hair of his own Head, the Flag of his Ambition was made the Instrument of
his Execution. So that God himself may be said to be vindex sui ordinis, the
avenger of his own Ordinance.

CHAP. VII. Shows that vindictive Justice is also derived from God to the
King as Supreme, and that all Subordinate Officers derive their Jurisdiction
from the King, and through his Mediation from God also, and that herein the Law
of England is also agreeing with the Law of God.
NAY, it is said, Vengeance is mine and I will repay it says the Lord; and it
is the very Ground and Foundation of all Order and Government, that it is so;
for otherwise as Men do Multiply and Increase, natural Love does decrease, and
the Mightiest (as so many Bulls in the Herd) would be most mischievous to the
Weaker, and would be always quarrelling about Limits and Rivers, from whence
came the words, Lis and Rivales. And therefore this vindictive Justice, is
derived also from God himself, to his Vicegerent on Earth the King (as St.
Peter says, where before cited) for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well. So that Magistrates are of two sorts, Supreme and
Subordinate, Subjection is due to both, to the King as Supreme, and to the
subordinate, such as are Judges, Justices, such as are missi, Commissioned
Officers, and sent by him that is the King, for as he has his Authority
immediately from God, so they have theirs from him, and through his Mediation
from God also. As God has confirmed the Kings Supremacy, so has he also
ratified his Subordinate Officers deputation, as may be seen, Exodus 18.18.
where we have Jethro the Father in Law counselling Moses his Son in Law, about
the Prerequisite qualifications, who they should be, and the business of
Judges, what they must do; but neither of these without Gods approbation, and
therefore by Moses followed then, and by all Kings observed ever since; they
were to be able Men, such as feared God, Men of truth, hating Covetousness,
such as these were to be placed over the People, to Judge them at all seasons.
Hence it is, that Bracton (cited by Stanford, 54, 55.) says Dominus Rex hab^t
Ordinariam jurisdictionem, dignitatem, and potestatem super omnes qui in regno
suo sunt, habet enim omnia jura in manu su^, etc. Our Lord the King has the
Supreme Jurisdiction, Dignity, and Power over all the People that are within
his Realm; he is said to have all the Laws in his hand which belong to the
Crown, he has also the Material Sword, which extends to the Government of the
Realm in War, he is also said to have Justice and Judgment, which are of his
Jurisdiction, as within his Jurisdiction only, as he is the Minister and Vicar
of God, and is to distribute to every one what is his. He has also in him,
quae sunt pacis, the Powers which are of, or belong to the preservation of
Peace, that the People (with the Governance of whom God has entrusted him) may
live quietly and safely in Peace, that one may not Beat, Wound, or evil Entreat
another, that one may not by Force and Robbery Steal, or bear away that is
another Man's, or one may not Maim or Kill another. He has also Punishment in
his Power, that he may Punish and Correct Offenders, etc. However for the King
in Person to Arrest or Commit a Man, or do any Offices of Justice, is indignum
rege, is beneath the King; Mercy and Honor flow immediately from the King,
Judgment and Justice are his too, but these flow from his Ministers. And
therefore least there should be a failer of Justice, and because the King
himself in Person may not be Judge or sit in Judgment in Treason or Felony,
because he is one of the Parties to the Judgment; he may therefore commit his
Authority to another, who is to be Judge between him and the Offender. And
therefore Expedit rei publicae ut Magistratus constituatur, and to this
purpose, Eligere debet Rex de regno suo, viros sapientes, and tim^ntes deum,
etc. and ex illis constituere justiciarios, etc. Therefore it was thought
expedient for the general good of all; that Magistracy should be Constituted
and settled. And in this work of Constituting Magistrates, the King (as it is
said ( Exodus 18.22) in his own ease, and that they might help to bear the
burden with him) is to Elect and Choose out of the Kingdom wise Men, Men
fearing God, regarding the Truth, hating Covetousness; and of such to make and
create Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, and other his Ministers and Bailiffs, to
whom are referred all matters of Controversy, relating either to real o^
personal Actions; setting forth perspicuously and more fully all the
prerequisite good properties he ought to have, and to be endued with all, to
whom the King shall commit the Office of a Judge, Justice, etc. Et sic
concordat lex divina non aliquantulum, sed quamplurimum cum humana, And so the
Law of God is not somewhat, or a very little, but very much agreeing with the
Law of England, especially in these matters relating to the Royal Privileges
and Rights of the Crown. Now these Royal Rights and Jurisdictions may not be
Transferred to Persons or Tenements, or possessed by any private Person, nisi
hoc datam fit ei de super; unless it be given him from above, (that is to say)
from the King. Now delegatus dicitur, cui causa demittitur terminanda vel
exequenda, vices delegantis reprsentans, and in Jurisdictione nihil proprium
habens, he is said to be a delegate to whom Authority is committed to Handle
and Determine Matters, being the Representative of him that Delegates him, and
yet he has no propriety in the Jurisdiction, nor can properly call it his own.
So it is with Judges, Justices, the Judgments, and the Courts; they are called
the Kings Judges, the Kings Justices, the Kings Judgments, and the Courts of
our Lord the King. So that Jurisdictio delegata, non delegari potest, quin
potestas Ordinaria remaneat cum ipso Rege, this Jurisdiction delegated cannot
be delegated, but still the Supreme Power must remain with the King himself.

CHAP. VIII. Shows that the Subjects of England are bound by their bond of
Allegiance to serve the King only in his Wars, and that the King is the
Fountain of Honor: and by way of Induction to the same, something is said of a
Countee Palatine, David's worthies, and good old Barzillai the Gileadite.
IN our Books, we read of a Countee Palatine, to have diverse Royal Franchizes
and Privileges, which were not Granted to other Earls; and that the Doctors of
the Imperial Law hold, Quod solus Princeps, qui est Monarcha and Imperator in
Regno suo, ex plenitudine potestatis, potest creare Comitem Palatinum,
according to which Rule the King of England may well Create a Countee Palatine,
for he is Monarcha and Imperator in Regno suo, as is apparent by many Records
and Judgments in Parliament. Here we may observe by the way, that when once the
King was Invested with Royal Authority, that his workings in his Sphere were
Honored with the Name of Creation; he was said to Create, as we may say in our
own Phrase, Men that are Advanced by the King to some Title of Nobility, or
Office of State, are commonly said by him to be Created, and that the Style of
their Pattents, is not only facimus, but creamus, that (as in Scripture) Kings
are Named Gods, I have said, ye are Gods. So they may in their Sphere do
something resembling the Power of God. And every Countee Palatine Created by
the King of England is Lord of a whole County, and has in it Jura Regalia,
which are consisting in Two principal Points, 1st. In Royal Jurisdiction, by
reason whereof he has all the High Courts and Officers of Justice the King
has. And 2ly. In Royal Seigniory, by reason whereof he has all the Royal
Services and Escheats that the King has. And therefore this County is merely
disjoined, and (as it were) Separated from the Crown: as is said in the Case of
the Duchy Plow. 215. b. so that no Writ of the King runs there, unless it
be (Observe) a Writ of Error, which being the last Resort and Appeal, is only
excepted out of all their Charters, 15. Eliz. Dyer 321. and 345. and 34. H. 6.
42. and as to Royal Escheates, the Countee Palatine has the Escheates of
Treasons that the King by his Prerogative shall have of Lands holden of all
other Lords; but that is to be understood, of Treasons, which were so at the
time when the Countee Palatine was first Erected, and not of new Treasons by
Act of Parliament afterward 12. Eliz. Dyer 288. b. 289. a. and this comes
Palatinus was so called, a comitando vel sequendo principem, and the Persons
advanced to this Name or Title of Honor, were summi proceres and a Rege
proximi, he was to be a Chief Officer and Counselor in the Palace of the
King; and it is said, he was not only to be a Companion of the Person of the
King, but he is to be comes curarum also, he is par extans curis, solo
diademete dispar, and is to Sink and Swim at all times and seasons with his
Lord the King, though it be in troubled Waters. So that the King is, and ever
was the fountain of Honor; for as it belongs only to the King of England to
Make or Coin Money, and that no other person can do the same without special
leave or Commandment of the King; and if any presume of his own head to Coin
Money, it is Treason. And as he only has the Privilege to Coin Money, so he
has the same Prerogative to give a vallew to base Metal by his Impression or
Character, as he has to give a higher Esteem to a mean Person, by imparting
the Character of Honor to him, sic fiet viro, quem Rex honorare desiderat,
Davyes rep. 19. a. 25. a. yet the Countees Palatine are to take notice what is
said also in Davyes rep. 66. b. Comites Palatii regalem habent potestatem in
omnibus, salvo dominio Domino Regi, sicut Principi, Countees Palatine have
Kingly Power in all things (excepted always nevertheless) Lordship, Dominion,
and the Power to Rule over them and their Counties to the Lord the King, as
their Prince and Sovereign. And they and all the Nobility (either of the more
Ancient, or the latter impression) are to know, that no Lord can be Ancienter
than the King; for all was of him and came from him at the beginning, Stanf.
prer. 10th. a. and we have a saying in our Books, that honor est in honorante
non in honorato, that Honor is in him that does the Honor, not in him that is
Honored; and amongst many reasons might be given for the same, I shall only
presume to mention one, which is, that Persons of Honor should so behave
themselves to all Men, that they should not give the least occasion to any Man
to think much less to speak Dishonourably of them. In the 2d. Book of Samuel
23d. chap. we have a Catalogue of David's Worthies, of whom some were more
mighty, and had done more signal Services than others of them, and therefore
were more Honorable than the others: so we may also see in the same Book of
Samuel, in the 17th. and 19th. chapters, That Barzillai the Gileadite of
Rogelim, that (when the Armies of Israel and Absalom were pitched in the Land
of Gilead) had relieved David and his People with him, with all manner of
Forage, Beds, Basins, Earthen Vessels, Wheat, Barley, Flower, parched Corn,
Beans, Lentils, parched Pulse, Honey, Butter, Sheep, and Cheese of Kine, that
David and the People with him might Eat and refresh themselves; for there it is
said, the People were hungry and weary, and thirsty in the Wilderness, in the
18th. chap. we have the Relation of the Defeat of Absaloms Army and his death;
in the 19th. chap. we have King David saying unto Barzillai, come thou over
Jordan with me, and I will feed thee with me in Jerusalem. Barzillai was to
have been made Comes Palatinus, was to be taken into the Kings own Family, and
to feed with the King at his own Table. But the good old Man being very Aged
excused the matter, saying, Thy Servant will go a little way over Jordan with
the King: and why should the King recompense it me with such a reward? Let thy
Servant (I pray thee) turn back again, that, etc. But behold! my Son thy
Servant Chimham, let him go over with my Lord the King, and the King answered,
Chimham shall go over with me, and I will do to him that shall seem good unto
thee, and whatsoever thou shall require of me, that will I do for thee: and all
the People went over Jordan, And when the King was come over, the King kissed
Barzillai, and Blessed him, and he returned to his own place. Hence may be
inferred, that the King has not only paenam, Punishment, but also praemium,
Reward, in his Power, and so he is set over us, not only for the punishment of
them that do evil, but also for the praise and reward of them that do well. And
as if for the Life only of King David, to have created Chimham, Comitem
Pallacii sui, or Pallainum, had not been a reward suitable to the Merits of
good old Barzillai, in the First Book of Kings, the 2d. chap. and the 7th.
verse, we may see, That when the days of David drew nigh that he should die,
and that he gave several things in charge to Solomon his Son; amongst the rest
he gave him a special charge to show kindness, not unto Chimham only, but unto
all the Sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, charging him, that he let them be of
those that Eat at his Table (rendering this for reason) for so they came to me
when I fled because of Absalom thy Brother. Absit, be it far from me, I do not
mention this matter, as if I would thence infer, that King David was obliged to
have done this Honor to Barzillai and his Sons: No! Cujus est dare, ejus est
disponere, he that has the power to give Honor or Reward, has also the
disposing power to give, to whom, what, and when he pleases; and the very
words of Barzillai (and why should the King recompense it me with such a
reward) manifest, that good old Barzillai thought it his bounden Duty to do
what he had done. And as appears (by the preamble of the Statute of 11th. H.
7th. ca. 1.) Every Subject of this Realm of England by Duty of Allegiance is
bound to serve his Prince and Sovereign Lotd in his Wars, for the defense of
him and the Land against every Rebellion, Power and Might, reared against him,
and with him to enter and abide in service in Battle. And Sir Edward Coke also
(in the 7th. parr of his Reports Fol. 7. b. 8. a.) says, that all Subjects are
bound to go with the King in War, infra and extra regnum, both within and
without the Kingdom.

CHAP. IX. Herein you have a Subject defined, you have Ligeance defined, and is
showed that the King has two Capacities, the one Natural, and the other
Politic, that the body Politic cannot be separated from the Body Natural;
that Ligeance is due to the Natural Body of the King; that the Kingdom of
England admits of no interregnum, and that the Disherison of the Right Heir of
a Kingdom is wont to be the beginning of Civil Wars.
NOW whosoever is born under a natural Ligeance due by the Law of Nature, is a
Subject. And it is neither caelum, Heaven, nor solum, the Soil, that makes the
Subject, but Ligeance: which is of as large extent and Latitude, as the Royal
Power and Protection of the King is; which Allegiance or Ligeance is a true and
faithful Obedience of the Subject due to his Sovereign; and is, or ought to be
an incident inseparable to every Subject; because Ligeantia est vinculum fidei,
the bond of Faith, est quasi Legis essentia, est ligamentum, quasi ligatio
mentium; quia sicut ligamentum est connexio articulorum and juncturarum, etc.
As the Ligatures or Strings do knit together all the Joints of all the parts of
the Body, so does this Ligeance join together the Sovereign and all his
Subjects; quasi uno ligamine, as in one knot or tie. In some Acts of
Parliament, Subjects are called Liege Subjects or Liege People; and again in
some Acts of Parliament, the King is called Liege Lord of his Subjects, so that
I may further say, Ligeantia est quid quodamodo reciprocum, a certain
Reciprocal thing; hence it is we say, Protectio Regis tiahit subjectionem
subditi, and subjectio subditi trahit protectionem Regis, The Protection of the
King does draw or attract the Subjection of the Subject, and the Subjection of
the Subject does draw or attract to it the Protection of the King. So that this
Ligeance is the mutual Bond and Obligation between the King and his Subjects,
whereby Subjects are called his Liege Subjects, because they are bound to Obey
and Serve him, as well in times of War, as in times of Peace; and he is called
their Liege Lord, because he is to maintain them in their just Rights and
Liberties by the power of the Sword times of War, and by the Legislative power
to defend them in times of Peace from Injuries and Oppressions. Now the King is
said to have Two Capacities, one Natural, the other Politic, one framed of
God, the other by the Policy of Man, one subject to Infirmities, the other not.
And the Estate Royal or Politic does not confound the capacity of his Body
Natural, but their Capacities remain distinctly as in other Persons that have
double capacity as a Bishop or a Dean, etc. Plow. 234. a. and the Body Politic
of the King may not be disjoined or separated from his Body Natural, Plow. 230.
a. 242. b. So that when the King is Sworn to his Subjects (as he is at his
Coronation) he takes Oath in his Natural Person, for the Politic Body is
immortal, and invisible, nay, the Politic Body has no Soul; for (as is
aforesaid) it is framed by the Policy of Man, and therefore the King cannot be
said to Swear in his Politic Capacity. In likewise when at the Assizes by the
Judge of the Goal delivery, at the Sessions of the Peace, by the Justices or
the Commissioners of the Peace; when at, or in the Leet, by the Steward there,
the Subject is, or shall be Sworn to the King, to bear Faith and true
Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; then the Subject is Sworn
to bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Natural Body of the King. And
accordingly in all Indictments of Treason, when any intend or compass mortem
and destructionem Domini Regis (which must needs be intended and understood to
be of his Natural Body, for his Politic Body is Immortal and not subject to
Death) the Indictment always concludes with contra Ligeantiae suae debitum,
contrary to the Duty of their Allegiance; and therefore Ligeance is due to the
Natural Body of the King. And Sir Edward Coke says, this Ligeance or Faith of
the Subject is proprium quarto modo, to the King (a degree beyond the
Grammarians Superlative) omni, soli, and semper, to every King; to the King
alone, and always to the King. And it will be material, and not contrary to Sir
Edward Cokes meaning, to add these words (de jure) to every of his omni, soli,
and semper. And so Ligeance will be due (as it is) to every King that is so de
jure of Right, to him alone that is so; and always to him that is King de jure
of Right. Thereby every King de facto, and Usurper will be excluded, and the
greater safety will be secured to the King, and to the Subject too; for the
Disherison of the Right Heir of a Kingdom is always wont to be the beginning of
Civil Wars. But however Sir Edward Coke omitted those words (de jure) yet his
meaning was without question the same, as if those words had been added,
because C. 7. 10. b. he says, that the King holds the Realm of England by
Birthright, upon which Succession is ever attendant, and in the same place he
says, that the King in individuo moritur, but not in genere, which is as much
as to so say, that the Natural Body of the King is subject to Death, but the
body Politic of the King dies not. And therefore the Death of the Natural
Body of the King is called, Plow. 234. a. the Demise of the King, because that
thereby he Demiseth the Realm to another, and the Body Politic is transferred
from one Body Natural immediately to another Body Natural, that Right has; and
that because our Realm does not admit of any Interregnum. Hence it was that in
the year of our Lord, 1660. at the very instant of his late Sacred Majesty's
most happy Restoration, all Charters, and Writings whatsoever were Written,
Reputed and Esteemed to be made in the Twelfth year of his Reign, though that
from 1648. to that time, he was injuriously and wickedly, Deprived, Robbed, and
kept out from his Inheritance of all his Regal Rights of the Crown (whereof he
was the undoubted right Heir) by the late Usurpers.

CHAP. X. Herein you have an Heir defined, and divided, and is showed, that the
Right Heir of the Crown ought not, nor can lawfully be Disinherited; that a
Bastard ought not, nor can be Heir to the Crown; and further something is said
to the late Bill for the Exclusion of the late most Illustrious Prince James
Duke of York, now our Sovereign Lord, King James the Second.
NOW Sir Edward Coke in the First part of his Institutes Fol. 7. b. says, that
in the Legal understanding of the Common Law, he is said to be haeres, an Heir,
that is, ex justis nuptiis procreatus, for haeres legittimus est, quem nuptiae
demonstrant, and is he to whom Lands, Tenements, or hereditaments by the Act of
God, and right of Blood do descend of some Estate of Inheritance; for solus
deus haeredem facere potest, non homo, God alone can make an Heir, not Man. And
Heirs, are either Lineal, (who ever shall first Inherit) or Collateral, (who
are to Inherit for want of Lineal) Lineal descent is conveyed downwards in the
right Line, as from the Grandfather to the Father, from the Father to the Son,
etc. Collateral descent is derived from the side of the Lineal, as Grandfathers
Brother, Fathers Brother, etc. Now in Mr. Swinb. 5th. part, Fol. 289. he that
has Issue Natural, but not Lawful, is said to die without Issue, and in such
Case, the Fathers Brother shall Inherit, and not the Issue Natural of the
Father, for such Issue Natural in our Law is said to be nullius filius, no Man's
Son; whence may be Inferred, that no Man's Son shall Inherit no Man's Land, much
less a Crown. And in the 23d. chap. of Deuteron. the 2d. verse is said, a
Bastard shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord; even to his Tenth
generation shall he not enter into the Congregation of the Lord. And 10. H. 7.
18. it is said, that Rex est persona mixta cum sacerdote, quia tam
Ecclesiasticam, quam temporalem habet jurisdictionem, The King is a person mixed
or participating with the Priest in the Priesthood, because he is said to have
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as well as Temporal. And Sir John Fortescue, Fol.
95. a. b. says, that it is convenient, that Man's Law in the benefit of
Succession should cut them short; whom the Church judges unworthy to be
received into Holy Orders; yea, whom Holy Scripture judges (as touching their
Birthright) inferior to the Legitimate, or Lawfully Begotten; as we read (in
the 25th. chap. of Genesis 5, and 6th. verses) Abraham gave all his Inheritance to
his Son Isaac; and to the Sons of his Concubines he gave Gifts. And again in
Mr. Swinb. part 5th. Fol. 17. is said, A King may (ex plenitudine potestatis)
make his unlawful Issue capable of whatsoever by Will deviseable he does give
or bequeath unto him. But Mr. Plowden says, 247. a. b. It is an evil or
unlawful thing to Disinherit the Right Heir. And Mr. Swinb. in his 2d. part,
Fol. 118. says, that by the Civil, Canon, and Common Laws also of this Realm
of England; It is unlawful for a King to give away his Kingdom from his Lawful
Heirs. However, we had lately a House of Commons, or rather a Major part of
them, that had framed a Bill for the Excluding and Disabling the then most
Illustrious Prince James Duke of York, now King James the Second, for ever,
from Possessing, Having, Holding, Inheriting, and Enjoying of the Imperial
Crowns of this Realm and Kingdoms. It was a Presumptuous Bill for the Excluding
of the Presumptive Heir of these Crowns. However, it was refused by the Lords
House, and so could not be offered to his late Majesty, for his Royal Assent to
make it a Law.

Have me excused for saying it was a Presumptuous Bill; Matters of that nature
have been in times past esteemed so; in 35o. Eliz. Mr. Peter Wentworth, and Sir
Henry Bromley, delivered a Petition to the Lord Keeper, desiring the Lords of
the Upper House, to be suppliants with them of the Lower House unto her
Majesty, for entailing the Succession of the Crown, whereof a Bill was ready
drawn: the Queen was highly displeased herewith, and charged her Council to
call the Parties before them; so Sir Thomas Heneage was sent to fetch them,
they were first commanded to forbear going to the House, and not to go out of
their several Lodgings, afterward they were called before the Lord Treasurer,
the Lord Buckhurst, and Sir Thomas Heneage; Wentworth was Committed to the
Tower, Bromley to the Fleet, together with Mr. Stevens, as also Mr. Welsh
Knight for Worcestershire; and yet it was then thought no Breach of
Privilege. They that meddle with this matter of the Succession to the Crown,
do not only trench upon the Power and Privilege of Almighty God, who (as the
Prophet Daniel tells us in his 4th. chap.) is the most High that Rules in the
Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will; but also we have found by
woeful experience, that they Praevaricate with the King himself, for in the very
word (King) is included all Succession; so that where a Gift is made to the
King, a Fee-simple passes without the words (either of Heirs or Successors or
both) as may be seen C. Inst. 1. part 9. b. and in the same Book, Fol. 22. b.
is said, a Man cannot have an Heir during his Life, for non est haeres
viventis. And Mr. Plowden 45. b. says, no Heir has Right or Title till after
the Death of his Ancestor, that has the Inheritance (be the Heir either Lineal
or Collateral) and not in his Life: and this is, because let all the provision
imaginable by Man, nay by a Parliament be appointed; yet the same, by the death
of the Presumptive Heir, or Heir apparent in the Life time of the Ancestor, by
the Act of God, not otherwise may, and can be disappointed. And Anciently, and
now also, (as in C. 8. 28.) it is held, That Princeps coruscat radiis Regis,
and censetur una persona cum Rege, the Prince is enlightened and made splendid
by the shining brightness of the King, and is esteemed to be one and the same
Person with the King. And as in Bracton cited by Stanf. 99. b. Since nihil
aliud potest Rex in terris (cum sit Dei Minister and Vicarius) quam quod de
jure potest, ita quod potestas juris, sua est, non injuriae, etc, because the
King (as he is Gods Minister and Vicegerent) can do nothing upon the Earth, but
what he may do by Law, so that the Power of Equity and Justice, not of injury,
and Injustice, is properly said to be his Power. Therefore his late Sacred
Majesty, (not being minded to Calm the Storms of some discontented Spirits, by
stirring up a Tempest in his own Bosom) was pleased (at the opening of the late
Parliament at Westminster,) to signify to the Two Houses, that he desired them
to preserve the Succession of the Crown in the right Line, and withal
intimated to them, that he would give his Royal Assent to any Laws they should
devise or make for the Security of the Protestant Religion, as it is now
Established by Law in the Church of England, or to that Effect; but we are
living in faece seculi, in the very Dregs, and the very last and worst of Days;
we are Jealous again of our own shadows, nay we mistrust Gods Providence and
Protection; and the Kingdom again is like to be ruined by secret Plots and
Machinations. We have for many years (by the wonderful Providence of God) been
delivered from the Slavery and Superstition of Popery. And yet nothing is now
more feared, than the Introduction and Public exercise of Popery again in
these Kingdoms. Although as King James the First the Royal Grandfather of our
gracious Sovereign Lord King James the Second, in his first Speech to his first
Parliament, next after his Advent to the Crowns of England and Ireland, did
declare that it was then our happiness, that our Head (meaning himself) was of
the same Religion, that the Body was of! and that as he was no stranger to us
in Blood, no more was he a stranger to us in Faith, or in the matters
concerning the House of God; so likewise his Sacred Majesty (whom God long
preserve) in his first Speech to his Privy Counsel, next after his first Advent
to the Crowns of Great Britain and Ireland, has been Graciously Pleased to
Declare, that he will do his utmost endeavors to Preserve and Defend the
Government in Church and State, as it is now Established by Law in his several
Realms and Dominions. And besides diverse other undeniable Arguments might
demonstrate, that his late Sacred Majesty, or his dear Royal Brother, now King
James the Second, never intended in their Imaginations the least thought to
make any alteration of the Protestant Religion (as it is Established by Law) in
the Church of England; that further happy alliance of Marriage contracted and
Consummated between the Eldest Daughter of his Royal Majesty and the most
Illustrious Prince of Orange; And a later Marriage contracted also and
Consummated between his Younger Daughter, and the most Illustrious Prince
George of Denmark; most clearly confirms the reality of their intentions
herein: by which Nuptial engagements, it appears further, that their joint
endeavors have been, not only to defend, uphold, and maintain a bare
profession thereof in these his Majesty's Dominions, but also to enlarge and
corroborate it abroad, as much as lies in their Power. Do we not know, that
when a Protestant Prince is to intermarry with a Foreign Princess of the
Catholic Religion, what great care and provision is made by the Parents or
Friends on either side, by Articles made, and confirmed by some Ministers of
State, equally chosen and empowered for the purpose of her having a set number
of Priests, and other Ministers and Servants of her Judgment and Profession;
for the due Administration and Execution only of such Rites and Ceremonies, as
are proper for her having and enjoying that Freedom and Liberty that is
agreeable to the Rule of her Conscience, in that Religion wherein she has been
born and educated? And (I pray) in the time of his late Sacred Majesty (by whom
the true Protestant Religion was professed, that by Law is Established) why
might not some wholesome Law or Laws have been made by the great Council the
Parliament, for the prevention of the extirpation of the Protestant Religion,
and the setting aside those Idle and Aerie Jealousies of the Massacre of the
true professors thereof after his Demise or Death? But alas! I fear I am
mistaken in, or do not put the question right; there are diverse Sects, and not
Religions, such as are called Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Independents,
Quakers, and I know not how many sorts of Novelists amongst us, (that had not
only their Birth and Production, but also their full growth in the late times
of Usurpation and Rebellion) who (though they differ in judgment amongst
themselves) yet in this (as formerly) they are all still agreeing that if they
had but the opportunity, they would all shake hands, and join together in being
against the Kings Supremacy in Church and State, as much, if not more, than the
Papists. For these several sorts of Sects, do not so much differ from us in
points of Religion, as in their confused form of Policy and Parity, being ever
discontented with the present Government, and are impatient to suffer any
Superiority, which makes these Sects unable to be suffered in any well
governed State or Kingdom. But if we take into serious consideration, that it
is above Forty years since the late times of Rebellion, and that every
Individual person now living, and that has since attained to the Age of Fifty
years, or thereabouts, were then Children, and had not the discretion to
discern or put a difference between good and evil, if we consider the great
changes, and mighty revolutions, the Metamorphosis, and Transposition of all
things, in point of Government then; and afterward in time, till his late
sacred Majesty's most happy Restoration; then all these Sects or most of them,
I hope, will be ready to conclude with me, that they did not, nor could know
better because that in their Youth, in stead of better, and more wholesome
nutriment, they sucked in, were nursed, and educated in those bad times upon
Venomous and Rebellious Principles.

Quo semel est imbuta recens, fervabit odorem Horace.

Testa, diu, etc.
Accordingly, what Children have been instructed or Grammard in, in their
Youth, it is hard for them to leave in their Old or Elder years: some of these
several Sects do still retain their first drunken in Liquor, upon a certain
shamefacedness to be thought curious, or changeable; others of them (that are
more Willful and Obstinate) will not be reformed, because contrary to St. Paul's
advice, Romans 12.16. they are wise in their own conceit, and will not be
informed.

CHAP. XI. Shows that Ignorance of the Law will excuse none, and that
therefore all Dissenters to the Government in Church and State, are advised to
Conformity.
IT is horrible, that St. Paul says, they that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation, Romans 13.2. I pity them therefore, and wish charitably
their convertion. I do not Condemn, yet can do no less than show them their
Peril. Ignorance of the Law excuses not, but it be invincible, (that is to
say) they have done that in them is, to know the truth; as to counsel with
Learned Men, and to ask them what the Law is in that behalf, and if they answer
them, that they may do this or that Lawfully; however they may thereby be
excused in Conscience, yet in Man's Law (says St. Jermin Dr. and Stud. 46. a.)
they are not thereby discharged, but they that have taken upon them to have
knowledge of the Law: be not excuse by ignorance of the Law: nay! no more are
they that have a Willful Ignorance, and that would rather be Ignorant than to
know the Truth, and therefore will not dispose themselves to be informed, or to
ask any Counsel in it, and if it be a thing that is against the Law of God, or
the Law of reason (as the matter of Obedience to the Magistrate Supreme and
Subordinate is) no Man shall be excused by Ignorance. And the same Author Fol.
146, 148. says, that Ignorance in the Law, though it be invincible, does not
excuse as to the Law; for every Man is bound at his Peril to take knowledge what
the Law of the Realm is, as well the Law made by Statute, as by the Common Law,
giving for reason, that there is no Statute made in this Realm, but by the
Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of all the Commons (that is to
say) by the Knights of the Shire, Citizens, and Burgesses, that be choson by
Assent of Commons; and every Statute there made, is of as strong Effect in the
Law, as if all the Commons were there present personally at the making thereof:
and so since all were makers of the Statute, the Law presumes that all have
knowledge of that, that they make, and are bound at their Perils to take
knowledge of the Statute that they make: and so be all that come after them.
And Mr. Plowden, Fol. 343. a. says, that Ignorance of the Law is not to be
presumed to be in a Subject, and that therefore Ignorance of the Law shall
excuse none. Therefore let all of the Sects aforesaid, who through Curiosity,
affectation of Novelties, want of better Education in their Youths, or that
they will not yet suffer themselves to be weaned from the good Old Cause (as it
was called in the late times of Rebellion) let them all make have to come over,
and join with us in the same way and Worship of God; and let them be more
careful how they are for the future Factious, stirrers of Sedition, and
disturbers of the Public Peace. All of all sorts, have had ample proof of his
late Sacred Majesty's gracious Favor, Mercy, and Amnesty since his coming: yet
some good Old Cause Men (none will deny but Walcot and Rumbald were such) and
others of Wicked, and Traitorous principles, lately contrived, and Plotted
Barbarously to Murder his late Gracious Majesty, and his dear Royal Brother,
since our Lord the King, and then the most Illustrious P. J. D. of York; and
instead of the best Government in the whole Christian World, to have introduced
a Hexarchy or a Government by Six; whether jointly or separately is not much
material to enquire. All persons in general within the Three Kingdoms, are
infinitely bound to praise God, for the preservation of the Lives of his late
Sacred Majesty, and his dear Royal Brother our Sovereign Lord; and for the
timely discovery of their Wicked and Hellish designs and Machinations, that
threatened not only the alteration of the Government in Church and State; but
also then was by designed and forethought malice purposed, and intended the
expense of the Royal, and all Loyal Blood. And (God give us all Grace to be
thankful) some only that were to have been the Malicious Authors, and
instigators of its Effusion; have therefore suffered according to Law, and
their Wicked and Willful Obstinacy has been corrected by the Magistrate: and
by Gods great Goodness and infinite Mercy, his late Sacred Majesty his dear
Royal Brother now King James the Second, and the public Peace of all the Three
Kingdoms are preserved in peace and safety; and under his Sacred Majesty, as
under a goodly Cedar Tree of full growth, irremovable not to be otherwise, or
other where, set, planted, or supplanted, all his Subjects sit secure and are
protected.

CHAP. XII. Shows that all Subjects owe true Ligeance to their Sovereign,
though they never were, or ever shall be Sworn to the same; and is showed the
diversity between Enemies, and Rebels, then all are advised from Rebellion, and
is showed that the King has no Peer, and therefore cannot be judged by his
Subjects for his Actions.
ILlaesa sit Majestas Regis, let the Majesty of our King hereafter be free from
all hurt and injury, either in our thoughts, words, or deeds. And since you
have heard, not only cui, sed quomodo, debetur Ligeantia, not only to whom, but
also in what manner your Ligeance is due unto the Natural Body of our Lord the
King, (which is always, at all times, and in all places, accompanied with the
Body Politic, and cannot be disjoined or separated, from the same) you are
likewise to understand, that this Ligeance does not begin by the Oath in the
Leet, or elsewhere; and that the Swearing in the Leet, or elsewhere; makes no
denization. For all Subjects owe true Ligeance to their Sovereign, though they
never yet were, nor ever shall be Sworn in the Leet; only that the King may
have an account of his Peoples Frank pledge for their due Obedience, and
Subjection within the Precinct of every Leet; the Municipal Laws of this Realm
have prescribed the Order and Form of this Oath of Allegiance to be administered
at or in the Leet. All Subjects are Born under this Natural Ligeance, Aliens
and Strangers only are properly said to be amici, or inimici, to be in League
with us, or to be Enemies to us. Hosts sunt qui nobis; vel quibus, nos bella
decernimus; ceteri proditores, praedones, etc. They are Enemies, against whom
our King Proclaims War, or who Proclaim War against our King; all others are
Traitors, Rebels, Thieves and Robbers. A Rebel is to be Indicted, but an Enemy
is to be put to death by Marshal-Law. Now as outward Peace is a great Blessing,
yet is it as far inferior to Peace within, as Civil Wars are more cruel and
unnatural than Wars abroad; for avoidance whereof, let all in general refuse so
much as to harbor in their thoughts, that detestable and long since exploded
opinion, that levying of War against the Command of the King, though his person
be present, is no levying of War against the King; but the levying of War
against his Politic Person, and Laws, that is the only levying War against the
King. Admit of this damned Thesis or Position, then we are all presently
fellows at Footbal; and Over Milk will presently be as good as Swasey Cream:
and whatever gets uppermost, will be King. In the time of Edward the Second
about 400 years since, this separation of Sovereignty from the person of the
King, and manner of abstracting the Person of the King from his Office, was
found out by the Two Spencers, the Father and the Son; who to cover their
Treason, invented this damnable opinion, that Homage, and the Oath of
Allegiance, were rather by reason of the Kings Crown, than his Person: upon
which (as may be seen in C. 7. 11. a. b.) were inferred these Execrable
Consequences, First, If the King did not demean or behave himself well, his
Liege People were bound by their Oath to remove him. Secondly, Because the King
might not be reformed by suit of Law, that ought to be done by asperty.
Thirdly, That his Liege People are bound to govern in aid and default of him.
All which detestable opinions were then condemned in two Parliaments, the first
was by an Act made in the time of Edward the Second, called Exilium Hugonis De
Spencer, the Banishment of Hugh Spencer; the last was by an Act made in the
First year of Edward the Third the first Chapter. Let all take notice, that by
the Laws of our Realm of England, all Power, Sovereignty, Homage, Allegiance,
and Subjection is commanded and required, as properly due to the Natural Body
of the King. And that therefore it was said by Glanvil (who was Chief Justice
in the time of Henry the Second) Dominus Rex nullum habere potest parem, multo
minus Superiorem, Our Lord the King can have no Peer or Equal, much less can he
have any Superior within his Realms or Dominions. And Bracton (qui sub Henrico
tertio viginti annos summi Justiciarii munere defunctus est, that for Twenty
years together was Chief Justice in the time of Henry the Third) says, that
Omnis quidem sub Rege, and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub deo, every Man is
under the King, and he is under none but God alone. And Non potest Regi
necessitatem, aliquis imponere, quod injuriam suam corrigat, and amendet; cum
superiorem non habeat nisi deum, and satis erit ei ad paenam quod Dominum
expectet ultorem, nor (says he) can any Man put a necessity upon the King to
correct and amend his injury, unless he will himself, since he has no Superior
but God; it will be sufficient punishment for him to expect the Lord for his
Avenger; neither has he hereby other Privilege, than what by God Himself is
given to Kingly Majesty (as may be seen in the 8th. chap. of Ecclesiastes, 2,
3, and 4th. verses) I Counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in
regard of the Oath of God: be not hasty to go out of his sight; stand not in an
Evil thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him; and where the word of a King
is, there is Power; and who may say unto him, What do thou? Yet I observe
that once heretofore, the Miter may be said Sawcily to have Oretopped the
Crown, in the 20th. year of King Henry the Eight, we read in Mr. Howes
Chronicle Fol. 541. that the Kings Marriage came on to be argued in open Court
at the Black Friars; then the King and Queen were Summoned and Ascited to
appear; but there may be seen, what the opinion of wise Men in those times was
thereupon; which was, that it was a strange sight, and the newest device that
ever was read, or heard of before in any Region, Story, or Chronicle, a King
and Queen to be constrained by Process compellatory to appear in any Court as
Common Persons, within their own Realm and Dominion; to abide the Judgments and
Decrees of their own Subjects, being the Royal Diadem and Prerogative thereof.
However this was the less wonder then, because the Pope did then send as Legate
into England, the Cardinal Campejus, to debate the Controversy delegated to
him, and the Cardinal of York, for the publication of the invalidity of the
Kings first Marriage; at the instance of the King himself, as may be seen in
Guicciardin's History, Fol. 756. But as we may see in Stanf. 153. a. The King
of England has no Peer in his own Land, Realm, or Dominion, and therefore he
cannot be Judged, or called to account for his Actions by his People. Nay! it
may be there seen, that Parliaments are Assembled for the profit of the King
and his People; and the People are Summoned thither by the Kings Writ, ad
consulendum, etc, non ad consedendum solum, multo minus ad supersedendum, to
consult of the certain difficult matters, etc. not only there to Sit together,
much less to Sit upon their Lord the King in Judgment.

CHAP. XIII. Shows that no Action lies against the King, but in place
thereof Petition must be made unto him; and that (due circumstances observed)
the Subject shall have his remedy against the King by way of Petition, as
readily as one Subjct may recover against another Subject by way of Action in
any of the Kings Courts: for that all his Majesty's Subordinate Officers are
Sworn to do Justice between the King and his Subjects, which if they do not,
they are Answerable for the injury, not the King.
IT is said, C. 11. 72. a. b. That the King being the Lieutenant of God, solum
hoc non potest facere; quod non potest injuste facere, which is agreeable to a
Maxim in our Law, that the King can do no wrong; therefore, as we may see in
Mr. Stanford, prer. 72. b. In place of Action against the King, (for the
dignity of his Person) Petition must be made unto him in the Chancery, or in
Parliament; for no Action did ever lie against the King at the Common Law, but
the party is driven to his Petition, which is all the remedy the Subject has,
when the King Seizes his Lands, or takes away his Goods from him, having no
Title by order of his Laws so to do. And this Petition is called a Petition of
Right, because of the Right the Subject has against the King, by the Order of
his Laws to the thing he sueth for by Petition. And it may be sued as well in
the Parliament, as out of the Parliament, and if it be sued in the Parliament,
then it may be Enacted and passed as an Act of Parliament, or else to be
Ordered in like manner as a Petition that is sued out of Parliament: And suit
by Petition can be to none other than only to the King, for no such suit shall
be made to the Queen, the Consort of the King, or to the Lord Prince; for these
Personages have no such Prerogative. Further plainly showing and declaring the
manner of suing by Petition, and where, and in what cases it lies, and where
not; and that (due circumstances observed by him that sueth by Petition) he may
afterward enterplede with the King; and (if cause be for the same) the Subject
shall have right done him, and shall have restitution of that he sueth for by
Petition, as readily as one Subject may recover against another Subject in any
of the Kings Courts. For the King of England has all Subordinate Offices in
him to grant, but none in him to use himself; and all his Subordinate Officers,
Ministers of State, and such as do occupy Judicial places, and others, even
from those of his Majesty's Privy Counsel, to the Petty Constable, at their
admittance to their Offices, are Sworn by meet Forms of Religious Attestations,
or Oaths, for their just and upright Execution of the same between the King and
his Subjects; meaning thereby not only to set God before their Eyes (whom by
such Oath they call to Witness of their promise, and call upon for revenge of
their falsehood) but also they are thereby threatened with temporal peins,
provided by the Policy of Christian Laws against corrupt dealings; and thereby
their minds are strengthened, and they are Armed with Courage against the force
of humane affections, which otherwise might allure or draw them to partiallity,
and out of the way of right Judgment and Justice. And the King (as is said
Plow. 231. b. neither gives, nor takes, but by matter of Record; and therefore
(Livery of Seizin being matter in Deed) the King ought not to do it, for he
ought to have a Record for his Acts; therefore the King shall neither make
Livery, nor take by Livery, and a Subject may not give Lands to the King by Act
Executed in his Life time, if not that it be by Deed Enrolled, or other matter
of Record. So that seeing the King must have a Record for his Acts, and that
the same are had and obtained by his Subordinate Officers, if any thing be done
in prejudice of the Subject, his Officers are answerable for the same, not the
King. And also C. 11. 90. b. an Officer or Minister of the King may do nothing
in disadvantage of the King, nor of the Subject; by reason Public Officers are
at their admittance to their Public Offices and Employments Sworn, Well and
Lawfully to serve the Lord the King, and his People; and that Lawfully they
shall Counsel the King in his business, and that they shall not Counsel, nor
Assent to any thing which shall turn him in damage, or disherison by any
manner, way, or color; and that they shall do equal Law and Execution of right
to all his Subjects, Rich and Poor, without having regard to any Person, as may
be seen in Mr. Pulton's Statutes at large, 18th. Edward the Third, in the Oath
of the Justices, and the Oaths of the Clerks of the Chancery, etc. And Stanford
59. a. The King is said to be always present in Court, and if the Parties in
pleading, or any Jury in their Verdict, disclose matter that entitleth the
King, and the Court shall adjudge for the King; though that he is not any of
the Parties to the Action.

CHAP. XIV. Shows what inconveniences happen in the Realm of France, through
Regal Government alone, with the Commodities that proceed of the joint
Government Politic and Regal in the Realm of England. And all the Community
are herein dissuaded by mutinous and Rebellious practices to Disinfranchise
themselves.
IN Sir John Davyes rep. Fol. 40. b. it is said that the Kings of England have
always claimed and had within their Dominions a Monarchy Royal, and not a
Monarchy Seignioral, or Tyranny, and that under a Monarchy Royal, the Subjects
are Freemen, and have property in their Goods; and Freehold and Inheritance in
their Lands: but under a Monarchy Seignioral or Tyranny, they are all as
Villains or Slaves, and are Proprietors of nothing, but at the will of their
Grand Seignior or Tyrant, as in Turkey and Moscovy. But Sir John Fortescue,
Fol. 25, etc. says, That the King of England cannot alter or change the Laws
of his Realm at his pleasure; for that he Governs his People, not by power
only Royal, but also Politic, and such King Ruling by Power Royal and
Politic, can neither change Laws without the consent of his Subjects, nor yet
charge them with strange impositions against their Wills, so that to Rule the
People by Government Politic, is no Yoke not only to the Subject, but to the
King himself, accordingly within the Realm of England, no Man Sojourneth in
another Man's House, without the love and leave of the good Man of the same
House, saving in Common Inns, where before his departure he shall satisfy, and
pay for all his charges there; neither shall he escape unpunished whosoever he
be, that takes another Man's Goods without the good will of the owner thereof;
nether is it unlawful for any Man to provide and store himself of Salt, and
other Merchandises and Wares, at his own will and pleasure, or any Man that
sells the same; neither does the King take away any of his Subjects Goods
without due satisfaction for the same; neither does the King by himself, or his
Servants and Officers, leavy upon his Subjects, Tallages, Subsedies, or any
other burdens, or alter their Laws, without the express consent and agreement
of the whole Realm in his Parliament. So that every Inhabitant of the Realm
uses and enjoys at his pleasure all the Fruits that his Land or Cattle
bears, with all the Profits and Commodities which by his own Travel, or by
the Labor of others, he gains by Land or by Water; not hindered by the
injury or wrong detainment of any Man, but that he shall be allowed reasonable
recompense. So that the People of England are plentifully furnished with all
things, that are requisite to the accomplishment of a quiet and wealthy life,
according to their Estates and Degrees; neither are they sued in the Law, nor
are Arrested or Impleaded for their Movables or Possessions, or Arraigned of
any offense Criminal but only before ordinary Judges, where by the Laws of the
Land they are justly entreated. And these are the Fruits which Government
Politic and Regal conjoined does bear and bring forth. But in the Realm of
France (where the People are Governed by Regal Power alone) the Villages and
Towns are pestered with the Kings Men at Arms, and their Horses, so that it is
hard in any of the great Towns there to get any Lodging; which Men at Arms,
though they continue in one Village a Month or Two, do not, nor will pay any
thing at all for their own charges, or for the charges of their Horses, and
when they have spent all the Victuals, Fuel, and Horse-meat in one Town, then
they go to another Town, wasting the same in the like manner, not paying one
Penny for any necessaries; and thus are all the Villages, and Unwalled Towns of
the Land used, so that there is not the least Village there free from this
miserable Calamity, but that it is Once or Twice every year beggered by this
kind of pilling. And the King there suffers no Man to Eat Salt within his
Kingdom, except he buyeth it of the King at such price as it pleases him to
Assess: and if any poor Man had rather Eat his Meat fresh, than to buy Salt so
excessively dear, he is immediately compelled to buy so much of the Kings Salt
at the Kings price as shall suffice so many Persons as he keeps in his House.
Moreover all the Inhabitants of that Realm, give yearly to the King, the Fourth
part of all the Wines that their Grounds bears, and every Vintner, the Fourth
Penny of the price of the Wines that he sells; And besides all this, every
Village and Borough pays yearly to the King great Sums of Money assessed
upon them, for the Wages of Men at Arms; so that the charges of the Kings Army
(which is ever very great) is maintained by the poor People of the Villages,
Boroughs and Towns of the Realm; and (these things not considered) other
exceeding great Tallages are yearly Assessed upon every Village of the same
Realm to the Kings use, whereof they are no year released. And the People being
with these and diverse other calamities plagued and oppressed, do live in great
misery and thraldom; for there the Princes pleasure stands in force of a Law,
so that by reason thereof, their Kings at their pleasure change Laws, make new
Laws, Execute Punishments, burden their Subjects with charges, and also when,
and as themselves list, they do determine controversies of Suitors as pleases
them. I have showed you here out of Sir John Fortescues Book De laudibus legum
Angliae. (For every sober Man would judge me, or any other a Madman, that
should Write of Matters of this nature, without good and warrantable Authority
for that is Written) what inconveniences happen in the Realm of France through
Regal Government alone, with the Commodities that proceed of the joint
Government Politic and Regal in the Realm of England; that being hence
instructed with the experience of both Laws, we may the better by their effects
Judge whether of them we ought rather to choose; for that, Opposita juxta se
posita magis elucescunt, contraries laid together do the more perfectly appear.
It is, and has been held to be one of the principles of Policy in France to
keep the Peasan (which is the Gross of the People,) still indigent and poor,
because they are of such a volatile instable Nature, that if they were Rich and
Fed high, Wealth and Wantonness would make them ever and anon to be kicking
against Government, and crying out for a change. The Old Cavalier now again
takes leave to look Backward, and to put this Question to all the Commons of
England (for it is only to them he directs this his Discourse, he may be taken
notice of, not to have presumed to take upon him, to Advise the King or any of
his several Counsels) whether all the People of England (comprehended under the
notion of the Community, or style or name of the Commons of England) have not
been for Threescore years last past and upward of as volatile, and instable a
Nature, as ever the Gross of the People of France are, were, or possibly could
or can be? I must Answer in the Affirmative, that the People of England in this
latter Age have been very changeable, always endeavoring to promote alteration
in Church and State; and so in the late times of Rebellion, they changed Peace
for War, and consequently all the miseries and sad effects thereof were laid
open to their Eyes; their Goods were spoiled, their Children Slain, their Wives
and Daughters Ravished, their Cattle driven away, and themselves made miserable
spectators to behold their own unhappiness; and though what by destiny was
decreed, Man could not prevent; his late Sacred Majesty was Miraculously
restored to his Realms and Dominions; yet still (by reason of variety of
Opinions lodging in various, particular individual Persons Breasts, differing
amongst themselves) the subvertion and alteration of the Government (none will
deny) has again been menaced and threatened; and a person Good-enough for so
Wicked an undertaking, was employed with Letters, Legations and Messages, to
invite and desire the Aid and Assistance of our dear Brethren the Scots, Aiming
again to have subdued all to their own Will and Power; under the Old disguises
of Holy Combinations, in the same manner as heretofore, by Solemn League and
Covenant, or otherwise howsoever. But my good Brethren of all the Community
within all his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, seeing that as free born
Subjects by Birthright, we are Entitled to all those Fruits, and Privileges,
Government Regal and Politic conjoined bears, let us take care for the
future, that by Mutinous, Disobedient, and Rebellious practices, we do not
Frenchifie, and Disinfranchise our selves; knowing that he that is free, and
voluntarily runs into Fetters, is a Fool, and whosoever becomes Captive
without constraint, may be thought either willful or witless.

CHAP. XV. Shows how tender this Government Politic and Regal conjoined is
of the safety of the Kings Person, and of all his Royal Rights and
Prerogatives. And that our Law does not reject Women or Infants in the high
point of the Descent of the Crown; and that our King holds immediately of God
to himself, and acknowledges no Prince on Earth his Superior.
NOW as Government Politic and Regal conjoined is tender of the preservation
of the just Rights of the Communalty; and this Communalty without a head can in
no wise be said to be corporate, so in likewise we are to understand, it is as
tender and curious, in the preservation of the Royal Rights, Privileges, and
Jurisdictions, and Prerogatives of the Chief Head, and Supreme Ruler of this
Body Mystical, which is the King, or Queen of these Kingdoms. For in this high
point of Descent of the Crown. Our Law does not reject Women, tho Women are
commonly said to be such, whom Nature has made to keep home, to nourish their
Family and Children, and do not meddle with matters abroad, nor are to bear
Office in a City or Commonwealth, no more than Children and Infants; yet in
such Cases, wherein the Authority is annexed to the Blood and Progeny, as in
the Descent of the Crown; there the Blood is respected, not the Age, nor the
Sex: and such a one is called an absolute Queen, which has the Name not by
being Married to a King, but by being the true, right and next Successor, in
the Dignity, and upon whom by Right of Blood that Title is descended. These (I
say) have the same Authority, though they be Women of Children, in these our
Kingdoms, Realms, or Dominions, as they should have had, if they had been Men
of full Age. For the Right and Honor of the Blood, and the Quietness and
Surety of the Realm, is more to be considered than either the tender Age, as
yet impotent to Rule; or the Sex, not accustomed (otherwise) to intermeddle
with Public Affairs, being always by common intendment understood, that such
personages never do lack the Counsel of such Grave and Discreet Men, as be able
to supply all other defects. Now we are to understand, that our Nation has not
used any other general Authority, neither Aristocratical, nor Democratical, but
only the Imperial Monarchy, or the Royal and Kingly Majesty; which Anciently
and at the very First (as in the time of the Heptarchy) was divided to many and
sundry Kings, each absolutely Reigning in his Country, none under Subjection of
other, till (observe) by Fighting one with the other, (the Overcomed always
falling to the Augmentation of the Vanquisher and Overcomer) at last the Realm
of England grew into one Monarchy; neither one of these Kings, neither he who
first or at the last had all, took any investiture at the Hands of the Emperor
of Rome, or of any other Superior or Foreign Prince; but (as may be seen in
the Statute of 16th. Rich. the Second, chap. 5th.) held immediately of God to
himself, acknowledging no Prince on Earth his Superior, and so we are to take
notice, it is kept and holden at this day; and we may see that by a Statute
made in the 13th. Car. 2 di. ca. 1. That if any during the Life of the King
Majesty, shall within the Realm or without, Compass or Intend the Death, or
Bodily Harm, Imprisonment or Restraint of the Person of the King, or to Depose
him from the Kingly Name of the Imperial Crowns of his Realms, or Levy Wars
against him, or stir up any Forreigner to a Forcible Invasion, and such
compassings shall express by Printing, Writing, Preaching, or Malicious and
Advised Speeches, and be Convicted thereof upon the Oath of Two credible
Witnesses; every Person so Offending shall be Adjudged to be Traitors, and
shall lose and forfeit as in Case of High Treason. And by the same Act it is
provided amongst other things, That if any shall affirm the King to be an
Heretic, or a Papist, or that he intends to introduce Popery, or shall
Maliciously and Advisedly, by Writing, Printing, Preaching, or other Speeches,
Publish or Declare any word, or other thing or things to stir up the People to
hatred or dislike of the Person of his Majesty or Government; every such Person
thereof convicted, are thereby made incapable of any Office or Employment in
Church and State, and are made liable to such Further punishments, as by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm are to be inflicted in such Cases; take notice
this Act was made presently after his late Majesty's most happy Restoration,
when again the Major part, (if not all then Living) of the Secluded Members in
the late pretended Parliament without King or House of Lords, were again chosen
by the Freeholders of their several Counties, to come to this long expected and
much wished for Free Parliament. It would then have made a true Englishman
smile, to see Old Esquire Prynne trudge through Westminster Hall to the House of
Commons with his Basket, not Silver Hilt Sword by his Side; time was then come
that his Eyes were opened, and as a principal Member of that Parliament, he was
one of the Framers of that Bill for the forementioned Act; wherein it is
further-provided, that if any Person or Persons shall Maliciously, and
Advisedly by Writing, Printing, Preaching, or Speaking, Declare or Affirm, that
the Parliament began at Westminster, November 3. 1640. is not Dissolved nor
Determined; or that it ought to be in being: Or that there lies any Obligation
upon him or any other Person, from the Oath, Covenant, or Engagement, to
endeavor a change of Government; or that both or either Houses of Parliament
have a Legislative Power without the King; or words to the same effect. Every
Person so Offending shall incur the danger and penalty of Praemunire, whereof
mention is made in the before mentioned Statute of 16th. Rich. the Second. I
have made mention of this latter clause in the said Act the more especially,
because thereby all Interregna, Kings de facto, wicked and injurious Usurpers
are Excluded, and the Body Natural and Politic of our Lawful King are so
conjoined and closed together, that (I hope in God) for the future, it shall
not lie in the Power of the People by Rising in Rebellion against their
Rightful Sovereign Lord, to make any Separation of the Sovereignty from the
Person of our Lord the King, or to abstract the Person of our King from his
Office; to the Ruin, Alteration, or Subvertion again of his Majesty's Realms
and Dominions. And I have mentioned the former Clauses, to give you to
understand, what care has been made for the Security and Preservation of his
Majesty's Royal Person and Government, ask it is freed and secured thereby from
all Restraint, Bodily Harm, or violence whatsoever, by wicked Words, or Deeds.

CHAP. XVI. Shows that all Unlawful Assemblies or Meetings for the Plotting
of harm to the King, or the Alteration of the Government, are Unlawful, and
further shows what Misprision of Treason is, and that it is the Duty of every
good Subject presently to discover Treason.
NOW we are to know, how that we are forbid also (by sundry Laws in force) to
Congregate and Associate our selves to Unlawful Assemblies, or Meetings in
Coffee-houses, or elsewhere; where any discontented, seduced, wicked Persons
shall Assemble themselves together, to Plot, or Contrive Bodily harm to the
King, or the Alteration of the Government. If it shall be the hard mishap of
any Loyal, and well affected Christian Person, to chance to be in such evil
Company, let him learn of Mordecai the Jew, his Duty therein, (as we may see in
the second chap. of the Book of Esther, the 21, 22, 23. verses.) while Mordecai
sat in the Kings Gate, Two of the Kings Chamberlaines, Bigthana and Teresh, of
those which kept the Door, were wroth, and sought to lay hands on the King
Ahasuerus; and the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the
Queen, and Esther certified the King thereof in Mordecai's Name; and when
inquisition was made of the matter, it was found out, therefore they were both
Hanged on a Tree: and it was Written in the Book of the Chronicles before the
King. And Ahasuerus afterward reading in the Chronicles of the good service
done by Mordechai, took care for his reward, as may be seen in the sixth chap.
of the said Book of Esther. And we may see in Stanf. 37. b. when one knows
that another has done Treason, or Felony, and he will not him discover to the
King, or his Counsel, or to some Magistrate, but concealeth his Offense, that
is Misprision; which Offense, Bracton places amongst the Offenses of Treason,
because he was of opinion, that concealment beyond a certain time, shall make
it amount rather to Treason than to Misprision: for that purpose he says:
Statim, and sine aliquo intervallo, etc. that presently and without any stop,
pause, or giving over for a time, he ought to go to the King himself, if he
may, or otherwise to some of his Secretaries of State, or some Magistrate, and
to discover the whole matter in orderly manner: that he ought not to stay Two
days or nights in one place before he sees the King; nor to be let or hindered
by any business, though never so urgent: quia vix ei permittitur, ut
retrospiciat, because the Law gives him not so much time, as to look back; in
some Cases, as we must render an account for every idle word, so must we
likewise in this case, for our idle silence; for in such a Case as this, where
any knows of any Conspiracy against his King or Country, he is bound by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, presently to discover it; for as Fire in its
beginning, whilst it is but small, is more easily quenched than it is
afterward, when by some continuance it has gathered strength; so the
beginning of Rebellious contrivances, being known and discovered, with more
ease the sad events, and evil consequences thereof are nipped in the Bud, and
are smothered hindered and prevented: therefore as to this Evil, or rather Devil
of Rebellion, all are to be advised by the Poet, who says; Principiis obsta:
sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.


CHAP. XVII. Shows that all Writs, Process, Executions and Commandments, are
and ought to be in the Kings Name only.
NOW I shall acquaint you further, that all Writs, Executions, and Commandments
are done in the Kings Name. Nay! we do say in England, the Life and Member of
the Kings Subject are the Kings only (that is to say) no Man has hault or
moyenne Justice but the King, nor can hold plea thereof. Hence it is, that
those Pleas which touch the Life or Mutilation of Man, be called Pleas of the
Crown; nor can be done in the Name of any inferior Person than he or she, that
holds the Crown of England. And all Enditements, Presentiments, and Processes
relating to the Sessions of the Peace begin with Juratores presentant pro
Domino Rege quod I. S. de, etc. or Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si A. B. de, etc.
And every warrant from a Justice of the Peace upon all occasions whatsoever,
directed to the Constable, begin with these or such like words, these are in
his Majesty's Name to Will and Require you forthwith, etc. If any Process,
Summons, Invitation, or Commandment come to you, in Parliament time, or out of
Parliament time, in any other Habit, Dress, or Name whatsoever. Be you assured,
such Coin is counterfeit, and not current within his Majesty's Realms and
Domions; but are deceitful and delusory, and may not improperly be likened to
the Melody of Sirens, who Sing, not to stir up Mirth, but to allure unto danger
and mishaps.

CHAP. XVIII. All Freeholders are advised as to what manner of Persons they
are, or ought to Choose for future Parliaments.
I Remember, I made mention of the Secluded Members in the late times of
Rebellion, These were they with whom Treason had no place, because with them,
Obedience to their Sovereign Lord the King and his Laws Ecclesiastical and
Temporal bore sway, and held Principallity: some of whom (when the confluence
and Clamours of the Tumults in those times passed all boundaries of Laws and
Reverence to Authority, by the rude and unseemly deportments both in
contemptuous words and actions of the vulgar, and that no means prevailed for
their suppression) withdrew themselves with his Sacred Majesty King Charles the
First, for the security of their Persons from Violence; others of (when the
Lords were Excluded and the House of Commons was purged by the Military power
to a Rump Parliament,) for rotten Members (as they then termed them) were cast
out, and all of them (that were afterward living) were again chosen for
Parliament Men upon his late Majesty's most miraculous and happy Restoration.
Many of them held their King and Country, and the Government thereof so dear,
that in defense thereof, they feared not to hazard their lives and Fortunes.
Such as these were, (Men Fearing God, Honoring their King, and abhorring to
meddle or join with those that are given to change) I advise every Freeholder
(who has a voice in the Election of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses) should
Chose and Elect to sit in Parliament for the future, when his Majesty shall be
pleased to Issue forth his Royal Writs for the same. If you know of any that
have offended grievously in former Parliaments, Elect them not again, upon an
expected repentance. (All jealousies and fears laid aside) Elect such as are
Men of good Fortunes, not such as have their fortunes to make; such as are Wise
and prudent Men in the management of their own private Affairs at home; and in
their several Countries make a right and good use of those benefits which God
has put into their hands, for their succouring of others, their poor Tennants
and Neighbors, whose virtue is yet altogether joined with that Justice, that
is prudently guided with Moderation and reason; for they that know well how to
manage their own private Affairs (when called thereto) will in all probability,
as carefully contribute their prudent and hearty endeavors for the
preservation of the Public Peace, and welfare of the whole Community. Let not
Elections be carried on (as heretofore) with partiality and popular heat, let
the Gravity and discretion of the more sober, and better educated Gentry, allay
and fix the Commons to a due temperament, guiding some Men's well meaning Zeal
by such Rules of Moderation, as are best both to preserve, and restore the
health, and welfare of all States and Kingdoms. Every Freeholder ought to know,
and well to consider with what power he trusts those whom he chooses, in
regard the Power of the House of Commons is derived from that trust: and the
Kings Writ directed to the Sheriff, gives Authority to the Freeholders to make
their Elections; in which is expressed, not only the Sheriffs Duty in point of
Summoning; but the Writ also contains the Duty and Power of such Knights and
Burgesses as shall be Elected, and such as shall be Elected, are to know, that
as a Body Natural cannot do any perfect Act if it be dismembered (viz.) if the
Head be in one place, and the Body in another place, and so of the rest of the
Members of a Body Natural: so it is in like wise of the Parliament; which may
be said by the Power of the King to be made corporate, or the highest Court
aggregate and consisting of the King or Queen of England, the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in Parliament Assembled; the Members whereof are
or ought to know that they are Capitulariter, or rather sub uno capite
congregati, Chapterwise, or rather Assembled under one Head, which is the King
or Queen thereof, who have the only Power, Privilege, and Prerogative not only
of Summoning, but also of Adjourning, Proroguing, and Dissolving of the
Parliament; as alsh of Passing, or not Passing any Bills whatsoever framed for
Acts at their own Wills and Pleasures. There is no Government more resembling
Heaven, or more durable on Earth, or that has any certain principles, but
Monarchy, and such a Monarchy, that has an actual visible military strength to
support it self, not only to protect the Good and Loyal, but also to awe the
Bad and Rebellious People. The King represents God, the Houses of Parliament
the People. And (as in some sort is expressed before) the King by his Writ
gives the very essence and form to his Parliament, being the production of his
breath; therefore Privileges which are the consequences of the Form, must
necessarily flow from him. Now would you know how to Elect Men Fearing God,
Honoring the King, and such as will not meddle with those that are given to
change? Know and take notice, that true Religion is the well tempered Mortar,
that builds up all Estates: that there can be no true Religion where the word
of God is wanting or not duly observed. I have proved from, and made it plain
to you, that the word of God condemns and prohibiteth all mutinous Rebellious
Actions whatsoever against the Magistrate either Supreme or Subordinate. And
because there can be no surer sign of the ruin of a Kingdom, than the contempt
of Religion. My Advice is to all, that they would Conform, but as to such that
will not Conform, nor be Reformed, nor advised to join with us in the way
Established by Law for the Service and Worship of God, because they are either
stubborn, obstinate, or wise in their own conceits, and will not be informed,
such as these, that are Dissenters from us, in the better half of the
Government; (that is to say) in the Government of the Church. I pray that (as
they absent themselves from us in the Divine Service and Worship of God) so
they would be pleased to absent and separate themselves from the public
meetings in their several Counties for the Choosing and Electing of Members to
sit in Parliament for the future, for as the Vessel savoureth of the same
Liquor, wherewith it was first seasoned; so (it is to be feared) the mind of
these Dissenters still retains those very qualities in their Elder Age,
wherein it was trained up in Youth. However by their absence, their misguided
Consciences will be clear, and the more Loyal and conformable Subjects by their
so doing, will be less offended and disturbed in their choice and Election of
such as themselves, that may better Comply (than heretofore) they did with his
late Sacred Majesty in making and constituting such wholesome Laws and
Provisions, as may make for the security and preservation of our Protestant
Religion, which is confirmed by Scripture, and History of Ancient Fathers in
the Primitive Church, to be agreeing in Doctrine, and Discipline, with the
truly Ancient Catholic and Apostolic Christian Religion and Profession (as it
is now Established by Law) in the Church of England.

CHAP. XIX. Shows that the King of England is, and always has been, Supreme
Head of the Church, not the Pope.
FOR we are to know and understand that the King of England is in all Causes,
as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, within these his Majesty's Realms and
Dominions Supreme Head and Governor. By the Ancient Law of the Realm, the King
has power to visit reform and correct all Abuses and Enormities in the Church,
and by the Statutes made in the time of King Henry the Eighth, the Crown was
but remitted and restored to its Ancient jurisdiction, which was Usurped by the
Bishop of Rome. Reges sacro oleo uncti, spiritualis jurisdictionis sunt
capaces, Kings Anointed with Holy Oil, are capable of Spiritual Jurisdiction.
And 10. H. 7. 18. Rex est persona mixta cum sacerdote, the King is said to be a
Person mixed or participating with the Priest in the Priesthood. Also the King
shall have Tithes by the Common Law, of which no Lay Person can be capable. And
the King by himself, or by his Commissioners, shall visit his free Chapels and
Hospitals. And by the Cannon Law, Omnes Reges dicuntur Clerici, and another
Text thereof says, quod causa Spiritualis committi potest Principi laico. All
Kings are said to be Clarks, and that however a Spiritual Cause may be
determined by a Lay Prince, as may be seen in Davyes rep. 4. a. And although
the proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Courts be in the Name of the Bishop, yet
they are the Courts and Law of the King: as the Leet, though it be holden in
the Name of the Lord of the Manor, yet it is the Court of the King. C. 5. 1.
part 39. b. The Canonists ascribe to the Pope, Prerogative as to the
Interpretation of Laws, and granting of Dispensations, but the jurisdiction,
that the Pope by Color thereof claimed in England, was a mere Usurpation to
which the Kings of England (as I shall presently show you) from time to time
made opposition even to the time of King Henry the Eighth. And the King of
England not the Pope, before the making the Statute of Faculties, might de
jure, of right dispense with the Ecclesiastical Law: for though that many of
our Ecclesiastical were first devised in the Court of Rome, yet being
established and confirmed in this Realm by acceptance and usage, they are now
become English Laws; and are no more to be reputed Romish Cannons, and they are
to be observed as the Laws of the Kingdom of England, and not to be esteemed or
reputed as Rules of the Pope, Davyes rep. 71, 72. And the King is Supreme
Patron as King, and not as in respect of the Supreme Jurisdiction that the
Realm by the Statute has acknowledged in him. Therefore a Resignation to the
King of a Deanery, is as good as if it had been made to the Bishop, because that
by the Common Law he is the Supreme Head of the Church of England, and the
Deanery is void by it. And the King shall be made privy, and shall give his
consent to every Appropriation, where the Church is of the Patronage of
another, as well as where it is of his own Patronage, Plowd. 498, 499. And it
appears by Doctor and Student 124, 125. That the Law has appointed Six
Months unto the Patron to present his Clark unto the Bishop, but if the Patron
do not present his Clark unto the Bishop within Six Months next after the
Church shall become void, then shall the Lapse incur to the Bishop, and he
shall present for the default of the Patron a Clark of his own choosing, and
his presentation is called Collation; and if the Bishop or Ordinary surcease
his time, and shall not Collate within the Six Months, then shall the
Metropolitan (the Archbishop of the Province) Collate his Clark, and if he do
not Collate within other Six Months; then shall the Kings Majesty (not the
Pope) as Supreme Ordinary of all the Benefices in England, present his Clark to
the Church. And all the Archbishopricks, and Bishoprics within the Realm of
England, are of the Kings foundation, and the Kings of England are the Founders
of them all; and they sit in Parliament, and have the Names of the Lords of the
Parliament, non ratione Nobilitatis, sed ratione Officii, not by reason of
their Nobility, but by reason of their Office, and in respect of their Ancient
Barronies annexed to their dignities. C. Inst. 1. part. 97. a. And in C. 5. 1.
part Cawdreyes Case, it may be seen, That King Kenulphus by Charter in
Parliament in the year of our Lord 755. Exempted the Abbot of Abingdon from
Episcopal Jurisdiction, and gave it him. That amongst the Laws of Edward the
Confessor, it was Ordained, that he should Govern the Kingdom and his People;
and above all the Holy Church, not the Pope. That William the Conqueror
Appropriated Churches with Cure. That King Henry the First presented to Abbeys,
as well by his Ecclesiastical, as his Kingly Power. That Henry the Third
granted Prohibitions, and in Issue of Loyalty of Marriage, and general
Bastardy, the King wrote to the Bishop as his immediate Officer. That in the
time of Edward the Third, the Temporalties of the Archbishop of York were lost
during his Life, for refusal of a Clark of the King, by reason of a Provision
of the Pope. That by 25. Edw. the Third, a Man might kill those that procured
Provisions from Rome, and those that executed them. Also by 25. Edw. 3d. It was
Enacted, that the Pope shall not give Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, etc. but
that the King them shall give, etc. That by 16. Rihard the Second, chap. 5th.
It is Enacted, that (because the King holds his Crown immediately under God)
they who purchase or pursue in the Court of Rome, Translations, Processes,
Excommunications, Bulls, Instruments, etc. and their Fautors and Councillors,
shall be out of the Protection of the King, and Praemunire facias shall be
awarded against them. That 2. H. 4. 9. It is resolved, that Collectors of the
Pope by their Bulls have not any Jurisdiction here, and that the Archbishops,
and Bishops are called the Spiritual Judges of the King. And 11. H. 4. 37. it
is said, Papa non potest mutare leges Angliae, that the Pope cannot change or
alter the Laws of England. That 2. Henry the Fourth, chap. 3d. he that
obtains from the Bishop of Rome to be exempt from regular Obedience, is
within the Case of a Praemunire. That 6. H. 4. chap. 1. Forfeiture was imposed
upon those who paid great sums to the Chamber of Rome. That by 2. H. 5. chap.
1. The King, not the Pope, gave power to the Ordinary to enquire of the
Foundation and Government of Hospitals, and to correct, etc. That in 9. H. 6.
16. The King only can give License for the Foundation of a Corporation
Spiritual, not the Pope. That 12th. Edw. 4th. 16. A Legate of the Pope was
compelled to Swear that he would not attempt any thing against the Crown, etc.
That in 2. Rich. 3. It is said, that Excommunication or Judgment at Rome is of
no force here. That in First Henry the 7th. 10th. It is said, that in time of
King Henry the Sixth, Humphry Duke of Gloucester burnt the Letters of the Pope,
that were in Derogation ot the King, and his Crown. And 1. H. 7. 20. It is
adjudged, that the Pope may not grant Sanctuary. And 25. Henry the 8. chap. 21.
It is Enacted by the Statute forementioned of faculties, that none shall make
suit to Rome, but that the Archbishop of Canterbury may grant to the King and
his Subjects, such Licenses, Dispensations, Grants, Faculties, Escripts,
Delegacies, Instruments, etc. not repugnant to Holy Scripture, as been used to
be granted by the Pope, yet it is to be noted, that such Cannons,
Constitutions, Ordinances, Synods, Provincials, etc. were provided to be in
force, which had been allowed by general Consent, and Custom within the Realm,
not repugnant to Law, or the Prerogative of the King, and so by the same
general Consent may be Corrected, Enlarged, Explained, or Abrogated; hence we
may rest satisfied, that for many Hundreds of years last past (successively) in
the time of one King after another King (when all our Ancestors were Papists
and of that profession) that yet the Government of the Church ever was inherent
to the Imperial Crown of the Kings of England. In the time of King Henry the
Third, the Usurped Jurisdiction of the Pope was elevated more high, than ever
before, or since, yet it may be observed, that in the Ninth year of his Reign,
in the very first Chapter of the great Charter, Entitled and Called, The
Confirmation of Liberties, is mentioned, First, We have granted to God, and by
this our present Charter have confirmed for Us and Our Heirs for ever; that the
Church of England shall be free, and shall have all her whole Rights and
Liberties inviolable. And by the Statute of 24. H. 8. chap. 12. by 24. Bishops,
and 29 Abbots, it is recited that England is an Empire, and that the King is
the Head of the Body Politic, consisting of the Temporalty, and the
Spiritualty impleet and furnished with full Power to render final Justice in
all matters whatsoever, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal. And that part of
the said Body Politic, called the Spiritualty, has been always thought
sufficient, and meet of it self, without the intermeddling of any Foreign
Pope, or any exterior Person or Persons (when any cause of the Law Divine
happened to come in question, or of Spiritual Learning) to declare and
determine all such doubts, and to adminster all such Offices and Duties (yet as
the Spiritual Judges of and under the King) as to their several Rooms
Spiritual does appertain. And the Laws Temporal for Trial of Property of Lands
and Goods, and for the conservation of the Realm in Unity, and Peace, without
Rapine or Spoil, were, and yet are Administered, Adjudged, and Executed by
sundry Judges, and Ministers of the other part of the Body Politic called the
Temporalty. And their Authorities and Jurisdictions do conjoyn together in the
due Administration of Justice, the one is a help to the other; and both are a
help to, and in ease of the King the Head of this Body Politic; here you have
concisely and in few words discovered unto you, the Ancient form of the
Government of England both in Church and State, and accordingly in Ancient
times, the Parliaments of England consisted only of the King, the Lords
Spiritual, and the Lords Temporal, who were Anciently the Representatives of
the whole Kingdom in Parliament Assembled under the Kings or Queens thereof;
but for some Hundreds of years last past, a Writ has been framed for the
Election of Knigts, etc. to sit in Parliament, and these Knights, etc. are to
be chosen by the Freeholders in their several Counties.

CHAP. XX. As to the Kings Supremacy is showed the difference between the
Primitive and more modern times, herein the Author advises all to be at Unity
within themselves, and since we are restored to our Ancient Government, to give
to our Sovereign Lord the King his Dues; and desires all to join with him (in
the Conclusive Prayer, for the Morning Service in our Church Liturgy) for the
King.
NOW since, as the living Members of a Body natural united together, maintain
life; so it is in a Kingdom, by concord of the People, the state thereof is
maintained, but by their discord it is destroyed. And accordingly Holy
Scripture tells us, that Houses or Kingdoms divided within themselves cannot
stand, but true Peace is the quiet and tranquillity of Kingdoms, burying all
Seditions, Tumults, Uproares and Factions, and planting Ease, Quietness and
Security with all other flourishing Ornaments of Happiness. Now would you be
happy, and would you have your Posterity happy also? Pray to God (as you are
directed by the Prophet Jeremiah in 32. chap. and the 39th. verse) that he
would give you one Heart, and one Way, that you may fear God for ever, for the
good of you, and of your Children after you. Labor therefore to be at unity
within your selves; and above all, be advised, that when you again shall have a
Lawful call to Elect Members for a subsequent Parliament, you be sure
unanimously to choose such Men as are Men well affected to the better half of
the Government (that is Established by Law) in the Church. For nunquam been res
succedunt humanae, ubi negliguntur divinae, things Temporal and Humane, never
succeed well, where things Spiritual and Divine are neglected. Subjection is
required by St. Peter (where before cited) to the King as Supreme; and with me
be pleased to consider the Authority of the words too (and marking the
difference between the Primitive, and more Modern times, you shall not need to
fear the introduction of Popery again in these Kingdoms) who writes them?
Observe, they come from St. Peter, from whom the Successors of St. Peter derive
their Title of Supremacy above Kings. So that howsoever they will have the
Authority Entailed upon them from St. Peter; yet St. Peter himself challenges
no such Supremacy, for he says, To the King (mark the Epethite) as Supreme;
it is true, we read that Cardinal Bellarmine, and Boniface the Eighth, and
Innocent the Fourth, with others of that Party, being carried on by their Pride
and Ambition, maintain the Head of their Church to have both the Swords, and
therefore (say they) is above all Kings, and Emperors, that have but one; yet
here we see, That in the beginning it was not so: St. Paul denies it, St. Peter
disclaims it, and the Ancient Church, and (according to the practice thereof)
all our Kings of England, Successively from time to time even to this present
time, have disowned it. Remember and never forget, we had heretofore the Minor
part of a House of Commons, Exercising the Sovereign Power, the corrupt
Majority (as they then termed them) being ejected and cast out for Delinquents,
and Malignants. And by them we had the Government Changed, or rather purposed
to be changed, regality (it was then death to say the King) and House of Lords
were cast of, next this we had nothing Visible, but a General and an Army. Next
this we had the whole Constitution, Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom at once
subverted, certain Men being called by the Name of a Parliament, and the
Sovereign Power pretended to be given them, that were never chosen by the
People, but by we know not whom (such a fact as was never heard, or read, that
any King of England was Guilty of, since Parliaments were known) Next this we
had a Protector Governing by an instrument made by -- God knows who. After this
we had the same Protector Governing according to the humble Petition, and Advie
(and Sworn to both) And (unto God be thanks for the same) by his late Sacred
Majesty's happy Restoration, we are also restored again, to our Ancient
Government Established by Law both in Church and State, and to the fruits and
benefits of the same. Mark therefore what St. Peter says in the 13th. chap. to
the Romans give to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tibute is due, Custom to whom
Custom, Honor to whom Fear to whom Fear. St. Paul hereby advises us to our
bounden Duties and due Subjection to the Magistrate Supreme and Subordinate.
And his advice may be reduced to these Three Heads, 1st, Supply to their
Estates. 2ly, Fear to their Authority. 3ly, Honor and Reverence to their
Persons. First, Their Estates are to be supported, for as one says, Pecunia
nervus Imperii, without which the Work of the Magistracy can neither be
effected nor respected; and as it is necessary, so it is convenient, that he
that is employed for the good of the Commonweal be supported by the
Publickweale, for as says Seneca cited by Mr. Stanf. in his Prerogat. 5. a.
Omnium somnos, illius vigelantia defendit, omnium Otium, illius labor, omnium
delicias, illius industria, omnium vocationes, illius defendit Occupatio, his
Watchfulness keeps us in our Rest, his Pains secures our Pleasures, his Calling
defends us in all our Callings. Secondly, Fear his Authority, the Apostle gives
the reasons, Romans 13.4. for he bears not the Sword in vain; he is the
Minister of God, he comes Warranted with Authority, and as he has Authority so
he has Power too; Might and Right are both in him: he is the fountain of
Justice, and the life of the Law, he bears the Sword, and he bears it not for
naught, therefore if thou do Evil fear. Thirdly, Yield Honor and Reverence
to their Persons, for though they are Men subject to the same Natural
infirmities that we are; yet we must remember whose Person they bear upon them;
they are the Deputies of God, And therefore Honored with his Name, I have said
ye are Gods. It is said of the Persians, that when they come into the presence
of their Prince, they draw their Hands into their Sleeves, in token of their
Reverence and Loyalty, they will not have a Hand stirring while Majesty is in
presence. Now as to the concluding this my present Discourse, I pray not only
your Hands be lifted up to Heaven, but your Hearts also, and that all may
fervently join with me in the conclusive Prayer of our Church Liturgy for the
Morning Service every Sabbath Day, which is as follows.

ALmighty God, whose Kingdom is Everlasting and Power Infinite, have Mercy upon
the whole Church and so rule the Heart of thy chosen Servant James our King and
Governor, that he (knowing whose Minister he is) may above all things seek thy
Honor and Glory, and that we and all his Subjects (duly considering whose
Authority he has) may faithfully Serve, Honor and humbly Obey him, in thee,
and for thee, according to thy holy Word and Ordinance, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, who with thee and the Holy Ghost, Lives and Reigns one God World
without End. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. l. 23. for Petion r. Petition. p. 18. l. 2. for Privileges r.
Prerogatives. p. 21. l. 21. for agrreing r. agreeing, l. 36. for joined r.
enjoyed. p. 25. l. 6. for datam fit r. datum sit, l. 8. for reprsentons r.
repraesentans p. 28. l. 2. for Pallainum r. Pallatinum. p. 29. l. 24. for
tiahit. r. trahit. p. 30. l. 1. after Sword, add in. p. 42. l. 36. after King,
dele and.


