(...)

THE HOUSE OF WISDOM.

(...)

The HOUSE of the ^ons of the Prophets.

(...)

An HOUSE of Exquisite Enquiry, And of Deep Research.

(...) the Mind of Jehovah Aelohim in the holy Scriptures of Truth, (...) the
Original words and phrases, and their proper significancy, is ^^gently studied,
faithfully compared, and aptly put together, for ^^e further Promoting, and
higher Advancing of Scripture-Know^^^ges, of all useful Arts, and profitable
Sciences: In the one Book ^^ Books, the Word of Christ, copied out, and
commented upon, in ^reated Beings.

Second Essay, in pursuit of the same Design, held forth in a former Treatise,
in^^tled, All in One: By the same Author; more, and yet more a Lover and Ad^^er
of Christ, and of his Word and Works.

Prove. 9. 1. Wisdom has builded her House.

2 King. 4. 38. The Sons of the Prophets sitting to the faces of Elisha.

Matthew. 11. 19. She has been justified This Wisdom of those her Sons.

LONDON.

^^^nted for the Author, and are to be sold by John Lawrence, at the Angel in
Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1681.

THE House of Wisdom.
LET such an Uniform Prove. 9. 1. 2 King. 4. 18. Mat. 11. 19.
Building be founded and superstructed, and finished, according to the
Architectonick Art, with Windows looking every way, and Casements to be set
open, when it is needful to have the Rooms freely perflated, quite blown
through, with gently-moving, and sweetly-wholsom winds, and excellently
clarified, and bright-beaming Sun-shines of Radiant splendor. A dull and dark
closet, a Close smothering Room, will breed Stifling Asthmas, clogging phlegms,
panting wheezings, they feed melancholy sluggishness, raise offensive vapors,
and make the Spirits faint and swooning; let it be in an Air pure, clear,
fragrant, and temperate; such as may nourish and refresh the spirits of
students, and may preserve an healthful constitution, and lively state, of both
their inward and outward man; and such as is best suited to a Generous mind, an
Acute wit, a clear brain, a good Heart, free-breathing lungs, a sound liver, a
lively Color, a peircing sight a quick Hearing, a discerning Palate, a savoury
smelling, a milky honeyed fountain under the Tongue, a clear voice, and
activity of limbs, such Airs as are grosly-thick, putridly-Corrupted,
noisomly-vaporous, darkly-cloudy, do breed rheumes, cause obstructions, annoy
the lungs, corrupt the blood, beget ill humors, infect and oppress the heart,
deject and imprison the Spirits, having a malignant influence, and diseaseing
contagiousness, quite subverting the Constitution and State of the whole man.
Let it be eminently Situated in some open place, some high Champion on a firm
dry ground, on an healthy red Earth, having some living Spring of pure Water
lying open to the East, (which East should also face the Front of this House)
that it may have the benign influence, and the aspect of that Glorious luminary
the serviceable Sun in its ascending flight with Healing wings 2 Chronicles. 31. 14.
Ezekiel. 11. 1. Luke 1. 78, 79. Mal. 4. 2. Deuteronomy. 33. 2. Isa. 60. 1. Job 1. 3. and
23. 8, 9. Psalm. 103. 12. Ezekiel. 40. 6.
. There was an Eastgate of the Temple on Mount Tzijon: This looked toward the
East, and was at the Principal Entrance into the Temple, faced by the Rising
Sun, which is one of Christ's Names: Christ is said to Rise up, and to Shine
forth, as the Sun arises; for, of That Rising is the Hebrew word properly
used. The East is called Kedem, Before, because of the Positure of Man, facing
of the East; The West, Achor, Behind; The South, Jamin, the Right Hand: The
North, Semoal, the Left Hand. In the Early Mornings, when Students should be at
their work betimes, a clear Sunshine does visit them, and a more pure and
lightsom, fresh and healthy Air salutes them; or, if there be not such a living
spring, yet some running Brook with silver Streams on a Sandy or Pebbly, or
Gravelly clean Channel and Bottom, somewhat near adjoining; the Water being
pure in taste, sweet in smell, altogether clean: Low marshy, filthy, foggy
Seats, do infect Spirit, Soul and Body also with vaporous, sickly blasts, with
their grosness and impurity, muddishness and waterishness, and are thereby
great endammagers of health.

The Grand Design of this noble undertaking being the improving-advance of
Scripture-learning, let us examine, and collect, and put orderly together, what
the written word of Jehovah Aelohim has recorded concerning this Subject
matter about Such Houses or Schools of the Sons of the Prophets.

Let that at Genesis 28. 17, 19, 22. and 31. 13. and 35. 1, 3, 6, 7, 15. Hos. 12.
4. (1 King. 12. 28, 29, 30. Jer. 48. 13. Amos 3. 14. and 4. 4. and 7. 10, 13,
15. and 5. 5. Hos. 4. 15. and 5. 8. and 10. 5.) 1 Samuel 7. 16. Jos. 18. 21, 22.
2 King. 2. 3. Genes. 12. 8. Josh. 16. 1. (Mat. 5. 14.) 1 Samuel 13. 2. 1 King.
13. 4, 11. Amos 7. 13. 1 Samuel 10. 3. 2 King. 2. 23.
Beth-Ael, because of its Name and Nature, be the First it was a name of
Honor, The House of Ael, whilst it was a Place kept pure for the instituted
worship of Jehovah Aelohim. In this City the Sons of the Prophets Some of them,
had a kind of College or School. Here the Lord appeared and revealed himself in
special to Jacob: manifesting his gracious Presence unto him. Judge Samuel went
from year to year in circuit to this Place, which was in the heart of the
Country, belonging by Lot to the Tribe of Benjamin. The Prophets Elijah and
Elishah often visited This City; for, here was the Nursery for
Scripture-learning where the Sons of the Prophets were addicted to that Study.
It had a mountain Eastward of it; and Such little mountains and Hills, at a
convenient distance, do somewhat hinder and keep back, over-sharp, blasting,
vaporous, over-piercing, over cold, or otherways hurtful, winds. It stood upon
a mount; the eminence of the Habitation being best approved for health and for
the prolonging of life, the Air there being the more open, and the breathing
therefore the more Free, the apter to engender an acuteness and generousness, a
publickness and magnificence of mind; whereas when the dwellings of Studious
men are in crooked and close, in low and Fenny Countries, those who are of a
retired, sedentary, pondering, and inquiring life, are greatly incommoded
thereby; being of a more dull and drowzy, sluggish and lazy; sordid and
earthy-distemperature; whilst those who dwell in a more healthful and high, a
more pure and thin, a more clear and heavenly Air, are of a more princely and
celestial, of a more subtle and refined, of a more nimble and witty, of a more
ingenious and ingenuous, of a more magnanimous and winged Spirit, Habit, State,
and Temper. In this Beth-Ael dwelt an old Prophet: It was a Royal City; the
house of the Kingdom; There was an Ascending up unto it: when it became
Idolatrous its name was changed from Beth-Ael an house of God, and
Ael-Beth-Ael, The God of the House of God, into Beth-Aven, The House 2 King. 2.
1. and 4. 38. Josh. 4. 19. 1 Samuel 11. 14, 15. 1 Samuel 7. 16. 2 King. 4. 38.
(Deuteronomy. 33. 3. Luke 8. 35. Acts 22. 3. Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3.) Neh. 12. 29. Deuteronomy. 11.
30. 2 King. 4. 38, 39, 40, 41. Hos. 4. 15. and 9. 15. and 12. 11. Amos 4. 4.
and 5. 5. 1 Samuel 7. 16. and 10. 8. and 11. 14, 15. and 13. 4. and 15. 12, 21,
33. 2 King. 4. 38.
of iniquity, of grief (or of an Idol.)

Galgal, or Gilgal, or Galgala, was another of their Schools. There was a Plain
over against it, which shows that it had an open and free Air: it was not far
from the River Jordan; Here Saul was made King; and David also was received
again to his Kingdom. Samuel a Priest, Prophet, and Judge, yearly visited this
Place: Elijah and Elisha, two old Prophets, were, if not Presidents of this
College, yet at the least visiters of it, to examine how the sons and students
profited there, to instruct, reform, and to put all into good order: for, There
they sat before these Rectors on lower seats to hear instructions as Disciples
at the feet of their Masters and Teachers, and Tutors. They sat to the Faces of
their Instructor. This Scripture-Expression of the Sons sitting to the Faces of
the Old Prophet Elisha, does speak out such an useful Truth, as gives a very
apt Direction both to Teacher and to Scholars, in order to both his instructing
and disciplining of them, and their regular demeanor before him, and growing,
profiting by him.

The Old Prophet shows himself in an higher Seat above them Neh. 8. 4-9.
, some Tower of wood; in our English Tongue and Language, we call it a Pulpit,
because, it is set in a Public place in open view where the Teacher may be
seen and heard of all who come thither to be Gal. 6. 6.
catechized; From whence the Master, praises and Blesses, prays and makes
Supplication for Grace unto Jehovah The great Aelohim, whilst the Scholars lift
up their hands and eyes bowing their Heads, and worshipping Jehovah with Faces
toward the Earth. The master reads in the book; the Bible, the Book of
Books, the Scriptures of Truth, taking some part of the law of Aelohim out of
the Book of Moses, or of The books of the Prophets, or of the writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles; This he reads, (for Deuteronomy. 31. 11. Isa. 34. 16. Acts
15. 21. Luke 10. 26. Rev. 1. 3.
, Reading is an Ordinance of Christ, And he reads it Distinctly, so as to
expound it in the proper Significancy of its words and phrases, to make the
Disciples to understand it, by a declaration of all the parts and opening the
meaning, and he gives the sense, he puts accurate industry, an intent mind,
diligent study, and considerate inspection, to see well to it, that, no one
word were misinterpreted, Thereby to cause the learners inwardly to consider in
their mind with a certain disposition and judgment to judge aright, inwardly to
discern, accuratly to perpend, and duly to weigh.

To this end, the Faces of both Master and Scholars must be toward each others
Faces, in the Plural number, For so is the Hebrew, Panim, always used, There
are in nature, two sides of the Eyebrows, which are sometimes smoothed with
good likeing, at other times bended and frowning with dislike: There are two
Eyes, which can cast a favorable aspect, or look with anger: There are two
Nostrils, which can breath, either wrathfully or not, as the Master sees cause;
There are two Cheeks, where the Color does come and go, or not, as the Teacher
is affected; These varieties of countenances an observing Scholar should take
notice of; counsel is given by the Eye and Look, and so Christ councelled Peter
with his Eye, He gave Peter such a look, as drew bitter weepings from Peter's
Eyes: and the Teacher may observe and discern by the Faces of his Scholars,
whether they be intent and Serious, or not, whether the Heart and mind be
fixedly pondering upon what the Tutor does instruct his Pupils in, or not: It
were easy to put an Heap of Scriptures together about this. If young Sons turn
the back toward the Old Prophet, or if he turn the back toward them, How can
he know, whether they regard his instructions or not? how quickly will one
idler or Scoffer among them put his Fellows into disorder? If the Teacher pray
for them and their Faces be not toward each other, as if their backs be
toward him, or his toward them, or if either he or they do close or cover
their Eyes in Prayer, They are not like to profit. The Eye has a Commanding,
aweing, affecting, aspect with it: sense, observation, and Experience are
Evident proofs and demonstrations of these things: and therefore also he should
be above them, that, none may be hid from his Eye, For otherwise, a Taller one
before may have another behind him of lower Stature who is not so seen by the
Teacher, and They should so sit in rows, Face to the back, and back to the
Face of their fellows, that they may mind their work, and not by glanceing with
the Eye and face of one another put each other into disorder. These seeming
pedantick trifles, are really great and u^^ful things.

There is mention made of Beth-Gilgal, the House of Gilgal, of this College
more eminently, where Priests and Levites dwelt after their return to Jerusalem
from their captivity in Babylon. This College of the Prophets also was in the
Tribe of Benjamin; a great honor put upon that Tribe: and this Gilgal was in
the very heart and middle of the Land of Judaea. In this Academy, or Seminary
of learning* The Sons of the Prophets as Scholars were educated, who exercised
themselves in the Study of the Hebrew-Scripture. If he, who went out into the
field to gather Pot Herbs, were one of these Sons, he was no very skilful
Herbali^ (wherein yet those Scriputres they then had would have better
instructed him, and made him more expert) for when he went out to gather Herbs,
he found a vine of the field, the herb and leaves whereof were very bitter and
poisonous, and these wild gourds, a lapful of them were shred into the Pot of
pottage together with the savoury and wholesome Pot Herbs, which when eaten,
would have endangered the lives of the young Scholars, had not the old Prophet
Elisha healed and cured the pottage of its poisonfulness. This College was
afterward greatly corrupted with Idolatry and Superstition; for, so is the
design of idolatrous Princes to taint and defile the Universities, from thence
to send forth young Scholars to infect the people where they come, with false
Doctrines and worship, which was more poisonful, contagious and Pestilential to
Souls, than the forementioned wild vine would have been to the Body. It was a
place of public conventions.

Gibha 1 Samuel 10. 5. 10, 11, 12, 13. (2 King. 3. 15. 1 Chronicles. 25. 1, 2, 3. 2
Chro. 29. 30. and 35. 15. 1 Cor. 11. 5. Judge. 1^. 14. and 20 10. 1 Samuel 1. 4. 2 Samuel 21. ^.) Hos. 9. 9. and 10. 9.
was a Third, Gibbeah, Gibea, Giboah, Gabang, Gibgnah: This name does import
some High place or Hill, in, or very near a City so called, where there was a
School of young Prophets, called, The Hill of God, a good seat therefore for
Students, proper for such an Education in a Free Air; An Heap of Prophets A
cord or String or Chorus of Prophets, a Colledgiated company of them well
embodyed and held together; whom Saul, as they were coming down this Hill, met,
they having musical instruments, for to help forward the rousing and reviving
of their Spirits in Prophecy praising Jehovah Aelohim, in Hymns and in Psalms:
For so did the Prophets of old, when they either foretold things to come, or
otherways made known the will of the Lord unto the people, uttering themselves
musically by well tuned Harmony in a poetical strain or versifying composure;
which will give some light unto some Scriptures, where the word, Prophecy, has
this signification. In the present instance about Saul, The very Instruments
themselves, A Psaltery, Tabret, Pipe, and Harp, do discover it to be This kind
of Prophecy, Praising Jehovah with melodious Hymns, and Spiritual Songs* in
Divine raptures; Saul himself at that time being in the same Transport of
spirit; for, the Spirit of Jehovah coming and leaping upon him, he also
prophesied in the midst of them, which occasioned that saying, what is This,
that has befaln to the Son of Kis, Is Saul also among the Prophets? which
became a Proverb: and a man of that place answered, But, who is their Father?
It was Jehovah the Father, who gave unto Saul as unto those sons a spirit of
Prophecy; and under God they had a Father, some Aged Prophet, who was their
Teacher to skill them in Scripture-learning, as they studied the orginal
Hebrew, in this School or Synagogue at Gibeah of Ael, where the forces of the
Philistines did garrison, and keep watch: Soldiers and Armies even amongst
Pagans and Enemies should yet be friendly to Schools and Colleges of
Scripture-disciples and Students; allowing peaceably the opportunities,
advantages and maintenances of such. If this were Gabaa-Benjamin, it was also a
further Remark putting a peculiar Additional Honor upon That Tribe: It had the
Surname of Saul, Gibeah of Saul. The Instructors and Tutors of these young Sons
were mostly the more aged, gifted experienced and skilful of the Priests and
Levites, and some other special extraordinary Prophets of other Tribes,
trayning up, and Catechizing of the more promising and hopeful youths for the
Service of the Sanctuary, and for the Teaching of the people; this was the more
ordinary way in the use of instituted means for the Educating and instructing
of such under the Government and Tuition of the wiser Elders, though the
manifestation of the Spirit in a Gift of Prophecy was freely distributed to any
other when He would. Thus had this Place a Name of Honor, whilst the word and
Laws of Christ were the Study and practice of these Disciples; till they
corrupted themselves and one another, and the worship and Service of God, and
so defaced and blotted their Glory. The Places where these Scholars were
taught, were usually Hills, called Geba, and Gebajoth, High places or 1 Samuel
10. 5. 10. Josh. 24. 33. Judge. 7. 1. 1 Samuel 10. 19, 20. 2 King. 22. 14.
Hills, where their Colleges or Synagogues did stand; and one of them is
named, The Hill Moreh, The Hill of the Teacher, or of the Teaching one, of him,
who Teaching these young Sons; from an Hebrew root, which does signify, to
cast, whence also Torah, The Law, Doctrine, Teaching Instruction, An orderly
disposition of Precepts, an Aiming at the Knowledge and exaltation of Gods Law
and Honor, as the shooter of an Arrow, or the caster of a Dart at some eyed
mark: The Targum calls such a School, the House of Doctrine; and such a place
in the City of Jerusalem had its name, Mishnch, translated, College, from a
root, which does signify, to iterate, reiterate, repeat, geminate* ingeminate,
because, the manner of Teaching of Scholars, is by repeating, and going over
again the Doctrines and Lessons which are taught, that, they might make the
more deep and abiding impression upon the mind and memory of the Learners.

A Fourth was 1 Samuel 19. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. 23, 24. and 20. 1. 2 King. 6. 1, 2.
Najoth: The word, taken Appellatively, and so considered, does signify
laudable delightful Habitacles, Fair and pleasant dwelling places; For, there
usually were these Colleges built in an hilly, high, pure, and healthful, Air,
where was commodious, Free breathing, and a goodly spacious dwelling: for too
straitning a place, or too-stifling an Air does very much incommode students.
Here it is a proper Name, near Ramah, where Samuel dwelled, and it was a School
of the Prophets, where Sons and Disciples were educated under the Tuition of
Samuel, unto whom these disciples came who gave themselves to the study of the
Scriptures, which their Tutor and Teacher expounded to them, opening both the
secrets of Nature, the mysteries of Grace, and the significant Propriety of the
Hebrew words and Phrases to them: here again the Targum calls it, The House of
Doctrine, Ramah was the name of an High mountain, and Najoth, the name of this
pleasant School nigh unto it; A retired College, fitted for study, suited to
meditation, where Samuel was overseer, and President, Rector and master
Governor and Father. Here Saul's messengers,

not only once, but a second, and a third time, and Saul himself too in his way
thitherward, a second time, were ravished into an Ecstasy with a spirit of
Prophecy. These Masters and Teachers in tract of time, were greatly corrupted
themselves, and accordingly they corrupted the minds of their disciples,
imposing their own magisterial dictates upon the Learners; as if it had been
Authority enough, that, such Rabbis said so: Matthew. 23. 7, 8, 9, 10. Luke 2.
46, 47, 52. Mat. 5, 6, 7. chapter Matthew. 19. 16, 17-27. and 22. 16, 17-46. 1 Timothy
3. 1, 2, 6. and 4. 12. and 5. 23. and 2 Timothy 3. 14-17.
which Lording it over men's consciences Christ declared against in His time;
calling Disciples from such usurpers of Supremacy and Infallibility, He Himself
being their One and only supreme Doctor. Master and Father. When Christ was but
twelve years of age, so incomparably-excelling were His Gifts, His
understanding and Answers, even to astonishment, that, He Sat among the
Doctors in the midst of them, both hearing them, and asking them Questions;
For, that was the manner of teaching of these Disciples, either by a continued
Speech of the Master, or else by Questions and Answers between Teacher and
Learner. Christ was well grown in wisdom, when He was but young in years; but
as for others, it becomes them to remember, that, whilst they are in their
young years, they should acknowledge themselves to be but Sons and disciples;
and such young Plants are not fit ordinarily to be overseers and Teachers,
least being lifted up with Pride, they fall into the condemnation of the Devil:
How many hopeful young men has self-pride in growing Gifts ruined, whereby they
have provoked the Lord to blast and to nip their Bud? how rare a Jewel is it,
to meet with a young Timothy, so very early to be so mortifyed, so knowing in
Scripture-Learning, so experienced, so every way well instructed and furnished
for the Ministerial office and work? 1 Cor. 1. 18-24.
The Greeks who counted all the rest of the world Barbarians in comparison of
them, and of their University-Learning at Athens yet retained so much of
modesty, that though they had Scribes amongst them to open the grammatical
significancy as to the words, phrases, parts of Speech Orthoepie, Orthographia,
and Syntax of the Text, and Disputers who sought out by debating and arguing
the interpretation, meaning, design, drift, and Sc^pe of the Text and Context;
and wisemen, who made researches into the Secrets of nature, and mysteries of
their Religion, yet in their Universities and Colleges, they became higher and
higher Graduates by orderly steps: The first year they had the Name of
wisemen, the second year, They were called Lovers of wisdom; The third year
they were Rhetoricians, The fourth year (would you know by what Title and
Degree they were distinguished?) they were Idiots, Fools: How so? when they
were wise at the first stair they got up upon; it was thus; The more they know,
the less they were to think of themselves, and to have the clearer sight, and
deeper sense of their ignorance and folly: That knowledge, which is True, Solid
efficacious, Saving knowledge makes more humble, whilst that which 1 Cor. 8. 1,
2, 3. and 3. 18, 19, 20. 1 Timothy 1. 7.
puffs up is but the vanishing shadow of Knowledge, He, who would be wise,
should well learn this Lesson first, to become a Fool, What shall we then judge
and say of many of our young Speakers in the present Age, who though they have
not Edifying Gifts, nor (as is feared) Sanctifying Graces for it, nor any
warrantable lawful call to it, not thoroughly understanding one word of the Bible
in the original language, yet like Lapwings will run away making a noise, even
whilst the shell in part is upon, their head; flapping with their wings before
their feathers be grown; undertaking to be Teachers of others, whilst they have
need to be Catechized-themselves and to be taught what be the first Principles
of the oracles of God, unskilful and unexperienced in the word of
righteousness; mere babes in knowledge; yet take themselves to be well Able to
provide strong meat for others, when themselves never yet well-digested the
breast milk. And oh what a shame is it, that some Elderly ones, who would be
esteemed Fathers and Masters as to Teaching-office and work, are yet so
unlearned themselves in Scripture-knowledges! and, to the inward Grief of
Discerning friends, and to the proud insulting of watchful Enemies, do raise
some doctrines, which have no Solid foundation either in that particular Text
or the Context, which they would bottom them upon!

At ^osh. 18. 21 Deu^. 34. 3. 2 ^ing 2. 4, 5. 7. 15-22. and 25. 5. 2 Chro^. 28.
15. (...)* 1. 16. and 3 13. (Josh. 2. 1. and 3. 16. and 4. 13, 19.)
Jericho there was another of these Schools or Colleges, This also fell by lot
unto the Tribe of Benjamin, and was another Jewel set in its Crown of Honor,
All these Houses of Doctrine in this Tribe not being many miles from the Royal
City, Jerusalem, and so not from the Temple, when it was built in S^on. The
place was very delightful for situation, its very name according to one
interpretation carrying an odoriferousness or Fragrancy, a sweet good Savor
with it in its proper significancy, so fragrant and Lovely its Flowers, so
well-scented and wholesome it is Herbs, those, that were some for Food, others for
Me^icine, a City of Palms* or of Date trees, growing in great plenty round
about it, which were goodly for sight, choice for Fruit, and pleasant for
shadow and walks where its Garden of Balsam had a name of praise from all the
gaping wounds, which it closed and healed, very well seated for Students, when
its waters were miraculously healed, by Elisha's casting of Salt into the
spring; for, Fountain water, such as is Pure, and clear, of good Taste and
smell, very clean, without muddy, earthy mixture and dreggy Sediment, not
flowing from such Metallin places, as do conveigh such unsavory tangs from
Sulphur, Lead, and such like, as by their ponderousness and indigestableness do
trouble and annoy the Stomach, oppress and load the heart, and bowels, and do
otherways offend and hurt. This City had a very Fair, and open Prospect; for,
it was surrounded with Plains on every side, and it being the first City in the
land of Canaan, that the Israelites possessed in the beginning of their
Conquests, it was so far commendable, that some years after a School and
Scholars were dedicated here to Scripture-Studies and learning: for, Here the
Sons of the Prophets were under the Teaching and oversight of Elijah and
Elisha, Two Eminent witnesses for the LORD, and for the Truths and Duties of
that Age and Day; Happy those ^oung men who sat under the instructions of such
Tutors. Thus were these Acts 3. 24, 25. Amos 7. 14.
Schools kept up and continued more or less as Times would give way and permit)
from Samuels time, who was one of the first Founders and Erectors of such
Colleges for such an End, by the Prophets in their successive generations even
unto the Apostles days.

That part of the Country, which was alloted to Ephraim and to his posterity,
being (^osh. 17. 15. 16, 18. and 10. 50. and 2^. 7. and 24. 30, 33. Jer. 4. 15.
and 31. 6. and 50. 19.) 2 King. 5. 22. 1 Chronicles. 5. 64, 67, 68. (Genesis 46. 11.
E^od. 6. 16, 18. Numb. 3. 17, 1^. 2^, 30. 31. Josh. 21. 21, 3^. 1 King. 4. 1^
^osh. 21. 2^. 22.
Mountainous, There also upon some one of the Eminent Mountains was there
another of these Schools: It may be, diverse other of the Mountains in that
part of Judea were dedicated to the like use; For, we may read of several of
the Citys with their Suburbs belonging to that Tribe, which were given unto the
Levites, such as Shechem, Gezer, Jokneham, Beth-horon, These were given to the
Sons of Kehath, who was the Son of Levi, and their Ministry was used in the
Service of the Sanctuary. Gezer was by Lot separated to the Levites: so
Beth-horon, as there were also diverse other Cities in other Tribes.

The Scriptures we see are very far from being silent in this matter about
Colleges or Houses for students; where pregnant ^oung men might improve a
retired private life in an Healthful Air in profitable studies having under
Jehovah Aelohim the Help of such whose riper knowledge, and longer experience
had better furnished and fitted them to be Teachers of others. These 1 Samuel 2.
and 3 chapters, Mat. 9. 14. and 11. 2. Joh. 1. 35, 37. and 3. 25. Mat. 5. 1.
and 10. 1. Acts 9. 1. and in scores of other places, Mat. 10. 24, 26. Luke 6.
40. Joh. 13. 13, 14. 2 King. 2. 3* 5, 16. and 5. 20, 22, 25 and 6. 5, 15. Prove.
27. 11. 2 Cor. 7. 14. Romans 1. 12. Prove. 10. 1.
Schools were places, in which Arts and Sciences, were taught and learned
chiefly Scripture knowledges, which was their primary-Institution and Design.
Thus was Samuel the Disciple of Heli; Thus the Prophets had their Disciples and
Sons of which much has been written already: Thus also John, and Christ had
theirs. These Disciples, if they would profit under good Teaching, ought to be
duly Subject to their Teachers: They should give them all due Honor and
Respect; they should by their Docibleness and Progress in useful Learning
rejoice and make glad the Heart of their Teacher, and give them matter of holy
Glorying; This will excite and encourage him to take the more pains, and use
the more industry for a further putting of them onward and forward, till they
become skilfully useful in their generation. Their demeanor should be very
Dutiful, as that of Humble, obedient Children, for which cause they have often
in Scripture the name Joh. 13. 33. 1 John 2. 1. 28. and 3, 7, 18. and 4. 4. and
5 21. 1 Timothy 1. 2. 18. 2 Timothy 1. 2 and 2. 1. and 3 14. 17. Tit 1. 4. 1 Pet. 5.
13. Joh. 3. 4,
of Sons, and Children, Sons of the Prophets have been already mentioned. Thus
Paul called Timothy his Son, and Titus his Son: Peter names Mark his Son; into
the like relation John took Gajus: How often in the Book of the Proverbs do
David and Solomon thus lovingly bespeak those whom they instruct? who will
give, that, we had more of such Teachers and Tutors as Paul! and more of such
Disciples and Sons as Timothy and Titus? Paul the Teacher, though he was versed
in Philosophical Studies, and had read their Pagan Poets, yet when converted,
he saw an Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 2. 2, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 10, 14, 17.
Excellency in Scripture-Learning, and in the Saving knowledge of a God in
Christ, of a Christ crucified of his all-wonderful Person, and of his
Mediatorial office. And it was Timothy's commendation, that from a Child he had
known the Holy Scriptures which were able to make him wise unto Salvation,
through faith which is in Christ Jesus; The whole Scripture being God-inspired,
and Profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for instruction in
Righteousness; that The Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished or
perfected for every good Work. Schools, Colleges and Universities there are,
to instruct youth in Ciceronian Act. 17. 16, 17, 18, etc. and 19. 9.
and Athenian Philosophy, and in Paganish Religion; but, where are the Shools
and Colleges, in which the Scriptures of Truth are the only Book of Authority,
and Christ himself is the main Subject matter, the Saving knowledge of whom is
not only the best knowledge but also Eternal Life: And other Arts and Sciences,
such as are lawful and Profitable, are more inquired after there, and the
Original Language is the Tongue of Tongues? What a Shame is it unto Christians,
that, the Jews who for so many ages and generations have been bitter Enemies to
the Christian Religion, and who have framed a Religion, much of Sundry strange
opinions of the ancienter Philosophers, together with certain capricious
fancies and fables of the Rabbis, wherein they are so ready, and will give a
quick account thereof out of a certain moral philosophy, and natural Reason,
wherein they are well seen, and will also make some plausible show for it out
of that part of the Bible which they own, wherein they are very skilful; that,
these Hebrews should Set their Children to the Hebrew language at three years
old, and following no other Study but this of the old Testament Scripture, and
writing upon it all their life long: excepting some few of them, who betake
themselves to the medicinal Art, whereas scarcely one Christian among the
common people of many hundreds does understand any one word of Hebrew all his
life long.

If this Hebrew-Tongue and Language were the Universal Character, all the
inhabited Earth over, in All Ambassies between Princes, and were all Places and
offices of Public trust more thoroughly studied and researched in
Scripture-words and Phrases, collected and well put together, both concerning
their office and work, as to Counselors of state in Peace and in war, As to
Generals of Armies, and all under officers and Soldiers, their Training up,
their Encamping marching, ambushes, fighting, weapons, martial-discipline, and
what else does belong to them, As to A^mirals at Sea, shipping, Sailing, and
the rest of the Naval Art; As to Ambassadors; As to judges; and As to what else
may serve and tend toward the making of Nations and of kingdoms Holy and
Happy, Honorable and Rich, Potent and Successful, strong and safe, well Settled
in Peace and in Plenty at home, and feared an^ Admired abroad: were this once
thoroughly effected, it would carry the Self Evidence of its own Excellency and
commendation along with it, before the Eyes of every Spiritual discerner.

There is a singular Excellency, and a peculiar Honor, which the Lord has
tipped the Hebrew-Tongue withal: What a shame and rebuke is it unto Christians,
that the Emperor of China, who has so many several Languages of Peoples under
his large Dominion, has yet one kind of Character, which all his Subjects do
understand, in which he writes all his Edicts, and sends all his Messages?
Whilst the many Princes, who outwardly profess the Christian Religion, do not
yet agree to own and commend the Hebrew-Letters as the only Universal
Character; that one part of this Hebrew-learning, which is onomastical, that
is, which does explain the true, full, significant meaning of the Hebrew proper
Names recorded in the Scriptures, does contain in it all true good ^eligion,
the Sum and substance of whole Christianity: and were this more retained in all
Translations, that the proper names be all retained in all versions, and the
meaning of each of them be rightly opened, in some little Treatise, as the
Geneva Bibles turned into English have somewhat done, (for it is imperfect in
diverse places) it would be much more useful. Some of those Names are continued
all the Inhabited Earth over, as Jehovah (though the veiled Jews
Superstitiously as yet refuse to use it) Haleln-jah, Amen, Cherubims,
Seraphims, David, Solomon, Abraham, Jacob, Daniel, Sarah, Elizabeth, Messiah,
Adam, Eve, Paradise, Jerusalem, to name no more: Whereby, together with the
Names, the Christian Religion is also some ways kept alive and propagated, and
the Glory of a Redeemer does somewhat shine out, and still comes forth, and
shows itself in love to all Mankind, would they more attend unto it; such is
his ( Tit. 3. 4. Prove. 8. 31.
) Philanthropie, or Man-love, thus to communicate unto Mankind Soul-saving
Doctrines, and for the convincing of all Atheists and Infidels. Thus is the
Hebrew-Tongue, and Religion somewhat founded in Universal consent and common
acknowledgment of all Nations; The very origina^ions of Scripture names having
left some Impression on humane Hearts, Minds and Consciences; at least they
would do so, were Scripture names interpreted in all the several Tongues under
Heaven. There is in all Languages a well-agreeing Harmony, with the Hebrew
Tongue, which is the Mother of all the rest, which cognation of Consanguinity,
and Affinity should be preserved and propagated. There are several Hebrew
words, which being put into the nature of the Things themselves by Catholic
Custom and Consent of Men have the very same sound and significancy, such as
Balsam, Cinnamon, Myrrh, Satan, Sabbath, and a many others. The very Letters of
the Hebrew Alphabet do speak their own Divine Original, there being no other
Tongue in the world, that has such natural Characters, so evidently to be
known by the motion of the Mouth and Tongue, and other Organs, the Tongue being
the Primary Organ of Speech; by observation whereof, those who are born Deaf,
may yet be taught the knowledge, and use of Speaking, Writing, and Printing.
The very sound of some Hebrew words in the Ear, does tell the Heart and Mind
the meaning of them: as ^zippor is a Sparrow, and so it does sound in several
Languages, which Name they have from the sound they make thus Tzip Tzip: thus
Bakbu^ is the very sound, that Liquor does make, in coming forth, when it is
poured out from a big-bellied Bottle out of a narrow mouth. He who would inform
himself in more of these kinds of Hebrew excellencies may consult with
Onomastical, and Harmonical Lexicographers, how much paper might be written
upon, to show how many multitudes of Greek, Latin, Gallic, Italic, Hispanic,
Anglic, Belgic, Cambr^-Britannic, Danic, Flandric, Frisic, Hollandic,
Portugallic, Saxonic, Teutonic, or Germanic, chiefly Chaldaic, Syriac, Arabic,
Punic, Samaritan, Aethiopic, and Persic words are but as so many Rivulers
flowing from the Hebrew-Fountain, which the similitude of sound does
demonstratively declare! And not only the similitude of sound, but also one and
the very self-same reason of Origination and Derivation; the primitive proper
meaning of that nomenclation, or that name, by which such a (...) or thing is
called, having its first foundation in the Hebrew word, and in created Being.
The King, and God of the Hebrews will have a time to Recrown this Hebrew
Language: For there are many both Mysteries in Grace, and Secrets in Nature,
which are best opened by Hebrew significancies; take one of each, Tepillath are
properly, Prayers made to a Judge by a Mediator. Gnophereth does signify Lead,
which does spring from a Root that does signify Dust; because when other Metals
are consumed of Dust, and eaten out of Rust, yet Lead is not at all diminished
or devoured thereby, if that be truth, which is written about it, but lying hid
under it, does gather somewhat from it, by which that does become fuller and
fairer. Our LORD Jesus Christ does name and call himself by one Worm, ( Psalm.
22. 6.
) Tologna^t, which is a Worm born of some putrefied Grains, which Worms are
useful in the service of those who do die colors, for they leave a Scarlet, or
Bloody color upon Wool: He being such a crucified Savior, as by his Blood
does tinge Believers. To close these lines about an onomastical Religion, let
it be considered, that Jehovah Aelohim has kept up the honor of a School of
the Sons of the Prophets in some Hebrew words and Names in the Holy Scriptures,
as ( Josh. 15. 15. 1 King. 4. 13. 1 Samuel 21. 1. 1 Chronicles. 4. 12. Jud. 8. 7. 24.
Josh. 15. 58. 2 Samuel 23. 8. Jer. 39. 13. 2 Samuel 21. 16. 1 Samuel 21. 1, 2. and
22. 9-19.
) Kirjath*Septer, the City of Letters, or of Scripture, or of Literature, or of
the Bock or Bible: and Charroth, Jaair, the Villages of him who illuminating,
or enlightening: and Nobeh, which is Prophetie; and Bethrapha, the House of
He^^th; and Bith-barah, a choice House, or House of Purity: Beth-tzur, an House
of Rock: Tachcamom, and Chacmoni, one who is wise; Nebusharban, Speech or
Prophetie flowing. Jiskbibenob, sitting in Speech, or in bringing forth words,
or in Prophetie: Nob was a City where were many Priests of Jehovah, the City of
the Priests.

A competency of Provision should be every way made for such Students; A
Library well filled with all the best Editions of the Bible, in their
originals, Autographs, if procureable at least Apographs (which were a work
well befitting the greatest Christian Prince to send Embassies all the
inhabited Earth over to get such) All the Versions and Translations of the
Bible in all the, several Languages: all the lexicographers and Philologists in
all Languages, especially in the Hebrew, which is the mother tongue of Tongues,
and so of the Greek and the rest, to improve the Cognation of Languages by
collating them with the Hebrew: all the learned skilful Critic*authors upon the
Bible, or upon any particular Scriptural subject matter: all the Exactest
Grammarians upon the Hebrew-Tongue especially: all the best Commentaries upon
the Scripture; In short, all that whatsoever it be that may promote this Grand
design: The Holiest Humblest, Heavenlyest; and most able and apt to teach the
Scriptures Learning, should be encouraged to preside in this work; The Scholars
chosen to be thus trained up, should be well educated young men, sober,
temperate, modest, Serious, humble, meek, mortified, teachable, studious,
healthful ones, such as are sound in the Faith, experiencing a Work of God and
of Grace savingly that, Scripture weapons may be put into the hands of the
Friends of Christ, not of Enemies against Christ. According to their Ingenies,
inclinations, and capacities, so should the Arts and Sciences be which they
learn: one to be made skilful in the office and work of the Magistracy, another
of the Ministry, a Third in the works of Creation, a Fourth in the
Scripture-judicial-laws for rewards to the obedient and for punishments upon
the disobedient; a Fifth for Controversal Theology: a sixth for Practical,
mysterious, or experimental Christianity; a Seventh for the Medicinal Art, and
so for other Arts and Sciences as those of the Astronomer Geographer,
Geometrician, Husbandman, Seaman, Soldier, or Handicra^^s man, and what else
that is useful in Church, or in State, in Commonwealth, City, or Family.

They should b^ well accommodated for Lodging, clothing and Diet; which last
should be sufficient but sparing, fitted to a Studious life, of Flesh at the
most not above once in a day, and that of pure clean young beasts, cattle,
fowls or Fishes* all of good nourishment and easy digestion: Psa. 104. 14. 2
King. 4. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. Matthew. 3. 4. what they translate Locusts,
is properly such tops of green buddings, (...), The tops of Trees and of Herbs,
fit food for the Sons of the Prophets.
much in the use of Herbs, for broth, Sallads, and otherways, and of the tops
of green buddings in the Fall and Spring especially, of both which Herbs and
Tops a discreet choice should be made of what is apt and proper for Food, and
also for Medicin if the Case call for it. There are some sorts of Roots also
which taken up out of healthful ground, if discreetly chosen and well dressed
are very wholesome Diet for young Students, whose employ is much in digging after
Hebrew roots and the branches and buddings of their roots in their proper
significancy. Good Fruits also in their Season, Milk and Honey; wholesome Drinks,
all with moderation for the measure, seasonableness for the Time, and aptness
for the Kind, have a name of Honor in the word scarce one man of a thousand,
who knows aright how to make one meal in order to health and other good ends.

Proper wholesome diet, as it does make much for the health of young Students, so
also does it much promote their Learning, when Dan. 1. chapter
Nebuchadnezzar would have hopful young men bred up for his use and Service in
state affairs, (This being a noble Princely work fit for the greatest King to
put on upon it is due advance) he gives a strict charge to one of his chief
Officers that, he should choose and ^ull out certain of the Children of Israel,
of the seed of the Kingdom and of the nobles, young men Good to see to,
intelligent in all wisdom, of a good Temperament, likely ones to apprehend and
to learn, to be quick and expert in Arts and Sciences, sharp witted of
peirceing understandings in whom was strength of Body and of mind to stand and
to serve in the Kings Palace, for which purpose they were to be fitted and
furnished by being instructed in Languages and in Books, which he thought in
three years time, they might be well skilled in; Daniel Hananiah Misael, and
Azariah were singled out for this end; and the King by a Court-order appointed
to be given to them, the word of the Day in his day, of the pieces, parcels,
portions, Messes or relics of the Kings meat, and of the Wine of his
Drinkings. Daniel, though but yo^ng, yet had so much perception with him as to
discern and judge that this Commons and Meals, which was prepared from them,
was both forbidden by the Laws of his Religion, being somewhat of that a part
whereof was offered to an Idol and so was prohibited, and often being of
unclean beasts Fowls or Fishes, which Jehovah Aelohim expressly forbad, as
against both their Health and holiness too, and foreseeing that, at least this
kind of food and such variety of wines was too high for them, and would
altogether indispose them for Study, and for Proficiency; he therefore
requested of this Officer and Overseer and Steward, that, he and his Companions
might not desile themselves with such Food, but that, he and they might have
such diet as was everyway better agreeing with the Principles of their
Religion, with their State of Health, and with their Progress in Learning: This
Steward at the first was afraid, that meaner fare would breed a sadness,
thinness, palenes and wannes) upon their Faces, which if the King should see
(For it becomes the greatest Prince to look after the education of such with
his own Eyes) and so the Officer should fall under the displeasure of the King,
and forfeit his head and life to the Prince: Daniel perceiving, that, this
Principal Officer would yet at least connive at it, desired him who was an
under Steward who by the direction of this chief Officer was to bring the
Provision to him, and to his Fellow-feeding friends, to prove them for ten days
long with what they translate Pulse, and Water; but in proper significancy,
Zeragnim, are such things as do spring and grow from what is sown, such are all
manner of wholesome Herbs, Grains, Corn, Wheat, Barley, Rice, Pease, Beans, and
such like, also of good Fruits from Trees; and then, after so many days were
expired, to compare their countenances with the countenances of such as did eat
of the Kings meat, and drank of his Wines, and as he made the observation, so
to judge upon trial: accordingly this under-provider makes experiment, and at
the ten days end, Daniel and his Companions, were good of Countenance, and fat
of Flesh beyond the other, fairer and healthfuller: God giving these four young
men Knowledge and understanding in all books, and to Daniel more particularly
and especially understanding in all manner of Visions and dreams; so that, at
the end of the days, when they were brought in before Nebuchadnezzar to his
faces, upon communing with them, there were none found like Daniel and his
fellow-feeding friends, They excelled all the rest of his wise men. Their diet,
with Jehovahs blessing, contributed much toward the forwarding of them in
their Studies and Knowledge; their Food being Garden, and Field-Herbs, Grains,
and Fruits, which did grow out of the Earth from what was sown, or Planted.

Pot Herbs, in Latin, are called, olus, either from (...) or Totus, because Man
might live almost wholly upon it or, ab Alendo dictum, because a discreet
choice of these in good Broth, especially in the spring with some good Raisons
stoned, are good nourishing Food, and proper physic too. The Creator who best
knew what was for man's use and good for Food, gave him every Genesis 1. 2^. and ^.
3. and 2. 8, 9, 15.
Herb, seeding-seed, which upon the face of all the Earth, and every Tree, in
the which the Fruit of a Tree seeding seed, to Adam and Eve it shall be for
meat. And this Grant is continued to Noah, and the Garden of Eden or of
Pleasure where was every tree desirable for sight, and good for meat, of
Jehovah Aelohim's own planting, whe^^ these Fruits and Herbs grew up out of an
healthful ground, that was the Place, where he put the man whom he had formed,
and his calling and work was to serve, dress, and to keep it.

Should I treat at large of all these, and also of the well-governing of the
Affections of these Sons and Disciples; of their conferences, debates,
disputes, walks, bodily Exercises, Ta^^^ Discourses, Hours for Study: for
sleep, for rising, closet, and Famil^, and more-publique-Assembly worship with
Scriptures directories and Rules and what else may fit them to be Healthful,
more learned Scholars, Through Disciples of Christ, experienced believers,
useful Instruments, every way about their generation work, I might fill up some
quires of Paper, but this I now rather leave to be somewhat of the Product of
their Studies and observation according to the written word and created beings.

When I first entered upon this useful discovery, I had it also in my intentions
(concerning the promoting of which I have collected and prepared many Materials
out of the Scriptures) to have given a Specimen of these following Particulars
toward the Advancement of Scripture-learning, toward which I am like to
bequeath my Studies and Collections unto such a School, both as to my printed
and written books.

An exact version or Translation of the Original Scriptures, word, for word,
without any human alterations or Supplements, additions or Substractions; with
instances in several places what wrong is done unto the word of God, and how
the Translators, were Malignly influenced upon by some, thereby to serve
Partial designs and Carnal ends and Corrupt interests of Churches and States.
Those who may have a call to and for such a work, should be eminently gifted
and graced fitted and furnished by Jehovah Aelohim for such a work. Such as
would be Right Translators of the Bible they must be God-taught-ones, very
Humble and mortifyed very Skilful in the original Language, Experienced
believers and Growing Saints, not wedded to private interests, nor swayed by a
Partial Spirit, such as are much and mighty with a God hearing prayer,
spiritual wrestlers and powerful prevailers, through Christ's intercession with
Him, having Free converse, and Distinct Communion with the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit. It is a reproach to the Protestant Cause that, one of the best
Translations, that we have of the Bible in an interlineary we have received
from a Popish hand; what pen can write down all the losses which the precious
Souls of the Common sort of people do Sustain by the many useful mysteries of
the Christian Religion which are hid from them for want of This? How much has
the Cause of Christ Suffered even from a Preaching Ministry by a pertinacious
adhering to a Corrupt Translation, whilst they let go, if they understand it,
That proper significancy of the Original words and phrases, which do best set
out the great Truths and things of the Christian religion, and do most commend
themselves to the knowledge, Faith, and Experience of Spiritual Discerners? with
what singular endowments, they should be qualifyed, who are employed in such an
undertaking, is sooner set dow^ ^^ writing, then to be found as yet actually
given to men by the Holy Spirit: my own unfitness and inability I do readily
acknowledge: It is honor enough for me, to Commend the work to others and to
quicken them up by the Prayers of ^i^h to wrestle with the Lord for larger
pourings down of his Spirit for su^^ an End. O that I might live to see the
Day, when Such Eminently called ones might come forth more clothed with that
Spirit.

An Hebrew Grammar and Lexicon should be composed out of the Holy Scriptures,
and not these Scriptures wrested and wryed to speak conformably to Grammars and
Lexicons of Traditionary humane Composure All being to be kept within the
Confines and borders of Original True Scripture, and of Primitive pure nature;
of what use the Cognation of Languages would be in this, might be considered.
For the Promoting of this, such as have laid up any store, or prepared any
Materials concerning that which Jehovah Aelohim has put into his written word
and into Created Beings, about Letters, their figure, name, Power or force in
Sound and Pronunciation. Vowels, Consonants Syllable^, words, sentences,
accents punctations, distinguishing of Sentences, Orthoepy or right Speaking
with the instruments of Pronunciation, which have so many wonderful secrets and
hidden Mysteries, both in Nature and in grace, by which we communicate the
Conceptions of our Heart and mind. Orthography, or Right writing, Parts of
speech, in their several Proprieties, particularly as to the verbs in the
distinct significancy of their several Conjugations, and as to the verbal
Participles, Syntax or Construction, The only one Primary Original meaning of
every Hebrew root, the ^ap and Juice, of which peculiar significancy should run
into all the deviate branches, not so making one and the same Word to signify
so many various and contrary things: To add no more now: I am heartily thankful
for what we have already hereof, but, it has not as yet received its
perfecting Advance. This and what else might be further named, I leave to the
Serious and judicious to meditate upon. The Lord give understanding herein;
Jehovah will give Wisdom, out of his mouth Knowledge and understanding, he has
hiddenly laid up essential Wisdom to the upright; Wisdom shall enter into their
Heart, and Knowledge shall be sweat unto their Soul.

Of Hebrew Alphabet, and Letters, their Number and order of vowels, Consonants,
Syllables, Words, Sentences, Notes of Distinction, and of Punctation in
Sentences, the Art and Science of Right speaking, Right writing with their
mutual Corresponding, of the Parts of Speech, of Etymology, or Analogy, and
somewhat of Syntax, or of Construction.
JEhovah, Psalm. 139. 1, 2, 4, 14.
Thou have searched me, and Known: Thou understandest my Familiar thought afar
off, when the speech not in my Tongue, lo, Jehovah, Thou know it All. I will
confess thee, for that Fearfully, marvellously made am I; mavelous thy works,
and my soul knows very well.

Adam was made a speaking Creature, whereby he was separated from, and
excelling of, all others, the Glorious Holy Angels only excepted, His Psalm. 16.
9. and 30. 12. compare Act. 2. 26. Psa, 57. 8, 9. Genesis 49. 6.
Soul and tongue were his Glory. Jehovah Aelohim could have glorified and
enjoyed himself in himself, though no Creature had been spoken into a Being: or
seeing he would give an Essence and Existence to a World, He could have made
all his Creatures dumb: but his will and pleasure was, for the exalting of
himself, and the extolling of his Name to create Angels and men, such noble
Beings as had Rational Souls, intelligent minds, and were voluntary Free
Agents, having Hearts and Judgments to conceive and understand; and Tongues and
other Instruments of speech, wherewith to offer and bring forth those inward
Conceptions vocally, and so to be the tongued Trumpeters of the whole Creation,
and thereby to sound forth the high Praises of his Wisdom and Power in so
Excelling and Perfect a Work as this goodly beauteous World; not only to behold
it with their Eyes, and to admire it in their Meditations, but also by
Angelical and Human voice, to confess it with their Mouths.

How great a Mystery This is both in Nature, in institution and in grace, How
notions of truths and of things have their Conception, Apprehension, clear and
distinct Perception, speculative Reasoning, Practical judging, comparing and
considering, Resolving and ultimate dictating, how they have Assent or Dissent,
in the Heart and mind of Intelligent Creatures; How these, being Formed there,
are uttered and communicated to the other instruments of speech: how brought
forth into words and sentences, by these, how conveyed by voice to the Ear of
another, how received by the Ears of others, how understood by hearing, whither
carried from the ear: How these come to be written in such a multitude of
expressions and phrases where the Letters are so few: how written words are
discerned and understood by the Eye on a sudden, and transmitted to some inward
Parts; These are full of Admirable Arcanums, and hidden Secrets, and deserve
further more perfect Inquiry. At present my inclination leads me distinctly to
handle some Particulars about Hebrew Grammar, which I may put together into
some kind of Frame, wherein its uniformness and proportionedness and Beauty may
the more and better commend itself to a spiritually discerning and a right
judging Eye.

The Hebrew Bible does give us a good account both of the Number and order of
the Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet. The one hundred and nineteenth Psalm has
them in Eights, It is a Psalm, a Song, a Praise, a prayer, a meditation, a
conference, all in one: It is composed exactly and completely according to the
Number and order of the Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet; It has eight verses for
each distinct letter, and every one of those verses does begin in all and in
every of the eight parts of it severally with the same Letter: by which Letter
each Part is called, and the number of Eight, is in some respect a full perfect
Number. As in Music, there are some Gradual Tones or Degrees of sound, by
which the voice Natural does either Ascend or Descend; Then comes the Eccl. 11.
^. Mich. 5. 5.
Octave, or Eight, whether you reckon upward or Downward, which is still the
like, as well in Nature, as Denomination, which does much commend the
Excellency of this Original Language, and speaks the Weightiness of the
matter in this Singular Psalm; There are in all Twenty and two Octostic's,
wherein almost in every verse, except verse. 122. The law of Jehovah,
comprehended in the Decalogue or Ten words, and commented upon in the other
Scriptures has a Name of Honor, in great variety, and sweet significancy of
choice expressions, as Law, Way, Testimony, Institutions or ordinances,
visitings, deposited Truths and Things, Praecepts Sayings, Word and Words,
Promises, Judgments, Justice, Statutes, Truth, Name, or such like. This Psalm
is called by the Masora, The Great Alphabet.

The Book of the Lamentations, has the same Remark of Honor put upon it. The
first, second, fourth, and fifth chapters whereof do each of them consist of
Twenty and Two verses, Every verse beginning according to the order of the
Hebrew Alphabet in the first chapter which is else where to be found in
heavenly Psalms, and high Poems of holy Scripture.

The third chapter of this Book has all and every of those Letters in Trines,
every one of the Letters in three verses one after another which do begin with
one and the same Letter, only in the second, third, and fourth chapters, two of
the Letters, Gnajin and Pe have inverted the order, (...), being before (...).
This did not fall out casually, but, by special Dispose, and wise ordination of
this language and Alphabet, and the letters thereof.

The Thirty seventh Psalm is penned according to the true right order of the
Hebrew Alphabet, there being two verses allowed to every one of the two and
twenty Letters, except four which have but one verse Daleth v. 7. Caph. v. 20.
Tsade v. 29. Koph v. 34. Gnajin, is left out, Pe, and Tsade transposed, Thau
omitted.

The Twenty and fifth Psalm is also composed according to the same order of
Letters, one verse is alloted to each letter: only Koph is left out and Resh is
doubled; Beth left out, and Aleph doubled, and Vau wanting, a second Pe, in the
last verse.

The Thirty and Fourth Psalm is in the like order, one verse being allowed for
every letter: only the verse in the Title does begin with Lamed, and the last
verse does begin with Pe, only Vau is left out and Pe, is a second time
repeated.

The one hundred and Eleventh Psalm observes the same order, every point of a
Sentence beginning with a distinct Letter.

The one hundred and twelfth Psalm is composed in the same Alphabetical order.

The one hundred forty and fifth Psalm is after the same manner, one whole
verse for every letter, excepting only one, which is Nun.

The one and thirtieth Chapter of the Proverbs, that part of it, which is a
Commendation of a virtuous prudent woman, beginning from the tenth verse, and so
on to the End, is set down in the first letters of every verse according to the
number and order of the Hebrew Alphabet.

Thus careful has the LORD been to preserve this original mother tongue, in
the very letters of it? according to that saying and Promise of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Mat. 5. 18. Luke 16. 17.
that, not the least letter, not any one Iota nor Apex not one Jod, or Chirek,
not any one essential original Letter, vowel, or consonant, or accent of of His
word shall be lost, shall pass away, or fall out, from His Law: no little
Vowel, or Consonant, or punctation of them, that is original in the true Text
and necessary to the right understanding of the words, phrases, and Sentences;
of which some proof is given in the Greek of the new Testament, where so far as
the Rules of that Tongue will admit, it does retain some Hebrew words, As
Halleluia, Hosanna, and Amen: not any little Top or corner of a word was
missing in Christ's time; for the miss of such a small thing makes a great
change in the sense; as between, Daleth, (...), and Resh (...), so between He,
(...), and Cheth, (...), Beth, (...), and Caph, (...), and Nun, (...), Mem,
(...), and (...), Samec, Cap^ Final, (...), and Daleth, (...), Nun final (...)
and Zain, (...), and This is the more punctually observed, as relating to the
Law. Some of the Hebrews have been so unweariedly diligent herein, as to reckon
up; how many, not only verses, but words; neither only words, but Letters;
neither only Letters, but also how many of particular Letters in some books of
the old Testament: and they are very punctual in their Printing of Hebrew
Bibles and that, The Purity of this Hebrew Tongue might not be lost, The Lord
has shaped the very Form of the Character of the Hebrew Letters in Nature: as,
in pronouncing of the First and the Last Letter ni the Heb. Alphabet, for
instance Al^ph (...); the sound, as it goes out of the Mouth, does make a
sloping line, thus (...), which is that part of this Letter, that moves side
long: the right side of the Tongue goes up to the higher Gumm or Teeth, thus
(...): the left side of the Tongue Moves downward, and rests upon the lower
teeth or gumm, and does add the rest of this letter (...). Thus for (...), Thau
there is a Transverse line on the top, from one side of the Tongue to the other
in the Palate, and the drawing down both of the sides of the Tongue, the left
side a little crooked in its motion, do add the two legs of ^^ ^or its support
(...). He who would inform himself about this mystery in Nature, let him
narrowly observe how his own Instruments of speech do form every Letter: and
let him consult Helmonts Natural Hebrew Alphabet, which is that peculiar Honor
this orginal Language has put upon it above and beyond all other Tongues.
Thus, by some such means, The Purity of the Text has been preserved.

A letter in the present case, is an Element, Principle or Rudiment, of which
syllables are made up in the Hebrew tongue; Pila^es inscription on the cross of
Christ was Luke ^3. 38. Joh. 19. 19, 20. Act. 28. 21. 2 Samuel 11. 14. (...)
Esther 9. 20. 25. Jer. 29. 1. 25, 29. Dan. 41, etc. and 6. 25. Act 9. 2. 22. 5
and 15. 23, 3^. and 18. 27. 1 Cor. 7. 1. and 16. 3. (...). 2 Cor. 3. 1. 2 These.
2. 15. 2 Timothy 3. 15. John 7. 15. 2 Chronicles. 21. 12. Isa. 29. 11, 12. Dan. 1. 4.
17. Act. 26. 24. Rev. 1. 8, 11. and 21. 6. and 22. 13. Isa. 41. 4. and 44. 6.
and 48. 12. Joh. 5. 39.
in Greek Roman, and Hebrew Letters: from these Letters, we have word^, and
sentences, (...) a letter, (...), in Greek from (...), to write; hence comes
Grammar; hence, Epistles are called Letters, so are Books. The Holy Scriptures
have their name from hence, (...): so Christ is said to know letters which the
carnal Jews wondered at, because, he had not been so trained up, in their
Schools, Academies and universities: Thus we read of the letters of Elijah to
King Joram; of Christ's letters, sent by John the servant of Christ unto the
seven Churches of Asia* in the First, second, and third chapters of the Book of
Revelation; written Letters are for this end, that they may be read: Daniel,
and his Companions were to learn the Letters of the Chaldee tongue. By Letters
are signified the several sorts of Sciences, contained in Writings: Festus
wrongfully charged Paul, as if he were so addicted to Letters, that, many
letters, his much reading and Learning, particularly, as to Scripture-learning,
would bring him to madness. We may read of A. Alpha, and of. o, Omega, the one
the first Letter, the other the last Letter in the Greek Alphabet, answering to
(...), Aleph and to (...), Thau, the former the first, the latter the last
letter in the Hebrew Alphabet. By this name Christ is called, He being the
First and the Last, The Beginning, and the Ending, This is subjoyned, by way of
Explanation: Jehovah Christ, is honored with the same Title in the Old
Testament: All Creatures have their Being of and from him, As the Author, and
therefore they should all be for and to him, As the End; such an honourarie
dignity has Christ crowned little letters withal, He is the Author, the
Subject Matter, and the End of the whole Holy Scripture, this is that written
word, which does testify concerning him, This being the ordinary appointed
means, by which we come to the saving knowledge and Acknowledgment of Him, These
Greek Letters, have their derivation from the Hebrew, Alpha from Aleph, Beta
from Beth: Gamma from G^mel; Delta from Daleth; Lambda from Lamed, etc. Thus,
in other Tongues and Languages is the Hebrew Alphabet imitated. Hence it is,
that, from no Translation of the holy Scriptures in other Languages can we so
convince Gainsaiers, and Contradicters as by the Original language and
Authentic Tongue of the God-inspirer of them, The Greek tongue wants two
Consonants, Jod and Vau and it has no, h, in the beginning of a syllable in the
middle of a word, nor in the end of a syllable in the End of a word; hence it
is, that that Name of Names, and word of words (...) Jehovah is not ordinarily
pronounceable by the Greek tongue according to the Common rules of their
Gram^^^s; which does not admit them; so neither Jah, by itself, nor in Compound
form, as Halelujah, nor any other proper name in Hebrew that has those
consonants in it, as, Aijob, Mirjam etc.

Vowels are Essential to Pronunciation, hence has a Consonant his
signification; for, a Consonant is a Letter which does sound, that is,
constitute a Syllable with a vowel, not without a vowel: A vowel is to a
Consonant, what the Soul is to the Body, it does give Animation to a Syllable
to a pronounced articulat sound without which we cannot rightly understand any
speaking or writing; as the Soul can move by itself, and also move the Body
together with it, so a vowel both moves by itself, that is, it does constitute
a sound: thus in the Hebrew, it is in pronunication and in voice.

These Discoveries are not Childish trifles; Great and weighty truths and
things do much depend upon them, as the Intelligent do know. If the vowels were
taken away, and only the Hebrew consonants written, as if these only, and not
also they were original, one and the same word would have so many various
significations, as would leave the true right meaning of the Scripture at great
uncertainties, which may not be given any way to at all. In the way, it being
natural to write as we speak, and to speak as we write, let Advancers of the
best learning diligently inquire and seriously consider, whether there ought
not to be Dipthongs put into Hebrew Grammars which is commonly omitted, and
whether it be not an Error both in Hebrew Grammar and Pronunciation that,
those four consonants (...) being put with out a vowel in voice do lose all
their valor, value, force, virtue or price, in pronunciation, as if worth
nothing at all in pronunciation, being idle, and doing nothing in sound, so
that they call them Quiescent, having a place in the word written, but not
being movable consonants, because not pronounced?

All dipthongs in the Latin tongue the Ancients so brought forth into sound as
that both the vowels were heard in the pronunciation, which was the true way of
uttering in speech: when two vowels one following another did not constitute
one Dipthong, but made two diverse Syllables, they were noted by two points on
the Top or Cap of them, as Igneus, Oceanus, Ait, Phaeton. The Greeks have
twelve Dipthongs six of these they call Proper, because in these the sound of
both the vowels was heard, as (...), Aura; a and v are both in the sound; and
the like in (...), Eja; both e and i are heard in (...), Euge, e and v; and in
the rest.

Their Poets were more punctual in this, for, when there was need, they would
disjoine them, and therefore they signed the latter vowel with two points, as
(...) for (...), judicio; (...) for (...), puer. In the Hebrew Language, a
vowel is that letter, which does give a sound; The proper vowel, is always a
vowel or vocal, and it is is either long or short: the Proper long vowel is
that which is spoken with a long drawn out sound, or of double time, The short
vowel is that, which is pronounced or spoken with a short quick sound, and is
of simple, single or short time: Thus, they have in Music; There is a long
note, and a short note, A Breve, Semibreve and Minim.

Why those vowels, which they call improper, should not be vocal, that is
sounding in the voice always, where written in the Original, consider whether
there be any grounded reason for it either in Scripture or in Nature.

There are diverse exceptions, which are brought in by some against some
commonly received Rules.

One is, that they make no Dipthongs of any two vowels at all, though the
Compounded improper vowels do consist of two short vowels.

Another, that they reckon some Letters to be Vowels, which yet are Consonants,
as when they express a Dipthong, they say that is a Sound of two Vowels joined
into one Syllable.

A third is, that they admit of no Dipthongs, where one Letter is a Consonant,
and the other letter a simple vowel or a Compound vowel.

The grounds on which the Excepters do enter their Dissent, are these, one is,
because by these Rules, they speak otherwise, than they write, and they write
otherwise than they speak: what some have observed of the people of one Nation,
that they neither do as they write, nor write as they speak, nor speak as they
think, nor think as they would be thought, having a quite contrary meaning than
what can be gathered from their words.

Another is, that, they make not a Sufficient distinction in the sounds of many
words, which yet are of different signification: whereas, one great end of
voices and of sounds in speaking, is 1 Cor. 14. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
intelligiblenes; without this, men speak into the Air, and the hearers do not
so well understand what that is which is said. Nature even in other creatures
does instruct in this. For, it does evidence it self, not only in the voice of
a Rational man but, also in the voice of Bruit beasts, and in chirping birds:
For they all do designate somewhat distinctly by their sound and voice to one
another which does carry some meaning with it such as they have a perception
and knowledge of; they understand how they are affected, either well pleased or
some way agrieved by the very tone and noise in their way of expressing it,
either calling upon each other to come away to help one another, or to partake
in some sensible good, or giving warning to them to be aware of some evil when
they are apprehensive of danger; yea the sound of lower creatures, as of a
drum, or trumpet, how many several things do they speak unto Soldiers and
Armies, being certain signs of determinate warlick affairs: if there be not an
intelligible force or significant power, going along in speaking and utterance
of letters, syllables, and words, we shall be as Barbarians to one another, the
Idiom of the Language being outlandish and foreign, strange and unknown.

From this also other inconveniences do follow, For, it will hinder profiting
and edifying for want of ability in free conferring: which is one dangerous
hurt which the Jews and the Israelites do wound their souls with; by keeping up
such a tone, and way of pronouncing the Hebrew words, which they would have no
Christain so thoroughly to be versed in, that, we can hardly treat with them
about the grand concerns of the Scripture-religion, they affirming, that no man
can utter the Hebrew language aright unless the instruments of speech be used
to frame unto it from the Childhood; and there are diverse of the Hebrew
letters, particularly, as to their Sound, uttered by, A and H, with so little
difference in the voice, that the proper significancy of many words is much
clouded thereby.

This also does further leave a great discouragement upon the spirit of young
Scholars, who fear, lest after some years study to get skill in this Tongue,
they shall then be very far to seek as to a right pronunciation; the Jews
having gotten such a name for this Hebrew language, because it is more their
mother tongue then of other people, though in several letters, syllables, and
words, their manner of bringing them forth into sound, is not so Articulat, so
joynted, so distinct, so significant, and express, as that which more according
to the very nature of the instruments of speech, in the throat, Palate, Nose,
Tongue, Teeth Gums, cheeks, and lips, either pure and single, or joined and
double, they do not distinctly take in all natural sounds neither is their
voice so articulate as to make it very intelligible; if it were written as they
pronounce it, how soon might a discerning Eye see, that were words written as
the Jews and some others do utter, that many words and Phrases of Scripture
would have their sense in Syntax much wronged? How much did that one letter,
Judge. 12. 6. Psalm. 69. 3. Isa. 28. 11. and 32. 4.
(...), cost, some even their very lives, when some pronounced it, sh, and
others only as a single, S? the Ephraimits, whether from some impediment in
their speech stammering and lisping out of their words, or by evil custom, or
whatever else might be the cause, were many of them thereby deprehended and
slain: It were worth the Inquiry, Seeing that the Hebrew tongue was the
language of all the Tribes of Israel, of that Tribe of Ephraim, as of the rest
of the Tribes, how this corrupt pronunciation should so run into a Tribe, was
it a natural imperfection in the shape of their mouth, and so an Hereditary
defect in their lip or tongue, or some other Instrument of speech? or was it an
evil Habit gotten by Apish imitation (for though the first Adam were created a
speaking creature, yet children now in the ordinary way do learn to speak by
imitation of Sounds which they hear, and by eyeing the motion of the mouth of
those who do speak:) having some little perception of consent, and of Dissent
between Audibles and visibles? or was it from the quality of the Air, hot,
cold, dry, or moist to excess; from the nature of the Soil, or influence of
winds? because its borders Eastward had all along the river Jordan, and
westward the mediterranean Sea; as it has been observed of a village at
Charleton in Leicestershire, that the Inhabitants therein have a wharling in
their utterance, not speaking that with clearness and distinctness as others:
See Camdens Brit. in Leicestershire.
or was it from bodily constitution and temperament? The Tongue of some has
such a chill and coldness in it, as makes it sluggish and unapt to move it
self, whence proceeds a stutting; which is usually the cause of Fools, Idiots,
naturals* as they are called, who have some such impediment in their speech:
and in others a moderate use of wine with its heat and moistness does help in
speaking: such is the (a) nature of pure wine, that, it does manifest its
goodness by Song. 7. 9. Prove. 23. 31. Exodus 4. 10-16. Job 11. 2. Psalm. 140. 11
Ezekiel. 3. 5, 6, Mark 7. 32, 33, 34, 35.
its, Effects, for it moves and springs in the Cup, whereby it does discover
it self to be right natural generous wine, in its going, walking, moving it
self in rightnesses in the Cup, causing the lips of those who are sleepy to
speak, it gives utterance to the Lips, when the Tongue was slow, and as it were
sleepy before, as sleepy men when they speak, it is with some Clogg upon their
Tongue, for want of Spirits heat, and quickness: They make some offers to
speak, but at the first are not so able, till they recover their Tongues who
are Subject to stutting; but the more the Tongue is moved, the more it heateth;
motion generating Heat.

In some others, over-moistness may be a cause, as when Men are drunk they
utter not words with that distinctness, the Spirits and other parts of the
tongue are drowned for a time, though they would be talkative: In other some,
the too much Lam. 4. 4. Psalm. 22. 15. and 137. 6.
dryness of the tongue does hinder free articulating of Sounds; as when the
tongue even cleaves to the roof of the Mouth; so it is now and then in
scorching fevers; hence it is that Choleric men are often Stammerers in
speaking, they being more dry; although another reason there may be of this in
such, from over-praecipitancy, when words in heat and in haste, do press so
fast to get out, that, they have not vent speedy enough, and so do obstruct
their own passage; like a great throng of people at a narrow door, who by
over-hastening to get out do hinder one another. Whatever be the causes, this
has been the case of some very wise, holy, great and good men: such was Moses,
who yet was not a man of lips, or of words, he was not eloquent, but of an
heavy mouth and of an heavy tongue, slow in speech, troubled, or mussled in
utterance, not so easily understandable by Hearers: He is Jehovah who makes
the mouth of Man, who makes the Dumb, who is with the Mouth, and who taught
Moses what he should speak; who gave to Aaron the Levite, Moses's brother,
ability of utterance, so that, speaking he could speak, speak eloquently,
readily; Moses was to speak to Aaron and to put the words into Aarons mouth;
Jehovah promised to be with Moses's mouth and with Aarons mouth which Aaron was
to speak for Moses unto the people who, he, even he, should be to Moses for a
Mouth.

The Hebrews in their Canons, allowed no Priest to lift up his hands to bless
the people who stammered or lisped or was of an heavy Mouth or Tongue: and they
teck on nine blemishes in the mouth, which disabled a Priest for the discharge
of that Office: whatever it be as to that case, it is Lev. 21. 16, 17-24. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7. Tit. 1. 7, 8, ^. Acts 14. 1^. 2 Cor. 1^. 1^. Ephesians. 6.
19, 20. Col. 4. 3, 4.
expressed in the Typical Law, that, the Priest who was to execute that Function
was to be unblemished in 12 particulars specityed, besides a general clause
added to that Enumeration which intimated, that any other notorious great
blemish, though unnamed, did disinable such for the actual exercise of that
calling. O how many are the Gifts and graces of body and of Mind that are
requisite in the Ministers of Christ! which does direct in the choice of young
Sons, that, they be eloquent ones: In the case of Paul and Barnabas, Barnabas
had more of a Faculty to be a Leader in speaking, of readier utterance to
deliver a Message, than Paul, who by some Expressions does acknowledge, that, he
had not naturally that Freedom of speech, that Liberty of bringing forth into
words the conceptions of his Min^: Thus useful are apt Instruments of speech;
whence Esa. 66. 18. Dan. 3. 4, 7, 29. and 4. 1. and 5. 19. and 6. 25. and 7.
14. Zach. 8. 23. Romans 14. 11. Esa. 45. 23. Phil. 2. 11. Revel. 5. 9. and 7. 9.
and 10. 11. and 11. 9 and 13. 7. and 14. 6. and 17. 15. Prove. 17. 20. and 18.
21. and 21. 23. Esa. 3. 8. Jer. 9. 8. 1 John 3. 18. Prove. 10. 20, 21. and 12.
18. and 15. 2. Song 4. 11. Esa. 50. 4. Eccl. 10. 11. Esa. 57. 19. Heb. 13. 15.
Hos. 14. 2. Prove. 12. 14. and 13. 2. and 18. 20, 21. Ezekiel. 3. 5, 6. Genesis 11. 1,
6. and 10. 5, 20, 31. Esth. 1. 22. and 3. 12. and 8. 9. Acts 10. 46. and 19. 6.
1 Cor. 12. 10, 28, 30. and 14. 4, 5, 6, 13, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 27, 39. Esa.
28. 11. Mar. 16. 17. Acts 2. 4, 6, 8, 11. and 21. 40. and 1. 19. Mat. 26. 73.
Mar. 14. 70.
a tongue, and tongues, are put in some Scriptures, for words and speeches,
which are brought forth with the tongue: An Eloquent tongue in the Teacher is
well adapted to instruct the hearers: This is to be Lord of the tongue; and
such words are the Fruit of the tongue, that which the tongue does bring forth,
Thus is the Tongue or Lip put for an I^iom, or Proper form of speech, which was
one in the beginning, but was afterward multiplied and confounded for the sin
of the Builders of Babel-tower; hence the Phrases, of new Tongues, other
tongues, our own tongue, hence also a Language is set out by Esa. 19. 18. Genesis
11. 1, 6, 7, 9. 1 Cor. 14. 21. Esa. 28. 11. Ezekiel. 3. 5, 6. Job. 12. 20. * 13.
6. and 15. 6. Psalm. 40. 9, 10. and 63. 3. Prove. 10. 13, 19, 21, 32. and 14. 3.
and 15. 7. and 16. 10, 23, 30. and 17. 7. and 18. 7. and 24. 28. and 26. 24.
Eccles. 10. 12. Isa. 29. 13. Matthew. 15. 8. Mark 7. 6. Zeph. 3. 9. Mal. 2. 6, 7.
a Lip, which is another Instrument of speech; and the Lip is used in several
Scriptures, for words and Speeches brought forth and uttered by the Lips. By
this an Intelligent Discerning Reader may see, how much there is in Letters,
words and Pronounciation.

Another great damage by not speaking, and writing of Letters, vowels,
Consonants, and words aright is, that, in many Scriptures, many letters and
Sillabical adjections are counted insignificant, as if they stood only as
Expletives to fill up a room, or for Euphonies sake to make the better,
smoother, and pleasanter sound, such they make (...) hence their bold
affirmations of Redundant, as also of Deficient, letters: whereas, it is a
perfect word, to which we may not add, and from which we may not substract. I
shall cull out two compound Pronoun Affixes, ci and mo, one of these Letters,
jod in ci not one of which Christ would have Matt. 5. 18.
to fail, which common Grammarians, Translators, and Interpreters do often
misjudg to be altogether insignificant, whereby much sweet Edifyingness of
Experimental Scripture, is quite lost to a vulgar reader.

When the Psalmist was in colloquie or conference with his own self, calling
Psa. 103. 1, 3. 4, 5.
upon his soul and all his inward parts to bless Jehovah as for other things,
so particularly and especially for these, he thus expresses it, Bless him O my
Soul, it is He, who pardoningly-sparing All-thy-my iniquities, who healing all
thy-my-diseases: who redeeming from the corrupting pit thy-my-lives; who
crowning thee-me with mercy and tender pities: He will renew as an Eagle thymy
youths thy iniquities are my iniquities: and my iniquities are thy iniquities:
thy Diseases are my Diseases, and my Diseases are thy Diseases: thy life and
lives is my life and lives; and my life and lives is thy life and lives; Thy
being crowned with mercy and tender pities, is my being crowned with mercy and
tender pities, and my being crowned with mercy, and tender pities, is thy being
crowned with mercy and tender pities. Thy youths being renewed as an Eagle, is
my youths being renewed as an Eagle, and my youths being renewed as an Eagle,
is thy youths being renewed as an Eagle: and should not thou and I therefore
be blessing of this Jehovah? are not every and all of these, mercy and good to
thee and to me, and to our whole Man? Thus in Ps. 116. 7.
another Psalm Return thou O my soul, unto thy-my-Rests, For, Jehovah has
bounteously-rewarded over thee-me, all good rests are injoyable in him; thy
rests are my rests; and my rests are thy rests: Jehovahs bounteously rewarding
thee, is his bounteously rewarding me; and his bounteously rewarding me, is his
bounteously rewarding thee. In this compound Pronoun-Affix, (...) the first
letter (...) caph, this does signify the second Person singular, thee, thy
thine being substituted in the room of Attah, thou, thee, thy or thine. ^^ Jod
is the Affix or Suffix of the First Person singular importing, me, my, mine;
being put for, (...), me, my, or mine. Both these put together do signify, thy
my, etc. when alone without caph as in Melchizedech, Psalm. 110. 4. is my, my*
King of Righteousness, or King of my righteousness, which does set out the
office and work of faith in applying of Christ's imputed righteousness for
justification. I leave other places to the Holy Spirits teaching, and to the
observation, and experience of the Intelligent.

In like manner have they dealt with that other Compou^d Pronoun*Affix, or
Suffix, (...), Mem, is the Pronoun Affix or Suffix of the third Person plural
Masculin; this, when it does stand a single termination added at the end of a
word, it does signify, Them, their, or theirs; and is a letter taken out of
(...) They, them, their, or theirs, the Pronoun of the third Person Plural
Masculin (...), is an Affix or Suffix of the third Person singular Masculin,
when a Termination put after a word, importing him, his, etc. which is taken,
and put for (...) he, him, or his, the Pronoun of the third person singular
Masculin; so that these two pronoun suffixes at the ends of words do differ as
much as Plural and singular, that is, as much as one single individual person,
or more persons than one: Take some Scripture Examples of this, which will more
clear it up, and open the great usefulness of this discovery. In Psa. 2. 3.
(Acts 4. 25, 26, 27, 28.) Luke 1^. 14, 27. 1 ^oh. 5. 10. Joh. 3. 3,-36. and 5.
23.
the second Psalm, both Jews and Gentiles are in a tumultuous rage peoples are
muttering, Kings of the Earth are setting themselves, and Princes are plotting
together, and all against Jehovah (the Father) and against his Christ, his holy
Child Jesus, whom he has anointed, and they are brought in as saying and
resolving, we will break Those-Their-His bands, the Bands of Father Son, and
holy Spirit, all of them jointly together, and the bands of the Son, (of
Christ,) in special; and we will cast from us Their-His-Cords, the Cords, of
Father Son, and holy Spirit, and his Cords; Christ's cords particularly; we will
not be held in subjection under him; we will not have him to reign over us; we
are resolved upon this* not to give unto the Mashiach, the Anointed One, these
signs of Homage. This does set out the sinningness of the sin of unbelief,
which does reject the only remedy of Salvation by Christ in a way of believing,
which will not obey Christ's laws, nor receive the witness of God the father
concerning his Son, and thereby has made God a liar, because they believe not
the Record that God gave of his Son, and so by not honoring of the Son, they
do not honor the Father who sent him. Thus in the Psa. 11. 7. 2 Cor. 13. 14. 1 John 1. 3. Psa. 11. 4, 5, 6. and 34. 15, 16. and 33. 18. Job 3^. 7. 1 Pet. 3.
12.
Eleventh Psalm, For, the righteous or just Jehovah righteousnesses has loved,
The Right one they will, or shall view Their-his-Faces; The Faces of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Spirit have very favorable aspects toward
him, toward every such one who is right or a righteous one, They will each of
them and every one of them; all jointly, and each distinctly, will accept the
Person and Service of such a one, and plead his Cause; he presenting himself
and his case before them, and orderly applying himself to each, and keeping up
a way of special communion with All and every one of these three Subsistences
in the All-glorious one Jehovah-Essence, when he does solemnly appeal to them
for Right, referring his just cause, or the Cause of others of the Lords
people, to them for righteous Judgment in their Court in Heaven against any
false Accusers perjured witnesses, or unjust Judges, who would condemn him in
the corrupted Courts of men: And more especially the Faces of the Son of God,
of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is a Mediator, Advocate, and Surety by Office, in
whose name, For whose sake, and by whose satisfaction and intercession, they do
supplicate for grace, who has a Propriety in such a Righteous one, which
Propriety is the ground of his care, and whose Interest it is to look after his
own. So that, for want of opening of this in the Translation, some of the most
high, Heavenly, and holy mysteries of the whole Christian Religion do lie hid
from a Common understanding. The one is, Three subsistences of Father, Son, and
holy Spirit in one Jehovah-Essence, and the way of an Experienced believers
orderly distinct Communion with each of them: The other is, Christ's Mediatoral
Office, in what manner as to this Office he does stand specially related to the
believer, and how the Believer may make a right Adress more particularly to
this Christ in All cases. All and every one of these have other manner of looks
against those, who are unjust, Angry killing Faces. Thus, as to Jehovah
Aelohim, and to the M^ssias.

It may be of use on this occasion to give direction in a great and weighty
case, in, and about which the working unbelief, distrust and fears of many of
the Reformed Religion do much hurry and perplex them. The Lord having
wonderfully discovered and defeated the bloody plots of the Confederate Papists
by some of their own Party, whose consciences have been terrifyed and amazed at
the thoughts of such horrid Murdering and cruel Massacring of so many innocent
persons; and so had no inward peace, till they openly Confessed the hellishness
of the Design: now one of their last attempts is to suborn false Witnesses
perjured persons, to forswear themselves in open Court against particular
Protestants, thereby under a Color of Justice to take away their lives under a
pretense of proving treasonables Crimes, upon many of them. Against this
abominable provocation given to the Eyes of the All-seeing holy just Jehovah
Aelohim, who is All-knowing and Truth itself, whom these bold Atheists and
monstrous infidels are prepared to call in to their Party for his witnessing of
their Falsehoods, the Lord has graciously armed and defended his people with
this Scripture-shield and ward, let an innocent person engage some of the most
serious believers he has acquaintance withal who are near him, to seek Jehovah
Aelohim about this some time before the Trial, and when the Falsely Accused is
at the Bar, and the perjured persons are about to forswear themselves, let him
solemnly charge them, as they will answer it to the just Judge over All, to be
wary what they do depose upon Oath; For, the righteous Jehovah loves
righteousness: if notwithstanding this caution they will swear falsely, and call
in God to witness it as if it were a Truth, let the Prisoner at the Bar and
those other believers with Eyes and Palms of hands lift up to Heaven solemnly
call in Jehovah Aelohim to determine the case, To hear in heaven and Do and
Judge, condemning the Malignants, and bring the way of the unjust upon their
Heads, and justifying the Righteous just one, to give him according to his
righteousness or justness of his Cause, For the Encouraging and drawing forth
of Faith herein they have Scripture Prophecies, Promises and 1 King. 8. 31, 32.
1 King. 18. 21, 40. 2 King. 1. 9-16. Rev. 11. 3, 4, 5, 6. Zech. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Mar. 11. 24. and 9. 23. Luke 17. 5, 6. Mat. 17. 20. Act. 5. 1-14. and 13. 6-12.
Luke 18. 7, 8. Exodus 20. 7. Lev. 19. 12. Deuteronomy. 5. 11. 1 Timothy 1. 10. Hos 4. 2.
Lev. 6. 3, 5. 2 Chronicles. 6. 22, 23. Psalm. 24. 4. Numb. 5. 21, 27. Jer. 5. 2.
Prove. 12. 2. Deuteronomy. 19. 15-21. Jer. 7. 9. Hos. 10. 4. Psalm. 52. 1, 2-5. and 120.
2, 3, 4. Osea 34. 15, 16. and 33. 18. 1 Pet. ^. 12. Job 3^. 7. P^al. 11.
throughout.
Presidents.

The like is with respect to men, I, Deuteronomy. 32. 23, 32, 35.
says Jehovah, (speaking of a very froward generation, Sons in whom no Faith,
corrupt Worshipers, who provoked him to Anger with their vanities, both
idolatrous Heathen, and Apostatizing Israelites, one and another) I will heap
evils upon them-him: All of them jointly together, and every one of them in
particular, not any one guilty person amongst them had any Privilege or
protection, from which to promise to himself exemption and Escape. Their-His
grapes, grapes of gall, they have most, bitter Clusters; such are the works and
fruits of them All and of every one of them: this guilt is upon them in
General, and in Particular: The Day of their Calamity near, and the things
making have that shall come to them-him, to All of them, and to every one of
them; there will be a particular hastening of all and every of the threatened
judgments in a terrible manner and in a dreadful measure (For, so is the
significancy of the Hebrew phrase, when a word of the singular Number, and of
the Masculin gender is joined to, and with a foregoing word of the plural
number, and of the saeminin gender.) Psa. 5. 11.
This meditation will serve to awaken conscience and to move Fear in all such
who are thus guilty; and should arm believers against their dreading, or being
afraid of such ungodly ones, who are under such threatenings from so just a
Judge. In the fifth Psalm, they shall rejoice All who hoping for safety in
thee, O Jehovah Aelohim, to ever shall they shout, and thou shall, thou will,
cover over Me-Them-Him; all of such, and every one of such, and me in
particular among such, Thy protection will be over me, and over them, and over
each of them, I, and they, and every one of them seeking of, and hoping for
my-their-his Covert and defense in Thee from all evil, so as that it shall not
be able to hurt me, or them or any of them. These Interpretations may be read
by him who runs, to have much sweet encouragement in them to Faith, and Hope in
Jehovah Aelohim, and in his word, for All and every of sound believers to seed
upon.

This also does further give a Rebuke and Check to such who are so bold and
daring, as if they could teach the All-wise Jehovah to speak more significantly
then he does, by their Supplements of their own words to make the Scriptures to
be sense, as they sometimes blasphemously speak: and by asserting the Right
pointing of Sentences, and distinguishing of these Sentences by Accentuations,
and Punctations to be a mere human Invention, and not a God inspired
institution.

Concerning Supplements of men's Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Pro. 30. 5, 6. Rev. 22.
18, 19.
addings, there is a Prohibition gone forth, a woe threatened against all
Addings to, as well as Substractings from, the words of the Lord. Examine we
the Translations of some Particular Scriptures.

When the Israelites, who were brought our of Egypt had sinned a great sin, in
making a Molten Calfand worshipping of it, the Translation does render it, They
have Deuteronomy. 9. 12. and 32. 5. Exodus 32. 7. Isa. 1. 4.
corrupted themselves; Themselves, the Translators do put in, and add it to the
Text, whereas that does much both narrow and mistake the sense of that place;
for, though those Idolatrous Israelites did corrupt themselves, yet withal they
corrupted one another, and what was worse, they corrupted their Religion both
in principle and in Practice, they corrpted the instituted Ordinances of the
Lord, his Worship and Service.

In the Psa. 27. 13.
twenty seventh Psalm, the Translators put in, I had fainted, those three
words; unless I had believed to see the goodness of Jehovah in the land of the
living; which does too much imprison the sense, and confine it to that one
particular, which is not the weightiest neither: For, that expression, except I
had believed, this does take in all the experimental cases mentioned in that
psalm, except I had believed, I had been afraid of men, when they made battle
against me to eat my flesh; I had dreaded my distressers and my enemies; my
heart had been afraid, when a pitched Host pitched against me, when war rose up
against me; except he had believed, his heart had not been confirmed and strong
waiting and expecting, when he was banished and driven from the house of
Jehovah, where he longed, to sit all the days of his life, to view in the
pleasantness of Jehovah, and to enquire in his Palace; except he had believed
this, what should he have done in the day of evil? how could he in such a case
have been confident, that, Jehovah would keep him privily in His pavilion,
that, he would keep him secret, in the secret of his Tent, and that, he would
exalt him on a Rock; and that, his head should be lifted up above his enemies
round about him; that, he should Sacrifice in his Tent Sacrifices of shouting,
and sing Psalms to Jehovah? except he had believed this, how could he have
lived to his comfort and Satisfaction, that, though his Father and his Mother
would forsake him, yet Jehovah would not leave nor forsake him, but be his
Savior, and gather him? except he had believed this, how could he have kept an
even frame of spirit, when he had so many envyers, when he was in such danger
to be given to the Soul, to the will, and lust, of his Distressers; For,
witnesses of Falsehood did stand up against him and the man who breathed violent
wrong? how injuriously therefore do they charge the Scriptures, as if they were
no perfect Rule, because of such imperfect Speeches, as they miscal them;
whereas, this Psalm has the greater Fullness, and more Perfection by this means,
as has been shown. In Psa. 109. 4.
the one hundredth and ninth Psalm; For my love they (my slanderous enemies)
are adversaries to me, and I give my self to Prayer: here the Translators put
in four words of their own, which are, Give my self to; whereas, the original
is, And I Prayer; this does set out one singular truth. Duty grace, and
experience, concerning prayer; for, besides the Several Passages in this Psalm
to which it does relate, and concerning which it does afford a choice, either
Prevention or remedy as to heart-akes, Soul-sicknesses, and bodily ailes, it
does contain in it An excellent Directory for Prayer when a Believer under such
trying cases is at prayer, he should be All prayer, his whole man should be all
engaged in prayer, he should go to Jehovah in Prayer: to Jehovah the father, to
Jehovah the Son, to Christ as Mediator; to Jehovah the holy spirit; to a proper
word, and to suitable promises in prayer; he should see that Graces in their
places be acted in prayer: he should pray in prayer: thus Prayer should be
prayer, prayer well filled up. How much beyond the Translator's-Supplement,
would this Scripture-expression lead an experienced beleiver.

Take an instance in the New Testament: When the Mother of Zebedees Children
came unto Christ desiring a certain thing of Him even to grant, that those her
two Sons, whom she brought along with her to him, might sit, the one on his
Right hand, and the other on his Left in His Kingdom; one part of Christ's
answer was, Mat. 20. 23.
that to sit on his Right hand, and on his Left, was not his to give, but (the
Translators put in of their own, It shall be given to them: these five or six
words they add) for whom it is prepared of my father: If an ignorant Teacher of
an ignorant People, were to raise Doctrines from this clause, they were like to
be these two; One, that, to Sit on Christ's right hand, and on his left is not
Christ's to give: The other, that, to Sit on Christ's right hand, and on his left
shall be given to them, for whom it is prepared of Christ's Father.

These two seem very fairly and rightly drawn from the words as translated in
English; and yet, the former of these two is a False Doctrine; For, it is
Christ's to give, as other Rev. 3. 21. John 5. 22. 27. and 13. 3. and 17. 2.
Scriptures do convincingly prove he has commissioned Power to grant unto him
who overcoming to Sit with him in his Throne: The Father has committed All
judgment unto the Son; he has given Christ authority to execute judgment: The
Father gave All things into Christ's hands; he gave Christ power over all flesh;
All authoritative power in heaven and in Earth was given unto Christ. The
Translation therefore should have run thus, To Sit from my Rights and from my
lefts (the Plural Number in both, takes in hands, Arms, sides etc.) not is it
mine to give, But, (or except, or save) to them it is prepared of my Father,
Christ's it was to give, but, to such as were expressed in his Commission, whom
the Fathers purpose was to honor with such a Privilege.

Though these and such like Supplements, of men by which they pretend they
would fill up the Sense, be printed in lesser Characters in many Bibles; yet
not in All English Bibles and where they are printed in lesser Letters, yet
scarce one of many scores does take any notice of this, to exercise practical
judgment about it, and to compare Spirituals with Spirituals concerning it.

As for what does concern the Right pointing of Sentences, and distinguishing
of those Sentences by Punctations and Accentuations, This is not a mere humane
invention, but, a God-inspired institution: For, if these be taken away, how
many blasphemies would Ignorance and malice quickly run into? consider that
Passage Psalm. 5. 4.
in the Fifth Psalm; If a full Period be placed there, where there is but a
Comma or a Colon, would it not be Blasphemy to make a full stop to these words,
Thou art not A God? and so to read no further; whereas it must be otherwise
pointed; For, Thou not Ael, (or the mighty, Almighty one,) A God delighting
wickedness, The Evil shall not sojourn thee. Thus, he who will read to the
Period finds excelling sense in this choice Scripture.

To have a Distinction of a Sentence into certain members of it, is natural and
significant, that, there may be just spaces alloted both for due breathing, and
for right understanding: the moderating of the respireing Faculty gives both a
Grace to the speech, and a light to the apprehension of what is spoken; The
shortest point in a Sentence leaves such a space, as the ordinary pulse and
measure of time is in music; yet so, as that what does follow do quickly
Succeed after the breath is drawn in; the next to this has a longer and larger
respiration; as in music, there is a brve, and a long note; the third is
larger yet, containing the perfect member of a Sentence, and so, as in music,
has more of length or quantity; the last does bring the whole Sentence to a
full Period, and is the perfecting and filling up, of all the parts and Members
of it; like as in Music Natural, there are distinct Pauses or Rests which have
shorter or longer intermissions and cessations of sound, Breve-Rest, or long
Rest, according to the measures and Proportions of time, wherein natural Organs
and the breathing faculty should mutually direct and help each other as to the
manner of Pronunciation, that, we be neither too much Minim, nor too much
Maxim: we should know how to keep Time, and give every particular note of
distinction its due measure, without making it, either longer or shorter than
it ought to be. Musicians do this by a Constant motion of the hand, or Foot, or
imagination, down and up successively and equally Divided, every down and up
being called a Time, measure-note or Time-note, the lively pulses in our own
arteries, sinnews, and veins, and the little minutes of a steady going watch
or Pendulum, do help somewhat to measure this motion: in like manner is it
applicable to the Notes of distinction for pointing of Sentences: and look as
in Music, where two Minim-Rests do stand together (in common Time) there it
may be Supposed, that, the First belongs to the Foregoing Time, and the second
to the Time following: thus is it useful, in pointing the Sentences, to know
thereby the meaning of words relating to the Context, as they have an Eye to
what does go before, or to what does follow after, or to both, and the
Musicians have a mark or Arch commonly set at the end of a Song or Lesson to
signify the close or Conclusion. These things have foundation in Nature, that
the Spirit and Soul in breathing when tired out by long speech, may resume and
recover its forces and strength by due spaces and pauses, and that the Oration
and Sentence may thereby be rendered the more perspicuous and intelligible
Oration or Speech, I mean that which is in a perfect Sentence, complete in all
its parts and members, being as to the present matter in hand, a distinct
complexion of Hebrew words or a comprehending, or agreement of such words in a
Sentence, till the Sentence be brought to a just period or conclusion, whereby
the opinion, judgment, or sentence of the mind is brought forth in word or in
writing; which complexion is sometimes drawn out into more length, at other
times brought into a less shortness; Therefore the nature of the thing itself
does show the necessariness and usefulness of distinctions, which is to be
denoted by certain points, according as the parts of the Sentence are
imperfect, or the whole of it is perfect: so that those Hebrew punctations and
Accentuations, which do evidently point out these Particulars must be
acknowledged as natural and Essential to the right understanding of Scripture
Sentences in the Hebrew Tongue the 1 Samuel 18. 18.
Scripture in the Margin may be taken for an instance; as also the 111 Psalm.
where every distinct point of a Sentence does begin with a second letter
according to the order of the Hebrew Alphabet, whereby this Doctrine of
Punctations is commended and preserved and secured in the very nature of the
Letters, which is noteworthy. The same has a like remark set upon it in the 112
Psalm, as observable.

The Book of the Proverbs is full of Distinct Sentences, where the members of
the Sentences do Naturally distinguish themselves, either, by the comparison,
similitude, opposition or such like, Even instruments of music, as well as the
voice of the musician has 1 Cor. 14. 7, 8. 2 Timothy 2. 15. Lev. 1. 6. (...).
Distinction, not only for sound in Tunes and in Notes as opposed to union, nor
only for time, but also for the parts of the Song. The Holy Scriptures are
distinguished into its several Sections; the word of truth must be Rightly cut;
as the Dissecting of the offering was to be into the Natural pieces and parts
thereof; which did figure the office and work of a Minister of Christ in Church
Assemblies; It might not be a confused handling, or a disordered mangling, but
it must be the Natural parts, both in reading, and interpreting. The
Pronunciation and the reading Neh. 8. 7, 8. Lev. 24. 12. Job 23. 12. Det. 27.
8. (...) in Piel, expressit verbis aut characteribus.
should be according to the writing, as the Mouth of Jehovah had spoken it, and
as it is written in Characters words, and Sentences. How monstrous therefore
was that evil invented fiction of those Hebrews who were so bold as to affirm,
that, Jehovah Aelohim spoke the ten words or commands at one moment of time,
all and every of the letters, Syllables, Words, sentences in one breath without
any interspiration, pause, or distinction, as if it had all of it been but only
one continued word; whereas, how could it be understood, if it were not uttered
distinctly? and if it were not understood, how could it be obeyed? How could it
be said that Aelohim spoke all those Exodus 20. 1. and 34. 27, 28. Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
words, and that Moses wrote words, the ten words, if they had been all but one
such confused Indistinct word? which expression of words, is used for whole
sentences or commands; as Paul says elsewhere, Gal. 5. 14.
one word, when there were diverse words in it, and when he rehearsed the sum of
all the Commandments of the Duties of man toward his neighbor: Mar. 7. 13.
Mat. 15. 6.
what also in one place is called the word of God, in another place is called
the commandment of God; and this must be after the tenor, rather over or upon
the Mouth, so is the Hebrew, of these same words.

The Greek of the New Testament does also give us further light in this
Subject Matter; Luke 4. 17s. Act. 8. 32. Heb. 2. 6. and 4. 4. and 5. 6. (...) 1
Pet. 2. 6. Romans 10. 18. Heb. 3. 7. Mat. 21. 13. John 8. 17. Mat. 1. 22. Mat. 2.
17. Mark 12. 26. Act. 1. 20. and 13. 33. Col. 3. 16.
where we may meet with words that do signify and set out, sometimes an whole
Book or Psalm, at other times an whole entire matter treated of; a
comprehension or complexion, a certain text or versicle of Scripture; an entire
sentence or part of a sentence. A part of Scripture is mentioned, where neither
the Penman of that Book is named, nor the particular place in that Book; or,
the holy Spirit, the Inspirer and Inditer is named; or such a phrase is made
use of as is mentioned Indefinitly; or, in general terms, it is written; or In
the law it is written; or a prophet is Indefinitely spoken of, but not
particularly named; or, their Name is expresed. We should be so well versed in
Scripture, so familiarly acquainted with it, It should so Indwel in us richly
In all wisdom, that, as soon as any sentence, or member of a sentence, or part
of the distinction of a member is spoken of, we should know it, that it is a
Scripture-Testimonie or Scripture Phrase, although the particular Book, Place,
sentence, or clause, be not expressed. There are some Accents in the Hebrew,
which some do call King-Accents, because they do posess the Chief Stations, and
do most distinguish the sentences, called pauses and Distinctive-Accents:
Soph-pasuk, Eccles. 12. 13. Acts 8. 32.
that which puts an end of the sentence, and is the period of it, they express
by two words; the former of them does signify An End, and is so taken in
several Scriptures, particularly in the closing up of that Book of Solomon's,
called Ecclesiastes as the pause at the ending of it, an End of all this word
has been heard, or we will hear; this same Aelohim fear thou, and those
commandments of his keep thou; for, this All that Adam; Because, Al-that-work
these -Aelohim will bring in-judgment over all that is hidden, If good, and If
evil: and, the other word, which is translated place of Scripture, in a passage
of the Acts of the Apostles, is retained in the Syriac, denoting a cessation,
as when one does cease to read, and does shut the book; It puts an end to the
section or sentence of a Scripture, when the reader puts a stop, or makes a
pause. Hence the Hebrews do call these Distinctive Accents (...)
by a name, which has its meaningof Tastes, or Relishes, because, to a right
judging-spiritual discerner, they do indicate and discover, what the nature and
sense of every speech is, as the palate does judge of meat by the Taste and Relish
of it. Those, who would find out more of this kind of Hebrew Learning, let them
industriously dig deep to come at Hebrew roots in their proper significance and
apply themselves Joh. 16. 13. 1 John 2. 20, 27.
unto the holy Spirit for teaching, as others have done: In the supplies of
which Good Spirit (whose office and work it is from the Father and from his Son
Christ to lead into all truth, and to anoint with such a spiritual Unction
whereby they may know all things) the writer and composer of these few sheets
does intend, if life and liberty be continued, to set about the Practical part
of this Science of Sciences, and Art of Arts, as any young hopeful sons and
Disciples shall be willingnesses in the day Christ's Power.

The method and mode of Arguing and Disputing about any matter of profitable
Inquiry in any Useful Art or Science, will be this, according to the Scriptures.

The Lord has given us a Full Treasury of useful Knowledge in his word, did we
thoroughly apprehend, prize, and improve it; in so much as that, there is
sometimes more in the right understanding of one Hebrew word (For instance, the
first word of the First Psalm, (...) in its Full significancy, than in all the
Commentaries that I have met with upon that whole Psalm: as This word, O the
Happy goings on, with a straight foot! Or, O the blessed progresses with a
straight foot! The Root of this word, is Ashar, in Piel, Ishsher, he went with
a straight foot, he went happily, he walked on in a right way: This one word
rightly understood, does cast a shining light upon the whole drift and Scope of
the Psalm; which is to discover, who and what they are who do make an happy
progress in the Christian Religion, and what choice Privileges they are, which
such holy Proficients do enjoy: This is more particularly and expressly
described, negatively, such a man is one, who has not walked in the Council of
the unjust, nor has stood in the way of sinners, nor has fate in the seat of
the scornful: For, Experience will convince Evidently, that he who has thus
walked, stood, and set, (the Hebrew Phrase by the time past being often used to
set out continued actions) he will be thereby hindered in his religious journey,
and lose much of his precious time; Then positively, such a man is one whose
delight in the Law of Jehovah, and who in his Law will meditate Day and night;
because, if he have done so, do, and shall do so, This will put him onward, and
set him forward in the way of the LORD. The holy Spirit will bear witness with
his Spirit unto the Truth and goodness of This to his clearer Evidence, and
sweeter satisfaction; And then shall he be As a Tree planted by brooks of
waters, which shall give his Fruit in his season; and his leaf shall not fade,
and whatsoever he shall do, shall prosper; when others are fruitless and
fading, and unthriving, as to any Spiritual, holy, good Progress: he shall be
confirmed, established, and not so moved, whilst the unjust shall be As Chaff,
which the Spirit or wind, drives it away; he shall be justified and stand
upright in judgment, when others are condemned and cast; he shall have
Church Communion and Gospel-fellowship in the Assembly and Society of just
ones; which the unjust shall not be so privileged withal; For, Jehovah will
know, he will acknowledge this way of such just ones, wherein they make such an
holy happy Progress; whereas the way of the unjust will and shall perish; they
and their way together shall be done away; decay, be lost, not regarded, but
rejected; note this well, what a Storehouse of practical religion there is
contained sometimes in one Hebrew word.

It has been puzzling, disturbing, distracting, and discourageing unto many in
their endeavors and Studies after the knowledge of the Hebrew tongue, that, in
most of the Hebrew Lexicons, they meet with so many various, and sometimes
contrary significations of one Root; which does so leave them at a loss, that,
they are under a temptation to throw away their Books, and to conclude, as if
there were scarce any certainty in this Kind of Knowledge: whereas, the
Scriptures of Truth copied out in the true real nature of created Beings, is
the one and the only Book of books (where rightly and thoroughly understood,
believed, experienced, lived, and practiced) for infallible certainty of useful
Science, which Philosophical writings (...), Academica, qui Academici negabant
aliquid posse comprehendi, idest, intelligi certo, from a, privativa particula,
and (...), deprehendo apprehendo.
of vain affecters of human wisdom are not. Therefore this also would I further
commend to those who are Gifted and Graced for and called to, such a work of
Works, (and so others, who having estates might do much in their place for
encouraging and promoting of it by large Contributions that way) that, in
writing of Lexicons, in translating of the Orginal Scriptures into
Mother-Tongues, and in giving forth the interpretation and meaning of Hebrew
words and phrases, they would keep close to some only one certain proper
signification of every distinct Hebrew Root; and that, the Sap and juice of
that significancy may run itself into every one of the branches, boughs, limbs,
fruits, and leaves, which do spring from thence; so will the True and Genuin
meaning have more clearness and Compare Genesis 18. 23. Eccl. 7. 16, 17. Prove. 21.
18. Eccless. 3. 16. Deuteronomy. 25. 1, 2. Prove. 17. 15. Psalm. 37. 33. consider the
Hebrew of Psalm. 121. 2.
certainty. The most Proper significancy of diverse Hebrew words is best
discerned, by their opposites, from words of a quite contrary meaning: * As, he
who would find out the true signification of, Reshengnim, must inquire, what is
the right understanding of, Tzaddikim: if the one do set out such as are just
ones, justified ones, then the other must denote these who being unjust, not
justified. How holy a Mystery, How full a Treasury is there sometimes in one
Compound-praeposition in This Tongue of Tongues? Take a short hint of this, My
help, said the Psalmist, From-with Jehovah, who making Heavens and Earth; it
has been so, is so, will be so, from Him, as the Author, and Giver of it; yet
so from Him, as that, it is with Him; He must preserve and keep alive what of
help he does actually afford, and he continually gives more. Oh! who can enough
sigh at, and cry over, the neglect of an exact version, or translation of the
Original Scriptures, word for word, without adding or altering, into the Mother
tongues, as they commonly call them, because, they are such as their Mothers do
teach their Children in the several Country's where they are born and bred?
whereas, in True propriety of speech, The Hebrew tongue is the only
Mother Tongue, as the most ancient original Tongue, all other Tongues, being
daughter tongues at the Babel-Confusion of Languages, each of which does retain
and borrow somewhat of and from the Hebrew.

This is an ingenious Age in almost every Art and Science else, which the
Virtuosi of the times are set much upon highly to advance, and greatly to
promote in their several sorts of Learning, though it does appear to me,
through a God-taughtness, they lay aside, at least the Best, if not the only
way of through obtaining of a Satisfying Knowledge, which is the Holy Spirits
teaching in the written word and in Created Beings according to that word? and
what? must this only, of all other ways, be laid aside? Oh how often, have I
bewailed it, with yearning bowels and compassionating pittyings over the
precious Souls of the Sons and Daughters of Adam, that, so many rich truths
should lie so much concealed from them, wherein their Temporal, Spiritual, and
Eternal good is so much concerned, either by giving them no translation of the
Scriptures in their own Country Language, or by putting of them off with such
a corrupt and defective, such a dark misinterpreted translation in some places,
as does hide so many profitable parts of Religion from them, which yet
Jehovah-Aelohim has graciously vouchsafed to them in Holy Writ. How many large
Incomes and great estates have been sinfully misspent, and prodigally wasted of
late years in England by riotous living and such like Sensual bestialities,
which will pass heavily upon account another day, when the Righteous judge of
All shall sit upon their case, and reckon with such; and how many others are
there who with the Horseleach are still crying, Give, Give, still coveting more
Gold, and Silver, Houses and Lands, and still more, being never satisfied?
whilst scarcely can one man be found, who first lays up, at least that portion
of Gods part, the tenth part of his incom, and who also lay's by more of the
rest, that, upon a clear call and just occasion he may have by him a
considerable sum for the carrying on of some eminently useful work for the
Honor of our Lord, and for the good of Souls, and the Blessing of Nations?
such a work especially as this is, which I am now upon? If there be a new Bridge
to be raised, or a new great gate or Gate House to be built, or a conduit to be
set up, or a Superstitious Aedifice to be Superstructed, or some such
London-Monument to be erected, the present Lord Mayors will lavish out of their
Baggs to have their names Engraven and their Majoralties recorded, to be read
in the stones: In such cases, It is who can be the chief Overseer of such a
work, some Prince, or Noble man, or rich Merchant is ambitious, at the
Foundation or Finishing of such a great public structure, to lay on, or cause
to be laid on in open view the first, or the last stone, one or both of which
stones it may be, they will lay with their own hands, Zech. 4. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and then, O what shouting outcries, and joyful Acclamations are there sounded
forth by the people! But, where are the Zerubbabels and Joshuahs, who will set
their hands to this new Temple work, this later day-glory-work; and where do
such Prophets, and such sons of the Prophets, as of old in Samuels, in Elijahs,
and in Elisha's days dwell?

what entertainment this printed paper may have upon the hearts of any into
whose hands it may be received, I have referred and committed to his care who
has the hearts of the great ones in his hand, Praying Longing, and waiting for
the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the conspicuous appearance of his
Personal Presence, when there shall be larger pourings out of his Spirit, and
when some shall come forth so clothed with that Spirit, when Isa. 19. 18.
Zech. 3. 9. Isa. 34. 16. Acts 14. 13. 1 These. 3. 13. 2 These. 2. 8. Heb. 9. 28.
1 Timothy 6. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 10. and 4. 1, 8. Titus 2. 13. Jude 14. Isa. 32. 15. and
44. 3, 4. and 59. 19, 20, 21. Ezekiel. 39. 29. and 47. 1-12. Joel 2. 28, 29. Zech.
4. 6. and 12. 10. Rev. 1. 4. and 2. 7, 11, 17, 29. and 3. 1, 6, 13, 22. Mat.
24. 29, 30, 31. Mal. 4. 5, 6. Rev. 1. 7. and 22. 16-21.
the lip of Canaan, the Pure lip, shall be turned to Jehovah's new
Vovenant People, and shall be Spoken by, not only such as are born and bred
Hebrews, but others also; when Jehovahs book shall be more searched after and
into from above, and when it shall be more crowned with good success upon
hearts, who shall here below set to their Seals unto that Testimony which shall
by miraculous Attests from Heaven be given by the Author of that word of his
grace. Even so, come Lord Jesus Amen: Hallelujah.

POSTSCRIPT.
The Author intends Freely to impart, what in his Measure he has Freely
received, to any Sons whom the LORD shall make willing to be Christ's Disciples
in this School. About Three-times in every week there will be these Exercises;
One about the proper significancy of Original words and phrases: Another about
Philosophy: A Third, about Textual Sermons: To which may be added a Specimen or
Example of some particular Art or Science.


