Vindiciae Poedo-Baptismi: OR, A CONFIRMATION OF AN ARGUMENT Lately Emitted for
Infants Baptism: IN A LETTER To a Reverend Divine OF The Church of England.

By R.B. M.D.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Prince's Arms in Ludgate Street.
1685.

SIR,
I Was at the Point of making a Resolution before I received yours (of June 9.)
wholly to neglect that Libellous Disputation (as it is called) between a Doctor
and an Apothecary; as a thing that does not only betray the Unsincerity, the
Artifices, the Impotent Passions of him that wrote It; but that to a Prudent
and Judicious Reader, does (as is said of the Viper) carry in its own Bowels,
Causes that in time will destroy it.

But seeing you Advise me that it may not be unfit that something be said to
it; and I know we ought not to have too good an Opinion of the World, which
generally, being malicious, and invidious, is apter to take impression from a
witty Calumny and Detraction, than from the soundest and most solid Reasoning
and Argument, on these and the like considerations, I now resolve to Reply.

But in doing so, that I resemble not my Adversary, whom not only I, but many
sober and indifferent Persons do condemn for Impertinence, for Falsehood, for
Bitterness, for Peremptoriness and Presumption, and for such other Courses as
(to use the Expression of a Noble Person) tend rather to Rumor and impression
in the Vulgar sort, than to the likelihood of any good Effect. For this Reason,
I am determined in Replying to him, to propose unto my self for my Example,
That wise and Religious Bishop of whom when he returned Answer to a Pamphlet
much (it seems) of a nature like to this before me. My Lord Bacon says, That he
remembered that a Fool must be Answered, but not by becoming like unto him, and
considered the matter which he handled, and not the Person with whom he dealt.

The Points therefore that I will go upon, shall be only these: First, To show
nakedly and truly the Occasion of my engaging with my Adversary in this
Controversy. Secondly, To show the Unfairness of his Proceeding in the Public
Management of it, together with the motives, which (as I suppose) induced him
to the Unfairness. Thirdly, To Note but as it were in passing, and by the By,
the Undue Aspersions which he casts upon me, in reference to my Argument;
together with the Malice is in them. Fourthly, Briefly again to state the
Argument I made, and to demonstrate, That as it is not a Log (as he calls it)
nor Uncouth, so that he is still extremely Affrighted at it. (for he dares not
touch it;) and still has cause to be so.

As for my Engaging with him; the first Occasion (as I have said already) was
purely Accidental, and it was drawn on I scarce know how; he says, by the
importunity of the Lady, my readiness to comply with it, and his unwariness;
and let it be so. But a casual, passing, undesigned Discourse it was; a
Discourse that as it did begin, so I thought it would have ended in the same
place; for my part, I scarce had one Thought of it afterward. But as for any
Insulting upon him, of which he now complains, and never before that I know of;
and with which he thinks to bespeak the Affections of his Readers (for indeed
he needs them) and to excuse his own Acerbity; he cannot produce one Witness of
any; I am sure, by me: I can many, even of Persons that were present at the
whole Discourse, to Attest the Contrary. But that he was Insulted upon, and
that (in his own Terms) his Sword was as it were broken over his Head, and with
Triumph, you must believe it; and yet all the while, the Weapons on both sides,
(They) were but Words; and you can hardly think, He lost His, THEN; who, still,
speaks Swords and Daggers.

But you will tell me; Well: All this, hitherto, was but a Transient Accidental
Discourse, such as might happen every day, when Persons meet who are of
different Persuasions, and there is an End. But how came it afterward to be so
Solemn, and so Deliberate, as from Words that are but Birds in the Air, to
become Writings, which are as Bears at the Stake? Truly as to this, one would
think, by what my Adversary writes, and by the Fashion in which he writes, in
his Epistle, and in Page 16. 17. that nothing but Resentment on his part, of
the Insolence and Affront that then was offered Him, and a motion of Vanity on
mine, to Answer his Challenge, drew on this second Engagement; Little else can
be inferred from what he has written concerning it. But indeed, on my part it
was nothing less than so, and nothing less on his neither, Pretendedly; for all
was Conscience, nothing but Conscience and enquiry after further Light, with
which in a Letter that he sent me above a year and half (he calls it in his
usual figure, Sometime) after, he importuned my Answer, and prevailed. For who
is there, but would have believed (as then I did) that it was Conscience, pure
Conscience that Acted him; if he had received from him (as I had) a Letter so
concernedly Penned, and with so much movement: with so much importunity, and so
much seeming sincerity; and if he knew him not any better than I did at that
time; for thus his Letter, bearing Date Sept. 9. 1681. does speak in so many
words.

UPon this Occasion Honored Sir, (and that Occasion was a motion he made me,
about Perfecting the Printing and Publishing of a Book of Dr. Worsley's) I
shall also take the boldness to remind you of a Conference you were pleased
sometime since to entertain with my self upon the subject of Infants Baptism,
when you were pleased to insist upon the Covenant made with Abraham, wherein
God Promised to be a God to him and to his Seed after Him; from whence you
Argued, that in as much as by Virtue of that Covenant both Abraham and his Seed
after him were to receive the Sign of Circumcision; and in as much as the
Apostle does expressly tell us, that the Blessing of Abraham was to come upon
the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ; it thence followed, that the Believing
Gentiles and their Posterity also, as being the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, had
a Right to Baptism, which is the Seal of the same Covenant under the New
Testament Administration. Having since that time therefore Revolved this
Argument of yours in my Thoughts over and over, I could not satisfy my
Conscience till I could either come to some satisfactory clearness in my own
mind concerning the Cogency thereof, or otherwise till I had drawn up something
or other in writing, that might at least be a sufficient Justification unto my
Self in the way of my present Practice. And after many fervent Addresses and
Petitions to Heaven, that as I might not mistake my way, so that I might not
Oppose or neglect any part of the Heavenly Truth; I have at length drawn up the
Enclosed paper, which I do therefore now humbly offer to your serious
consideration, with this Earnest desire, that if after all that I have now
said, you shall yet Judge me to be under a mistake in the Present Point in
reference to my Opinion about the spiritual seed of Abraham, that you will
please at least to suggest to me what you think may be substantially Objected
by way of opposition thereunto. I hope dear Sir, that it is the Investigation
of Truth that both you and my self also do aim at, which should be Dearer to us
than all the World besides; and therefore if notwithstanding what I have now
offered, you shall still apprehend that I have mist it in my present Search and
Reasonings concerning it, I beseech you to endeavor my Correction and better
Information therein.

I have indeed drawn up the Enclosed Paper by way of Postscript to a large
Discourse in Reference to Infant Baptism, which I had before Compiled, wherein
I do consider and give answer to all the most material Arguments which are
usually Insisted on for the Justification of the Practice of Infant Baptism.
And therefore also in the Present Paper you will perceive that I do touch upon
some other Arguments than what you were pleased to Insist upon in the
formention'd Conference, that I had with you upon this subject. I know dear
Sir, that you will not be Offended with me for making thus bold with you, and
that you will not Reject what may be substantialy offered for the discovery of
Truth, though by never so mean a Hand. Now that God would be pleased at length
to send forth his Light and his Truth, that all that Love and fear him may
Serve and Worship him with one heart and with one shoulder, according to the
Primitve Pattern, is the Earnest desire of your most Affectionate and Humble
Servant P C.

Now Sir, is there in this whole Letter the least Insinuation of any Resentment
in him? the least of any Insulting over him? or Abuse put upon him? in that
which here himself calls but a Conference; the softest word in the world? If he
had any Resentment at that time, how often has the Sun gone down on his Wrath!
How deeplv was it dissembled! how subtly masked over with the fair Pretenses
of Conscience! of Enquiry after further Light! and of Longing for Satisfaction!
and All, how faced with seeking of God! -- This Letter was that which drew me
on in this business; which being a Business of Conscience, as I then believed
it, (and who in my Circumstances but would?) I pursued it in my first Reply,
with all the Fairness and Candor imaginable: But was Answered with so much
Presumption, Asperity, and Arrogance, that I must have been as void of Sense,
as He of Civillity, and Sincerity, not to have seen at last (though somewhat of
the latest) that it was not Conscience, and a willingness of Receiving, or of
Giving further Light, as was Pretended; but Rooted Malice, and a Lust of
Revenge that inspired him. Conscience was but the Bait, the Hook was uuder; Let
him Print his First, Second, and Third Answers, as he sent them to me, and then
let the World judge, if it went any less.

And this Reminds me of the second Head on which I am to Discourse to you, and
that is, of the unfairness of his Proceeding in the Public management of this
business; and of the Motives, that (as I suppose) Induced him to this
unfairness.

His unfairness is, that when it was but Letters only that had been Written by
him to me on this Occasion, and Letters only that are Referred to by me in
those I Published: as also, seeing I wrote not any but on this urgent
Importunity; and when I Printed what I wrote, I was so Candid, so Just, and so
exact, that in the Publication which I made, as I Omitted nothing so I added
nothing but what I put a Mark upon, that all the world might note it. I say the
unfairness is, that, for all this, this seeker of Truth and one who as himself
tells us, daily prays for the desirable Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace, that he instead of Publishing the Letters which Indeed he sent, and as
he sent them, should Print a Base and Fictious Disputation that never was in
Reallity, as the Sum of all the Letters that went between us. Where as indeed,
he but presents the World with Pieces, and Patches, both of his own Letters,
and of mine; and withal, in those Patches (he) so Industriously Disguises,
Alters, and abuses the Argument I manage, that it is as impossibly to see it in
his Libel in its true Proportions and Figure, as to believe, that Base and
Barbarous Methods (such as these he uses) are Proper means, either of Attaining
unto the Bond of Peace, or, unto the Unity of the Spirt. Thus four Letters,
which are the Main ones, are suppressed; the first of which I even now
repeated. This is his unfairness.

The true Motives, why he did not Publish his Three first Responsory Letters,
his Second, Third, and Fourth, as well as his Fifth, and Sixth, (for why he
supppessed the First of all that was sent, is Evident enough, from what has
been declared already,) may Probably be presumed to be these (following.)

First, He did it, to hide from the Observation of his Readers, the Just causes
I had of making those Complaints I did in my Letters, of his unfairness,
Rudeness, and Vanity? of his bold Assertions, without Proofs, his Cunning
Evasions, instead of direct Answers; his always partial, and often false
pretended Repetitions; and his Triumphs before the Victory etc. which undue
Proceeding, used without any provocation or any Examaple by me, and that too,
by a man that breathed nothing but Conscience, but desire of Satisfaction, and
seeking of Light in the business, and all this after seeking of God; should it
be apparent in his Letters, as undoubtedly it is, and I believe he is Conscious
it is; as it would have had an aspect not very pleasing unto most others, so
possibly it might awaken in some of his own party that mean well, and are truly
Conscientious, very strange apprehensions, not only of his humor, carriage, and
conduct, but even of the main of his Cause. This likely he foresaw.

Secondly, He chose to act his part by way of a Dialogue, rather than of
Letters, to hide from the Eyes of his own Party, the Strength and Cogency of my
Argument; which being Harmonical, the force and power of it lies in the Joints
of it, and in the Reference of its parts; so that, either by the Dividing and
Mangling of the parts, or by the Hudling and Confounding of them together,
(both which, at times, he has done, in his Dispute,) the force thereof is
unseen, and is lost. And indeed, as he has managed the business, he might well
hope to persuade his own Party, whose hands likely would be as full of his
Books, as empty of mine, that I had said nothing in my Argument but what he
there Repeats of it; which is as true, as that the whole Chapter of the first
of Genesis is in the Contents of it; he never giving but an imperfect summary
(and that too, many times, with a mixture of falsehood) in the Report he makes
of what I did propose to be proved; but he mentions not the very Proofs
themselves, of what I proposed. This will appear most manifestly, by but
comparing his Pretended Disputation, with my Printed Letters. Had he only
Printed His Letters, some of his own Party Probably, those of them that are
Just and Prudent, would have had recourse also to mine. But now, his
Disputation speaking all on both sides, they may think, there is no need of
that.

Thirdly, it was done to hide the Advantage I had over him in the course of the
Argument; how I gained ground, by what steps, and with what Mediums; as also,
to conceal that Tergiversation shifting and shuffling; that declining the force
of my Argument; and that Insisting on little things that are by the by; with
other such like Artificies, of which I accused him. All this is hinted in my
Letters, and he was not ignorant, it would be plain by his own: Let him show
the Contrary else, by Publishing them. Half an eye may easily discern, that the
controversy was almost at an end, before his fifth Letter was written; which
yet, is the first he Publishes. And surely, what ever he says, more was in it
then a bare Respect and kindness to his Reader, to whom (as he tells us P. 66.)
he would not be burdensome; Ay, there was also some little mixture of kindness
and Respect unto himself, he knew the Burthening of his Reader (for Burdened
certainly he would be, if judicious and Considerate, with Verbosity without
sense; with Common placing without discretion; with skirmishing about but
words; and with other such unseemly and Impertinent Artificies.) he knew, such
Burthening of his Reader in the Consequence would be a Renewing of that
Vexation and Anguish which he had found so grievous, and which he Bemoans so
much both in his Epistle, and in his book. P. 17.

And here, seeing I despair, with all the Provocation I can give, to succeed in
my design of induciug him to print entirely, and Bona cum fide, the suppressed
Letters which he sent me, I will therefore take occasion, from his Published
Animadversions, to make his other Readers sensible (for you are so already)
both of the Credibility of the former Motives, and of the truth of the charge
Employed in them; by observing (to them) out of many Instances that do occur,
but one or two for a taste. The first shall be of his Candor and sincerity,
the Second, of his way and Method in Arguing.

The First, which is of his Candor and sincerity, shall be in the Repetition
which he makes of the first Paragraph of my first Letter, in which he
purposedly, but ungratefully omits that part of the Period that Relates to the
Movement and Importunity with which he solicited, and even compelled me into
this business. For instead of adding (and so Importunate and Iterated Requests
to give you the Result of my most cool and serious considerations of what you
have done in it.) he knowing that a passage of that significancy, would make it
plain he was the first aggressor, at least as to writing, and that I came not
in but on his great Solicitation; and consequently, as it would detect his
great ingratitude, so it would interfere with what he often insinuates, about
the Rise of the Controversy. Therefore, he Craftily Omits it, and only draws a
Line; which only notes, that something is wanting, but no body could Divine, it
was this; the sense going on so smooth without it.

The former, is one instance of his ingenuity and of his sincerity, but we have
another which does much resemble it, ( viz.) that of publishing to the world
his Reflections on those little Points (for (...) you may see them to be so) in
the first Edition of my Letter, which my self had altered and amended in the
second; for though he knew I had Corrected and altered them; yet he slily
insinuates in the margen of his dispute, (P. 28 and 32) as if he had not known
it, and that the alterations are only in the Print: whereas, I printed nothing
in my Letters but what I first sent him, Except That in my Last, of which I
advertised the Reader, and which I marked with an Asterisme. This is so great
an imposture on his Readers, and so great an abuse, that (P. 65.) even himself
does offer something that might pass for an Extenuation, If this meanness of
his proceeding should ever chance to be Noted. But this is one of his arts
still; he kn^w that many would observe the wound he gives in the Margen, that
would not much regard the Balm he afterward applys, for the healing it; and the
less, because it is not applied directly. So much for his ingenuity and Candor.

As for his Method of Arguing; besides a gift he has of telling and Applying of
Tales, and of Capping of verses; he uses to pervert the words of his Adversary,
and in things of little moment, to raise a dust, and make great a do; either
to blind the Eyes of those that shall consider him, or to divert them, from
what is the main in the business; for with this, Especially if it be difficult,
he is but seldom used to meddle, at all; or if at all, not closely. To manifest
this, I but desire his Readers, that after the perusal of the Title Page of my
Book and of my Advertisement, they would observe his Reflections upon them;
both as to the matter of them; as to the manner of them; and as to the design
of them. How that for the matter of them, they are made upon words only; and
for the manner of them, upon words distorted from the proper and Genuine sense
of their Author; and for the design of them, that they are made to expose, and
abuse, and inodiate, and therefore some of them are often, and most maliciously
Inculcated; and all this, without the least consideration of what is material,
and substantial, and in confirmation of the Argument.

For, as he is Witty enough in little matters, to pervert the sense of his
adversary, to raise a Calumny on him, and to make things soberly said to pass
for ridiculous; so he is as wise in greater Matters, to avoid any touch of
them; and that for fear of his Head, which, he well remembers (Page 17) once
already was in danger, by having a Sword as it were broken over it. This I say,
is a Truth, and very manifest. For in my Advertisement, all that is done by way
of Argument (and that is no Inconsiderable part of it, the whole consisting of
but Nine L^aves, and Six of them are spent that way, under four considerations)
all this he wholly skips over: and, as if it was not, at all, his business, or
in his design, at all, to reason and argue, but only to Calumniate, Expose, and
abuse; he that has so many words for bad, or for Impertinent purposes, has
not one word for that purpose, which only became him. One would think a man so
much in pretentions of Conscience, and of nothing but Conscience in the case,
who did only seek to give, or to receive satisfaction, should have judged it
proper to have considered what was Argumentative; and that, whatever else he
did, he should be sure not to have left undone the thing that most Imported
those ends. But of this not one word, but while he is dealing in his Mint,
Annis, and Cummin, (and yet he is not for Tything) he leaves those greater
matters undone. I believe by this, that you will easily infer as I do, that
really it was not Conscience, as he at first pretended, in his Letter to me;
but it was Rouzed Courage as he tells his Reader, in the Epistle to him, that
made him so concerned, and so forward in this controversy. And he accordingly
manages it, not as a serious matter, a matter of Conscience, for light and
Information; but as a business of Quarrel, and of Vanity; only to recover (if
he can) his lost Credit, and that Field, which (as himself confesses P. 17.)
once he fairly left me, and now he would unfairly regain.

You see his unfairness in the Public Management of the business between us
which is the Second Head I propounded; I now advance to the third, which is to
Note (but briefly) the Unjust Aspersions which he makes of Contradiction and
Incoherence, and of Ostentation and Vanity, as he scents them in my Discourse;
and those he runs upon, under two Heads: the First, with Respect to the
Harmony; the Second, to the Novelty of it.

As to the Harmony, he says; First that I affirm in my Advertisement that in
this Controversy, there is no need of of Exactness of Critiscisme; and yet,
that I say, namely in one of my Letters, that Genesis 17. 9. 10. must be
understood Crittically: and that the Apostle was as Critical upon it as I, or
any other can be.

Secondly, that I say in my Advertisement, that I was concerned to see the
Article of Infants Baptism to Hang on Wyres, and by Geometry, and that I could
not see it owner of sure and solid Foundations, unless it be as in my Letters I
lay it; and yet in my Letters I applaud Mr. Baxter's Argument for it.

Thirdly, that in one of my Letters, I call the Opinion of antipedo Baptism a
Novelty; and yet had said in another, that it is probable that those who would
not suffer little Children to come to Christ to be Blessed, were of the
Persuasion of this Anabaptist. These are his Mountains Births as to the Harmony
of my Argument.

Really Sir, I know not how, without Blushing, and Begging of your Pardon, for
giving you the trouble of so great Imp^rtinencys, to Enter into Discourse of
things so Vain, so Frivilous; but since it must be done, I will endeavor to do
it as Little to your Disturbance, that is, with as much sobriety and
Tenderness, and with as little Amplification, as is Possible: I will but touch
on these matters, and note them, without Insisting and Staying upon them.

To his First Imputation then I say, that as one may understand a Text made out
and unfolded by a Crittick, who himself is no Crittick; so, that I spoke of
Exactness of Crittiscism; and of that too, as a Part of Humane learning; as is
Evident by the Coherence, where I spoke of it. Ay, and when in my Advertisement
I affirmed, that there was no need of Exactness of Critiscism, as to this
Business; I then did and with a direct Prospect unto what I had affirmed in my
Letter, both concerning Genesis 17. 9. 10. and the Apostle Paul's being Crittical
upon it; I say, I did add by way of Limitation ( for the main) that for the
main of the Controversy, there was no need of it. And indeed the Controversy
for the main of it, does not depend on any Crittiscism; much less upon
Exactness of Crittiscism, and least of all upon Exactness of Crittiscism as it
is a Part of Humane Learning; one need not to be a great Scholar, a great
Philosopher, or a great Crittick (as he must be, to be an exact one) to
understand that Text, or the Apostles Crittiscism upon it; which to, is not a
Humane Crittiscism, but a Divine.

To the Second, I grant I did say I was concerned, (and so I was) to see the
Article of Infants Baptism hang on wyres, and by Geometry; on which I did, and
do believe it to be hung by all that do not find it (as indeed it is, and as I
find it is, and as many others before have found it) inlay'd in the
Constitution of an Instituted Church, and in the Harmony of the Scriptures.
Those that lay it otherwise, do not lay it on its true Foundations. But I never
said as this Wyre drawing man, whose only business is to put me under Odium,
and Envy with all Partys, would make me say; That all before me hung it but on
Wyres; for Those did not, even according to that saying of mine, who founded it
on Abraham's Covenat, and in the Constitution of an Instituted Church; as many
did before me; and as even Mr. Baxter must; seeing the Membership of Children,
which is the Principal Argument he goes upon cannot be understood but with
Relation to the Constitution of a Church; and it is Inlay'd in the Covenant.
And where now I Pray you, Sir, is that Vanity or that Contradiction which this
Lincey'd man that Looks through stone walls has Espied, or rather Invented? I
say Invented; for when he Affirms ( P. 3.) that I said I could not see it
(meaning Infants Baptism) to be owner of sure and solid foundations, Unless it
be as I here lay it;) he Imposes Grossly; I said no such words; I only said,
(Unless it were Inlaid (as I find it is) in the very Constitution of an
Instituted Church, and in the Harmony of the Scriptures.) and many to be sure,
If not most now a days do take it to be so Inlaid; All do, that Ground it on
the Covenant of Abraham, though they do not All find it to be so in one way,
and in the same Method.

As to his Third Exception; Give me leave to tell you, that in the last
Paragraph of my first Letter, speaking of some that in our Saviors time, did
forbid little Children to come unto him to be Blessed, I said in a Parenthesis,
and as it were smilinglyly; not by way of Position as a thing on which I
Insisted, but only Pleasantly (that some (it may be of your Persuasion) etc.)
But such is the Judgment, the Exactness of Judgment of our great Disputer, that
he takes as spoken seriously, That which was but Pleasantly spoken; making it
to Contradict what other where I say, concerning the Novelty of his Persuasion.
And to persuade his Reader the better (for none that is mine can think so,)
that he has grounds for what he says; he falsely represents my words, and
makes me say ( Page 3.) That it is Probable, those that would not suffer little
Children to come to Christ were of his Persuasion. Is not this an honest
Disputant, or rather a cunning sophister? I said (some, it may be, of your
Persuasion. And, it may be, is but happily, and that at most, is but a
Possibility, and he has made Probability of it: in a word, has made a Serious
matter of what was only intended for a Divertive one. But of this I doubt not
but I shall hear again, and be Rhimed for it. In the mean time, I will Ask him
one hard Question, ( viz.) Where it is that I do say, (as he says I do) to this
purpose, (that it is Probable, etc.) sure he can never find it, but where he
finds, that Mahomet's Tomb at Mecca, to use his own Expression ( Page 5.) is
said to hang by Geometry; or that the Licians suffered none to propose a New
Law but at his Peril, ( Page 5.) and that is no where, but either in his own
Common-Place-Book, or (to speak in his own most Civil Language) within his own
Pericranium; and there, Magnetism and Geometry, Serious and Pleasant, Licians
and Locrians, Scotus and Sotus are all one: and not so much as Mensa, as a
Table between them.

I have ended with the Reflections which he makes as to the Harmony of my
Argument, the which you see, are so rarely Proper, and so Judicious, that you
may well believe (though he say it himself Page 64.) That his Reader will find
(namely in his Book) somewhat of Brain as well as Tongue: and somewhat of his
Brain you have already had, upon the Harmony of the Argument. Now, you shall
have somewhat too of his Tongue, upon the Novelty of it.

And upon this Head; First, He Gravely Informs me, that Innovators hear not
well among the Judicious) ( P. 4.) As if Anabaptists were not Innovators; but
all for Antiquity, and the good Old way. Secondly; He is again at his Tales,
that the Licians (he should have said the Locrians) suffered none to Propose a
New Law but at his own Peril) ( P. 5.) as if Arguments were Laws; or that
Infants Baptism were not settled by ours. In fine; He Adds, (and you may think
from Pure love) that the Church of England (by all means, He is much Concerned
for Her;) and all other the Assertors and advocates of Infants Baptism on the
Old Foundations, are more concerned in one Passage than He) (P. 5.) As if all,
of all orders, were fast asleep; and all like to be lost, unless a Goose a
Second time, should save the Capitol. You see Sir, his Extraordinary Courtesy
for the Church of England, as well as for other the Advocates and Assertors of
Infants Baptism But I hope this Church and those other Advocates and Assertors
of Infants Baptism, will not, for all that, be Wheedled into a Mistake. You may
be sure his Courtesy is but Polyphemus' s; Now indeed, He fights against one;
but know, he has a Reserve for all (you now must look to your Old Foundations;
He is Principally (P. 5.) at Present at least) only concerned about the new
one.) Mark that, ( at Present at least.) This Church, no more then others, has
no entire security (from him;) It is not a Peace but only a Cessation he
grants. ( He is at Present only concerned about the new one;) But time may come
for the old ones too; And Really, he is Provided already if such a time shall
come; For (as you had it before, in his Letter) He has a very Large Discourse
which he had before Compiled, in which he does Consider and give Answer to all
the most Material Arguments which are usually Insisted on for Justification of
the Practice of Infants Baptism, etc. The Church of England it seems (for all
his Kindness to her) and all other the Advocates and Assertors of Infants
Baptism (though now he claws them) might have heard of him sooner; Ay, and have
felt him too before this; but that, unluckily for my self, but luckily enough
for this Church, and for those other Advocates and Assertors, I did come in his
way; and now, the Cry is Novelty! Novelty!

Truly I think it very needless, (and I could wish that others thought so too)
to Vindicate my self from his Extravegancies upon his Topic, and to tell you,
That the Title Page of my Book on which he principally grounds Them, as it went
from me, was nakedly this: An Argument for Infants Baptism deduced from the
Analogy of Faith, and Harmony of the Scriptures. And what is added, if any
Imputation can be laid to it, of Gaudiness or Ostentation, it must be Put on
the Bookseller, as the Occasioner of it. I acknowledge it is said, that the
Method is wholly New, and that it certainly is; but it is not said as this
Disputer does Report it, That the Argument is wholly New. Method and Matter are
very different things, and in the very Title, where it is noted that the Method
is wholly New; it is said of the Grounds, and these are Matter, not that they
are wholly New, but that they are not commonly Observed. Implying, that they
may have been, and are, by some, Observed, though, Happily, not by every Body:
And who will say they were? And when I say, the Argument as I do manage it,
has little Authority; it is manifest I speak not of the Argument as to the
matter and grounds of it; but as to the Method and Form of Managing of it. I
say not, the Argument Simply, but the Argument as I do Manage it: the Method of
Management is mine, and is New; but the Grounds on which it is Bottomed are not
New; but are as Old as the Church, and as the Bible. In fine, to Alter Schemes,
is not to Innovate Articles: Schemes are but Dispositions of Matter, and may be
exceeding various, and often are, even where the Matter for the main is the
same. But what if the Argument were New, and all as New as the Method? Would it
to a Man of Conscience, a Seeker of Light, a Lover of Truth, go the less in
Value but for That, if it is Good? It is not Antiquity any more than Novelty:
It is Verity only, that ought to be considered by Conscience, and indeed that
is; for, as old Arguments are not Entertained by it, only, because they are
old. So new ones are not Rejected, only, because they are new. Dies diem docet:
but I may not so much Imitate the weakness of my Adversary, as to fall a Common
Placing, and therefore I say no more as to this.

Thus Sir, I have Followed my Adversary in his Prosecution of his two Topics,
Harmony and Novelty, and have considered his Reflections; and now, should very
gladly dismiss a Subject so unpleasant; and so little to Edification: but that
in a charge he makes upon me, both in his Epistle to the Reader, and in other
places, there is another Instance of his Falsehood, Malice, and Calumny, Proper
fruits of that Distemper ( zeal you must believe it for the abused word of God)
which (as himself tells you) did put him out of his Temper and warmed him.) And
this I might not omit, he says, ( He dares Refer himself wholly to his Reader,
whither I have not with equal absurdity ( for so he modestly Expresses it)
First, made Abraham the Representative of the Carnal seed. Secondly, Included
Baptism in the 17 th. of Genesis. And Thirdly, Excluded the first grand Promise
out of Genesis. 3. 15, etc. And he Wonders ( for he is given to Wondering,)
that I should see a command for Infants Baptism in Genesis 17 th. and not
discern a Covenant of Grace in the Third of Genesis. For this matter He dares
Refer Himsef to the Reader.) And indeed it is a daring matter.

For as to the First, that I should make Abraham the Representative of the
Carnal seed) As he Expresses it, simply and Absolutely; so, it is another
Calumny, and is Maliciously said; for in that very Letter in which I do Explain
my self as to this Particular, there ( P. 157.) my words are these; ( on the
whole, it is not absurd, if duly weighed, to say (which yet I do not
peremptorily say,) that in That part of the Covenant in which Abraham is joined
with the seed, He should stand for his natural posterity, as the seed does for
Christ Mystical.) And now let the Reader judge; am I not so far from a
possitive affirmation of what he says I make, that I say in Terms, I do not
Possitively affirm it? What I said, is Evidently said not by way of Position of
what I did conceive as certain; but by way of Proposal, of what was yet
Uncertain to me, but which yet might merit Consideration: and more is to be
said for it, than Happily this Disputer can answer. Indeed in Genesis 17. 10.
there, under the Term (ye) Abraham and Ishmael and the rest of the Family then
Present are Comprehended, and those I take it, did represent and stand for the
natural Family.

As to the Second, namely Baptism in Genesis 17;) I never said in Terms that
there was any Immediate Command for Baptism in Genesis 17. I knew the
Institution of Baptism was long after. I only said, and still say, that an
Obligation is laid in Genesis 17. 9. not only upon Abraham himself, to keep
the Covenant, that is, the sign of the Covenant, but upon his seed also; and
the Apostle says, that this seed is Christ, Christ Mystical, or the believing
Gentiles. And is this an absurdity? what I say, is in the Letter of the Text;
and what the Apostle says, I hope is no absurdity. I take it for granted,
because the Apostle says it, that the seed is Christ. To disprove that, is not
to Put the absurdity on me, but on the Apostle.

As for the Third, which is concerning the Covenant of Grace in Genesis 3. 15)
I still affirm, and still believe I may without absurdity, that though by the
seed of the woman in that Text, our Savior Christ be meant, and consequently,
that he is Predicted there, and was prefigured also in Sacrifices; yet, that
nothing there does pass by way of Covenant, or is spoken of Christ there by way
of promise to Adam; all is by way of Denunciation on the Serpent. I say, all
that is spoken there is spoken but to the Serpent, not to Adam; and let him
that thinks otherwise, but Look into the Text and see if it be not. I appeal
from unwarie Prejudices, unto Common sense. But of this, as I have spoken
somewhat in my Printed Letters, from Page the 99 th. to Page the 106. So I have
discoursed more fully (of it,) with Persons of a greater Caracter, and of more
Integrity and Candor, than our Present Disputer; wherein, one day, the Reader
may receive satisfaction. But for my Antagonist, he thought, This was a Popular
Point, and that it would Affect me, and therefore only he Insists upon it, and
so often Inculcates it; and is not this malicious? why had he not Argued it
out? as I Expected he should, but that it is much Easier to Exclaim and
Calumniate, than to Demonstrate and argue.

And now I am come (and very glad I am, that I am come) to the fourth thing I
promised; and that is, briefly to state again the Argument I made, and to show,
how little He is in his Reply unto that, who is so Great, in Callumniating, and
in Perverting. And the method I will take shall be, First, to lay down the
Grounds of the Argument, and then to form it.

The Ground I go upon is this, That the Covenant Established by God with
Abraham, and with his Seed, in Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. is the Covenant of Grace;
or that Original Grant, and Great Charter, by which Believing Gentiles always
did, and do Claim both Heaven and Earth, and all the Promises they have Title
to; As also, that Abraham is The Person By, From, and Under whom they Claim; as
being his Seed. If Christ's then Abraham's Seed, and Heir's according to the
Promise.

In this Covenant, as in all others that are Proper, there is, First, A Promise
on the One Part, and then, Secondly, A Restipulation on the Other: A Promise on
God's Part; and then a Restipulation upon Abraham's Part, and upon his Seed's.

As for the Promise that God does make to Abraham, and to his Seed, it is (
Verse. 7, 8.) That he will be a God to Abraham, and to his Seed, and will give
to Abraham, and to his Seed, etc. And this Promise made to Abraham, in which
Almighty God does give Himself, and all he has to him, is called by the
Apostle the Blessing of Abraham; of which he says, That it does Descend on the
Gentiles, Gal. 3.

As for the Restipulation, which is on the Part of Abraham, and of his Seed, it
is ( Verse. 9.) Thou shall keep my Covenant Therefore thou and thy Seed; In
which Restipulation, it being the main thing on which I do insist in reference
to my Argument, I shall (in order to the making Clear whatever any wise Relates
unto it, and so concerns our present purpose) Particularly consider, First, the
Nature of the Duty in it, Thou shall keep my Covenant, and show what is
imported in that Expression. Secondly, I will show the Propriety of this Duty,
that it is a Duty bound on Abraham by this Covenant, as his Proper Duty, in
Reference to it, and to the Blessing in it. Thirdly, I will demonstrate, That
the subjects in this Restipulation and Duty, or the Persons upon whom the Duty
and Incumbence is bound, are Abraham and his Seed, and that Abraham's Seed is,
Principally, the Believing Gentiles.

As for the Nature of the Duty, or what is meant by Keeping of the Covenant. It
was, at Last, Agreed between us (and I in my Argument, Fol. 132. 133.
Abundantly have Proved) that to keep Gods Covenant, which is the Duty enjoined,
is to keep the Sign of Gods Covenant; And it must be Granted Also, that to keep
the Sign, is, for him that keeps it, not only to wear that Sign himself, but to
put it upon all His, in Token, that as he Himself, so that All he owns, is
God's. This I proved in my First Letter, from Page 16. to Page 23. and
Confirmed in my Advertisement; to which I Add now another Consideration to make
it further manifest; namely, that in the Covenant, (and the Covenant for
Substance is but one and the same) whereas God is pleased to say in Genesis,
17. I will be a God to thee and thy Seed, and will give to thee and thy Seed,
etc. And therefore thou and thy Seed shall keep my Covenant, and to keep his
Covenant, is to keep the Sign of his Covenant. I say, whereas he speaks so in
Genesis, 17. he says in Jer. 31. 17. (where he Repeats the same Covenant,) I
will be their God, and they s^all be my People; what in Genesis is expressed by
their keeping of the Covenant or Sign, is in Jeremy Expressed, by their being
Gods Propriety, or own: So that, these are Equivalent Terms; and the keeping of
the Covenant of God (or his Sign,) is only to denote the Propriety that those
who are in Covenant with God do All Acknowledge, All Own that he has in them,
and in All theirs. And thus it was Interpr^ted to Abraham; who was not only to
be Circumcised Himself, but to see that all his Males, Old and Young were
Circumcised; and in his Males, who only were Actually Circumcised, and only
Capable of being so, the Females also were Reputed Included. For (as I said in
my former Discourse) as the Sign was directly given Only to the Males, so the
Promise also in Terms, was only to the Males, Abraham and Isaac; but then, as
the Females were Included in the Males in the Covenant (for who will deny
That?) so, by like Reason, they were included also in the Sign. It is but
Reason that Concludes the Former, and the same Reason will Conclude the Latter.
Besides, who will say the Females were Excluded the Passover? were they not of
the Congregation of the Lord, and Members of the Families, or Houses, in which
the Passover was Eaten, and by which? are they Excluded any where? And is it
not plainly intimated both by Maimonides and by other Rabbis, that even they
also did Celebrate that Feast; but yet, none Uncircumcised might.

Well then, the Duty bound upon Abraham, and upon his Seed by the Covenant, is
to keep the Covenant or Sign, by wearing of it themselves, and by putting of it
upon All Theirs, in Token of Gods Propriety. The Next Thing is, to show that
this Duty which is bound upon Abraham, and upon his Seed, by the Covenant, is
the proper Duty of the Covenant. And what can be more plain than that it is,
seeing, First, It is bound upon them in Reference to the Promise, as a
Consequence of it; I will be a God to thee and thy Seed, and I will give to
thee and thy Seed; There is the PROMISE: Thou shall keep my Covenant THEREFORE,
thou and thy Seed; There is the Consequent DUTY. And it is the only Duty
mentioned, as Required by God by way of Restipulation. And indeed, Secondly, it
is called Keeping of the Covenant, and therefore, must needs be bound upon them
by virtue of the Covenant, as the Proper Duty and Incumbence of it. In fine, it
is most highly reasonable that it should be so; For as God in this Covenant
Solemnly, by Promise and by Oath, does give Himself and All His to Abraham, and
to his Seed; Is it not most Fit, most Proper, that, by way of Correspondence,
Abraham and his Seed should Solemnly, (and that is by some Open and External
Rite, and Act, and such an Act and Rite, Signing is,) give up themselves and
Theirs again to God?

And here, by the way, it is Observable; That, seeing the Command to keep the
Covenant, is laid upon Abraham, and upon his Seed; and seeing keeping of the
Covenant is keeping of the Sign of it, in Token of God's Propriety; it follows,
That putting of the Sign on Children, and on Servants, is not done, at least
not Principally, by virtue of any Title, Right, or Privilege which these
Children, or Servants have, by virtue of their own immediate being in the
Covenant; but it is done, in Consequence of the Duty and Incumbence under which
the Parents and Masters are, by virtue of the Covenant in which they do
Restipulate, and so, take on them this Duty.

As for the subjects in the Covenant, or Those on whom the Duty and Incumbence
in it is bound, which is the Third thing to be Demonstrated, they are Abraham
and his seed, or Abraham and Isaac; and in Isaac, Christ mystical, or the
Believing Gentiles, Abraham's Spiritual Seed. And that Christ Mystical, or
Christ and Believing Gentiles are Intended principally, by the Seed; I
manifested in my First Letter, ( P. 24. 25.) in my Second Letter (from P. 128.
to 132.) and in my Last Letter, from Romans 4 th 13, 16, 17; which Text does
put it out of all question, that Isaac did not only Typifie and Figure the
Believing Gentiles in the manner of his Birth (as my Adversary would have it
only do,) but that he did also stand for them, and Represent them in the
Covenant of Promise. And if Isaac Represented the BelievingGentiles, and did
stand for them (as he did) in the Covenant of Promise, then Certainly whatever
Duty by virtue of that Covenant, was Bound upon him, That very Duty, by Virtue
of the same Covenant, was also Bound upon them; Else, how could he stand for
them and Represent them in it! This Interpretation of that Text is so plain, so
Evident, that even my Adversary in his Last Letter ( P. 115.) says, I well
Expounded Romans 4. 13, 16. 17.) but what he adds ( viz.) that I do so to this
Purpose, namely to Prove Isaac a Type and Figure of the Believing Gentiles in
the way and manner of his Supernatural Birth, to which our Regeneration in
Some sort Corresponds. That Is another Falsehood, another Impious Fraud, and made
on Purpose to deceive his Party; that when He cannot answer me, he may yet
Impose upon them. For that I had no such purpose there as he Insinuates, is
plain; for there I prove, that Isaac Represented the Believing Gentiles, or
spiritual seed, not only in the Promise; but in the Duty and Obligation also,
bound upon the seed by virtue of that promise; and I Appeal unto his own Party,
or to any man Else that is of sense in all the World, that will comparehis
Letter and mine, if this be not so.

This is the Ground on which I state my Argument, which thus I Form. If the
Believing Gentiles are under Abraham's Covenant, are Abraham's seed, and are
Principally meant in the 17 th. Genesis 9 th. Then, the Believing Gentiles are
to keep Gods Covenant: The Consequence is Evident, the Text is Plain for it;
Thou and thy seed shall keep my Covenant. And if to keep God's Covenant there,
be to keep the sign of his Covenant, by Wearing of it themselves, and putting
it on all theirs, in Token of Gods Propriety; Then if believing Gentiles be to
keep God's Covenant, they are to keep the Sign of it, by wearing of it
themselves, and putting it on all theirs, in token of Gods Propriety, and
Title: (Themselves must be signed, and, all theirs also must be signed.) Now,
the Believing Gentiles are under Abraham's Covenant, are Abraham's Seed, and
are Principally Meant and Intended in Genesis 17.9. as I have proved; and to
keep Gods Covenant there, is to keep the Sign of God's Covenant, by wearing of
it themselves, and putting it on All Theirs, in Token of God's Propriety in
them, and Title to them, as I have also proved before; and therefore the
believing Gentiles are to keep God's Covenant, God's sign, by wearing it
themselves, and Putting it on all theirs, in Token of Gods Propriety in them,
and Title to them; which Sign must be, either Baptism, or Circumcision, or some
other Sign.

But for the greater Elucidation, I will break the Argument abroad, into
shorter Sillogismes. Abraham's seed must keep God's Covenant; the believing
Gentiles are Abraham's Seed; Therefore the believing Gentiles must keep God's
Covenant. To keep God's Covenant is to keep the Sign of it; the Believing
Gentiles must keep God's Covenant; Therefore the Believing Gentiles must keep
the Sign of it. To keep the Sign of God's Covenant, is to wear it themselves,
and to put it upon all theirs, in Token of God's Propriety in them, and Title
to them; the Believing Gentiles are to keep the Sign of God's Covenant;
Therefore the Believing Gentiles are to wear it Themselves, and to put it upon
all Theirs, in Token of God's Propriety in them, and Title to them. Abraham's
Seed must keep the Covenant, and to keep the Covenant is to keep the Sign; Thou
shall keep my Covenant therefore THOU and thy SEED. A Sign of the Covenant
then, there must be in the time of the Seed; Else, how shall the Seed keep it?
they cannot keep the Sign of the Covenant, if the Covenant have no Sign. Some
Sign then the Believing Gentiles, which are the Seed, must keep, by wearing it
themselves, and putting it on All Theirs; and if any, Let this Disputer tell
(as I said) whither it shall be Baptism, or Circumcision, or what; for I need
to go no further. Only here, as we go along, it may not be Unfit, in Order to
the Preventing of further Calumny, to Observe, that when I speak in Reference
to a Sign, of taking it themselves, and putting it on All Theirs, I mean
nothing but their being Signed themselves, and their seeing that All Theirs be
also Signed; without Considering here, or intending to Consider, who is the
Minister of the Sign: But only who is the Subject.

This is my Argument, which in my Letter I did lay on four Propositions. First,
That the Covenant or Blessing of Abraham, which is the Promise of the Spirit,
is that Covenant of God, under which Believing Gentiles, the Spiritual Seed of
Abraham, Are: and is the Blessing that does Descend on the Gentiles. Secondly,
That All the Seed of Abraham, that has the Benefit and Advantage, of the
Covenant and Blessing of Abraham, is under Equal Obligation, to the Duty and
Incumbence of that Covenant, of that Blessing, as Abraham himself. Thirdly,
That the Duty or Incumbence arising from the Covenant, or Blessing made to
Abraham, is, That, in Token of his Dedication of himself, and of All his unto
God, he should take himself, and should put upon All His, the Sign of the
Covenant: which is the Mark and Sign of God. Fourthly, That from Abraham's
Dedication of himself, and of All his unto God, there arises a Distinction of
Holiness, into Internal and External, Absolute and Relative; and that This
Distinction is Evangelical. From these Grounds I drew the former Conclusion:
and you may take the Argument from them Briefly, Thus. The Blessing does
descend upon the Believing Gentiles, and therefore the Proper Duty of that
Blessing does Descend also: and this is the Proper Duty of that Blessing, to
see that both themselves, and all theirs be Signed, in Token of God's
Propriety: and the Believer, that gives himself sincerely, is Internally Holy:
and those that are given by him are Externally so. It Is you see in the former
four Propositions, (which even my Adversary himself does also Acknowledge, Page
25.) that the main strength of my Argument for Infants Baptism Consists: and
yet, it is Plain, that, hitherto, there is no need of any Criticism, much less
of Exactness of Criticism, and least of all, of Exactness of Criticism as a
Part of Humane Learning: either to Conceive, or to make it: But as it is, I
pray you let us take a View of his Reply unto it; Comparing what I say for
Infants Baptism, with what he Answers to That I say.

But before we do so, give me Leave to tell you, that his way of Replying
thrusts into my Thoughts a Story I have Read long ago in Keckerman, (and I hope
I may be Pardoned if I shall tell one Story, when he does many) It is, that a
Certain Respondent being Nonplust by his Opponent, and Unable to Conceive any
Sensible Answer to return to him, makes use of two Nonsensical, but strong
words, to Chouse him. If (says he) Mr. Opponent you do take it Archepadial^ter,
I grant it; But if Reflexive, I deny it: That is, if you take it Nonsensicaly
one way, I grant it; if you take it Nonsensicaly another way, I deny it: and
thus I take it, my Respondent deals with me; and he may be sure, and I believe
he knows it, that I have not been the only Person who have said so of him, on
this Occasion.

I hope, you will not think I go about to Abuse him, it is the very Truth I
tell you; for what Distinct, what Proper Sense is there in what he says in
Answer? or what Application of it can be made to either Proposition? which yet,
he would be thought to Reply unto; but, inded does only Elude: for, in Answer
to the several four forementioned Propositions, he speaks Thus.

In your first Proposition, I only allow the Spiritual Essence of the Covenant
to Descend upon Believing Gentiles; but that the Additaments and Appendages
being variable things, and separable from it, do not necessarily descend with
it I have Elsewhere at Large Evinced unto you. Here he should have told us,
what is the Essence, what the Spiritual Essence of the Covenant, and what the
Additaments, and should have Applied it.

In your Second Proposition, I Allow that the Seed of Believing Gentiles that
have the benefit of Abraham's Covenant, and to whom it is made, are under an
Equal Obligation unto those Proper Duties and Services NOW required of them, as
Abraham was Himself; Understanding it of the Adult Believing Offspring, and
not the Infants of Believing Gentiles. My Second Proposition speaks of the Seed
of Abraham, ( viz.) the Believing Gentiles: his Answer of their Children only.

In your Third Proposition, I Allow that the Believing Gentiles are Obliged to
Dedicate themselves and all that is theirs to God, as Abraham was. But in as
much as there is a double Dedication, the one by Baptism, and the other by
Religious Education and fervent Supplication, this Latter Dedication I Allow;
the Former as it Respects our Infant Seed, for the Reasons I have Elsewhere
given you I deny. I say there, that Signing is the Proper Duty of the Covenant;
what is This to That?

In your fourth Proposition concerning a twofold Holiness, External and
Internal, Absolute and Relative, arising from the Covenant, though I grant that
so it was under the former Administration, yet I have Elsewhere proved that as
for any External or Relative Holiness then Arising from the Covenant, it is now
Abolished. And as I have already also demonstrated that the first of Cor. 7.
14. does not at all prove the Continuation thereof in the Gospel-Day, so
neither is there any other Scripture that I know of, that can be Pertinently
Alleged, for the Justification of such a Notion. Though I grant that there is
an External and Internal Holiness now arising among Gentile Professors, the
Latter from the Covenant, the Former from a mere Pretension to it. You see his
demonstrations (as he calls 'em) His Proofs which should be Here, are all
Elsewhere. But what if they were here?

What in all This is to the Business in hand? for if the Promise or Blessing of
Abraham do descend upon his Seed, the Believing Gentiles; and the Proper Duty
of that Promise or Blessing (which Descends) does also Descend; and to be
Signed themselves, and to see that all theirs be Signed also, in Token of Gods
Propriety and Title, is That Proper Duty: then let him Talk Of Spiritual
Essence that does Descend, and of Appendages that do not; of Proper Duties and
Services now required of them, understanding it of Adult Believing Offspring,
and not the Infant Seed of Believing Gentiles; and that the Dedication must be
by Religions Education and Supplication, not by Baptism. I say, let him talk in
this fashion as long, as long as he lives: it will certainly follow for all
That; that the Proper Duty Now Required of Believing Gentiles, is to sign
themselves, and t o see that All theirs (their Children also) are signed; which
as I said, must either be with Baptism, or with Circumcision, or with some
other sign; Let him tell which, or what. For Mark it, shall the Blessing
descend, and not the Proper Duty of that Blessing? Is not to keep the Covenant,
as much a Duty Bound upon the Seed, as the Promise, a Blessing made to it? Ay!
is not Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore thou and thy Seed, as Plainly
said, as I will be a God to Thee and to thy Seed, and will give to Th^e and to
thy Seed? And if to keep the Covenant be, (as it is agreed to be) to keep the
Sign, Let him distinguish as he will, ( with Spiritual Essence, and Appendages;
with Proper Duty now, and then; with Dedication by Religious Education, and by
Baptism. That is, with Archepodialiter and Reflexive: Certainly, to keep the
Sign, is as much the Proper Duty of the Seed, and as much bound upon it, and
All as fast, as the Promise it self is made unto it: And if the Gentiles that
Believe, are (as I have proved, and as the Apostle says they are) That Seed;
Then, to keep the Sign, is as much the Proper Duty of the Gentiles, that
Believe, and as much bound on them, and All as Fast, as the Promise and
Blessing there, is made unto them. And this is not only high Reason, but God's
Express WILL: Thou shall keep my Covenant Therefore thou and thy Seed. It is
God's Mind, therefore it is to be done: and that this is a proper way of
Arguing, himself says, Page 27.

You may think it is impossible to speak more Plainly, and more closely to any
Point, than here I have to this; and that certainly the 17 th of Genesis 9 th.
is very much to purpose, as to an Obligation upon Gentile Believers or
Abraham's seed, with Reference to the keeping of some sign, and in the last
Result, to the keeping of Baptism; and happily you will think there needs no
more than what is said already, to make it manifest, and beyond Dispute. But
Sir, if these are your thoughts, they are not my Adversaries; he tells me
plainly, that if I will find a Rule as he spakes) in Genesis 17. or (as my self
do word it,) If I will find any Obligation there upon believing Gentiles to
keep the sign, in the way I have mentioned; it will be incumbent on me to
prove, First; my three Partys (as he calls them) in the Covenant there
mentioned. Secondly, my two signs; Thirdly, that Abraham Represented the
Carnal seed only in Circumcision, and Isaac, the spiritual seed in Baptism.)

I know it must exceedingly surprise you, to see me put on three new issues;
Especially, seeing in his fifth Letter ( P. 71.) All was fairly and Heartily
Agreed (for so he speaks,) to depend on two others, ( viz) the Duty and the
Subjects; And seeing also, he might as well have put me upon Proving that the
POPE is Antichrist, that the Earth is a Planet, or that there is a world in the
Moon, as on Proving the Points he Mentions; so little they are to the purpose.
For, whither three Partys are in the Covenant, or but two Provided Abraham's
seed be included in one of them, and that seed be Believing Gentiles: and
though but one sign be spoken of Determinately and Particularly, and no more,
and that one be Circumcision; Provided Genesis 17. 9. be understood of Signing
generally: and though Abraham Represented not the Carnal seed only in
Circumcision, nor Isaac the Believing Gentiles at all in Baptism, seeing he was
never Baptized: Yet, if Isaac Represented the believing Gentiles in the
Covenant, namely, in the Promise verse the 7 th. and 8 th. and in the
Obligation and Incumbence verse 9 th. Though he did not Represent them (as
Certainly he did not) in Baptism; (yet) It will as clearly follow, That the
Obligation and Incumbence which was Bound on Isaac verse the 9 th. as He
Represented the Beli^ving Gentiles, was, in him, in that verse bound on most
fast upon them; As, that the Promise and blessing which in verses 7. 8. was
made to him, was in those Verses, in him, made and Confirmed also unto them;
and if that Obligation and Incumbence be to keep the Covenant, and to keep the
Covenant be to keep the sign; they must as surely keep the sign, by virtue of
that Covenant; as, by virtue of it, hope for the Blessing. The Duty is as much
Bound on the seed, as, the Promise is made to it; Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore thou and thy seed. This ( I must tell him again) is as Plainly said
as, I will be a God to thee and to thy Seed, and give to thee and to thy Seed;
and the same Seed is under the Obligation, that is within the Promise. These
are not things that are barely said, but are Abundantly proved before, and
Evident in the Text.

I know he says ( P. 50) that as to what concerns the Obligation, there is
nothing in the whole 17 th of Genesis but what relates to Abraham and his
Natural Family any, etc. God only then designing to signify unto Abraham
together with his Natural seed and Family, what was their Present Duty under
the Then Present Administration) And that God did signify their Present Duty
under that Administration is beyond dispute; for therefore he Instituted
Circumcision, as that Duty. But that in that whole Chapter He should signify
nothing as Duty and Incumbence, but with Reference only unto Abraham and to his
natural seed and Family, can no more be said, than that he Signified nothing
there as a blessing promise and privilege, but unto Abraham and to his Natural
Seed and Family, only. For, the same persons, plainly, are in the Duty and
Incumbence, that are in the blessing an d promise, I will be a God to thee and
to thy Seed; I will give to thee and to thy Seed; and therefore thou and thy
Seed shall keep my Covenant. And who shall be believed? the Apostle that said,
that that seed is Christ, Christ Mystical; or this Disputer that says, no
seed is meant there, but the Natural Seed and Family. But shall the Seed indeed
be within the promise and blessing, and not under the Duty and Obligation? when
yet the same Covenant, and God in the same Continued speech, and to the same
Persons under the same Denomination, ( viz. Abraham and his Seed) does both
bind on the Duty and make the Promise: who, but such a Tender man as This is
will dare to say, that one must still abide, and the other be laid aside; that
we may take the blessing but leave the Duty? Certainly they that will not look
to the Old Testament, for new Testament Dutys, must not Look to the Old
Testament, for new Testament Privileges. We must not claim by the Old
Testament Promise and blessing, if we will not be under the proper Duty and
service, of that promise and blessing.

But to Return to his three Points, of which he says, it is Incumbent upon me
to prove them, if I will find believing Gentiles any wise concerned in the 17
tth. of Genesis, with Reference to Signing; the First is, my three Partys; the
Second my two signs; the Third, Abraham's standing for the Carnal seed in
Circumcision, and Isaac's for the Spiritual in Baptism.)

To the First, that the Covenant is Tripartite; though still I say as I have
said already, that, as to my Argument, I need not stand thereon; yet, it is
Evident enough, from what I urged in my last Letter, (P. 155. 156.) to which I
Expect a distinct Answer. And indeed, the three Partys are Distinctly Noted,
and are God, Abraham and Abraham's Seed; for first, the Covenant is made
between God, and Abraham, singly and separately, in his own person, Genesis 17.
2, 4, 5, 6. But then, in verses 7, 8, 9. Abraham's Seed is taken in as well as
Abraham's self; and so, the the Covenant, which, had it been only between God
and Abraham, would have been but Bipartite; Now, another party being taken in
or Added, Namely, Abraham's seed; becomes Tripartite.

To this, His answer is in the Sixth Letter, in which he glorys as Unanswered;
and there he says, (P. 121.) that there was a Covenant Between God the Father
and Christ, and after that a Covenant taking in all his seed, called the
Covenant of Grace, and (says he) does that make it Tripartite? are not Christ
and Believers considered as one Party?) you see how Theologically and how
Divine-like he speaks (if this be he that speaks and not some Supervisor) as if
the Covenant of Redemption, which yet (to Note it by the by) is never called,
in Express Terms, a Covenant, in all the Scripture; as if that Covenant were
the same (Covenant) with the Covenant of Grace, and that what passed Between
God the Father and the Son before the Worlds were, was the very same with what
passed between God and Abraham and his seed, in time. The Covenant of
Redemption indeed was Bipartite, it was between God and Christ only: But the
Covenant of Grace is Tripartite, between God, Abraham, and Abraham's seed or
Christ, for Isaac the seed, is Christ. In the Covenant of Redemption are but
two named, but in this Covenant of Grace are three Partys. But on this, as
being a Logomachy and strife about words, I do not much Insist.

The second Point to be proved, is, (he says) my two signs. And that Baptism
and Circumcision are two signs, is not hard to be proved; But doubtless, That
is not his meaning; he has the Confidence to say, That I do make two signs,
not only under the two administrations, but Two Determinate Particular signs in
Genesis 17. namely, Baptism in the 9 th verse, which says, ( but falsely,) I
call The sign; and Circumcision in the 10 th for says he ( P. 80.) thus Runs
your own Paraphrase upon the words; therefore thou Abraham and thy seed Isaac
in the Letter and Spirit, shall keep the sign of my Covenant, that is, both he
and they, and thou also must be Baptized. ( P. 114) he says; But say you though
Isaac was Circumcised, and Ishmael too, yet there are two signs in that Text
Circumcision and Baptism.) And ( P. 115.) He says, But that there is any such
sign as Baptism in Genesis 17 th. and that Isaac was signed by it as a Type or
Figure of the Gentile Believers (as you now seem to Affirm, and your Paraphrase
Imports) I deny etc.)

You Sir, who have Perused my Letters, know very well how false and how
Imposturous an Imputation this is; and Bad is that Cause, which cannot be
upheld but with Impostures, Lies, and Forgeries. But (for the Rectifying of
others, who happily have not seen those Letters, and who, otherwise, may be too
Credulous to this Inventor,) I must say, I was so far from Affirming any thing
of any Tendency to what he Impudently fastens upon me in the former Passages,
that I never once thought it; I only Affirmed, that Isaac ( Abraham's Seed) did
Represent and stand for Believing Gentiles in the Covenant, both as to the
Promise and Blessing given to them and to the Duty and Incumbence put upon
them; This I did say, and but this; and this, Let him Confute it if he can.

Nor did I ever say, that there were two Determinate and Particular Signs,
namely, Circumcision and Baptism, either Instituted, or immediately intended in
the Seventeenth of Genesis; I said, that in the Seventeenth of Genesis, there
was a double Obligation, namely, First, a more General One, Verse the Ninth,
imposed upon Abraham and upon his Seed, ( viz.) Isaac in the Spirit
Principally; and that was in General Terms to keep the Covenant; and to keep
the Covenant, is to keep the sign of the Covenant, which I said, must be
understood Generally, for keeping the Covenant in the sign of it, whatever the
sign at any time be: and not Particularly and Determinately, for keeping of it
Immediately in Circumcision or in Baptism, or in any other Particular Sign.
Secondly, the Particular Obligation is in Verse the Tenth, and This is laid
upon Abraham and his Natural Family, but not, in Terms, upon Abraham's Seed:
and it is an Obligation unto Circumcision: This being the Particular Sign of
the Covenant for That Administration of it.

But to this he tells me, ( Page 58.) You tax me (and I believe by this, you
see that I had reason to tax him) for a bold Abuse in saying, that you intimate
that Baptism is immediately intended in the Ninth Verse of Genesis,
Seventeenth. Mark your own word, not Instituted, but Intended: whence I Argue,
if Baptism be neither there Instituted nor Intended, if it be not in the
Letter, nor Intention of that Text, it is not there at All.

Here this Wyre-drawing man, instead of giving Satisfaction to my first
Taxation (as he calls it) shamelesly incurs a second; for his perversion of my
words, in what he says, is so Notorious, that truly it was for Pitties sake I
passed it over in my last Letter, without a Reply; and yet he Tryumphs in it,
that This was never Answered. I said, and do say, that Baptism is not
immediately intended in the Seventeenth of Genesis, Ninth, and that the Sense
of that Verse is General and indeterminate; whereas, if Baptism, or
Circumcision either, were immediately intended, it must have been Determinate
and Particular, not speaking (as it does) of Signing in General, but of signing
with This or That Particular Sign, which it does not immediately.

But I pray you Sir, Observe here his Extraordinary Skill in making of
Arguments, for thus he forms His: If Baptism be neither Instituted nor Intended
in the Text, ( He should have said immediately intended, for so I did:) and
again, If Baptism be neither in the Letter nor in the Intention (for so he
varies again, to Tenter it unto his Purpose, for I never said so.) What then?
then it is not at all there; well concluded: If it be not at all there, it is
not at all there. I said, it is not Immediately intended; This he Reports; (if
it be not in the Letter nor in the Intention,) and that you will say, is very
wisely said of him; As if the Letter and the Intention were Opposites, and that
That were not in the Letter of a Text, which is intended in it; nor That
intended in a Text, which is in the Letter of it; whereas all other men, but
he, do think that That is intended in a Text, which is the Sense of it; and
that to be intended is no more than to be meant. And may not that be mediately,
I do not say Remotely, as he does, to make a Quibble upon it (Ay, Remotely
enough) may not that be mediately meant and intended, which is not so
immediately? and that Secondarily, which is not so Primarily? Yes, doubtless.
And So all Particular Instances are intended and meant in General Propositions;
not Immediately and Primarily, for so the Sense is only General, Else the
Proposition were not so; but Secondarily and Mediately. And thus Baptism may be
intended in the Seventeenth of Genesis Ninth, Thou shall keep my Covenant, my
Sign, Thou and thy Seed: not immediately, for so the Sense is but General and
Indeterminate, God not having yet Discovered in what Particular Sign or
Covenant, either Abraham, or his Seed should keep it; but it may be mediately
intended, as it is a Particular Sign of the Covenant. I do not say, that the
Sign of the Covenant must be kept generally and indeterminately; but I say,
that those words Verse the Ninth. Thou shall keep my Covenant (or my Sign)
therefore, thou and thy Seed.) must be understood Generally, and
Indeterminately. But though the Sense be General and Indeterminate in the Ninth
Verse, both as to Abraham and to his Seed, yet in the Tenth it is determined,
as to Abraham and to his Natural Family; though not as to his Spiritual Seed.
And if Determined but in the Tenth, it was not yet Determined in the Ninth.

I thought once to have said no more upon this Particular, than what I had
before; my meaning and intention in it being so Perspicuous, to Prudent and
Understanding Readers; and his Absurdity and Grosness in Opposing it, so Plain
and Manifest. But the Opinion of the Many, with whom the Last word is always a
sufficient Answer, has made it Necessary that I should say more. And
therefore, once for All, to put my meaning out of Doubt (if it can be yet in
Any,) I will here a little further Illustrate it. And to this Purpose; it
having pleased God to say in the 17 th. of Genesis, 9. Thou shall keep my
Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed; Understanding, by keeping the Covenant a
keeping the Sign; Let us suppose he should have added, in the Tenth Verse;
Circumcision is the Covenant or Sign which thou Abraham shall keep, and Baptism
the Conant or Sign thy Seed shall keep. Would it not in this Case, be very
Evident that keeping of the Covenant or Sign in the Ninth Verse, must be
understood but Generally, and Indeterminately, not, as yet for a keeping either
of Circumcision, or of Baptism in Particular, but Generally keeping Gods Sign
be it what it will, when he shall Please to institute it. Now as God has said,
Thu shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed in the Ninth Verse, so
he has said PARTITIVELY, This is the Covenant that thou shall keep, for so the
Seventy render it; or, That YOU shall keep, (Distinguishing YOU from thy SEED)
for so the Hebrew. But though he say what Covenant, or Sign it was that Abraham
himself and his Present Family should keep, he leaves unsaid, as not proper yet
to say, what Sign or Covenant the Spiritual Seed of Abraham should keep; for
that Seed being yet Un-born, it was but Reason that the Covenant or Sign it was
to keep, should not yet be Instituted. Ishmael was at the Institution of
Circumcision, Isaac was not there. Ishmael that stood for the Natural Family,
He was there; Isaac that stood for the Spiritual Family, was then Vn-born; and
this Timing of the Institution, of Circumcision, as Inoted before, should be
insisted upon; it signifies much.

But, in Regard my Adversary will be Apt to tell me, that the case I put is but
supposition, and one may suppose any thing; I shall therefore take the Text as
it Lies, and only ask him two or three Questions, to which I do Expect Direct
and Categoricall Answers. The First is, whither Circumcision were Actually
Instituted in the 9 th. verse? for if it was not, (as indeed it was not, for it
was not Instituted but in the 10 th.) then certainly to keep the Covenant in
verse 9. could not be Determinately to keep Circumcision. I ask him again, If
this proposition, Circumcision is Gods Covenant, or Gods Sign, be an Identick
proposition, and do signify no more, than that Circumcision is Circumcision?
for if he say it signifies more (as I should think he will,) then the Term
Covenant or Sign, in it, must signify Generally and Largely. In fine, I would
Ask him if when it Pleased God to say, this is my Covenant which you shall
keep, every man Child among you shall be circumcised, He then said no more than
what he had before in verse the 9 th. thou Shall keep my Covenant therefore,
thou and thy Seed? For if God do say no more, or no other in verse 10. than he
had said before in verse 9. then he says but the same again; But if he do say
other, or more, (as undoubtedly he does, for now and not before, he tells what
the Covenant is,) then keeping of the Covenant verse the 9 th. must be
understood but generally; as certainly it must, and I have Evincedit must; in
some measure in my First Letter ( P. 25, 26, 27.) but more expressly, in my
Second; from ( P. 85. to 91.) and most fully in my Last, from ( P. 150. to
154.) In these Places you will see the Vanity of his Boast ( P. 62.) ( viz.)
that the sense cannot be General and Indeterminate, for a General Indeterminate
sense is no sense.) Thus, General and Appellative Expressions are Nonsensicall
to this man, and ( owe no man any thing but to Love one another,) at this Rate,
shall signify nothing; (as indeed, it seems not to signify much with Him;
because it is not said Owe not James, Peter, John, or Paul, but (owe no man,)
nothing but Love.

And so much for his two signs;) a Fiction of his Own, which he would fasten on
me; whereas I never spoke, or thought of two particular signs, as Actually
Instituted in the 17 th. of Genesis, but only of signing Generally, spoken of
verse 9. and of a Particular sign instituted In verse the 10 th; Thus I spoke,
and still speak; which no more does signify two signs, than when one shall
say, (God made man a Reasonable Creature, and Peter is a man,) He speaks of two
men; of one in the former proposition, and of another in the Latter.

As to the Third Point which he would put me upon, which is to Prove, That
Abraham Represented the Carnal Seed only in Circumcision, and Isaac the
Spiritual Seed in Baptism) I have spoken abundantly what my sense is, as to the
former, already: and, as to the latter, I have also already showed it a Calumny
as to the Implication that Isaac was Baptized, and in Baptism was a Type. But
though he was not a Representative or Figure of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham,
the believing Gentiles, in Baptism; seeing he never was Baptized; yet that he
was a Representative of them in the Covenant of Promise, and that as well in
the Duty and obligation, as in the Privilege and Blessing of it, is, I think,
by this, beyond all Dispute. But of all this I have said enough before; Isaac
was not a Representative of the Believing Gentiles in Baptism, but in the
Covenant.

As to the 1 Cor 7. 14. from which I prove there is an External Relative
holiness under the Gospel, as well as an Internal and absolute; He Roundly
tells his Reader ( P. 24. (for he never told me so before;) That as he has
already Demonstrated, it does not at all prove the Continuation of any External
or Relative holiness arising from the Covenant.) But Sir, you must not be too
Easy in Believing of him as to Demonstration, for I Assure you, after what I
answered in my First Letter, (from P. 33. to 49.) which once you thought beyond
Exception, and, I hope, still do, I never Received the least reply in any of
his Letters as to That; and therefore, what he speaks ( P. 24.) of
Demonstration here, It is as what he says of it in many other Places, and with
Reference to many other Particulars ( viz.) But a Vision of his too much heated
fancy, and a Popular charm. The world must know that he has done great things
some where, but he cannot tell where himself.

Not that I would have you think too Confidently, that here he is Caught; for
though he have Affirmed, as you may see he has, that he has already
Demonstrated, when Indeed he has not; you must not presently believe he cannot
make it out: for this, as Difficult as you or I would think it; It is an Easy
Atchivement to a man of his Performance. He that can find a sign in Genesis 17.
9, as employed in the sense, (for so he speaks P. 105.) when yet himself says,
the Text mentions no sign at all or gives the least hint of any; He I say that
can Affirm, the Text Mentions no sign at all, nor gives the least hint of any,
and yet can Interpret what he says, (as he does,) that there is no such Term,
or a Syllable of that sound in the Text; that is he that can say a thing is in
the sense of the Text, that is neither mentioned, nor Hinted in the Least, in
the Terms of it; He may say what he will; you must not think to hold him; if
you think you have Him fast in the very Terms, he will give you the slip by a
Syllable of the sound; and salve his Contradictions with Nonsense. To be
Mentioned and Hinted, which (with all others) is, to be Expressed and Implied
in a Text; by this Interpreter, shall be understood of Sounds, and not of
Senses, Ay, though it be said, no Mention nor hint of any sign; And he that
says (any sign) cannot be understood to mean the sound (sign.)

The Mention of the 1 Cor. 7. 14; Reminds me of his Amazement, ( P. 128.) for
he is often Amazed; Amazed much he was, at my Exposition of Genesis 17. 9. 10.
and now again Amazed almost as much, at my Interpretation of Romans 4. in my
Argument (from P. 166. to 168.) And indeed, nothing but a Mazement can Excuse
his great mistakes; as, that I should say the Reward to Abraham was Personal
and Earthly, and was of Canaan only; and that my Expressions have a sound that
is Harsh and dissonant to Romans 4. and 4.) My design in Touching on this Text,
was only to Evince that Abraham's Receiving Circumcision as a Seal of the
Righteousness by Faith (which he had urged, was nothing Contradictory to what I
said Concerning His standing with Ishmael, and the Rest of the Family Genesis 17.
10. in the Business of Circumcision; how that they stood for and Represented
there the whole natural Household. That Canaan was the Reward of Abraham's
Faith, who but such a Sophister, dares soberly to Deny it? the Text is plain
for it. Genesis 15. 17. But that Heaven also was not his Reward, I did not say;
no more then the Text does, which though in the Letter it does but Mention
Canaan, yet surely, it did not Exclude Heaven. And as for the Danger, and
Dissonancy in my Expressions to Romans 4. 4. I ask him; was not the Reward
given to Abraham, for his Believing? How else was it that his Faith was
Accounted unto him for Righteousness? for though the Reward was Infinitely much
Superior to any Desert of his Faith, and was a Thing that God in Justice, was
no ways Obliged to make; yet a Reward it was, and a Reward (in the very Idea
and Notion of it) is of and For something: A Reward it was, but a Reward of
Grace, not of Debt; God gave it as a Gratuity, for what Abraham did; but
Abraham could not have Demanded it as his due, or a Debt.

After this He tells me ( P. 129.) that all that follows to the close (namely,
in my last Letter from P. 169. to the End.) is but strife about words; In which
he finds not any thing but what does Nauseate.) But you Sir, will find a
Vindication in it of that (But) incerted in my Paraphrase; and also a
Demonstration in it that (ye) in Genesis 17. 10. even from his own Concessions,
cannot be understood of Abraham and that his Seed which is in verse the 9 th.
but must be meant of Abraham Ishmael, and the Rest of the Then Present Family;
and Consequently, that Circumcision was not then Enjoined on the Seed as it
stands in the 9 th verse, for the Believing Gentiles; but only on the Natural
Family; which was the Main thing to be Proved.

I do not know I have omitted any thing of Moment, (for his Scoffs, Jears,
Gibes, etc. are of none) among his Reflections: no, nor any thing in His Last
Letter, that is to the purpose; Except a Sophister will think I should consider
his Logic ( P. 120.) and, because Stierius and Sanderson, and indeed other
Logicians, Generally, do say, (and he must be a very Mean One that does not
know so much,) that Members of a Division must be Opposite; Meaning not
properly, that they must be Enemies; but that they must not Interfere and be
Coincident; That therefore, it must be concluded, That All Distinction is
Opposition; that Disparates are Opposites; and that God, Abraham, and his Seed,
could not be Distinct Partys, if they were not Opposites, and even Enemies to
one Another. But if any think so, I Leave him to the Care of this Apothecary,
and to Hellebore. You may be pleased to see what I have said in my Argument (
P. 153, etc.) as to This.

Upon the whole, Sir, you cannot but Observe how Little Reason there is to
Trust my Adversary in Citations and how much cause I have to make you and All
his Readers this Request, that you never believe that I Affirm, or deny any
thing which he, hereafter, though with never so much Confidence shall Report I
do, unless you first consult my own Writings, and see it there: And I would
also desire of Him, that seeing he is so much given to mistake my Meaning, He
would never Report my sense, But in mine own Terms; and That is but a fair
Request.

In fine, I am not much Afflicted that my Adversary gave me this Occasion of
Writing again on this Subject. I know that Truth, Like silver, will appear the
Brighter for being Burnished. The more He presses this Controversy, the more
the Subject of it will come in Discourse; and Discourse, in Time, will Ripen
and Mellow Notions in the Minds of Men, which At First, seem hard and Harsh.
Nor will his Pious Frauds, His Railing upon Arguments instead of Answering of
them, His unsober Reflecting on His Adversary instead of Arguing with him; His
Base Hints; or his Direct Scurrillitics, which Even now Dis-serve his cause
with Wise and Good-men, Uphold it Long with any. These are mean, Unmanly, and
Unchristian Methods, and (Let him Note it) never used but in Extremity, and
when a Case is Deplored; which His being, I hold it time to End this Trouble

From Sir, Your Faithful Friend and Servant. R. B
Bowdon. July 4. 1684
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Simmons at the Prince's Arms in
Ludgate Street.
THe History of the Old Testament methodized, according to the order and series
of Time wherein the several things therein mentioned were transacted. In which
the difficult Phrases are paraphrased, the seeming Contradictions reconciled,
the Rites and Customs of the Jews, opened and explained: to which is annexed, a
short History of the Jewish Affairs, from the End of the Old Testament, to the
Birth of our Savior; and a Map also added of Canaan and the adjacent
Countries, very useful for the understanding of the whole History, by S.
Cradock, B.D. fol.

The Lives of sundry Eminent Persons in this latter Age, in Two Parts. First,
Of Divines, ( viz.) Mr. Hugh Broughton: Mr. R. Boid: Dr. Twist: Mr. Tho.
Wilson: Dr. Sam. Bolton, Mr. Richard Vines, Mr. Richard Blacherhy, Mr. Ralph
Robinson, Mr. John Janeway, Mr. John Machia, Dr. Sam. Winter, Mr. Thomas
Tregas, Mr. Rich. Matthew, Mr. John Allein, Dr. Staunton, Mr. Samuel Fairclough,
Mr. Thomas Wadsworth, Mr. O. Stochton, Mr. T. Gouge. To which are Added, some
Remarkable Passages in the Lives and Deaths of diverse Eminent Divines in the
Church of Scotland: ( viz.) Mr. John Scringer, Mr. Robert Blair, Mr, And.
Stewart, Mr. John Weleb, Mr. Hugh Kennedy, Mr. Robert Brute, Mr. Davidson, and
Mr. Patrick Simpson: Together with an Account of several Providence strange
and Extraordinary. Secondly, Of Nobility and Gentry of both Sexes, ( viz.) Mr.
Philip Sidney, Sir Charles Coot, Mr. John Lamot, Sir Nath. Barnadiston, Mr.
John Row, Sir Matthew Hale, Mrs. Mary Hunter, Lady Alice Lucy, Lady Mary Vere,
Mrs. Kath. Clark, Countess of Warwick, Mrs. Margaret Baxter, Lady Armine, Lady
Langham, and Countess of Suffolk. By S. Clark sometime Pastor of Bennet Finek,
London: to which is Added, the Life of the Author. fol.

The New Testament of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, with Annotations,
Containing First, An Interpretation of all difficult Phrases and words.
Secondly, Parallel Scriptures, both as to Matter and Words, to which is Annexed
the Harmony of the Gospels. By Samuel Clark, I. f. 4 to.

Church History of the Government of Bishops and their Councils abreviated,
including the Chief Part of the Government of Christian Princes and Popes, and
a True Account of the most Troubling Controversies and Heresies till the
Reformation. By Richard Baxter, a Hater of False History. in 4 to.

A Treatise of Episcopacy, confuting by Scriptur-Reasons, and the Churches
Testimony, that sort of Diocesian Churches, Prelacy and Government, which
casts out the Primitive Church Species, Episcopacy, Ministry and Discipline,
and Confound the Christian World by Corruption, Usurpation, Schism and
Persecution: meditated in the Year 1640. when the etc. Oath was imposed,
written 1671. and lastly published 1680. by the importunity of our Superiors,
who demand the Reasons of our Nonconformity. By Rich. Baxter, in 4 to.

Forgetfulness of God the great Plague of Man's Heart, and Consideration of the
Principal Means to cure it. By W. D. M.A. once Fellow of King's College
Cambridge, in Octavo.

Londinum Triumphans: or, An Historical Account of the grand influence the
Actions of the City of London have had upon the Affairs of the Nation, for many
Ages past, showing the Antiquity, Honor, Glory, and Renown of this Famous
City, the grounds of the Rights Privileges and Franchises, the Foundation of
the Charter, the improbability of its Forfeiture or Seizure, the Power and
Strength of the Citizens, and the several Contests that have been betwixt the
Magistracy and Commonalty, Collected from the most Authentic Authors, and
illustrated with variety of Remarks, worthy of the perusal of every Citizen. By
W. Gouge. Gent. 8^.

The Samaritan showing that many unnecessary Impositions are not the Oil that
must heal the Church, together with the way or means to do it, by a Country
Gent. who goes to Common Prayer and not to Meetings in Octavo.

The Plea for Children of Believing Parents, for their interest in Abraham's
Covenant, their right to Churchman ship with their Parents, and consequently
their Title to Baptism. The cause of Publishing this Discourse after so many
Learned men have labored in this province is declared in the preface to the
Reader by Giles Freeman in Octavo.

Peaceable resolution of Crioscience touching our present Imposition, wherein
Loyalty and Obedience are proposed and settled upon their true foundation in
Scripture Reason, and the Constitution of this Kingdom against all Resistance
of the present Power, and for compliance with the Laws so far as may be in
order to Union with a draught in specimen of a Bill for Accommodation, in Octavo.

Moral prognostications, (1) what shall befall the Church on Earth till their
concord, by the restitution of their primitive Purity, Simplicity, Charity.
(2.) How that Restitution is like to be made (if ever) and what shall besall
them henceforth unto the End, in the Golden Age of Love, written by Richard
Baxten, when by the King's Commission, we in vain Treated for Concord, 1661.
and now published in 1680.

FINIS.

