PRUDENTIAL REASONS FOR REPEALING THE PENAL LAWS AGAINST All Recusants, And for
a General Toleration,

Penned by a Protestant Person of Quality.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Turner at the Lamb in High Holborn. 1687.

READER,

YOu will admire perhaps at first the Confidence of this Person, who never was
of the Council, be sure, nor is of the Parliament, that he should make so bold
as to endeavor to show the Interests of All Parties, and even those of the
King and of the Country. But you will have cause to cease your Admiration, if
you consider, that the Interests of the Parties do not lie so deep under ground
as is thought; and that if Men do not see them, it is not because they Cannot,
but because they Will not; not because the Object is Hid, but because their
Eyes (with which they must see it) are mop't in Passions and Prejudices. The
Author pretends to see no more, than every body else may, provided, that he
will wipe his Eyes, and be as impartial and as unprejudiced as He.

As for the King, whom God long preserve; Thanks be to God, he has a clearer
Prospect of His own and of His Kingdoms Interest, in the Matters debated, than
Any His Royal Predecessors had; and He pursues it too with that Conduct and
that Vigor which corresponds with the Miracles that preserved the Crown for
Him, and also Him, both for the Crown, and for a Glory greater than that of
wearing Crowns, to wit, to be the Restorer of Religion to Liberty and Freedom
of Exercise.

Prudential Reasons for Repealing the Penal Laws against All Recusants, and for
a General Toleration.
1. CHristian Religion and Civil Government are things so different, as in
their Originals, so in their Natures; and ordained for Ends so different, (the
Former being Divine and Spiritual, and ordained to be a Means to Men's Eternal
Felicity; the Latter, Human and Secular, and appointed for their Temporal
Welfare) that in themselves, and absolutely taken, they are nothing a Kin, and
of no Relation one to another. Wherefore Civil Government (as such) cannot be
obliged to concern it self in the Business of Religion, or to Incorporate Any,
any further than as Politic and Secular Respects do engage it, that is, any
further than as a Concernment of Religion may become a matter of State, and be
for the Quiet, Safety, Strength and Support, and so does make for the Ends and
the Interest of the Government.

Now it is for the Interest, Quiet, Strength and Safety of every Government to
give as much Contentment, and to make it self as easy as is possible unto all
its Subjects, but especially in matters of Conscience; which, as they have the
greatest Ascendent over the Minds of Men, so the Gratifications and
Displeasures that have reference to these, of all others do most deeply affect
them. And therefore it is against the Interest, the Quiet, the Strength and the
Safety of Government to espouse Religion (in any Mode thereof) so as to
establish it by Law any further, or in any other manner than as may consist
with the general liking, and give Content unto all in Reason; for Reason at
last will Rule, and overruled both Passions and Prejudices. StateBigottry (in
any Religion) cannot be for the Interest of Government.

2. But to circumscribe my self within a nearer compass. All the Sanguinary and
Burdensome Laws relating to Religion, that from time to time have been enacted
by our English Parliaments, against either Popish or other Recusants; They were
all made in a Passion of State, and only to humor the Times, as might be
proved by Induction of all the Particulars. And therefore as things of that
Production always have, so even these have something in them of Violent,
Inequitable and Extravagant, and of unfit and inconvenient at least for times
of Peace and Tranquillity: So that to repeal them, must needs be an Act of
Moderation, Clemency and Justice, and of Politic Prudence and Wisdom.

3. Besides, the Penal Laws did never answer the Ends and Designs for which
they were intended; but instead of securing good Order, Quiet, Peace and
Tranquillity to the Government, they too often proved a matter of Embroylment
and Disturbance unto it; and have been the Handles which upon all occasions,
Ambitious, Factious, Discontented Men have taken hold of, and have used to wind
about the People, and make a Property of them to serve their ill Designs and
Intentions.

1. The Penal Laws never answered or effected their Ends.

Queen Elizabeth on several Occasions, in several Parliaments, gave Life and
Birth to Laws of extreme severity, not only against the Roman Catholic, but
also the Puritan Recusant; but against both to little effect; for
notwithstanding all that severity, Popery was not extirpated, and Nonconformity
grew and spread; it is true, the less observedly, but not the less dangerously
for that it grew in secret, and that it was not observed.

King James succeeding Queen Elizabeth would needs be her Successor as to her
Methods of Prudence as well as to her Crown, and in the same Method was met
with the same success: Papists were more sharpened, and Puritans spread more; the
Severities of the Law increasing only the number of Enemies, without
establishing the Quiet, Repose and Peace of the Government. When Laws are
Enemies to any Men, to be sure, say they what they will, and swear what they
will, those Men will be Enemies to the Laws. Ay! the very Being of the Penal
Laws without a perpetual Execution of them does make Enemies. For Men will
always hate what they always fear; and the Laws (if in Being) are always
feared, because if they do not strike always, yet they may strike, and no body
knows how soon they will: Which minds me of the second Point.

2. That the Penal Laws have often ministered matter of Disturbance and
Imbroylment to the Government; to evidence which we need not to go back to far
remote and distant times, but may keep within our own Horizon and Ken, and yet
have Examples enough, and plain enough.

When King Charles the First, for certain Reasons of State, had remitted the
execution of the severity of the Laws against Roman Catholics, and for other
Reasons permitted some severities to be used by the Clergy for the suppressing
of Puritans; occasion is taken hence for making Complaints upon both Hands; to
wit, of the Non-execution of the Laws against the Roman-Catholics, and of a too
severe Execution against Puritans. Popery (the Cry is) is favored, and
True-Protestant Religion, under pretense of Puritanism and Nonconformity, (is)
discouraged and even undermined: At last out comes the Popish Royal Favorite,
and on comes War and Confusion.

3. To come nearer yet; When Charles the Second after a long experience of the
Unfitness and Inefficacy of forcible Courses for settling the Repose of State,
(the which he had wisely observed) found Cause to emit his Gracious Declaration
of Liberty and Indulgence, to quiet the Minds of his Subjects, that he might
have Peace at home, while he was making War abroad: Presently the Alarm is
sounded, the Church is in danger, an Inundation of Fanatics worse than that of
the Goths and Vandals, is like to run over all, and Currat Lex is the word,
and this too, by Men that would be thought to value themselves on the Doctrine
of Non-resistance.

Again, when by Intercession of Parliament and from other Considerations, he
was induced to Revoke his Declaration (from which moment he might have dated
the beginning of all the Stirs, and all the Imbroylments that followed) in a
little Time, the Fanatics being sufficiently mortified, up goes another Cry
(God wot) of the Growth of Popery, in which (without doubt) the Fanatics did
heartily join, both out of a sense of Revenge, and from that of their Interest.
After this came Plots upon Plots, and Difficulty upon Difficulty, to the
certain Danger, and almost as certain Ruin and Destruction of the Government.
Of such advantage are the Penal Laws to the Safety, Quiet, and Repose of the
State! Indeed while these are in being, there can never want Pretexts, upon one
hand or the other, Quiet a movendi, to make Complaints of; as, either of too
much severity, if they are executed, or else of too much remisness, if they are
not. Away then with these two-handed Tools of Contention and Faction.

4. I may add, That Severities, especially in Matters of Religion, are so
contrary to the Complexion and Temper of our Nation, which both by Nature and
by the Frame of our Government, in the Fundamental Constitutions of it, are
much more mild and gentle than most others, That the very Authors and Promoters
of the sanguinary and burthensom Laws, in a little time, and when the Heat was
over, grew weary and remiss themselves in executing of them. Fuller tells us,
in his Ecclesiastical History, cent. 16. That when these Statutes (he speaks
particularly of that in the Twenty third of Elizabeth, against Jesuits, etc.)
were first in the State and Magisteriality thereof, they were severely put in
practice on such Offenders as they first lighted on. But some years after, the
Queen and her Judges grew Remiss in the Execution thereof; witness the only
confining of many of 'them to Wisbich Castle. And in King James's Days, this
Dormant Law against Jesuits only awaked some once in four or five years (to
show the World that it was not dead) and then fairly fell asleep again, being
very sparingly put in execution, against some Notorious Offenders. Thus he.

5. And if we consider this Subject in a larger Circle, and speculate upon it
exactly, the Prudentialness of what I have proposed, and have hitherto argued,
will appear the brighter.

Opinions then, and Practices in matters of Religion are either Plausible and
Popular, or of a nature not so apt to take with the People. If Opinions and
Practices are not plausible and popular, but of a Nature unapt to take with the
People, in that case there is no need of Laws to suppress them, because no
danger of them, they will expire of themselves; Laws against them, will but
give them Credit and Reputation, and perpetuate their Memory; to despise and
neglect is to extinguish and stifle them.

It is true, when Opinions and Practices are plausible and popular, are well
nicked, and are apt to infect, and take with the People, but yet have not as
yet infected them and spread among them, all things being as yet still and
quiet, in that Case the Quickest and Severest Remedies seem the Best, because
they eradicate. And thus while the Reformation was circumscribed in the Breast
of one only Luther, if Friar Hogostrate's Counsel (indeed an Achitophel's) of
applying Chains, and Fire, and Flame, as the only proper Remedy, had been
followed, That Course ('it is very probable) would have for ever prevented it.
But God had better things in Reserve. And this Method even Queen Elizabeth
followed as to the Dutch Anabaptists that came over hither: She Burnt two, and
Banished all the rest that would not Recant: Which Proceeding, according to the
Rules of Policy, was certainly good; but how Equitable it was, and how
Christian, I leave to others to judge.

But after that Opinions and Practices have gotten Roots in the Minds of Men,
that they have spread among the People, and are entertained with Applause, so
that there are some Persons who think it to be a Concern of Salvation to them
to Propagate, and others that think it no less a Concern of theirs to Receive
them; in this Case (and this is Ours) the Severity of Laws, if executed, (and
Laws without Execution are Scarecrows, seen and despised) does only hinder the
Open Profession, but not the Belief and Secret Practice: may Repel the Humors,
and make them eager and virulent, and consequently increase the Danger; but
does not Expel or Alter them. Thus the Body Politic becomes replenished with
Malignities, and then any jogging and stirring of State endangers it; whereof
one day our neighbor Kingdom of France may have a dangerous Experience. And
certainly even at this time some of our own Church, who lately proceeded to so
great Extremities against Dissenters, and thought by that Proceeding to have
got an absolute Victory, begin to fear it; and should His Majesty please to
grant His Indulgence by Proclamation, and under the Seal, I believe they would
Find it a great Truth, That Severity and Persecution may make Conformists, but
not Converts: However the Observation is not new.

The burning of Men and Women like Torches in Queen Mary's Days, though it had
this Effect, that it produced an universal external Conformity to the
Roman-Catholic Rites, yet seeing those Fires did only heat the Humors of the
Men, they did not burn without Illuminating their Minds; no sooner was Occasion
presented, as, by the Descent of the Crown on Queen Elizabeth, it was not long
after, but the Ineffectualness, Folly, and Weakness of that Proceeding
appeared; for the People, no more than the Clergy (generally speaking) were now
no longer what they seemed before. Again, the Condemnation of Udal, and
Execution of Barrow and others, (who were hanged as Felons) for Nonconformity
in Queen Elizabeth's Time, had no better Effect, as the Consequence showed; for
notwithstanding that Severity, Puritanism grew in Her Time as Protestantism did
in Queen Mary's, and possibly the faster for that Severity.

Of this King James the First was fully convinced (at last) by the burning of
Legate and Weightman (for the Writ de Haeretico comburendo has done jobs for
others, more than once, as well as for Roman-Catholics) he finding by that
experiment of Fire Ordeal, the truth of this Observation, That severe
Executions in matters of Religion, even when the Opinions are but speculative
and not apt to take, do ordinarily more hurt than good. The Observation Fuller
has made of the success of those Executions in King James's time, deserves that
we should put our Finger upon it. God may seem (says he in his Ecclesiast.
History Cent. 17. Sect. 4.) well pleased with this seasonable severity, for the
Fire thus kindled, quickly went out for want of Fuel, I mean, there was none
ever after that avowed these Heretical Doctrines, only a Spanish Arian, who
condemned to die, was notwithstanding suffered to linger out his life in
Newgate, where he ended the same. Indeed such burning of Heretics much startled
common People, pitying all in pain, and prone to asperse Justice it self with
Cruelty, because of the novelty and hideousness of the Punishment. And the
Purblind Eyes of Vulgar Judgments looked only on what was next to them (the
Suffering it self) which they beheld with compassion, not minding the demerit
of the guilt which deserved the same. Besides such being unable to distinguish
betwixt Constancy and Obstinacy, were ready to entertain good thoughts even of
the Opinions of those Heretics, who sealed them so manfully with their Blood.
Wherefore King James politicly preferred, that Heretics hereafter, though
condemned, should silently and privately waste themselves away in the Prison,
rather than to grace them and amuse others with the solemnity of a public
Execution, which in Popular Judgment usurped the Honor of a Persecution. Thus
he. But to return.

The only proper Method then, in case Religious Persuasions have taken Root,
and are so largely diffused among the People that they cannot be eradicated but
by Barbarous Cruelty, and with extreme scandal, as by Massacres and
Assassinates; I say, the only proper Method in this Case is that which is
Lenitive, the method of Toleration and Indulgence, but with due Regulations.
For in this Method, although Recusants are permitted to continue such still as to
the Church, yet they cannot but become entirely the Friends of the State, which
by giving them such Reasonable Satisfaction, does as well deprive them of just
occasions of complaint, as take away from the Multitude all occasions of
Compassion and Pity. And in this state of things should any Recusants be still
contriving and intriguing it will be manifest (to all) that it is not
Conscience, but a Lust of Power and Rule that Acts them, the very suspicion of
which will lose them the People; so that they may be punished by the Hand of
Justice, not only without Murmur, but even with general Applause. Though many
will hear them that say, We preach our selves your Servants for Christ's sake,
but few will endure such as shall say (but in effect) We Preach our selves your
Lords, and you our Servants, for our own sakes.

It may be added, that Restraint does whet the Appetite, and therefore that
Indulgence and Liberty will abate it: Men will not care so much to hear
Recusants, when they are not restrained from hearing them.

Prudential Reasons for Repealing the Penal Laws against the Roman-Catholics
particularly.
1. FIRST, that his Majesty having professed himself of the Roman-Catholic
Persuasion, it is but a just expectation, not only in those of his own
Profession, but in all the World, that he should procure a Legal Freedom of
Exercise for that Religion; which should he be unable to effect with the
Consent of his People in Parliament, it would much obscure and eclipse the
Glory of his Character abroad, it being impossible that he should appear as a
King of Great Figure to the World abroad, if he shall appear to make (as then
he will) but a little one at home: Whereas it is for the Interest and Safety,
as well as for the Honor of the Kingdom, that the King should make as Great,
and as Illustrious a Figure abroad as is possible, seeing the Strength and
Power of the Kingdom (the Reputation of which is its Safety) appears not to the
World but in the Greatness of the King, and in His Power with His People.

2. A Continuation of the Penal Laws against Roman-Catholics, when the King
professes Himself to be One, must needs have a particular Ill Reflection upon
Him even in other Respects. For who can think or say of Catholics, that they
are so Criminal and Ill a sort of Men, and of Principles so very Bad, that the
utmost Severity against them is but little enough; but withal he must abate of
Regard and Veneration for the King, who acknowledges Himself a Roman-Catholic?
which how it can consist with that Proportion of Duty, Love, and Allegiance
that we owe unto Him as our Sovereign Lord, is too hard a Point for me to
conceive.

3. I am very confident, that many Examples (if any) cannot be given in All
History, of Governments in which the Prince was of a Religion, the Exercise
whereof Himself did punish in His Subjects, by His Laws and Judges; and indeed
it cannot be but a Solecism in State to admit it. For, that a King should
punish in others, what yet He publicly avows and owns and approves in Himself,
is very odd, and a Self-condemnation. I know the Case of Sigismond the Third,
King of Poland and King of Sweden; but I suppose it will not be urged as an
Instance against me.

Prudential Reasons for Tolerating other Recusants, as well as, and together
with, the Roman-Catholics.
1. NOt to give a Toleration and Indulgence unto Protestant Recusants, when it
is given to Roman-Catholics (if at any time it shall be given), would make the
Toleration of These, how Just soever, to become Invidious, and a Subject of
Clamor and general Scandal, and so a Matter of Disquiet and Trouble to the
Government.

2. Ay! And the Roman-Catholics cannot hope to hold and enjoy a Toleration that
should be given them by Act of Parliament, if other Recusants be not also
joined with them therein, longer than they may be sure of a Toleration without
such an Act, only by the Royal Prerogative and Clemency: Whereas if the
Toleration is General, and All Recusants, as well the Protestant as
Roman-Catholic, equally comprehended in the Grant thereof, in one Act, and upon
one Bottom, a Consideration of the Quality, the Number, and the Interests of
the Parties so joined together in the Liberty, will secure the Possession of it
in Future: For, then, it will not be Wisdom to go about to disturb it.

3. Trade is the Interest of England, and Liberty of Conscience the Interest of
Trade; it being beyond Dispute to all considering Men, that the Body of the
Industrious Trading Part of the Nation are either themselves Dissenters, or
Favorers of those that are (such.) And it is as evident, that Trade, which,
before, lay even gasping for Life, since His Majesty's Gracious Intentions are
known to lean toward Liberty of Conscience, and that He has Extended His
Dispensations from the Penal Laws in Matters of Religion, is Recovered to a
wonder, and grown Brisk and Quick, and that too so much to general
satisfaction, that we hear no more Now, as Before, the Idle Stories of
Prophecies, Prodigies, Complaints, and Murmurs, (those certain Symptoms of a
Diseased and Crazy State) but All is Quiet and Still.

4. It is for the Interest of those that do Profess themselves the true Sons of
the Church of England as by Law established, if really they are Lovers of the
Reformation, more than of their Passions and Humors, that All Recusants, as
well the Protestant as the Roman-Catholic, should be Equal Sharers in the Grant
of Liberty, if any is made. For seeing it is impossible that these two should
agree but in things in which their Interest joins them, and as impossible that
it should be the Interest of either one of these (any more than it can be the
Kingdoms) to suffer the other to get uppermost, one of them will always
Balance the other, and consequently both must be contented with Liberty,
without aspiring to Power and Rule. And thus the Church will always remain
undisturbed as well as the State.

5. But if the Church of England will have security in the Possession of the
Establishment they have, or may have, by Law, upon their own Bottom, without
the Assistance of Ballancing and Policy to support it, they must resolve to
enlarge that Bottom, (which indeed is their true Interest) by parting with
things to them indifferent, but not indifferent to others. For if some Men
resolve to be always stiff and inflexible, and not to condescend in the least
to any Abatements, for the Love of Peace and of Unity, one may adventure to
foretell, without pretending to Prophecy, that sooner or later, they will find
themselves in his Folly, who rather than cast the worst of the Loading
Overboard to save the Ship, will sink with it.

6. To conclude, It is certainly for the Interest of the Royal Family, as well
as for the Kingdoms Interest, that such a Settlement should be well
deliberated, and be surely established, as to the Business of Religion; that
whether the Crown hereafter shall descend on the Head of a Roman-Catholic, or
of a Protestant, (for it may again (as has already) sometimes descend upon the
one, and sometimes upon the other) that That Descent should make no Change and
Alteration in the Law, or the State of Things in the Government. Preventive
Wisdom is the best Wisdom; and such a Settlement will Prevent Convulsions and
Difficulties, which (else) on every Demise of the Crown, the State will be
subject unto.

But such a Settlement, I doubt, can never be effected without Resolving that
the Religion already Established, shall be the Religion of the State; and that
those who dissent from it, shall yet have Toleration and Indulgence, but under
due Regulations and Qualifications. For my own part, I admire the World is so
fond of Uniformity in the Externals of Religion, that in most things else
prefers Convenience before It. The World it self is Elemented of Contraries,
diversely proportioned, and the Variety in it, is, of the Being, and for the
Beauty and the Ornament of it.

FINIS.

