A NARRATIVE OF THE Conversion OF Thomas Mackernesse Late of MARCH, IN THE Isle
of ELY. Who was Condemned for Robbery, etc. and Executed at Wisbech, Aug. 19.
1694. With an account of his Penitential Behavior, and Discourses with the
Ministers who came to visit him.

Published by the Reverend Mr. J. Buroughs Minister at Wisbech.

London, Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey, 1694.

To the Inhabitants of Wisbech, and March, and Towns Adjacent, with all the
Spectatours of the Tragical End of THOMAS MACKERNESSE, Grace Mercy, and Peace,
etc.
IT is not my Ambition to appear in Print, that has prompted me to this Work;
for none can be more averse from such a thing than my self, as too conscious of
my Inability in that kind, but the Advice and Importunity of some, upon
Considerations respecting Gods Glory and the Public good and Interest of
Souls, have compelled me to do what is otherwise contrary to my own
Inclination; and indeed when I had pondered all the circumstances of that
Affair, I am about to relate, and found, that the hand of God was eminently
therein; that it was a rare and greatly affecting instance of Divine Power and
Grace; that what has already been openly known, has made some awakening, and
serious Impressions on the Minds of People, and knowing that no Body was so
thoroughly acquainted with the whole as I am, having spent much of my time with
him in Prison for three or four Days, I do therefore for these, and other
Reasons, present this following Narrative to the World.

The Lord knows my design purely is to Revive, and Inculcate more what you have
either seen or heard of so wonderful a Providence. Oh that what I write may be
as Goads and as Nails fastened by the Masters of Assemblies, Eccl. 12. 11. And
I hope you that were the Visitours of this Poor Man, and you his
Fellow Prisoners, have not so soon forgot his Expressions at several times in
your hearing. To the end they may never be forgotten by my self, nor you, I
publish them. Let me appeal to your own Consciences, did not his Words, his
Looks, his Actions declare, that he was in good earnest for Eternity? Ah! Death
will make Men serious, when it shall please God to set the Consideration of it
home upon the Heart of a Poor Sinner.

Cannot you remember how often, some of you at least, have heard him admire the
Grace of God, that touched his Heart with a feeling sense of his Sin? Did you
never hear him say, I have a bleeding Heart for Sin? I am sure some of you did;
Oh let there not be wanting in Wisbech Town, or Goal, Hearts bleeding for Sin,
while there is a Heart there. What say you Sinners? what were your thoughts
when you beheld this Poor Penitent? Did you think to continue in your Sins, or
to forsake them? If the former, who can express and sufficiently lament the
hardness of your Hearts, and misery of your State? But if the Latter, now put
your then good Resolutions into Practice. Oh that Conviction and Conversion
Work may not expire in Wisbech with this Poor Creature, but let the Exhortation
he gave to some of you the Night before his Death, be ever in your Memories
fresh, and lively. The Lord make it effectual to you, and all others that shall
hear of it. Repent, said he, and turn to God speedily, Do not drive it off so
late as I did. Let it be now. Mine is a late Repentance, though I hope not too
late. He was convinced to the Quick, that in sound Conversion there must be
Repentance toward God, as well as Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and would
often say; I expect Salvation at the Hands of God, only for the sake of Jesus
Christ, my sweet Savior, that Immaculate Lamb: Yet must I earnestly seek, and
beg it at his Hands, with a truly Penitent Heart, bleeding for Sin, and I hope
I do; it is my earnest desire to do so. Imitate him in this; may it not be in
vain, that Providence brought him hither to suffer Condign Punishment, who had
been once before condemned to die at Lincoln: Oh that this one Soul may be the
first Fruits of a plentiful Harvest of Souls! So prays heartily,

Yours Affectionately, Who would gladly spend and be spent in the service of
precious Souls. J. B.

A True and Impartial Account of the Pehitential End of THOMAS MACKERNESSE.
THomas Mackerness, Late of March in the Isle of Eley; was a Man of a most
Profligate and Heinously Wicked course of Life. As to his Parentage and
Education, (being utterly a stranger to him till after his Condemnation,) I can
say nothing, nor is it much material. But by his own Confession to me, and
others, he was famous, or rather infamous for all manner of Impieties; living
many Years in such a Dissolute Flagitious and Atheistical way, as was extremely
hazardous to his Souls Eternal welfare, and exposed him to the fatal stroke of
Justice, even from Men here: He told me, that for Drunkenness, Swearing,
Whoring and Theft, none had exceeded him; that in these Capital and Epidemical
Sins of the Age, it was not possible to apprehend how Notorious he had been:
For of late Years especially, he had abandoned all fear and regard of God,
giving himself wholly up to work Wickedness; and to use his own Phrase, Had
been the Devil's Pack Horse; or in the Apostles style, Led captive by him at
his will. At last seized by the hand of Justice, and laid in the Goal at
Wisbech, there he discovered the Hardness of his Heart, and Impenitency, by all
the ways he was capable of in those Circumstances he was then in. Thus obdurate
did the poor Wretch continue till the Assizes, and Sentence was passed on him;
which was on Wednesday the Fifteenth of August Last: I went not to Visit him
till the Saturday Night after his Condemnation, being prevented by some
Extraordinary Occasions.

When I first came into the Room, one was praying with him, and I observed him
to be intent upon that great Work. After it was over, I entered into Discourse
with him about his Soul concerns.

It was easy to discern by his Looks and Expressions, that he was under great
Rebukes and Tumults within, from a Guilty Conscience. Sometimes his Countenance
would be very Sad, Dejected and Disturbed, as Indicative of inward Horror,
Gripes, and Struglings, fetching bitter Groans: Otherwhile he would speak with
self abhorrence; charging Sin with vehement Indignation, and highest
Aggravations of himself, saying, What a vile Wretch have I been, for Lying,
Swearing, etc. and the other Sins before mentioned, with utter neglect of God,
and of his Sabbaths; there was not a Viler and more Wicked Wretch upon the
Earth. He Listened Attentively to Counsel, and said, he had too long turned
away his Ear from hearing instruction. He Enquired sollicitously, how he might
come to God: Said, that he was convinced it was his Duty to go to God, but How
he should go, and in what manner, he added, I could instruct him better then he
knew of himself. Now (said he) I am Resolved to Prepare my self for Dying,
though at first, when I returned from the Place of Trial, and Condemnation to
Prison, many Vain Projects came into my Head of preventing my Execution: And
truly (said he) all along I have cherished flattering, but false hopes of
Escape, never once admitted a serious thought of Death; till I heard the Judge
say, Mackerness, You shall Die: And then those Words struck me to the Heart,
yet for a time I stifled that Allarm; till on a Sudden my Mind Laboring hard
under many Temptations to the contrary, and overcoming them, I was fully
determined to a Vigorous and Serious Application to the Things of another Life.

Hereupon I Endeavored to help him what I could, in the Great work he had to
do for his poor Soul; Desired, and Assisted him to look into himself, that he
might discover the Vileness, and Deformity of his Depraved Nature, that
Fountain of Corruption, from which all the Evil of his Life proceeded, spending
some time in such Discourse as I thought most conducive, thoroughly to inform
him of his Lost, Undone Estate, not without some fruit; I at last commended him
to God by Prayer, so left him that Night, promising to come again the next
Night.

Accordingly, I went, and found him at Prayer himself, and in much the same
temper of Mind, though still more hopeful. He declined a multitude, saying He
desired no company, but that which might do his Soul good. For now he found all
was vanity, wished he had looked into his own heart, when he came first into
Prison, and desired a few days longer to have prepared for Death, but, since
that was impossible, feelingly declared. That the worst place in Hell would be
too good for him, if he did not industriously improve every Minute of this
little Time. In Prayer he did with great eagerness catch hold of the
expressions I used, Repeating them over again with more than ordinary fervency:
When I importunately begged of God, that those poor Sinners (including the rest
of the Prisoners, and particularly that poor Woman that suffered with him)
might be as Firebrands pulled out of the burning, he vehemently cried out,
Firebrands indeed Lord: And when I added, A Christ, good God, for these
miserable Souls, he cried aloud, A Christ, and nothing but a Christ, weeping as
he spoke; with much more to the like purpose, giving various expressions of a
Heart, in some good measure broken with a true sense of sin and misery thereby,
seeming desirous to speak with me alone, but could not that Night, by reason of
much company, and therefore deferred it till Morning.

Coming again the next Morning, he did ingenuously open to me the state of his
Soul, and acquainted me how Satan, that malicious and subtle Adversary, did
watch for Advantages against him, to obstruct his Proceeding, in the great
Business of his Soul's Salvation; manifested more Self-Detestation, accompanied
with Pathetical and Ardent Longings after Christ. Now I observed in him some
kindly Beginnings of True Repentance; which I labored to Promote with utmost
diligence. He showed me several Books lent to him, concerning which he asked my
Advice: My Reply was, That he had not time to Read Books, and that I judged it
best to lay them all aside, except the Bible, and a little Book, Entitled, A
Guide for Heaven; because it contained Excellent Directions for a saving close
with Christ.

I directed him to several Texts of Scripture, which I desired him to Peruse,
and Meditate upon, in my absence: He thankfully accepted my Directions, and
when I returned in the Evening, he saluted me on this manner, Welcome, welcome
Guest indeed! I can now tell you, that you, and none but such as you are, that
come to do my Soul good, are welcome to me. One might read a marvelous change
of his inward Disposition in his Countenance; he seemed transported with more
than ordinary sense of the Quickening and Comforting Influences of Divine
Grace: I have been considering (says he) the Advice, your gave me, and
Meditating on those Scriptures, you directed me to: And, Oh! I see it is
Nothing but a Christ will do me good: Oh the Sweet Promises that God has made
to Returning Sinners! Blessed be God I am out of Hell. I had thought I had been
in Hell in the Night; I saw, as it were, Hell Gaping, the Devil Roaring, and my
own Conscience Condemning me to the Pit of Hell; and indeed crying out with
Horror, Blood gushed from my Nose: Some, that lay in the Room with me, said, I
had been in a Slumber, whether I was, or no, I could not well tell, but thought
I might be so. However, when I found my self out of Hell, Oh, how it affected
me! Then he Wept and Melted kindly, saying, Oh, what a Wretch am I that I
should Sin against so good a God, as this, who has declared himself so ready
to forgive! I am resolved to lie at his Feet: I am convinced that I am a lost
undone Creature out of Christ: It is not all I can do, that will or can save
me: Were I to Live my days over again, and spend them in nothing but Prayers
and Tears, that could not Save me, no, it is nothing but the mercy of God in
Christ, that must save me; and upon this will I trust. I am resolved that at
the last I will lay my self wholly at the Feet of God's Mercy in Jesus Christ,
and there I will Die: This he utteered with raised and enlarged Affections.
They have brougt my Coffin, and I am not afraid to see it; proceeded he, I
thank God I can freely Lie down in it: These Shackles about my Legs are, as if
they were not; I do not regard them. My Heart is so cheared with the
consideration of the Precious Promises God has made to poor perishing Sinners;
and Why not to me? And Why not to thee indeed said I. She Loved much, to whom
much was forgiven: Ah Replied he, it is much must be forgiven me, Much indeed.
More to this purpose passed between us: Several other Ministers were with him
that Day, and Prayed with him as he told me, what Discourse they had with him I
know not.

On Tuesday Morning, being the day before his Execution, after some Conference
for the settling his Faith and Hope upon a right bottom, cautioning him against
all the delusions of a subtle Tempter, and self-deceiving Heart, that he might
not be confident in himself, or any thing else, but only in the sure Word of
Truth, he broke out into a most Pathetical Rapture, not without a Flood of
Tears, Admireing the Love of God to Man in Christ Jesus, so as was wonderful to
behold, and next to inexpressible: Thus he continued for about a quarter of an
hour, his Heart seemed, as if it would break in pieces before it could get
vent, it seemed to me impossible such Words, as then flowed from his Mouth,
should proceed from any other than an Heart truly touched and broken with godly
Sorrow, and that felt indeed, what the Love of God in Christ meant. Oh how did
he abase himself, saying, There was no Creature upon Earth more loathsome, than
he was to himself by Reason of Sin, adding, He had been the Devils Vassal, and
Drudge, hurried on by him to all manner of Evil, and that now God should touch
his Heart with remorse, make him sensible of his Sin, he did admire with
greatest thankfulness. One sitting by, and speaking of Assurance, that
Christians should labor for it, as a most excellent thing, He answered, If the
Lord will not give me the assurance of the Pardon of my Sins before I die; yet
if he will but enable me to Hope in his Mercy, to seck him, wait, and trust in
him, I will praise him. I spent the greatest part of this day with him in
Prayer, Instruction, and Exhortation. He was not without some damps upon his
Spirit that Afternoon, signifying his fear of miscarrying; often loading himself
with his Sins, as exceeding the common size: And yet durst not but own, that
the Merits of Christ's Blood and Mercies of God through him, were infinitely
more and greater. Verily, it was mavelous to me, to observe the Methods of
Free Grace with this Poor Man: How the Lord by a holy Fear and awakening
Apprehensions of the evil of Sin, and eternal Misery, preserved him from carnal
Security, and Presumption: And also upheld him from sinking into horrid
Despair, by letting out some Tokens of his Love, and Mercy to him, now and
then. He was ever most humble, when most raised with any Hopes of finding
acceptance with God through the Lord Redeemer.

Having left him three or four hours, in the Evening, I visited him again, at
which time People came thronging into the Chamber, so as created some trouble
to the Keeper; and He looking round on them, dropped several seasonable and
weighty Exhortations to them, saying, Come see the Fruit of Sin, and what it
will bring you all unto, if you don't take warning by me, and turn to the Lord
by true Repentance, I mean not, you shall all come to Shackles, and a Halter,
but to such an Hell in your Consciences. Oh, I have felt a Hell in my
Conscience. Then looking upon his Coffin, Ah, says he, I am thinking a House,
a Town, a Country, nay a Nation, could not hold me, not long ago, and to
morrow I must be confined within the narrow limits of that little room. Look
Sirs, what they that have most, must have at last but their length, a Coffin:
Then shaking his Head, says he, I may truly say with Solomon, All worldly
things are but Vanity, and Vexation of Spirit, Vexation of Spirit indeed to me.

Spending again some time in calling upon God with, and for him, he was sweetly
affected in the Duty, and cried out, Lord, thou have said, Whosoever is weary and
heavy laden, let him come to thee for rest for his Soul, and he shall find it.
I am heavy laden with the Burden of Sin, it is a heavy Burden, that I have
lain under these three, or four days, but thanks be to God, it is lighter than
it was, Lord, thou have said, He that comes to thee, thou will in no wise cast
out.

It growing late, he desired the Company might be dismissed, and I left with him
alone; I desired we might sing an Hymn before they went away, all readily
assented to it, he joined with us with a very audible and cheerful Voice: After
we had done, he said, Blessed be God I can sing with cheerfulness. Did you not
Mind me, how cheerfully I sang? My Heart is very much refreshed with the
Consideration of Gods Mercy, so that it affected the Hearts of all that were
present; there were not many dry eyes in the Room, though full of People, who
were astonished at what they saw and heard. When all the Company was departed,
he told me, his Companions, that came to visit him, said, Look, how he is
fallen in two or three days, shaking his Head and lifting up his Hands, he
retorted, Oh happy fall for me, would to God I had so fallen sooner; Blessed be
God for this fall, it is the happiest fall that ever I had: After a little
pause, To Morrow, said he, my poor Soul must take its flight out of this Body;
Oh that it might fly into its Saviors bosom!

I signified to him, that I had thoughts of staying with him all Night, he told
me he could have been glad of it; but for some reasons we omitted it: He Prayed
me to come Early in the Morning, and then not to leave him till I saw him
Executed. He most Affectionately thanked me for the Service I had done him,
praying God to reward me: I told him my work was wages, excusing my self that I
came not sooner to visit the Prisoners, telling him, it was often in my mind so
to do, but a Sinful Shame prevented me; Oh! said he, Would to God you had come
sooner: And truly I found a General Acceptance among all the Prisoners, beyond
what I could expect; I mention this only to encourage my Brethren in the
Ministry to visit poor Prisoners. You cannot tell till you try how welcome you
may be to such distressed Souls, and how serviceable for their Eternal welfare.
The general greeting I had from this poor Prisoner after my second visit, was,
Welcome, Welcome.

Here I cannot omit the Civility of Mr. Bloodwick, their Keeper, who did
readily admit of any that might be helpful to the Souls of those under his
charge; and the peculiar excellency of Mrs. Bloodwick is worth taking notice
of, by whose oversight the Prison is kept with great neatness, whereas other
Prisons are so filthy, as renders it very prejudicial to the Health of those
that visit them; here it is not so, the Nicest persons need not fear being
offended with ill scents.

But to digress no further, I left him that Night, promising to be with him
Early in the Morning: Soon after Four I went to him, we spent most of the time
till Nine in Discoursing of what he had Read after I left him, and in Prayer:
The frame of his Spirit still remained Humble, Tender and in good measure:
Spiritual Death and Judgment were now Solemn things in his Account and the
thoughts thereof lively and influential on his whole deportment. He labored
with mighty concernedness how to Die Well, pressed all about him with strong
Arguments to live better than he had done; especially he strictly admonished
and charged his Wife, who had been a copartner with him in all his villainy,
that she should immediately Reform, and what straits soever she came into,
still to depend upon, and trust in God, following and serving him in ways of
true Religion and Godly Fear, to keep her self from the snares of evil company,
which had been Ruinous to him, so dangerous to her already, and is one of the
greatest Engines of destruction the Devil uses in the World. Not only the Life
of his own Soul was precious to him, but he showed strange Zeal for the
Salvation of others, pitied poor Sinners with bowels of Compassions, often
declaring his deep sense of their miserable state, who lived careless in the
matters of their Souls Eternal Peace, and Comfort.

A little before Execution, enquiring of him what Confession he thought to
make, he said, he was not inclined to speak much publicly in that respect, for
this reason, That he judged it useless, and at most would only gratify some,
who came for nothing else but to hear him tell a long Story of a Vicious Life,
which was more likely to discompose his own mind, than tend to their
Edification. Moreover he said, I cannot affect the Guilty, and for others, some
may believe me, some may not: The Guilty know themselves. I will therefore
leave them to God and their own Consciences, wishing them true Repentance, that
they may never come to this miserable End. He did not think fit to go out of
the World accusing others, whom he could no more than accuse, and neither bring
them to deserved Punishment for what they had done, nor prevent thereby their
proceeding in the same course of Wickedness: No, for (said he) God must
convince them, and change their hearts, which he did, and would pray earnestly
for to his last.

He was desirous to employ all his little space in seeking God, and giving up
himself to Jesus Christ in humble prayer; now and then saying, Oh! my Time is
short, within a few hours, yea moments, I shall be in Eternity; O vain World!

And thus he prepared himself to Embrace Death with comfort; for though any one
might see great seriousness in all his Carriage, when going to the Place of
Execution, and when there, yet as little sadness appeared, as ever did sn any
in his condition, that was not absolutely stupid, and insensible.

Requesting me often not to leave him till Death separated us, I accompanied him
to the Place of Execution, where I prayed with him, committing his Soul to God,
he joined with me with great Ardency: Then was sung the latter part of the 39th
Psalm by his appointment; in singing whereof he seemed Elevated in Heart and
Voice above most present. At last turning about and looking round on the
multitude, he took his farewell in these words, or words to the like effect.

Gentle Spectators, You are come to see a sinful miserable wretch suffer this
Ignominious Death; I thank God it is not terrible to me, for I trust that I
shall find Mercy with God for my poor Soul, through the precious Blood of my
sweet Jesus. You may see here what Sin will bring you to; Oh take warning by
me; take heed of Sin; shun Temptations; flee Evil Company; beware of
Sabbath-breaking, for by this Sin the Devil begins with many to draw them to
all manner of Wickedness, so he did with me; Oh forsake all your Evil Ways!
turn to the Lord, he is a gracious God. Oh vile Wretch! that I have so sinned
against a holy, just and merciful God: I have been a Prodigal indeed, but I
hope now a Returning one; Oh that they that have been my Companions in
mischief, may repent before it be too late! I beg of them to fear God, and mind
their Souls: There may be some of them that hear me at this time, the Lord
touch their hearts: Oh do not still go on! you are known to God, who will call
you to account for all one day: Think of it, I beseech you; the Lord give you
Repentance, and Pardon your Sins, that you may not come to this miseable End
you see me come to. With more to the like purpose.

Then Resigning himself to God, and beging Acceptance with him, for the Merits
of a Dear and Alsufficient Redeemer, he Ended this Temporal and miserable Life.

Hitherto I have given a bare Historical Relation of what came within my own
personal knowledge; and I Appeal to God for my Fidelity in the whole: For,
though in some things I may have varied from his precise words, (which yet I
have stuck to as much as is possible) I dare confidently affirm, that I have
not departed from his Sense, and the truth in any thing. Only let me add
farther a few Observations for Spiritual improvement; as, what may from the
Preceding Narrative be inferred.

First, That when God sets sin upon the Conscience, and inlightens the mind to
see its Guilt, the most obdurate sinner cannot withstand the Terrors of Divine
Wrath: This was most plainly demonstrated in this Man's Case* He that had once
made a mock of Sin (as all ungodly Fools do) and no fear of the Great and
Terrible Majesty of an Infinitely Holy, Just and Omnipotent God, did lay
constraint upon him; but in contempt of Hell and all the Threatenings of Eternal
Divine Displeasure, swaggered it out in those ways that lead directly to
Eternal perdition, till the Lord graciously let in some beams of Holy Light
into his Soul; then how horrid were his Sins? and how dreadful the apprehension
of their just desert! Oh, the Agonies that I saw him in! How did he Tremble?
And the thoughts of having to do with an Angry Almighty God, will shake the
Hearts of the stoutest Sinners; for, Who knows the power of his Wrath? Who can
dwell with Everlasting burnings?

Secondly, That when Men come once seriously to consider Death, Judgment and a
future State, the necessity of a Christ for their Souls, will presently and
evidently appear to them: Did not Men cast these out of their Thoughts, it
could not be that they should live at ease; set so light by a Savior as the
generality of them do. Alas! Men put the evil Day far from them, and look upon
Death, Judgment and things of another World, as at a vast distance; or at most
not absolutely certain, and so their Preparations for Eternity are but Languid,
Remiss, Heartless and Insignificant: But let Death look them in the Face, and
their Minds be possessed with Sober, Lively, Believing Apprehensions of the
grand important matters of a World to come; then give them a Christ, and
nothing but a Christ is the load and earnest cry of their Souls. Oh, the worth,
excellency and necessity of that precious Christ that they had long before
vilified and rejected!

Thirdly, If the Lord please to put a poor Sinner upon sollicitous care and
concern for Saving the Soul, no means will be neglected, no diligence in the
use thereof wanting for that end; especially they will be much in Prayer: Cry
often and mightily to the Lord for Grace and Mercy: Give God and their own Souls
no rest, till they find both. Nothing more remarkable than this in the present
instance. What a price did he set upon Prayer? as appears by this, that he
gladly accepted the Prayers of any, though of never so mean capacity; and
though at first he could only Pray with others help, yet upon my pressing him
to exercise himself in Prayer, using his own expressions, and telling him (when
he pleaded he could not Pray without help) that a due sight and sense of our
Sins, Wants and Miseries, would find us matter enough for, and open our Mouhts
wide in Prayer. He acknowledged he wanted not words to plead with the Judge for
his Life, accepted my Counsel, set upon the Duty, found assistance and comfort
therein; told me when I came next to him; I thank God now I can Pray: And I
have heard him with Ardour of Affection make his Address to God. No time, no
pains were now too much for making his peace with God, obtaining pardon of sin,
and working out his Salvation. But alas! is it not a sad, and too certain a
sign, that few are as solicitous as they ought for their Souls. Would there
then be so many Prayerless persons and families in the World? Would God's Holy
Day, Word and Worship, and Necessary Means of Grace be so neglected? Oh! that
in Wisbech, and every place there may be more Praying, Striving and Running in
the ways of Gods Ordinances for Heaven; that they would testify abundantly
that they are in good earnest to provide for their Souls, and that the one
thing necessary is their chiefest business and only weighty concernment in this
Life.

Fourthly, They that apprehend the Mercy of God in Christ aright, will look
upon him as a most holy and Righteous God also: They Will not set Free Grace, and
the Infinite Riches of his Mercy in opposition to his Justice, but admire and
adore his Grace the more, by seeing a full satisfaction to his Justice in the
Blood of his own dear Son of indispensible necessity. Scarce did any more
magnify the Love and Free Grace of God to sinners, than he; Blessing the Lord
with admiration, that his Mercies were so infinite, Compassions boundless; yet
had he an Eye upon his Righteousness, and severest Justice: Often, when speaking
how gracious God is, and merciful to poor sinners, such as he was; he would
add, He is a just God too. Yea indeed he will be just, as well as merciful; and
therefore he is merciful in Christ only, who can satisfy his Justice: Oh that
Sinners therefore would not presume upon the mere Mercy of God, contenting
themselves with a general Notion, that God is merciful, and so will save them:
For all the Mercy and Grace in God, will never save one Soul, but as it Runs
through the Lord Jesus Christ, the only proper Channel of its Conveyance to
humble penitent believing Sinners. It Is Christ alone, who by the Sacrifice of
himself has made Atonement for Sin, paid a Price adequate and satisfactory to
Infinite Justice, born the Curse, fulfilled the Righteousness of the Law, for
the Justification and Salvation of those, who believe in him, and obey his
Gospel.

To conclude: Receive a word of Exhortation; Up and be doing; omit no
opportunity; spare no industry for securing the Eternal Interest and Happiness
of your Souls; let not the awakening Call of this sad and Dismal Providence
prove in vain, to any, whose Eyes or Ears, it has already, or hereafter may
Reach: Awake, awake, secure Sinners, and know the Day of God's Patience, and
Long-suffering toward you, that you may be prepared for, and safe in the Day
of his Vengeance. O Sirs! the Judge is at the Door; the Great and Terrible Day
of the Lord is nigh, to every one of you: Search your Consciences: T^^^ the
State of your Souls: How do you think to stand before the Dreadful Tribunal of
the Great God? Is Arraignment and Condemnation, at an Earthly Bar, and the
Execution of Man's Sentence, so Amazing and Terrifying, what will it be then,
to be Tried, and Cast Eternally, by the Great and Righteous Judge of Heaven and
Earth? O trifle not with Eternity! But again, search your Hearts and
Consciences: If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and
knows all things; But if our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God. O fly to Christ! accept of him upon Gospel-Terms; there is no
escaping the Wrath to come, but by an Interest in him; make sure of it then,
and live not without a Christ, that you die not without a Christ: Die in your
sins, and so die eternally. If the Lord will bless, and make this useful for
the Conversion of any Soul; give God the sole Praise, and Glory. Amen.

Books Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey.
A Peaceable Inquiry into the Nature of the Present Controversy among the
United Brethren; containing the Excellency of Peace and Love. Luther's Opinion
of it: The mischiefs of Strife and Contentions in the Church, instanced in the
Rise and Progress of the Miletians and Arians: The Cure difficult, yet
necessary to be endeavored: The Improvement to be made of former Divisions: An
Inquiry into the Present Controversy, whether about the substance of Truth, or
the manner only of declaring it. That great Divisions have been among such as
have agreed in the same principles. This the present Case among the United
Brethren proved; with several other particulars. Written by Mr. Stephen Lob.
pr. 1 s. 6 d.

The Second Volume of the French Book of Martyrs, is now Published in English,
with Her Majesty's Royal Privilege, and ready to be delivered to the
Subscribers. The Third and Fourth Volumes are also preparing for the Press, and
comprehend (with the two Volumes already Published) all the Martyrdoms, etc.
that have been in France from the beginning of the Reformation there, down to
this present time.

The WORKS of the Right Honorable Henry late Lord Delamer, and Earl of
Warrington, containing his Lordships Advice to his Children, several Speeches
in Parliament, etc. with many other Occasional Discourses on the Affairs of the
two Last Reigns. Being 32 Original Manuscripts Written by his Lordships own
Hand; never before Printed. Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel, and John
Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey, price bound 5s.

Several Gentlemen of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, have so highly
approved Mr. Sault's Translation of Malbranches Search after Truth, ( the first
Volume of which was lately published in London in Octavo that so useful a Work
might be sit for the Pocket,) as that it has greatly encournged the Sale at
Oxford and Cambridge, and occasioned the Undertakers to send great Numbers
thither a Second Time, and to expedite the Publication of the Second Volume.
The Extraordinary Usefulness of this Work of Malbranches, may be seen at large
in the Book lately published by the Reverend Mr. Norris, entitled, Spiritual
Counsel, or the Father's Advice to his Children: Printed for S. Manship, at the
Ship in Cornhil.

Bishop Barlows Remains, containing near an hundred distinct subjects,
Theological, Philosophical, Historical, etc. In Letters to several Persons of
Honor and Quality, to which is added the Resolution of many abstruse points,
as also Directions to a Young Divine for his study in Divinity, and choice of
his Library. Published from his Lordships Original Papers. Price bound 6 s.
Printfor John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey.

FINIS.

