OF THE SOUL OF THE WORLD; AND OF Particular Souls.

IN A Letter to Mr. Lock, occasioned by Mr. Keil's Reflections upon an Essay
lately published concerning Reason.

By the Author of that Essay.

Minut. Fael. in Octav. Veritas obvia, sed requirentibus. Erasmus in
Hyperaspist. l. 2. Verborum umbris territamur, quum in re nihil sit absurdi.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar. M DC. XC. IX.

TO JOHN LOCK Esquire
SIR,
IT may seem an improper way of making satisfaction for a former Trouble, to
give a new one: yet since you have pardoned the Confidence that made a Present
to you of my Essay concerning Reason, and that some very sharp Reflections have
been published on a part of that Essay, I hold my self obliged to send you my
Defense of it.

My Intention in this Address is not to engage you in the Protection, or to the
Countenance of any Opinion, further than as Reason allows it; nor is it to
insinuate that you are of mine, to gain it the more Authority: For tho I could
not procure a greater Advantage to any Opinion I own, than to have others
persuaded that you are of it; yet I must do you the justice to profess that I
am wholly ignorant what yours is, as to the Point in debate.

I only appeal unto you now, as I did at first, as to an Arbiter or Judge, for
which your excellent penetrating Understanding highly qualifies you, without
inviting you as a Party to come to my Assistance, which at this time I hope I
shall not need.

Mr. Keil in the Introduction to his Examination of Dr. Burnet's Theory of the
Earth, has done me the Honor (tho I am not sure he designed it for one) to
mention me with several very celebrated Persons; but he does it in that manner,
and with that Abatement, that I have no great cause of being exalted on that
regard.

After he had instanced in Spinosa, Dr. More, and Mr. Hobbs, as Authors of
great Discoveries, which might well demand Esteem and Veneration, if they were
real, he picks out some of their Opinions, which he believed the most
obnoxious, that by them his Readers may see how well they deserve such a
Character. He then adds, But a new Philosopher (naming me, who am not ambitious
of that Title) has much outdone any I have yet mentioned, in a Book lately
printed concerning Reason; there he assures us that there is but one universal
Soul in the World, which is omnipresent, and acts upon all particular Organized
Bodies, and makes them produce Actions more or less perfect, in proportion to
the good Disposition of their Organs. So that in Beasts that Soul is the
Principle of the sensitive and vital Functions; in Men it does not only perform
these, but also all other rational Actions: just as if you would suppose a Hand
of a vast Extention, and a prodigious number of Fingers, playing upon all the
Organ-pipes in the World, and making every one sound a particular Note,
according to the Disposition and Frame of the Pipe: So this universal Soul
acting upon all Bodies, makes every one produce various Actions, according to
the different Disposition and Frame of their Organs. This Opinion he as
confidently asserts to be true, as other Men believe that it is salse; tho it
is impossible he should any other way be sure of it but by Revelation; and I
believe he will find but few that will take it upon his word.

Mr. Keil, I hope, will give me leave to tell him without offense, that the
Representation of my Opinion, had he pleased to make it in my own Terms, would
have been less invidious, and withal more just than it appears in his. However,
since he has endeavored by a Comparison to illustrate, or else to expose [for
I cannot well resolve which 'tis] the Sentiment I own, and that this Comparison
is capable of being applied unto it to good purpose, I will my self make use of
it my own way.

But first I must give a Plan of my true Notion, which in short is this; That
the Mosaical Spirit (called Genesis I. v. 2. the Spirit of God) being a Spirit of
Life, and present every where, in all the Parts of the Universe, is the
Original of all the Energy, Motion, and Action therein, especially of that
which is Animal. And that particular Souls [for such I acknowledge there be] are
Portions of that Spirit acting in the several particular Bodies in which they
are, according to the Capacities, Dispositions, and Qualities of those Bodies.
A Sentiment conformable to two received Maxims: Quicquid recipitur, recipitur
ad modum recipientis. Actus activorum sunt in patiente disposito.

To make it imaginable, let us suppose a vast Organ, consisting of innumerable
Pipes of different Sizes and Fabric, and this Organ to be filled with Wind
blown into it, and the Wind to be received, and some portion of it appropriated
by each particular Pipe: Imagine also innumerable Fingers playing upon those
several Pipes: For then each particular Pipe being played upon, will, by means
of the Wind, be made to sound a particular Note, differing from the Notes of
all the other Pipes, according as its Qualities, Dispositions, and Fabric
differ.

The World is as such an Organ [an orderly Aggregate;] and the several sorts of
Bodies that compose it are as the several Pipes of that Organ; the Mosaical
Spirit present every where throughout the whole World, is as the Wind (which
is) blown into the Organ. This Spirit is received and apportioned by the
several particular Bodies, as the Wind in an Organ by the several particular
Pipes: and as these inspired with Wind, being played upon, do sound different
Notes or Tunes; so those animated with their respective Portions of the
Mosaical Spirit, being impressed and acted upon by Objects, do perform their
several vital Functions, according to their several Dispositions and Fabric.

Thus far the Comparison plainly holds; but it may be carried a greater length,
and made serve to illustrate what I say in my Essay concerning the nature of
Animals, of Spirits, and of Souls. For it may be added, that as the power of
making an Organ sound at all, or the power of making a particular Pipe to sound
a particular Note, arises not solely from the frame of the Organ, or from that
of the Pipe; for the Organ sounds not at all, if it be not inspired with Wind,
and tho inspired with Wind, and consequently tho it gives a Sound, yet it will
not sound to such and such a particular Tune, if it be not played upon with the
Fingers. In like manner, the Power of making a Body live, or of any particular
Instrument of it exercise any particular Action of Cogitation, as of Seeing, or
of Hearing, arises not solely from the frame of the Body, or from that of the
particular Instrument, the Eye, or the Ear: for the Body lives not, if it be
not animated with some Portion of the Mosaical Spirit; and if it be animated,
and consequently has Life, as the inspired Organ has Sound, yet it does not
exercise that Life in this or that particular manner of Cogitation, by its
several Instruments, as in seeing by the Eye, or hearing by the Ear, if it be
not acted upon, and impressed by Objects, any more than an Organ which is only
inspired, tho it sound, will sound to this or that particular Tune, if it be
not played upon with the Fingers. Thus Life originally comes from the Soul: I
say, comes from the Soul; for that, speaking properly, it is not in the Soul,
considered as a Soul, any more than Motion is, which properly is not in the
Soul, but from it. And as Life, so Cogitation, which is a Species of Life,
proceeds from the Soul, but the Specification of it from the Body. And for the
actual exercise of Cogitation in its several Species, whether of Sensation, or
of Intellection, it comes originally from the Impressions and Operations of
Objects. For Images and Ideas, that is to say, the Sentiments of the Sense, and
those of the Mind or Understanding (they) are nothing but different
Modifications of Cogitation; the former, Modifications of Sensation, the latter
of Intellection; after the same manner as different Notes or Tunes are but
different Modifications, or diverse Modulations of sound.

In this way of conceiving, the Production of Images and Ideas is more
perspicuous and intelligible, as well as more connatural, than in that of
Malbranch; which, methinks, in things of Nature, instead of having recourse to
natural Causes, dotha little too unphilosophically, too soon repair unto the
first Cause, which is the Author of Nature. But (as I said) in the way before
set out, the Conception of it is very easy: For Images and Ideas being but the
Modifications of Cogitation, they are made by Impressions, and made different
by different Impressions of Objects upon the Faculties; as Notes and Tunes are
made by the playing, and different Notes and Tunes by the different playing of
the Fingers upon the several Pipes of an Organ.

This Comparison of the World animated with the Spirit of God, to an Organ
filled with Wind blown into it, cannot but be acknowledged to have much of
Resemblance and Agreableness; and the more, if we consider that this Spirit of
God is called Ruach in Hebrew, a word signifying Wind; and likewise that
Pneumatical or Wind-Instruments of Music are said (tho but metaphorically) to
be animated, as I think they are in Psalm 150. v. last. For here it is said,
Let every thing that has Neshamah; the same Word that is used for the Soul of
Man, Genesis 2. 7. when God is said to breath into him the Breath of Life: so
here, Let every thing that has Neshamah, every thing that is animated with
Wind, let every Wind-Instrument (for the Coherence plainly carries it unto
Musical Instruments) Praise the Lord. And as Neshamah comes from Nasham,
Anhelare, to pant or breath, so likewise Nephesh, another Word in Hebrew for a
Soul, derives from a Root of the like signification, and often stands for
Breath, as well as for a Soul.

Nor was this a particular Sentiment only of the Jews, but both the Greeks and
Romans were in the same: For in Greek the Name for Spirit is (...), and (...)
comes from (...) to blow; and (...), the word for Soul, derives from (...) to
breathe. With the Romans, the word for Soul is sometimes Anima, sometimes
Animus; words that come from (...), which signifies Wind, as in like manner
Spiritus does from Spiro.

When I affirm that [Anima] and [Animus] are often used promiscuously in Latin
Authors, I have good Authority to support it, since Cotta in Cicero l. 3. de
not. Deor. saying, Qui magis quam praeter Animam, unde Animantium quoque
constet Animus, exquo Anima dicitur, intimates the same: for there he calls the
vital Principle of inferior Animals Animus, and in effect says, both that it
consists of Anima or Breath (which is inspired Air or Wind) and that for this
reason the Breath is called Anima, because it is to inferior Animals what the
Animus is to Man; [Animus ex quo Anima dicitur.] Anima it is Animus with a
little distinction; Anima is the Animus or Soul of Brutes, and Animus is the
Anima or Soul of Men; as in the Holy Scripture, where St. Paul speaks of Body,
Soul, and Spirit, what he means by Soul may be expressed by Anima, what he
intends by Spirit by the word Animus; the former word importing the sensitive
Principle, which is common to Beasts, the latter the rational or intellectual,
which is proper to Men.

To clear this Passage further, which I have quoted out of Cicero, and the
sense I have given of it, we ought to consider that the Stoics held an opinion
that all Souls were Fire; and Balbus (who was one of them) taking it for
granted, is told by Cotta that he was too forward in assuming so much; for,
says he, it is the probable Opinion that the vital Principle or Soul is not
Breath only as most think, or Fire only as Stoics think, but a Complex or
Result of both; probabilius videtur, tale quiddam esse Animum, ut sit ex igne
at que anima temperatum.

It is true Julius Scaliger in his 107th Exercitation against Cardan, is
extreme severe upon that wonderfully knowing and learned Man for saying but by
implication, that other Souls besides the human were called Animi. For Cardan
having said, Animi vires praecipue humani, etc. Scaliger replies upon him,
Quasi vero alius sit Animus ab humano. Insinuating thereby, that to hold that
every (or indeed that any) Soul might be called Animus is very absurd, as in
truth it would be, if what he says was well grounded, to wit, that all wise Men
did ever understand by Animus a Faculty of the human Soul, which he says; tho
at the same time he confesses Cicero (who, it seems, for this reason he thought
not very wise) to be in a different Opinion: Nam tametsi Cicero (says he)
Animal ab Animo dictum scribit, tamen hominis proprium Animum, id est, Animae
vim, sapientes omnes intellexere.

And to lessen Cicero's Authority in this particular, he impeaches him of
Inconstancy, telling us that at another time, speaking of Apronius, he uses
such Expressions as do evidently so distinguish between Anima and Animus, that
no room is left to imagine but that he took the latter for only a Power or
Faculty of the former. At (says Scaliger) non servabit [Cicero] constantiae
opinionem invitis doctis viris, ejus enim verba de Apronio sunt, qui non modo
Animum integrum, sed ne Animam quidem puram conservare potuisset, ubi aperte
Animae facultatem innuit Animi appellatione.

But our Hypercritick has not exercised his Talent to advantage in this place:
for tho it must be acknowledged that Animus is very often used for a Faculty of
the Soul, and not always taken for the Soul it self; yet when Cicero says of
Apronius that he could not conservare animam puram, he does not mean by Anima
his Soul (of which the Animus, that he distinguishes from it should be a
Faculty) but he understands his Breath, which was impure, foul, and stinking.
This is evident from the Orator himself, who in Verrem lib. 3. describing this
Apronius, says of him, that his Breath was so fetid, that, as some affirmed,
the very Beasts could not endure its Stink: Ut odor Apronii teterrimus oris and
corporis, quem, ut aiunt, ne bestiae quidem far possent.

In truth, nothing more surprises me on this occasion, than to find Scaliger (a
very extraordinary Man, and a great Critic) so positive in this Opinion, that
none of the Ancients who had any Wit, ever denominated the Souls of inferior
Animals Animi, or even that of Man Animus. For Seneca Epist. 113. tells it to
Lucilius, as the Opinion of the Ancients, that the Animus is an Animal, for
that it makes us Animals; and that Animals receive their name from ANIMUS: Quae
sint (says he) quae Antiquos moverint dicam; Animal constut Animum esse, cum
ipse efficiat ut simus Animalia, and cum ab illo Animalia nomen hoc traxerint.

However (to note it by the by) it must not be said neither that the Ancients
never gave the name [Anima] to the Soul, or that Anima of old did only signify
the Breath: For tho Anima was used to signify the Breath, it was so but in a
secondary Sense, the Breath being therefore called Anima, because the Anima or
Soul was generally understood to be contained therein, or to consist thereof.
This is manifest not only from what is said already, but (to omit others) from
a Passage in Seneca l. de provid. where As he says, sive haustus ignis cursum
Animae remeantis interscidit, etc. where [Anima remeans] signifies Respiration
or Breathing: So he likewise says, Id quod vocatur MORI, quo Anima discedit a
corpore, etc. For here [Anima] is taken for the Soul. But to put it out of
question, that even the human Soul is called Anima by ancient Authors, I need
to cite but Seneca his 117th Epistle; where, writing of the Immortality of
Souls, and saying that the consent of Mankind in that point is a cogent
Argument for the truth thereof, he uses the word [Anima] not [Animus] for a
Soul; cum de ANIMARUM aeternitate disserimus, says he, non leve momentum apud
nos habet consensus hominum, aut timentium Inferos, aut Colentium.

I have a fruitful Subject before me, and could add a great deal more, if I
believed it proper; but it may suffice at this time to have showed that both
Anima and Animus are Names for a Soul, and that both derive from a Word that
signifies Wind or Breath: for this evinces that the Comparison I have made
between the animated World and an inspired Organ, is not any remote one, or (as
we usually speak) farfetch'd, but very fitting and agreeable.

However, tho this Comparison between the World and an Organ is well enough
imagined, and carries much resemblance; yet since an Organ is but a Machin, and
only artificial, and that Animals are Works of Nature, and more than mere
Machins, I chose in my Essay to illustrate and set out my Notion by Comparisons
taken from Nature, as from Sound and Echo, from Light and Colors; but more
particularly from our own Souls, and their different Operations in the several
Organs of Human Bodies, by means of their several Faculties.

In that Treatise I have showed at large, that there is a universal vital
Principle diffused throughout the World; and withal have showed how that
Principle comes to be singularized, and individuated, so as that there be
particular Souls. I have also endeavored to satisfy Objections, and have
instanced in the Theodosian and Scottish Monsters, as sensible Demonstrations of
the truth of what I affirm in reference to this Subject.

I have showed likewise that the Jewish Doctors, many Philosophers, some
Fathers, and several Schoolmen, were in the same Sentiment as to the main: for
tho perhaps they all agreed not either each with other, or with me, as to
particular explications; yet all held a vital Principle that does permeate the
whole World; and that, unto the Universe, is what the Soul of Man is to his
Body. And if common Language does signify a common Sentiment, this must be
owned to be one. For why else is Man called a Microcosm or little World, but
because he is like the Great, and has Soul and Body? And tho this Expression is
appropriated unto Man, yet if we believe Galen, the Ancients held that every
Animal is a Microcosm, a World in little; and then surely, in their Opinion,
the World it self is, after a sort, an Animal in Great.

Upon the whole it is evident, that for any to imagine I exclude particular
Souls, because I do affirm a general (one,) is to do me injury; and, in effect,
the same as to infer that I deny there are Colors, because I affirm there is
Light; or that I deny there is Echo, because I affirm there is Sound. In sum,
he might as fairly conclude that all those deny the Powers of Seeing, of
Hearing, of Feeling, etc. to be in any Animal, who do affirm that the Animal
has a Soul which is the Principle of those Powers; for those Powers in divided
Bodies would be so many Souls, that in the same Body are only so many Faculties
of one Soul. This way of reasoning goes on the same ground that Seneca's does,
when, in another case, he says, Epist. 113. Animal sum and Homo, non tamen duos
esse dices: Quare? quia separati esse debent. Ita dico, alter ab altero debet
esse diductus, ut duo sint.

Yet, after all, it has pleased Mr. Keil to make a sharp Reflection upon me for
this Opinion (but with how much Equity or Candor, our Readers must determine)
and he does it in these Terms.

This Opinion he as confidently asserts to be true, as other men believe it is
false; tho it is impossible he should any other way be sure of it but by
Revelation; and I believe he will find but few that will take it upon his Word.

First he says, I confidently assert, etc. As for Confidence, I acknowledge that
a Confidence like his in this Reflection, that does only assert but not prove,
cannot merit any great Commendation: But otherwise I know no fault in being
confident of any Opinion, or in a confident asserting of it, (which however I
am no way conscious of) if there is reason for that Confidence, and that the
Opinion be well grounded.

But this he supposes mine is not; for he says, I confidently assert, etc. tho
it is impossible I should any other way be sure of it but by Revelation. If he
mean it is impossible I should be absolutely sure of it but by Revelation, and
that for this reason it is a Presumption in me to assert the Opinion, since I am
not assured of it that way, he must excuse me if I differ from him. For, in the
first place, I will take the liberty to tell him what I believe most others who
consider, would upon occasion, that there are many Degrees of a just
Confidence, that yet do all fall much beneath Infallibility, or absolute
Certainty. Besides, methinks it should content him, as being a sufficient
ground of asserting any Opinion, even with Confidence, that there is Reason for
the Opinion, tho he that asserts it cannot be absolutely sure of it without a
Revelation; especially since Mr. Keil himself, I dare say, will not affirm he
had a Revelation for all he confidently asserts in his Book, of which yet he
cannot be absolutely sure without one; but what there is of Revelation in the
Question between him and me, he may be told hereafter, and might have learned
somewhat of it from the Essay, where also he might have seen that there was
some reason for the Opinion.

And whereas he says, that I as confidently assert my Opinion to be true, as
other Men believe that it is false: If I should yield him so much, what would
follow but this, That if this be all, it is only Confidence on either side; I
confidently assert it to be true, other men as confidently believe that it is
false? And when equal Confidence and nothing else is in both the Scales, what
shall turn them? But certainly, tho other Men (if but other Men) believe an
Opinion to be false, that any one affirms to be true, it will not necessarily
follow that it is false indeed; for if it should, Mr. Keil himself, who writes
in opposition to other Men (and those very worthy Men) must believe himself in
the wrong Box, till he can convince them, ay, and all the rest of Mankind that
think otherwise than he does; for till then other Men will believe that what he
says is false. Indeed, if my Opinion went contrary to common Sense, and that
all other Men, or but all considerate, wise, and thinking Men were in another
belief, I should be very apt to suspect I was imposed upon by false
Appearances; but there is nothing of this in the matter, as will be manifest
presently.

Mr. Keil closes up his Censure (for all he says against me is Censure only,
not Argument) with telling his Readers his Belief, which is, that I will find
but few that will take the Opinion upon my word. In truth it is not my desire,
as it is not reason any should; nor as it falls out, is there any need they
should: for if a Revelation in the Holy Scriptures, if the Authority of some of
the most thinking and sagacious Philosophers, and if Reasons taken from the
Phenomenon of Nature, can put any Sentiment beyond the Misfortune of being
precarious, mine is safe enough from that Imputation.

As for Revelation, what interest it has in this Opinion, I have showed in my
Essay from Genesis Chapter 1. v. 2. compared with Psalm 147. v. 15, 16, etc. which
I will not repeat, only I will add that I think it abundantly confirmed by an
Evidence I find in the Book entitled, The Wisdom of Solomon, where it is said
Chapter 1. v. 7. The Spirit of the Lord fills all the World; and the same that
maintains all things has Knowledge of the Voice.

This Spirit, as it has in the Holy Scriptures the Denomination of the Spirit
of God, because it comes from him, and is his hand in all his Influences upon
the World; so it has that of the Spirit [or Soul] of the Creatures, whether
these be Plants, Sensitives, or Men, as being that Vital Principle that acts
and actuates them all. Thus in Psalm. 104. v. 29. that which is called the
Breath of the Creatures, or the immediate Principle that makes them live, and
is their Soul, upon whose Departure they are said to die, and to return to
their Dust, is, in the 30th verse of the same Psalm, called the Spirit of the
Lord, which being sent into them, makes them live: Thou sendest forth thy
Spirit, and they live; and thou renewest the face of the Earth.

This is particularly affirmed as to Man by Elihu, Job 33. 4. The Spirit of God
has made me, and the Breath of the Almighty has given me Life: By Job
himself, Chap. 27. v. 3. All the while my Breath is in me, and the Spirit of
God is in my Nostrils: And by Elihu again more comprehensively, Job. Chap. 34.
v. 14, 15. If he set his Heart upon Man [to take notice of him, and remark his
Iniquities] and [consequently] gather unto himself his Spirit and his Breath;
all Flesh shall perish together, and Man shall turn again unto Dust. Plainly
intimating that the Spirit of God (as if it were a common Soul) is the Original
Principle of Life and vital Operation in Man, as well as in all things else
that have Life. See Isa. 42. 5.

The Prophetical Scheme in Ezekiel, Chapter 37. concerning the dry Bones, is very
pertinent, and full to the same purpose. For when the dry Bones are to be made
to live, God is introduced saying to them, v. 5. Behold, I will cause Breath to
enter into you, and you shall live. And he effects it by the same steps, and in
the same manner as he created Man at first. For first he organized Bodies, v.
7, 8. The Bones came together, Bone to his Bone, the Sinews and the Flesh came
upon them, and the Skin covered them above. But tho the Bodies were organized,
yet being not inspired, [for there was no Breath in them] they were not made to
live as yet; and therefore to make them living Bodies, and put Soul into them,
the Prophet had a Commission to the MUNDANE SPIRIT to come and animate them, v.
9, 10. Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the Wind, prophesy, Son of Man, and
say to the Wind, Thus says the Lord God, Come from the four Winds, O Breath,
and breathe upon these slain, that they may live: So I prophesied, as he
commanded me, and the Breath came into them, and they lived. Where it may be
observed, that the Spirit that quickneth and gives Life to those Bodies is
compared to inspired Wind or Breath; that this Spirit of Life or quickening
Breath is diffused throughout the Universe in all the Quarters thereof; and
that it is entirely at the Command and Beck of God: For it is Breath is called
upon to come and quicken those Bodies; and it is called upon to come and
quicken them from the four Winds; and it is no sooner called upon, but it comes
forthwith, and quickens them.

It may also be observed that the Breath or common Spirit of Life, that blew
upon those Bodies, as it came upon them all, so it was apportioned by each; for
the Breath must be in them: And where the Breath is in all, each has his
Portion of it in particular, and then may say as Job, Chap. 27. v. 3. All the
while my Breath is in me, and the Spirit of God is in my Nostrils, etc. So long
his Breath is in him, as the Spirit of God is in his Nostrils.

Thus every Man has his own Soul, but this Soul is only a Portion of the
Spirit of God that, as a Soul, does permeate the Universe; so that it is (as in
Pythagoras's Expression, which I find in Lucretius) (...), a Spark of Either; or
as others choose to express it, particula Aur ae Divinae: which, according to
the grounds that I have laid in my Essay, I would render a Portion of Mind in
Matter. So much for my Opinion from the Authority of Revelation.

As for that of Philosophy, I produced in my Essay as Vouchers of my
Hypothesis, not only the great Philosopher last named, who was Founder of the
Italick Sect, but also Zeno, Seneca, Plutarch, Marcus Antoninus, and Apuleius.
To all which, from as many as would fill a Volume, I will add a few more.

Thales the Father of the Ionick Sect, held (as Laertius tells us) that Water
was the Principle of all things, and that the World was animated [(...)] In
which Doctrines (as is very probable) he was instructed by the Mosaic
Tradition [of the Waters, and the Spirit that moved upon them] for unto this
his Dogmata are very conformable.

There are in Plato so many Testimonies of a mundane Soul, and his Opinion is
so generally known, that it were to overdo to instance Particulars.

I have mentioned Zeno Cittieus in my Essay; but seeing he was Founder of the
Stoic Sect, and that I find in Laertius, who wrote his Life, a fuller State of
his Opinion, and in more particulars consonant to mine than what I have
mentioned already, I will produce him again. He then, as Laertius tells us,
asserted a Mind that permeated every Portion of the World, after the same
manner that the Soul in us does permeate the Body. (...). But through some
more, through others less, (...).] For instance, some, he says, it pervaded
only as a Habit [(...)] as through the Bones and Nerves; but through others as
a Mind [(...)], as through the understanding or rational part: [(...).]

This Sentiment of a Divine Virtue that pervaded the whole Universe, was in
ancient time so generally received, that even the Tyrant Phalaris, in an
Epistle Consolatory, written by him to the Children of Stesichorus (if indeed
he was the Author of those Epistles passing in his name) mentions it as such an
one; (...), says he, (...), etc. which his honored and very learned Translator
renders thus: Immortalis quippe Dei vis, quae per universum diffunditur, mihi
nihil nisi haec ipsa harmonia videtur. He is also understood by that excellent
Person in his Annotations, to mean the mundane Soul of the Pythagoreans, when
in his 104. Epistle, which is to the Inhabitants of Catana, he says, (...),
etc. Si enim Divinae sortis, quemadmodum caetera naturae elementa, etc.

And even Aristotle, tho a great Opposer of the Platonic Soul (yet) being
prevailed upon by irresistible Experience (he) in a Paragraph quoted out of him
by Julius Scaliger, in his 26th Exercitation against Cardan, comes somewhat
near to my Opinion: For there he affirms, (...). That both Animals and Plants
are produced in the Earth and in the Waters, for that there is, as in the Earth
Moisture, so in the Water Spirit, and throughout the Universe an animating
[vivifick] Heat; insomuch that after a sort [it is true that] all things are
full of Soul.

To those Philosophers I will add the well-known Testimony of a Philosophical
Poet, Virgil Aen. 6.

Principio coelum, acterras, camposque liquentes,
Lucentemque globum lunae, Titaniaque astra,
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per Artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet.
Rendered by Eugenius Philalethes thus:

The Heavens, the Earth, and all the liquid-Main, (nian,
The Moon's bright Globe, and Stars Tita
A Spirit within maintains, and their whole Mass (does pass,
A Mind, which through each part infused
Fashions and works, and wholly does transpierce
All this great Body of the Universe.
I begin to be fatigued with the unpleasant Drudgery of quoting and
transcribing; and therefore wholly omitting modern Testimonies, I will add but
one more of the ancient, and that shall be from Cicero, who l. 2. de nature.
Deor. introduces Balbus demonstrating that all things in the World are subject
to a sentient perceptive nature, and are administered and governed by it. This
he evidences by showing, that particular works of Nature have infinitely more
of the Beauties of Art and Contrivance than the most noble Productions of Human
Skill, and yet that no particular Operation of Nature, for example, the
Production of a Vine, of a Tree, or of that of the Body of any Animal, can show
as to Conformation, Order, and Situation of Parts, or as to Adjustment and
Fitness of them for ends and uses, that wonderful Sagacity, that Subtilty of
Invention, or that wise Contrivance that shines with great brightness in the
general frame of the World; whence he confidently, but justly infers that the
whole World is under the Conduct and wise Administration of a sentient and
perceptive Nature, or else that nothing at all is so. Aut igitur, says he,
nihil est quod a sentiente Natura regatur, aut mundum regi confitendum est.

This last Testimony, as it is an Evidence, so it is also an internal Argument;
and being taken from the Phenomenon of Nature, reminds me of what I undertook
to do in the third place, which was to show that my Opinion had Reasons for it
in Nature, and grounded upon things themselves: And these I will now produce.

The First is taken from the Uniformity even in Difformity, the mutual Relation
and the Harmony of Parts that is in the World in its general Fabric, if it may
be allowed to make a judgment of the whole Frame by that of a particular
System, which we our selves belong unto: But I will not now insist any longer
on this Argument, because it is set out at large in my Essay in many Instances,
and the learned Reader will find more in Nemesius de not. Humana.

Again, this Hypothesis accounts for another Phenomenon that cannot be so well
accounted for any other way, that whenever any Matter becomes disposed for
Animal Life, this is presently afforded to it; which how it should come to
pass, is easily conceived, on supposal of a mundane Soul, or a Principle of
vital Energy diffused every where; but otherwise one must imagine particular
Souls, and those too to be Spirits (that are) always every where in waiting for
an Office, which is hard to be admitted. I say [and those too to be Spirits]
for that it is certain that mere corporeal Souls (as some call them) suffice not
for Animal Operations, even tho we should conceive them (as those do) to
consist of Flame for vital Actions, and of Light for the sensitive ones: for if
Matter be not radically vital, and so there be no need at all of Spirit or
Mind, and then there is no such thing, it will be absolutely unconceivable how
Flame and Light (which are only Matter under greater comminution of its parts
of a particular Texture, and in rapid Motion) can of themselves be vital and
perceptive, or make other things become so. But to return.

Mr. Lewenhoec's Experiment of peppered Water, every Drop whereof affords (as
he says) so many thousands of Animalcles, is a sensible Demonstration of an
omnipresent vital Principle that acts as occasion is; and a sensible
Demonstration too of spontaneous equivocal Generations: for so I call the
Productions of Animals that do not come from Seeds in the common Acceptance of
this word. I acknowledge it almost a Scandal but to name equivocal Productions
at this time, they are now so generally disbelieved and exploded; but for my
part, I am not ashamed to confess that as yet I have not observed so much said
by the excellent Redi, or by any other Author against the Reality of them, as
to oblige me to depart from a Sentiment that has been the common Belief of
most Inquirers into Nature, in all Ages before this last. And the Hypothesis of
a mundane Soul will make Productions of that kind conceivable; without which
indeed it will be hard to apprehend how they can be.

Dr. Cox, in a Process of extracting volatile Salt and Spirit out of
Vegetables, which is described in the Philosophical Transactions, intimates
this Observation; That, many of the Herbs putrefied and fermented after his
way, did swarm with Maggots, especially at the Bottom, and in the Middle, where
(he tells us) Flies and other Insects could have no access to deposite their
Eggs, and where the Heat is so violent that they could not possibly subsist.
Some years after that learned Person, I find another, the experienced Juncken,
in Processes of much a like nature, making the like Observation, that in the
Putrefaction and Fermentation of the Vegetables, great numbers of Insects and
little Animals were generated, tho (as he says) the Vessels were never so close
stopped: And indeed it is commonly observed that Putrefactions do terminate in
Animals of one sort or other.

The Relations of Barnacles, that are said to be Birds arising out of the
putrefied Relics of shipwrack'd Planks, which Relations have been confirmed to
me by an Eyewitness of unsuspected Credit, are further confirmed by the
Testimony of an Eagle-eyed Philosopher, who tells us he has seen a Creature of
that kind; for so I understand Julius Scaliger, when in his 59 Exercitation
against Cardan, he says, In Oceano Britannico magis mireris ignotam avem,
anatis facie, rostro pendere de reliquiis putridis naufragiorum, quoad
absolvatur, atque abeat quaesitum sibi pisces, unde alatur: hanc quoque vidimus
nos.

To the former Story Scaliger in the same Exercitation adds another, which he
calls miraculous; it is of an Oyster-shell not very great, that was presented
unto Francis King of France, and contained in it a little Bird, almost finished
with Pinions, Feet, and the Bill, sticking to the Extremities of the Shell.
This Bird he says, some Learned Men believed a Transformation of the Oyster.
His own words are these, Singularis nunc miraculi subtexenda historia est, ubi
de aquis agimus. Allata est Francisco regi opt. max. Concha non admodum magna,
cum avicula intus pene perfecta alarm fastigiis, rostro, pedibus, haerente
extremis oris ostraci. Viri docti mutatum in aviculam Ostreum ipsum
existimarunt.

My Lord Bacon, in his natural History, Century 4th, Exp. 228. tells us, That
if the Spirits be not merely detained, but protrude a little, and that Motion
be confused and inordinate, there follows Putrefaction, which ever dissolveth
the consistence of the Body into much inequality, as in Flesh, rotten Fruits,
shining Wood, etc. and also in the Rust of Metals; but if that Motion be in a
certain order. there follows Vivification and Figuration, as both in living
Creatures bred of Putrefaction, and in living Creatures perfect: But if the
Spirits issue out of the Body, there follows Desiccation, etc.

In Experiment 339. his Lordship further tells us, that all Moulds are
Inceptions of Putrefaction, as the Mould of Pyes and Flesh, the Moulds of
Oranges and Lemmons; which Moulds afterward turn into Worms, or more odious
Putrefactions, etc.

And methinks the Production of Plants without Seed affords a very weighty
Argument for the like Production of Animals. My Lord Bacon gives us many
Instances of the former in the 6th Century of his natural History, where he
tells us, Experiment 563. That it is certain that Earth taken out of the
Foundation of Vaults and Houses, and Bottoms of Wells, and then put into Pots,
will put forth sundry kinds of Herbs: but some time is required for the
Germination; for if it be taken from a Fathom deep, it will put forth the first
year, if much deeper, not till after a year or two. And in the 565th Experiment
adds, that the nature of the Plants growing out of the Earth so taken up, does
follow the nature of the Mould it self; as, if the Mould be soft and fine, it
puts forth soft Herbs, as Grass, Plantane, and the like; if the Earth be
harder and coarser, it puts forth Herbs more rough, as Thistles, Furs, etc.

Scaliger in his 323d Exercitation against Cardan, speaking of the Production
of Frogs, that sometimes have been rained in great abundance, of which there he
gives several Instances, tells Cardan, who affirmed them to be bred of
Frogs-Eggs or Spawn, that they were spontaneous or equivocal, as being
Productions of a general Nature, and not seminal ones; which kind of Animal
Productions he evinceth to be possible the same way that I have, by showing
that there are the like in Plants: Quid multa, says he, nonne quotidiana
foetura caelestis genii, quae natura est potentiam declarant Plantae, nullis
ortae seminiis?

My Lord Bacon assures us for a certain truth, that Toads have been found in
the middle of a Freestone, where it cannot be imagined that an Animal of that
kind should come and lay her Eggs; and I have been credibly informed that-very
lately a living Toad was found in the Heart or Middle of a large Oak when it
was felled.

The Animation of Horse-hairs lying in the Summer time in Pools, has been
observed of many, some of which I have discoursed concerning it; and an
understanding Man of my acquaintance assured me, that more than once he has
made an Experiment which very much confirms the truth thereof. He takes a Hair
with the Root, plucked from the Main or Tail of a Mare that is proud, and in a
warm Season puts it into a wooden Dish full of Water, where letting it lie two
or three Days, the Hair in that space will, for the most part, become quickened
with a strong Motion, and a Head like that of a Serpent grow out of its Root.

The infectious Water of the Showers that accompany the Tornadoes on the
African Coast, standing any where, do (as Mr. Terry tells us in his Relation of
a Voyage to East India) presently bring forth many little offensive Creatures;
which is likewise affirmed by Mr. Herbert.

The Vermination in Human (as well as other Animal) Bodies, of which there are
innumerable Instances in Medical Writers, as in Bartholinus's Centuries, in
Borellus's, in Tulpius's Observations, etc. is another weighty Argument for
spontaneous Generations; but I will mention only one: A Worm of an unusual
Figure, with the Head of a Serpent, found in the left Ventricle of the Heart of
a Gentleman, whose name was John Pennant. The Relation well attested, together
with the Figure of the Worm, was in the year 1639. printed at London by one
George Miller, to which Relation I refer the Reader. This Phenomenon of
Vermination is a good Evidence of SPONTANEOUS GENERATION; and this a weighty
Confirmation of the Existence of a mundane Soul.

Another Argument for it may be taken from the Difficulties that the admittance
thereof will remove, as to the Production of Human Souls; which some conceive
to come, as they express it, ex traduce; not indeed by way of Eduction from the
Power of the Matter, for they acknowledge no such Power therein, but by
propagation. But others think them immediately created by God, either all at
once, as those do who hold the Doctrine of Praeexistence, or (as most imagine)
on occasion, according to the exigence of Matter.

As for the first Opinion, that of Traduction, I find it in Nemesius lib. de
not. human. cap. 2. where he tells us, it was the Sentiment of Apollinarius,
that Souls do propagate Souls, as Bodies do Bodies; and Julius Scaliger concurs
with him, affirming that Souls may come from Souls, ut lumen de lumine, that
is, that Souls do propagate one another, after the same manner as Candles light
one another. Poiret believes as the two former, that Souls are propagated, but
extends the business of Propagation somewhat further than they do, and upon
other Grounds. For in his Cogitat. rational. l. 1. c. 5. in Annot. he affirms
that all things are Prolifick, and that as Matter produces Matter, and Motion
is productive of Motion, so in like manner one Soul or Spirit may generate and
produce another.

But there are many Difficulties in this Opinion, of all which I will insist on
this only; That a Soul, if it be an immaterial Substance (as most conceive it
to be) is as incapable of Propagation (otherwise than by a Metaphor) as it is
of Discerption or actual Division. For even the Propagation of Light is by
Discerption; some Effluvia or Emanations of the enlightening Candle passing into
that which is lightened. And for the Propagation of Motion, the way thereof is
so obscure, it cannot afford Light to this Subject. Only this is certain, that
in local Motion derived from Body to Body, so much of it as is imparted unto
one, departs from the other; which (I suppose) will not be admitted in the
Propagation of Spirits. And as to the Prolifickness of Matter, I should think
but few will allow thereof, who consider, that there is no more of Matter in
the World now than ever was, and that Matter is ingenerable and incorruptible,
being a Subject of all substantial Mutations, but not the Term of an^^ so that
(...) if the Generation of Souls has no^ ^^r, or no better Foundation than
this, (...) Soul is productive of Soul, as Matter (...) of Matter, I conclude
the belief thereof will never become general with knowing Men.

As for Creation of Souls (an Opinion generally held by Divines, and among our
late Philosophers, particularly embraced by des Carts) many Objections lie
against it; of which I will touch but one or two, as sticking most with me.

The first is, that it seems a little unphilosophical to call in a supernatural
Agent for a Business and Work of Nature, such as is (if any is) the Propagation
of Kind: My full consent is with Julius Scaliger, when he says nihil quod est
in natura praeter naturam est: Nothing is in Nature that has not a Cause in
Nature.

Again, it may be further argued, that if human Souls are immediately created
by God, it must be admitted that those of Beasts are so too, since nothing can
be clearer, even to Sense, than that Men and Beasts do propagate their kinds
the same way, whether that way be by Creation, by Traduction, or by any other
whatever. There is in Mankind, as well as in the kinds of Beasts, a Distinction
of Sexes for the Business of Generation; a Furniture and Disposition of Organs
for it in both; and in both a like Use and Application of Organs. All Men and
Beasts are alike conceived in their respective Wombs, alike nourished and
augmented, and both come out in the same manner: and therefore there being the
same Evidence, it is but reason to make the same Conclusion for both.

I know this Argument will have but little effect upon Gartesians, who, against
the testimony of Sense, believing that Beasts are only Machins, without any
conscious Perception or Knowledge, do not own them to have Souls as Men have, in
the proper Sense of the World. But yet it cannot want its due Weight with all
others, who, believing their own, refuse not Senses unto Beasts; as thinking
they have reason to conclude that Beasts see and hear, etc. as Men themselves
do, because they have Eyes and Ears, etc. as Men themselves have, and, to all
appearance, make the same use of them upon occasion, as Men themselves upon the
like would do. And all these will find the same reason to infer that Men and
Beasts beget their like the same way, because there are the same Appearances to
make us think they should.

These Appearances are obvious, and they ought to be considered; nor are they
capable (I think) of being solved, or the other Difficulties, that do lie in
both the ways of Creation and Traduction, capable of being removed otherwise
than on the Hypothesis I have proposed, by acknowledging a Mundane Soul, that,
according to the Exigence and Disposition of the Matter, is always ready with a
Portion of it self to animate and actuate it; so that there is no need of any
new Creation, of Praeexistence, or of any Traduction of particular Souls. But
to proceed.

There is another Phenomenon very obvious, that is better solved on this
Hypothesis of a mundane Soul, than it can be on any other; to wit, that certain
Animals do move and stir, and give other Tokens of Life and Sensation, tho cut
in several pieces, such as Eels, Snakes, Earthworms, Butterflies, etc. This in
the common way is hard to be conceived, since it must infer either that there
is a Discerption and actual Division of Souls, of which, if Souls be
immaterial, they are absolutely incapable; or else that vital Effects may
remain in being after that the Soul, which is the next immediate Cause of those
Effects, is departed; contrary to the Maxim, Sublata causa, tollitur effectus.

But the Reason of this Phenomenon, if we suppose an universal mundane Soul,
will be very plain: for since the Parts of those divided Animals do retain for
some time the same Qualities and Dispositions that they had before their
Separations, there not being in them, as in those of other Animals, that sudden
Dissolution of the Texture, or of the Spirits; it follows that they must
receive the same Influences which they had before from the mundane Soul, and
consequently, that for some time they must continue to live, and in convenient
Circumstances would longer; for like Reasons as the Parts of Vegetables do,
which, tho separated from their Wholes, yet continue to live in Slips, in Buds,
in Grafts, when inserted into other Wholes. Nor do I see but that the Parts of
Animals might be inoculated, or ingrafted into Animals, as well as those of
Vegetables are into Vegetables, if the Qualities and Dispositions of Animal
Parts, when separated, could be as well preserved as those of Vegetables, and a
Coalition of them as well made: a Sentiment that is confirmed by the Experiment
of Taliacotius, and by all the others that the Chirurgia Curtorum affords.

Thus I have instanced in a few Phenomenon of Nature, to which I might have
added many others of a higher Quality; but these sufficiently confirm my
Hypothesis, against which I cannot imagine any Objection of moment, capable of
being raised, except this, that it does seem to render the Distinction between
human and inferior Souls less conceivable, and in consequence the Immortality
of the former.

But this Objection will soon vanish, if we but suppose there is a firm and
indissolvable Union between the Spirit of God and its Vehicle in Man, and that
there is not the like Union between it and its Vehicle in inferior Animals. And
this Supposal is not without ground. For such a firm indissolvable Union
betwixt the Spirit of God and its Vehicle, must be admitted to be in Angels, if
they are (as they are) immortal; and then the Ligament or Bond of that Union,
provided it be natural, must consist in a natural, but a naturally immutable,
Congruity. Now the System of Spirits, that in Man is the Vehicle of the mundane
Soul, must be owned to have more Alliance unto that of Angels than the Vehicles
of it in inferior Animals have, if we consider the advantage the Human
Understanding has in excellency of Operations, above the Imagination of
Beasts; and also consider that the Souls of Men are capable of the Divine
Image, which those of Beasts are not: for thence it will evidently follow that
the former have more of a natural congruity to the Spirit of God, which is the
Soul of the World, than the latter have; those as to their Vehicles being of a
celestial, but these of a terrestrial and an elementary matter. No wonder then
if the Spirit of a Man when he dies, goes upward, but that of a Beast goes
downward.

Thus Sir, I think I have evinced from the holy Scriptures, and from several
Phenomenon of Nature, that there is a Principle of Life diffused throughout the
Universe; and I have likewise evinced that it was the Sentiment of many great
Philosophers: so that tho I am not very fond of any Opinion, I hope I may say
of this, without Injustice to Mr. Keil, that what he has offered in
contradiction to it, does in no degree impeach its Credit, or lessen mine for
asserting it. However I do own I am obliged to that ingenious Gentleman for the
occasion he has given me of further explaining and confirming my Hypothesis,
and thereby too of professing a second time before the World, that

I am with the greatest Respect,

SIR, Your Devoted Humble Servant, Rich. Burthogge.
June 13. School.
FINIS.
BOOKS printed for Daniel Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar.
GEntleman's Recreation; in 4 Parts, viz. Hunting, Hawking, Fowling, and
Fishing: wherein those generous Exercises are largely treated of, and the Terms
of Art for Hunting and Hawking more amply enlarged than heretofore: Also the
Method of breeding and Managing a Hunting Horse. Illustrated with Cuts proper
to each Recreation. The 4th Edition. To which is now added a perfect Abstract
of all the Forest Laws relating to the several kinds of Game abovementioned.

The History of Poland, in several Letters to Persons of Quality; giving an
account of the Present State of that Kingdom, Historical, Political, Physical,
and Ecclesiastical, etc. in 2 Volumes. By Bernard Connor Fellow of the Royal
Society, and Member of the College of Physicians: Composed and Published by Mr.
Savage.

The History and Reasons of the Dependency of Ireland upon the Imperial Crown
of the Kingdom of England, rectifying Mr. Mollineux's State of the Case of
Ireland's being bound by Acts of Parliament in England.

A Journal of the Embassy from their Majesty's John and Peter Alexiovitz,
Emperors of Moscovy, etc. over-land into China, through the Provinces of
Ustingha, Siberia, Dauri, and the Great Tartary, to Peking the Capital City of
the Chinese Empire: By Everard Isbrand, their Ambassador in the Years 1693.
1694. 1695. Written by Adam Brand Secretary of the Embassy. Translated from the
Original in High Dutch, printed at Hamburgh School. To which is added Curious
Observations concerning the Products of Russia: By H. W. Ludolph.

A Late Voyage to St. Kilda, the remotest of all the Hebrides, or Western Isles
of Scotland; with a History of the Island Natural, Moral, and Topographical:
Wherein is an Account of their Customs, Religion, Fish, Fowl, etc. as also a
Relation of a late Impostor, there pretended to be sent by St. John the
Baptist. By M. Martin Gent.

The Fables of Pilpay, a famous Indian Philosopher, containing many useful
Rules for the Conduct of Human Life; made English, and addressed to his
Highness the Duke of Gloucester.

Catalogus Plantarum quae in Insula Jamaica sponte proveniunt, vel vulgo
coluntur, cum earundem Synonymis and locis natalibus; adjectis aliis quibusdam
quae in insulis Maderae, Barbados, Nieves, and Sancti Christophori nascuntur:
Seu Prodomi Historiae naturalis Jamaica, pars prima. Authore Hans Sloan M. D.
Coll. Reg. Med. Land. necnon Soc. Reg. Land. Soc.

The Art of Swimming; illustrated by proper Figures: with Advice for Bathing:
By Monsieur Thevenot. Done out of French. To which is prefixed a Prefatory
Discourse concerning Artificial Swimming, or keeping ones self above Water by
several small portable Engines in Cases of Danger.

The Church Catechism explained and enlarged, from the Articles and Homilies of
the Church of England, and the approved Expositions of the Church Catechism.
Price 3 d.

Curiosities in Chemistry: Being new Experiments and Observations concerning
the Principles of Natural Bodies: Written by a Person of Honor, and published
by his Operator H. G.

Four Tracts. I. A Short Discourse about Divorce and its Causes, Fornication
and Adultery. II. A Charge to Judges, Juries, and Witnesses, concerning Oaths.
III. About Infant Baptism. IV. A Letter to a Lady, who has forsaken the
Protestant Religion for the Romish.

Instructions in the Art of Grammar; writ to instruct a young Gentleman in the
speedy Understanding of the Latin Tongue. By Ob. W.

Christ's Power over Bodily Diseases. Preached on several Sermons on Mat. VIII.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. And published for the Instruction especially of
the more ignorant People in the great Duty of Preparation for Sickness and
Death. By Edward Lawrence, M. A. Minister of the Gospel at Baschurch in the
County of Salop.

An Account of the first Voyages and Discoveries made by the Spaniards in
America. Containing the most exact Relation hitherto published, of their
unparalled Cruelties on the Indians, in the destruction of above 40 Millions
of People. Together with the Propositions offered to the King of Spain to
prevent the further Ruin of the West Indies. By Don Bartholomew de las Casas,
Bishop of Chiapa, who was an Eye witness of their Cruelties. Illustrated with
Cuts. To which is added, The Art of Traveling, showing how a Man may dispose
his Travels to the best advantage. Price in Calls 4 s.


