THE Constant Communicant, A DIATRIBE, Proving that Constancy in Receiving THE
Lords Supper Is the Indispensible Duty of Every Christian.

By AR. BURY, D. D. Rector of Exon. Coll. in Oxford

Canon Apostol. IX. (...).

Whoever of the Faithful enter, and hear the Scriptures, but stay not out
prayers and Communion, ought to be Excommunicated as disturbers of the Church.

Socrates Hist. Lib. V. Ca. 22. (...).

For whereas All Churches through the world, on the Sabbath day, in every
revolution of the week celebrate the mysteries; they of Alexandria, and they of
Rome, upon a certain ancient Tradition, have refused so to do.

OXFORD, Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, for STEPHEN
BOLTON, 1631.

TO The Most Reverend Father in God WILLIAM By Divine Providence Lord
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan, And one of
His Majesty's most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL, etc.
May it please your Grace,
MANY great miracles do the Romanists pretend to be frequently wrought By the
Holy Sacrament of the Altar, but none so admirable as what their ancestors
wrought Upon it: For what more wonderful than This, that a particular Church,
by color of a Tradition, should prevail with All other Churches throughout the
whole Christian world, to reneg That Constancy, which was universally practiced
as indispensible for more than 400 years? That from Dispensing they should
proceed to Discouraging, and therein so prevail, that those who have freed
themselves from their many other gross abuses, cannot from This; but still
believ our Lord more honored by Forbearing his Table, than by Frequenting it?

In opposition to this Vulgar error, I have in my narrow Sphaere used all other
endeavors, but with so little fruit, that I must either sit down in despair, or
fly to the last remedy, Writeing: which beside the advantage of fastening
conviction better upon those few that ly under My inspection, may extend it to
as many others as shall bring my papers under Theirs.

But here also I meet great discoragements: I see that many worthy persons have
of late be'n as careful to exhort to the Performance of the Duty, as to
Worthiness in it: but with no better success, than those first messengers,
who is kind Invitations brought nothing to the Lord of the Fest, but variety of
excuses.

If therefore I would conform either to the Parable or to Reason, I must proceed
to rougher means, compel by force of irrefragable arguments, the unwilling and
resisting world, and by all cogent proofs assert a Truth, which by Many ages
was never Doubted, by More generally Denied, by Ours sometimes Affirmed, but
never (that I know) clearly proved, viz. that it is every Christians duty to be
a Constant Communicant.

And this I have do'n with Such evidence, that I fear not any man's confutation;
yet with litl hope to see the Table furnished with guests.

For alas! what can a poor Enchiridion do, toward subduing such an error,
double armed with Prejudice in the Understanding and Partiality in the
Affections, fortified with long Possession, defended by the Priests, and
beloved by the Peopl?

I must therefore be unfaithful both to the service I have undertaken, and to
Your Grace's right, should I either expose it naked and unsheltered to a Cold
Advers world, or seek any other Patron than your Grace.

For as this Sacrament has a double aspect, so has your Grace a double right
to it is protection: As it is the greatest exercise of Love and duty to our
Lord, by your Eminence in Piety; As it is the Principal office of
Church-worship, by your eminence in Power Ecclesiastical: By the former, every
good christian may claim common with your Grace in most of the following pages;
but by the Later, your Grace has a peculiar jurisdiction over some,
particularly PART III. Chap. 1. Sect. 4.
those wherein I have justified the Constitutions of our Church, as doing what
in such unhappy circumstances, is possible for retriving Primitive Constancy.

Could I say as much for the Practice! -- But be it never so defective, it
cannot hinder us from justifying our Church as well as St. Paul himself. For
his (...) is no less generally mistaken for a derogation from That very
obligation to constancy, which he employed it to prove indispensible; than is
the three times in every year, which our Church defines as the Least that she
can tolerate in the Peopl, for the most that she expects from the Priests;
who therefore think themselves exactly conformable, if they minister it just so
often and no more; though without any care, either Beforehand, to exhort the
people to Receve it, or Afterward, to reprove them if they Neglect it; which
yet they cannot avoid seeing them generally do, being so taught and accustomed,
during our confusions, and still biased by their sloth, or worse.

What may be allowed for the untractableness of the people under our present
Distractions, is not for Me to determine: But that those very Distractions,
which now toss us between two such parties, whereof the One first robbed the
Sacrament of Constancy, and the Other strippeth it stark naked of All
Performance, ly on us as a just punishment for our compliance with them, is
plainly enough to be discovered, without any rude intrusion into God's secrets:
For Constancy in This Office is apparently the most effectual means to unite
us; as being both by it is own nature most serviceable thereto, and by its
singular interest in our Lord's Person, singularly entitled to his Blessing.

I therefore conceve it no impertinent disturbance of those great cares
wherewith your Grace is too much molested, if as a kind of
Church-warden-general, I make humble presentment, of that defect in Parochial
Churches (especially) which your residence in Cathedrals has hindered you from
discovering, because those Officers who ought to be eyes to your Grace and our
other Fathers in God, are themselves blinded with the vulgar error;

Whereof we saw a pernicious experiment in the days of your Grace's immediate
predecessor; when a General enquiry (made upon these Questions, 1. How many
inhabitants in your Parish? 2. How many refuse to join in Communion with the
Church?) proved abortive, because those who refused to communicate in This
Principal office, were not noted as refusing to join in Communion with the
Church; which had they ben, the necessity of compulsory means would have
appeared so evident, that we had not now be'n in danger, to have our nineteenth
Article urged against us, to disprove our being a True Church.

I know my self chargeable with a double great boldness; first in fronting
these Papers with your Grace's name, and then in the account I make for it: But
when I first engaged in the work, I resolved not to do it by halvs, and I think
I might better have omitted the better half, than This way of advantageing the
whole: And since your Grace is so well known eminent for zeal in redressing
whatever you shall find to need it; I have thence taken encouragement to
believ, you would much more easily pardon such a Presumption, than such an
Omission.

I therefore humbly recommend, not so much these Papers, as their Sacred
subject, Our Lord's Institution, and our Churches Constitutions, to your
Grace's protection; as I do your Grace's Person and pious Labors to that of
Almighty God; who, that He be pleased to make your Grace a glorious Instrument
of His service in This World, and a more glorious partaker of His rewards in a
better, is the hearty Prayer of

Your Graces most humble and Dutiful Servant, A R. BVRY.

THE CONTENTS Of the whole.
I. WE are not at liberty to Receive or Refuse the Lords Supper, Proved by 1.
Scripture, which must be regulatly examined, PART I. Chap. 1. 1. Our Lord's
Institution: wherein, 1. The word THIS points at some singular Bread and Cup.
Chap. 2. This singular Bread and Cup hunted out and found in a Jewish
Tradition. Chap. 3. No dishonor to the Lords Supper. Chap. 4. This origination
more plainly proved from 1 Cor. 10. Chap. 5. 2. The word DO; requires
Performance. PART III. We may not omit it without warrant. Chap. 2. Our
obligation cease not, though Church festing be not the same. Chap. 2. 3. The
END. PART IV.
The Livree of a Christian. Chap. 1. Appropriate to our Lord's Person, with
signal marks of his favor. Chap. 2. Serviceable to our own interests. Chap. 3.
2. The Apostl's Explication. PART. II. His primary design was not to assert the
Reverence, but the Constancy due to the Lords Supper. Chapter 1. The Clause [as
often as] examined by several Phenomenon. Chap. 2. The vulgar interpretation
examined. Chap. 3. Objections answered. Chap. 4. 3. The Examples of other
Apostls and their Churches. Chap. 5.
2. The Practice of Antiquity. Chap. 6. 3. Answers to Objections. PART. V.
Deference paid to former Ages and the Sacrament. Chap. 1. Concerning
Unworthiness. Chap. 2. Concerning Self-examination. Chap. 3. Allegories of a
midl nature between Reason and Scripture answered. Chap. 4.

II. Were we at liberty, Reason would persuade us to Frequency. The very Being
of the Sacrament must not be hazarded. Chap. 5. Distant Communions Useless for
Conversion of Sinners. Too much Aw Vexatious to the Godly. Pernicious to Peace
and Charity.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE INTRODUCTION. Showing it necessary to enquire how often we are obliged to
receive the Holy Communion.
I. The seeming impossibility and real necessity to add to what has be'n
already written concerning the Lords Supper. II. A double Objection, slighted,
yet answered and turned to a double plea. The former concerning the dignity of
the Sacrament. III. The other concerning the deference due to Antiquity. A
short retrospect upon the several stages of our departure from it. How later
Fathers departed from the first. The Papists from the Fathers. IV The Reformed
Churches from the Papists. The Moderation of the Church of England blamed by
the Non-conformists, who dissented heretofore in One extreme, and now in
Another. V. Our own Divines of the last age less justifiable than those of the
present; who do better, yet not enough. VI. The sum of the account. A request
for rigid examination, and its reason. An example of noble Ladies: An
advertisement to the Reader.

PART I. Concerning the Particle THIS. Page 1.
CHAP. I. The Scripture cleared from the scandal arising from our contentions:
by showing the true cause and cure.

I. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper highly esteemed by our Lord and all his
Churches. In later Ages many differences of Opinions concerning it. II. Not the
number only, but matter of the differences scandalos to the Scripture, both
toward Papist and Jew. III. The blame removed from the Scriptures to the
Doctors. IV. The Papists, best perhaps silenced by our claiming the literal
sens in the Wine as they do in the Bread. Our own Divines neglect the former
part, which yet is the Head of the Apostl's discourse. V. The regular way to
understand his meaning. Two Suppositions taken upon trust, with engagement. VI.
The whole Discourse Paraphrased. VII. The whole Argument Analyzed. And reduced
to Logik form. The great Limbs more minutely to be dissected in four
considerable Members: And all to be closed with an answer to what is said to
the contrary.

CHAP. II. Of the Necessity to fit the word THIS with some singlar Bread and
Cup. Page 18.

I. The difference of our Lords style toward this Bread and Wine from That
toward litl children. II. This subject requires the clearest expression. III.
The Particle THIS most considerable. IV. Grammar and Logic. In Logic it is
considerable. 1. As a singl word, a Demonstrative must have something for its
object precedences. Every word must be answered by some Idea. V. 2. As the
subject of a Proposition. The meaning of the Predicate must be mesured by the
capacity of the subject. Offers at the import of the word rejected. 1. That
Individual. 2. The whole kind. 3. Something indeterminate. 4. The Action.

CHAP. III. The singular Bread and Cup hunted out and found. Page 28.

I. Customs of that time and place to be enquired. 1. The Custom of Festing in
publik worship, fitteth the Apostl 's Argument, but not our Lord's Institution.
II. 2. The Passover fitteth our Lord's Institution, but not the Apostl's
Argument. Three incidental remarks upon the Jews Paschal form. III. A Jewish
custom pitched upon, exactly fitting both our Lord's and the Apostl's words.
IV. An Objection answered with a story.

CHAP. IV. Page 37.

I. No more dishonor to This than to the other Sacrament, to be derived from a
Jewish Tradition. This Tradition more worthy than That. II. In what sens our
Lords Table is an Altar? Were our behavior at Table more pious, the Sacrament
need not be ashamed of such a relation. III. Our Lords form of consecration
derived from the Jewish Forms, both Festival and Sacrificial.

CHAP. V. Page 44.

I. A plainer proof from Chap. 10. From the sameness of names. In the Cup the
Greeks aped the Jews: The Apostle styles the Cup of the Lord, the Cup of
blessing, which is a perfect translation of the Heb ew name. II. The breaking
of Bread, a Jewish phrase. III. Some Phenomenon not salvable but by this
Hypothesis. IV. He expressly tells us; that each part of the Jewish Tradition,
by name, is a part of our Lord's Supper. V. An Illustration from our Grace-cup.
VI. A Sacrament, What?

PART II. Concerning the word (...).
CHAP. I. The Apostl's design, was not to assert Reverence to the Lords Supper.
Page 55. I. The Apostl's proper design first to be enquired into. II. Three
steps. 1. What might be the Corinthians case? III. 2. What might become the
Apostl to do in such a case? IV. 3. How does the Apostl's procedure agree with
such Suppositions? 1. The former part very well agrees with them.
V. 2. The later part necessarily requires them. Proved, 1. Negatively. He did
not design to assert Reverence due to our Lords Supper, precisely taken. The
subject of the Proposition, ver. 26. is not the Lords Supper, but This Bread
and This Cup. The Praedicate is utterly useles (and wors) toward such a design.
VI. 2. Positively, The Proposition points at some Determinate Bread and Cup.
The Argument reduced to a Syllogism.



CHAP. II. Concerning the Clause [AS OFTEN AS.] Page 70.

I. The unhappiness of this Clause. II. The true sons of the words mesured by
parallel precepts. III. Serviceable remarks. 1. With what care the Apostl
records this Claus. IV. 2. With partiality he treats the Cup. V. The
justice he does the Bread, joining it with the Cup in his deductions, VI. The
Conclusion, with an Objection answered.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Vulgar interpretation of [as often as] page 85.

I. The Distinction between Suppositive and Absolute stated, because made the
mesure of obligation. II. The words of the Author set forth, and III. Examined.
IV. The merely suppositive sens enervates our Lords Command. And V. The
Apostl's own Argument. VI. The two senses balanced in order to Conscience.

CHAP. IV. Objections answered. page 100.

I. The First Objection [That the Tradition may be novel] answered. 1. By matter
of Fact. II. By passing judgment upon it. 2. No necessity of difference in
point of frequency between the breaking of bread before meat, and Grace-cup
after it. 2. If the Jews Antiquities be against us, we may reject their
authority. III. 3. Seeing a party of them are on our side, we may well prefer
that party above the opposite. So great an agreement as is between them, could
not be, 1. From Chance. IV. 2. Nor the Jews conforming their custom to Christ's
Institution, because it is incredible they should have such 1. care, 2. or wit.
V. Another Objection [That we must have Fests or no Sacrament] adjourned. VI. A
third Objection [That the Jews used their Grace-cup in their Houses, not their
Synagogs] Answered by six steps. VII. The last Objection [The universal silence
of all Ages] Answered. 1. By showing reason why both Primitive and Later ages
should be silent, and 2. by showing that the best critiks have observed it.

CHAP. V. Matter of Fact recorded in Scripture. page 117.

I. A transition to Matter of Fact. Not so easily understood as might have be'n
expected. Two things considerable. 1. The Backwardness of the Apostl's in
Understanding our Lords mind. 2. The means which our Lord used to recommend it,
unprosperos: The night of Institution, by its terrors. II. Our Lord's
conversation with the two Disciples in the way, and at Emaus, so ordered, as to
discover the meaning of his Institution as well as the truth of his
Resurrection; ineffectual upon a contrary reason. Their ignorance 'till the
coming of the Holy Ghost. III. The second observable. Their diligence in
obeying our Lord's will when discovered. That by their breaking of Bread must
be meant the Lord's Supper, appears by, 1. The exercises accompanying it. 2.
The Phrase expressing it. IV. 3. The Place, (...) must signify the Meeting
house, where the first Christians held their Conventicles for fear of the Jews.
V. 4. The time. The Apostl's a d Brethren at Hire: daily. The Remote Churches
on the Lo d's day. VI. The first day of the week consecrated to this office,
and for that reason styled the Lords day, dishonored by derivation from the
Fourth Commandment, cannot be worse profaned than by neglect of this office, to
which it owes its sacredness.

CHAP. VI. The Practice of Antiquity. page 131.

I. The constant Practice of Christ's Church in it is best ages, proved by one
evidence of each kind. viz. 1. Canon, the 9th Apostolik. II. 2. One Father,
Justin Martyr. 3. One Historian, Socrates. The Church of Rome under pretense of
tradition, innovated against the Church Universal. III. 4. Enemies of each
kind. 1. Protestants. IV. 2. Papists. V. 3. Junior Fathers, particularly St.
Augustine, whose words are recited, wherein we must distinguish between. Father
and Doctor. As Father he stateth the question. The question and the practice of
the Church both in Doctrine and Discipline, very different between St.
Augustin's time and Ours. VI. As a Doctor he determins the question. 1. His
style very diffident, because his Opinion is opposite to all other Fathers. 2.
His determination reaches not Our question. Yet have later ages caght at his
words, and strained them beyond his intentions, with unhappy success. His
Syncretism rectified.

PART III. Concerning the word DO.
CHAP. I. We must answer such a Command no otherwise but by Performance. Page
149.

I. The cause of our disobedience to this Command, too much Fear, II. We may
not commute Doing for any other service. III. The reason why some think best not
to do this often, and their appeal to the Church of England. IV. The Church
vindicated. V. The two opposite opinions personated. The University Statutes
the best comment upon the Churches Rubrike. The Greek Church in great Churches
celebrateth the Holy Communion every Sunday and Holy day. VI. Those who omit
the Communion it self, greater Non-conformists, than those who neglect the
Communion Service.

CHAP. II. We may not omit This duty without warrant. page 164.

I. Necessity may be complied with. A doubl question. II. Difference between
Laws Moral and Positive. The Apostl's vouching our Lords revelation a proof of
the valu of the Sacrament. Fear of cheapness, no reason why we should make it
scarce. III. Omission compared with unworthiness. IV. Our Warrant must be
either Countermand or Dispensation. V. Defect of preparation no Dispensation.
VI. All other Duties in the same danger.

CHAP. III. The Obligation ceased not upon the change of the Manner of the
Festing in the Church, but must be accommodated thereto. page 174.

I. The Apostle has prevented such a consequence, by saying, our Lord
appointed us to do this 'till he com. II. The adequate mesure of our doing
this, is not Eating, but Meeting in the Church. As change of the Ceremony
hinders not Perjury from being a sin, Nor does change of the season hinder us
from stiling it a Supper. III. The Church careful to preserve the memory and
titl of Festing. VI. The Apostl's argument holds by verse. 20. more for the
Thing than for the Manner, wherein we cannot now be guilty as the Corinthians
were. V. The Equitable and Moral sens of the Argument, accommodate to the
present manner of Church-meetings. VI. Distinguish between yielding and
justifying.

PART IV. Concerning the End: In Remembrance.
CHAP. I. It is the badge of a Christian. page 183.

I. This the only rite whereby we honor our Lords Person. Three Considerations.
1. Every Religion distinguished from Every other by some proportion. This,
Nature taught the Heathen; and Gods Law, the Jews. II. The New Testament
contracteth the multitude of Jewish rites to two; whereby Christians ar known,
as the Knights of the Garter. 1. By a rite of admission, III. 2. By continual
wearing the badge. IV. Those distinguishing rites must be highly valued. It was
mortal to a Jew to omit any of them, and to a Heathen to wear them. V. This
wors in a Christian upon several accounts. 1. The Law giver. 2. The Rites, VI.
3. The Obligation.

CHAP. II. This is Appropriate to our Lords Person, and recommended by signal
marks of his favor. Page 196.

I. This Command appropriat to our Lords Person and Humanity. And thereby 1.
Endeareth all other Laws by new obligations proper to the Nature of a Man. II.
2. Is it self a New Law upon a New account. III. It is not only a Monument
proper to our Lords memory, but a Statu lively representing him. IV. Our Lord
expressed his esteem by his care in recommending it in the most advantagees
circumstances. 1. It was the Last night in his Life. 2. The night in which he
was (and knew he should be) betrayed. V. The perverse returns many make to this
care. 1. The Profane make it their Last act, as if it were to show forth their
own death. 2. Some make it their Last care, by preferring every other before it.
Business, unpreparedness, uncharitableness. VI. The Scrupulos, refusing to
receve, because hindered by impossibl conditions, blemish our Lords wisdom and
goodness.

CHAP. III. Serviceable to our own interests. Page 213.

I. The kindness of the Command as it regards our Interest. 1. In point of
Ease. It is a sacrificial Fest, not a Sacrifice. Suffering an expression of
Love: exercised by many, but not requited in this duty. II. 2. In point of
pleasantness: 1. Spiritual pleasures greater than Sensual: though the Atheist
cannot relish them. We must believe the experienced, not the ignorant. III. 2.
Pleasures of the Christian, greater than of any other Religion. IV. 3.
Pleasures of this greater than of any other Office of Christian worship. 1. It
has proper sweetness of its own. V. 2. It improveth all other Offices. 1.
Preaching. 2. Swearing. 3. Prayer. This proved by the practice of those who in
danger desire the Sacrament. VI. 4. Thankfulness. VII. Other Advantages,
intimated, but not insisted on, because set forth by many other Writers. A
brief Recapitulation of what has be'n here said, with a Transition to what
remains.

PART. V. Answers to the Vulgar opinion.
CHAP. I. Deference paid to the Former age, and to the Sacrament. Page 235.

I. Former ages excused for advancing Reverence, when there was no other
danger, but of Irreverence; and stating preparation in such manner as might
best serve Piety. Reason to believ, that were they now living they would press
the Performance as earnestly as they have do'n Preparation. II. A Second
Protest against robbing the Sacrament. III. The Adversaries opinion set forth
in his own words; whereby almost all the World must be prohibited. IV. A
Warrant demanded. A confession that a good Consequence is Warrant sufficient.

CHAP. II. Concerning Unworthiness. Page 247.

I. What [Unworthy] imports. 1. In its singl signification. 1. In Grammar it
is an Adverb. 2. In Logik a Relative. II. The degree of the Crime not
expressed, why? We need not be so fearful as the Papists. We deny not the Real
Presence. III. 2. The Aspect of the word upon the Apostls design. 1. Personal
worthiness dishonorable to our Lord. 2. Different from the Apostls mesure. IV.
The Apostl oght to have warned the Corinthians of it. 1. For the Lord's Table
sake. 2. For his own arguments sake. V. 3. For the Corinthians sakes, who were
such as oght to have be'n forbidden.

CHAP. III. Of Self Examination. page 260.

I. How Self-examination is usually pressed. II. The question is not
indifinite, but confined to the Present occasion; and the answer is dubl. 1.
Negative. III. 2. Positive. IV. The true question concerning which we must
examine our selves.

CHAP. IV. Answers Reason, Objecting Allegories. page 268.

I. A Transition from Scripture to Reason, and by the way notice taken of
Allegories of a midl Nature between both. II. The Allegory of Covenant and Seal
answered and retorted. III. The Allegory of Member likewise answered. IV. The
Allogory of Sons and Enemies. V. A General answer to all objections of this
kind.

CHAP. V. Reason (as the case now stands) forbids, to hazard the very being
of the Sacrament for advancement of Reverence. page 275.

I. A Descent from Scripture to Reason. The case now different from what it was
formerly. II. 1. Because the very Being of the Sacrament is hazarded. III.
Every step from Constancy, an approach to That danger. At first the Prohibition
lay only against singl persons, not qualities; and against Persons by sentence
of the Bishop. IV. From sins grossly scandalos a pass made to All sins. The
moderation of the Church of England. V. Motives to bring tepid persons to the
Sacrament, not potent. VI. A comparison of such Doctrines as endanger the
Being, with such practices as profane the Sacrament. 1. Something is better than
Nothing. More hope of reformation. A Protest against encorageing irreverence.
Three good ends laid down, which the Sacrament is fit to promote, but disabled
by disuse.

CHAP. VI. The Sacrament made useless toward Conversion. page 287

I. That it is made unserviceabl toward conversion of a sinner. Three
propositions. 1. To deny it a converting virtue is dishonorable to the
Sacrament, and more so to our Lord. II. No danger to the Worthy, but the whole
question is about the Unworthy: and concerning them there is more hope than
fear: five reasons why the hope should be embraced. III. 2. The Sacrament has
a converting virtue, Proved 1. by the joint authority of the Apostls, and by
consideration of this Apostl's argument. St. Augustine used the same argument
with the same unhappiness. IV. No fear that such stating the Argument, should
drive men as far from the Church as the Altar. V. 2. By Reason. 1. The Death of
Christ serviceabl to convert. That he suffered more for This end than any
other, proved by Scripture and Reason. VI. 2. This Sacrament sets forth
Christ's death more powerfully than Preaching. We may not imagine that he will
deny it his blessing. VII. 3. The converting power promoted by frequent
repetitions. A supposition that One solemn address may be worth Twenty,
examined. An hypotyposis of such a performance. 1. Frequent offers his one time
or other. 2. Repetition adds new force to the former decaying act. 3.
Teaches to act better. So it will help, not prejudice the performance in
respect of the manner.

CHAP. VII. Wors than Useless toward comforting the Godly. page 309.

I. The second end, Comfort of the Godly. This Sacrament founded upon Festing,
the tessera of Love. II. The conscientious griped between a fear of
Unworthiness on the one side, and of Disobedience on the other. III. Hopes
mingled with Fears, a snare to the Godly, which the Ungodly escape. IV. The
Lords table more dishonored by such preparation, than by None.

CHAP. VIII. Pernicios to Charity. page 318.

I. Fasting a bond of kindness among guests. Salt an emblem of Love. II. This
a Fest of Charity, seasoned with a kiss of Charity. The highest Communion.
Drinking and Pledging. Drinking healths. The Bride-cake. The Apostl's way of
Arguing our Union from this Communion. III. The kiss of charity translated
kissing the Pax, Panis benedictus, a mockery. The Sacrament not only disabled
from advancing Love, but turned to a makebate, 1. by taking away the necessity
of the Supper, we take away its power to make us One body. Our Saviors precept
of being reconciled before we offer our gift, miserably perverted. IV. 2. By
our too great aw, we not only disable the Sacrament from healing the least
breach, but make it an instrument of the greatest. 1. This multiplieth
questions. 2. Invenometh them. 3. Makes them incurable. V. Takes away the
very subject of the question: 'better the Sacrament had never be'n instituted
than so abused.

The Conclusion.
Reflecting upon the whole. I. All reduced to three questions. Qu. 1. By what
Authority do we depart from Constancy? By that of the Church of Rome. II. No
Doctrine has so much of Popery as This. III. Qu. 2. With what Success? 1. By
loss of Constancy we have lost tolerabl Frequency. IV. 2. By too much
advanceing Reverence we have made it mischievos, 1. To the honor of our Lord,
2. to the peace of his church. V. Qu. 3. Upon what Need? No such danger as is
feared, of loss of reverence: or if there were any, it is much outweighed, both
by prudential and conscientious considerations. VI. The Reverence which is due
to the Sacrament is not such as belongs to Gods Decrees, which require our
Forbearance, but such as belongs to his Laws, which require our Performance.

THE INTRODUCTION, Showing it necessary to enquire how often we are obliged to
receive the Holy Communion.
I. The seeming impossibility and real necessity to add to what has be'n
already written concerning the Lords Supper. II. A double Objection, slighted
yet answered and turned to a double plea. The former concerning the dignity of
the Sacrament. III. The other concerning the deference due to Antitiquity. A
short retrospect upon the several stages of our departure from it. How later
Fathers departed from the first. The Papists from the Fathers. IV. The Reformed
Churches from the Papists. The Moderation of the Church of England blamed by
the Non-conconformists, who dissented heretofore in One extreme and now in
Another. V. Our own Divines of the last age less justifiable than those of the
present; who do better, yet not enough. VI. The sum of the account. A request
for rigid examination, and its reason. An example of noble Ladies: An
advertisement to the Reader.

AFTER so many Treatises and Contentions concerning the Lords Supper, it is
Nature and Mysteries, the Duties we are to pay it, and the Benefits we are to
receive from it, etc. it may well appear, not only needless to write any more
upon so spent a subject, but impossible to do it without troubling the World
with Repetitions of what has already, and (perhaps) too often, been said by
others.

But the complaint which our judicious Sandys made in behalf of the devout
Pilgrims, who with great trouble and danger visit the Holy Sepulcher, may well
fit those pious persons, who travel in search after our Lords mind in this
Monument, raised with great care by himself in memory of his death.

There the devout Pilgrim finds the Grave it self buried out of his sight,
the herbs and flowers withered into costly, but dead Marble, and the glorious
spacious Vault of Heaven, contracted into a much duller and meaner one, of a
splendid magnificent Temple. And here, the conscientious enquirer, finds This
Monument buried under so many incomprehensible Mysteries, that the Sacrament of
the Altar looks no more like the Lords Supper, than does the Temple of the
Sepulcher like Joseph's Garden.

How much more had our learned and ingenious Writers, advanced both the honor
of the Sacrament, and the interest of Souls; if in stead of those Many, Great,
and Fine Buildings, wherewith they have endeavored to beautify, and really
hidden it; they had left us the naked Area: a Plain, Honest account of our
Lords Meaning, especially in such points as are therefore necessary to be
known, because otherwise we cannot conform our obedience to it: Such are These,
Whether our Lord intended more than he expressed? and how much? Whether he
intended to impose it upon us as a Command or no? and how much? and with what
limitations? Whether all Persons be obliged to perform it? and how often?
Whether we may omit it in any case? and in what cases? Whether, and in what
cases we be not only permitted, but obliged to forbear? Whether it be best to
perform it seldom, or often, or constantly? etc.


These, and such as these, are questions so obvious, yea so unavoidable, ly so
directly in our way, so cross it, and even block it up, that it may be wondered
how Any one, much more how Every one, that pretends either to guide others,
or follow his own light, should (I cannot say Neglect, but) Avoid them.

For they serve not to tickle the Fancy, or scratch the Curiosity, but to
inform the Conscience; they do not amuse us with impertinent Speculations, but
direct us in necessary Duty; and that not in Collateral or Inferior, but in the
Principal Articles: So that it seems no less than admirable, that any should
sincerely desire to keep a good Conscience, yet neglect to understand his
Obligations in the necessary points of Time and Frequency required.

For unless we can believe that our Lord most carefully established an
Institution, only to be talked of, stared upon, or fought for: If we believe a
word of the Imperative Mode, must have an Imperative sense: If we should think
our selves ill served, when having commanded our servants to do some useful
work, we should find them busy themselves in talking, or perhaps quareling
about the wisdom of the Command, or the usefulness of the Work; and so leave
the applauded Command unexecuted, and the magnified Work unperformed;

Then, after so many Inventions, yea so many Veins exhausted; after so much
profusion not only of Ink, but Blood, unhappily spilt upon this sole Subject;
it is not only Possible but Necessary, to write yet more concerning a Subject,
so far from being spent, that it is untouched in those Points which are most
worthy our labor.

For while some employ their zeal in Disputing, or worse, concerning the manner
of our Lords Presence, and the Adoration due to it; and others, who deny
Adoration, strain Reverence to such a pitch, as turns it to Fear: While they
forbid us to approach the Lords Table, upon any other terms than we may safely
come to his Judgment Seat; while our kinder Writers help us with Schemes for
self-examination and Forms of Devotion, that we may (if possible) come Worthy;
but press the Duty so coldly, that it is questioned whether it be a Duty or no,
and past question that it is not one, to come at all Times: When so much is
spoken to fright us from the Altar, and so little to oblige us to approach it,
What other Fruit can we reasonably expect from such Labors but what we see?

Many pay their Reverence by bowing their Knees to the Holy Table, and turning
their Backs upon the Holier Sacrament; their Aw puts them to as great
distance as Neglect can; and this occasions others to cloak their real neglect,
under pretense of aw: so the slothful join with the fearful, to plead, There is
a Lion in the way.

Many come only, Once in a year, as if our Lord intended to consecrate none but
the Passover: Others, not until they are dying, as if they were not to show
forth the Lords death, but their own: Others, not at all, as if it were the
duty of the Priest only, because Instituted in the presence of the Apostles
only; and upon one pretense or other, the much greater part of the People never
think of it at all, no not to their very death.

In the mean time, the most zealous Servants of our Lord lament, that his last,
and therefore not least Command, has lost the Obedience due to it: The
greatest lovers of Piety, that it has lost one of its greatest supports, in
the time of greatest need: The most affectionate Sons of the Church, that she
has in a manner lost a Sacrament, an indispensible mark of a true Church: The
tenderest Friends of Peace, that she has worse than lost her best Cement,
which is abused to an Instrument of Division: And the most Prudent and Pious
cry aloud, that it is a shame to our Government, and a wound to our Religion,
that our practice should give such a publicly to the Apostle, when we read,
That we are therefore one Bread, and one Body, bieause we eat of that one Bread.

Since therefore the Work is equally necessary and Neglected, he that shall
labor in it will be secure from being blamed, as troubling the World with
repetitions of trite Discourses.

BUT then he shall be no less sure of the contrary censure, as doing it with
New ones; and, which is worse, as vilifying the adorable Sacrament.

For the Temple of the Sepulcher, however venerable for the Antiquity of its
Buildings, is much more so, for the Place they stand on; which though they do
not so much Honor as Oppress, yet whoever should endeavor to rescue it from
them, should be doubly censured, as Sacrilegious both against the Holy Temple,
and Holier Ground.

Whoever will measure the Ground, whereon the mistaking zeal of former Ages
has built so many and great Mysteries, cannot avoid showing it incapable to
bear them; and consequently must run a severe gandelope, lashed on one side in
behalf of Antiquity, and on the other in behalf of the Sacrament.

II. BUT, once thoroughly convinced of the Fitness, yea Necessity of the
undertaking, these Fears move me no otherwise than to set me forward. From the
Dignity of the Sacrament, I conclude it worthy my service; and from the
Duration of the Error, I conclude it to need it. Did not Both these concur, I
should not have raised Work for the Learned, or Game for the Censorious, by
opposing a popular error in so Sacred a subject.

Yet lest that which sets me forward to the Work, should set me backward in the
Success, I think it requisite to take such notice of the double Objection, as
to justify my self against both its parts.

1. ONE part of the Objection concernerh the Dignity of the Sacrament, who is
greatness I most heartily acknowledge.

I confess we may be guilty of the Body and Blood of our Lord, in either sense,
That of the Institution, or that of his preceding Doctrine, Jo. 6. wherein he
interprets eating and drinking, by believing. And therefore we ought to
examine our selves before we Receive, much mote before we Publish any Opinion
concerning it, as carefully as before we receive the Sacrament it self.

But this is so far from a reason against Examination, that it pleads for it:
For as Both ways we may be guilty of Rashness, if we Receive unworthily either
the Sacrament or the Opinion; so may we be of Neglect, if we consider not what
we are obliged both to Do and to Teach.

I know a Gentlewoman that hardly escaped falling into water, because a poor
neighbor that stood near her, and might easily have helped her, forbore that
good office; upon this reason (as she afterward excused her self) because she
durst not be so bold. Whoever accuses me of boldness toward the Holy
Sacrament, let him consider, whether he would be pleased with such reverence in
a time of such need.

Whatever others do, certainly none of those good men who so sadly complain of
the neglect, will blame him who labors the remedy: No, though he should abate
somewhat both of Fear toward the Sacrament, and of Reverence toward those
former Ages, which teaching men to Dread, have by consequence taught them to
Shun it.

Yet is there no such danger. For neither will the Institution be a loser, if
in stead of the Superstitious Dread which contradicts it is Nature, we pay it
the Obedience which it requires, and the Love which it deserves; nor true
Antiquity, if instead of the Middle ages, we venerate the First.

III. 2. TO that OTHER part therefore of the Objection, I answer; that we ought
to take none but the first and best Ages of the Church for our guides, in all
such Controversies as are capable so to be determined: That those which concern
Matter of Fact, are Such; since the Practices of those Ages are visible, but
not (always) their Opinions, especially in such Modern Questions as never
troubled them, to declare their judgments: That the public Offices of
Christian Worship are visible, and therefore it must needs be a great crime for
Later ages, therein to depart from their Fathers.

All this I not only acknowledge, but urge, and I hope no man will deny that it
was as true a thousand years since. If therefore it appear, that the Middle ages
have departed from the First, we must nor follow but reform the Error; and
whoever shall retrive the long lost truth, ought not to be looked upon as a
Contemner, but faithful Servant of Antiquity; and so much the more deserving,
by how much longer the Error has continued.

That this is the present case needs no other proof, than the Records of
Matter of Fact, never in any case more legible; whereby we may easily discover
by what steps we are go'n so far, from the authentic examples of the Apostles,
and several immediately succeeding Ages.

This though we shall meet another occasion to examine, yet for preventing
prejudices, which perhaps might hinder some from reading so far, I conceive fit
here to offer in a more contracted Landschape.

THAT the Apostles and Primitive Christians, for some hundreds of years, were
as constant at the Lords Table as at his House, is so manifest, that those who
wanted not the Tentation, ever wanted the Face to deny it. And the Evasions
whereby some have endeavored to shun the unavoidable Evidence, are as plainly
false, as the denial it self can be.

True it is (says the most excellent of them) the Apostles did indefinitely
admit the Faithful to the H. C. but they were persons wholely inflamed with
those Fires, etc. and so goes on, describing them in such Characters as may
very well fit the Apostles themselves; but how ill Some, if not Most of their
Communicating Disciples, is too manifest in a certain reproof, whereby one of
the Apostles themselves charges them with such Debaucheries at the Lords Table,
as had been inexcusable at their own; yet does not therefore Excommunicate,
though he vehemently Reproves them.

As long as there was any hope to prevail, his Successots labored in the same
contention for This Cup of the Lord, against That of Bacchus: but at last
dispairing of success, and thinking it better to submit to an Inconvenience
than a Mischief, changed the Primitive manner of Church-meetings, from Feasting
to Fasting; as upon another kind of necessity they had do'n the proper Season,
from Evening after Supper, to Morning before Day: well considering, that
however ill a Fasting Feast, or a Morning Supper might sound; yet those or any
other Solaecisms, were less grievous, than such Profaneness, as otherwise
appeared equally Unavoidable and Intolerable.

And as they changed the Circumstances of the Celebration, so did they the
Style of their Writings: from exhorting to Constancy, which in those days
appeared unquestionable, they transplanted all their endeavors into pressing
Reverence, which they saw too much wanting,

Wherein that they might answer the then urgent necessity, they put all their
strength to bow the stick the opposite way; spoke such glorious things as
dazeled the understandings of the Readers, and advanced the Sacrament from
their Contemt, first to their Admiration, and thence to their Fear.

So that which in St. Paul's time was (...), in St. Chrysostom's was made
(...), which was a pretty large stride, and soon followed by another: For,
Shunning naturally follows Dreading, and the people quickly grew willing to
avoid (if possible) the terrible duty, which in a while they so deserted, that
the Priest was left alone without Communicants.

Nor were the People more willing to keep a distance from the dreadful Table,
than the Priests were to enclose it to themselves: So, in super-conformity to
our Lord's Institution and his Churches practice, the Priest celebrateth the
Holy Supper in all Church-meetings (and upon worse accounts, often without any)
and in compliance with the Peoples Superstition and their own Interest, they
dispense with them for Communicating, which was another large stride.

In another Age they widen the useful distance between themselves and the
people with a further stride: They pass from Dispensing to Forbidding, not the
whole indeed, but a full half. And thus at last, taking from the people the
Need to do any thing, and the Power to do more than half, they are gotten so
far from Primitive Doctrine and Practice, that they have robbed the People of
their Right; The command, of its Power; and the Instituion, not only of its
Power but its Nature.

The Cup is metamorphosed from a Cup of Eucharist to a Cup of trembling; the
Performance, from a Communion to a Spectacle; the Institution, from a Command
to a Prohibition; and the Bread which at first did, and still ought to knead
all Christ's Members into one bread and one body, crumbles them into almost
innumerable, and utterly irreconcilable divisions.

IV. FOR many who are willing to be freed from an Obligation, are not so, to be
robbed of a Right; and the corruptions of Rome being now so swollen and
suppurated, that they could no longer hold from breaking; Most, if not All the
Reforming Churches, equalled the People with the Priests, as in their Right to
the Cup, so in their Obligation to receive it.

Nor does the Church of England put any other difference between them, but only
in her hopes concerning their Obedience, To the Priests therefore (from whom she
apprehended better hopes) she Enjoyneth; but to the People she only
Recommendeth constancy in the performance: By the former keeping up her claim,
by the latter yielding to Necessity, which yet she would not so far do as to
leave even the People at liberty; but enjoyneth That, three times at least in
every year, which by her Injunctions to the Priests she more than intimates,
desirable at least once in every week.

This moderation toward the People, the Nonconformists heretofore complained
of. For Mr. Gartwright, the chief opposer of the Liturgy in Q. Elizabeth's
time; and the Author of the Altar Damascenum, the most violent censurer
thereof in King James his time, would have all who are in the Churches
Communion, forced to receive the Lords Supper, condemning them who abstein out
of fear as guilty of Superstition, and not to be born with: and had more
authority for This, than other of their complaints.

But the Melancholy proper to that Sect, would neither permit them to tarry
long in That Extreme, nor stop till they came to the other. For they now take
up for Piety That fear, which their predecessors condemned for intolerable
Superstition.

While they had the Scepter, they laid aside the Holy Table, as useless to any
other purpose but That of bringing their people to examination: when upon
restitution of our Government, there appeared danger of restoring this
Institution to its abolished power; they moved in a public Conference, that
the Rubrike which requires every Parishioner to Communicate at least three
times in every year, might either be wholely left out, or so curtailed as to
enjoin no more but this, That the Communion should be celebrated three times in
every year, provided there were a competent number to receive it.

Which to hinder, they employ their utmost diligence: For even those among them
who yield it lawful to conform in our other offices of Pubick Worship, will by
no means do it in This.

V. NOR are our own Divines (those of the former Age I mean) altogether free of
this humor: Whether out of deference to the later Fathers, or an opinion that
the Obligation being self-evident needs not be pressed, or a conceit that Aw
conduces more to the advancement of Godliness, or for whatever other reason;
plain it is, they have been more industrious to advance the honor of this
Institution, by our Fear, than by our Obedience: For they make the Conditions
of worthiness so strict, and the Obligation to the performance so slack, as if
they designed to fright us from the one, and free us from the other; depending
(doubtless) upon our Church-Rubrikes, and Constant Practice, for prevention of
the inconvenience; and not intending to deal with the Sacrament, as some say
our Rich: the 2d was dealt with after his deposition, served a la royale with
store of costly Dishes, his Esquire taking the Essay, and all other pomps of
Grandeur, but not permitted to taste any thing, and so destroyed with Hunger and
Ceremony.

But to those who since the Restoration have written on this subject, we must
not deny our just acknowledgement; that as there is greater need, so have they
used greater care to press the almost forgotten duty: Yet still so, that their
labors have not answered the necessity.

For they all write Ad populum, and accommodate their Discourses not to the
amplitude of the Subject, but to the narrowness of their Readers capacities;
whereby they are obliged to shun the strongest, and confine themselves to the
weakest Arguments.

Whereas he that will stem an Error, pretending both to Piety and Universality,
and backed with the rarely combined assistance of the Peoples inclinations and
the Pastors silence, yea and encouragements; must consult rather the necessity
of the Subject, than the capacity of the vulgar, whose office is not to judge
of Arguments, but obey Exhortations.

For correction of Manners indeed, a plausible Rhetorical Suasory may therefore
suffice, because the Readers judgment is of the Authors party: But for
conviction of Errors, where the Judgment concurs with the Affections in joint
opposition, there must be such greater strength, as may not only fairly
persuade, but forcibly subdue Both.

If such Elenctik Discourses be too unweildy for the weak vulgar, it is to be
considered, that those only are able to Reform an Error, who are so, to
Understand whatever can be said to prove it one. And such, though
(comparatively) few in number, are not therefore less worthy our best service.

For every Learned person is a Publik one, and may be reckoned for as many as
his Example or Discourses may influence: Nor can this Holy Office ever be
restored to its long lost observance, but by Their conduct who are guides to
the people.

VI. THIS therefore is the sum of my account. I see the Holy Communion ly under
the unhappiness of Gideon's Fleece, denied the blessing of Restoration, which
all other Offices of our Worship enjoy: The most Pious and Prudent complain,
not only in relation to the Sacrament it self, but to those good ends which it
was designed to serve, and which wither for want of it. Those who labor the
Remedy, do Well, but not Enough. I have long expected that some better hand
would proportion the Remedy to the Need: But finding those Hopes disappointed,
and the Evil unabated, can no longer forbid my self, to undertake a Work so
necessary; wherein though I be obliged to comply with every understanding, yet
am I rather to leave Many Vulgar Readers Ignorant, than One Learned one
Unconvinced, and therefore must not balk any thing, however difficult to be
understood, if it have force answerable.

And if I appear singular in any my Positions, That also must be imputed to the
singularity of my Task. I must dig deeper than others have done, prove what
they have supposed, disprove what they have connived at, search the bottom of
those Expressions, whose Surface they have built upon: and so state the whole,
that every Practical Question, especially those necessary ones abovementioned,
may be satisfied both fully and convincingly.

We are to travel antiquated ways, overgrown not only with Weeds which hide
every path, but Briars and Thorns which incumber them; not only with the
Forgetfulness, but Prejudices of Many Generations; which to grub up, will
require both strength and labor, learning and care.

1. Some Learning will be requisite, but not much. We shall not need capt
Fathers, or Councils, or Schoolmen, etc. tumble our Books, or torment our
Brains, to reconcile One Author with Another, or the Same with Himself. There
is but one only Text which at all speaks to the matter; and a little Logic,
with sufficient Care, will discover its meaning.

2. But as much Care as you please. For I profess to fear any Learned Readers
Have, more than his Rigor: and therefore I entreat and provoke him, to view and
review, examine and cross-examine, sift and search every clause in this whole
Dissertation, and spare me not, if he find any one inconsistent with any other,
either in This Work, or the Apostles Discourse, or other Scripture, or with any
other authentic Evidence, or any other rule of Reasoning.

I very well know what appearances my fundamental notices will make to the
first glance: They will seem extravagant, and perhaps ridiculously
contemptible, because not only far out of the Rode. but short of those awful
apprehensions that we have grown up in toward the Holy Sacrament: Yet am I
fully persuaded, that the more strictly they are examined, the more will they
appear, not only Suitable and Serviceable, but absolutely Necessary to a clear
understanding of our Lords Institution, the Apostles dissertation, and our own
duty.

And were I mistaken and confuted in any collateral Position, yea in almost
all, yet if any One evidence remain unanswered; That One must not suffer for
the defects of its fellows, but claim such submission as is due to its (however
single) power.

I therefore pray my capable Reader, by all the abovementioned and all other
concerned Interests, For the Lords, the Churches, his Own and Others Souls
sakes: if he values the Power of Godliness much decayed, the public Peace much
endangered, or this Holy Sacrament (the great promoter of both) much neglected:
By all that ought to be dear to Christians or Men, I pray him to be as severe,
but withal as impartial, in examining what is here offered, as the dignity of
the Subject, and the neglect it suffers both from Doctors and People,
require; and rhen to put That sentence in execution which he so finds to be
just.

That I may not only exhort, but provoke you, and withal prevent an Objection
supposing it unpracticable. I tell you, what our Lord said in another case [The
very stones will cry out] is in a sort verified in this.

When the defection of our Nation is almost as general as was that of Israel in
Elijah's days; and those to whom it properly belongs, neglect the redress; to
the shame of us Priests, yea of us Men; but to the honor of the weaker Sex, and
more tempted Quality, in a place promising as little as the condition of the
persons; as if Piety wrought by Antiperistasis, a number of noble Ladies,
emulating the Primitive Christians, as in other offices of Devotion, so in This
also, have combined themselves with their suitably pious Ministers in a Holy
Society, paying our Lords day, his Supper, and his Poor, their joint rights, by
celebrating the Holy Communion, with its Offertory at least every Sunday.
Wherein probably they design not barely to Perform, but to Exceed the utmost
Obligations of strict Duty, and by That very error so surmounted, deserve the
applause of doing things that are more excellent: Yet leaving them the honor
due to such extraordinary good Intentions, I must rob them of the glory of
supererogating in the performance, by proving that they hardly do all that is
commanded them.

Which since I cannot do with any reasonable hope or considerable success, but
by convincing the Learned; nor that, but by carefully tracing the Apostles
discourse through its various turnings, which will require more Care than
learning, as well in Reader as Wrirer; lest those who are either unable or
unwilling to undergo that task, should by the obscurity or cragginess of the
Entrance, be tempted to lay aside the Whole; I was willing to have taken such a
method, as by the planeness of the first part of the way, might have invited
them to hold through the rest, however uneasy.

For to trace a Story, is much easier and pleasanter than to trace an Argument:
And I thought it very probable, that upon view of the Practice of Christ's
Church in its best Ages, every inquisitive person would be willing to
understand, upon what ground That Practice was built: which finding to be no
other but the Apostles reproof of the Corinthians, he would think it worth his
labor, both to measure and dig that ground, so to discover, both how the
Building was supported by it, and how it self also was supported; and since he
could not fail to discover, that the Argument was built upon our Lords mind in
his Institution, with manifest indications, that the Institution it self was
also grounded upon something antecedent: This doubtless must invite him to dig
on, till he could discover That Something which lay at the bottom of all as the
first Foundation.

But finding that This method, however more proper to Invite the Reader, was
less so to Convince him: I chose to proceed in the same order as the subject it
self has do'n* by building upward. First therefore I have opened the Ground,
then showed how our Lords Institution was built upon That Ground; then how the
Apostles Argument was built upon That Institution: and lastly, how the Churches
practice conformed to That Argument: and so we may most clearly understand how
far our selves are concerned to conform to That Practice.

And now to make what recompense I can for the discouragements which this
procedure may cast upon the Reader, I know no better way than to advertise him,
That if he either can not or will not take the pains to hunt after the Apostles
Argument, he may pass over the first and more troublesome part of this
Discourse, beginning at the fifth Chapter of the second Part; wherein I hope he
will find such satisfaction, as may in a good measure deliver him from his
misapprehensions, and encourage as well as oblige him, to the performance of
his Duty, which is the aim of my undertaking; but not so completely attained
without a full understanding both of our Lords and the Apostles measures
whereon they built, the one his Institution, and the other his Dissertation;
and himself (if he will do it regularly) must build his knowledge and practice.

For without such a discovery of the first Foundation, he may perhaps be
sufficiently Persuaded, but not fully Convinced; whereof the Former may
satisfy a Learner, but the Later is necessary for a Teacher; to which better
Quality I therefore offer the following Researches, because without Their
conviction first, and then endeavors, the so General Error can never be cured.

PART I. Concerning the Particle THIS.
CHAP. I. The Scripture cleared from the scandal arising from our contentions:
by showing the true cause and cure.
I. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper highly esteemed by our Lord and all his
Churches. In later Ages many differences of Opinions concerning it. II. Not the
number only but matter of the differenecs scandalos to the Scripture, both
toward Papist and Jew. III. The blame removed from the Scriptures to the
Doctors. IV. The Papists, best perhaps silenced by our claiming the literal
sens in the Wine as they do in the Bread. Our own Divines neglect the former
part, which yet is the Head of the Apostles discourse. V. The regular way to
understand his meaning. Two Suppositions taken upon trust, with engagement. VI.
The whole Discourse Paraphrased. VII. The whole Argument Analyzed. And reduced
to Logic form. The great Limbs more minutely to be dissected in four
considerabl Members: And all to be closed with an answer to what is said to the
contrary.

WHOEVER shall give a clear account of our Lords mind in this Institution,
shall do more than one good Work. For as he shall rescue the Holy Sacrament,
from stifling under a heap of humane Inventions, so shall he the Holy
Scripture, from suffering under the scandal of insufficiency, in a subject
necessary to be known.

That This is such a Subject, we shall find hard to deny, if we observe with
what Care our Lord recommended it, and upon what Reasons.

This we shall hereafter find occasion to consider more fully. At present we
shall rest in the concurrent agreement of All Ages and Nations Christian.

But though All ages agree in This, that it is to be honored with our best
services; yet do the Last much differ from the First in the manner of payment.

The Primitive, so certainly made it the Principal part of All their publik
Worship, that they gave it the honor to denominate the Whole: they consecrated
a Weekly day to it, because (during the power of the Jews) they could nor
celebrate it on their Sabbath: they embraced it as the instrument of their
Communion, both with Christ and one another, etc.

The Later departed from This constancy, not out of Neglect, but Reverence;
wherewith they have so unhappily Over-honored, that thereby we have Lost both
It, and its Benefits: Yea, which is worse, perverted it to a Destroyer of That
Communion of Love among our selves, which it promoted, while constantly
celebrated among better Christians.

For when Necessity cried to the Officers of Christ's Church to rescue this Holy
Supper from the Profanation it then suffered, by the licentiousness of the
Greeks, they employed all their powers to put it in the greatest Distance from
any such contemt.

They thought they could not speak too much, or soar too high: They were not
satisfied with what the Scripture has Said, nor what Reason can Apprehend; but
laying aside their Rule, differ as much among Themselves as from It.

HENCE is it, that nothing has be'n Said by any One, which has not be'n
Denied with equal confidence by Others. There are not so many Words in
Scripture concerning it, as Differences of judgment. Philosophers had not so
many Opinions concerning Man's chief happiness, as Divines have concerning this
chief office of Worship.

So we sometimes espy (it is the conceit of an excellent person) a bright cloud
formed into an irregular figure; when it is observed by unskilful and
fantastic Travelers, it looks like a Centaur to some, and a Castle to others;
some tell that they saw an Army with banners, and it signifies War; but another
wiser then his fellows, says it looks for all the world like a flock of Sheep,
and foretells plenty; and all the while it is nothing but a shining Cloud, by
its own mobility and the activity of a wind, cast into a contingent and
inartificial shape: So it is in this great mystery of our Religion, in which
some espy strange things, which God intended not, and others see not what God
has plainly told, etc.

And would to God it were no worse: But it is no such jesting matter. For as
Opinions are Multiplied without Number, so are they Valued without Mesure; and
what is spoken without Reason, is imposed without Moderation.

No Province in Religion is so pestered with Controversies among the
Scholastical, Mysteries among the Contemplative, Scruples among the Practik;
none prosecuted with greater heat and less satisfaction: Every ones zele for
his Opinion taking its mesure (or unmesurableness rather) from his value for
the Subject.

II. WERE there no other Disputes but such as concern the precarious Mysteries,
which have no other Parent, but fanciful men's Inventions; nor no other Nurse,
but Curiosity in niceties not practical; however great the Troubl might be, the
Scandal would be little toward the Scripture, which might with Gallio, refuse to
be judge of such matters.

But when the Question is as Important, as the Subject is Venerable; when it
pretends not to gratify Curiosity, but to satisfy Conscience; and that, not
in some Inferior, but the Capital, Critical duty: That our Lord and All his
Churches should value it so High, and yet the Scripture treat it so Slightly,
is a Mystery as Great and as Falls, as any among the multitude imposed upon it.

How then shall we escape the Scandalous Dilemma? Either the Scriprure cannot
be Sufficient, if defective in so Capital a subject; or the Institution must
not be so Valuable, if the great Author both of it and the Scriprure did not
think it worthy to be Legibly written.

Were not the Recrimination more obvious than the Objection, did not Tradition
leave the Romanists under as great uncertainty in these great questions, as the
Scriptures do us, they would undoubtedly so Urge, that we should not be able to
Answer the Scandal.

But to Recriminate is a poor justification. Or if the Papists be to be
answered, What say we to the Jews? If the Lord took off the vele from Moses 's
face, and put a thicker on his Own, How shall the Light of the Gospel triumph
over the Obscurity of the Law? Not all the Ceremonies of the Mosaik Law put
together, will thicken to so opake a mask, as this One.

They hid indeed the Significance, but not the Obligation of the Law. The vele
was upon their Hearts, but not upon their Eyes.

They saw not the full meaning of Circumcision, but they did the Certain Time
wherein they were to celebrate it: They understood not the utmost signification
of the Paseal Rite, yet were they sure How often, and in what Day they were to
Sacrifice and eat the Lamb. But This great office is obscure even in its
Obligations. We as little know what we are to Do, as the Jews did what they were
to Believe.

How then shall we justify the Scripture in point of Sufficiency against the
Papists, or in point of Clearness against the Jews, without reneguing the Honor
due to the Sacrament?

We find a kind of Composition offered by one of our greatest Assertors, both
of the Sufficiency of the Scripture and Dignity of the Sacrament: It is (says
he) not much opened in the writings of the New Testament, but still left in its
mysterious nature; it is too much untwisted and nicely handled by the writings
of the Doctors, and by them made more mysterious: and like a Doctrine of
Philosophy, made intricate and difficult by the aperture and dissolution of
distinctions.

But if the New Testament has left it a Shining cloud, and the Doctors
reasonings varied it into Contingent shapes; (as he expresses it) what can we
say, but either there is no need to unvele the Mystery, and then the Sacrament
must be degraded from its Dignity, as not Worthy to be understood or
celebrated, or we must have some better Oracle to fix its signification, and
since other Doctors make it more Intricate, where can we hope to find
satisfaction, but from the Infallible Chair?

This most excellent Author has written so Much and so Well, both for the
Scripture and the Sacrament, that I cannot doubt him willing to sacrifice This
One assertion to Their Reconciliation; which also is as worthy our labor, as
the advancement of Either in prejudice of the Other.

AND why should we not improve the offer now made us? wholely free the New
Testament from Mysteriousness, and lay the whole blame upon the Doctors, as
having not increased only, but first caused the entanglement?

He that shall do this and Prove it true, if he appear Rude toward so many
Reverend Persons, may well hope to be justified by the Necessity: And if he
further discover, not only the Cause of the entanglement, but the way to clear
it; if he take the right Thread, and so draw it as to Untwist the whole, without
leaving any Knot untied, he may deserve no worse usage than a Child, that with
better Luck than Art, has disentangled a skein of Silk, which his Parent had
snarled and could not unwind.

The former half of this so justifiable work, will not require much time or
labor. It is but observing (and it is obvios to the first glance) what is the
regular way to discover the mind of any Author; and we shall soon find how
Generally, how Grossly, and how Mischievosly it has be'n forsaken in this
Subject.

If we look upon the Anatomist dissecting a dead Body, we may thence learn how
we are to examine a Discourse. The Artist, who aims at no other design but to
trace the ways of life, first takes a General vieu of the whole Body, and then
a Particular one of every Member, examins the Texture of every Particle, the
mutual Aspect of each to other, and the joint Usefulness of All to the life:
But the Butcher, who aims at nothing but his Profit, chops off such members as
may best advance it, makes of Them the most he can, leaving the Bowels as
inconsiderable, because unprofitable to himself, though most serviceable to the
life.

Can I help it, if truth oblige me to say, the Doctors have handled those parts
of Scripture which relate to This Sacrament, not like Anatomists, but like
Butchers? that they cut off such a Particular clause, as they think most
advantageous for their own preconceved Opinion, treat it as a distinct Body by
it self, regard not its Office in the Discourse it ought to serve, but make the
utmost they can of that One, without respect to all the Rest, etc.

In matter of Fact, nothing is rude that is true: I need not therefore stand
upon manners, but boldly say, that the Doctors on both sides have so Treated,
as if they had agreed to Abuse the Apostles Discourse, and our Lords
Institution. For the Papists cut the Institution along, and lay aside One
Side; our Own Divines cut the Apostles Comment athwart, laying aside the Upper
half.

IV. 1. THE Papists, that they may maintene their beloved Transubstantiation,
cut our Lords Institution into Sides, make all possible advantage of That which
seems most Serviceable, and lay by the Other as wors than Useless.

For whereas the Elements are two, they make all possible advantage of the
Bread. This they say must be the Lords Body in the literal sense, because he
has categorically said so; and since it is as easy for him to Do it as to Say
it, there is no Necessity, and therefore no Reason, why we should quit the most
Proper sense. For Reason must not be balanced against Faith. This must believe
the Thing, though That cannot comprehend the Manner.

But the Wine all this while is laid aside as Unserviceable; All the regard
paid it is but as an Attendent; It is concluded, that since the Bread is the
Lords Body, the Wine must needs be his Blood, whether our Lord have said any
thing at all, or any thing to the contrary concerning it, or no.

Yet our Lord honored the Wine, No Less; and the Apostle, More, than the Bread.
There are no Valves that hinder the Reflux; but we may with the same
Authothority and Evidence, interpret That by This, as This by That.

Now (if we believe the Apostle) Our Lord said not of the Wine [This is my
Blood] but [This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood.] And the literal sense
says not more plainly of the Bread [This is my natural Body] than it says of
the Wine [This is NOT my natural Blood.] If therefore They may argue
Positively, That the Wine must be our Lords Blood, because the Bread is his
Body; we may upon the same evidence argue Negatively, The Bread is Not his
Body, but only the New Testament in his Body; because the Wine is Not his
Blood, but only the New Testament in his Blood.

With the favor therefore of our better Champions, I conceive we ought to
learn, as of the Adder, so of the Papist, to direct our blow to That part, they
are so careful to fence, and restore the Cup to its due office. Possibly they
have denied it its right in the Peoples celebration, out of pique for the ill
office it is so apt to do to their beloved doctrine: let us restore it to Both
its Rights, its honor due by our Lords Institution, and its power of
interpretation due by the Laws of Reasoning.

We cannot more effectually silence their importunity for the literal sense,
than by claiming it. They who deny Sense and Reason, worthy to be balanced
against the Letter, cannot deny One Element to be so against the Other. What
therefore they have put asunder, if we remember our Lord to have joined
together, we cannot but know our selves obliged to Receive both in the same
sense, whether Literal or Mystical.

If Both are to be Mystically understood, the querel is ended between us; If
Literally, we make a new one between the Elements. If One must comply, he that
has One grain of it, will grant, that Reason must turn the scale on that side
where it shall be found. Those who deny it weight enough to preponderate the
the Literal sense, cannot deny it sufficient to turn Aequilibrate Scales.

So that the defect lies not in the Scripture, but the Doctors; whose
partiality to One side above the Other, has made a difficulty, which an equal
regard to Both sides would have prevented.

And it is yet further considerable, that they carry the same Partiality toward
that side they so favor. For as our Lords Institution has two equal parts, so
has their favored Proposition [This is my Body.] And whereas the Laws of
Reasoning require we should first understand the Subject, and then the
Predicate; the Former they wholely lay aside, and employ all their endeavors
upon the Later; which I might now insist upon, as another Butcherly abuse, but
I shall hereafter meet another occasion to call it to account, and therefore
hasten to what more nearly concerns our present bisiness; wherein if I should
prefer reverence to persons, however worthy, above the Truth I am engaged to
serve, I ought to be branded with a worse Character than that of Irreverence to
my betters, which I expect to be accused of.

2. Our own Divines therefore I cannot avoid impeaching, as guilty of the same
Partiality. To cut the Higher part from the Lower, is Another, but no less
irregular way of dissection, especially when the Lower depends upon the
influence of the Higher, for all its Life and Motion.

That the 27th depends as a conclusion upon the Premises, is manifest by the
illative [Wherefore] From the Forgoing discourse therefore ought all the
Following to derive its Life and Power. Yet who is there that takes any notice
of Those Premises or their Influence? Does not every one pass by All the rest,
and begin his endeavors at the Conclusion?

And as if we gloried in varying our irregularities into all possible shapes.
We take the quite contrary way with the next (the 28th) verse; for whereas the
Apostle there makes the Former half the harbinger of the Later, we employ All
our care about That, and wholely neglect This, which That is to serve.

Yea, as if it were a small matter to Neglect; we Countermand the express
Injunction, and so dash One Precept against Another. Let a man examine himself
(says the Apostle) and so let him eat, etc. [Let a man examine himself] (say
we) with all possible caution, and so let him beware that he eat Not that Bread
Nor drink of that Cup, if he find himself Unworthy, whatever the Apostle have
said to the contrary.

V. BUT it is easier to find faults than to amend them, and I promised not only
to show the cause of the embarra's, but the way out; which sure must be by the
same Light, and by contrary steps. If we Therefore miss the Apostles true
meaning, because we miss the true way to trace it; then must we needs be obliged
to search after it in that same way, which we have so discovered to be the
Right and Forsaken one.

We must therefore carefully Anatomise the whole Discourse. First observe the
Design, then the great Limbs, then the least Particles, Their proper Textures,
their mutual Aspects, their joint Serviceableness to That Design, which
animates them All to its own Use.

But as in Dead bodies (especially such as have any considerable time layen so)
many D^cts disappear, which during life were as Visible as Necessary; and the
Artist many times is led by mere Reason, grounded upon consent of parts, to
Find out if possible; otherwise, to Suppose those secret channels whereof he
finds no other evidence but necessity: So are there in This Discourse very
observable Suppositions, which though they were sufficiently evident when the
Apostle wrote, and will ever be necessary for the circulation of his Argument;
yet by Length of time, and Forgetfulness (if not worse) of those who should
have kept them open, are now so lost, that without careful Probing they are not
discoverable.

Two such Suppositions I shall now take upon Trust, pawning all my labor to pay
good Evidence for them, in a more proper Season.

1. That the Churches of Christ at That time celebrated All their Religious
meetings with Fests: (This is more then half proved by the very first glance
upon the Text.)

2. That in All their Church Fests, they honored some Special Bread and Cup
with Special ceremonies; the Cup ever closing the Fest: This will require a
fuller Examination.

Upon these two Suppositions, the Apostles Argument (otherwise unintelligible)
and All his Expressions (whereof some must be otherwise impertinent) will
appear most Clear, Rational and Unanswerable.

By their help therefore I shall make a duble dissection; of the Words, by a
Paraphrase; and of the Argument, by an Analysis.

VI. THE Paraphrase must take in the 20th Verse, because all the rest hang to
it.

20. When you come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the
Lords Supper.

21. For in eating every one takes before other his own Supper, and one is
hungry and anothor is drunken.

22. What? Have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the Church
of God, and shame them that have not? Shall I praise you in this? I praise you
not.

23. For I received of the Lord, that which I also delivered unto you, that the
Lord Jesus in the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread, etc.

25. After the same manner also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying,
This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, this do ye as often as ye drink it
in remembrance of me.

26. For as often as ye eat this bread, This bread, and drink this cup, you do
show forth the Lords death, etc.

27. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

28. (...). But let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of This bread and
drink of This cap.

29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation
to himself, not discerning the Lords body.

33. Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another.

34. And if any man hunger, let him eat at home.

When you meet in that publik place appointed to Gods Worship, your behavior is
such that you cannot be thought to celebrate the Lords Supper.

For whereas the whole Fest oght to be common to all the Communicants; (...);
you on the contrary in that foregoing Supper, which the Lords is to close, eat
every one his own Supper apart; so that one takes more than Temperance
allows, and another less than Nature requires.

If your debauchery be such, that you cannot forbear drunkenness, it were less
intolerable to practice it in private in your own houses, than thus impudently
to affront the whole Church, and insult over them who have neither houses nor
such plentiful provisions. I said indeed, verse 2. I praise you that you
remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances, as I delivered them to you.
But in this, which is an Ordinance of the first Magnitude, I must make an
exception. In this I do not, cannot praise you.

For this Tradition I received not, as I did the rest, from my fellow Apostles,
but from the Lord Jesus himself: and since you seem either to have forgotten or
mistaken it, I again repete it, That the Lord Jesus in the same night wherein
he was betrayed (being a Festival one) took Bread, etc.

After that same Festival manner also, he took the closing Cup, in its proper
time, viz. after Supper, saying, As often as ye drink this Cup, in this manner,
do it in remembrance of me, and not as you have hitherto do'n it.

For by this Institution, This Bread and This Cup is so advanced above its
former dignity, that it is consecrated to a representative of our Lords death;
and as such is to be honored, and that to the end of the world; so that neither
you, nor any other Christian Church, shall ever be at liberty to use it
otherwise.

Wherefore, this bread and cup are now no longer your own, but the Lords; and
who ever uses them in a manner unworthy of that Relation, is guilty not only
of Intemperance, but Sacrilege; as abusing not common Bread and Wine, but the
thereby represented Body and Blood of the Lord.

But remember that it is the proper character of a Man to examine his own
actions: Do so in This, consider what you do, and act sutably to your rule. Let
not the fear of so great a guilt fright you from your Duty, but from your
Irreverence.

For he that does it in a manner unsuitable to its relation, provokes our Lord
to anger; as leveling His Flesh with that of a Beast, and His Blood with that
of a Grape; putting no difference, but treating the one in the same rude manner
as he does the other.

Wherefore, when you come together to your Church Fests, entertain you one
another, (...); you that are able, communicate your meat to those who have none
of their own.

But let no man either eat or drink immoderately in Gods House; if he be given
to appetite, let him rather satisfy it in his Own.

By this Paraphrase well understood and duly heeded, we shall not fail of the
Apostles meaning in the whole and every Particle; provided we handle them
regularly, which I shall now do by a Logical Analysis of the Argument.

VII. BY the Rules of Reasoning, we must First consider the Conclusion intended
to be proved, and Then the Media employed to that End; mesuring These by their
serviceableness to That.

The Conclusion, is the charge of Profaneness in the Corinthians, relating to
our Lords Supper. This animates, and This must interpret every word, and
therefore requires to be it is self most carefully heeded: And one might think a
little heed sufficient, since it seems impossible either to Overlook or Mistake
it.

He does not only plainly lay it down, but thrice inculcate it. And since in
every proposition the Quantity is highly considerable, we must carefully
observe, that he does not accuse them as guilty of misdemeanors in Some more
than Other meetings, but in All alike.

Had he charged them as guilty in Some special meetings, wherein the Lords
Supper was more especially concerned, we had then understood that it was not
concerned in All assemblies as such: Or had he charged them as Profaning the
Lords Supper in All meetings, without heeding whether it were concerned in
them, or no; if in Those meetings they were at liberty to have celebrated or
omitted it, they might excuse themselves by saying, they intended it not in
those particular ones.

But because they Never met in the Church without Festing, and in All such
Fests they were obliged by Christ's command to celebrate his Own; he therefore
blames their Fests Universally, and that in such language, that thrice varying
the Phrase, he still further clears his meaning.

Verse 17. Your coming together is not for the better, but for the worse.

Their coming together Indefinitly, if it be not plainly enough equivalent to
an Universal, is more clearly made so by ver. 18. When you come together in the
Church, where the more general [coming together] is so appropriated to the
[Church] that the indefinite [when] must be equivalent to whenever, as yet
more plainly appears by ver. 20. When you come together into one place, it is
not to eat the Lords Supper. This is the extract of the whole charge, That when
they came together into That holy place which was set apart for Gods worship,
they so behaved themselves, that what they did, could not be taken for the
Lords Supper.

A charge which now adays we should not decline; and why should the Corinthians
more than we? We acknowledge (might they not say?) yea, we plead it. We cannot
be said to Eat the Lords Supper: and what then? therefore we cannot be said to
Profane it.

This might have be'n an evasion as Effectual as Obvios, if the Lords Supper
were not concerned in Those very same meetings, which he so Described and
Reproved: i. e. in All.

This therefore is the sum of his Charge, and it must be the Design of his
Reasoning, to prevent any evasion; not to be do'n, but by proving, That in All
their meetings the Lords Supper was Therefore Abused, because it was Concerned
in them All.

Let us now consider by what Media he proves it.

At the 23d verse. he begins his evidence: appealing to our Lords
Institution, explained by a Revelation. In recital whereof it is most
considerable, that in reporting the consecration of the Cup, he adds words
not mentioned by any of the Evangelists; nor by himself, in That of the Bread.
For none of Them say, that our Lord said of the Cup [Do this as often as you
drink it] nor does Himself say that our Lord said of the Bread [Do this as
often as ye eat it.] The Reason of this difference we shall have a fitter time
to enquire hereafter.

At Present we must not neglect to observe, That as he is very careful thus to
Insert these words; so is he, immediately to Resume them, and settle them as the
Foundation of his whole Argument. For upon this Supposition, that our Lord
preferred This Bread and This Cup which was constantly used in All
Church-meetings, to such an Office, that whether they Considered it or no, yea
whether they Would or no, it must set forth his death; Then (and not otherwise)
will All his Inferences follow, that the abuse of [This bread and This eup]
reach That body and blood, which they so represent.

And lest This should fright them, not only from the Abuse, but the Use too, of
[This bread and This cup] to prevent so great an inconvenience, he is careful
to warn them, that it is no less crime to disobey our Lords Authority, than to
Profane his Supper: They must first examine themselves to prevent the One, and
then [Eat this bread and drink this cup] to avoid the Other. And having thus
secured the duty, both in the Thing and the Manner, he binds it by Threatenings
to the end of the Chapter.

These are the great Limbs of this Body, This the Process of the Argument; Thus
does it answer his own character, The body is fitly joined together and
compacted by that which every joint supplieth. Not one joint too little, or too
much; not One loose Expression, not One word Impertinent or Unserviceable;
every part has its mutual consent with every other part, and its office of
Serviceableness to the whole, which also is complete, without any the least
defect.

His Charge made good in its whole Latitude. The Corinthians convicted, All
Evasions barred, The Crime displayed, the Danger discovered, the Duty enforced,
the only Safe way set forth, and the Fear of deserting it prevented.

And because some require not only Logik force, but Logik form too; This is the
formal Process of the Argument.

Those who so come together that they cannot be said to eaet the Lords Supper,
com together for the worse. You so com together, ver. 21, 22.

The Proposition (which alone needs it) he proves by words purposely
inserted in his recital of our Lords Institution, ver. 25. and resumed, ver. 26.

As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords
death] which Proposition signifies nothing, unless helped with this Assumption,

As often as you come together in the Church, you eat this bread and drink this
cup.

And by assistance of this Assumption, the whole is made unanswerable.

This fundamental Assumption then Deserves and Requires our utmost care. I
shall therefore most diligently observe it; And for greater clearness, shall
transpose the Apostles words, reading them Thus,

This cup as often as you drink, do it in remembrance of Me.

And so we find these considerables.

1. A certain special cup, pointed at by the Demonstrative THIS.

2. This cup made a standard whereby we must measure our performance.

3. The Performance which we must mesur by This standard.

4. The end for which we must do it.

And having thus stated our obligation, by examining the Apostles discourse, I
shall examine what is said to the contrary by our late Divines, who not heeding
the Standard, and mesuring the duty by a (good, but) unfit one, have defeated
both our Lords design and their own too.

CHAP. II. Of the Necessity to fit the word THIS with some singular Bread and
Cup.
I. The difference of our Lords style toward this Bread and Wine from That
toward litl children. II. This subject requires the clearest expression. III.
The Particle THIS most considerable. IV. Grammar and Logic. In Logic it is
considerable. 1. As a singl word, a Demonstrative must have something for its
object praecedances, Every word must be answered by some Idea. V. 2. As the
subject of a Proposition. The meaning of the Praedicate must be mesured by the
capacity of the subject. Offers at the import of the word rejected, 1. That
Individual. 2. The whole kind. 3. Something indeterminate. 4. The Action

OUR Lord, after his last Supper, treated Bread and Wine with such kindness, as
at another time he did little Children: He took them up, laid his hands upon
them, and blessed them.

But with This great difference, that of Those he favored the Whole kind:
Suffer (said he) [little children] to come to me. [Little children]
indefinitely, i. e. Any little children whatsoever; and gave a Reason,
comprehensive as the Precept, For of such is the kingdom of heaven.

Whereas Here, he prefers not Bread and Wine indefinitely, nor speaks a
word of their Fitness for the honor; recommendeth not either of them as Such,
but as This; i. e. Not the whole Genus, nor any Other Species, but only This,
i. e. This singularly Proper cup.

So great a difference in his Expression, must needs proceed from a suitable
difference in his Intention.

In the Former case; his Words plainly declare his meaning, That as often as
Any parents, or other friends, desired to bring Any Children to him for his
blessing, his Disciples should admit them, whoever they were. And had he now
meant as Universally of Bread and Wine, as then he did of Children; he Easily
Might, and therefore Certainly would have declared such a parallel Intention,
with a parallel Expression, saying, As often as you desire to set forth my
death by a visibl representative, do it with Bread and Wine; for such viands ar
proper to That end.

Thus I say he Might, and therefore Would have declared his meaning, if he had
meant no more; because Thus it would have be'n best understood. For (as reason
required) it was his constant Practice to deliver his Practical precepts in the
clearest style, that the dullest apprehension of the most illiterate Fisherman,
might understand his duty.

II. IN the Mysteries of the Kingdom indeed, especially such as might have
temted his (yet) carnal followers to forsake him, he Hinted, and Intimated more
than he thought fit to Express: and he gave his reason, I have many things to
say to you, but you cannot bear them now. He therefore spoke only so much as
might serve to prepare them for that Spirit of truth, which as it brought all
his Sayings to their Memories, and all his Institutions to their
Understandings; so did it indue them with power from on high, to bear such
truths, as were then too Big for their narrow Capacities, or too Heavy for
their sensual Affections.

Now, this is a Practical Precept, Therefore Injoined, that it may be
Performed; and for that reason oght so to be Expressed, that it may be clearly
Understood, especially in such Necessary points as are to be Mesures of the
Performance.

Besides, as it is a Practical precept, so it is a Positive one too. And such
(above all other) require the Fullest and Clearest declaration of the Authors
meaning:

For Precepts Moral, if they be less clearly delivered, may receve further
light from the candle of the Lord, which shines in every man's Reason.

But Precepts Positive, having no other Mesur, but the mere Will of the
Lawmakers, can have no other Interpreter but his Words, which therefore need be
as Clear, as his intentions to be obeyed can be Real.

Which in This case we cannot doubt them to be, since it is appropriate to his
own Personal honor, and favored with many expressions of his esteem.

If ever therefore we must mesure our Lords Mind by his Words, it must be Now:
and Consequently, Now must we most carefully examine the Proper sense of Every
word, by such tests as are owned by all mankind.

III. AND among his Words this Particle [THIS] as it has the first Place, so
has it a principal Importance. Our Lord made it the head stone of the corner,
though the bilders have rejected it, and made it a stone of stumbling.

For what St James said of the Tongue, may be applied to THIS Particle. It is
very little in Bulk, but very great in Power: and that Power it exercises in
the same Manner too.

The Bridle determins the motion of the otherwise wandering Horse; and the Helm,
That of the otherwise floting Ship; and THIS, the otherwise Undermined object.

If we go on with St James, and complain of it is setting on fire the course of
nature, the unhappy sentence may appear more gilty than Any: But our THIS is so
far from the Incendiary, that had not it is help be'n refused, it would either
have Prevented or Quenched the flames.

For had the Doctors employed some of That care in duly Stateing the power of
the word [THIS] which they have worse than lost upon Exalting that of the word
BODY; the Cup of blessing could never have spent (as it has do'n) more blood
of Christians than of the Grape.

But those who resolved to Deify the word BODY, must Sacrifice to it our word
THIS: That they might destroy the principles of Natural Philosophy, they must
begin with those of Grammar and Logic, which concur to require our Special
regard to the neglected Particle.

IV. GRAMMAR tells us, that it is a Pronoun Adjective and Demonstrative. As an
Adjective, it cannot stand without a Substantive: and as a Demonstrative, it
must have a proper Object to point at.

And Logik says the Same, if we look upon it as a Simple word; and More, if we
look upon it as part of a Proposition.

If we look upon it as a Single word, Logik calls it Syncategorical, which is
another expression of the same office which Grammar ascribes to it. It so
points at some Singular object, as to change the Vagum into Determinatum, and
put as much difference between This Cup, and Any cup, as there is between Hic
homo and Quidam; which is no less than what the Proper name can add to the
Common nature. For if Peter be pointed at, and called This man, he is thereby
as much distinguished from all other men, as if he were named.

Obj. If it be thought sufficient that there is a difference between THIS and
other bread, as soon as it is prepared for Consecration.

Ans. I answer, We are not yet com'n so far. We are not now enquiring into the
Consequence of the Action, but into the Meaning of the Institution; which was
the Cause, of the (then futur) Action,

We know it to be no Common Bread, when it is Separate (or about to be so) from
Common use: but we would also know whether it were not distinguished from Common
bread, before the Institution required us so to Separate it: whether it had not
some Praevios fitness above Any other Bread, which might prefer it before All
orher, to the Office wherewith our Lord honored it, in consideration of That
singular Praevios fitness.

Now since our Lord pointed to it by the Demonstrative THIS, before ever he had
Consecrated it, and thereby declared it Singularly capable of the Office;
either it must have some Praevious singularity, or the Demonstrative must be
vain, as having Nothing to demonstrate.

FOR Words are but Images of Thoghts: and as That Thought must be vain which
has no Thing to answer it, so must That Word be, that is not answered by a
Thought: the One and the Other must be verified by some Idea.

But of All words, the necessity lies heaviest upon THIS. Others must Signify
some proper object: This does not only Signify, but Point to it, and must be
not only Vain, but Abusive, if professing to show something, it have nothing to
show. This Priest must of necessity have something to offer.

I here challenge Any one to show me, in Any Author whatsoever, any one example
wherein This Demonstrative creates the first Difference, without any Praevios
disposition in the Object so to be pointed at: And 'till That can be do'n, we
may very well receve our Lords word in the same Sense, since it carries the
same Sound, as it does in Moses's style.

This (said he of the Blood of sprinkling) THIS is the blood of the Covenant:
That Blood receved not All its proprieties from what Moses said or did: But it
First differed from All other blood, by its Proper circumstances of offering;
and Moses finding it so Predisposed, honored it with a singular Demonstrative
and Dignity.

Our Lords style is the very same, and plainly alludeth to the same form of
Consecration: This cup (said he) is the New Covenant, and therefore This blood
of the New Covenant; must (as well as that of the Old) have some Praevios
singularities preceding the Proposition, and Fitting it for the honor whereto,
merely by reason of That fitness it was so preferred above All other.

As we know what Honor it receved from the Institution, so we must enquire what
was the Singular fitness it brought to it: We are not yet com'n to the word of
command, DO THIS, where the Demonstrative following the Action, may derive a
singularity from it: but we are yet in the porch, in the Declaration, [THIS is]
etc. and desire to learn what THIS can signify, before any other word be
spoken, which may change it to some other state, than what belonged to it
before.

V. HITHERTO we have looked upon it in its Single capacity. Logik further
considers it as a Part, and the principal Part too, of a Proposition. It is
no less than the Subject, considerable Always as the Foundation whereon the
Praedicate is to be bilt; and Oftentimes as the Standard whereby its meaning is
to be mesured.

For the sense of the Praedicate must ever be fitted to the capacity of the
Subject: and if the ordinary signification appear too big or too little, the
Inrerpreter must imitate the Prophet, who applied his Own Eyes, Hands and
Mouth, to the Child's; wherein he must derive his mesures from the Speakers
mind, sometimes discoverable by common Reason, and sometimes by the Speakers
annexed Exposition. E. G.

Jacob categorically affirms of several of his Sons, that they are Beasts of
several kinds: and immediately limiteth the extravagant Expression to some
determinate Resemblance.

Juda is a Lions whelp] (Not in all respects, but this) From the prey my son
thou art not go'n up.

Issachar is a strong Ass.] (What in the whole form? No, but in This) couching
down between two burdens.

Dan shall be a Serpent in the way] (Not in All, but this One respect) He
biteth the horse heels.

Our Lords style is the same, at other times as well as now. And we may as
reasonably say, Our Lord was not a Man, but a Plant, because he said [I am the
Vine] though he interpreted himself by adding [In Me ye bring forth fruit] Yea,
not so much as a Living plant, because he said [I am the door] though he
immediately added [by me if any enter in, he shall be saved] As we may, that
this is not Bread, because he said [This is my body] when he immediately glossed
upon the word, by adding [Do This in remembrance of me.]

But on the contrary, we are as much obliged to mesure This Proposition by the
annexed Limitation, as either of the Other; and so to confess, that This is no
more our Lords Body, than himself was a Door, or Issachar an Ass.

Now if it be true, that the Praedicate must be thus accommodated to the
Subject; then, the less capable the Subject is, the less must we giv it of the
Praedicate. If therefore Bread [as such] cannot be understood to be our Lords
body; Then perhaps [as THIS] it may carry such diminishing characters, as may
write it less capable.

For This reason, it is probable that former Ages have be'n industriously
silent concerning it, and for This reason is the enquiry necessary.

Though This be a quite different question, yet it is not unserviceable, even
toward our understanding the Other. It is one question, which asks what Jacob
meant by the word Ass? when he put it upon Issachar: and another to ask, which
of his sons it was whom he so styled? So it is one thing to enquire what our
Lord meant by the word [Body] when he said of the Bread, This is my body: and
another, to enquire what extraordinary Bread that was which he preferred to
that dignity.

THE Eunuchs first question was Not concerning the Things to be suffered, but
the Person that was to undergo them: He asked not what was meant by being led
like a lamb to the slaughter, his judgment taken away in his humiliation, or
the obscurity of his generation; But of whom speaks the Prophet this? And the
same must be our method if we will understand our Lords Institution. Before we
enquire what he meant by calling the bread his Body, we must ask of what bread
speaks the Lord this?

We may probably better understand [Into What] our Lord changed it, if we first
know [From What.] Many Therefore understand not What they say, because they
know not Whereof, (...), 1 Timothy 1.7. Many would not have Spoken, Others would
not have Believed, what All confess they cannot Understand, in the Praedicate
of this unhappy Proposition, if they had first understood its true Subject as
they ought to have do'n.

1. That our Lord spoke only of that individual Bread and That individual Cup
which he then distributed, so as to make Those Individuals the adaequate
Subject, as well of his permanent Institution, as of That One Distribution,
cannot be imagined; since Those Individuals must perish in the useing, but for
ever live in such successors, as may be the Same in the General Nature of Bread
and Wine, and in the Special circumstances wherewith those were accompanied,
even before their preferment.

2. That he spoke of the Whole kind, Any Bread and Any Cup, we may not believe,
both because of the now mentioned difference of style in This text, and That
concerning Children: and because such a sense would oblige us to Consecrate All
bread and All wine, seeing the Demonstrative would have pointed to All alike.
This sense is as much too Wide as the former was too Narrow: yet some will have
a yet Wider. For

4. They conceve that our Lord was so far from pointing to any determinate
Bread, that he did not to any determinate Thing. But the Hoc must be taken
Indeterminately, Hoc, i. e. Hoc aliquid, This Something. That they may destroy
the nature of Bread, they begin with that of the Pronown.

For whereas the Proper office of This Pronown, is to make the Object More
determinate, by singling One out of Many, contracting the General to a Special
or Particular; This sense will make it Less Determinate and More General:
'twill be so far from distinguishing This bread from Other bread, that it will
take away the Specifical difference, whereby it is distinguished from an Egg, a
Stone, or a Scorpion, etc. Which is so contrary to the nature of a
Demonstrative, as Black is from White; whereof One is said to Congregate, the
Other to Segregate.

And the Constant Practice of All mankind contradicts it. For whoever shows
any thing to another, and styles it [This] Does not pretend to disable him
from judging what it is in its kind, but to difference it from Others of the
same kind; does not pretend to Contradict his sense, but to Direct it.

If Caius show Titus a Guinny, and say [ This you shall have, if etc.] he would
do him injustice if he gave him a Shilling instead of it, pretending he meant
not by the word THIS any determinate coin; nor would Any arbitrator judge, but
he must pay what the constant import of the Phrase called for, i. e. what to
sense the piece appeared to be worth, which Cajus pointed to by the word THIS.

The case is the same on both sides; as it must not signify Less, so must it
not More; but just the same as the sense to which it is shown takes it for: If
Therefore to All senses it appear Bread, the Demonstrative will not make it Any
thing else: it will leave it its Proper Nature of Bread, and Add to That Nature
some Enclosure from the Common, to exclude All Other but THIS only.

4. That our Lord pointed Not at the Elements, but the Action, is the concept
of a greater than Bellarmine, of our Church; which he bildeth upon the
Grammatical disagreement of (...) with (...).

But it is contradicted by the Other Element; for (...) does more necessarily
require that the Demonstration should be applied to the Cup, than the other
(...) can forbid it to be applied to the Bread: And the two Elements being
joined in the same interests, often help one another in the interpretation of
what is not equally expressed, but must equally be employed, as equally
belonging to Both.

Nor can we abstract the Action from the Subject, but must take the whole
complex together: This Action, Thus performed, with THIS Bread and THIS Cup.
For our Lord first Declared what THIS IS, before He Commanded us to DO THIS.

We cannot therefore perform the Action, until we know what is the Necessary
Matter: because the Action is confined to THIS bread, and the Common nature of
bread is determined to THIS only, with exclusion of All Other, and That before
the Action has passed upon it.

I have (I doubt) tired my good Reader with this dry kind of reasoning: I come
now to another kind of evidence, probably more Satisfactory, certainly less
Troublesome.

If I can show some special Bread and Cup, that shall exactly fit both our Lords
Institution, and the Apostl's Comment thereupon; This probably may be more
persuasive than Any Logical Demonstration whatsoever, that there Must be such
an One, let us therefore try if such can be found.

CHAP. III. The singular Bread and Cup hunted out and found.
I. Customs of That time and place to be enquired. 1. The Custom of Festing in
publik worship, fitteth the Apostl's Argument, but not our Lord's Institution.
II. 2. The Passover fitteth our Lord's Institution, but not the Apostl's
Argument. Three incidental remarks upon the Jews Paschal form. III. A Jewish
custom pitched upon, exactly fitting both our Lord's and the Apostl's words.
IV. An Objection answered with a story

WHEN Grammar and Logik can discover nothing to us, but our Want, and thereby
set us upon the indispensible task of enquiring after the Extraordinary Bread
and Cup, honored above All Other both by our Lord and Apostle, but cannot
direct us one step in our way to find them; Whither shall we go but to History,
the last interpreter of Those sayings, whose Obscurity is derived only from
That dust wherewith time has covered them.

It is the very frequent fate of many a good Speech (and the very Sound shows
it so of This) that their meaning depends upon the Customs of remote Time and
Place for which they were Calculated, and with which alone they are to be
Retrived.

Let us therefore put our selves in the Corinthians Place and Time, and enquire
into their Publik assemblies, if possibly we may therein meet satisfaction.

I. FESTING in Gods Publik worship, was Then, and before that time, so
Universal to All Nations and Religions, that it may seem derived from the light
of Nature: But that it was the Practice of the Apostles and their Coaetaneos
Churches, the book of their Acts sufficiently declares; and that it was so in
the Church of Corinth, the Apostles reproof must necessarily suppose, both in
his Charge wherewith it is Ushered, and his Evidences wherewith it is Proved:
And This alone can give us a good account of that solemn and otherwise
insignificant, ver. 26. whose Implicit meaning is only thus to be Explicated.

As often as you Eat this Bread (which in All your assemblies you constantly
Eat) and Drink This Cup, (which you also Constantly Drink) you show forth the
Lords death (by virtue of that Institution, whereby I have declared to you by
revelation from himself) he Consecrated them to That use.

By this light, as the Importance of That verse, so its Connection both with the
preceding and following, and its irrefragable Force toward his design,
manifestly appear, not leaving One syllable Obscure or Unserviceable in the the
whole Dissertation.

BUT though it suffice for the Apostles Argument, it does not for our Lords
Institution: We hereby find To what state our Lord had preferred it, but not
From what? And we are obliged to enquire out such a Special bread and cup, as
may answer [This] in our Lords hand, before ever his Church had celebrated it,
or Himself commanded them so to do.

If we understand it to signify no more nor less but a Fest, it cannot be
denied that [Eating bread] was but another phrase to signify Festing, and the
Expression will concur with the Apostles Argument to say, That our Lord by This
Institution commanded, that as All of All Religions, consecrated All their
publik Feasts to the honor of their several Gods; so should His own Worshippers
consecrate All Theirs to His own memory.

Did this sens agree as well with the Actions and Words of the Institution, as
it does with the Apostles Comment thereupon, I know not why it should be
refused: But bread in That style must signify the Whole Supper, All the Viands,
as well as the bread and wine; for in customary speaking, Eating bread
signified eating flesh, fish, and what ever else was provided: whereas our Lord
took the bread, brake and distributed it, leaving the rest of the Provisions
untouched the while: And beside the Bread, he took the Cup also, and that,
After supper was ended, pointing to This no less solenly than to That, which in
common speaking comprehended it: And all the while the Paschal Lamb was not
honored with the least Touch of his finger or Word of his mouth.

II. 2. THE Paschal Lamb! Well remembered! Did then our Lord point at This, not
as A Supper, but as The Passover? Let us consider,

He embraced This Passover with the greatest affection. With a desire (said he)
i. e. wirh a vehement desire, have I desired to Eat This Passover with you
before I suffer; and immediately (as declaring his reason) proceeded to this
Institution. And what could more fitly represent his death when Past, than That
which most lively prefigured it while Future?

If beside this, the Jews in their Passover used our Important [This] in such a
Form, as did no less plainly prefigure this Institution, than the Sacrificed
Lamb did the death of the Author; then must it seem reasonable that he chose
that Form, with the same affection that he did that Season: and if so, then
must we mesure our Lords [This] by that of the Jews, making the resemblance an
evidence that the One was the issue of the Other.

Let us therefore to the Jewish rituals: The Law of Moses requires Unleavened
Bread, and for That reason to This day they honor Bread with many ceremonios
solennities, Before, In, and After Supper. Particularly, they break a Cake into
two unequal parts: The greater part the Master of the Fest hides under a
cushion, there to be kept safe till the end of Supper. Then does he solenly
bring it forth, distributing it among the guests, and saying, This is the bread
of affliction which your fathers ate in Egypt, whoever is hungry, let him come
and eat of the Paschal Lamb.

And have we not now found our so much sought for Singular bread, exactly
answering what This bread is more than any Other bread? Do not All features
exactly concur? The Season, the Matter, the Form of words, All Circumstances the
same?

This is so plausible, that to this very Day (though not for this Reason) many
look upon the Passover as the Predecessor of the Lords Supper, and consequently
the Standard of our Performance: Many think that women have no right to the
Lords Supper, because they had none to the Passover; and (which is more proper
to our present purpose) that we are not obliged to receve it but at Easter
only, because That was celebrated only at the same season. And that the
Corinthians were of this Later opinion, the more we consider it, the more
probable will it appear; but most manifest, that the Apostle has utterly
confuted it: For he first reproves them as profaning the Lords Supper, not in
their Paschal only, but their Ordinary meetings, and then convinces them that
it is concerned in them All; whereby the Former error is also destroyed, unless
its Patrons will exclude all women, not only from the Lords Table, but his
House too.

The Paschal bread therefore, 'though it exactly answer our Lords Institution,
yet can it by no means agree with the Apostles gloss; and we must not rest till
we meet an answer for All Phenomenon, as well in the One as the Other.

YET have we not lost our labor. For as the Chemist, 'thogh he miss his great
Secret, often finds his cost and labor well paid by some profitable
Experiment; so we, 'thogh we meet not full Satisfaction in our main enquiry,
meet something worthy Observation.

1. That since our Lord in the same Circumstances used the same Word, we ought
to understand him in the same Sens. And therefore [This bread] must be our Lords
body, just so, and no otherwise but so, as the Pascal cake celebrated to this
day by the Jews, is the very bread which their Fathers ate in Egypt.

2. That since [This in the Jewish Passover, points at a Singular remarkable
piece of bread, distinguished from All others of the Kind, by its Proper
circumstances wherein it is to be eaten; therefore [This] in our Lords
Institution, must likewise point at some Special bread, known by the
Circumstance of eating it, from All ordinary bread.

3. Though we have not hereby found what are the proper Marks whereby we may
know [This] from Common bread, yet we have the Way wherein we are to seek it.
For since there is no other defect in the Paschal, but This, that it answers
not the Apostles dissertation, which reproves their Ordinary Fests; it must
needs concern us to enquire into the forms of their Common Fests, if possibly
we may therein find, not only such a Special bread, but such a Special cup too,
as may answer both our Lords design, and his word [This] in his Institution,
and the Apostles explication too, whereby he proves them concerned not only in
the Passover, but generally in Church Fests.

III. 3. LET us therefore again to the Jewish Ritual. Behold, at the very first
Step we receve such light, as leaves Nothing unsatisfied but our Wonder, that
the Jewish Rabbis should be better Commentators upon our Lords and his
Apostles words, and discover more to us of the Original, Nature, and Design of
our great Sacrament; than All the Christian Doctors, who so long and so much
have labored to honor it with their explications.

Because they are short and full, take the words of Leo Modena, a modern
Rabbin; and to remove all doubt of his veracity, you shall find the same said
by Buxtorf in his Syn. Judaica: so that you cannot doubt of matter of fact,
equally testified by two such witnesses, as (you are secure) agreed not to
deceve you.

After they are sat down, they say for the most part the 23d Psalm: and
afterward the Master of the house takes a loaf of bread, and says a
benediction over it, which having do'n, he breaks it, and gives to each
person about the bigness of a great olive, and afterward every one eats as he
pleases: and so the first time that every one drinks, he says a
benediction. When they have do'n eating they wash their hands, and take their
knives from off the table, because (say they) the Table represents an Altar,
upon which no iron tool was to come. And if they be three or more that eat
together, then does one of them command a glass to be washed, and filling it
with wine, he takes it up from off the table, saying with a loud voice, Sirs,
let us bless His name with whose good things we have be'n filled. After this,
the master of the house blesses it, and prays for peace; and having so do'n,
he gives to each of them a little of That wine which he has in his glass, and
he himself also drinks of it, and so they rise from the table.

The Necessity considered, which lies so hard upon us to find some Special
Bread and Cup, which may equally answer both our Saviors and Apostles THIS: we
may justly, upon That single account, require any Dissenter to admit of This,
or show us a Better.

But the Resemblance considered, we may challenge him not only to show a better
Tally to our Lords Institution, but any Pictur better answering the life. Yea,
upon supposition that we were allowed to Forge what we pleased, we might
challenge him to Invent any Hypothesis that may more exactly answer all the
Phenomenon, both in our Lords Institution, and the Apostles Dissertation, to
the least tittle. Mark I pray you.

After they are sat down, the master of the house takes a laaf of bread (says
the Rabby.) Our Lord distributed The bread, when he had given thanks (says St.
Paul) as they sat at meat (says St. Luke.

Then for the Cup. The first time any one drinks he says a benediction
(says the Rabbi.) The Lord took the Cup and gave thanks, says St. Luke. But
of This Cup because it concerned not the Lords Supper, St. Paul takes no
notice. When they have done eating, he distributeth a little of the wine (says
the Rabbi.) Our Lord took the Cup when he had supped, says St. Paul. After
supper (says St. Luke) saying, (...), THIS signal cup, THIS closing cup, etc.

Could we have Expected, yea could we have Desired greater resemblance? Are not
the Matter, the Actions, the Seasons, All circumstances the same? And do not All
these agree as exactly with the Apostl's Argument, and All its Clauses, as with
our Lords Institution?

The very first sight discovers such Resemblance, as manifestly declares
Relation; and the more exactly we vieu, the more shall we discover; nor would
we doubt the One were the proper issue of the Other, did not the Parentage
appear too Mean, and too long Concealed.

V. WHAT! must the adorable Sacrament of the Altar, which has so long
exercised the highest devotions of devoutest Souls, must this inestimable
Sacrament fall to so low a meanness, as to own a poor ordinary Feasting-cup for
its Original? And must all the Admirable Mysteries which contemplative Souls
have so Long and so Much venerated; must they All dwindle into a mere
Representative of That death, which the Evangelists have as plainly set forth
by Words, as This can do by Figures? And shall we believe that so many good and
learned Men, who have so carefully studied, it should be so much deceived, and
the Christian world at last, after almost 1700 years, be obliged to we know not
whom for information?

To such erronios purpose may Those declame, who use to judge of the truth of
the Sun-dial by their Watches, and I shall answer them by a story.

Codrus (or some such brave Prince) the night before he sacrificed his life for
his people, delivered into the hands of his chief Officers a Cabinet, telling
them, he therein bequeathed them his very heart, and requiring them publicly to
produce it in every Assembly as a lasting Monument of his death. It contained
his directions for its use legible enough through its Crystal covering, but
much more if opened with its annexed key. They receved it with all due
reverence, and while the memory of their so deserving King was yet fresh, they
constantly obeyed his command. But after some ages, as their love cooled toward
his Person, so did their regard to his Legacy. Which the Officers lamenting,
and endeavoring not only to restore it to its due reverence, but to advance it
higher, told the people, That however incredible it might seem, they must
believe what their dying Lord told them; viz. That in this Cabinet he left them
his very heart, which therefore they must adore as his Royal Person. And lest
by opening it, any one might therein find the Kings plain directions, they laid
aside the key, and then omitted the use of the Cabinet it self (except only
upon extraordinary seasons) pretending that too frequent use sullied it. When
many considering and considerable Persons complained, that they were brought
the back way to the same contemt, as former ages were condemned for; a certain
Officer of a middle rank, knowing the Kings directions could not otherwise be
legible, sought about till he had found the forgotten key; and upon trial,
finding it exactly to answer every ward, brought it into public vieu, pleading,
that such a concurs of lock and key in so many wards, could not be fortuit; and
seeing Some key must necessarily be had, they who refused This, must be obliged
to produce a Better. And because the metal was objected against as base brass
or iron, no way suitable to the richness of the Cabinet, and the Jewels therein
contained: he fell to scouring it from that rust wherewith Time and Neglect (if
not Design) (...) covered it; and finding it pure Gold, turned that Objection
Against its worthiness, into an Evidence For is. And thinking that All cavils
must be abundantly answered by a duble ocular Demonstration, he turned it round
in the lock, showing that all its parts were as well suited to all the wards
thereof, as its matter was to the worth of the Cabinet it self.

What success this had with the people, my Author does not inform me; but this
proceeding seems so genuine, that I shall follow it.

First, I shall show that the Jewish Tradition was fit for the honor of a
Sacrament. Secondly, That it exactly answers our Lords Institution. And
thirdly, That it serves every syllable of the Apostl's Dissertation.

CHAP. IV.
I. No more dishonor to This than to the other Sacrament, to be derived from a
Jewish Tradition. This Tradition more worthy than That. II. In what sens our
Lords Table is an Altar? Were our behavior at Table more pious, the Sacrament
need not be ashamed of such a relation. III. Our Lords form of consecration
derived from the Jewish Forms, both Festival and Sacrificial.

THAT it is a dishonor to This Sacrament to ow its original to a Jewish
Tradition, can ill be objected by those who make no such scruple against
Baptism, which yet deriveth its Institution from the same Author, and its
Extraction from the same Family.

That had lost its Key almost as long as This; for an Age has not past over
us, since it was found among the same Jewish rubbidge; yet are we not ashamed
to expound those Evangelical allegories, Regeneration, New birth, New creature,
Old man and New man, etc. by the Jewish Rituals, which speak them more than
Allegorical effects of Baptism upon Proselytes.

NOR is This Sacrament barely Equal, but much Superior to That, both by Natural
and Positive Law. For the Jewish Baptism was a mere naked Ceremony, Significant
(indeed) of the purity required in the person which received it, but neither
Derived from it, nor Effective of it.

But This Festival solennity did not only Represent, but really Exercise and
Improve, and 'twas its self the issue of true Piety.

Their affectation of Ceremonies might (for ought appears in Scripture) be
all the reason which moved Them to Baptize their Proselytes: but to bless God
for his Benefits is a worship acceptable to God above all burnt-offerings and
sacrifice, though instituted by himself, as appears in the 50th Psalm, where
he rejects Those and approves This, saying, He that offers me praise, he
honoreth me.

And if even under the Law, much more under the Gospel must such a Service be
acceptable, which carries in its countenance such fair Characters of the
Divine Nature.

And as it has more of Gods Image, so has it of his Superscription; more
Authority from Positive, as well as more Dignity from Natural Law.

That Gods people should Baptize their Proselytes, the Law of Moses took no
care; but that they should acknowledge his Bounty in feeding them it made
special provision. For Lev. 17.3. we find it thus written, What man soever
there be of the house of Israel that kills an ox, or lamb, or goat in the
camp, or that kills it out of the camp, and brings it not unto the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer an offering unto the Lord before
the tabernacle of the Lord: blood shall be imputed to that man, he has shed
blood: and that man shall be cut off from among his people.

He that killed an Ox, yea Goat or Lamb, was, if he slew a man and robbed God;
if he did not expiate the destroyed life, and acquire a new title to the flesh,
by offering it to (that he might receive it from) the Lord of all.

This was easily enough performable when the People and Tabernacle traveled,
and lodged together in the same Camp: But when the Camp was disbanded through
the whole Land, and the Tabernacle fixed in one City, then did necessity plead
for a dispensation from the unpracticable duty.

And this necessary Dispensation we find granted, Deuteronomy. 12.21. If the place
which the Lord has chosen to put his name there, be too far from thee: then
thou shall kill of thy herd and of thy flock, which the Lord has given thee,
as I have commanded thee, and thou shall eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul
lusts after.

In which words God shows his kindness to his former Law, no less plainly
than to his people. That must still be obeyed as far as it was practicable; and
what distance was too great, while he did not determine, but left it to the
piety of the people, he thereby obliged them to enlarge it as much as possible.

AND THEY in thankfulness for the favor, thought no distance great enogh: But if
the remoteness of their dwellings permitted them not to bring their Meat to the
Altar, found a way to bring the Altar to their Meat: Not really indeed (for
That the Law forbad) but the Representation and more: taking for a rule, (...)
Quod Altar expiat hoc Mensa expiat. They gave their domestic Tables the title
of Altars, and their Meat they styled Offering; Salt they therefore made
necessary for the one, because Gods Law had made it so for the other: When they
came to That Office, for whose sake the Allegory became reasonable, the
Benediction; they removed their Knives upon This express reason, because the
Law forbad any Iron tool to come upon Gods Altar: And by many other Ceremonies
indeavored to make the Succedaneum answer the Principal.

II. TO THIS probably, certainly to no better sens, must those frequent
Expressions of our Christian Fathers be reduced.

When they speak of the Sacrament of the Altar, they use the same Allegory, but
mean thus much more than the Jewish Doctors; that the Holy Fest is not only a
Representative Sacrifice (as were the Jewish) but a Commemorative: Does not set
forth what our selves would do, if we had opportunity, but what our Lord has
actually suffered.

And if the Jews thought it sufficient reason to call their own Table an Altar,
because they did what themselves thought fit to make it Represent one, much more
may we call That holy Table an Altar, and That Holy Meat a Sacrament, which
(not by our own voluntary Act, but by our Lords express Command) does not
barely Represent, but Exhibit his flesh and blood.

Nor is it sufficient reason, that because some strain the Allegory too far, we
should therefore abhor any use of it. Why should it be Unlawful or Unfit; yea,
why should it not be most Proper, for Us to borrow the Allegory from the Same
Tradition, from which our Lord borrowed the Institution? Had it be'n
Sacrilegios in the Jews to style their Table by That sacred title, our Lord
doubtless would not so have justified them by honoring the Tradition: Why then
should we not think it Equally lawful, since it is More proper, to give This
much Holier Table the same title, wherewith the Jews honored their domestic
ones without any such warrant.

WOULD to God we would so imitate the Jews, that not only the Lords, but Our
own tables might some way answer That name. For it is to be considered, to Our
shame, but to the honor both of That people and This their Tradition, and
consequently to the silencing of the Objection we are now answering, That the
same Piety which induced them so to Consecrate their tables, conciliated such
Reverence toward them, as represented what is due to the Altar it self.

Philo and Josephus of Old, and their Modern Rabins to This day, bost of their
Sobriety as beyond that of any other people, which (if true) may very
reasonably be imputed to the Piety wherewith they thus begin and end their
freest intertenements.

We are apt to mesure others by our selves; and because we see too many of our
great Tables so unlike Altars, that they shun, or run down all appearance of
Religion: because we Sit down and Rise like Quakers, Riot like Corinthians, and
Talk like Atheists, without any blessing before or after Meat, or any mention
of Piety (but to baf^le it) while we are eating: because we have degenerated
not only from Primitive Christianity, but from the litl Piety practiced so
lately, even by our selves, who a few years since would have be'n ashamed of a
Grace-less meat: we are therefore apt to believe the Jews as bad as our Selves,
or our Neighbors; and consequently, that there could be nothing in their Fests
capable of our Lords approbation, because there is not in our own.

But if we remember that our Lord blessed his loaves before he distributed
them, we must needs think This example better worth our imitation, than that of
the French: and if we believe he did therein comply with the Customs of his
Nation, and that Those Customs were such as their Rabbis describe, we may
reasonably both admit that to be true which their Writers bost concerning their
Sobriety, and impute That Sobriety to those Customs: and then we may well
believe that the Tradition which made the Table emulate an Altar, was so far
from Unworthy, that it was most Fit to be adopted into the Gospel, and
dignified with an immortal relation to our Lords Person.

Our Key therefore is of the most noble metal possible. Had it be'n immediately
enjoined by any positive law of God, it must have be'n Destroyed, Not
Perpetuated by the coming of that Body which Abolished such Shadows: Yet does
it carry such legible Intimations ever from that very ^^w, and such fair
Characters of Natural Religion, and that in its prime immortal Article,
Thankfulness, that it may plead as fair for such Preferment as any Custom could
possibly do. So that we are so far from any need to be ashamed, that we may
well glory in the Matter of the Key, as no way Unworthy its office.

III. YEA from this discovery of suitableness in point of Worthiness, we may
derive another in point of Fitness. It will invite us to compare our Lords Form
of Consecration, with some of their Sacrificial, as we have do'n his Matter with
their Festival; and so doing, we shall find as great a resemblance between
Those, as between These: Which must double the probability of the relation,
seeing it carries apparent marks, not of Father only but Grandfather too; not
only of the Tradition, but the Rite of Sacrificing whence that Tradition was
derived.

LET us then consider. The Institution-Supper, as it was Festival so was it
Sacrificial; more particularly, it was Paschal, i. e. a Fest of unleavened
Bread. And Bread was, and still is therein honored with a solen Distribution,
and these words, This is the bread of affliction which your fathers ate in
Egypt. Do you not perceve the air of our Lords Form? This is my body which is
given for you? If not, observe that of the Cup.

Moses when he sprinkled the blood of the sacrificed Heifer upon the Peopl,
records himself to have said, Behold the blood of the Covenant which the Lord
has made with us; the Apostle recites it, This is the blood of the Testament
(or Covenant) which the Lord has enjoined you. The One of these Forms is not
more like to the Other than Either of them is to our Lords, This is the blood
of the New Testament (or Covenant) that is shed for you.

And (...) we doubt This to be a copy of That? Can we doubt but This points
at That, as its shadow, now to disappear?

Neither the Jewish style, which caleth their Table an Altar; nor the
Christian, which caleth this the Sacrament of the Altar, can desire a more
honorable approbation, than these words of our Lord give them, manifestly
owning That Jewish Phrase for the Parent, and This Christian one for its Issu.

This resemblance of the Sacrificial Form, added to the other of the Festival
Matter, what is it, but the Scripture-way of naming considerable persons? that
we may not know Joshua the son of Nun more distinctly, than we may this
Festival Ceremony the issu of that Sacrificial.

CHAP. V.
I. A plainer proof from Chap. 10. From the sameness of names. In the Cup the
Greeks aped the Jews: The Apostle styles the Cup of the Lord, the Cup of
blessing, which is a perfect translation of the Hebrew name. II. The breaking
of Bread, a Jewish phrase. III. Some Phenomenon not salvable but by this
Hypothesis. IV. He expressly tells us, that each part of the Jewish Tradition,
by name, is a part of our Lords Supper. V. An Illustration from our Grace-cup.
VI. A Sacrament, What?

NEVER did Talies more exactly agree, than do This Institution and That
Tradition, both in Substances and Circumstances: Yet shall we be content to let
all this pass for Accidental, and the Evidence thence derivable for
Incompetent, if we confirm it not by a Demonstration as full and unanswerable
as the Subject can bear, or the most Skeptical person require.

Suppose a Prince had be'n long lost, and his Friends had met with a person of
Princely deportment, carrying in his countenance all the features, and in his
voice the perfect tone of the lost Prince: This must certainly make them full
of hopes that it was the same; and what greater satisfaction would they desire,
than This, that some credibl person of his retinu should giv in his clear
Testimony that it was so? And what clearer testimony could any such person
give, or how could he more effectually express it? than by naming him by his
proper name, and declaring that this Person, ^^^med, was the Prince they
desired.

If therefore we find the Apostle call the Lords Supper in each Element, by the
very same names as the Jews did each Matter in their Tradition, and then declare
them to be the Communion, the one of his Body, and the other of Blood, I might
hope the evidence capable to silence all doubts.

Look we then back to the 10th Chapter, and observe his motions and expressions.

His Design there, is to dissuade his Corinthians from communicating with
Heathens in their Idols Temples: His Medium for this, he there takes from the
same Topik, as he does here for the reproofs of their misdemeanors in the
Church: As Here the Lords Supper is inconsistent with Intemperance, so is it
There with Idolatros Fests.

There is (says he implicitly) the same relation between the Church of
Christ, his Table, and his Cup, with Us; as between the Temple of the Idol, his
Table, and his Cup, with Them: These are the Characteristiks of an Idolater, as
Those are of a Christian; and therefore you cannot use them Both, because you
cannot at once be of Both families.

In pressing this Argument, he so manageth each part of the Lords Supper, as
may best answer the Customs of the Heathen, from which he is to dissuade them.

That they used any benedictions of Bread, is nether manifest nor probable,
because not so suitable to the Greeks humor, which ran all upon Drinking. But
their Closing-cup is so evident, that they, who above all Nations in the World
were excellent at Both, Speaking, and Drinking, could not find a word more
expressive of Drunkenness, than (...), as if it were the inseparable attendant
of Sacrificeing.

And that in their other Fests they aped this Tradition, as in their
Sacrificing they did the Law, appears by what we find in many of their Poets
and other Writers.

I mention only the Scholiast, who seems little more than a Translator of the
last claus of our Rabby, (...). The custom was to offer drink to the good
demon, when the Table was about to be taken away.

This does the Apostle so lay hold on, as to express in their own abominable
style: therein opposing Name to Name, as expressly as he does Cup to Cup; caleth
That by the Name themselves had given it [the Cup of Devils] (for (...) is only
the diminitive of their (...).) And thereto opposes the [Cup of the Lord] by
the very same Name, which the Jews in the abovementioned Tradition knew it by.

For this I urge as most considerable, that to this day they call their
closeing Cup, (...) which it is not possible to translate into Greek more
exactly than the Apostle has do'n by (...).

The Strength (or at least the Evidence) of the Argument, depends upon the
Sameness of the Name; whereby he here points at the Cup, no less (yea perhaps
more) plainly,, than we have seen him do in the next Chapter by his
Demonstrative [This] and I think it not easy to find a third way, wherein he
could have more clearly have do'n it. No properer way of determining an
Individuum, than either to call him by his proper Name [Peter, or John, etc.]
or by pointing at him, and saying [This man.] Thus do these two Arguments
mutually enlighten each other; and Both concur to make it manifest, that the
Cup of Blessing in the 10th Chap. and that pointed at by the Demonstrative This
in the 11th Chapter, are the same with that which the Jews honored, both in the
same Circumstances, and by the same Name too.

II. AND this will be yet more evident when we consider, that he is no less
careful to speak of the Bread in the same Jewish style, caling that also by its
traditional ^lame.

For the Jews throughout their Misna and Talmud, call this part of their
Tradition by the same Name, as does the Apostle in this place, and whereby it
is still known in the New Testament. They call it, (...) which Phrase cannot
be more exactly translated than by [The breaking of the Bread] Yea, this is so
expressive with them, that it is diverbial to style the head of the family from
this office, and the whole performance by one word.

This you may plainly discover by what the learned and laborios* Doctor Castle,
in his Heptaglot Lexicon, says upon the word (...) his words are these, (...)
Rabb. Fractor. Sic dicitur Pater familias q. in convivio primus frangit panem,
s. cibum, illumque benedicit, and distribuit convivis. sec. illud, 1 Samuel
19.13. Hinc Phrasis illa in N. T. (...).

III. LEt us now observe how the Apostle treats these parts of the Lords
Supper under these their Proper names,; and we shall find still more proof of
his respecting This tradition.

He caleth That [the cup of Blessing] but he does not call This [the bread of
Blessing] and why not? Two Evangelists more expressly note, that our Lord
blessed it, and the third agrees with our Apostle, that he gave thanks before
he brake it.

On the other side he caleth This [the bread which we break] but does not style
That [the cup which we distribute] yet does our Lord speak it more plainly of
the Cup, than of the Bread, Take This and divide it among your selves.

Other reason for this duble difference of styles we cannot Find, and Better we
cannot Desire than This; that as our Lord borrowed both Parts of his
Institution from the Jewish tradition, so did the Apostle both their Names.

Again, the Apostle keeps to the Jewish style in the Cup, saying, [You cannot
drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils] but in the other part he
quitteth the name of [Bread] changing it for [Table] and saying, [You cannot be
partakers of the Lords [Table] and of the [Table] of devils.]

And for this he had sufficient reason, if the Greeks did not (what we find no
reason to believ they did) consecrate Bread as they did Wine, in All, yea or
Any of their Fests: but if we quit This reason, we shall hardly find another.

Yet again. The Bread had the First Place both in the Jewish Tradition, and the
Lords Institution: yet ver. 16. he gives the Cup precedence.

Why does he thus cross his hands, as old Jacob did, preferring the Cadet
before the First born? What Is the reason? were his eyes dim, or his choice
irrespective? By no means. For we shall again find him in the same partiality,
and upon the same reason, because the Cup was more serviceable to his Argument
than the Bread.

In This place it better demonstrates the inconsistency between the Church of
Christ which blessed it, and an Idols Temple which did not; and in That, it
better distinguishes a Fest, which requires the Lords Supper, from a common
Supper, which does not.

Yet must not the Bread be so deposed from its primogeniture, as to be left
without its blessing: Though the Greeks custom had no rival for it, yet our
Lords Supper has need of it, and must not be maimed of the one half; equally
necessary to His Table, though not to the Apostles argument.

Though therefore he cannot now (as in the Cup) oppose Name to Name, yet he does
Thing to Thing, Table to Table; and under that style, pays the Bread the same
Justice, though not the same Deference, as he does the Cup.

Look we now which way we will, we meet clear evidence; Direct, in the so
careful caling each Element by its proper Name; and Collateral, in the no less
careful Transplaceing them, suitably to the aspect they had upon his Design;
yet doing right to the Institution and Tradition, by mentioning the Bread, as
necessary to These, though not to That.

IV. WHat more can be Expected? yea, What more can be Desired? must we prove
not only that here are the same Names, but the same Person too?

This is do'n, 8.15, 16. I speak as to the wise men; judge ye what I say.

The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ?

The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

Can now any thing be plain could any Lawyer or Grammarian more clearly and
properly have expressed, that the same bread and cup whose names he had thus
translated from Hebrew to Greek, were by our Lord translated from the Jewish
Tradition to his Own Institution? Are not Those the same with These?

I cannot pretend any stronger Proof, but I shall endeavor to Illustrate it by
a Custom of our own, in our accademical Fests, hitherto unaccounted.

V. OUr predecessors have no less exactly translated the name of the Jewish cup
into English, than has the Apostle into Greek. What They caled [Blessing the
Table] We call [Saying Grace] and This answers That in Both senses, Praying
or Praising, Imploring a Blessing upon the Meat before we eat, or returning
Thanks for it after we have eaten. Our Grace-cup therefore, deriveth its Proper
Name from St. Paul's Cup of Blessing, by exact translation of the word.

And this same Cup has a Surname, derived from the Same original by another
Apostle. In Acts 20. we find the Primitive Churches met every first day of the
week to break bread. And 1 Cor. 16.1. Upon this day they made their
contributions to the poor; so joining their Charity to the Lords Mystical Body,
with their Honor to his Natural; which St. Jude so highly approves, as to
denominat those meetings [ Fests of charity J whence our Ancestors have given
this Grace-cup its Surname, the Cup of Charity, as used in those Fests of
Charity. I wish they had be'n as careful to preserve the significance, as the
ceremony and the duble name.

But if from These we may learn That, we find Characters legible enogh to
inform us: The Cup of Blessing and our Grace-cup have Both the same Name, the
same Matter, the same Circumstances; after Grace, after Washing, in such order
that not one of the Guests can be past by; It Is the Last action before rising,
requires the same Number, three at least.

We find that however the remoter Churches met the First day of the week to
break bread, yet the Apostles at Jerusalem did it daily; and Religios
Fraternities think themselves obliged, rather to take their paterns from the
Apostolic College, than the Grecian Churches; as our Church requires more
constancy in Collegiate and Cathedral Fraternities, than Parochial.

When the Governors of the Church, upon urgent nenessity, changed the Season
for the people, who were not to be trusted after Supper; they recompensed the
thus injured Season, with a succedaneos Sacrament in the Grace-cup, as the Jews
did their unattended Temple, with a succedaneos Sacrifice in the Tradition.

The concurrence of two such Names, evidently derived from the same Cup, no
less remarkable, than that of all other circumstances, dubleth the evidence.

All this may well justify a challenge to the gainsayer, either to accept of
This, or produce a better: Yea perhaps it might be urged, that we cannot avoid,
but that we must own either the cup of the Lord, or the cup of devils, there
being no other imaginable Original for the unaccountable Grace-cup.

Yet as I will not disparage the Table in our Chapel, by equaling it with That
in our Hall; so neither will I my better Evidences, by leveling them with a
mere Conjecture, how ever Probable.

I therefore take it, not as we may suppose it delivered down by our Ancestors,
but as it is still practiced among our Selves: not as a Proof of a pios custom
in the Churches of Christ, but as an Illustration of his Own meaning.

Suppose we then, that our Lord should again visit the Earth, convene a Council
truly General, make a publik Fest, declare his great satisfaction in the
Opportunity; and then, in its proper Season, and with all due Circumstances,
take the Grace-cup and deliver it about, with the same Words as he did that in
his Institution, saying, This is, etc. would we then doubt, but by the Particl
This, he pointed at That Cup, so in his hand, under the long known character
of a Grace-cup?

If This would not put us out of doubt, let us further suppose, that our Lords
chief Secretary should profess, that he had to him declared his meaning; and
that this unexceptionable person, should not only describe the Grace-cup by its
proper characters, but even it by its proper name, and in plain words tell us,
that the Grace-cup which we drink, is the Communion of the blood of Christ:
Would any one now doubt, but the Grace-cup, so Circumstanced, and so Named, and
so pointed at, must be the peculiar cup of the Lord, which must carry its old
Constancy to a new Dignity?

If this amount not to Full Evidence, yet sure we cannot deny it to be more
then Half, and then the Civil Law will allow us to bring a Suppletory.

The Bread then, joineth its Evidence with this of the Cup. In our Lords
Institution it holds the same Place, as in the Jewish Tradition: In the
Apostles Argument, by loss of its Place, it is advanced in Power; for by its
Deposition so alloyed, it appears, that though the Apostles Argument were, yet
was not our Lords Institution, complete without it; for which there can be no
other reason given, but this, that it was an equally Necessary part of the
Tradition, whence the whole Supper was derived.

Let us therefore carefully compare them: What Lineaments? what Feature? what
Mien? what Motion is there in the Tradition that is not answered, both in our
Lords Institution, and in each of the Apostles Arguments? What Family can show
a Son, so lively resembling both Father and Grandfather? what Artist a Picture
more exactly representing the Original? what Wisdom less then that of the
wonderful Counsailer, could have invented a Rite, more perfectly setting forth
the Tradition it copieth, the Passion is commemorateth, the Benefits it
exhibiteth, etc.

I do not upon all these Evidences crave your Sentence. There remain other
necessary Enquiries to be made. We have rejected the Passover, because it
answered not the Apostles Argument, though it better did so our Lords
Institution; we must bring them to the same Test, and if it agree not with
every title, confess all our hopes vain, and labor lost.

VI. WHICH yet I am so secure against, that I cannot forbear to anticipate the
Observation, That this notice must silence a multitude of trifling troublesome
questions, concerning the definition and qualifications of a [Sacrament.]

For Both This and its Twin Sacrament, upon examination, confess themselves
nothing else, but Jewish Traditions sublimed by our Lord to Evangelical
Commands, requiring all Christians to wear them as badges of his service: as we
shall have another occasion more fully to discover.

And from this we may well take occasion to warn some too zelos persons, that
they need examine, whether there be as good agreement between their own Spirits,
and that of our Lord, as we have found between these two Cups.

The Jews were no less zelos of Moses's Law, in opposition to the Gospel, than
any Papist can be of his Superstition, in opposition to Reformation: Our Lord
as much abolished Legal Ceremonies, as our Reformers did Popish; He as much
declared against the Traditions of the Scribes, as our Church does, or needs
to do, against Superfluos Ceremonies. Yet, behold! he was so far from refusing
their Customs, for This only reason, because they were Theirs; that for This
very reason, he chose them.

He could (doubtless) have invented some other rite for Matriculating Disciples,
no less proper than that of Baptism; and some other, for Commemorating his
death, than This of the Grace-cup; yet did not disdain to borrow Both his
Sacraments, from those implacabl Enemies of his Person and Gospel, while he
abolished all those Divine Ordinances that prefigured Both: Leaving us an
example so to shun what is prejudicial, as to retain what may be serviceabl,
and make our adversaries practice a reason not to Fly but Embrace it.

PART II. Concerning the word (...).
CHAP. I. The Apostl's design, was not to assert Reverence to the Lords Supper.
I. The Apostl's proper design first to be enquired into. II. Three steps. 1.
What might be the Corinthians case? III. 2. What might become the Apostl to do
in such a case? IV. 3. How does the Apostl's procedure agree with such
Suppositions? 1. The former part very well agrees with them.
V. 2. The later part necessarily requires them. Proved 1. Negatively. He did
not design to assert Reverence due to our Lords Supper, precisely taken. The
subject of the Proposition, ver. 26. is not the Lords Supper, but This Bread
and This Cup. The Praedicate is utterly useles (and wors) toward such a design.
VI. 2. Positively, The Proposition points at some Determiminate Bread and
Cup. The Argument reduced to a Syllogism.

HAVING thus found our Key as Fit as Necessary, to unlock our Lords
Institution; we may with the better courage prove it upon the Apostl's Discourse
concerning it: Wherein, as there are More, and some of them cross Wards, so if
it answer them All, in All their turnings, we shall have so many the More
Evidences that it is the true one.

That we may work regularly, it will be necessary in the First place, to Enter
it in due manner, i. e. begin with a right understanding of the Apostles proper
Design, whereto every word is to be serviceable: For it is no small help to a
travailer to know which way his journies end lies, and to cast the Country
accordingly.

His General design we cannot mistake: Nothing can be plainer than This, that
it is to convince the Corinthians of their guilt in profaning the Lords Supper:
but the Medium whereby he prosecutes this charge, is both Generally and Grossly
mistaken: and since this is the Mother error, whence all our Neglects on One
hand, and all our Earnestness on the Other, and all our Disputes on All hands
proceed, it cannot be too plainly exposed: and though it be troublesome, yet must
we crave the Reader to undergo a labor so necessary, that without it he cannot
understand what the Apostle means throughout his discourse.

We too hastily believe, that he endeavoreth to prove no more but this, that
our Lords Person was concerned in all the abuses of his Supper; taking it for
granted, that they knew how his Supper was concerned in Those Meetings which he
reproved: Whereas the more we consider it, the plainer we shall find, that his
Direct and Immediate endeavor, is to prove the Later, supposing the Former as
self-evident, upon the first notice of our Lords Institution.

So the case of the Corinthians toward the Lords Supper, was much like the
Apostles Own toward the High Priest, Acts 23.4, 5. They that stood by, said,
Revilest thou Gods high priest? Then said Paul, I wist not, brethren, that he
was the high priest: For it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler
of thy people: He reproves the Corinthians, as the Bystanders reproved Him.
Profane you the Lords Holy Supper? And supposing them likewise to excuse
themselves in the same manner, by saying, We wist not that it was the Lords
Holy Supper, for we cannot but know, That must be celebrated with reverence; he
argues in such manner, as to convince them of what they seemed either not to
Understand, or not to Own.

II. THE understanding of This will give us great light toward discovery of
every step; and that this is true, we may the better perceve if we proceed by
these Enquiries.

1. Whether this might not be the Corinthians case?

2. What might become the Apostle to do in such a case?

3. How does the Apostles procedure suit with such a Supposal?

1. This might very well be the Corinthians case. For

1. Possibly they might suppose that our Lord pointed at the Bread, as Paschal,
not as Festival, and consequently preferred not Every Fest, but only the
Passover to this honor: and for This, there are appearances of reason not
contemtibl. 1. He chose the Passover for the Season of his Institution, and
embraced it with such expressions of Affection, as seemed Proper to That
Particular solennity, saying, With a desire have I desired to eat (not this
[Supper] but) this [Passover.] 2. This above All other Fests, best Prefigured
his death while Future, and was therefore most fit to Commemorate it, when Past.
3. The Jews said of the Lamb, This is the BODY of the Passover; and our Lord
seems to allude to it, saying: This is my BODY. 4. The Jews distributing the
Paschal Cake, said, THIS IS the Bread of affliction, etc. and our Lord
distributing the Bread, said, THIS IS my Body, etc. And at That time, having
newly filled their minds with phrases proper to the Season, it is very probable
that they might receve our Lords words in such a sens.

2. And probably, such an error might proceed from want of a proper form of
Words, to accompany the celebration. One of the best Doctors our Church can
bost of, authoriseth me to say, That such a Form of words (however Useful) is
not indispensibly Necessary: Our Lord enjoined none, and we find not that his
Apostles either Practiced or Taught their Disciples any: and it was prone for
the Corinthians to slide into an error concerning That cup, which carried no
Inscription to declare its contents.

Certainly from hence came that which Tertullian complains of in his days, That
Fests of Charity were celebrated in the Church without the Lords Supper: and
from hence came our loss of the meaning (which is the Soul) of our Grace-cup.
And on the contrary, the Jews, with the Matter, retene also the meaning of their
Tradition, because both the Bread and Cup are accompanied with such a Form of
words as will not suffer it to be lost.

3. And possibly, they might look upon the Whole as a mere outward Performance:
For knowing how little fondness our Lord had toward Such exercises, they might
thence infer, that he left it in Their choice to Perform or Omit it, as
Themselves should judge convenient: and their Partiality to their beloved riot,
might incline them, both to Entertene such an opinion and Improve it. Our Lords
Supper must strike some Aw into their unwilling minds, Commanding not only
Sobriety, but Devotion: And how unwelcom such a check must be to the Corinthian
humor, and consequently how willing they must be to free themselfs from it; if
we know not already, we shall anon.

Thus far we have considered Probabilities, we come now to Certainty.

4. Whatever they Really believed, it is Certain they might Pretend, that they
believed our Lords Supper unconcerned in Those Fests which the Apostle thus
reproved: and the very Possibility of such a Pretense, no less required a
confutation, than a Real profession of such a Belief: which requires us to
consider as our next step.

III. What might become the Apostle to do in such a case?

If it were but Possibl for them to believ so, Himself has taught us that he
ought to suppose they Did: For- Charity thinks no evil, but hops All
things, believes All things: Since therefore This was much better than
Knowingly and Willingly to affront our Lord in his Representative; This must in
Charity be supposed.

And Prudence agreed with Charity, rather to seek out Excuses for them, than to
expose them to the Uttermost. He was to deal as Sweetly and Obligingly as
possibl, so to endear Himself and the Gospel to them, Praise them as much as
possibly he might, Reprove them no more than Needs he must, and Excuse them
when he could not Justify them.

And this as it sweetened the Reproof in appearance; so did it more bitterly
aggravate the Crime, if their own consciences upbraided them, as uncapabl of
such an excuse: Since the Guilt must needs be Great, which to the Reprover
appeared Incredibl.

Nor could any Inconvenience on the Other side dissuade such a procedure. This
way he might meet with them at All turns: If they were Really mistaken, he might
Rectify their Judgments; if they were not, he might Baffl their Pretenses, and
Both ways Reprove their Misdemeanors; rescuing our Lords Supper from
Profanation, if they intended to celebrate it, and his Commands from Neglect if
they intended it not, and Himself from any appearance either of Severity
toward Them, or Coldness toward our Lords Supper.

IV. 3. HOW does his Procedure suit with such Supposals? If we carefully
observe we find that the former part agrees very well with them, and the later
part will agree with no other.

That he designed to treat them as Kindly as possibl, we may see in his
entrance upon This Chapter: Now I praise you, brethren, that you remember me in
all things, and keep the Ordinances as I delivered them unto you: And again in
his entrance upon this very Reproof, verse. 17, Now in This that I declare unto
you, I praise you not, that you com together, not for the better, but for the
wors: And again by his close upon his description of their miscarriages, verse
22. What shall I say to you? Shall I praise you in This? I praise you not. How
Unwillingly! How Gently! and (if his thoughts were like ours) how Coldly, does
he put in this calm exception against his late General Praise!

He had in a case far less scandalos, said, Now therefore there is utterly a
falt among you: And speaking of those Divisions, which are here also objected,
as the first instance of their unworthy coming together, says, I could not
speak unto you as unto Spiritual, but as unto Carnal.

Yet here, when Divisions of the Rich among Themselves, and their joint
contemts of the Poor; their Shismatical and Uncharitabl separations, eating
every one his Own supper, and destroying the very Nature of a Communion; and
their Intemperance in Those Suppers, affronting not only our Lords Doctrine,
but his very Person; when such abuses of his very Body and Blood, in his Own
House, in the face of his Own Church, cried to his utmost zele and eloquence for
a Reproof loud as the Crime; in so clamoros a provocation, what do we meet, but
a cold Negative, much short of Eli's (however condemned) reproof? Not so much
as his [This is no good report. You make the peopl to abhor the table of the
Lord] but only, [I praise you not.]

We shall indeed hereafter find him lift up his now calm voice and loudly
thunder both Reproofs and Threats, verse 29. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords
body. But this, in consequence of Conviction, which by That time he supposes
his argument to have wrought in them: After which, if they should Willingly and
Knowingly profane This Bread and This Cup, now proved to be the Lords Body and
Blood; their Crime would be incapable not only of Praise, but of Excuse.

The Gentl language therefore that Ushereth in the Argument, compared with the
Severe, which Follows it; does more than intimate a supposal, that they knew
not what they did; and therefore were first to be Convinced of their Error by
good Evidence, and then Frighted with Threatenings, lest they should continu in
the now inexcusabl wickedness.

And we may (perhaps) yet better understand his judgment of their Disease, by
the Medicine he uses for its Cure; which is no other, but a re-minding them of
what he had before Declared to them, and they (perhaps) misunderstood in This
subject, wherein he seems thus to bespak them.

I am loath to believ you guilty of so horrid a contemt of our Lords Person, as
to drink his very Blood, in a manner so shameful, as looks more like the
mockery of a contumelios Jew, than the devotion of a faithful Disciple: No, I
rather impute this to your Forgetfulness or Misunderstanding, of what I
declared unto you concerning this most holy Ordinance; which therefore I now
repete to you

Then does he proceed to recite the whole Institution, so Particularly, as at
That time he might very well think Sufficient throghly to convince them, in
what he Supposed, or would seem to Suppose them, Mistaken.

I say it was at That time sufficient. For it is most necessary that we
distinguish between That time and Our own. The Tradition where on we suppose
our Lords Supper founded, was Then not only in Memory, but in Practice. The
Demonstrative had its Object, not only Intelligibl, but Visibl; they did not
more plainly Hear the Word than See what it pointed at; and therefore our Lord
might well think it superfluos to express How Often they were to do This in
remembrance of himself, since the Tradition, which That very Institution
commended, sufficiently declared it.

[Do This] said he, [This] which you see Me do; [This] which your Whole Nation
in such circumstances constantly do in conformity to the Tradition: Do [This]
with the same Matter, Bread and Wine; In the same Order, First Bread, and Then
Wine; at the same Season, After Supper; and (is it not equally plain?) with the
same Frequency, when Three or More fest together.

This mesure of Frequency might our Lord well suppose at That time, in Those
circumstances sufficiently plain, by that known rule, Exceptio firmat legem in
non exceptis.

But it seems the Disciples were either less Able, or less Willing to
understand, than He had reason to expect: And how the Corinthians might
mistake, we have made not improbable conjectures. The Apostl therefore, to Clear
what now appeared to Need it, tells them plainly, that what our Lord at the
time of institution did Not Express, he had since Reveled to be his meaning,
viz. That as often as they drank That Cup, which he then consecrated after
Supper, they must do it in remembrance of himself. Since therefore they closed
(or ought to close) All their fests with the Same Cup, his Blood was concerned
in them All.

WHAT fairer account can possibly be desired of this Former part of the
Apostles Process? Of the Lenity of his Reproof, of his Method in convincing
them, first of their Error, and then of their Gvilt? Of his Reciteing the Lords
institution, so to vindicate his Supper from Cheapness, of his inserting the
omitted (...), so to assert the Interest that his Supper had in Their public
meetings, and of his authorizing this insertion, so to avoid the objection that
might be raised from our Saviors not useing it, proved by the joint testimony
of the three Evangelists.

WHAT need the Apostl do More, than baffle All their Pretenses, and rectify
All their Mistakes? and what could he do Less, than prevent that most obvios
Evasion, whereby they might have pleaded for Those Meetings, as unconcerned in
the Lords Supper?

If any one of a contrary judgment can give a fairer account of this Former
part of the Apostl's discourse, he will do a Great work, but he will have a
Greater yet to do: For the Later part, wherein the Apostl draws his
Inferences, will not only Offer this as the Fairest, but Urge it as the Only
sens of his argument.

V. LET us now therefore carefully examine HOW and WHAT he bildeth upon his so
solen recital of our Lords Institution.

He begins his deductions at the 26th verse, wherein he resumeth the Last as
the most Important clause, laying it down as the Sum of our Lords mind in his
Institution, and the Foundation of all his own intended Inferences therefrom,
that As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show forth our Lords
death.

By This Proposition therefore must we mesur his Design: by This must we
enquire, whether he intended merely to prove, that Reverence is due to the
Lords Supper (as is generally supposed) or whether he mean to prove, that Some
determinate Bread and Cup, was consecrate by our Lord to his Supper.

In This Inquiry we shall proceed. 1. Negatively, showing that the Former
cannot be his meaning. 2. Positively, showing that the Later must be so.

1. The FORMER cannot be: This will appear whether we consider the Subject or
the Praedicate of the Proposition.

1. The SUBJECT of the Proposition, is not [the Lords Supper] but [This Bread
and This Cup] and therefore whatever the Praedicate brings, must not belong to
That but to These.

That the Lords Supper precisely and formally considered, is not the true
subject of the Proposition, is plain, both by the express words that have not a
syllabl of it, and by plain reason, which requires it to differ from the
Praedicate: For if the Subject differ from the Praedicate only in Syllables,
not in sense; the Proposition will be no better than a tautology, a mere
repetition of the same thing in other words.

It is true, the Lords Supper is concerned in the Proposition, but Mediatly,
because of its intimate relation to This Bread and This Cup, which for its
sake, are advanced above All other of the kind, consecrated first to the Lords
Supper, and thereby to his Body and Blood.

And This is so much the more considerable: because, if the Apostle had no
other design, but only to assert the dignity of our Lords Supper, he ought in
all reason to have insisted upon the very Phrase, which would go far in his way.

For the very Name of the Lord challenges Reverence: the very Sound is an
Argument, it carries Aurhority and Commands Aw into the hearts of the
hearers: whereas on the contrary [Bread and Wine] in their natural State, are
but poor beggarly creatures, servants of our Appetites at best, and too often
of our Corruptions, and need a Law to defend them from our abuses.

Now that our Apostle should have No other Design, but to assert the dignity of
our [Lords Supper,] yet desert that style which would Strengthen his Argument,
and take up another that would Weaken it; is so much the more unreasonable,
because he had used That more potent style in his charge, ver. 20. and thereby
obliged himself to enforce it: So that he must now desert, not only the Reason
of his Argument, but the very Subject of his Charge; if he had no other design
in This Proposition, but to prove that our [Lords Supper] oght not to be
treated as he complained.

2. The PRAEDICATE of This Proposition is utterly useless, or worse, to such a
design.

The Argument would run more Clearly, more Briefly, and more Conveniently,
Without the Proposition than With it. For the Institution having styled this
Suppor of the Lord his [BODY and BLOOD] the Inference is most Natural and
Cogent, therefore whoever celebrateth the [Lords Supper] unworthily, is guilty
of his [Body and Blood.]

So this whole 26th verse will at best be but impertinently troublesome, good
for nothing but to amuse our thoughts, confound our minds, and cloud the light
of the Argument.

Yea, the very Phrase of the Praedicate will conspire with That of the Subject,
not only to Darken the Argument, but to Weaken it. For to declare it our [Lords
Body and Blood] must needs command our aw more, than to say it [setteth forth
his death] so that the interposition of This meaner office, between our Lords
Institution and his own next Inference in verse 27. in Both whereof That higher
one is given it, can serve to no other effect, but to eclipse the Light, and
intercept the Influence, which otherwise would stream more powerfully and
directly from the One to the Other.

In a word: let the Otherwise minded show what Necessity, yea, what Use this
26th verse serves; what Light, or what Strength it ministers to the
Discourse: otherwise they must needs, either suppose the Apostle to talk
impertinently, or accept of That service which his words offer; which what it
is will yet forther appear.

VI. POSITIVELY therefore: This Proposition points at some Determinate Bread
and Cup, declaring, that Whoever eats That determinate Bread, and drinks
That determinate Cup, does Thereby show forth the Lords death.

And now the lately disputed Particle [THIS] is no Less, perhaps More
considerable in the Apostl's mouth, than we found it in our Lord's: For the
sake of This Demonstrative did he so solenly recite the Institution, and resume
That as the most important clause therein: From This does he derive All his
Argument, and to This does he pay All his Service.

He observes to what honor our Lord advances the Bread and Cup, From His hand
does he take them, clothes them with the important Demonstrative as the Robe
royal, rendering them conspicuosly honorable in the beholders eyes, Crowns them
with the potent (...), as giving them power to prescribe mesures to our
obedience, leads them in pomp, and proclaims before them, THIS is the Bread,
and THIS the cup which the Lord delights to honor: THIS Bread and THIS Cup
has he commissioned to show forth his death: THIS Bread and THIS Cup, are the
Supper of the Lord; and therefore whoever eats THIS Bread, and drinks THIS
Cup of the Lord unworthily, is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord.

The Process is Pompos, yet withal it is Elegant: he so inculcateth the
important particl, as to favor your ears: he so indeavoreth to satisfy, as not
to surfeit you with nauseos repetitions: and therefore having so showed it, as
abundantly to fill you with his meaning, he withdraws by degrees, still
varying the phrase, yet so, as still to preserv the influence, even when he
quitteth the sound of the Demonstrative.

That you may see both his Art and Care, I shall set down his very words.

Ver. 25. -- (...).

26. (...).

27. (...).

28. (...).

29. (...) --

In verse 26. he gives the Bread honors before denied it; Equaleth it with the
Cup, honoreth it with the same Emphatical Article, and the same potent (...),
neither of which was given it in the Institution: The reason will anon be
plain; he now describes the complete Supper, wherein the Bread is no less
necessary than the Cup, though not equally honored with it in the Institution,
as we shall see (and understand why) anon.

In verse 27. He keeps the same style for the Bread, but varieth it in the
Cup; says not now [THIS cup] but [The cup of the Lord.] And here we must
pause, lest we seem to contradict truth: for I said but now, that the Apostl
mentions not [the Lords Supper] whereas here he styles the Cup [the cup of
the Lord.]

But what I said but now, I spoke of the 26th verse, wherein he cut out work
for his whole following process. Again, in this very verse 27. it is yoked with
[This Bread] and being thus secured from any danger of mistake, might safely be
clothed with That larger title, more suitable for It than for the Bread;
because it does not only Represent his Blood, as the Bread does his Body, but
Prescribe the frequeny for celebration, which the Bread does Not.

In verse 28. The Demonstrative is laid aside: and in the 29th, not only the
Demonstrative, but the very Subject. In both, a manifest Ellipsis, easily and
necessarily supplied: since we cannot apprehend the Action of Eating and
Drinking, without the Bread and Cup, nor any other Bread and Cup but only THIS,
so earnestly inculcated in the same breath.

And now that I may bring the whole Argument to a closer vieu, I shall from a
disjointed examination of its scattered parts, proceed to a reduction of All to
Logik form, in a Syllogism of the most perfect mode.

Bar- As often as you show forth the Lords death unworthily, you are guilty of
his Body and Blood.

ba- As often as you eat This Bread and drink This Cup, you show forth the
Lords death.

ra As often as you eat This Bread and drink this Cup unworthily, you are
guilty of his Body and Blood.

Of this Syllogism the Assumtion is set forth, (...), verse 26.

The Conclusion thence inferred, verse 27.

But the Proposition (which is generally looked upon as the adaequate design)
the Apostle no otherwise proves, but by reciting the Institution, which
abundantly declares the relation between the Lords Supper, and his Body and
Blood.

Since therefore it was necessary for him to convince them, that the Lords
Supper was concerned in All their meetings, but not at all, that the Lords Body
and Blood were Represented in his Supper; since accordingly, he pays All his
service to [This Bread and This Cup] which was used in all their Meetings, but
None at all to the [Lords Supper] otherwise then by consequence therefrom:
Since the whole 26th verse must be utterly Impertinent, and worse, if it
pretend only to assert the dignity of the [Lords Supper] but most Cogent, if it
intend to assert that of [This Bread and This Cup] since One way, he shall
prove a truth, whose importance Deserved his service, and whose Doubtfulness
Needed it; and the Other way one, who is Self-evidence superseded any Proof; one
might think the choice between them not very doubtful.

Yet, ar we all this while no farther than the Entry: For the very Life of the
Argument is laid up in a Clause, purposely inserted in the Close of our Lords
Institution, and resumed in the Head of his Own discourse, as the strength of
the whole; yet so miserably mistaken, that it is made the only Enemy to the
Apostl's direct design; Dispensing with the Constancy, which he so industriosly
laboreth to prove Indispensibl.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Clause [AS OFTEN AS.]
I. The unhappiness of this Clause. II. The true sens of the words mesured by
parallel precepts. III. Serviceable remarks. 1. With what care the Apostl
records this Claus. IV. 2. With partiality he treats the Cup. V. The
justice he does the bread, joining it with the cup in his dedeductions. VI. The
Conclusion, with an Objection answered.

HOW unhappy our Lords Supper has be'n in All the means he used to indear it,
we have already noted. He chose the Last night, because the words of dying
friends most forcibly affect the survivors: and the horrors of the Tragical
time dashed it out of the Apostl's thoghts. He then made a contrary
opportunity, and by a Supper purposely contrived, evidenced his care of This
memorial of his Death, equal to that of evidencing his Resurrection: And then,
Joy and Wonder hindered them more from heeding This, than from believing That:
Nor did Any other means prevail, till the Holy Ghost brought it to their
understandings.

But their Disciples had not the same mesur of This Spirit. The Corinthians
either mistook or soon forgot; and St. Paul found it highly necessary not only
to Remind them of their duty, but further to Explain it.

And This very Explication suffers as much from the mistakes of Interpreters,
as did the Holy Supper it self, from the profaneness of the Corinthians.

For St. Paul did no more intend to discorage our Obedience to our Lords
Command, than did our Lord himself, to encourage Their profaneness in the
Performance.

Yet in his Own words do we take refuge from his Reproofs, as if he had taught
us to place All our safety from Unworthiness, in keeping distance from
Obedience.

That we should run from One extreme to a Contrary, though it be a great Error,
is no great Wonder: though nothing be more Condemned, yet nothing is more
frequently practiced.

But that Those very words, whereby he indeavored to Prevent the Error, should
be made to Serve it; That he should use his utmost care to prove Constancy
indispensibl, and we should take his words for a Dispensation from it: is the
Singular unhappiness of This Only clause, perverted thereby to an utter
Defaisance of our Lords Command, and an utter Defait of his Own Design.

We shall therefore endeavor to restore the Words to their due power.

First, by showing what must needs be their true meanang: And Secundly, by
exposing the Absurdities of That, which is vulgarly imposed upon them.

II. FIRST, we are to enquire into the true sense of this Clause [As often as.]
And to this end we need not look back upon what we have seen in the word [THIS]
For, This Claus no less peremtorily requires a certain Standard, than That
Demonstrative does a certain Object: And the Apostle plainly joineth them
together in the same power, as the dubl hinge whereon his whole Argument
turns.

These does he jointly resume as the sum of our Lords institution; These does
he fasten as a nail in a sure place, and upon These does he hang that chain of
Consequences, whereby he convinces his Corinthians of their crime, and
discovers the Need and Way to avoid it.

Let us first vieu the import of the Words, and Then his care concerning them.

This (...) is plainly Relative: it imports Equality in point of Frequency, and
requires that the new Relative should conform it self to the mesur of a Former
Correlate.

Now it is plain, that whoever is obliged to make One thing Equal to Another,
must certainly know the mesur of That Other, which he is to conform to. No Town
can show a Standard made of Air or Water, but of Wood or Metal, whose firm
substance having a stable bigness of its own, may certainly determine the
Quantity of what is to be mesured by it.

The Apostl is very careful to prove and inculcate, that [Eating THIS bread and
drinking THIS cup] is the stable Standard whereby we must mesure our Frequency
in the Lords Supper: It must therefore be necessary, that it self must have its
Determined Frequency, fixed by some praevios Law or Custom certainly foreknown,
and thereby capable to give mesures to any Other performance.

If therefore [THIS bread and THIS cup] be (as I hope I have proved) a Singular
bread and cup, used at Certain Determinate times, then have we the Standard
whereby we must mesure our Frequency in the Lords Supper: And again, if we are
obliged to do This [As often as] That; then must we understand how often we
must Do That. So the Relation is perfect and reciprocal. Our obligation to
celebrate the Lords Supper [As often as we Eat THIS, etc.] supposes it certain
[how often] we eat it: And the Certainty of difference between THIS and Other
bread and wine, determines how often we are to use Them in the Lords Supper.

Thus will our Lords mind in This Institution, be as plain as in Any other
Practical Precept; The Apostles Argument as convincing as Any in All his
Epistles; And our Lord's style, conformable to that of All mankind, and that
which himself frequently used, when most desiros to be understood by the
meanest.

When th u fastest (says he) anoint thy head and wash thy face: when thou
give thine alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does: When ye
Pray, say Our Fasher, etc. Had these exercises no other Foundation, but the
precariosly supposed Will of the performer; and That too, undrawn by any
preceding motive: Had they never before be'n heard of in the World (as is
supposed of This bread and This cup) what would such a groundless Precept have
signified? Who would thereby have be'n induced to undergo the penance of
Fasting, the cost of Alms-doing, or the labor of Prayer? Or what Obligation had
there be'n broken by the neglect?

Whereas now, that these Precepts did not Create New performances, but Reform
Old ones; since, before our Lord had opened his lips concerning them, his
Disciples very well knew how frequently Those exercises were performed, it must
be needless to tell them what they knew already; but he must be supposed to
imply it in what he bilt upon it.

And if we may paraphrase his words, we may thus do it: You often Fast, and
give Alms, and Pray, and ye do well in it: I give you no new command concerning
the Substance or Quantity of those good exercises; go on to do as much as you
have formerly do'n; but I caution you concerning the Manner, that as often as
you do them, you do them sincerely without any misture of Hypocrisy.

The language is the very same here, and so ar all materials; A practice
presupposed, and left to its former mesures, a new Precept concerning a change
of manner, and This mesured in point of frequency by the foreknown Standard:
Our Lord's and the Apostl's meanings, as clear at That time, as the supposed
practice (they both refer to) was common. I say [At That time] and insist upon
it, as necessary both for Justification of the Scriptur, and Satisfaction of
our Own Consciences, that we must redeem That time, that therewith we may
retrive the Only proper light, whereby we may discover both our Lord's and
Apostl's meaning.

And though we might now supersede any further proof, since our Lord himself may
be pleaded the best Interpreter of his own Language, frequently used upon like
occasions; yet because another and more acceptabl sens (shall I call it) has
gotten possession of Most, if not of All minds: I shall further observe, 1. With
what care the Apostle Records these words. 2. With what partiality he
applies them to the cup, and with what suitable partiality he honoreth the cup
for their sake. 3. With what care he righteth the bread, by giving it equal
power with the cup in his own deductions.


III. 1. IT is very observable with what care the Apostle Records this
clause. None of the Evangelists mention it, and it is probable our Lord used it
not in his Institution; and therefore the Apostle is careful so to Insert it, as
withal to Authorize it, saying expressly, That he receved it of the Lord. This
is very considerable, and therefore we shall observe,

1. This Apostle was our Lords Disciple, after another rate than were the rest:
He enjoyed not (as They did) an intimate conversation with him upon Earth, but
was abundantly recompensed with Revelations from Heaven.

St. Luke (indeed) is very sparing (as became an abridger) in recording such
Revelations: he mentions only That which converted him, and a very few others,
relating to some of his journies: Yet in recital of his speech to King Agrippa,
he plainly intimates a larger discourse even in That First Vision, than
himself had expressed; and particularly, that our Lord promised to make That an
earnest of More, and Those more instructive: I have (said he) appeared unto
thee for This purpose, to make thee a Minister and a Witness both of these
things which thou have seen, and of Those things wherein I will appear unto
thee.

Which After-appearances were Such and so Many, that he declares himself in
danger of being puffed up by them.

2. What he declares himself to have receved of the Lord, must needs be This
considerabl (...).

All the rest were openly delivered at the Institution, to the whole College of
Apostles; from Them he might have receved them, and to their Testimony he might
have appeled, if his truth had be'n questioned.

But concerning These important words, they must All have joined their
testimony Against him, if the Evangelists did not join in a strange omission,
neglecting to report such a considerable clause.

As therefore our Lord by a very intelligible Ellipsis, left these words
unspoken, because needless at the time of his Institution; so does the Apostle
now by another Ellipsis, omit the distinction which we are supposed to
understand, between This clause which he inserted, as receved of the Lord by a
posthum explication, and the rest, which All the other Apostles receved without
it, at his Last Supper.

3. These words alone he immediately resumeth, and inforceth as his principal
Evidence, for all his deductions thence inferred.

Since this is the Basis of All, it oght to be firmly settled, and he needed our
Lords authority for This only.

4. This Authority evidenceth not Only the Truth, but the Importance of what
was thus delivered.

These words of deference [What I have receved] are never paid but to Truths of
the first rate.

In the fundamental Article of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.1, etc. when he had
honored it with the most illustrios titles, The Gospel, That whereby we are to
be saved, etc. he adds This also: I have delivered (says he) [that which I
also receved] but expresses not from whom; since the cloud of witnesses was
apparent.

When he would confirm the truth of the whole Gospel, and exalt its dignity to
the highest, he speaks in the present style, Gal. 1.11. I receved it not of
man, neither was I taught it, but by Revelation of Jesus Christ.

And since the Style is the same, the Consequence must be the same, Here as
There: If I, or an Angel from Heaven, teach any other doctrine than what you
have received, let him be accursed.

When our Lord himself has so reveled his mind, All the inhabitants of Earth
and Heaven should they combine, are nether to be believed against the
Revelation, nor obeyed against the Command.

And to what purpose such a Revelation, and such a Vouching? If These words do
not Streighten the obligation, they will be but Impertinent; if they Slacken
it, they will be Worse. They can no other way answer the Care bestowed upon
them, but by enforcing constancy in the performance.

IV. 2. MY next Observation is, the Partiality wherewith the Apostle treats
the Cup, which alone is honored with these considerable words. Something of This
Partiality we have already observed in his Argument against the Cup of Devils,
which added to what we are now considering, will duble the weight.

Describing the Institution, he gives the Bread its due Place, but as cold a
Treat as possible. Affords it not so much as the common articl, but without
welt or guard, speaks in the slightest manner, (...); and describes our Lord
as equally slighting it, not stiling it (...), but Indefinitely (...): much
less giving it the power to mesur the performance.

But coming to the Cup, ver. 25. He uses it with much more deference himself,
and reports our Lord to have used the same Partiality. He says (indeed) that
our Lord took the Cup (...): But the Equality must relate to the Tradition
which it equally honored, not to the Circumstances wherewith it self was
honored, not in Like, but in Higher manner.

1. He expresses the exact Season [After Supper] and This in exact conformity
to the Jewish style, which uses to fix a character of emphasis upon the Cup
After Supper: As we find most properly to our purpose, Berach. cap. 7. ver. 6.
Wine is brought to them in the midl of the meal, they bless severally every one
by himself: (...) For That After meal, one blesses for them all. Where that
prefix pays deference the Wine After Supper as to Wine of note. But this is
not paid to Bread, because none but the Paschal Cake was distributed After
Supper; and had our Apostle spoken of That in the same style, he had intimated
that which he endeavoreth to confute, viz. that our Lords Supper was successor
to the Passover.

2. He honoreth it with an emphatical Article, (...).

3. Then he describes our Lords partiality, who did not speak of it as of the
Bread, with a simpl (...), but more emphatically, (...).

4. Nor Indefinitely [This is my blood;] as of the Bread [This is my body] but
with an Explication, fixing his meaning [This is the New Testament in my blood.]

5. And above All; the important (...) is industriosly put upon the Cup, and
denied to the Bread.

Let us now reflect.

He First recites the consecration of the Bread: and he could no otherwise:
matter of fact obliged him to it, as appears by the uniform testimony of all
the Evangelists which spoke any thing of it. Yet he prefaceth the consecration
of the Cup with the note of conformity [In like manner also.]

In which form of speaking, it is Not unusual to omit in reciting the later,
what had be'n expressed in the former; the very phrase excusing, because
manifesting the Ellipsis, used merely to avoid the tediosness of repetition.

But it is contrary both to Reason and Practice, that any thing should be
omitted in the Former, and understood in the Later; and therein expressed by
such a conforming Phrase, when This cannot find in That any likeness.

What the Reason of this strange method is, we shall the better discover, if we
observe Another care which seems to cross This.

He is very punctual in reciting the difference of Time, between the
consecration of the One and the Other. Our Lord took the Bread [when he had
given thanks] and the Cup [when he had supped.]

His Argument would have go'n more Smoothly, though not so Strongly, if in the
common way of speaking he had made the later every way like the former. But how
could he avoid this cross?

Should he give the Cup the precedence? he must then misreport matter of Fact.

Should he then apply these mesuring words to the Bread, that he might speak of
the Cup in like manner also? He must then have confounded his Own argument: For
the mesuring clause must have signified either too much or too little: too
little, if this should point at the Paschal Bread; too much, if to the Ordinary.

For since, of All Fests, the Passover was most prefigurative of our Lords
Death, and he delivered the Bread with such a form of words, as manifestly
alluded to the Paschal cake; if to such peculiar suitableness with That Season,
and That Form, he had added These words also; Would not the Demonstrative have
pointed to the Bread, as Paschal? and consequently, would not these words have
required us to mesure our performance of the Lords Command, by that of God to
Moses? And would not this have cleared the Corinthians from any profanation of
his Supper, except only in the Easter Communion?

But if these words had be'n applied to the Bread, as blessed Before Supper,
then must they have signified too much: For they would have comprehended, not
only every Fest, but every Private meal. They would not be a Rubrike for Publik
worship in the Church, but Advice for Private manners at home, they would
neither require Fest nor Communion, nor distinguish the Church of God from the
meanest Parlor.

Possibly to Prevent, certainly to Remove both sides of mistake, and to
convince the Corinthians of their obligation, to close neither All their
Private, nor Only their Paschal, but All and Only their Festival Suppers with
our Lords: he So describes the Institution, that it appears probable, that
our Lord distributed the Bread at the Beginning, and more so, that he did it
before the End of Supper; but manifest, that the Cup he delivered at its proper
time: And since the Cup was the Adaequate character of a Fest, to the Cup only
must the power be given, which these words import.

Let Any one giv Any other tolerabl account why the Apostl should thus deprive
the Firstborn of the Blessing which naturally belongs to it, and I must
confess my self to have lost a great evidence of the Relation between our Lords
Institution, and the Tradition whence I endevor to prove it derived.

There are too many who have need to consider another honor to which our Lord
preferred the Cup above the Bread. He said not, Eat ye [All] but said, Drink ye
[All] of this: Whether This difference were occasioned by Judas 's Presence when
That was distributed, and his Absence when this was so, is not so plain as it
is, that it falls very cross to the Laws of That Infallible Church, which
denying the people the Cup; takes away the better half of our Lords Supper, and
the Whole of the Apostl's Argument, which cannot outlive this lose, but would
not have be'n wounded so mortally by That of the Bread.

V. 3. MY last remark is, that in the Deductions which which himself draws
from our Lords purposly recited Institution, he pays to the Bread joint honor
with the Cup, which he had denied it for no other reason, but only for its
unserviceableness to his Argument.

Those Deductions ar ushered with ver. 26. For as often as ye eat this bread
and drink this cup, ye show forth the Lords death till he com.

1. Here we see he applies These relative words to Both elements, whereas in
recital of our Lords Institution, he had not at all applied them to the Bread:
And this, contrary to that known rule, which forbids the Conclusion to infer
more than was contained in the Premises.

Hereof what other account can there be given, or what better desired, than the
Tradition offers? In the former verse he was to state our Lords mind reveled
to himself, concerning Frequency: And thereof the Cup was the only Standard,
because That alone distinguished Festival Suppers from Common: But in This he
is to describe the Supper it self, wherein the Bread has right, not only to be
joined with it, but to be preferred before it.

Had he now excluded the Bread, he must have intimated concerning It, what some,
without any such color, declare concerning the Cup; that it were needless,
because the Supper were complete without it: But by this care, he preventeth
any such concept.

2. He adds another Claus, not mentioned in the Institution ['till he com]
thereby either to obviate an evasion in point of Duration, if possibly the
Corinthians might pretend to shift from his reproofs, by supposing the
Obligation worn out; or to strengthen the command, by showing how great esteem
our Lord had for it, as extending it to all times future as well as present.

3. But the most remarkable is this, that the Imperative is changed to the
Indicative: A change so Considerable, and otherwise so unaccountable, that our
glorios Dr. Hammond thinks it not to be made. The Greek is indifferent to
both; but in the Imperative there appeared a grain of sense, and none at all in
the Indicative.

For if in the Subject of the Indicative proposition, we see no other
difference between. This Bread and Cup, and and any Other Bread and Cup, but
what our own actual Consecration has advanced it to; if this style be only a
Periphrase of the Lords Supper, differing therefrom only in Syllables, then
will the Proposition tell us no news at all: Every child will without its help
understand, that as often as we eat. This bread and drink This cup (upon no
other reason but this, that we may thereby show forth our Lords death) we show
forth our Lords death. And that the Apostl should so carefully bring a candl to
show us the Sun, seemed no way probable to our learned Doctor.

But if the (...) be read Imperatively, not [ye do] but [do ye] then may there
be so much of reason in the Precept, as there is of possibility to do
otherwise. For look how much danger there is, that we may do this without
showing forth our Lords death, just so much need there is of Caution, and just
so much reason will there be in the Command, which has no other use but to
prevent such danger: whereas in the Indicative, as there can be no possibility
of error (since the very naming of the Subject makes the Praedicate
self-evident) so can there be no reason for the Proposition.

Yet all this while, if there be Any at all, there can be ^ut a very small
difference: for the Performance contains the End, almost as necessarily as
the Subject does the Praedicate: it is almost as hard to do this without
showing forth our Lords death, as it is to doubt whether we oght to do it or
no: And all that can be gotten by the change is this, that upon supposition of
the Reverence which every one will certainly pay our Lords Person; the command
enjoining an action in remembrance of our Lords death, will by consequence mind
them of doing it with such Intentions.

But be the gain little or great, we must quit it: because the word FOR which
ushereth the declaration, necessarily requires the Indicative mode.

Had it be'n an Illative [wherefor or therefor] the (...) had be'n indifferent
to the other mode. [Therefor do ye] had be'n all as proper as [Therefor ye do.]
But the Causal FOR will by no means endure any other than an Indicative: Its
proper office is to confirm our Belief, or instruct our Understanding, not to
command our Will: No Author ever speaks so, nor will our Ears endure such an
incongruos sound: so that our excellent Doctor must lose on one hand, whatever
he may seem to gain on the other, and he will reap but small thank from the
Apostle, by delivering him from a supposed Solaecism in Logik, and casting him
upon a real one in Grammar.

I say it is but a supposed Solaecism in Logik, and That supposition is
grounded upon our inadvertency. For grant once that our Demonstrative [This,]
and our Relative (...) point to some praeviosly singular Bread and Cup; and
immediately we discover a sens so far from trifleing, that probably it will
appear too severe, certainly most worthy of so great an Apostle, most
serviceable to his Argument, and most worthy our utmost consideration. For thus
will it convince the Corinthians.

It is in vain for you to pretend that you do not celebrate the Lords Supper in
Those your intemperate meetings: FOR I have so recited our Lords Institation,
that you may plainly perceve it to be his meaning, that as often as you drink
This cup, which he Then consecrated, and which is the same with that wherewith
you close All your Church Fests, you must do it in remembrance of Him.

FOR he has not left it in your power to make his Supper Concerned or
Unconcerned (by celebrating it as often or as seldom as you please) in such
meetings; yea; or to choose which way you will be guilty, whether of
Disobedience to his Command, by Omitting the duty; or of Contemt to his Person,
by Doing it unworthily: FOR he has inlayed it upon All such Fests so
inseparably, that though you would, you cannot take Any of them without it.

FOR YOU DO, whether you intend it or no, whether you will or no,
notwithstanding any contrary Intention, You Do, you cannot but Do, what he has
thus made not only Unlawful, but utterly Impossible for you to Omit.

It is not only a Command, obliging you; but an Institution, necessitating you;
and you cannot avoid the Actual doing it, if you avoid not All Church Fests.

FOR as often as ye eat This bread, you eat That whereof our Lord said, This is
my body: and as often as you drink This cup, you drink That whereof he said,
This is my blood. And taking this for the sens of the 26th verse, the necessity
of the 27th, and all that follow, immediately appears; For if they be so Much;
and so Unavoidably concerned; then, whoever eats This bread and drinks This
cup unworthily, must needs be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, who
has so made Those the representatives of These, that whether we receve them or
no, will make no difference in his imputation, because the Relation depends
not upon Our admittance of them for such, but upon His own Commission,
constituting them for such.

So that in the recess, by intending to Omit the Lords Supper, you make your
selves guilty of breaking his Command which obliges you to Do it, without
escaping the other guilt of Unworthiness, since his Institution has made his
body and blood concerned in all the abuses you put upon This bread and This cup.

SINCE therefore this 26th verse cannot be Imperative, because Grammar requires
the Indicative mode always to follow the causal FOR: And since it cannot be
Indicative, if [This bread and This cup] in the whole comprehension signify
nether more nor less, than [the Lords Supper] because then, in their formal
concept, they will necessarily import setting forth his death; and Logik
requires that the Praedicate in every Proposition, should bring something of
news concerning the Subject;

But if we fit the Demonstrative [This] with its necessary Object, and the
Relative (...) with its necessary Mesure, then will the Proposition carry
Weight enough to lay it as a foundation for all the Deductions which the Apostl
bildeth upon it, and Light enough to show the use of every syllabl in his
Argument, and Force enogh to convict the Corinthians beyond all possibility of
reply;

To doubt now whether we will accept so Serviceable, yea so necessary an
Hypothesis, is no other than to put our selves into a very hard straight: For we
shall be obliged either to accuse the Apostl of transgressing the plain rules
of Grammar and Logik, yea, and of Justice too, in charging the Corinthians with
the greatest Crime, without sufficient evidence; or else to produce some Other
Hypothesis of our own, which shall be at least equally serviceabl, toward
clearing his discourse from such great defects.

And while the adversary deliberates upon so hard a choice, I proceed to examine
that Other Sens (shall I call it) which allows our (...) No ground to Build,
or so much as to Stand upon.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Vulgar interpretation of [As often as.]
I. The Distinction between Suppositive and Absolute stated, because made the
mesure of obligation. II. The words of the Author set forth, and III. Examined.
IV. The merely suppositive sens enervates our Lords Command. And V. The
Apostl's own Argument. VI. The two senses balanced in order to Conscience.

THAT in so doing I may escape both the Task of setting a tolerable countenance
upon an opinion so generally receved, and the Suspicion of representing it
disadvantageosly; I conceve it most Convenient, if not absolutely Necessary, to
exhibit it in the words of its Patrons -- Patron I should say: For among the
Many that entertein it, I know but One that has put himself to the charge of
affording it any means of Subsistence, by clothing it with any proper Rules,
or nourishing it with any Proofs.

But it is Such an One as may pass for a Multitude: One, that may not be named
without Reverence; One, of the greatest Ornaments and Pillars of our Church;
One, who professes to fit every subject with its proper Rules and Mesures; and
therefore One, whom we may believe to have said the utmost in behalf of his
Opinion.

This singular Person puts it to the question, Whether our Lords words in This
Institution amount to a Command? And though his interest persuaded him to have
Affirmed it; yet the sound of These words, and inadvertency to the Custom we
suppose them to relate to, engaging him for the Negative, embarrased him in
difficulties inextricable; from which, because he struggles to free himself by
help of the distinction between Suppositive and Absolute; I shall first state
That distinction, and Then try what service it can do in the present question.

A Suppositive Command Obliges, just so as a Suppositive Proposition
Declares, viz. nothing else but a Connection or Disjunction between the Parts.

An Absolute Proposition may be true, though its Subject have no Being: and so
may an Hypothetical one, though its Antecedent have no Truth. And as a
Hypothetical Syllogism, Absolutely concludes Nothing without help of an
Absolute Assumtion; so does not a Hypothetical Command oblige to any thing,
without the help of some Positive addition: Hypothetical necessity is therefore
consistent with Absolute liberty, because the Obligation must derive half its
power from the yet undetermined Position.

E. G. If my Father should have laid upon me this Suppositive Command, [As
often as you go to London, go by land] This would not oblige me either to the
Journey, or the Manner. By staying at home I should have be'n as obedient, as by
a hundred tedios Journies. But if my Inclinations or Bisiness should call me to
the Journey; then, by virtue of the Command, joined with the Urgency of my
Business, were I obliged to go, not by Water but by Land.

Such a Command would by no means have amounted to [Get you a horse, and away.]
Nor can a Suppositive Command amount to such an Absolute Precept, as [Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat.] But the utmost that so civil a word could
amount to, is this, [If you are pleased to eat, then is it necessary you examine
your self.]

This is the true state of a Suppositive Obligation: It leaves us at full
liberty, though it expose us to be robbed of it, by some Absolute Proposition
following.

And how impossibl it is to reconcile the Wisdom of our Lords Institution, with
the Weakness of such an Obligation cannot better be discovered, than by the
succesless attemts of so habile an Undertaker, whose words I com now to examine:
wherein I beg the Readers just charity to believ (what I most seriosly protest)
that it is not without great reluctance, I engage in so unwelcom an office
toward a person to whom I am so much obliged: and nothing but faithfulness to
so great a Subject, should compel me to expose the words of him whom all good
men are obliged to honor.

His Rule is,

The Institution of a Rite or Sacrament by our Blessed Savior, is a direct Law,
and passes a proper obligation in its whole integrity.

This one would think is as plain as heart can wish, but the Gloss quite mars
the Text: for thus does he endeavor to bend his Rule to his Conceptions, and
Other Writings, concerning This Holy Sacrament.

THIS Rule can relate but to one instance, that of the Holy Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood; for although Christ did institute two Sacraments, yet
that of Baptism was under the form of an express Commandment, and therefore for
its observation needs not the auxiliaries of This Rule.

But in the other Sacrament, the Institution was by Actions, and intimations of
duty and relative precepts, and suppositions of action, as quoties feceritis,
and the like. Now whether this do amount to a Commandment or no, is the
enquiry; and though the question about the half Communion be otherwise
determinable, yet by no Instrument so certain and immediate as this.

2. In order therefore to the Rule of Conscience in this instance I consider,
that an Institution of a thing or state of life by God, and by his Christ, is
to be distinguished from the manner of that thing so Instituted. When a thing
is Instituted by God, it does not equal an universal Commandment, but obtains
the force of a Precept according to the subject matter, and to its appendant
relations. Thus when God Instituted Marriage, he did not by that Institution
oblige every single person to marry; for some were Eunuchs from their mothers
wombs, and some were made Eunuchs by men, and some make themselves Eunuchs for
religious and severe ends, or advantages of a retirement and an untroubled
life. But by this Institution (say the Doctors of the Jews) every man was at
first obliged, und so they are still, if they have natural needs or natural
tentations. But because the Institution was relative to the publik necessities
of mankind, and the personal needs of a man, therefore it was not an universal
or unlimited Commandmene, but only so far as it did minister to the necessary
end, so far it was a necessary Commandment. It was not Instituted for Eunuchs;
but for whom it was Instituted, to them it was a remedy against sin, and the
support of the World, and the original of Families, and the seminary of the
Church, and the endearment of Friendships, and the parent of Societies; and
until the necessities of the World were abated, and the needs of single persons
were diverted, or broken in pieces by the discipline of a new Institution, it
was esteemed infamous, and it was punishable not to marry.

3. But then if we consider the manner of this thing so Instituted, it is
certainly a perfect, unalterable, and universal Commandment. For although every
man in every circumstance be not by virtue of the Institution obliged to marry;
yet if he does marry, by the Institution he is tied up strictly, that at no
hand he must praevaricate the mesures and limits of the Institution, He that
marries, must marry by that Rule and no other. He must marry one woman only
while she is alive: he must leave father and mother and adhere to her; he must
treat her with charity and honor; he must use her by the limits of Nature and
Sobriety; he must make her the Mother of his Family; he must make her serve no
desire but what is Natural; and so in every thing is he limited to the first
Institution.

Then after a Paragraph spent in a critical account of the word Institution,
wherein nothing so much concerns our present enquiry, as a word (to his purpose
unhappily) dropped, that Institution does not directly signify a Commandment,
but it supposes the persons obliged; only it superads the manner and mesures of
disobedience, which is as much as I pretend to: he thus sums up his opinion.

5. And thus it is in the matter of the Sacrament, as it is in the matter of
Marriage. All men are not always obliged to receve the Sacrament; for the
Institution of it being in order to certain ends, and in the Recipients,
certain capacities and conditions required by way of disposition, there can be
but a relative, and therefore a limited Commandment of its reception: but to
them who receve it, the Institution is a perfect indispensible Commandment for
the manner.

O the misery of slavery to an Opinion! Quantum mutatus ab illo! How unlike
himself in his other Works, is this admirable Person, when he attemts to reduce
That Opinion to rules and mesures, which cannot consist with Any! But let us
follow him step by step.

III. BY Actions] No, not by naked Actions, but by Actions with their lemmata,
declaring their design. Such Actions as those of Abimelech and Gideon, who said
' As ye see me do, so do ye: Actions which made the words of command, not the
Less, but the More obliging.

Intimations of Duty] Intimation and Duty are no equal correlates: As express
words of the Imperative mood, import more then Intimation; so is Duty more then
an Intimation can enforce. If our Saviors modesty was so great, or his
authority so little, that he did not Command, but Intimate; we may comply in
Kindness, but need not obey in Duty.

Relative Precepts] must have a Foundation, and so must

Suppositions of Actions] otherwise, they are not reasonable Suppositions, but
groundless Imaginations:

As quoties feceritis.] But where is the ground for any [feceritis] at all?
Does any man act without competent reason? he acts not like a man: Does any
man suppose another will act so? yea, Does any man suppose that Ages and
Nations will act so? and that, as of duty? He betrayeth his own want of Reason,
by supposing it in all mankind.

And the like] The like What? this etc. sure was added merely for show; and it
shows no more but this, that something more needed to have be'n said, could we
have known what. For all that has yet be'n said, rests at last upon a
groundless Supposition, which though enlarged 'till it cover the face of the
whole earth, will still be unstable as water, not able to afford the good Dove
footing, or so much as an Olive-leaf toward satisfaction of our conscience in
our great enquiry.

It is in the matter of the Sacrament, as in the matter of Marriage] True, as
to the relation between the State, and the Obligation consequent thereupon: For
as every one that enters into That State, is obliged to all the Duties which
It requires; so is every one that receveth the Holy Sacrament, obliged to do
it in due manner.

But is it not in This as in That, as to the Supposition of the Action it self,
which is owned for the whole reason of the Obligation. For there is the firmest
ground in the World whereon to bild a Supposition, that Many will do That, to
which All are drawn by strong Inclination, and Most by Necessity. For however
uneasy the yoke be, yet to Most it is not so galling as that of Eunuchism: Of
Marriage therefore, Nature it self has made the Supposition, which stands
like the Earth, firm upon its own magnetism.

But what Pole? what Center? what Natural Inclination? what Rational Motive?
what Divine Command? what other Reason, antecedent to this Institution, does
this Supposition hang upon?

When it appears that men have as strong a propensity to This [feceritis] as
to That, then will it appear, that it is in this matter as in That: but 'till
Then, the Suppositions, and consequently the Institutions built upon them, will
differ as much as a Castle in the Air, and a Castle upon a Rock.

I wish I could deny that [it is in the matter of the Sacrament, as in the matter
of Marriage] in This unhappy respect; That Many frighted with the troubles of
the Married state, refuse to engage in it; and More, frighted with the
difficulty of coming worthily, and the danger of coming unworthily, refuse to
com to This.

But then in this respect again [it is Not in the matter of this Sacrament, as
in that of Marriage] for when the Disciples said, If the matter be thus with a
wife, it is not good to marry: our Lord granted the consequence, and advised
those that could receve Eunuchism should receve it. But we never find our Lord,
or any Apost'l, say of the Sacrament, He that cannot receve it worthily, let
him forbear it; nor did our Apost'l close his severe threats with saying, Let a
man examine himself, and so if he find himself unworthy, let him forbear. But in
both the one and the other without any [if] absolutely oblige us to the
performance.

All men are not Always obliged to receve the Sacrament]

This is very modestly, but withal very warily and wisely expressed: for had he
spoken all, he must have marred all: his rule would have inferred [no man is at
any time obliged.] For mere suppositive necessity is on all hands agreed to be
perfect liberty: since a counter-supposition in the other scale, equally true,
by counter-poising annihilates its weight.

For the Institution being in order to certain ends, and in the recipients
certain capacities and conditions required by way of disposition.

The excellent person had said, 11. 2. An Institution obtains the force of a
Precept according to the subject matter, and to its appendent relations.

Let that Rule be translated hither, we need seek no further for an answer. For
the End of This Institution is such as All men at All times are obliged to
serve; and by the last recited clause it will follow, rhat this must be so far
a Necessary Commandment, as to remember our Lords death is a Necessary Duty.

Certain capacities and conditions are required] They are so, and that not only
in order to the Sacrament, but absolutely, and by their intrinsik necessity. It
is our Duty first to have them, because the Gospel, upon other indispensible
accounts, requires them: and then it is our duty to bring them to the
Sacrament, even by this excellent Persons own rule.

But if we will speak distinctly, Natural capacities are not Required but
Supposed; and as Marriage was not Instituted for Eunuchs, so was not this
Sacrament for children or fools. But Moral capacities are required by the Moral
Law; and if they be the Foundation, they are also part of the Bilding; They
were necessary to All men, before they were so to Communicants, and therefore
cannot make This the Less necessary to Any.

There can be but a Relative, and therefore limited command of its reception] It
must Relate to, and be Limited by, Those Ends, Capacities, Conditions and
Dispositions; and since Relata must be Equal, therefore the Performance must
neither Exceed, nor Fall short, but Equal those Limits, i. e. we must neither
Oftener nor Seldomer, nor Otherwise do it, than In remembrance of Christ, with
due Dispositions, and all requisite Conditions.

But Those Conditions, though they be Limits of our obedience in the Manner, do
not limit our Obligation to the Performance, being themselves comprehended in
it, as antecedently necessary upon the Moral account, Les a man examine himself,
is no less a Command, than So let him eat. The Disposition it self is a part of
the Duty; and the want of it is so far from a Dispensation, that it is it self
a sin.

But to Them who do receve it, the Institution is a perfect and indispensible
commandment for the manner.

i. e. Whoever does it, being not thereto antecedently obliged, does thereby
thrust himself upon a very Great, but Needless Trouble and Danger. For he was
under no Obligation, till he put himself under one, by undertaking an action
very Difficult to be do'n Worthily, and very Dangerous if do'n Unworthily; and
that, without any Necessity, derived from this Institution.

This is the whole that the most Excellent person and Only Patron could make of
this ungrounded sens of those Relative words: And as I said before of the whole
question, that we need no other than a due understanding of this One discourse
of the Apost'l, because we have no other Scholiast upon our Lords Institution;
so say of This member of the question. We need look no further for a due
discovery of this ungrounded Interpretation, than the unhappiness of this most
Excellent Person: since among the multitudes that have be'n seduced by it, no
other has attemted to put a regular countenance upon it: and This in effect
does but warn every considering person to so bear the performance, i. e. to
destroy the Supposition he bilds upon.

And if this be the Best, that its Best patron can make of it; what is the
Worst? we find the words twice, and in either place most studiosly mentioned;
In recital of our Lords Institution they are carefully inserted and authorized;
In the Argument thereupon bilt, they are solicitosly resumed, and settled as the
Foundation; let us see what work they make in either place.

IV. THIS interpretation enervates our LORD'S COMMAND. This we find abundantly
acknowledged. It is Only from These words, Thus understood, that we com now
from hearing a Rare person degrade it from a Command to an Institution; such a
poor Institution, as may complain with its great Author, it has not a place
where to lay it is head; It does not Command our obedience, but Beg our
benevolence, and begs also (with David's curse) in desolate places; and which
is yet wors, in places laid desolat by it self, for it self forbids us to give
it the entertainment it begs.

It enervats our Lords command, because it cancelleth our obligations. By doing
nothing we shall be as obedient, as by our most active diligence.

For if the Command (let us for once beg That title) be purely Relative; If it
do not Absolutely enjoin the Performance it self, but only a Commensuration
between It and the Manner; than is it no more obeyed when Both are equally
Performed, than when Both are equally Neglected: He that never does this at
all, does it no oftener than he does it in remembrance of Christ; and therefore
as often as he does it he does it to That end.

The Commensuration is no less exact when Both have the Most, and when Both
have the Least; yea, when Both have Nothing at all. And well may that be denied
the title of a Command, which is Performed by Neglecting.

But what title will be due to it is great Author? If he that does Nothing may
Obey, he must do something Less than nothing that Commands, because he pretends
to do something; and all the guilt of the neglect (if any be) will pass from the
obediently negligent Subject, to the impertinently busy Lawmakers: who having
not Required, but Supposed the Action, neither Found nor Made any ground for
the Supposition.

It forbids the benevolence it begs. For though it threaten No guilt of
disobedience to the Omission, it does to the Performance. While we may ly safe
in our Neglect, we run a great risk in our Officiosness.

For he that Omitteth the Performance, disobeyeth no command, therefore cannot
incur any guilt, nor deserv any punishment; but he that upon such terms
approaches the Holy Table, is already gilty of contemt toward the threatenings
denounced against Unworthy recevers, because he needlessly exposes himself to
them, and to com safely off, had need of more Piety in the Performance, than we
can Yet discover of Wisdom in the adventure.

V. IF WE can suppose the Apost'l so regardless of our Saviors command: yet
sure he had more kindness for his OWN ARGUMENT, than to use such solicitos
endeavors to destroy it; and for his own Credit, than to furnish the
Corinthians with a Plea, whereby they might nonsuit his Charge: He was (sure)
a better Disciple both to Gamaliel and our Lord, than to use such endeavors as,
by the ordinary rules of reasoning, must depose both his own Discourse, and our
Lords Command from all power.

But such is the unavoidable consequence of the merely Suppositive sens of
those important words. For it is obvious, that the Corinthians Might; and
therefore supposable, that they Would plead thus for themselves.

We are sufficiently sensible, that as often as we eat This bread and drink
This cup, we show forth the Lords death; and consequently, that whoever eats
This bread and drinks this cup unworthily, is guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord. But in these our ordinary Fests, which thou so severely reprovest, we
have nothing to do with This bread nor This cup.

We Fest indeed as often as we meet in the Church: but without any Intent, and
(we conceve) without any Need, to eat This bread or drink This cup. We intend
to do what all Nations agree to be the proper manner of worshipping God. This
is the Universal notion of mankind, in that so common Rite of Sacrificing. The
Votary therefore offers his beast, that he may become a guest to his God,
thereby at once Receiving and Expressing a confidence that he is propitious to
him.

And though our Lords great Sacrifice of himself, have made it needless to shed
any more blood by way of atonement; yet is that so far from any reason, that we
should lay aside Festing with Sacrificing; that it is a very good one, why we
should take it up, if it had never be'n used before; since now we have much
greater reason to rejoice in the Communion, to which God inviteth us.

But that in all our Fests we should be obliged to celebrate the Lords Supper,
since himself has not expressed it, we understand not.

For either he intended we should receive it only at the same Fest, whereat he
Instituted it (which was the Passover) or else he left it wholely to our
discretion, to receve it as often as we should think convenient.

Now that we intend not to do it in our ordinary meetings, thy self seem to
understand. For thou declarest, when ye come together it is not to eat the
Lords Supper.

Is it not, we own it, we plead it; It is not to eat the Supper, and how do we
Profane it when we do not eat it? When we do Eat it, if our behavior be
irreverent, we must confess our selves guilty: for we submit to thy rule, As
often as we Eat This bread and Drink this cup unworthily, we are guilty; but it
thence follows not, that we are so as often as we Fest together in the Church.

It is hard to say whether such a plea were more obvios to the Apostl's
Observation, or Destructive to his Argument. It was therefore infinitely
necessary he should answer it, and we find no other Answer to it but in these
words, nor any other Use of Those words but for such an Answer.

This is sufficient to persuade us, so to interpret them, that the Argument be
not Defective, nor Themselves Impertinent. But to fasten such a Gloss upon
them, as shall make them not only Useless, but Pernicios; and the Argument, not
only naked of so necessary a defense, but irrefragably retorted against the
Author, is perhaps a greater abuse to Them, than the Corinthians profaneness
was to the Lords Supper.

VI. FOR a close of this troublesome dispute, let us impartially balance the
rival senses upon This enquiry, which of all others is most important; viz.
which of them affords better satisfaction to a pious soul, conscientiously
enquiting how often he is obliged to receve the Holy Communion? A question,
wherein there are many things doubtful, but none more than This: Whether it
more Deserve or Need to be answered?

1, The One sens offers full satisfaction, by showing us a Certain Mesure to
which we must conform: And though the change long since made in the Manner of
celebrating Church Festivals, seem to have confounded it, yet if we once know
what it was at the time of the Institution, we may and must so accommodate the
never decaying Reason to the Change, as still to answer the first Intention:
For if the Corinthians were therefore obliged to Eat the Lords Supper in All
their Church meetings, because they Fested in them All in One manner; so are
we, because we also Fest in them All in Another manner: Since the Manner of
Publik worship, the Church upon competent reasons may alter: but the
Institution of our Lord indispensibly closing All Church Fests with his own
Supper, No human power may abolish; at least not in point of the Obligation,
though possibly invincible necessity may dispense with Actual performance at
some times.

So by This account, the clear answer will be, That the Church must offer the
Holy Sacrament, as often as she can persuade the peopl to receve it; and every
person is so often obliged to receve it, as the Church Officers shall offer it;
and Both the Church, and every person oght to come as near as possible, to
doing it every Lords day and every Holy day, i. e. All days of Church Fests.

2. But the other Sens for want of a Standard, will pack us off with an answer
more Delusory than the Collier's. If we ask [How often must I do this in
remembrance of Christ?] it will answer [As often as you eat This bread and
drink This cup] If we then ask, [How often must I eat This bread and drink This
cup] it will answer [As often as you do it in remembrance of Christ.] This I
say is more delusory than the Collier, in two respects.

1. Because it was possible to know what the Church believed. Publik
Confessions, Canons of Councils, etc. All of them independent upon the Collier
or his Faith, and all known to the Catechist. But Here, we have No Declaration
or Canon which pretends to oblige, 'till our own voluntary Act do it.

2. The Collier was not the same person with the Church: He might possibly
differ from her; or if he did Not, then might a further question join them Both
together, and by asking [How do both thou and the Church believe] call him to a
determinate account of his Own and the Churches Faith.

But here [This bread and This cup] are supposed to be a mere Periphrase of the
[Lords Supper] differing only in Syllables, and not at all in Signification.

It is therefore impossible that any one can Do This, which he would never have
do'n had not our Lord commanded it, and not remember That Command which must be
the adaequate reason of the Action; and it is no less impossible to remember
the Command, without remembering the Author. These are so far from separable by
any Forgetfulness, that they cannot be made so by any Endeavor. And therefore it
must be extremely frivolos, if the Apost'l should so solemnly press this as
reveled by our Savior, That [as often as we eat his Supper, we must eat his
Supper.]

Again, the entire question is compounded of Both terms: For we ask not
separately [How often must we Do This?] as a distinct question from [How often
must we set forth our Lord's death?] But join Both in This question [How often
must we so do This, as thereby to set forth our Lord's death?]

Had the Collier be'n thus Catecised, he could not have escaped either
confessing his ignorance, or giving account of his belief. But here the clearer
the Question, the more unsatisfying the Answer: When different expressions are
made different things, they may pretend to mesure each other; but when they are
joined together as parts of one whole Suppositive duty, then we have no mesure
at all:

Yea, Those very words which pretend to give us an exact one, rob us of one
that with some Latitude might have served the turn. For without them, we could
not have doubted, as now we do, whether we are under the obligation of an
absolute Command or no, as well to the Thing as to the Manner; nor be'n put to
such hard, yet unprosperous shifts, to make our Lords Institution and the
Apostl's Discourse worthy their Authors.

CHAP. IV. Objections answered.
I. The First Objection [That the Tradition may be novel] answered. 1. By matter
of fact. II. By passing judgment upon it. No necessity of difference in point
of frequency between the breaking of bread before meat, and Grace-cup after it.
2. If the Jews Antiquities be against us, we may reject their authority. III.
3. Seeing a party of them are on our side, we may well prefer that party above
the opposite. So great an agreement as is between them, could not be, 1. From
Chance. IV. 2. Nor the Jews conforming their custom to Christ's Institution,
because it is incredibl they should have such 1. care, 2. or wit. V. Another
Objection [That we must have Fests or no Sacrament] adjourned. VI. A Third
Objection [That the Jews used their Grace-cup in their Houses, not their
Synagogs] Answered by six steps. VII. The last Objection [The universal silence
of all Ages] Answered. 1, By showing reason why both Primitive and Later ages
should be silent, and 2. by showing that the best critiks have observed it.

HAVING thus balanced the two pretenders, and found the One not only
Serviceable but Necessary, and the Other not only Unserviceable, but
Prejudicial both to our Lords Institution and the Apostl's Argument, I might
with courage proceed on in the remains of my journey.

But sensibl how many prejudices he must encounter, who shall in so awful a
subject oppose the stream, and unable to prophecy what might rise in Other men's
minds, I communicated what I have above written to two or three pious and
learned Friends, requesting them to favor me with their Censures and
Objections, that I might either answer them or submit to them. Two Objections I
have by that means obtained, which I think requisite to Answer.

1. THE FIRST OBJECTION says, that The Custom referred to is in many
particulars novel, and by which we cannot judge of the practice of the Jews in
our Saviors days.

This strikes at the very heart, and must be carefully warded: I shall therefore
first examine what is to be found of the Jews Opinions in the case, and then
consider what judgment is thereupon to be made.

1. The Jews think the Practice so far from novel, that they think it as
ancient as (it is occasion) the disbanding of the Camp in Joshua's days, and the
consequent impossibility of the whole Nations bringing their daily offering to
the publik place of Sacrifice.

This we have found in Dr. Castle upon the word (...) where he intimates, that
the people must tarry for Samuel, 1 Samuel 9. because he was the (...). And this
seems confirmed by Jonathan's Targum, which is elder than our Lords
Institution, and paraphraseth the word which signifies Blessing, by (...)
(whence perhaps our Latin Pars) which signifies Breaking.

But my learned Objector does not impute novelty to the whole, but many
particulars, and advises me to consult the Misna in Berachoth: I have do'n so,
and thereby find reason enogh to suspect the Jews care or felicity in
preserving their Antiquities, but not enogh to suspect mine own Hypothesis.
Indeed I find them treat the Bread and Wine much like the Apostle; They speak
much more of the Later than of the Former, and it is not for a running vieu to
discover what difference they put between them. The 7th chap. of Berachoth
begins thus, Three eating together are obliged, (...). The word is proper to
This exercise, and its derivatives (...) signify the meeting, which Elias thus
describes, Three or more sitting at Supper, among whom one as the father of
the family, or some venerable Rabbi, if such be present as a guest, is obliged
to pray and bless the Table with an audible voice, as is said, Psalm. 34.4.
Magnificate Dominum meum. Magnificate, there are Two at least; Mecum, there is
the Third: if there be only Two, either of them prays privately by himself.
Here, and in most other of their Writeings, they speak indifferently of the
whole, (...). But if we com more distinctly to enquire, what interest the Wine
has above the Bread, we shall find nothing certain, but what Shulch: Aruch
tells us, That they are divided into three Opinions. 1. Some say the Wine is so
necessary to consecrate a meal, that though a man eat single, if he can get no
Wine, he must rather fast than eat without it; indeed he is not obliged to fast
more than one day. 2. A second opinion is, That the Cup of Blessing is not at
all necessary, be the number of guests never so many. 3. A third sort say with
our Leo Modena, that it must not be omitted if there be three.

And this last Opinion seems fairly intimated in the Berachoth it self, if
well interpreted. For in the eighth Chapter, reckoning up the differences
between the houses of Shammai and Hillel, they thus express the last, (...):
Which words may be thus translated; There comes to them Wine for the
Poscaenium, and there is there no other but That very Cup; The house of Shammai
say, he blesses first for the Wine, and afterward he blesses for the Meat:
But the house of Hillel say, he blesses for the Meat, and afterward he
blesses for the Wine. In which words is plain, that all agree that there is
Wine, (...) (as we observed them to style that After Supper.) 2. That there is
but one cup for the whole company: and 3. That the (...) blesses for them All.

But Zohar in Exodus p. 280. speaks full to our purpose, and names the Cup by
his proper name, (...) The Cup of Blessing was not used unless when there were
Three, because of the mystery of the Three fathers which blessed, and so there
is no need of the Cup unless there be Three.

The Reason is most Rabbinical, i. e. most ridiculous, but the Authority is
reputed great, because most ancient, and the words are most pertinent and
conclusive to our purpose, plainly expressing how much they stood upon the Cup
of Blessing, and what number it required.

II. UPON This account of matter of Fact, it will not be hard to pass judgment,
which I shall come to by steps.

1. WHETHER in our Saviors days they put such difference between Bread and Cup,
is not necessary for us to determine; for the Apostl's Argument will go as
strongly (though perhaps not altogether as gracefully) without it, since his
partiality to the Cup may otherwise be fairly accounted for.

1. Because we have seen from other pens that the Greeks understood the use of
the Grace-cup, but we meet no such footsteps of their Breaking of bread; and
it was reason the Apostl should rather bild his inferences upon a custom which
they knew, than upon One which they knew not.

2. Because Bread was never distributed After any Other Supper but only the
Paschal, and was Then attended with a form of words sounding much like that
which our Lord used in his Institution: Since hence appeared some danger, lest
the Corinthians should mistake our Lords meaning, it was fit the Apostl should
clear it; which he does almost as plainly as if he had said, You know the
custom of closeing a Fest with a Cup of blessing, and you may know the custom
of the Jews distributing a Cake after the Passover; and probably you may think
our Lord intended that his Supper should be mesured, not by the Cup which was
used after All Fests, but by the Bread which was so used only after the
Passover. But I tell you, I have receved from the Lord himself, that you must
celebrate his Supper as often as you drink the Grace cup. Here is ground enogh
for his Argument and all its turnings, and we may safely spare the trouble
either of enquiring or contending for the equal or unequal frequency of the
ordinary Bread.

2. WERE the Jewish Misna or Talmu^d directly against us in some material
particulars, it were more reasonable to reject their Authority, than so
Necessary and so Exact a Key. That we may see the reasonableness of This
assertion, it will be fit to balance them.

1. If the Jewish Doctrines in matters of their dearest Law be apparently
changed from what they were in our Saviors days, we oght to suspect their care
not to have be'n greater toward a Tradition: Let us then compare what our Lord
said, with what their Talmud now says. The Gospel informs us, Luke 14.5.
that our Lord spoke to the Pharisees and Lawyers, saying, Which of you shall
have an Ox or an Ass falen into a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on
the Sabbath day? And they could not answer him to these things: Which yet they
might have do'n, if their then Doctrines had be'n agreeable to those of the
Talmud, which forbids to pull him out, but allows to carry meat to feed
him; and if need be, straw to support him in the place.

And accordingly Munster furnishes us with a pertinent story out of the Saxon
Annals. A Jew (says he) fallen into a Jakes on the Sabbath, would not be
draw'n out, but have meat brought him thither, which the Bishop hearing of,
required that the same honor should be paid to the Christian Sabbath; so the
poor Jew suffered two days penance for the Talmud's swerving from ancient
practice.

I pretend not to equal any evidence with the Gospel: It is sufficient that I
hence infer, that we may not argu from their Present customs to their Ancient,
so as to reject any probable light, especially when so confirmed as we are by
some of their own Rabbis.

III. 3. SEEING so great a party of them so state their Tradition, as most
exactly jointeth with the Apostl's discourse, we have great reason to believe
Them to be in the right.

This, not as an arbitrator between the dissenting Rabbis, but in defense of
my Hypothesis from my worthy Friends Objection, I thus confirm from the exact
agreement which I found between the Apostl's Argument and That Custom so stated.

This Argument must proceed from Chance, from the Jews accommodating their
Custom to our Lords Institution; or from our Lords accommodating his
Institution to the Jewish Custom.

It was not from either of the Former.

Therefore it was from the Last.

That the Division is adaequate needs no proof: For Either it must be by
Chance, or it must Not, (since there can be no midl between the two ends of a
Contradiction) If it were Not by chance, then either That Custom must conform to
This Institution, or This to That: (For they cannot meet unless Mahomet go to
the Mountain, or the Mountain com to Mahomet.)

The Assumtion I thus prove by parts.

1. It cannot proceed from Chance: Such a concurs, of so many and so crooked
particls, can be no more imputed to undiscerning chance, than can the meeting
of the letters in the discurs it self. Chance may do one thing well, as a blind
man may shoot a Hare, but he cannot shoot multitudes without missing one.

When a FINE is levied in Court, the Chirographer writes two Copies at a
competent distance in the same Parchment: In the space between them he writes
two or three letters; then he cutteth the Parchment in the middle
indenturewise, so as to divide those Letters, leaving either indenture some
part, that upon any occasion the conterparts compared together, may by so many
agreements vouch either for the other.

There happened a question between three parties, concerning the conditions of
a Fine levied time out of mind: Two of the contenders produce for proof of
their pretenses common Parchments, attested only by their Fathers: The third
produces an Indenture of Fine, transmitted to him by his Father, with its
counterpart, which (by I know not what means) he had obtained out of the
Scriptoire of another Family: He applies the One to the Other, shows their
exact agreement in every word of the Writing, every turning of the Indenture,
and every stroke of the divided Letters; and proves this could not be the
effect of any collusion, because there had ever be'n, and still continued, a
mortal feud between his own Family and That whence he had gotten the
counterpart.

If this be our present Case, we are to consider 2 things: First, the agreement
of the Counterparts; and 2ly, the impossibility of Collusion.

1. The Agreement of the Apostl's Argument with the Thus stated Custom, we have
fully discovered.

1. In the Body of the discourse in either Chapter. In the 10th chap. both Bread
and Cup caled by their proper Jewish names, and under Those very names urged to
be Body and Blood of the Lord. In the 11th chap. the Argument no other way,
Rational; This way, Unanswerable; many words and Aspects of words, no other way
accountable; This way, Necessary: the Charge otherwise to be evaded; This way,
Unavoidable: In the whole, not one word, or order of words, impertinent,
deficient, or superfluos.

2. In the Indenting, every reeling step, exactly jointed with the answerably
crooked process of the Argument. No discourse in the World so full of odd
bizarreries; every one this way rendered, rational, clear, and convictive.

In the 10th chap. the names of Both elements industriosly so Varied, as to
answer the Jewish style; and so Transposed, as to answer the Apostl's argument.
In the 11th chap. the Demonstrative THIS affectedly inculcated, the (...)
inforcedly appropriate to the Cup, though distributed in like manner with the
Bread. The Bread honored above the Cup one way, and the Cup above the Bread
another way.

3. Letters so cut in sunder, that in the Apostl's discourse we find but one
half, not to be read but by supplying the other half from the Tradition. THIS
without an object, (...) without a relative, look like tails of Letters without
heads; but by application to This custom, become fairly legible.

So exact agreement in such strange variety: one would think Gods providence
here acted the Chirographer, managing the Apostl's pen in such a manner, that
after the death of all Wirnesses, and loss or embeazling of all other
Evidences, we might by this multiplied sutableness, be armed against all doubt,
which either malice or carelessness of the Jews, forgetting or corrupting their
Tradition, might bring upon us.

IV. 2. THE other part of my Assumtion is, that This Agreement could not be the
issu of the Jews conforming their practice to our Lords Institution: Since the
greatest Care married to the greatest Wit, Could not produce such an offspring,
and the Jews Would not employ either the One or the Other to such a purpose.

1. It were extravagant credulity to believ they Would employ such Care. Their
very differences concerning the Tradition of their Fathers, is abundant
evidence that they minded not its agreement or disagreement with our
Scriptures: And their known zele against our Lord and Apostle, is a yet greater
one, that they would not be more careful to explain the Ones institution and
the Others argument, than all the Fathers of the Christian Church have be'n.

Shall we believ their esteem for their Gamaliel, so much greater than their
hatred of Saint Paul, that they should he more than masorically careful to
contrive a way whereby to make such a discourse worthy the Disciple of their so
famous Master? Do they so glory in their ancestors crucifying the Lord of Life,
that they put themselves to great care and cost to adorn the Monument which
himself raised to his own memory, and That with such Figures as should blazon
His great goodness and their great wickedness? Were the Jewish Rabbis so much
more careful of Christ's worship than the Fathers of his own Church; that when
These had lost the key which must unlock his Oracles, Those took the pains to
make a new one?

Whoever can believ this, shall never from Them receve the thanks which he
shall deserv for such exorbitant charity.

2. To believ their Wit capable of finding out such an invention, is no less
incredible. So many wheels, so many motions, so smoothly and so strongly
cooperating: so remote from the common practice of All other Nations; so
suitable to the humor of their own, so exactly fitting every titl of the
Apostl's discourse, and the circumstances wherein it was written, was sure
above all human Wit to invent. Many discoveries appear obvious when made, which
yet for thousands of years escaped the sagacity of all mankind: The very
difficulties and odnesses of the Apostles discurs have be'n so far from
Smoothed, that many of them have not be'n Observed by any Critiks and
Commentators; and perhaps might not have be'n so now, had not their agreement
with This key occasioned it.

It is not to be believed that the Apostl should make the least falls step, drop
the least syllable that should be impertinent, much less that should be
mischievos to his design: And the account that is to be given of them, must
equal the sum to a farthing: Whoever will suppose the Discourse worthy of a
reasonabl man, much more whoever will suppose it worthy the Holy Spirit; if he
reject what I offer, Let him to his study, let him summon together All his
faculties, let him use as much liberty of invention as he please; and if he can
find out any Hypothesis that shall so cleverly answer all the Phenomenon.

-- erit mihi magnus Apollo. Since therefore chance Could not, and the Jews
neither could nor would conform their practice to our Lords Institution and the
Apostl's discurse: The conclusion must be, That both This and That were
conformed to the Jewish practice: And I thank my worthy Friend for giving me
occasion to confirm what I have said by this Reflection.

V. ANOTHER OBJECTION says, That if our frequency in celebrating the Lords
Supper, must be mesured by such a Grace-cup; since there can be no such
Grace-cup where there is no Fest (no more than there can be an end without a
beginning, or an Adjunct without a Subject) it will be as necessary that a Fest
should always usher the Lords Supper, as that the Lords Supper should attend
every Fest: and so the revers of our Hypothesis, will no less severely reprove
the Universal Church of Christ, for Not festing in All meetings, than did the
Apostl the Corinthians, for not honoring the Lords Supper in them All: but
every particular member of Christ's Church will be blameless, though he never
communicate in such manner as by his Church Officers he is invited to do; since
he is to do it only so often as by That Practice whence Christ's Institution
was derived, he is obliged, i. e. only so often as a Fest is to be closed with
a cup of blessing.

To answer such an Objection, and withal to justify our Ancestors, for casting
sensual Fests out of the Church, I shall say sufficient, Part III. Chap. 3.
Besides these two Objections, for which I am obliged to my Friends, two others
offered themselves to mine own mind, which I also think fit to answer.

VI. IT may be further objected, That the Jewish Custom concerned not Religious
Worship, but Domestik Fests, as worthy of greater reverence, saying, What? Have
ye not houses to eat and to drink in, or despise ye the Church of God? Since
therefore the Grace-cup was to be drunk in their Own houses, and This in the
Church, how can the One be derived from the Other?

I answer This Objection by steps.

1. It is not requisite, that the Successor should answer the Predecessor in
all Circumstances: Yea, the One may be opposed to the Other in very material
Ones. The Apostle, even when he pleads Christ to be the true Sacrifice,
opposes his blood to that of bulls and goats, as in other respects, so in This
of Frequency: Those were offered often, This but Once; yet were Those types of
This.

2. It is requisite, that the Successor should be more perfect than the
Predecessor; The Antitype must excel the Type, as the Gospel does the Law; the
Body the Shadow.

3. Difference of place (the ground of the Objection) is caused by difference
of Dispensations: That Gods worship is no longer confined to One Place, is one
of the great changes wrought by the Gospel; and This makes it needless for Us
to make out own houses Temples: Gods House is so near our own, that we need no
Chapels of ease.

4. This was the very design of the Tradition, they took the Names, and did
what possibly they could to perform the Things; caled their Table an Altar,
etc. and so professing to do their utmost, and com as near as possibly they
could, to the performance which could not legally be accomplished but only at
Jerusalem:

This therefore is so far from an Objection against our deriving the Lords
Supper from such a Tradition, that it is a Reason for it. It does not in This
respect contradict it (as at first glance it may seem to do) but comply with
it: The Tradition expressed their endeavor to offer their meat in God's house,
if possibly they could; and since that which they so professed to endeavor, is
to us not only Possible but Easy, we could not answer the very fundamental
design of the Tradition, if we did not make the Lord's House the place of his
Supper.

5. This difference of Place, speaks the Lords Supper successor, not only to
the Tradition (which was it self but a Succedaneum) but to the Legal Sacrifices
themselves: That hindrance being removed which induced the Jews to invent such a
supply, This Institution by a motion of refiliency, passes through the
Succedaneum to the Principal: Yea, and the very Principal it answers, not as an
Inferior, but a Superior; and therefore required a Place Superior (if possibl)
not only to their own houses, but the Templ it self.

The Apostl makes This an Instance of the greater dignity of Christ's
Priesthood, that he entered into a Holier place than did Aaron or his seed:
Since therefore this Bread and Wine has a better title to Christ's Body and
Blood, than had the flesh and blood of Bulls and Goats, and yet Those might not
legally be offered but at God's House; and since This very Tradition professed
to do what possibly could be do'n, to Fest before God in his own House; it was
not suitable either to the greater dignity of this Holier Sacrifice, or to the
very significancy of the Tradion, that it should be celebrated (except in case
of necessity) in any other than God's own House.

6. As the dignity of the Sacrament, so the interest of the Poor too (Christ's
body in another sens) caled for This translation.

The Rich make as many Fests as Meals, and were their own Tables the Altars,
might celebrate daily Sacraments: But the Poor (to whom our Lord bears as great
affection as to his Supper) seldom eat Three together (which is the necessary
Number) or drink Wine (which is the Necessary Matter) and for this dubl defect
must be excommunicate, though guilty of no other falt, but (what they certainly
repent) their Poverty.

What therefore they must otherwise have lost, they gain by the publikness of
the Place, which also gains the greater number: So the Poor gain the Fest, and
the Table gains Guests, and the Tradition gains greater perfection, by being
So answered as to be outdo'n by the Sacrament.

VII. THE most Obvios OBJECTION (or Prejudice rather, which has more force
though less weight than an Objection) comes from the Universal silence of All
ages, in a Subject of such importance. For it seems utterly incredibl, that
in so many hundreds of years, and thousands of Books, we should not meet one
word that so much as intimates what might justly require to be most plainly
Manifested.

But This Objection, however big it looks at first sight, Will hardly stand a
strict examination, or reply upon what shall be answered.

For ('pray' Reader) consider, Whence will you expect such an account? From the
Primitive ages? They thought it needless: From the Later? They thought it
Prejudicial.

1. The PRIMITIVE ages thought it Needless to give such an account in their
Writings, because they constantly gave it in their Practice. It would have be'n
a disparagement to the Institution to have written upon it, as the bungling
Painter did upon his rude pieces, This is a Cock, This is a Bull, etc. and it
would have be'n a fulsom officiosness to inform a Reader of what he daily saw
with his eyes.

The Reason of every Negative ceremonial Law, was at the time of stablishment
legibl as the Letter: but in following Generations almost utterly lost, till
Maimonides discovered, that most of them pointed at some Idolatrous Ceremony, at
That time practiced by the neighbor Nations, and therefore forbidden the Jews,
upon the same account as were their daghters.

And the same is the case in most Positive commands: Generally some present
custom declares the contents, though afterward by degrees, it wears into more
and more obscurity, and in process of time grows utterly illegible.

I instance only in the Other Sacrament. Both Scripture and Antiquity have be'n
altogether as silent concerning the Origination of That, as of This. All that
we read of it in the Gospel amounts to no more but This, that John ministered
it, the People received it, and the Pharisees questioned, Why Baptisest thou,
if thou be not the Christ, nor Elias, nether that Prophet? No Evangelist
thought fit to expound the reason either of the Action or Objection, because
the Then known custom sufficiently manifested it; which yet was lost as much
as This, to many Generations, though now retrived and generally owned by the
Learned: and why should not This share the right of Postliminium, as it has
do'n the loss?

2. LATER ages desired to hide any such notice. They bent their endeavors to
advance the honor of the Sacrament to the highest pitch of veneration, and
might well suspect, lest such a discovery should depress its esteem. They saw
how short the Greek Fests fell, not only of Jewish Piety, but Ordinary
Sobriety, and thought so base a descent, too great a disparagement to so
venerable a Mystery, which they therefore thought might lose much of its honor,
if its pedigree were not cast into the den of time to be there devoured.

And who can secure us, that upon This very reason we may not have lost some of
the Primitive Writers informations in This particular? We know the labors of
Earlier ages lay at the mercy of the Later, to be either preserved or
suppressed, as they should judge most suitable to their own conceptions, we
know how industrious they have be'n to strain their inventions, for dignifying
the Sacrament with such mysteries as may dazel our understandings; and it is
hard to imagine they should be very careful to preserve any such Papers as must
bring light to confute their dearest Opinions.

Yet has the Last inquisitive Age, in victory over the dubl hindrance,
Expressly discovered the One, and Virtually the Other half of the lost
Hypothesis: Whether our Lord in his Institution adopted some Jewish Tradition?
is at least half the question: And this is affirmed by several of the most
celebrated Critiks of this Century.

Our admirable Dr. Hammond in his excellent Annotations, has said enough to
justify me from affectation of novelty, in That Half which relates to our
Lords Institution, though without any eye to the Apostl's Argument, and our Duty.

On Matthew. 26.26. He has this Paraphrase: And whilst Judas was there, before
any of them was risen from the Table, Jesus, in imitation of the Jews custom
after Supper (of distributing Bread and Wine about the Table, as an argument of
charity -- instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist, as a contesseration of
charity among all Christians -- telling them that this taking and eating, was
now instituted by him as an holy rite, etc. And Luke 22.20. he thus
Paraphraseth: In like manner after they had do'n eating, he took the cup of
charity, usual among the Jews, and said, This cup is at this time. etc.

It is true, in both these places, and in his note upon 1 Cor. 10.16. He
refers the Institution to the Paschal Supper, which seems better to fit
our Lords Institution; but coming to the words I have so much insisted on 1
Cor. 11.26. he found himself necessitated to enlarge the mesure; for thus he
Paraphraseth those words: And do ye [in all your sacred Festivals] thus show
forth, etc.

Munster likewise upon Matthew. 26.21. Caeterum quando in textu subditur, Dominum
accepisse panem benedixisse atque fregisse, sciendum quod is mos olim celebris
fuit inter Judaeos, multaque scripta habent, de Fractione panis and
Benedictione calicis.

The same says Cameron on the same Text. The same and more has Grotius, who
further proves, That the Greeks as well as the Jews closed their Fests with a
cup of Wine solenly consecrated? And this Virtually discovers the Other Half,
which so naturally follows, that it is strange how One could be admitted
without the Other.

That the Primitive ages should wholely omit any mention of our Lords regard to
the Jewish Customs, upon supposition that it was sufficiently evident, That the
Midages should industriosly hide it upon fear of prejudice to their admirable
Mysteries, That the Last age should retrive it in their search of Antiquities:
Nothing of all This is so wonderful, as it is, that those who had the skill and
happiness to discover These Indies, should not care to enrich themselves with
such Treasures, as without digging offered themselves, especially the wind
blowing so hard as almost to compel them to Land.

For since we derive all our practical Doctrines concerning This duty from the
Apostl's discourse to the Corinthians, and That discourse appealeth to This
Institution; it is manifest, we oght not to sit down by any such Customs, as
can only answer That Institution as abstracted from This Argument, and not
consist with This Argument so built upon That institution: Nor is it less
manifest, that the Paschal Customs, however large enogh for That, were too
narrow for This.

Dr. Hammond could not Paraphrase the 26th verse, without extending it to All
Festival meetings. If then there were two sorts of Customs, Some only Annual,
Others ordinarily Festival; Those, agreeing with our Lords Institution, but
destroying our Apostl's Argument; and These, exactly agreeing with Both, it
cannot be very disputable, which of the two we are to receve for our standard.

Whatever weight therefore might have be'n in the Objection, upon supposal of
such an Universal silence, the same must be in our Answer, or rather our Plea;
For the authority of such eminent persons will bear me out in my fundamental
Hypothesis, viz. that our Lords Institution was derived from a Jewish Custom:
and plain Reason will bear me out in what I further add; viz. that it must be
Such a Custom as may agree not only with our Lords Text, but the Apostl's Gloss
too.

So the wise master-bilders have laid the foundation, and I have taken such
care how I bild thereupon, that I hope my good Reader will find no cause to
complain, otherwise than our Modern bilders do of ancient Houses; that they are
Stronger and Darker, with Thicker Walls and Less Windows than needed.

To the Former part of such an Objection I answer, that Thickness of Walls may
be a falt in a dwelling House, but not in a Castle, which must expect to be
battered and stormed by the whole Country.

To the Later part: That if I cannot be justified by the necessity which
obliged me to dispute in such manner as the Subject matter required; yet I hope
I shall be Pardoned, upon amendment in the remaining part of my Work, to which
upon That hope I now apply my self.

CHAP. V. Matter of Fact recorded in Scripture.
I. A transition to Matter of Fact. Not so easily understood as might have be'n
expected. Two things considerable. 1. The Backwardness of the Apostl's in
Understanding our Lords mind. 2. The means which our Lord used to recommend it,
unprosperos: The night of Institution, by its Terrors. II. Our Lord's
conversation with the two Disciples in the way, and at Emaus, so ordered, as to
discover the meaning of his Institution as well as the truth of his
Resurrection; ineffectual upon a contrary reason. Their ignorance 'till the
coming of the Holy Ghost. III. The second observable. Their diligence in
obeying our Lord's will when discovered. That by their breaking of Bread must
be meant the Lord's Supper, appears by, 1. The Exercises accompanying it. 2.
The Phrase expressing it. IV. 3. The Place, (...) must signify the
meeting house, where the first Christians held their Conventicles for fear of
the Jews. V. 4. The time. The Apostl's and Brethren at Hier: daily. The Remote
Churches on the Lords day. VI. The first Day of the Week consecrated to This
office, and for That reason styled the Lords day, dishonored by derivation from
the 4th Commandment, cannot be worse profaned than by neglect of This office,
to which it owes it is sacreduess.

HITHERTO I have labored to serve the Learned and the Inquisitive, the Able and
the Willing, to search both the ground of our Lords Institution, and the
Apostl's discourse concerning it; which reciprocate such light to one another,
that I hope every such Reader is fully satisfied, both in Conscience and
Curiosity. But there are many other, who either understand not such work, or will
not suffer the fatigue; whom I shall now endeavor to fit with less troublsom
Discourses.

It is much easier both to Understand and to Attend the the process of an
History, than that of an Argument; and the sens of Matter of Fact, as it is more
Obvious, so is it generally more Potent than That of Matter of Right.

What therefore I have hitherto be'n proving to have be'n our Lord's and
Apostl's mind, concerning our obligation to constancy, I shall now authorize by
the suitable Practice of All the Apostl's and Primitive Churches. In This
Chapter I shall search the Scripture for the Former; and in the following I
shall look into humane Writers for the Later.

In This Chapter let us vieu the Scripture, and see the strange unhappiness of
This Subject! We might well hope to 'scape all disputes concerning Matter of
Fact: when the witness is infallibl, what can we need more but to hear him?
Yes, we need understand him too; and as in the Apostl's argument we have found
difficulty, because those expressions which were familiar to His age, are worn
out in Ours: So the same difficulty still pursues us in the very History. We
must not only vieu what is written, but we must (...), Search and Examine, and
that carefully too, what is meant when report is made even of Matter of Fact.

But we have This comfort, that as the troubl will be now less, so will our
discoveries be more various; and at every step we shall meet something worth the
no great labor of the inquiry.

Two things will be worth our observation.

1. How careful our Lord was to recommend his Institution, and how backward the
Apostls were in Apprehending his meaning.

2. How diligent the Apostl's were in Obeying his will, when well informed
concerning it.

1. It is worth observing (be it but for our own justification) that
notwithstanding our Lords care to instruct them, the Apostl's themselves were
as hardly brought to understand his mind in his Institution, as we are now. And
it is more particularly observable, that Those endeavors which he used to
recommend it to their affections, met the same success, as we have seen follow
those very words of the Apostl, whereby he endeavored to prove the necessity of
constancy.

Our Lord's care to recommend it appears especially by two Actions. 1. His
timeing the Institution: Secondly, His care to mind them of it, while fresh in
memory.

1. He chose the fittest Time for the Institution. The Apostl observed it, and
we shall anon find another occasion more fully to consider how observable it
is, that it was the Last night, and That wherein he was betrayed: and the
Evangelist is careful to commemorate, with what affection he embraced That
Passover, for This very reason, because it was the most proper for This
Institution.

But That dismal night, however seasonable to endear it to Future times, was
least so, for it is publication to the Present. It was natural, that the
dreadful Tragedy then impending, should so confound both their Apprehensions
and Memories, as utterly to rob them of all other consideration, but of their
Lord's and their Own dangers, leaving them no power to regard the
at-such-a-time-scarce-considerable action.

To cure This inconvenience, he applies a contrary remedy, and that speedily.

II. HIS Resurrection was matter of as great Joy, as his Passion was of Grief
or Fear, and he makes That an opportunity to remedy the Other.

After his Death they met together, not to Fest but Fast, because the
Bridegroom was taken from them: the news of his Resurrection must give them the
garments of gladness for the spirit of heaviness, and invite them both to turn
their Fasting to Festing, and to close their Fests with his Supper, as he had
both very Carefully and very Lately commanded.

He therefore contriveth a way whereby he may at once assure them of the truth
of his Resurrection, and the meaning of his Institution. The story we meet in
Luke 24.13. which because we as little heed now, as the Apostl's did then, will
require some Animadversion.

Finding Two Disciples traveling together, to complete the necessary number,
himself makes a Third. He joins himself to them, discourses with them, gives
them sufficient opportunity and occasion to observe his countenance, his voice,
his mien, and whatever else he might be known by. But these (it seems) were
Disciples in extraordinary, not such as ordinarily conversed with him; and they
knew him not so perfectly, as to discover him in such circumstances.

He suppeth with them, and having by his discourses manifested himself a
Rabbin, takes the office of (...) the Breaker, and performs it not in the
Accustomed, but his Own New form; points not so much to the Bread as to his own
Body, and thereby so manifested his Person, that immediately they knew him.

This gives us an Hypothesis suitable to all the Phenomenon of the story,
otherwise unaccountable; and if our eyes be withholden that we no more know his
Meaning now, than the Disciples did his Person by the way, let us look how we
shall answer these questions.

How came their eyes to be opened, (...), in or by [the] breaking of [the]
Bread, more than by all his other appearances? You say, he might discover
himself When and How he pleased. True: but the question concerns not his
Power, but his Will which governs that Power, and is it self governed by his
Wisdom.

We therefore further demand, Why he that Could do it in what circumstances he
pleased, should Choose to do it in These, rather than any Other? This say you,
is a saucy question; we are not to call our Lord to account for his actions.

But may we not be bolder with his servants? his Disciples and Evangelist? Let
us then inquire concerning them. Why were the Disciples so careful to report
This very Circumstance? Why the Evangelist so punctual to record, that they
reported not only the Thing, but the Manner, (...), How (or in what manner) he
was known to them by [the] breaking of [the] Bread.

Here meet an unaccountabl Will of our Lord choosing This very Manner of
discovering himself, the no less unaccountabl Care of the Disciples reporting
This Manner, and of the Evangelist recording both the One and the Other: Must
All this be imputed to a fortuit concurs, without any design in either of the
Three, to honor the by Them Unregarded, and to Us Insignificant Circumstance?

Once more. We must never fly to a Miracle, where we find Nature: nor must we
suppose our Lord to have exercised his miraculous Power without his Wisdom. We
have a fair smooth account one way, his action suitable to his Own last
Institution, in circumstances exact, his form of words [This is my Body] in the
most proper manner signifying both Who he was, and Why he did this, must needs
by natural significance open their eyes; those of their Bodies to discover his
Person, and those of their Understandings, to discover his Institution. On the
other side, (...), a needless, fruitless Miracle, which we cannot believ,
without Neglecting our Lords wisdom, and Renouncing our Own.

Yet are the Apostl's eyes holden: This Season upon a contrary disorder
blinding their apprehensions, as the Passion-night had do'n. For though He
appeared to them whiles This very action was in relating, discoursed with them,
showed them his hands and his feet, yet at first they believed not for Joy and
Wondering. Which Passions, though they blew from a contrary point, brought
violence enogh to ruffle their minds into such confusion, that they could not
discover his very Person, much less his Mind.

No less than forty days did their eyes continu thus holden, nor were they
opened, 'till the miraculous illumination of the Spirit of Truth, brought all
our Lords sayings (with their explications) to mind.

The same St. Luke which records these appearances, closes the Gospel with
this short account of their Devotions: They were continually in the Temple
praising and blessing God. And with the same character does he describe it in
the beginning of their Acts 1.14. They all continued with one accord in prayer
and supplication, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his
brethren. Not a syllabl of [the breaking of the Bread] here or any where else,
during the whole forty days.

But immediately upon the coming of That Spirit of Truth, which according to our
Lords promise, led them into all Truth, and brought all things to their
remembrance that ever he had said unto them, and not only to their Remembrance,
but to their Understanding; Then did they both Remember and Understand, All
that our Lord said, did, and meant, concerning his Supper.

III. AND now we are com'n to the second Observable, viz: How diligent they
were in performing this duty when they knew it. For immediately we find This
added to their other Devotions, Acts 2.42. They continued in the Apostl's
doctrine and communion, and in [breaking of bread] and in prayer; and in verse.
46. They continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread
from house to house, did participate the food, (...), with gladness and freedom
of heart.

And here, because it may possibly be questioned whether our Lords Supper be
meant, we ought to observe. 1. The Exercises accompanying it. 2. The Phrase
expressing it. 3. The Place of celebration. 4. The Time.

1. The EXERGISES ACCOMPANYING it, were All Holy, Blessing God, Supplication,
Prayer, All Acts of Devotion; What makes Breaking of bread in such company?
What fellowship has God with Epicurus?

2. The PHRASE is Diverbial, every one in That age understood it. Eating of
Bread was their idiom for a Fest; and Breaking of Bread, for the consecration
of it by this Ceremony: so that This was not only the most Proper, but the Only
Phrase that could have be'n used to express both That Custom and This Sacrament.

Why St. Luke should here give the Bread the honor to denominate, when we found
St. Paul so partial to the Cup; we need seek for no other reason, but This,
viz. The Jews used so to speak; yet is there another.

Those cavilers who had so strained to impeach the Apostles, as drunk with new
wine, would not have failed to slander their Meetings, as drunken compotations,
if themselves should have professed they met to drink the Cup. In This style
therefore is wisely consulted the honor of the Exercise: which is hereby so far
removed from any suspicion of drunkenness, that is not so bad as ordinary
Eating; so far from Riotous, that it could not be suspected to be merely Civil.

IV. 3. THe PLACE where this Exercise was performed, seems to oppose it is
Sacredness, and therefore requires more than superficial heed. The word in the
Greek is (...): Our received Translation Englisheth it [from house to house]
some Margins [at home] Either of them importing a Common Place, would denote
Common Bread: but let us consider.

The Apostl's, opposing the Religion legally established, were necessitated to
hold Conventicles, for fear of the Rulers, when they met to celebrate This
office, which by Them was abominated, and would certainly be persecuted.

The Templ was a publik place for Jews and Gentiles, It was a house of Prayer
for all nations, because Natural, Universal Religion taught all Nations to pray
and praise God; Thus far might the Apostls communicate, as well with their
Enemies as Disciples; and that they might so do, they continued daily with one
accord in the Temple.

But should they have presumed There to celebrate This Christian office, and
thereby to Upbraid their Rulers for having destroyed the Lord of life; they
must infallibly have drawn upon themselves, not only certain Disturbance, but
certain Destruction. It was therefore absolutely necessary, to carry This office
to some Other place, wherein they might escape both eyes and hands of enemies:
And if there were Any to be found that emulated the Templ, as the Tradition did
the Sacrifice; That, above All other, might best pretend to the honor.

Our industrious Mede and Gregory have abundantly proved, that the Jews and
their Proselytes, in their greater houses, were careful to provide a large
upper room for Religious Exercises. Such was That, wherein our Lord instituted
This Sacrament, Such (if not the same) was That, wherein the eleven continued
with Mary, etc. in prayer and supplication, to the number of 120. Such That,
wherein Paul preached when Eutyches fell down from the third loft, etc.

These large Rooms were caled (...), because of their situation on the top of
the house, (...), either for the same reason, or for the Largeness of the
windows, and perhaps (...), because their amplitude, by the same (...), as the
fairest pile in a City is caled the Domo.

It was but Rational, that the Apostl's with their Disciples, finding it so far
from Safe, that it was not Possibl, to perform This office in the Temple,
should provide for their Quiet and Safety; and but Pious, that they should
choose such a Place as might com as near the Templ as possibl, both in Greatness
and Holiness.

This (...), we again find joined with the Templ, Act. 15. The Angel of the
Lord commanded the Apostl's to preach to the people in the Templ, verse. 20. And
in the last verse we find their obedience such, that daily in the Templ, and
[in every house] (if the Translation speak truth) they ceased not to teach and
preach Jesus Christ; But the Greek speaks as before. In conformity to the
Angels command, they preached to the people in the Templ, that they might
Convert the yet Unconverted; and they did the same and more in the (...), to
confirm those that were already Discipled.

Thus far we have found fair Probabilities: Now I add a Demonstration, not
heeded by the abovenamed Learned Authors. Hitherto we have found it in the
singular number, (...); but upon cogent reason we shall find it in the plural,
Acts 20.20. St. Paul having convened the Disciples of Asia, thus justifies
himself to them: I have kept back nothing from you, but have preached publikly,
and ((...) (which may now be more tolerably, though not exactly translated) from
house to house.

Now I demand any color of reason for this change of number, other than This
plain one: Asia was a large Province, There were Therein diverse Churches in
diverse Cities, and it was proper that every City should have it is proper (...);
and consequently, the Apostle must there preach, as from City to City, so from
House to House. But Jerusalem was no more than One, though perhaps greater than
two or three Cities: and required no more but One, so it were a great
Meeting House; and There, breaking of Bread might well be celebrated, (...), in
one Domo.

As certainly therefore as the Plural number signifies more than the Singular,
and a Large Provnice needs more Meeting Houses than a City, and the Apostl
changes numbers in conformity to the need; so certain it is, that the (...)
must signify such a House, as is appropriate to such a Meeting and such an
Exercise.

V. 4. THE TIME when this was do'n, is severally stated; one way for
Jerusalem, and another for remoter Churches.

1. At Jerusalem the Apostles and Brethren continued Daily in breaking of
bread, as well as in supplication and prayers: but it was not, could not be so
in other places.

Jerusalem was the Metropolis, There the Apostolik College kept their constant
residence; they deserted their Secular calings, devoting themselves entirely to
the propagation of the Gospel, preaching in that Mother-city, and thence
issuing their Emissaries and Orders to other Churches. There, all that believed
were together, and had all things common, sold their possessions and goods, and
parted them to all men as every man had need, Acts 2.45. and 4.35. This was no
more than necessary, that those who had nothing but their hands, might not be
compelled to employ them with their time for their bodily maintenance: and in
consequence hereof, when all the Believers were impoverished in Particular, and
their common stock spent, then must they be maintained by Contribution from
Other Churches, whom their Emissaries had converted to the same Faith,
receiving Carn I things in exchange for Spiritual things.

2. To These Churches therefore another life was necessary. Being to minister,
not only to their Own necessities, but to those of the now poor Saints at
Jerusalem, they were caled to Work as well as to Believ. To his Corinthians
our Apostle prescribes, that in what ever caling any man is caled, he therein
abide, (...), in Gods name; and to the Thessalonians, That if any one would not
Work, neither should he Eat.

Yet, as the poor Saints must have a Portion of their Goods, so must God have
of their Time: The Law had directed to the Seventh day. Upon that day they
Might, and they Did join with the Jews in their Sabbath Devotions in their
Synagogs, as the Apostls did at Jerusalem in the Templ: But for This holy
Supper, That Day was for the same reason no less unfit than That Templ.

What therefore we said of the necessity of another Place, is no less true
concerning another Day, necessary to be consecrated to this Anti-Jewish office.
And what Day more proper than the Next, not only nearest in Time, but superior
in Work? On the Seventh day God rested from his work of Creation, and fested
Himself in the complacency he receved from the vieu of its perfection. But upon
the First day, our Savior triumphed in the accomplishment of the to Him harder,
and to Us happier work of our Redemtion. And as this Office was to take it is
time after Reading, Preaching and Prayer (as we shall see more anon) so was it
congruos that it should succeed the Sabbath, consecrate by the Law to those
Offices.

The next day therefore, as every way fittest, is set apart for this Greater
Mystery, in memory of our Saviors Passion and Benefits. This we find expressly
declared, Act. 20.7. Upon the First day of the week the Disciples came together
to break bread, (...), for breaking breads sake.

And for this reason was it styled the Lords day, as appropriate to the honor
of His Person, Rev. 1.10. And in aftertimes, the day of Bread. Chrysostom. Hom.
5. De Resurrect.

And since we cannot better manifest our Love to him, than by charity to his
members; and this Supper was both an Emblem and a Means of mutual Love;
therefore must it be attended with Liberality to the Poor, recommended
specially at this time by our Apostl to the Corinthians, as before to his
Galatians; exhorting; that Upon the First day of the week, every one should lay
by in store as God had prospered him, 1 Corin. 16.1, 2.

And for this constantly attending Offertories sake, no less than for the
influence they had in promoting mutual love among the Communicants, were these
styled Fests of charity; under which character St. Jude mentions them, as the
ordinary exercise of all visible Members of the Church, which else had not be'n
so obnoxious to the Spots he complains of. Yet so incorrigibl was the General
sensuality, that by Tertullians time they were relapsed into the same
profaneness, with that reproved in the Corinthians: the Fests forgot their
relation to the Lords Supper, and a while after, were banished out of his
Church.

For some Ages did the now dead Sabbath ly in state, not as still in force by
virtue of the Law, which it self was dead, but in charity to the Jews; in order
to whose more probable conversion, Christians complied with them, as far as
lawfully and conveniently they Might; and they Might so, in All offices of
Natural religion, as in their Templ, so on their Sabbath, though the Sanctity of
Both were equally abolished.

But with This difference, that the (...) were without any Positive Command,
honored by the Jews as so many Chapels of ease, even while the Mother-templ
stood, and therefore were not by the Apostl's first consecrate to this office;
But the Lords day was never sanctified by the Jews, nor upon any other account
by the Apostls, but adaequately for this Duties sake, which gave it both
Holiness and Name, nor as Successor, but Superior to the Sabbath. And this is
worthy our consideration, not only for the Sacrament's sake, but the Day's too.

VI. FOR to derive the LORDS DAY from the fourth Commandment, as it is
Inconvenient upon other accounts, so is it Mischievous upon This; that it
looseneth its relation to This office, for who is sake alone it was dignified,
as with the assemblies of the Saints, so with it is title of the Lord's day: Nor
is such an opinion consistent with the practice of the Primitive Church, which
for several ages celebrated Both; the One for the Jews sake, the Other for the
Sacraments, which therefore we ought to celebrate as constantly (at least) as we
do That day; which cannot be duly (because it needs not all) be sanctified
without it.

Were this as carefully heeded, as in Scripture it is plainly declared, in
Reason duly accounted for, and in the Primitive times publikly practiced; both
the Lords Day, and His Supper, would have escaped Those Losses, which Both of
them suffer by their separation; the One robbed of it is greatest Honor, the
Other of its very Being.

For as it is higher Honor to the Day, to be acknowledged an Evangelical
Substance, than a Legal Shadow, and to be celebrated with this office, than
without it; so is it not only Less Honorable, but More Destructive to this Holy
office, to be spoiled both of the acknowledgement due to it, from the Day so
preferred by it is interest, and of Safety from that Neglect, which could never
have befallen it, while the Day it self is sanctified, if that Sanctification
were acknowledged to relate to this Performance.

Those therefore who ar zelos for the honor of the Day, are for it is sake
obliged to consider, whether any Sport, or any Lrbor, can be so pernicious a
desecration of it; as the Omission of this Sacrament, who is celebration was the
sole reason of the sacredness, both of the Day it self, and of its Eve; which
of the two has the greater interest in the Fourth Commandment, as being the
same Seventh day which Gods peopl celebrated, as thereby consecrated; yet had
not retained any difference under the Gospel from common days, but in order to
the better preparation for the Sacrament, to be receved the Lords day
following, and upon That account differenced not by Festing, but by Fasting.

And since necessity may drive to Mean condescensions I beg now, not only for
the Lord's sake, but for the Lord's day's sake, for That day's sake, in who is
behalf so many complaints ar made, not only To our Governors, but Against them:
I beg that those who ar so zealous to have the Day restored to its due honor,
would do their part to restore this Sacrament to its due celebration; whereby
the Lord's Day, with his Person, would be better righted, than by Sabbatizing
with Rigot more than Jewish, but with Worship less than Christian.

Let us now spell all together. The Exercises accompanying this constant
breaking of Bread, Were they not Holy? The Phrase expressing This exercise, Is
it not proper? The Place, Was it not consecrated before? The Time, Was it not
consecrated purposely? What then can be answered to the Apostls demand, The
bread which they brake, was it not the Communion of the body of Christ? Or to
Our inference? that they were as constant in the Holy Communion, as in Common
Prayer.

CHAP. VI. The Practice of Antiquity.
I. The constant Practice of Christ's Church in it is best ages, proved by one
evidence of each kind. viz. 1. Canon, the 9th Apostolik. II. 2. One Father,
Justin Martyr. 3. One Historian, Socrates. The Church of Rome under pretense of
Tradition, innovated against the Church Universal. III. 4. Enemies of each
kind. 1. Protestants. IV. 2. Papists. V. 3. Junior Fathers, particularly St.
Augustine, whose words are recited, wherein we must distinguish between Father
and Doctor. As Father he stateth the question. The question and the practice of
the Church both in Doctrine and Discipline, very different beeween St.
Augustin's time and Ours. VI. As a Doctor he determins the question. 1. His
style very different, because his Opinion is opposite to all other Fathers. 2.
His determination reaches not Our question. Yet have later ages caght at his
wonds, and strained them beyond his intentions, with unhappy success. His
Syncretism rectified.

FROM Scripture, I am now to descend to Humane Writers, to examine whether by
Them we find the Practice of the Primitive Churches agreeable to That of the
Apostls.

I. AND now I feel something like a Tentation, to employ my Servitor to collect
what the Fathers (the Eldest especially) have written on This subject; and then
stifling my Reader with a multitude of Quotations, purchase my self at Both
their costs, the name of Well read in the Fathers and Councils, etc.

But courage, Reader! I have no more such a Design, than my Subject such Need:
Where none contradicts, One competent witness of Each kind, may very well claim
the belief of any indifferent person: and with More I will not troubl you. I
shall therefore produce but One ancient Canon, One Father, One Historian, and
One Enemy, of each party.

1. Of CANONS, I account Those most Ancient, which have usurped the title of
Apostolical, though many of them bewray themselves unworthy of it. We have
reasons more than enough to decline their Authority, but None to except against
Their Testimony concerning Matter of Fact, such as is the Publik practice of the
Visibl Church, at the Time of their Date; which is Therefore certainly Ancient,
because not certainly known, since having no Council to father them, they must
needs be elder than Any. Of Those Canons, the 9th thus briefly and plainly
delivers the opinion we are pleading for. All the faithful which enter the
Church, and hear the Scriptures, but do not stay out the Prayers, nor receve
the Holy Communion, ought to be excommunicate, as disturbers of the Church.

To This so clear evidence I know nothing capabl of being opposed, unless
(perhaps) the word [faithful] be supposed to exclude All, but such as deserv
the highest sens of That title.

But it is sufficiently known, that That comprehensive word contains All but
Catechumens and Penitens: All others as visibl Members of Christ's Body, being
in Those days honored with That style.

And that it signifies no otherwise Here, the words themselves sufficiently
evince: For This title is allowed to Those very Persons, who at the same time
ar censured as worthy of Excommunication.

Nor can the Last clause be taken so copulatively, as if Those passed
uncensured who stayed out Prayers, though they receved not the Holy Communion:
For This was looked upon as the greater crime of the Two. The Councils of
Antioch and Bracara, required that such should be driven out of the Church: and
St. Chrysostom bitterly chides them, saying, If thou stand by and do not
Communicate, thou art wicked, thou art shameless, thou art impudent: And we
shall presently see, that none could stay out the Prayers, but they must be at
least bystanders at the Communion.

Or if any thought to avoid them Both, they were not thereby excused, as appears
in the case of the Alexandrians: for when many of them after reading of the
Gospel went away, John, surnamed the Alms-giver, then Patriarch, followed them
out of the Church, sharply reproving them, telling them, He came to administer
the Eucharist to them, and never giving over his importunity, till he brought
them back to the Holy Table.

Even those who were go'n out of the Church as resolved not to Communicate, and
therefore certainly both Unprepared and Unworthy, did he promiscuously even
compel.

And This zele of so Eminent a Prelate, might I vouch as my second Topik, since
he cannot be denied the title of a Father of the Church.

But I urge not This (however Venerable) Authority, further than as Expositor
of the true meaning of the now mentioned Canon; since by the shifts the People
made to avoid the Letter, by not [staying out Prayers] and the importunity the
good Prelate used, to recall them both to Prayers and Communion; we may best
Avoid any Evasions, that our Modern Teachers may use, who in Reverence to the
Sacrament fright the vulgar from it, and Justify my self in my professed
endeavor to compel them to it.

And from the first Testimony thus cleared, I com to

II. 2. ANcient FATHERS, among whom Justin Martyr shines with great luster. He
flourished in the midl of the Second Century, and is so Clear and so Particular,
that his words may serve as well to Describe, as to Prove the Practice of Those
days, consonant to the Apostls.

This excellent Father having before described the other Sacrament, and to its
Description added (what the Church constantly did to its Celebration) That of
the Lords Supper: proceeding afterward to giv a Several account of This, he
thus reports its Constant Revolution.

And That day which is caled [Sunday] there is a meeting of all that dwell in
Town and Country, and the Reader having do'n his office, the President makes an
Oration, wherein he exhorts the people to imitate such goodly things. Then we
all rise and pray, and (as I have said) at the end of prayers, Bread, Wine and
Water are brought forth, and the Prefect again pours out with all his might
Prayers and Praises, and the people answers aloud, Amen. And there is a
distribution and communication made of those things, over which thanks have
be'n given, to every one that is present, but to the absent it is sent by the
Deacons. But those that are wealthy and willing, contribute what they see good,
etc.

These words do so exactly suit the Practice of the Church to her above-recited
Censure, that I know not what Light can be Added, or what Evasion Pretended, if
we consider how expressly they declare,

1. That this was Every Sundays exercise. And that it was not confined to the
Sunday, appears by what he had said before in the description of the Other
Sacrament, whereof he made This a certain attendant, without declaring that it
was do'n only upon Sundays.

2. Every Christian was thought obliged to Communicate [every Sunday at least]
because the Church Officers were appointed to carry the Holy Supper even to the
Absent.

3. They mingled Water with the Wine; This we may very reasonably believ to
have be'n do'n in Conformity to the Jewish Tradition; which forbids the Cup
of blessing to be otherwise celebrated.

For so the Misna in Berachoth ends the 7th Chap. (...) They bless not for
the Wine, until Water be put to it: This Action they call (...) the Mingling of
the Cup, as they do the other, the Breaking of the Bread.

3. The third sort of testimony promised was an HISTORIAN. I might plead
performance of That promise, by the now recited words of Justin, reporting
Matter of Fact. But that you may see this was no short lived practice, I shall
further offer you the testimony of a professed Historian, that wrote about the
midl of the fifth Century: Socrates in lib. 5. cap. 21. describing the
differences between several Churches in their Rites, thus speaks concerning
the Subject now in question.

Although All Churches All the world over, in every week on the Sabbath day
celebrate the Communion, yet the Alexandrians and Romans, upon an ancient
Tradition refuse so to do. But the Egyptians which dwell near Alexandria and in
Thebais, celebrate also the Communion on the Sabbath, but receve it not after
the manner of other Christians; for after they have Fested, and filled
themselves with sundry meats, in the Evening making the Offering they
Communicate in the Mysteries.

Behold here a Testimony as full and as clear as can be expected from an
Historian, yea from a Witness: for he nether speaks by hearsay, nor
transcribeth other men's Writings of former ages, but reports what himself
certainly knew, of the Universal practice of the whole Christian World at the
time of his Writing. And for our better satisfaction, let us consider,

1. That He should say the Sabbath was the day of Celebration, whereas Justin
Martyr puts it upon the Sunday, can make no objection: The analogy between them
having given the One the name of the Other in our own days.

2. Whereas the Egyptians Fested first, and Communicated in the Evening after
they had Fested themselves, this may well be taken for a continuation of the
Primitive practice in their Fests of Charity, banished at That time out of
other Churches, because of the abuses they suffered from the Intemperance of
the Peopl.

3. Concerning the singularity of the Roman Church.

1. It is not hard to reconcile Socrates with St. Hierom, who says, That in
His days there remained plain footsteps of daily Communions in That Church;
which also continues true in Our days, without any contradiction to our
Historian: She has still evident Footsteps of more than Daily Communions, yet
no Face of so much as Weekly; It seems that even in Socrates's days they had
put it in Maskerade.

2. We see what right That Church has to ingross the title of Catholic: It is
one contradiction to confine so large a Word to any One part of the World; and
it is a Greater to confine it to That part which was singular, as differing
from All besides the Alexandrian Church.

3. We find what pretense that Church has to equal her Traditions with the
Scripture, since Universality is essential to a Tradition, and here she
pretends One unknown to the whole Christian World. But most pertinently to
our present purpose,

4. We see whence we are to derive the neglect of Weekly Communions: When the
Roman Church got the Power to impose her own Singularities upon All other, the
Ambition to usurp the title of Catholic, as if she were not only the Head but
the Whole, and the Confidence to set up her Inventions as authentik Traditions;
then must the Universal Practice of All the Christian World be swallowed up,
and our Lord's Institution be lost in a private Tradition, and an unintelligibl
Mass: but in the Beginning it was not so.

5. The result of all is, That the Doctrine of liberty from obligation to
constancy in the Lords Supper, is Popery most properly so caled, both in the
Matter, and the Derivation; in the Matter, as differing from the Church
Universal; in the Derivation, as proceeding from no pretense of Scripture (at
first, though it be otherwise now) but from Tradition of their own making,
contrary to Tradition worthily so caled, and Scripture carefully examined.

Whoever therefore desires a Thorogh Reformation from Popery and Popish
Superstitions, let him not spend his zele about litl Ceremonies and
Circumstances, but employ it in service of the most Sacred and most properly
Christian office, which needs be rescued from utter abolition by the Practices
of Rome, never more grossly superstitious than in This Subject.

III. 4. THE Fourth sort of Testimony is That of ENEMIES. Those that appear
such to the Constancy we assert, may be reduced to one of these three Glasses,
viz. 1. Protestants. 2. Papists. 3. Junior Fathers.

Among PROTESTANTS, and Abov all others I therefore apply my self to the
excellent person above praised, because I know no other that has asserted any
thing so distinctly as to be capabl of an answer.

This admirable Person finding the Evidence of the best Antiquity, That of the
Apostl's and Primitive Fathers undeniable, endeavoreth to Evade what he finds
necessary to Confess.

1. Concerning the Former we have heard him say, True it is, the Apostls did
indefinitely admit all the faithful to the Holy Communion, but they were
persons wholely enflamed with those Holy Fire, which Jesus Christ sent from
Heaven to make them burning and shining Lights, etc. And then he spends a whole
Page in such a Character as one might think intended for the Apostls
themselves, did not the question necessarily cast it upon the Faithful: and
then too, one might think that word must be taken in its most rigid sens for
the Elect.

But was there a Judas among the twelve chosen by our Lord himself, and not One
unworthy among the thousands of Disciples, whom the Apostls [indefinitely]
admitted? St. Jude describes not Such Saints (sure) where, among other black
characters, he brandeth them with This, that they are spots in their fests of
charity; and as litl does he blame the officers of the Church for admitting
them.

St. Paul too (I take it) does not describe Saintly conversation in those
Church meetings, for whose debaucheries he reproves, not the Pastors for
Admitting such Persons, but the Peopl for Committing such Leudness; yea, and So
reproves them, as not to Excommunicate them for their domestik riots, but to
require them (however unworthy in their persons) to come, but in a manner more
worthy.

Had the Scriptures be'n silent, we must have be'n very tame, if without any
evidence we had believed; that All Christians, in that (better then Golden)
age, deserved so great an Eulogy: but after such contrary Evidence, we have
nothing better to do, than to pity such an excellent Person, so enslaved and
hardly used by an Opinion, that puts him to seek (but allows him no)
shifts from such insupportabl Evidence.

Another Confession (with its annexed Evasion) concerns the Ancient Fathers in
these words.

St. Hierom and St. Augustine tells us, That even until their days, the custom
of receving every day remained in the Churches of Rome and Spain, And all the
ancient Fathers exhort to a frequent Communion: But just as Physicians exhort
men to eat the best and heartiest meats; not the sickly and faint, but the
strong men and the healthy.

All the ancient Fathers exhort to a frequent Communion. This is more than can
well stand with his own positions, which discorage the generality from it: yet
falls as much short of truth, as Frequent does of Constant: for we shall
presently meet some of them exhorting not only to Frequent but Daily Communions.

Yea, so certainly did the Primitive Christians make This not only their
Constant but their Principal exercise in All their meetings, that (...) which
primarily signifies no more than a Meeting, became the diverbial word for the
Lords Supper; in exact conformity to St. Luke's style, who says They meet to
break bread: and the footsteps of the phrase remain as plain, yet as much
corrupted, as do those of the Office, among the Romanists, who express their
Church-meetings by Going to Mass. As certainly therefore as the Papists make the
Mass the Principal exercise of their Publik worship, so certainly did the
Primitive Christians make the Lords Supper the principal of Theirs; the very
phrase confirming their express testimony of this truth.

They exhort men he confesses, but evades the consequence by adding, they do
it Just as Physicians, etc. whereas it is undeniable, that They exhorted, as
the Apostls admitted, All Indefinitely; and until we are shown that they
excepted any, besides Catechumens and Excommunicates; we must not clip their
indefinite Exhortations, with unwarrantable Limitations, derived from no other
reason but their serviceableness to our Hypothesis.

IV. ANOTHER Class of Adversaries ar the Papists, who yet no less manifestly
Preserv, than Contradict, the Primitive Practice; For That very Church which
obliges not the Peopl to receve, but at Easter only, That very Church in whose
magnified Synod at Trent, a Caveat was entered, not to derive even That
anniversary obligation from our Lords, but the Churches command; That very
Church, to This very day, so Prescribes, as to Outdo the constancy of the
Primitive.

Some may think it too much, that I have from the Acts of the holy Apostles,
taken the Lords Supper for the reason of the Disciples meetings the first day
of the week. But none (sure) can doubt, that with the Papist [to go to Church]
signifies the same, as [to go to Mass] but to go to [Hear Mass] is such an
errand as the first ages never went upon.

While they admit the people only to hear or see, Their [Hoc est corpus meum]
is an egregiosly; and Both words of St. Paul may be applied to such a Mass. To
the people belongs [This is not to eat the Lords Supper.] To the Priest, As
often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, you show forth the Lords
death.] And both the One and the Other forsake their Duty and their Pattern,
while they pretend to stick to them.

Thus the ruins of a beautiful Structure may at once evidence its amplitude,
and confess their own rubbidge, no way answerable to the beauty it formerly
served.

We need not therefore be ashamed of this kind of proof, as if we too much
honored the Church of Rome, in owning her Practice for an evidence of the
Primitive. We take it, not as the Testimony of the Honorable, but as a
Confession of the Guilty, when we make use of their Own words as an evidence
against the Speakers practice.

When we say every Mass ought to be a Communion, what do we more plainly, than
condemn the Private ones, as carrying a Contradiction in the very Terms; and
the Publik ones, as carrying One or More in their Performance: For they plainly
contradict both the word [Communion] when there are no Communicants; and our
Lords Command, while in One Element they Dispense, and in the Other Prohibit
what He commanded.

Yet still they do well in the Thing, though ill in the Manner; in this very
particular deserving to be owned a true, though corrupt Church.

V. 3. AND what if we now reckon the Junior Fathers among our Adversaries; yea,
Those very Fathers by name, whom we but now found vouched, as telling us, That
the custom of daily Communions continued in some Churches until their days?

What such Fathers, or other credible Writers, say of the Doctrines or Customs
of the Churches of Christ in their own days, we think our selves obliged to
believe upon their credit. And upon that account we doubt not, but This custom
of daily Communicating, who is footsteps remained in Those times wherein they
wrote, was derived as Catholic from the preceding: and if themselves Depart or
Detract from what they have so witnessed to be Catholic, what can we do better,
than distinguish the Doctor from the Father, and judge his Opinion by his
Testimony.

Whether St. Augustine have so do'n, and consequently how far his authority is
to sway us in the present Question, we cannot take a better way to find, than
by transcribing his own words; the consequences whereof, were he alive to see,
he would doubtless lament.

His Discourse is in his 118th Epistle, in these words among others. Some will
say that the Eucharist is not to be receved every day: If you ask why? he tells
you, because some days ar to be chosen, in which a man may live more purely and
continently, that so he may com to so great a Sacrament more worthily; because
he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself. On
the other side another says, If thou have received so great a wound, and
contracted so violent a disease, that such remedies ar to be deferred: every
such man ought, by the Authority of the Bishop, to be removed from the Altar,
and put to penance, and by the same authority be reconciled. For this is to
receve unworthily; Then to receve when a man should be doing penance, and not
according to his own pleasure offer himself to, or withdraw himself from the
Communion. But if his sins be not so great, as to deserve Excommunication, he
ought not to separate himself from the daily Medicine of the Lords Body.
Between those possibly a man may determine the question better, if he
admonishes that men should abide in the peace of Christ. But let every one do
what according to his Faith he piosly believes ought to be do'n. For neither of
them dishonors the Body and Blood of the Lord, if they in their several ways
contend who shall most honor the most holy Sacrament. For Zacheus and the
Centurion did not prefer themselves before one another, when one receved Christ
into his house, and the other said, he was not worthy to receve him under his
roof.

That by this Discourse we may undarstand what was St. Augustin's Opinion, and
how far we are to be determined by it, it will be requisite that we consider.

1. The State of the Question. And 2ly, His Determination of it.

1. In Stating the Question, we are to observe. 1. The Question it self. And
secondly, The Practice of the Church at That time.

1. The Question it self is extremely different from Ours: So different, that
we may very well subscribe to the Fathers determination. It is, Whether the
Eucharist be to be receved EVERY DAY, or some days to be chosen wherein a man
may live more purely, etc.

Now we pretend not to EVERY DAY: But believ that the Lords day was purposely
consecrate, and afterward other holy days were added, and that every such day
has its (...), set aside to the purpose expressed by St. Augustine, That a man
may therein live more purely and continently, that so he may come more worthily
to so great a Sacrament.

If therefore This great Fathers Arbitration which was bounded to Every day, be
stretched to the modern Question which exceeds All bounds; nothing will be so
questionable as This, Whether the injury we do the Fathers Discurs, or That we
do our Lord's Institution, be the greater of the two?

2. The Practice of the Church for which the Question was calculated, was
extremely different from Ours: and That in two respects.

1. In point of Worship. For at Thar time the Holy Communion was daily
administered by the Priests (at least in great Cities) and daily received by the
devouter part of the peopl. Some (says St. Augustine himself) Daily communicate
in the body and blood of the Lord, some receve upon certain days: in some
places it is offered every day without intermission, in some only upon the
Sabbath and the Lords day, in some upon the Lord's day only.

2. In the point of Discipline, which in Those days excluded the most
scandalous both from the Communion and publik Prayers: but This by the sentence
of the Bishop.

This, as it is plainly intimated in St. Augustin's above-recited words, so is
it more plainly expressed by St. Chrysostom in These words, Art thou not worthy
of the Sacrament nor Communion? thou art not then worthy of Prayer. Thou
hear the officer standing and proclaiming, Whoever of you are in Penance, be
go'n. If thou be one of those that are in Penance, thou must not communicate:
For he that does not communicate, is in Penance. Why then does he say, Be go'n
you that cannot pray, and thou impudently stand by, and art not such, but
one of them that can communicate?

In which words of St. Chrysostom, two things appear very considerable.

1. That those who were excluded from the Holy Communion, were no less so from
publik Prayer, which by the above-recited account of Justin Martyr, began at
the Communion Service.

2. That it was not left to every man's private Caprice or Conscience, to Com or
Forbear: But every one must com, if he were not under Penance by the Bishops
sentence.

VI. HITHERTO we have heard St. Augustine as a Father, discursing in the Early
style a uestion suitable to his own time. We are now to hear him as a Doctor,
determining the Question by his own Reason. And we are to observe. 1. The style
he speaks in. And 2. The Determination he gives.

1. His style is not definitive. Does not give his Sentence, but his Opinion;
yea, not his settled Opinion, but his staggering unfledged Sentiments: Does not
Impose upon our Belief, but Propose to our Examination: Between these (says
he) possibly a man determine, i. e. No man has yet so determined, nor can I
say that any man may, but I offer it to consideration.

In This he speaks most like a Father, that he confesses himself Not to
speak like one, as not declaring the Doctrine of the Church, but his own
Private Thoghts, and that how modestly! how diffidently! how contrary to his
style in other cases!

This is not the Only Doctrine, wherein he took the boldness to depart from the
Opinions of his predecessors: and in those cases he expressed himself with
confidence sufficiently; why so timoros now?

The Reason is as plain as the change. In the Other Questions they had not
declared their minds plainly; in this they had do'n it not only Plainly but
Zelously.

St. Cyprian had said, This bread we crave to have EVERY DAY given us, lest we
who are in Christ, and daily receve the Sacrament for the food of Salvation, by
interposing of any grievos crime, while restrained and not communicating, we are
forbidden the Heavenly bread, we should be separated from the body of Christ.

St. Basil had said, (...), etc. To communicate the body and blood of Christ
EVERY DAY, is good and most profitable, seeing himself plainly says, He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life: now then, who can
doubt, but that often to partake of the life, is nothing else, but often to
live.

St. Ambrose had said, If the Eucharistical bread be daily offered, why do
thou receve it after a Year, as the Greekt do in the East? Receve That EVERY
DAY which may profit thee every day. So live, that thou may deserv to receve
every day; He that deserves not to receve every day, deserves not to receve
after a year, etc.

Saint Chrysostom complained, (...), in vain is the DAILY sacrifice, etc.

So express and so earnest we see were the Exhortations of other Fathers, both
Before and In St. Augustin's time, that as they gave him sufficient reason to
be diffident in declaring his own contrary opinion, so do they Us, to except
against it, as singular and out-voted by his equals, if it prejudice the Truth
we have engaged to assert: which whether it do or not, we are to judge by his
Determination, wherein we are to observe, 1. His Design. 2. His way of ferving it.

1. His Design in determining this Question, is the same with that of the whole
Epistl: which is, to persuade compliance in matter of worship.

The Peace of Christ is dearer to him than his Supper it self which is to serve
it: and therefore oght principally to be regarded, though with it is diminution.

Rectius inter eos fortasse quisquam dirimit litem qui monet ut praecipue in
Christi pace permaneant.

And to This only purpose does he bring his instance of Zacheus and the
Centurion. Neque enim litigaverunt inter se aut quisquam eorum se alteri
praeposuit. He does not pretend by their Exampls to determine the Question, but
the Quarrel.

2. His Way to serve this good end, is by a toleration that every one should do
what he thinks best: which he encorageth with This reason, that nether of
them dishonoreth the body of Christ, if saluberrimum Sacramentum certatim
honorare contendunt.

In which last words the good Father may seem to unty the obligation I have so
much contended for. For if every one may do what he thinks best; if He do not
dishonor the body and blood of Christ, who striveth to honor the Sacrament by
forbearance, in sens of his unworthiness; then cannot our obligation to
constancy be indispensibl, but our selves ar judges of what is best.

Upon This Authority of so great a Father, so confirmed with pios reason, have
following ages proceeded to the modern way of honoring the Lords Supper. Having
learned to balance Reverence against Performance; to make the former the more
weighty, they have loaded it with so many doubts and difficulties, that he must
be both very good and very confident, who will not prefer the Centurions safe
and easy complement, before Zacheus's costly and troublesome entertainment.
Thus while every one chooses to excuse himself as unworthy that Christ should
come under his roof, He may complain that he has not where to lay his head:
And All, or at least much of this proceeding from the too much valuing and too
little considering the good Fathers words, I thought to rescue both the Truth
and Him from so great and unhappy a mistake.

For as These words will not Require, so will not his other writing Permit,
that we should list Him among our Adversaries; He that caled as loud as any
other Father, He that so earnestly expostulated with the desertors of the Holy
Sacrament, saying, What is the reason, O hearers, that ye see the Table and
come not to the banquet? He certainly did not intend to furnish his hearers
with an excuse, that they did what they thought best, upon the same reason as
did the Centurion.

Nor can we easily so mistake, if we regard either the case, or his very words:
Inter Eos, and Neuter Eorum, restrain his determination to Those two parties
between whom he professes to arbitrate, who both of them might plead such good
precedents as might entitle them to toleration at least. One thinks it best
to communicate Every day, Another thinks it better to do it only upon some
certain days: The Former voucheth the Apostls and the Jerusalem Church, who
continued Daily in breaking of Bread, as well as in Prayer: The Later, the
Provincial Churches who met the First day of the week to break Bread.

But how wide is this from our Question, wherein One thinks himself obliged
to receive the Holy Sacrament as often as it is offered; and another thinks
himself free to take or refuse it as often as he thinks fit.

Whether the good Father would have determined This Question, Inter Nos, in the
same manner as he did That Inter Eos, is not so apparent, as it is, that his
Instance can here have no place.

Zacheus had a Command from our Lord to come down and entertene him at his
house: he did so, and honored him by the forwardness of his Obedience: The
Centurion had no such command* and he honored Him by the humility of his
excuse. Had Zacheus receved no such command, who knows but he might have
excused himself as did the Centurion? Had the Centurion receved such a command,
who knows but he would have receved our Lord with the same alacrity as did
Zacheus? Had he not, his own instance of his servants obedience must have
condemned him.

Both of them honored our Lord, but Both cannot be imitated by Us. For either
with Zacheus we have a Command, or with the Centurion we have None.

That we have none to receve the Lords Supper EVERY DAY, we willingly
acknowledge, and thereby submit to St. Augustin's determination: But whether we
have one to receve it as often as it is celebrated, that we may understand, we
must proceed to examine, The word of Command, DO.

PART III. Concerning the word DO.
CHAP. I. We must answer such a Command no otherwise but by Performance.
I. The cause of our disobedience to This Command, too much Fear. II. We may
not commuse Doing for any other service. III. The Reason why some think best not
to do this often, and their appeal to the Church of England. IV. The Church
vindicated. V. The two opposite opinions personated. The University Statutes the
best comment upon the Churches Rubrike. The Greek Church in great Churches
celebrateth the Holy Communion every Sunday and Holy day. VI. Those who omit
the Communion it self, greater Non-conformists, than those who neglect the
Communion Service.

WHAT is meant by DO when joined (as here) with its Object; one would not think
so hard to Understand, as to Mistake. The force of the Imperative mode is so
known to every litl Boy, that it is strange Doctors should miss it: nor could
they, had they not be'n misled by the sound of Those unhappy words, which I
hope now sufficiently appear designed to an office contrary to that rhey have
so long be'n abused in.

If they are not to be a Defaisance but Inforcement, then will the Command be
for the Form as Absolute, and Intelligibl; for the Matter, as Serviceabl to the
ends intended; and every way as Obliging, as the greatest Care, joined with
indisputable Authority, can possibly render Any.

But it is the singular infelicity of This only command, to be Disobeyed out of
too much Regard. We think our selves unworthy to Do This: and ar therefore
willing to believ we Do better than This, if we pay not Obedience in kind; but
by some liberal Commutation, make the Command a gainer, and our Selves secure.

An error, so much the more Excusabl, because Natural; Fear of the Divine
presence, is as much Original, and consequently as Universal, as Sin against
it. Never were the Israelites so heartily obedient to Any law of God, as to
That which commanded them to keep Distance from the terribl Mount where his
Presence appeared.

They were so willing to forbear Touching, that they would keep out of Hearing;
Speak thou with us (said they to Moses) and we will hear, but let not God speak
to us lest we die.

Yea, not only the common people, and upon such terrible appearances, but even
the best servants of God, and upon his most gracious visits, have be'n frighted
at his Presence. The best Prophets fell down at the appearance of a good Angel,
and though the Godhead doubl-veled it self in Flesh and Poverty, that Humility
added to Humanity might prevent our dazeling; yet when the glory of his
Divinity brake through, and shined in his Miracles, even those who rejoiced in
the Benefit, feared the Benefactor.

The Centurion, even when he prayed that his Power and Goodness would bless his
house, deprecated his Presence. When Peter had gained a miraculous draght of
Fishes, the acknowledgement he paid was a Prayer, That the Lord would depart
from him. And the Gadarens (who suffer more in their Reputation, than they did
in their Swine) fell to the same prayer; not more in sens of their Loss, than
Peter did in that of his Gain; but both of them in contrary circumstances, were
frighted at the same sens of their unworthiness.

Were we as uncharitable to our Desertors of the Lords Supper, as we generally
are to the Gadarenes; we might censure their Absence, as the effect of their
Covetousness. Possibly, some may fear the Offertory more than their
Unworthiness, but (sure) they must be very Few.

We must needs believ, most men's departure from Christ, to be the issu of the
Same Fear, but not so excusable as that of Peter and the Centurion: For if the
same Peter had really forsaken Christ, when he receved his Command to follow
him; or if the same Centurion had receved the same command with Zacheus, and
denied obedience to it; Peter must have had his portion with Judas, and the
Centurion with the inhospitabl Samaritans.

II. AND this is our present case [Do this] is no less Imperative to us, than
[Follow thou me] was to Peter; or [com down to entertene me] was to Zacheus. It
leav's us not at liberty to do Any thing else in stead of This. We may as litl
Commute, as Omit the performance, when the Word of command points out as well
the Object as the Act.

Had our Lord said, Honor this, or Contemplate this, or Admire this, or Adore
this, or Dread this, etc. Had he left to our choice, whether we would pay in
Kind or in Value: we must needs have justified the Christian World, not only
for a Just paymaster but a Liberal benefactor. So industriosly have men taxed
All their Faculties, for an ample Contribution; their Inventions, for
Mysteries; their Fancies, for Allusions; their Severity, for Conditions; their
Affections, for Ardor: I wish they had moderated that ardor, not permitted it
to break out into devouring Flames, to destroy such multitudes, merely because
they could not translate [Do this] into [Worship this.]

Strange! that in a command so Positive and so Plain, the Teachers themselves
should no better have learned what That means, To obey is better than
Sacrifice. And I know not which may claim more of our admiration, the strange
Agreement among the otherwise most irreconcilable Sects of Christians, in
their joint resolution to Commute; or the strange Difference in the Sacrifices
they bring, for Recompense to the piosly injured Command.

I pass by the Papists, who commute Obedience to This command, into
Disobedience to Another; paying forbidden Adoration, instead of commanded
Eating; and the Non-conformists, who in stead of Obedience to our Lord, pay
Disobedience to his Officers, refusing to Do this, lest they should do it in
Circumstances, for This only reason to be Shunned by themselves, because
Required by their Governors.

I ass by Both These, and All Others, but Those of our Own (I wish I could call
it) Communion; who owning the Command of our Lord, and the Authority of our
Church; professing conformity to Both, disobey the Command in its own Defense,
and shelter themselves under the protection of the Church, pretending her to
have declared three times in a year, sufficient; and therefore more than Three
times, needless.

Had they appeled to St. Augustine, they had met some sound of words, that by
help of Inferences, might have afforded them some color. He did (indeed) first
hang up the scales between these contrary ways of honoring our Lord, and left
the Centurion aequilibrate to Zacheus.

But now almost all the weight is taken out of the One scale, and cast into the
Other; the Obligation to the performance made so Light, and the Conditions of
worthiness so Heavy, that it is Now questioned, Not whether we are to receve
Every day? but Any day? And what St. Augustine thought not Possibl to be
questioned, is now too Generally believed; viz. that there must be a choice,
not only of some Days, but some Persons above Others.

Concerning the required worthiness of Persons, I shall meet a fitter time to
speak more fully: I am now to enquire concerning Times, whether we are obliged
to take All? or Any? or Few? or Many?

In which Question, we are grow'n very much bolder than St. Augustine; He
Questioned, but durst not Determine between Every day and Some days: we boldly
Determine against Daily, yea Weekly, yea Monthly Communions; but stablish not
Any at all.

III. IT is manifest (say some) that Scarceity advances, and Plenty abateth the
valu of every thing. Those acts of worship which are Frequently, are also
Slightly performed; and since we cannot keep Both, we were better quit
Frequence than Reverence. For we shall more honor our Lord by doing this more
Reverently though less Frequently, Than more Frequently with less Reverence.

And in confirmation hereof, they vouch not only Experience, which shows that
Those very persons, who strained hard to enjoy the Common Prayer, when it was
not to be had without difficulty, contemn it, now it is truly Common: but (as
we com now from saying) the Authority of our Church too, as satisfied with
[three times in a year.]

This is their Opinion, and thus they defend it. It were heartily to be wished
that the Antecedent were as falls as the Consequent is weak: That there were as
litl Truth in the alleged contemt of Common Prayer, as there is Reason thence
to be draw'n against making the Communion common as That.

And it were further to be wished, that those who thus pretend to hear the
Church, would better consider her declared Judgment.

But This conceit, grave as it looks, with its countenance of Piety and
Prudence, we have found to be the very same with that in the Corinthians,
against which the Apostle leveleth his whole Argument: And plausibl as it
looks, with its Countenance of Conformity to the Church, we shall find it more
guilty of Nonconformity, than what is by its patrons condemned as such: And so
much the more injurious to the Church, because it does not only rob her of het
Authority, but her Innocence; as making her Accessory to the disobedience she
condemns.

And since I ow a duty to the Church, as well as to the Question, I shall not
proceed further, 'till I have vindicated Her from so great Suspicion, and This
from so great a Prejudice, as by This pretense they suffer.

IV. CONCERNING the sens of our Church in this Question, it is strange that
there should be any Doubt, much more that there should be any Error, so plainly
does she declare it in her Offices and Rubriks relating to this Sacrament:
preparatory whereto, she has provided two Exhortations; the One showing the
danger of Unworthiness, the Other of Forbearance: answering the doubl charge of
the Apostl, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat.

I doubt this is News to Them who most are concerned in it. For if they had
do'n the Church and Themselves the right, to Read and Consider That Exhortation,
which she has appointed to be read when the Minister shall see the peopl
negligent to come; they must needs be convinced, if not how great the Error is,
yet certainly, how little the Church favoreth it.

For what can be said to This Invitation? In Gods behalf I bid you All (All
indefinitely) and beseech you for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake that you will not
refuse to come, being so lovingly caled, and bidden by God himself. And again,
I bid you in the name of God, I call you in Christ's behalf, I exhort you as you
love your own salvation.

What to this Warning? Take you heed, lest you withdrawing your selves from
this Holy Supper, provoke Gods indignation against you. And again, Consider
with your selves how great an injury you do to God, and how sore punishments
hangs over your heads for the same.

What to this Argument? You know how grievous and unkind a thing it is, when a
man has prepared a rich Fest, decked his Table with all kinds of provisione,
so that there lacks nothing but the guests to sit down, and yet they who are
caled most unthankfully refuse to come, etc. which of you in such a case would
not be moved? who would not think a great injury and wrong do'n unto him?

What to the close of all? These things if ye earnestly consider, ye will by
Gods grace return to a better mind; for the obtaining whereof we shall not
cease to make our humbl peticions to Almighty God our heavenly Father.

The Invitation is Universal, I bid you All. The charge lies upon All Persons,
and at All Times. For as often as the peopl (the peopl in general) are
Negligent to com, so often is the Minister thus to reprove and warn them, and
there is no limitation to dispens with Any Person, or except Any Time.

Thus, thus it is that the Church incourageth us to dispens with our Duty; thus
she discourageth Constancy in it: Thus she sets up Reverence against
Frequency.

But since Error cannot subsist without borrowing from Truth; let us see, what
appearances there may be of the Churches countenance in the contrary opinion.

She declares (say they) three times in a year to be sufficient. But

1. Churches, as well as States, ar many times necessietated to comply with the
ungovernabl humors of the People. And what if our Church have do'n in This
Subject, as Moses did in That of Divorce, because of the hardness of the peopls
hearts? choosing a great inconvenience, as an escape from a yet greater mischief?

The indevotion of the peopl is so incorrigibl, that she saw too great reason
to fear, lest if she should exact the constancy due to it, she should thereby
rather draw contemt, then Guests to the Holy Table: and therefore, lest by
requiring All, she should lose All, thought necessary to accommodate her self,
not to what our Savior Requires, but to what she might hope to Obtene.

This appears by the two first Rubriks, which caution against exposing the
Sacrament, if there be not a convenient number to communicate; i. e. if there
be not the same number which is necessary for the Grace-cup, for so is the
number expressly determined, to three at least. And if she thus doubted of
Three, when it is so Seldom; what could she hope if it were Constantly
celebrated?

2. Where she may Hope more, she Requires more. She does not think the Priests
more Obliged to communicate, but more Likely to be devout and obedient, than
the People: When therefore there is a competent number of such (as in Colleges
and Collegiat Churches there often is) where they cannot want Opportunity, if
they want not Piety; There she requires, not only three times every Year, but
once every Week; and in This requiring of the Priests, she does more than
intimate what oght to be do'n by All; though she forbear to enjoin it, because
of the too justly supposed hardness of the hearts of the generality.

3. Nether is she satisfied with This, either in Priest or Peopl. When she
says it must be thus often [At least] she does not declare This to be the Most
that is required by our Lords Institution, but the Least that can satisfy her
Own Discipline.

Those who com not So often [At least] must be punishee as Non-conformists;
those who com not much Oftener, though they fall not under her Discipline, do
under her Reproofs, as we com now from hearing.

We can no more infer Three times a Year sufficient for the Communion, because
the Church does not punish those who come so often; than Once in a month to be
sufficient for Divine Service, because the Law punishes not those who com so
often.

Rules of Government, have mesures different from Rules of Devotion.

Our Church seems to have taken her mesures from the Council of Agatho and
Eliberis, which declare, That those who do not communicate on the Fests of
Nativity, Easter, and Pentecost, are not to be accounted Catholic.

She manifestly declares her judgment to agree with what we have all this
while be'n proving. Not every Sunday, but almost for every other Holy day; she
has appointed a preparative Vigil, that we may examine our selves with Fasting
and Prayer; and every Festival has its proper Communion Service, to be read at
the Time and Place of the Lords Supper. Just in the same circumstances as
Justin Martyr has described the practice of the Church in His days; when the
Reader and Preacher have do'n their offices, when the Catechumens are dismissed
with the Benediction of The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Then does the
Priest go to the Holy Table, accompanied in Collegiat Churches and Chapels
with one or two assistants, There to read the Communion Service every Holy day
throughout the year.

V. LET us now suppose a Priest of either party, about to read the Communion
Service at the Holy Table, declaring what he believes to be the Churches
meaning in that office, and it will not be hard to judge which of the two will
best deserv her thanks.

He that will make her satisfied with his three times in a year, must speak to
this purpose: Behold, hither am I com'n in conformity to the Customs of the
Primitive Church, and the Constitutions of our own. The first Churches
celebrated the Lords Supper every Holy dry, and Ours ordains the Communion
Service to be read every such day, in the same circumstances. After the
Benediction, with an Offertory, at the Holy Table.

Here am I, and my brethren ready to assist me, to communicate to you and with
you. If any Isaac demand, Here is the fire and the wood, but where is the Lamb?
Here are all other requisites, but where is the Bread and Wine? Know that our
Church does as litl intend a Communion, as Isaac did to be Sacrificed. She does
not indeed affront your senses by Consecrating the Elements, without
Communicating them, as does the Church of Rome, but she is no less willing to
withold them from you. She is content you should communicate thrice every Year,
that the memory of the Institution be not quite lost; but would have you
mannerly and modest, not constant and importure guests: com by such intervals,
as may become the awe due to so venerable a Mystery, not with such constancy as
may signify familiarity with it. For however our Lord intended (and the
Apostls and best ages of the Church conformed themselves to his Intentions) that
his Supper should be the constant office in every Church meeting; yet
experience has proved such Constancy prejudicial to its Honor; and therefore
our Church has taken this midl away, constantly to do somewhat in obedience to
the Lords Institution, yet to forbear the complete office, in reverence to his
body and blood, that as plenty has made it cheap, so scarcity may advance its
value.

To this purpose must such an one speak that will father such an opinion upon
the Church.

But he that pleads for constancy, may borrow a better speech from St.
Chrysostom, who complains, Here we wait, and none com; or from St. Augustine,
who expostulates, What cause is there, O hearers, that ye see the Table and com
not to the Banquet? Yea, or from her Own Exhortation now mentioned, which
assisted with her Rubrik prescribing to the Priests once every week at the
least; will complain, not only of deserting the Table, when furnished, but of
Discoraging the Ministers from furnishing it, as constantly with the Holy Fest,
as they do with the Office which supposes it.

For thus may such an one speak,

Here we attend in conformity to our Lords Institution, the Practice of the
Primitive Church, and the Injunctions of our Own, to communicate with you the
Lords Supper.

We do not indeed bring forth the Bread and Wine, because it is too manifest,
that in so doing, we must either expose them to contemt, by not using them at
all, or use them our selves alone.

The choice is hard, and the Church of Rome has chosen the Later, but without
escaping the Former; For how can That be caled a Communion (as by the Apostl it
is) where One takes all to himself; or how is the holy Supper rescued from
contemt, when all but one are idle spectators, not vouchsafing to be guests at
the divine Supper?

Our Church has taken the best course, that in so great a straight she could,
to avoid Both sides of the inconvenience. That our Lords body and blood may not
be so exposed, she forbids us to celebrate the Communion unless there be a
competent number to communicate: and to avoid loss of any opportunity, she
directs those who intend to communicate, that they signify their readiness, by
sending their names in convenient season to the Curate: By the One she
provides, that the Fest be not dishonored for want of Guests; and by the Other,
that the Desirous be not hindered for want of the Fest.

And lest this omission of bringing Bread and Wine, should be mistaken for an
intimation, that it is not our duty to receve them; she has provided that upon
Every Holy day, we be put in mind of our Obligation.

Yesterday Eve was consecrate to Fasting and Prayer; for This very purpose,
that we might thereby prepare our selves to receve the Holy Supper this day. And
now, that the Common Prayer is ended, and the rest of the people (who are not
capable to communicate) ar dismissed with their blessing; according to the
practice of Christ's Church in the best ages, we com up to the holy Table, in
this its proper place and season, to read the Communion-service; that you may
understand there oght to be a Communion joined with This Service, if you would
not be wanting to your duty in receiving it.

You know we dare not adventure to expose the holy Viands, without giving you a
weeks warning: nor dare we give you such warnings, as Frequently as we desire,
much less as Gonstantly as we ought, because we sind you too backward to
entertene, even Those too rare Invitations which we give you.

But that you may see with what regret we submit to That necessity you thus put
upon us; Our Church is careful clearly to intimate, how much more she Wishes,
than she Dares to Command.

What reason can you imagine, for her putting so great a difference between her
Injunctions to the Priests, and those to the People? By our Lords Institution,
either the People are not at all obliged, or they are cqually so, with the
Priests: Why then should Three times in a year be sufficient for the One, and
no less than Every Sunday for the Other?

There can be no other reason but This, that though there be not more Due, yet
there is more to be Hoped, from the Priests. From them therefore she requires,
that when they have opportunity, they communicate every Sunday [At least] And
how much more they might (and would do better to) exceed that [Least] This
Communion-service plainly declares: whereby our Church keeps up the claim to
that constancy which in the Primitive Church was practiced, of closing every
Church-jest with the Lords Supper.

Would you duly heed it, you could not miss either the Churches Doctrine
concerning your duty, or opportunities to perform it. She has plainly enogh
shown her Readiness to perform Her part, and Your obligations to do Yours. Try
us, Try us by the way she has directed, Signify your willingness by sending
us your names; and if you then have not as many Communions, as
Communion-services, let the whole blame lie upon us.

But while on the Churches part there are such Invitations, and on Your part
such neglects, She may well take up St. Paul's self-justification, Your blood
be upon your own heads, I am clean.

Such must the Languages be of those that on either side shall pretend the
Church of England's authority: and if it can be questionable which of the two
is the better Expositor of her Rubriks, possibly it cannot be put to a better
Umpirage (if it need any) then that of our University. And by her Statutes the
Communion-service is never read in the University-Church without a Communion,
nor the Common Prayer without them Both.

These Statutes have added Holy days of Our own to those of the Church, but
still with conformity to This rule.

We begin every Term, as with Common Prayer, so with the Communion. Nothing
therefore can be more apparent than the sens of the University, which (sure) you
cannot think ignorant of the Churches Doctrines.

And it may be worth some consideration, that this is the practice of the Greek
Church to this very day in their great Churches. For thus says the Learned Mr.
Smith, an ocular witness. At such solemnities the holy and august Sacrament is
always celebrated, and that with great pomp and ce emony: and indsed is not only
a necessary, but the principal part of the Festival.

And that we may not mistake, as if this were spoken only of the Principal
Fests, he says afterward upon another occasion, In the great Churches the
Priests celebrates the Sacrament upon the solemn Festivals, and upon Sundays,
and at other times upon occasion.

In the obligation of the Peopl also, they com not behind, but advance a step
further than our Church; for says the same Author, The Laiks ace obliged to
receve the Blessed Sacrament four times a year. With which law of their Church
they most readily comply, none omitting it, especially at Christmas or Easter,
unless hindered by real and urgent necessity. In order to their better
preparation, the preceding Fests (i. e. the four Lents fore-spoken of) are
appointed and observed.

VI. AND let me provoke the otherwise-minded to Emulation. Will they own such
Ministers for Conformists (if such there be) as for many Months, and perhaps
whole Years together, Omit to read the Communion-Service? will they not think
it the duty of the Churchwardens to Present, and of the Bishop to Punish such,
as Disobedient to the Churches Orders, and Mutilators of her Offices? Why then
must They Escape Presentment? yea, why must they pass for the best Churchmen,
who for Months, and perhaps whole Years together, omit either Offering or
Receiving That Communion, which That Service professes to celebrate; and so by
Neglecting the One, Expose the Other?

Let those now, who bost themselves the true Sons of the Church, show themselves
such, not by much Talking, but Studying her Thoghts, yea, her Declarations. A
good son will act, not only the express Commands, but the Inclinations of his
Parent: he will Enquire, and by all competent indications Search; and where
there are manifest tokens, that More is Desired than Expressed, will do not
only what the Command makes Necessary, but whatever such Indications show to be
Well-pleasing.

Since therefore the Church so plainly intimates, that she Recommendeth More
then she dares Command; how can Those pretend themselves her affectionate Sons,
who do not only Neglect to comply with her so clear Intimations, but downright
Disobey Those Commands, which she plainly imposes as Necessary to her
Communion?

Where is now that zele for the Church? Have we no better way to show it, than
by contending for a Vesture, or a Gesture? Do we think her such a coquet, as to
prefer a Ribon or a Lace before her Necessaries?

I speak not this to justify any Neglect or Disobedience toward the slightest
Injunctions of our Governors; but by comparing the weightier matters of the Law,
with tithing, mint and cummin; to prove that Those who ar earnest to have these
things do'n, oght not to leave the other undo'n.

I might further urge, that Those ar the worst sort of Non-conformists, who not
only Deny Obedience, but Slander Those very Constitutions which require it: and
so make themselves not only Disobedient children, but False accusers: for they
can hardly avoid that dubl character, who both refuse to communicate with her
in This (of all others most sacred and solen) office, and accuse her as
accessory to That very Disobedience which themselves practice, no less against
Her Injunctions than our Lords.

But it is not my business to accuse my brethren, further than is necessary to
the vindicating of my mother; which I hope I have abundantly do'n, so as to be
secure from having her Name abused, to the protection of an Error so Opposite
to her Constitutions.

CHAP. II. We may not omit This duty without warrant,
I. Necessity may be complied with. A duble question. II. Difference between
Laws Moral and Positive. The Apostl 's vouching our Lords revelation a proof of
the valu of the Sacrament. Fear of cheapness, no reason why we should make it
scarce. III, Omission compared with unworthiness. IV. Our warrant must be
either Countermand or Dispensation. V. Defect of preparation no Dispensation.
VI. All other duties in the same danger.

HAVING thus do'n right to our Church, I now com to do it to the Question:
which is not the same in Our days as in St. Augustin's. It is nor, whether we
ought to receve every Day? but, Whether we ought to do it upon every
opportunity?

How frequent those Opportunities ought to be, it is not the Peopl's business
to enquire, nor mine to determine. It must needs be as necessary for the
Officers, as for the Constitutions of the Church, to yield to the invincibl
hardness of the peopl's hearts.

In so corrupt an age, we may not stand upon our Lords [In the beginning it was
not so] but yield to his [Suffer it to be so now.]

I therefore urge no more but this, That it is the duty of every Minister, to
labor with his people to com constantly, and to offer the Holy Communion as
often as he can prevail with them to receve it.

Against this so complaisant Assertion, because St. Augustin's out-running
followers, have not only opposed his [Let every one do what he thinks best] but
preferred the Centurions aw, before Zacheus's reception; therefore must this
doubl Error be encountered with a doubl Question.

1. Whether our Lords [Do this] take not away our liberty to forbear it?

2. Supposing we had liberty to do what we believe best; whether it were not
better to do it frequently than seldom?

1. Our first Question must be, Whether our Lords [Do this] leave us any
liberty to forbear when we think it better? In this Enquiry we must distinguish
between Laws, Moral and Positive.

II MOral Laws ar written in the fleshly tables of the heart, whose yielding
nature may take impression from the various occurrences of life. Those Laws, as
they are Dictated by Reason, so must they be Interpreted by it, and bend to the
several requires of the subject matter.

For the Philosopher cannot so fix the bounds of Virtue, but that (in many
cases) the Determination of a Prudent man is necessaty to distinguish it from
Vice.

But God wrote his Positive Laws in Tables of Stone, whose rigor was uncapabl
of yielding. Of such Laws, the Will of the Lawgiver was the Only Reason, and
must be the Only Mesure. We must do Just so, no less, nor no more, nor no
otherwise. Reason has here nothing to do, but to deny it self to have the
least power to Dispens, or Derogate, or Commute, or any way Decline from the
express voice of the Law.

Uzzah could not then plead the appearance of necessity, or the evidence of his
good meaning; when the danger of the Law was greater one way, than that of the
Ark was the other way.

To this surpose ler us reflect upon what we have already observed; that our
Apostl vouched our Lord's authority, that so he might assert both the Truth and
Importance of what he delivered: For we cannot now deny the Truth, without
affronting the Apostl's veracity, nor the Importance, without disparaging our
Lord's wisdom; for the One must be said to take great care for a subject of no
valu, or the Other report a falsehood.

We have seen some danger that our Lord's mind might be mistaken, as if he
either intended to consecrate none but the Paschal Supper, or valued the whole
office at no higher rate, than he used to do outward performances.

We need no other evidence, that the Corinthians might probably believ This;
than the commonness of This belief now, notwithstanding the Apostl's endeavor
to confute it in both its members, by This declaration, which plainly
discovers, how much our Lord valued this office, how often we must perform
it, and how litl power we have to abate any thing of it.

For these reasons he does not plead here, as before in another case of outward
decency, Does not appeal to Their Judgments, nor offer his Own: says not, as
cap. 10. [I speak as to wise men, judge you what I say] nor as chap. 7. [I give
my judgment] This say I, not the Lord;] but quite contrary [This say not I, but
the Lord] and the consequence is, Neither I nor an Angel from heaven must be
believed against the Revelation; Neither I nor an Angel from heaven (much less
a man's own humor) can any way relax the Obligation.

Grant therefore now that the Observation be as True, as the Subject is Unhappy:
suppose Frequence bring danger of Cheapness: must we therefore presume to make
it Scarce? No doubtless! If we will needs hear Reason, it will tell us, that
our Lord knew this as well as We: It was so Before, and In, and Ever Since His
days, as it is in Ours.

How then dare any one judge That a sufficient reason to hinder him from Doing
this, which our Lord judged not so, to hinder him from Commanding it. Does not
such an one declare himself both Superior and Wiser? If thou judge the Law
(says S. James) thou art not a Doer of the law, but a Judge. I may add, Thou
art not only a Judge, but an Unjust one; if thy sentence rob the law of it is
due: and so much more so, by how much greater care our Lord took to have it
duly paid.

III. HE therefore that breaks This, which is not the Least of our Lords
Commandments, and teaches men so, must be weighed in others scales, than those
of St. Augustine: Not compared with the modest Centurion, or forward Zacheus,
but with the most Disobedient Rebel, and the most Unworthy Communicant: and
even so will be found more inexcusable than the worst.

For he that Does This, however unworthily, pays Something of obedience,
owneth our Lords Authority, and is easily Convinced of his Crime: But he that
says he needs not do it, does not only deny the Law, to have power over
himself; but assumeth to himself power over the Law; and renounceth all Need,
(and therefore all Benefit) of Repentance.

He that Disobeyeth the Kings Law, may be a Felon; but he that sets up an
Opposite Authority, is a Rebel; and declaring himself (as all Rebels do) a most
Faithful Subject, is thereby the more Unpardonabl. He that [doth this]
unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, he dishonoreth his
Person, and that in his Humanity; but he that Renounceth any Obligation to do
it, is guilty of his Crown and Dignity; Deposes him from his Throne, and
affronteth the Majesty of his Divinity: and his pretense of Reason for
disobedience, whether it be Reverence, or his Teachers Authority, or what ever
else it be; it is a Rival to obedience, and it is plausibl Pretenses make it so
much the more properly Rebellious.

This perhaps may seem too Severe; I grant it, nor do I believ our Lord judges
according to such Rigid mesures, but Rigid as they are, they are Just, and may be
urged against the Doctrines, though not against the Persons. For if the
Preformance be bound upon us by a Positive Law of Christ; and Forbearance, only
by my Own or my Teachers Reason; If I prefer This abve That, and Justify my
doing so; what is this but to say, I will not have That, but This to reign over
me?

We may not therefore without manifest Deposing our Lord, pretend any thing
Equal to his Authority; but if we will decline our obedience to This Command,
we must fetch our Warrant from That alone, as dispensing with us in such cases
as we oppose to our obligation.

IV. AND this Warrant must be as Express as his Command; and it must be either
a Countermand or a Dispensation.

1. A Countermand may be either Express or Implicit.

If it be not possibl to do this without breaking some Other (no less evident)
Law; This will amount to an Implicit Countermand: For then will This Law lose
all its weight, by the equal Counterweight of That Other; bicaus the Same Lord
who said [Do This] will have said also [Do Not That;] and when such a
Counter-Law is Pleaded and Proved, we must acquiesce.

But Where? Where in the name of Christ is such a Counter-Law? In what Book,
whar Chapter, what Verse, do we find him say, [Do Not This?] Pretenses we find
in abundance; but where do we find them Authorized? Where is it written, Do not
this, if there be a Judas in the company! Do it not, if you may not do it
without diminution of your liberty in things indifferent? Do it not, if you may
not do it in such Manner, such Forms, such a Place, such Company, such Gesture,
etc. as your selves like Best. Do it not, if the Form of Administration have
any Mixture of humane Ordinances, or the Assembly any mixture of Profane or
Suspicios Persons? Or (which is the same Kind, though not the same Color) Do it
not as Often as you have Opportunity, if you believ your Often doing it, will
occasion your doing it Less Reverently.

If in any of These, or any Other cases, we find any such Express, or Implicit
Countermand, as with equal Clearness of Words, and equal Evidence of Sens, and
equal Absolutness of Command, can balance our Lordr [Do this] we must yield;
but else, whatever weight is Wanting in the Opposite Scale, is Left in the
Obligation.

V. 2. AND the same rule also holds in the Other kind of Warrant. If we
pretend our selfs not Countermanded but Dispensed with; we must have an Express
Word declaring us so in That particular case.

I say we must have an Express Word: For Consequences of Our own drawing,
unless they be so absolutely Unavoidabl; as to be equivalent to an Express
word, may not be interpreted for a competent Dispensation; since it is an
undoubted rule, That every Dispensation is a grievance to the law, and
therefore to be avoided as much as possibl, in defense of the Law.

There is indeed an Express word, which has too long and too generally be'n
taken for an Unlimited Dispensation, not only to the Grievance, but the very
Destruction of the Law: upon which Very account (besides others) I hope I h ve
cleared it from that mistake, and therefore shall now say no more concerning it.

Our future troubl will be with some Consequential defeasances, draw'n from some
cautionary expressions of the Apostl, no less perverted against his meaning*
than Those other words are against both His and our Lord's.

He declares it a great crime to do this Unworthily, and for That reason
warns us to Examine our selfs: and from hence some hastily infer, That if we
have be'n hindered from This Preparation; and some others, that if we have
neglected it; then ar we, not only Excused, but Prohibired from the Performance.

And whoever has any kindness for his Sloth or his Sins, very Plausibly
persuades himself, That the Indulgent Apostl has left a wide door open, to
admit what he please for a Competent Hinderance from Preparation, and
consequently a Competent Excuse from the unwelcom exercise.

But This very Unpreparedness is it self a Violation of an Express Precept:
[Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat] is a doubl Precept; but so, that
Either Member is an Entire Precept by its self, without retaining to the Other,
as it is condition.

It is not [Let a man eat if he be prepared] but without any [If] though not
without an [And] they are Both, Absolutely, though Jointly, commanded. He that
Eats not, is guilty, though he be Prepared; He that nether Eats nor
Prepares himself, is Dubly guilty, because he has omitted a Dubl duty.

But that we may answer formally: We Deny That Consequence whereon the Evasion
is bilt, viz. That If a Command oblige to do a thing, and in due manner, the
Defect in the Manner (though voluntary) must be a Dispensation from the Thing.

God commanded the Jews to eat the Passover with their loins girt: Were it not
ridiculos to think, that if one be ungirt, he is free, both from the Obligation
and the Threat; so that notwithstanding them Both, That soul shall not be cut
off from his peopl! The Girding of the Loins is often used, as an expression of
Preparation; and the defect of That, may as well excuse from the Passover, as
the defect of This, from the Lords Surper.

VI. AND at This rate of pleading, we may as well excuse our selves from All
Religios Exercises whatsoever, because we cannot in any of them make Any
address to God unworthily, without affronting him. That our Partiality and
Injustice toward This Sacrament may the more plainly appear, let us for a
minute or two suppose (what probably the Corinthians believed) that it was not
concerned in those Meetings, wherein they behaved themselves so irreverently:
and Then consider, whether the same reproofs may not be transplanted into such
Meetings, upon as good grounds, and with as good fruit: Might he not have
pleaded with the same Evidence of reason, and even in the same words?

-- You come together not for the better, but for the worse.

For first of all, when ye com together in the Church, I hear that there be
divisions among you, and I partly believe it.

When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to worspip God.

For -- one is hungry, and another is drunken.

What, have ye not houses to eat or to drink in? or despise ye --

For I tell you, that as often as you meet in Gods house to worship him, you
address your selves to Gods person.

For as often as you pray to God, you address your selves to his Throne, and to
him that sits thereon.

Wherefor whoever prays to God unworthily, shall be guilty of affronting his
Majesty.

But let a man exawin himself, and so let him address his prayer to God.

For he that prays to God unworthily, prays for damnation to himself, not
regarding the Majesty of God.

What think you? Were any of these reproofs too severe? Any of those Warnings
needless? Any Precept for self-examination superfluos? Or do All of them amount
to a dispensation from worshipping God in his House?

May we not then take up the same Apostl's Language, expostulating with a
self-condemned Jew? Thou that dare not take the Lords Supper in thy
unhallowed lips; dare thou take his Prayer? Thou that dare not eat This
Bread, because thou art not one bread with thy offending brother; dare thou
use That Prayer, which makes thy forgiving or not forgiving thy brother, the
mesure of Gods forgiving or not forgiving thee? Thou that fear to bring an
unclean heart to God's Table, dare thou bring the same to his Throne? Thou
that fear to be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, dare thou make
thy self so of His Majesty and Purity?

Are not These as much contemned by unworthiness in Prayer, as Those by
unworthiness in Communicating? Is our Lord Man only? is he not God also? Is he
God of the Sacrament only? is he not of Prayer also? Is preparation therefore
necessary for That only? is it not equally necessary for This?

This were enogh. But it is further considerabl, that the case is very unequal
on both sides. For whereas unworthiness is more objected in bar to the Lords
Supper; the Scripture has spoken much more against it, in relation to Prayer.

For we shall hereafter find a more proper occasion to observe, that the Apostl
here reproves not the unworthiness of the Person, but only of the Performance.
Upbraideth not the Corinthians with any other sins, but only such as are
committed against the Lords Supper it self, and in the manner of its
celebration. Does not say, the Lords Supper is turned into sin, if the
Communicant be guilty of Other sins. But Solomon, Prove. 15.8. says expressly,
The Sacrifice of the wicked is sin: and again, chap. 21.27. The Sacrifice of
the wicked is abomination. David, Psalm. 50. expostulateth in God's name, that
they presume to tread his courts, and take his name into their mouths: and the
Prophet, Isa. 4. describes God sick of his own Ordinances, because unworthy
persons celebrated them. Jeremiah and Amos speak the same language.

So that if we take our mesures from Scripture, we find much greater reason to
examine our selves; and upon sens of our personal unworthiness to forbear Prayer,
than the Lords Supper.

Whence then this so gross partiality? Why should we take That unworthiness as
a Prohibition from This duty, which we think not one from the other?

Were the truth duly considered, it would appear that the difference lies not
in the greater or less sacredness of the Duties, but our own greater or less
Sens of their Benefits.

It is not Reverence, but want of Appetite; not Fear so much, as want of Love,
that keeps us at distance, Pretendedly Reverential, and Really Neglective.
Why do we not else use either the same Reverence, or the same Boldness toward
Both? Both equally require Worthiness, and Both equally require Performance:
with This difference, that in the One we remember the Lord, in the Other our
Selves, But in Both we rob God of his due, though in several kinds. In the Lords
Supper we own Preparation, and There we deny Frequency; In Prayer we own
Frequency, and there we deny Preparation: so the One we Perform unworthily, and
the Other we Forbear unworthily, and wipe our mouths, and say, we have do'n no
wickedness.

Say not I plead now for Irreverence in the Communion, or Forbearance of
Prayer: No! Religion is not to Compound with our Corruptions, but to Destroy
them: will no more connive at Unworthiness in Prayer, for fear lest Gods Throne
be as much Deserted as his Table; than at Unfrequency in Communicating, for
fear lest Irreverence should be as rude with his Table as his Footstool: There
is no necessity that we perish either by Poison, or Starving, By [DO THIS] we are not Invited only, but Commanded so to Honor our Lord, as to Fest our own
Souls.

CHAP. III. The Obligation ceased not upon the change of the Manner of the
Festing in the Church, but must be accommodated thereto.
I. The Apostle has prevented such a consequence, by saying, our Lord
appointed us to do this 'till he com. II. The adequate mesure of our doing
this, is not Eating, but Meeting in the Church. As change of the ceremony
hinders not Perjury from being a sin, Nor does change of the season hinder us
from stiling it a Supper. III. The Church careful to preserve the memory and
title of Festing. IV. The Apostl's argument holds by verse. 20. more for the
Thing than for the Manner, wherein we cannot now be guilty as the Corinthians
were. V. The Equitable and Moral sens of the Argument, accommodate to the
present manner of Church-meetings. VI. Distinguish between yielding and
justifying.

BUT there is yet another way. Obligations without either Countermand or
Dispensation from the Author, may fall by the sinking of the Ground they are
bilt upon.

Upon the death of our Parents we are no longer obliged to honor their Persons,
but only their Memories: and upon this account, all that we have said seems
to free us from any other duty toward This Institution, but that of speaking
and thinking honorably of it.

For if This be bilt upon a Festival Tradition, then will the Apostl's
declaration of our Lords will, oblige Us to do This, as often as They did That:
His argument must be good against the Corinthians, and All other Churches that
might irreverently Fest in the Church: But when the Council of Laodicea
banished Festing thence, they sent This Sacrament into the Same banishment with
it: This we cannot deny (since the Apostl has so declared it) an inseparabl
Adjunct to That, but still an Adjunct, which therefore must accompany its
Subject, whether in Life or Death: We must do This as often, but only as often,
as we do That, which Now we never do.

This Objection deserves our Answer, not so much for its dangerosness, as for
the occasion it ministereth, for a more clear stating our duty, in
accommodation to so great a change.

And to cut off at one blow all its power, we must observe, that the Apostl
has prevented it by an express claus added to verse 26. which shows This not to
be Mortal as ar our Parents; we must show forth his death (not only while
Festing continues an Ecclesiastical exercise, but) till he come. Whereby he
puts it out of the Churches reach, in point of Duration, as before he had
do'n, in point of Constancy.

He had proved it to be our Lords Constitution, not to be omitted in any of
their Church Fests, because They must do This, as often as they drank That
Grace-cup.

And that this humor might not fall upon another part, he further tells them,
That though they should omit the very Grace-cup it self; yea, those very Fests
which it must attend, or what ever other way they should invent; All must be
unable to free them from the Immortal obligation, which they had as litl power
to Abolish as to Intermit: since it must equal the World in Duration, as well
as their Fests in Constancy.

This therefore, though a positive Law, is no less Indispensibl than a Moral;
and the Church has as much power to Dispens with the Law against Murder, as
with This, whether by sapping the Foundation, or battering it with a Contrary
doctrine.

II. EITHER therefore That Council which forbad Festing in the Church was
Heretical, and then future ages must restore it by postliminium; or else the
adequate foundation of this duty, was not Eating but Meeting in the Church.

And that This later is the case, we have the Apostl's clear Intimation (at
least) if not his express Declaration. For however at That time, their Festings
were as frequent as their Meetings; and on the other side, their Misdemeanors
were not in the manner of their Meeting, but in That of their Festing; yet his
in thrice repeated charge, he does not lay his accusation against These, but
against Those, especially verse. 20. When ye com together in one place, it is
not to eat the Lords Supper.

From which words (especially if helped with the now mentioned clause of ver.
26.) it plainly appears, that it Then was, and Ever must be the duty of All
Christian Churches, to celebrate the Lords Supper when ever they meet in his
House: Otherwise, the Corinthians must be unjustly arraigned as Criminal,
having broken no Obligation.

God forbad Perjury, in This style [ Thou shall not take (in the Hebrew it is,
Thou shall not lift up) the name of the Lord thy God in vain.] The Phrase is
bilt upon their then Custom, of lifting up the hand in the name of God. Our
form of Swearing is not by lifting up the hand above the head, but perhaps by
bowing down the head to the hand: yet no man pretends the power of the Law
abolished with the Ceremony it seems bilt upon; since the Obligation
depends, not upon the variable Circumstance of Swearing, but the indispensibl
Connection between our Oath and Truth.

Just so it is here, This Institution relates to Festing, as That Law did to
lifting up the hand. This requires that our Lords Supper should accompany All
our Church-meetings; as That does, that Truth should accompany All our Oaths;
and the Church may be as Innocent, and the Obligation as Firm after the One
alteration in the manner, as after the Other.

And it is worth our observation, with what temper she has ever proceeded, that
in the Great Changes she found Necessary to make, the Sacrament might not lose
its right.

It seems not an Accidental, but Substantial circumstance, That This should be
Instituted In and After Supper; and consequently, that it should be Celebrated
in the same Season, necessary both to answer its Title [the Supper of the Lord]
and the Tradition whence it was taken: Yet to celebrate it before day,
appears by the unquestionable testimony of Pliny, to have be'n the practice
in Trajan's time.

But That Persecution which Necessitated, did thereby Justify so Great a
variation.

They were denied the use of their Public Churches, if they had Any; their
malicios enemies watched all opportunities to mingle their blood with their
Sacrifices: Either therefore they must do this before day, or not at all.

This was a great Change, but no Robbery: for the Sacrament lost not so much as
its Name by it, but still continued to be caled the Lords Supper.

That change the Emperors Persecution made necessary; and a worse Persecution
made a Greater one no less so. The unbridled luxury of the people turned it
from the Supper of the Lord, to a Fest of Bacchus; and it seemed impossibl to
rescu it from that wors Metamorphosis, but by turning it from a Desert after
Supper, to a Breakfast in the Morning.

III. AND though this seemed a Greater change than the Former, as taking away
not only the Season of the Supper, but the very Nature of a Fest, yet was the
Church careful to save the Institution harmless.

The Day, first consecrate to This office, still enjoys the title of The
Lords day, and of a Fest. Four Councils declared it heretical to Fast, and many
Canons forbad to Kneel upon That day; it is honored with a Preparatory Vigil,
and a Communion-Service; and every Other Holy day (if they be not expressly
consecrate to Festing) enjoy the same honor and title of Festivals.

And why (I pray' now) why all this care? Why so great a Soloecism to Fast upon
our Lords day? Was he indeed (as the Scribes and Pharisees charactered him) a
riotos person, and a Wine-bibber? If He were, yet certainly St. Michael and all
Angels are not, nor were All the Saints so. John the Baptist came neither eating
nor drinking. St. Paul was in fastings often; and many other Saints are honored
for their very Abstinence. How can it be congruos, that the Angels should
delight in That, whereof they are by Nature Incapable; or the Saints in that,
which by Grace they Shunned?

But granting this, Why then must their Eves be Fasting-days? What strange
meetings of Contradictions are these? That they who in their lives loved and
practiced Fasting, should after their deaths delight in Festing; and yet their
very Festing-days be honored by a Fasting Usher?

Suppose This be only a Preparative, To what purpose such a bedel? Must we
Therefore Fast upon the Eve, that we may have the better stomach to the
following Fest?

There must questionless be some Better reason; and what Better can there be,
than what we are now observing; viz. the constant Practice of All mankind, and
particularly of Christians, celebrating the worship of God with Festing; not
abrogated, but thus improved, that the Supper of our Lord might be it self a
Spiritual Fest, attended with a Corporal one, and ushered with a Vigil; the One
proper for its genuine Celebration, the Other for our Preparation to it.

Nor, has the Apostls argument suffered more by this change than our Lords
Supper: the only difference is this, That before, it concluded by Enthymem, and
now by Syllogism.

While the custom continued of Eating this bread and drinking this cup in Every
Meeting; the conclusion without more ado followed, Ergo, He that eats this
bread and drinks this cup unworthily, is guilty. But now it requires the
assistance of an Assumtion, which Then was, and the Apostl supposed would Ever
be self-evident, viz. that as often as they met together, they ate this bread
and drank this cup. And though the 27th verse seems to have lost its force,
because we do not eat that bread and drink that cup, as the Corinthians then
did; yet the 20th still retains its strength; and we are guilty of the same
charge, of so coming together as not to eat the Lords Supper, though we are not
to be convicted by the same medium.

IV. AND if any Claus in the Apostls whole Dissertation teach us, That charge
must needs do it. None of the rest can teach us point blank, but only compass,
and by Analogy with those sensual Debaucheries, against which they were leveled.

It can not now be said, [one is hungry and another is drunken] nor can any
other of those Characters fit us, by which the Apostl describes the
profaneness he impeacheth.

But we think our selfs obliged by Analogy to infer, that as their Sensual
unworthiness made them guilty, where they abused a Sensual Fest, so any
Spiritual unworthiness will make Us so, if by it we profane a Spiritual one;
and for this Analogical reason we must examine our selfs, etc

Now if this seem obliging in point of Worthiness, much more must it be so in
the Performance it self, For he disputes for That, not only by Analogy, but
Point blank. We find no Reproof, because no Mention, of any but Sensual or
Schismatical unworthiness in the Corinthians; but Express, and thrice Repeted
inculcation of their Meetings, as dishonoring the Lords Supper by their
necessary connection.

Either therefore we are quite out of the reach of his Threats, because we are
free from the Character he Reproves; or if we are Not, then are we most exposed
to That now mentioned, bent against their So Coming together as not to eat the
Lords Supper; since That, and only That, can literally be charged upon us:

And since his Cautionary precepts were also levelled against the Sin Reproved,
they must needs strike more directly upon That Omission wherein we are equally
gilty, than upon the Unworthiness wherein we cannot be so.

And that inseparabl connection between the Churches meetings and the Lords
Supper, which he so industriosly proves, must needs concern us more than any
such kind of unworthiness as he mentions Not, since That is to continu till
the end of the World, by our Lords own Institution; and This is not condemned
but by Our own Reason, in consequence of the Apostls reproving another kind of
gilt whereof we are uncapabl.

V. IF therefore we must accommodate the Apostls Dissertation to the change, so
as to shun the Unworthiness Not expressly forbidden; much more must we do so in
the Constancy, so Expressly and Industriosly enjoined. So that our concern must
needs be this. As often as the Corinthians ate that bread and drank that cup,
which our Lord had adopted to represent his body and blood; so often they
showed forth his death: and therefore whoever did unworthily celebrate That,
were gilty of profaning This: The connection between their Meetings and their
Fests, the Apostl did not, because he needed not mention; but That between Them
and the Lords Supper, he proved inseparabl, both as to Intermission and
Abolition: The former connection the Church has changed, the later she may not,
in either of its members.

We are therefore, and (till the Lord com) ever must be, obliged in All our
Church meetings, to celebrate the Lords Supper, and That in such manner, as
becomes his body and blood.

THIS is the Equitabl and Moral sens of the Apostls words, which was so Long
and Universally paid them, by all Ages and Churches, preceding and following
the change, as might create a right, even by Prescription: but on the other
side, it has be'n lost so many Ages, that the Contrary Sens pleads Contrary
Prescription.

It is now no less impossibl to reduce the people to Constancy, than it was in
the time of the Laodicean Council to reduce them to Sobriety; and therefore the
Officers of the Church now find it necessary to yield to the hardness of hearts
callos by time.

VI. BUT here we must carefully distinguish between Yielding and Justifying;
Our Church speaks not one syllabl to Dispens with the strictest Constancy,
but on the contrary still recommendeth it, as often as she can, without
exposing her Own Injunctions to the Same Contemt, from which she endeavoreth to
rescu our Lords.

She does indeed forbid the celebration, if there be not a competent number to
communicate; because if the Holy Table must needs be deserted, it is less
dishonorable, that it be so Without the Supper than With it: She therefore
leaves it to the Ministers Discretion, how often it shall be offered: but she
intrusteth their Piety, to exhort the peopl to com as often as possibl. She is
Both ways careful, that neither the Willing may want a Communion, nor the
Unwilling an Exhortation. She therefore complieth with the peopl's Neglect, no
otherwise than did the equally valiant and indulgent Captain with his Armies
cowardice: he Commanded, he Entreated, he Exhorted, he Reproved; but when he
could by no means prevail to stop their flight, he put himself in their head,
that they might seem rather to Follow their Leader, than Flee their Enemy.

But as this compliance of the Captain did not justify his Disobedient Troops,
so neither do the Churches Rubriks justify either Ministers or Peopl, that are
wanting to the Constancy so plainly Urged by the Apostl, Practiced by the Best
ages, and Recommended by her Self.

The Sum of all is this: Since the Church had no Authority, nor no Intention,
to slacken the Power either of our Lords Command, or the Apostls Argument; we
must therefore still own them to have the same Power now as ever, and must
accommodate them to our Present meetings as if they still were Festivals, not
only in Name or Spiritually (as we acknowledge them still to be) but in Reality
and Sensually, as at the time of his Writing they were; and in the Recess, the
Obligation is no less indissolubl against the teeth of time, and the
constitutions of Governments, than against any evasions of singl persons.

But All this, the More it Obliges, the Less it Persuadeth. It may (perhaps)
Compel us to submit to the Duty, but cannot Invite us to Embrace the Favor. And
our Lord does not use to Drive us like Beasts, we know not Why nor Whither: But
to Lead us with the cords of a Man, with bonds of Love, with strong Reason and
sweet Allurements, the savor of his sweet ointments, which so draw loving
souls, as to make them not only Follow, but Run after him. And This duty above
All others, is That way most attractive. The Command made Reasonabl by a good
End, and the End made Amiabl by Relation to our Lord's own Person: as we now
com to see in the remaining words, In remembrance of me.

PART IV. Concerning the End: In Remembrance.
CHAP. I. It is the badge of a Christian.
I. This the only rite whereby we honor our Lords Person. Three Considerations.
1. Every Religion distinguished from Every other by some proper rite. This,
Nature taught the Heathen; and Gods Law, the Jews. II. The New Testament
contracteth the multitude of Jewish rites to two; whereby Christians ar known,
as ar the Knights of the Garter. 1. By a rite of admission. III. 2. By
continual wearing the badge. IV. Those distinguishing rites must be highly
valued. It was mortal to a Jew to omit any of them, and to a Heathen to wear
them. V. It Is wors in a Christian upon several accounts. 1. The Lawgiver. 2.
The Rites. VI. 3. The Obligation.

HITHERTO we have seen nothing but Dry Law, the rough Issu of Authority and
Will, haling us to the unrecommended performance by chains of Compulsion;
without any gentler Attractives, that may Invite our Affections, or Persuade
our Reason.

And as the Country has be'n dry and barren, so have the Ways be'n craggy;
Troublesome to the Best, and Unpassable to the Most understandings. The Reader
must understand the Rules of Reasoning, and must be ar no little pains to mesure
the Apostl's discurs by Those Rules.

We now com to a pleasanter Country, and smoother ways: From the Apostl's
Argument to our Lords, which is full of endearments to our Affections, and free
from difficulties to our Understandings, though we never sat at the feet of
Gamaliel, or any other Tutor but Love.

For whoever loves our Lord's person, can no sooner hear that He is concerned,
but he finds abundant obligation, and can easily supersede all others.

That we may take the clearer vieu of this new Suasory, we shall distinctly
consider,

1. This is the Adequate Rite of Worship, whereby we own our crucified Lord.

2. As it is the Monument, so it is the Effigies of his Death and its Benefits.

3. It is not so appropriate to our Lords Own interest, as to forget Ours; for
even to us it is, 1. Easy. 2. Pleasant. 3. Beneficial.

I. THIS is the Adequate Rite of Worship, whereby we own our crucified Lord.
The Critical Tessera, The Badge, The Livree, whereby a Christian is
distinguished from Jew, Turk, Heathen, and Atheist.

All of All other Religions agree in All other offices of Devotion; Prayer,
Thanksgiving, Fasting, Preaching, are All of them Holy exercises; but of
Natural Religion, common to All mankind: Only by This ar we distinguished from
them All, as by our proper Livree, given us by our Lord for This very End, that
we may be known to be His.

It Is true, we differ from Jews, etc. in this, that we pray in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, etc. But we are not thereby distinguishable to any but such as Hear
and Understand our words: This Sacrament is the Universal Character, whereby we
are known and read of All men whatsoever, even Strangers, and Deaf, though the
one cannot hear, nor the other understand our words, by seeing this Action
apprehend our Profession.

That we may the more fully understand the importance which this oght to carry
to our care, Three Considerations will be useful.

1. Nature has taght all mankind, and God himself has confirmed it, That
every Religion should have some solen Rite, whereby it may be known to the very
ey from all Other Religions.

2. Those Critical Rites, however slight in the Matter, are yet to be highly
esteemed because of That office.

3. To this General Reason our Lord has added Particular marks of his favor
toward this Institution.

1. Nature has taught all mankind, that Every Religion should be known from
every Other by Proper Rites. Nature and Reason dictated that Law to the Romans
[Sacerdotes quae quoque divo decorae grataeque sint hostiae providento.] They,
and all other Heathen, multiplied Rites as they did Gods; so that those who
were skilful, needed not any further information, what was the God? than the
knowledge of, what was the Sacrifice? and what the solennities? Jupiter's Rites
were different from Pluto's. What was thought acceptable to Venus, was odios to
Diana: Nor would Pa^ be pleased with the Rites of Bacchus.

And for This Reason was it required, as a necessary qualification in a Jewish
Ruler (who was to receve and judge of an accusation concerning Idolatry) that
he should be skilful in the Rites of Heathen worship, lest he should sentence
any one to death, who had not worshipped the false God in his Proper manner: For
(says Maimonides) If any one worshipped Pehor in a manner proper to Mercury, or
Mercury in a manner proper to Pehor, he was guilt^^s.

But if any one say, that as were the Gods of the Heathen, so were their Rites,
mere Creatures of human folly; and that This concept of the Jewish Doctors, was
never authorized by any Law of God: we cannot but acknowledge, that thus much
of it God has authorized; That it is fit Every Religion should be known by its
proper Rites. For

He was careful so to distinguish his Own Peopl and Worship. Circumcision, the
Passover, Sabbath, etc. are all marked with This Asterisk [It shall be a sign
between me and you] And to This Reason are reduced by the now-named son of
Maimon; Most, if not All the Negative Ceremonials, as well as the Positive.

Many indifferent things were therefore forbidden to Gods peopl, because
practiced by the neighbor Idolaters. For how could it beseem the Majesty of a
Divine Law, to forbid a Barber to round the head, or mar the corners of a
beard; or the Plowman, to sow his land with diverse seed; or the Weaver, to
weave a garment of linen and woolen; or the Cook, to sees the Kid in the dams
milk; or the Gardener, to graff upon a strange stock, etc. Does God take care
for Beards, Garments, etc? No doubtless! but under those small matters, great
were hidden; Those were Rites of Zabius superstition, and God would have His
peopl forbear their Ways, as well as their Daughters; that they might be known
from Idolaters, as well by Negative as Positive distinctions.

II. NOW whatever is Rational in the Old Law, is to be Retained in the New, but
Accommodated to the change This therefore has its distinguishing Rites too, yet
no more than may consist with the generos liberty, to which we are thereby caled.

To which purpose St. Augustine speaks very well upon another occasion:
Primum itaque tenere te volo, quod est hujus disputationis caput, Dominum
nostrum Josum Christum, sicut ipse in Evangelio loquitur, leui jugo nos
subdidisse and s^rcina (...): Unde Sacramentis, numero paucissimus,
observatione facillimis, significatione praestantissimis, societatem novi
populi colligavit. All the multitude of intolerable Ceremonies ar reduced to
two, the smalest number possibl, always practiced as necessary in all honorable
Fraternities.

For as in all such Orders, the Knight is Once publikly Instaled, and ever
after wears some Badge of his Order; so has our Lord ordained concerning the
Members of his Church: By one Sacrament they are admitted, once for All; by the
Other, they ever after Appear his Disciples.

Of the Former, our Lords conference with Nicodemus well understood,
discovers both the Meaning and the Necessity: And well understood it cannot
be, without a praevios knowledge of the Practice and Doctrine of the Jews in
Baptism.

But whoever knows that they receved Proselytes into Covenant by Baptism, and
believed that thereby the Heathen soul was taken away, and a New one put in his
place; that in conformity to this Belief, the man was said to be Newborn, a
New ceature, a New man, etc. and This so properly, that he lost All Relation to
his former kindred, so as to be thereby free to marry his Mother, Sister, or
Daughter: He who considers this (and only He) easily understands the
Reasonableness of our Lords discourse. For

Nicodemus, convinced that our Lord was a teacher com'n from God, because none
could do the wonders that He did, except God were with him; Yet ashamed to
confess this openly, because of his Fellow-rulers; makes his address by Night:
but This our Lord, in the style familiar to the Doctors, tells him is not
sufficient; for he must openly take upon himself Baptism, the badge of a
Disciple.

Nicodemus not heeding the Rabinical sons of Regeneration, wonders at the
strange and impossibl necessity of entering again into the mothers womb; and
our Lord no less wonders at his wonder, that being a master in Israel,
understood not a Precept so familiar; and thence takes occasion to tell him,
that his Disciples must believe much greater Mysteries. If (says he) I tell
you Earthly things and ye believe not, how will ye believe if I tell you of
heavenly things? Meaning by Earthly and Heavenly (as St. Paul afterward did,
Phil. 2.10. and in several other places:) by the Former the Jewish, by the
Later the Christian Mysteries; whereof he gives a Specimen in his coming from
Heaven, his returning Thither, and his being There, and his crucifixion for the
salvation of the world.

That which we mention This for, is to show that our Lord manifestly adopted
the Jewish Tradition of Baptism into the Gospel, making it then a necessary
badge of a Disciple; as he also afterward did, when he returned to Heaven,
requiring his Apostles to go and Disciple all nations, Baptising them; for this
reason, because whoever believes and is Baptized (i. e. publicly professes
his Discipleship) shall be saved. By all which it is apparent, that our Lord
appointed this as a Livree, whereby his servants must profess to own Him for
their Master, if they should by him be owned and saved.

III. YET is not this the Adaequate, nay nor the Principal badge of a
Christian, For we receve This but Once, and that without our own consent. As
were we when this Seal was put upon us, so was its Impression, when we came to
age, we were at liberty to Own or Reneg it; and whether we do This or That,
appears by no other visibl mark, but only our Receving or Neglecting This more
Critical Sacrament, in due season appointed by our Lord, as a more Lasting and
Always Visible cognizance.

I say our Lord appointed this Other Sacrament [in Due season.] For had he do'n
it sooner, his Disciples would have forgotten his Command before they
understood it (yet could he not forbear to Prophecy of it, saying, He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life.)

But since his Death must needs be understood, when he had suffered it, even by
Those who before knew not what it meant; he therefore took the time when it was
in a manner Present, as fittest for the Institution, which was both to
Commemorate it, and Distinguish his Disciples by such constant Repetitions,
whereof Baptism was incapable.

Those who are honored with the Noble Order of the Garter, as they are solenly
Installed, so ar they Obliged ever after to wear the George and the Star, as
permanent badges of the Honor and Vow they have receved; and if Any person,
however solenly Installed, shall afterward lay his Habit aside, he does not
only Offend against the Law of the Order, but Disclaim his Interest in it, as
refusing to be esteemed a Brother of that Royal Fraternity.

This Sacrament is our George and our Star; This, if we constantly wear not, we
tacitly renounce our Christianity. Those very Persons, who perhaps will not
Admit (certainly do not sufficiently Press) this for a Necessary Duty;
abundantly urge it to other purposes.

When they are required to assign the marks of a true Church, they name
Administration of the Sacraments for One; and it will troubl any reasonabl man
to deny, that if the Administration be the mark of a True Church, the Reception
must be so of a True Member of the Church.

And some Ultramarine Churches have found it necessary to declare, as the
Council of Agatha did of old, that those who receve not the Sacraments, oght
not to be reputed as Christians. For which censure, though we have already seen
Reason sufficient, yet perhaps we may see more.

IV. 2. THOSE Rites whereby One Religion is Crititically distinguished from
Another, however slight the Matter may seem, ar highly to be esteemed for That
office.

Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, said the Apostl, yet
was the One mortal in the Old Testament, and the Other in the New, and Both
upon the same Reason; He that was circumcised was a debtor unto the whole Law.

To eat an Apple, or any other Fruit of a Tree, is a small matter; but when the
forbearance was made a Sacrament, i. e. a Specimen of the new made Creatures
owning the dominion of the Creator; Then, Eating was condemned, not only as an
act of Misdemeanor, but Rebellion: and the Smith which thought it too much that
God should be so severe for an Apple, might be answered, that it was not for
the Apple, but for the experiment he thereby gave of his disowning Gods
authority over him.

And for This reason did God make Those offenses Capital, which had otherwise
be'n Venial. He that was uncircumcised; He that kept not the Passover; He that
brake the Sabbath, etc. That soul must be cut off from his people; because God
had said of every one of those (otherwise slight) performances, This shall be a
sign between Me and You.

This dubl care of God, as well in Negative as Positive Ceremonies, taught his
peopl to infer, That if a Jew must forbear the Rites of Gentilism, then must
the Gentile (as for the same Reason, so upon the same Penalty) forbear those of
Judaism: Since the One no less than the Other, was necessary to the
Discriminarive, which was the Adaequate virtue of the Law.

As God therefore made it mortal to the Jew to Neglect such Rites; so did the
Jews make it to a Gentile to Usurp them, as thereby robbing them of their
proper virtue; since by being common to Both, they were disabled to distinguish
the One from the Other.

The Gentile (says the Gemera Babylonica) which observed the Law of Moses, was
guilty of death (How so?) because it is said, Moses commanded us a Law for an
Inheritance. It is an Inheritancs to Us, not to the Gentile. Yea, their most
Learned Maimonides says, that if a Gentile celebrated a Sabbath, though he
mistook the day, yet if he did it with intention to keep the Sabbath, he was
guilty of death. They did not indeed inflict death on such offenders, but
stripes only; yet not without admonition, that he was guilty of death, though
not punished with it.

Since therefore our Lord left us This Law, as Moses did His Ceremonial [for an
Inheritance] the Reason being the Same in the Law, the Crime must be the Same
in the Disobedience.

V. THE Same in its Reason, but incomparably Greater in Haynosness; For by how
much the Covenant is Better, the Lawgiver Greater, the Redemtion more costly,
etc. by so much more criminal must it be, to omit This, than any Mosaical Rite.
And how much That is, if we enquire, we must do it in the style of the Author
to the Hebrews, not to seek satisfaction, but to express amazement. He that
despised Moses 's Law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses: of how
much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden
under foot the Son of God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant,
wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has do'n despite to the
Spirit of Grace?

I grant, that This dreadful Thunder is not leveled against the neglect of This
Institution, as such; but against total Apostasy from Christianity: yet if we
carefully examine, we shall find the Reason, yea the very Phrase, reach the
former. For if we reduce the Rhetorical expressions to plain Reason, we find
the Christian Religion balanced against the Mosaical, and advanced above it in
a triple opposition; the Lawgivers, the Rites, and the Promulgation.

In the first, both parties are expressed, Moses, and the Son of God. In the
other two, One is expressed and the Other employed. 2. The Blood of the Covenant
wherewith a Christian is Sanctified, implicitly compared with the Blood of the
Heifer, wherewith a Jew was sprinkled. 3. The Spirit of Grace, in whose mirific
power our Savior first, and his Apostls afterward, proclaimed the Gospel, and
whom to Blaspheme was unpardonable; weighed against the Angel that proclaimed
the Law at Mount Sinai.

2. The Second is to Us most considerabl, That whereas our Lord styled This Cup
the New Covenant in His Blood, The Apostl points at it in the Proper Phrase,
as That Character whereby a Christian Professor is to be Known viz. The blood
of the Covenant wherein he was sanctified.

For he speaks by Metonym of the Sign for the signified, a Figure Elegant,
Emphatical, and Common, It is as if one should thus express a Knight of the
Garter, deserting his Order: He has torn off his Ribon, Broken in pieces his
George, Left off his Starr, etc. Every one sees that the Laying aside these
several pieces of his Habit, are so many Descriptions of his Apostasy, bicaus
the Wearing of them ar so many Cognisances of a Brother: Since therefore this
Supper Has (I should say, Had) the Same Office in the Christian Church, as
Those Cognisances have in That Fraternity; therefore must the Desertion thereof
be equally Expressive of an Apostate from Christianity.

There is only This (and no disadvantageos) difference: That This One Singly,
signifies as much in a Christian, as Those Severals did Jointly, either in
Knight or Jew. He that kept not the Sabbath, might retene other signs of a
Jew; he might be Circumcised, keep the New Moons, the Passover, etc. But at the
date of this Epistl, This Cup was Constantly celebrated by Every Christian, in
Every Assembly, as an Indispensibl (because Critical) Rite of public worship;
so that it was the same thing to desert the Lords Table, and his Church.

God forbid we should not allow for so Great a Change, (however unjustifieabl)
in our Publik worship; but should charge such as Apostates from Christ, who
perhaps fear less to Shed rheir Own Blood in his Service, than to Drink His at
his Table: yet were it to be wished that we would better consider, that Moses's
own Child was in great danger to be destroyed for want of Circumcision, and he
that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day, thought as litl of Apostasy from God,
as any of us do from Christ: Yea, look we upon the words before us: Who were
they that dyed without mercy as dispising Moses's law? Were they such only as
Totally fell from Judaism? Were they not All such as neglected any One of those
Rites, that were therefore Capital, bicaus Distinctive?

When therefore all is considered, we can plead nothing but the goodness of our
Intentions, or the greater goodness of Gods grace; if upon the same reason, we
should be caled to account for our omission of This Rite, no less Important and
Indispensibl.

Yea, as we have already seen, if the Reason be the same, the Crime is much
greater; not only because of the Better Law and Lawgiver, but because of the
Greater Contemt. There, the Law was despised; here the Person, who is blood is
the matter of the Law: That was the Law of Moses; This the Blood of the Son of
God: That was despised; This is trodden under foot: and therefore upon so Many
and so Great accounts; of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy
that is guilty of so much greater contumely.

But because we usually judge of the Price which the Lawgiver puts upon his
Law, by the Penalty which he annexeth to it; lest we be temted to think our
Lords Supper not intended in the words we now com from viewing; And its
deserter so far from worthy of any sorer punishment, that indeed he is worthy
of None; because None is threatened by our Lord in his Institution: It is
therefore necessary that,

Thirdly we observe,

IV. 3. WITH What Obligation our Lord has bound This duty upon us.

We are here fundamentally to consider the difference, between the Laws of
Christ, and Those of Moses, and all Other lawgivers. Our Lord declared his
Kingdom not of this world, and it is plain his Punishments are not.

For though the Apostl, the more to prevail with the Corinthians, speak no Less,
and perhaps More, of Temporal than of Eternal judgments; yet does he herein
rather speak his Own Reason, than our Lords Revelation; applying himself ad
homines, to their sensual apprehensions, not to any declared threats of our
Lord; who has not bound his Command upon us by any Chains of Fear, but the
much Stronger, and more proper Bonds of Love. And if the Prophet might make it
a complaint against Ephraim, I led them with the cords of a man, with bonds of
Love, yet they knew not that I healed them; it must not be Diminution, but
Aggravation of the crime, if we break Such bonds asunder, and cast Such cords
from us. The word used by the Prophet is the same, whence our English [Cable]
seems derived, and written by the very same Letters. But we need not contend
with the Translation, For rhose Bonds of Love ar Both; Cables for Strength, and
Cords for Compliance; Silken Cables whose Soft, Smooth flexiblness, twineth
about the heart; and whose Strength so forces it, that it cannot so much as
wish, either to Slip or Break the Obligation.

These ar called the Cords of a man; they lay hold on our Humanity, fasten upon
our very Nature, prevail on us by force of Reason. And they are the Bonds of
Love; no less suitabl to the Nature of the Gospel, and more particlarly of This
Institution, than to Our Own.

The very Design of the Command, is a Thankful remembrance of the Death of the
Author: and it had be'n most incongrous, to kindle the Spirit of Thankfulness
with the blustering of Threats. [Do this, or Dy] may very well suit with the
Spirit of Bondage; But [Do this in remembrance of my Death] to an Evangelical
Spirit, is much more Potent as well as Proper; than [Do This for fear of Your
Own.]

As our Lord chose this more Obliging way, so has he Improved it with all such
Endearments, as may fasten it most Powerfully upon our Affections; that so it
may not be possibl for any despiser to impute his Kindness toward Us, to
Coldness toward his Institution.

CHAP. II. This is Appropriate to our Lords Person and recommended by signal
marks of his favor.
1. This Command appropriat to our Lords Person and Humanity. And thereby I.
Endeareth all other Laws by new obligations proper to the Nature of a Man. II.
2. Is it self a New Law upon a New account. III. It is not only a Monument
proper to our Lords memory, but a Statu lively representing him. IV. Our Lord
expressed his esteem by his care in recommending it in the most advantageos
circumstances. 1. It was the Last night in his Life. 2. The night in which he
was (and knew he should be) bebetrayed. V. The pervers returns many make to
This care. 1. The Profane make it their Last act, as if it were to show forth
their own death. 2. Some make it their Last care, by preferring every other
before it. Business, unpreparednes, uncharitablenes. VI. The Scrupulos,
refuseing to receve because hindered by impossibl conditions, blemish our Lords
wisdom and goodness.

THIS, and This Only is Appropriate to our Lords Person and Humane Nature, and
has thereby a dubl singularity of power.

1. It adds a New inforcement to former Laws upon their Old account.

2. It is it self a New Law upon a New account.

I. IT endeareth all Former Laws upon their Common account, which well cast up
amounts to this End Total: They promote Our happiness, and that in all Kinds
and Capacities, Private and Public, Inward and Outward, Temporal and Eternal.
They exalt us above the Troubles, by putting us above the Cares and Pollutions
of this world; make us both Useful and Amiable in our generations, Spiritual in
our affections, Godlike in our conversation, Perfect as our heavenly father is
perfect, as much in Happiness, as Goodness: they promote not any other interest
of God, but his delight in our felicity: And This is a great argument to invite
our obedience, twisted of Interest and Gratitude.

And the bonds of Gratitude which oblige us to obey God for Kindness of his
Commands ar dubled by That of his Promises. He imputes it as a Service, and
promises Rewards, infinitely greater than the best Service could pretend to,
if we will accept of the happiness he offers us.

And what can Love do more? Yes! our Lord has do'n yet More, Infinitely More
for us. He has not only taken Care, but Paid for our happiness; and the Price
was great as the Love that paid it, and the Obligation thence derived greater
than Both the Other. For his Laws and Promises showed the Love indeed, but
mingled with the Authority, of a Father. His Power was thereby Governed, but
not Weakened: they provide for Our happiness, without robbing Him of any part of
his own.

What the Psalmist says of his Works, we may apply to his Laws and Promises: He
spoke and it was do'n, he commanded and they were created.

But the work our Redemtion, cost him not only a word speaking, but strong
cries and tears; whereby he purchased to himself Another Right; so much more
Obliging to Us, by how much more Costly to Himself than that of a Creator.

That our great Lawgiver should take upon himself the form of a servant, and
become Obedient; yea, that of a Malefactor, and become obedient unto Death, even
the death of the Cross: That he should with his Own blood purchase us a Pardon,
for breaking his Own so gracios Laws; and Himself, a peculiar peopl zelos of
good works; and thereby capabl of his so Promised Rewards; leaving us an exampl
that we should follow his steps, which it is no less Shameful to Desert, than
Impossibl to Ourgo, either in Active or Passive obedience: This is indeed a
most Admirabl, and no less Powerful charm, to constrain us to follow such a
Captain: These Things for their admirable Loveliness, the Angels desire to look
into; and by such cords of Love, Humanity must needs be Attracted;

No voice therefore of this Captain of our Salvation caled more loud upon Us to
Follow Him, than That whereby he caled upon God as forsaking him. Never more a
King, than when Crowned with thorns, Anointed with sweat and blood, and
Enthroned on his Cross.

There, There was he exalted on the throne of Love, There did he stretch out
his inviting Arms, There did he open, not his Arms only, but his Heart, who is
wide door let out his Blood, to make room for Us. This does himself call his
[Exaltation] I, when I am exalted, will draw All men unto me. All Men, of All
Humors and Complexions, All Nations and Ages.

The stubbornest metal, that will not be Broken by his Authority will be Melted
by his Love; which cannot be better Kindled or Fueled in our hearts, than by
the wood of the Cross.

Nor can That be better ordered, than by This Sacrament which was appointed for
That very End.

By This he is still set forth Crucified among Us (as heretofore among the
Galations) however remote in time or place. By this he is still Exalted to his
Cross. By This does his Heart still open it self, to send forth fresh blood;
and his Mouth, to utter new cries.

But oh! those Cries must be New indeed; and to New, but Sad purposes. On his
Cross, he cried upward, to his seemingly deserting Father, [My God! my God! why
have thou forsaken me] But at his Table, he cries downward, to his too really
deserting disciples: My friends! My friends! why do you forsake me! Is it
nothing to You, Oh all you that pass by? Behold and see if there be any sorrow
like unto My sorrow, which is do'n unto Me, wherewith the Lord Once afflicted
me in the day of his fierce anger for your sakes, and which you still repete by
your unkind neglects of the salvation I then so dearly purchased, and now so
lovingly offer.

Whether his Blood by speaking more Sweetly, do not also speak more Powerfully,
than his Commands, yea, or Promises can do; I neither Dare, nor Need to
determine. All that I pretend to, I hope is plain, viz. That This Sacrament, by
showing forth his Death, draws us with a New attractive, and binds us with
New obligations; to obey such a Lord, so purchasing, and so offering salvation.

II. 2. THIS does not only add New Obligations to former Laws, upon their Old
account; but is it self a New Law, upon a New account. This is therefore the
Cord of a Man, because it draws and binds us to our Lords humanity. He that
said, [If you Love me keep my Commandments,] recommendeth them after the same
proportion, as they have interest in his Person; to which therefore since This
has greatest Relation, it must also have greatest Claim to our Obedience: If
you love me, you will keep all my Commandments, because they are Mine: but This
above All, because it is not only My Commandment but My Monument.

Its Relation is so singular to our Lords Person, that it is Incommunicable
even to one part of his Nature.

In all the Rest, the whole Trinity is concerned, because they serve the whole
Divine Nature. In keeping them we obey the Father also, from whom he professes
to have receved them; If we partake his spirit, the Holy Ghost is honored; but
Spirits have not Flesh and Blood, which in this ar commemorated. By the Rest,
we serve God; By this, we honor the Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ
Jesus; to whose Mediating, suffering person, this service is adaequately Proper.

All our founders, as they have provided us Maintenance, so have they such
Statutes, as they thought most conductive to the enjoyment of their bounty, and
the service of God's Church: And some of them have left us particular ones, for
commemoration of their own Persons: Those we own our selves obliged to Obey,
but these to Embrace; and ar ready to pronounce That man Unworthy the Benefit;
who should contemn the Person, in such commemorative Statutes of the Benefactor.

This is the Sole Law of the later kind; In the rest he speaks as a Master, a
Shepherd, a Lawgiver; instructs us in our duty to God, our Neighbor and our
Selves: Every one points some Other way: This Only points to his Own body,
and says, Do this for My sake; Do it in remembrance of Me, of My Body, My
Blood, My Death: The Death which I was willing to suffer for your sakes, you
cannot sure think unworthy to be remembered for Mine.

WHATEVER influence this may have upon Others, one would think it could not
fail to reach Those, who is whole Religion is employed in amoros passions toward
our Lords Person, no way so much, or so distinctly concerned, as in This duty.

To cloth our selves with His righteousness, to lay hold upon him by Faith, to
be married to him by assurance, to say None but Christ, None but Christ, He is
Mine, and I am His, etc.

These and the like amorevolezzas cannot sit but with an ill grace, upon such
as neglect This office; which himself has appointed, as the Only one, whereby
we celebrate our Love to his Person, as a Man, and after the manner of Men,
Visibly, and Solenly.

III. 2. THIS Sacrament has not only the Superscription of our Lord, but the
Image too. Absalon built himself a Pillar, for the same reason as our Lord
instituted This Sacrament: That wore Absalons Name, but not his Likeness. Lots
wife became a Pillar of Salt. i. e. an everlasting monument of Gods judgments:
We may (for oght I know) innocently believ, as many do, that she was turned to
a Statu of Salt; which in some sens might be called her Body, though it retained
nothing of it, but the Dimensions: But This Sacrament is more than either
Monument or Image; It represents, not only his Body, but his Soul; not only
his Death, but his Benefits; nor does it only Represent, but Exhibit them All.

Suppose we now it were no more but a lifeless Statu; Erected for no other end,
but merely to commemorate his Person: The lowest Consequence of this lowest
Supposition, must be This; that all the Honor or Contemt we show it, must pass
on, and reach his Person.

Because the Persons of the Caesar's were sacred, therefore were their Statues so
too: not only Secure from violence, but Securities to such as fled to them
from it; and on the contrary, those who maliced the Persons, showed it to the
Images, either by casting dirt upon them, or (if they could) by casting them
down to the dirt. Whoever prophaneth this Sacrament, as the Corinthians did,
defiles our Lords Statu with dirt; whoever wilfully neglects it, gives it a
pull, toward casting it to the ground. To forget a Commemorative, or Hide a
Representative; is no better than casting down a Statu; who is whole worth
consists in it is Visibility.

Nor can it ever be more considerable than now, that the affront to the Person
rises in equality with the Liveliness of the Statu, and the Care and Cost
employed in setting it up. When ever we see a piece exactly artificial; we
conclude both the skill and care of the Artist suitably great. A great Artist
gave This for the reason of his industry in Painting, I paint (said he) for
Eternity. This is to show fotrh our Lords death [till he com] and he was
careful it is Perfection should be suitabl to it is Office and Duration.

What is it, dear Soul! what is it that thou would contemplate in thy
beloved? His Passion? Behold how the Bread is broken, and the Wine poured out.
His Benefits? Behold Bread that strengthens, and Wine that chears the heart.
Would thou melt in compassion? Behold he suffers for thee. Would thou
be ravished with Joy and Thankfulness? Behold he Feasts thee. ctc. So Many, and
so Contrary motions and aspects, All so lively represented; proclaim the Author
to have employed as great Care, as Art; and as great Affection as either, in
making a Piece so many ways Perfect.

IV. BESIDE these Intrinsecal endearments, ariseing from the Beauty and Design
of the Law it self; we may observe our Lords care, to honor it with the most
advantageos Circumstances.

Our Apostl is very careful to mind us that it was [the same night in which he
was betrayed] and good reason had he, so to remark this Season; since our Lord
himself expressed a wonderful Esteem for it. With a Desire (said he) have I
desired to eat This Passover with you before I suffer. And why such longing for
[This] above All other Passovers? Even because it came just before he suffered.
1. It was the last night of his life, And 2. The night wherein he was betrayed,
and foreknew he should be so; and consequently, as it was the Last, so the
Bitterest of his life.

1. It was the Last. Other Passovers Prefigured his death; This both Prefigured
and Accompanied it.

Had he do'n This in any Other Passover; he must both more Incongruosly have
commanded his Apostls, to commemorate what was future and unknown; and less
Powerfully have recommended what was yet Distant; and perhaps the intervening
time would have Blotted the command out of their Memory, before the meaning
were Printed upon their Understandings; which apprehended nothing of his
intended death, 'till That last night.

But now his Death being in a manner Present, Give That Life to the Law, which
it Took from the Author: For the words of dying persons, Live longest, and
Reign most powerfully, in the survivors affections: Potent, because they carry
with them all the Powers of departing life; and Venerabl, because attended with
all the Horrors of approaching death; as coming, not only From the Soul, but
With it too: They contract into a point, all the rays of dear affection in the
Speaker; and most powerfully inflame it in the Hearer: A Truth, more sensibly
felt by such as have received the Last requests of departing friends; than can
be expressed in Any, but such Dying Language.

I doubt whether All Augustus's living caresses, expressed so much Love to his
Livia, or stamped so Deep and Lasting impression upon her Memory; as did his
dying complement: Livia conjugii nostri memor vive and vale. What Expressions
and Incentives of dear Affections, did those few syllabls, at Such a Season
contein? He thereby told her, that he was now to leav Empire, Life, and Her.
But it was in Her Power, to preserv him in a great part of All Three,
especially That, which of All was dearest to him. He had Long made her heart
his Throne, and Now desired to have it for his Monument: he therefore prayed
both the Gods and Her, to take care of That life, wherein was preserved the
remains of his Own. To this purpose, but infinitely more obligingly, spoke our
dying Lord: not in the language of a faint, but quiet sickness; but in the
Agonies of a tormented Soul; not in a few Complemental words, suddenly offering
themselves to Augustus's mind, and perhaps as suddenly flitting out of Livia's,
certainly dying with her; but upon a premeditated Design, to settle a lasting
Monument; whose firm durablness should Fix the fugitive impression; and by
constant returns, perpetually Renew it; so to keep his Blood from Drying up,
and his Death from Dying.

His Last Command, oght to be as powerful to work Obedience in his Disciples;
as were his last Cries, to work Faith in the Centurion; since These showed no
less the Strength of his Love, than Those did the Vigor of Life, at the very
point of Death.

2. But much more, when we further consider, that as it was the Last, so was it
the most Dreadful night. This Passover had not only the same bitter herbs,
with others; but much bitterer Gall. He had the Devil for his guest; and he
that dipped with him in the dish, was about to Betray him; And he had his
merciless enemies for his attendants, waiting with swords and staves to take
and destroy him. This was That dreadful night, wherein his Soul, oppressed with
horrors, complained, That it was exceeding heavy, even to the death: The same
dismal night, wherein the stabbing agonies of his tormented mind, made every
pore of his body a wound, bleeding great grumos drops, and those so
plentifully, as to run down to the ground. The same terribl night, wherein the
dreadful prospect of his approaching sufferings so confounded his faculties;
that with dubled and trebled importunities, he prayed to have That Cup taken
from him, for drinking whereof he came into the World. The same amazing night,
wherein he was so near sinking, that he needed an assisting Angel, to support
him under his burden. Even in That most hideos night, did his care of This
Institution, so prevail over All Those Horrors, which prevailed over his
faculties; as to bring him to a truce, and he seemed almost to forget, what
night it was.

To Forget? No, but (what was incomparably more) to Long for it, to Desire it
With a Desire, i. e. with a vehement desire, with such a desire, as outvoiced
all the cries of his terrifying and tormenting passions.

Could we possibly understand the load that made him complain That his Soul was
exceeding heavy even unto death; and how much his Longings for This very
season, outweighed so great a load; then possibly may we adjust the esteem he
had for This his Dear Institution.

V. BUT if on the other side we compare the Affection, wherewith We Receive it
(shall I say?) with that, wherewith we find our Lord Recommended it; we shall
find Solomon's words most perversely verified: As in water face answers to
face, so does the heart of man to man: For as the Reflex is directly Opposite
to the Incident; answering the Right side, with the Left; so does (our
Obedience shall I say, or our Performance? no, but) our Neglect, answer our
Lords Care.

He chose the Last night of his Life for the Institution; and many answer This,
by choosing the Last of theirs, for the Performance; as if appointed to show
forth, not His Death, but Their own. When they have receved the Sentence of
death in themselves, and ar immediately to receve That of God; Then first do they
think fit to receve the Body and Blood of Christ, as a kind of Charm, somewhat
better than the Sign of the Cross, to fright the Devil from seizing his own.

When the Physician has declared, or other Indications make it apparent, that
there is no hope of returning to Those sins, which Therefore only they repent
of, bicaus they are Past; when the Will is sealed, wherein they bequeath That
soul to God, whereof they had so long given the Devil possession; Then, in
commutation for a whole life, spent in contemt of This and All other holy
exercises; the Minister is sent for, some good words spoken, Absolution granted,
and Sealed with This Sacrament. And now what uncharitabl Infidel can doubt, but
that the man is Pardoned, in virtue of the One; and receved into Eternal joys,
in that of the Other? since our Lord himself promised, that Whosoever Eats
his flesh and Drinks his blood has Eternal life; or how can This Bread and
Wine possibly be imagined ar Any time fuller of Virtue, than when so lately
receved, that the digestive faculty of the stomach, has not at all impaired it?

BUT others do not Thus put it off to the very Last. Many own it, if not a
Duty, yet an acceptabl act of Devotion; Laudably, though perhaps not
Necessarily, to be performed in the mids of life: Yet even Those, (though not in
the Same, in Another wretched sens) make it their Last Care.

When All other Interests and Inclinations ar served; Then perhaps shall This
have it is turn. But if any thing else crave it, however Slight or Trifling it
be; This Holy Office must yield it Precedence.

Pretenses so Slender, that a hundred twisted together, shall not be sufficient
to draw one from a Gossiping, or any other Meeting; shall singl be abl to draw
him from the Lords Table: With Solomon's yawning Sluggard he cries there is a
Lion in the way, a Lion in the streets; when indeed he fears no danger But to
his Lust or Ease.

I had business says one. But (pray Sir) what was That Business? Was it greater
than what our Lord had, in That last horrid Night, wherein he forced all his
dreadful crowds of griefs and fears, to give way to This Care? Was it so
Importunate, that it could not be Neglected? or so Urgent, that it could not be
Delayed? or so Suden, that it could not be Prevented? Did thou use all
indevors, to Keep or Dispatch it out of the way? Did it Surprise thee just in
the nick, when thou were going to the Church; and upon the very spot Disable
thee from performing thy then fixed resolution? Did thou Wrestle against it
with thy utmost Strength, and yield to it no otherwise, than as to an Invincibl
Necessity?

If so, thou art so far excusabl. For Necessity has This only of good nature,
that it Defends those most, who have most Resisted it. But if thou have either
Wilfully Draw'n this pretended hindrance upon thy self, or Carelessly Suffered
it to surprise thee, or Tamely Yielded to it, or be'n any way Defective in
striving against it; look how many grains the Hindrance falls short of
Insuperabl, and thy Endevors of Perfect; so many does thy Excuse, of
Justifiable.

BUT, the business which is too Slight, may be otherwise Innocent: And if it
condemn when put into the Opposite scale; what will it do in the Criminal! Many
plead their very Negligence, in excuse for their Disobedience; as if they were
therefore Not Guilty, bicaus they are Dubly so.

I was unprepared says he. And I easily believ it, For None duly Prepared will
be Absent. He had not Examined Himself. I know That too. For he that has do'n
so, must find that Omission of a duty, is a Crime. I may add, he has not
Examined his Obligation; for had he do'n so, he must have found, that the Same
Apostl, from who is mistaken words he deriveth his excuse; speaks Imperatively
to Both alike: Let a man Examine himself, and so let him Eat.

Go to the next Sessions thou trifler. Go, and There learn if any Offender be
quitted, upon pleading himself Therefore not guilty of the crime he is endited
for, bicaus That was the consequent of Another: See if a Thief be quitted, if
he plead, he stole bicaus he was Covetos: or a Murderer, if he plead he killed
bicaus he was Malicios: Or a Rebel, if he plead, he Rebelled because Ambitios.
But if neither These, nor any Other Malefactors, be quitted for pleading One
crime in justification of Another; then know, that for the same reason, thou
can not be justified, by pleading Unpreparedness in excuse for Disobedience;
since That is a breach of as positive a Law as This.

BUT Unpreparedness, though it cannot Wholely Justify, may in Part Excuse it
self. It is but a Singl omission, has broken No Other Law, but this One. There are, who go higher; and plead the Greatest Guilt.

Charity is the Greatest Command in the Moral; and if possibl, yet More highly
enjoined in the Evangelical Law. That, is as much a Moral mark of a Discipl; as
This is a Ritual one. For he that said Do this in remembrance of Me, said also,
By This shall all men know that you ar my Disciples, if ye love one another.

Yet some ar so impudent, as to plead their very Uncharitableness, in bar of
This Duty; as if they were therefore innocent, bicaus they cast off Both their
badges; that they may not make One, give the Ly to the Other.

I am not in Charity says One, and to this Another adds, I never will be.
These ar indeed Unworthy to com to the Lords Table, but so they are to be caled
by his Name. I wonder not, that Such should be afraid to Eat This Bread and
Drink This Cup; but I wonder, that they dare Eat, or Drink, or Sleep, at all;
much more that they dare Pray in our Lords Name; and most of all, that they
dare do it in his Words.

For he that says, Forgive me as I forgive; while he denies to Forgive,
needs no other Guilt, nor no other Sentence, to exclude him, not only from
This, but from the Eternal Supper of the Lord.

Under These Three heads com the general Excuses which are pleaded as hindrances
from Performing, what Nothing could hinder our Lord from Commanding. Business,
Unpreparedness, Uncharitableness. The first, too slight to be mentioned. The
second, too criminal to be justified: The last, too gross to be pardoned.

VI. THERE are other less General, but less Frivolos excuses; which carry more
appearance of Conscience, but not a jot more of Reason; as being equally weak
upon a contrary account; These ar as much too Strong, as Those ar too Weak.
These cannot be just excuses, bicaus they are Easy, and oght to be avoided; nor
These, bicaus they are Unavoidable.

For when we seriosly consider, that our Lord Therefore chose Such a season,
that by the Difficulties which himself broke through, in the Institution, he
might teach us to yield to None in the Performance; we must find it no less
unreasonabl, to think he would Clog such a duty with Impossibl Conditions; than
that he would have it postponed to our Slightest Inconveniences.

For it is irrational to say, He valued it so high, as to think it worthy his
Greatest Care; and yet left it so encumbered with difficulties, that it must
Rarely, if Ever, be celebrated:

Those therefore who object such Hindrances, as must Freqently, if not
Constantly occurr, and ar as hardly to be Overcom'd, as Avoided; must needs
cast a great blemish upon That wisdom, and goodness; that should provide such a
Costly Fest, use such care to sharpen our Appetites, bid us with such earnest
importunities; yet lay such bars in the way, that we may not Taste it.

Some cannot receve, bicaus they cannot do it without communicating with such
as they know (or at least suspect) to be Unworthy. These, if they want not
Charity toward Them, whom they so Boldly, and perhaps Unjustly, condemn;
certainly want Appetite to this fest: For, as none but the worst of men, ar by
St. Jude branded with This character, that [they ar spots in our Fests of
charity] so does the same Apostl declare, that such Spots did not hinder the
Saints from celebrating the Fests Themselves: The truly loving Soul, will not
disdain to com to Christ, though encompassed with Publicans and Sinners.

Some cannot receve it bicaus they cannot do it except they kneel. And kneel
they cannot (not bicaus it is otherwise unlawful, but) bicaus it is commanded
by their governors. These manifest their appetite greater to Disobedience, than
to their Duty: Not only bicaus they choose to Omit This Duty, which the Lord
never dispensed with, much less forbad; but bicaus they make Disobedience to
his Officers, more eligibl than Obedience to Himself.

Some cannot receve because the Minister is not (at least they think him not) a
Saint: These cannot have very great esteem for the Treasure, who refuse it
bicaus brought in an earthen vessel.

These and such as These ar the pleas of the Scrupulos, wherein they differ no
more from the Irreligios, than the Coward does from the Sluggard. And as Every
one of their pretenses, has it is Own Proper weakness; so do all agree in this
One; that they cast an inexcusabl dishonor upon our Lord, as Commanding and
Endearing, a Performance utterly Impracticabl.

For since he could not but foreknow, that in All Ages and Places, there would
be some spots in the Fest, some unworthy Ministers in the Church, and Some rules
for Publik Worship, in every country: how can we suppose he should forbid us to
Do this, if any such Inconvenience should ly in our way?

How could he be at once so Careful to stablish the Command in midst of so
Many, and so Great Hindrances; and yet so Regardless of the Performance, as to
require us to yield, either to far Less than Himself struggled with, or such
as we cannot fail to meet with?

How easily ar Both Kinds of excuses answered by that One fundamental rule of
Epictetus, teaching us to know our Duty and Happiness? Be careful (says he) to
distinguish between (...) and (...). What ever is pretended for an hinderance,
either Is in our power, or Not. If it Be, ye must Remove it; If Not, Pass it by.

To examine our selfs, To repent, To be in Charity, etc. ar therefore our Duties,
bicaus in our Power. But to Make, Alter, or Take away ceremonies, To Exclude
whom we judge Unworthy, either to Give or Receve the Sacrament, cannot therefore
be our Business, bicaus they are not in our Power, Those cannot hinder us,
because we can Master them; nor These, bicaus we can neither Master nor Avoid
them.

Those who plead the Former, condemn Themselves, as not having do'n their
endevor; and These who plead the Latter, accuse our Lord, as requiring what no
endeavors can make Possibl. And both the One and the Other may find their
sentence in Those Difficulties, which our Lord therefore thought Seasonabl for
his Institution; that Thereby we might understand, he would not admit Any, for
Excuses from his so highly favored service.

HOW unhappily now does the Image out do its office! How does our Lord suffer
more in This Representative, than he did in his Body! By their agreement in
delivering up his Person, Herod and Pilate were made friends: But the Profane
and the Scrupulos, though they jointly neglect the Sacrament, cannot be said to
Agree, since their mutual Opposition is not thereby Abated, but Increased.

What strange Antipathy is there in our Nature, more against This, than any
Other of our Lords Commands! that Both extremes meet, not only in Practicing,
but in Justifying Disobedience to it; and That, upon pretense of honor to the
Author! And what luck has This One Error, that it should be countenanced with
(the livree of Truth) the Concurrent assent of Opposite parties! Were the case
put in Other names, how plain would the truth appear, to the first glance of
the unprejudiced ey!

It is said that Tib. Graichus, finding two Serpents in his chamber, consulted
the Soothsayers, and being by them told, that if he let the male escape* his
wife must die; if the female escape, himself must die; let go the female, so to
preserv his Wives Life with his Own Death.

Suppose we now he had employed great care and cost, in procuring an excellent
Picture, most lively setting forth his so great kindness; and had on his
deathbed* recommended it to his Cornelia, praying her to keep it, as a token
and remembrancer of his love, manifested by his voluntary death for her sake.

What would gratitude have obliged Her to do? to cast it into some by-corner out
of sight? suffer it to be sullied with dust? or buried under lumber, neglected
and forgotten? Would it not have obliged her to hang it in her chief room,
where she might best honor it, not only with her care to keep it from abuse,
but with her frequent looks, still thereby renewing upon her heart, the
contemplation of the great love of her dear Gracchus?

No one certainly can doubt, which of these two ways, best savor of Love and
Gratitude.

How then can we pretend to honor our Lord, when we answer his so great care,
in providing and recommending This so excellent a Representative of his death;
by a contrary care in seeking pretenses to lay it aside?

We read (indeed) that some heathen worshipped Mercury by casting stones at his
image; and some others worshipped Pehor by turning their back-parts to it.

Strange expressions of honor and worship, and contrary to the universal ways
of mankind! Yet not so contrary to nature, as Our way of honoring the
Sacrament, is to the express words of its author; who does not only impose the
duty, by a peremtory Command to Do this; but bind it upon our hearts, by the
obligations of Love and Thankfulness, in Remembrance of his Sufferings and
Benefits.

CHAP. III. Serviceable to our own interests.
I. The kindness of the Command as it regards our Interest. 1. In point of
Ease. It is a sacrificial Fest, not a Sacrifice. Suffering an expression of
Love: exercised by many, but not required in this duty. II. 2. In point of
pleasantness: 1. Spiritual pleasures greater than Sensual: though the Atheist
cannot relish them. We must believ the experienced, not the ignorant. III. 2.
Pleasures of the Christian, greater than of any other Religion. IV. 3.
Pleasures of This greater than of any other Office of Christian worship. 1. It
has proper sweetness of it is own. V. 2. It improveth all other Offices. 1.
Preaching. 2. Swearing. 3. Prayer. This proved by the practice of those who in
danger desire the Sacrament. VI. 4. Thankfulness. VII. Other Advantages,
intimated, but not insisted on, because set forth by many other writers. A
brief Recapitulation of what has be'n here said, with a Transition to what
remains.

THAT this appropriation to our Lords person, may not more Prejudice than
Advantage This Law; as imposing upon us a duty, Serviceabl to Himself, but to
Us both Troublesome and Unprofitabl; we shall farther consider, that in This, as
much as in Any of his Other Laws; he was careful to twist our Interest with our
Duty; providing no less for Our Ease and Happiness, than for his Own Memory.

We therefore com now to Another kind of Obligations, derived from the Kindness
of This Command; which again points at the so considerabl [THIS.] And first
let us see how EASY it is yoke is.

For what is This, whereby we are So to set forth his cruel Death, that thereby
it may be said our Lord is crucified among us?

Must we Pledge him in his Bitter cup, and so Do, as to Suffer in remembrance
of him, what may in some kind make us Partakers of his passion?

Must we so Commemorate his Scourging as to Repete it upon our selves, yet call
the season Good Friday? Or must our Purses be drained in some such ^oftly
Offerings, as shall That way represent the effusion of his whole stock of
blood? Or at least, must our eyes be afflicted, and thereby our Bowels
tormented, with some such piteos spectacle, as may at once represent the ghastly
countenance of our dying Savior, and strike horror into our hearts?

No: Our Lord was careful to deliver us, not only from the Curse, but from the
Burden of the Law; and therefore shunneth whatever might have the least
appearance of Costly, or Troublesome; adopting only the Joyful part of Type.
What was Festival, he so retains, as to leav out the Bitter Herbs, yea, the
bitter spectacle.

The Type which prefigured This death, was to a compassionate Ey a painful
sight. A poor dumb innocent Lamb slain, the body hung up and flayed, with legs
spread'd just in the posture of a crucifix, the blood folenly poured out at the
foot of the Altar: must not the Commemorative exceed the Type? and must it not
be a more afflictive Spectacle? The Former it does, but is not the Later.

For here the very Sacrifice Escapes the suffering which it Represents. The
Wheat and the Grape, Represent the Benefits, but not the Sufferings: That is
broken, and This is bruised, but they feel it not; That Strengthens, and This
Chears; but Neither of them Afflicts the heart.

SOME may do well to consider it better: This is a sacrificial Fest, but not a
Sacrifice: And between these two the Distance is so wide, that it looks like
Opposition, such as is between Giving and Receving: Guilt, and Pardon; Fear and
Joy: All postures are inverted.

In the act of Sacrificeing, the Votary appeared as a Guilty supplicant,
confessing himself worthy of Death, and praying that the vicarios blood of his
beast, might be accepted, and his Own delivered: But in the subsequent Fest, he
was treated as a Guest and Friend, of his now Reconciled and Propitios God. In
the One he appeared as a Malefactor, dreading Punishment from his offended
Judge: In the Other as a Son, enjoying Communion with his Loving Father. In the
One, he Offered a Ransom; in the Other, he Receved a Treat.

Since therefore, this Institution answers the Later, and shuns the Former; it
oght to be honored with a suitable Name. Since here is No Offering, but All
Receving: No Costs, but All Advantages: No Blood, but That of the Grape; and
That, not now to be Shed, but only Drank; no beasts slain, but those Wild
Lusts, which prey upon our Souls; nothing of Pain to the Body, or Cost to the
Purs, but all joy and thankfulness to the Soul: it is so far from deserving the
name of a Sacrifice; that we seem to injure it by stiling it Sacrificial.

I KNOW not what so great sympathy there is between Love and Suffering, that
many voluntarily run upon This, to express That. Some merely to show forth their
Love to their Lord, have waited on him with swords hanging at belts made of
their Own skins, purposely so flayed from their flesh, as to fit that office;
yet still so hanging to it at either end, as to renew the pain every step:
Others with arrows voluntarily stuck into, and still sticking in their flesh,
etc. When the ponderos Idol is pomposly carried upon its Scaffold, roling on a
multitude of heavy wheels; the devout Indians oftentimes cast themselves in the
way, there to be crushed to death by their beloved God. That many offered their
Sont and Daghters to Devils, the Scripture both witnesses and condemns; That
the Turks oftentimes pull out their eyes in devotion to Mahomet, Travelers
inform us: What the Papists do upon Ash Wednesday, and That which they
(notwithstanding) call Good Friday, is sufficiently known.

Had our Lotd enjoined Some, or All this, in answer to his suffering, would we
not, oght we not have don' it? Had he required us to lay down our lives for
him, what had this be'n, but to pay what we could of a debt? At other times he
said, Go and sell all thou have, and give it to the poor, and take up thy Cross
and follow me: Pull out thy right ey, cut off thy right hand. But now that he
says only Do this, Eat This, Drink this; what a vast weight of contempt must
That be, which shall outweigh not only the Authority, but the Love of our Lord,
favoring us with a Commandment so sweetly obligeing!

Did He on his Cross drink Gall and Vinegar, made infinitely more Bitter by my
sins; and shall not I at his Tabl drink Wine, made infinitely Sweeter by his
blessing? Did he Eat the Bread of Affliction for My sake; and shall not I eat
the Bread of Life for His sake and mine Own? Did He Suffer death, and shall not
I Enjoy, by Commemorating it?

Could any thing Easier or Cheaper, less troublsom or costly, have be'n
enjoined; such was his kindness, that he would have commanded That; and if we
refuse This, which is the Least, it appears we will do Nothing for Him. For
Him? Yea, for our Selves. This is not a Work, but a Fest; which if it be but
Insipid, though not Bitter, is to be despised.

II. 2. THIS therefore is considerable as the Second kindness of this
Institution. It is as Pleasant as Easy; and if we would speak properly, we
must not call it a Command, but an Invitation. For it is a Fest, yea, it is the
Banquet: when men had Eaten the Fat, and Drunken the Sweet, and their hearts
were merry; Then came This Supper, as the Desert, furnished with the Fruits of
the Spirit, infinitely delicios,

And though the abuses thereof, made it in few ages seem necessary to change
This proper Season; yet is not the blessed and beatifik rite thereby
impoverished. Its delights were ushered with sensual mirth, rather for State,
than Need; For it is own Spiritual pleasures, ar abundantly abl to fill all our
great appetites, without borrowing any thing of the sensual.

For the more distinct discovery of this topik, we will rise by three steps.

1. Spiritual pleasures are greater than Sensual.

2. The Pleasures of the Christian Religion greater than those of any Other
Religion.

3. The Pleasures of This Office greater than those of any Other Office of
Christian worship.

1. That Spiritual pleasures are greater than Sensual, Plutarch has
sufficiently demonstrated in That best of his treatises, whose title professes
to prove, That upon the Principles of Epicurus it is impossibl for a man to
live happily.

Among other instances of the excellency of the pleasures of the Mind above
those of the Body; he thus speaks to our present purpose, concerning
Sacrificial Fests.

Princes and Kings keep good open houses, and a full Court for all comers, and
make publik Fests: But Those which are made in Sacrifices and Solemnities of
the Gods, amids perfumes and incenses, where men seem to touch and convers most
intimately with them, with all Honor and with all Reverence; such Honors, such
Fests, I say, give a joy more rare, and a delight more singular, wherein He
has no part, that has not faith nor confidence in the Divine providence. For
it is not the quantity of Wine that is drunk, nor the Cookery of good viands
that are eaten there, which give the joy in such Fests; but the assurance and
persuasion, that God is Present, Propitios, and Favorabl, and that he accepts
the honor and service there do'n him.

That the Atheist cannot taste these delights, the Apostl has given the Reason,
The Natural man understands not the things of God, neither can he know them
because they are spiritually discerned. His Faculty is defective: The Viands
want not sweetness, but His Palate is vitiated. He is in the gall of
bitterness, and therefore has no part nor lot in This matter.

And it is no less certain, that to such Palates, the very Supper of the Lamb
in heaven, would be no less Unsavory. For how can the Vision of God be
beatifical to Him, that Hates him? What delight can He find in the fellowship
of the blessed in Heaven, who finds none in Those who resemble them upon earth?
What Musik in heavenly Hallelujahs to Him who finds none in Psalms and Hymns
and Spiritual Songs? Can a Plowman find pleasur in a Mathematical
demonstration? or a Lion in sweet grass? or a Fish in clear Air? The fruits of
the Spirit (says the Apostl) ar Lov, Joy, Peace, etc. Love must lead, and Joy
must follow, but can never Outgo it: This Stream will never rise higher than
That Fountain: He therefore, and Only He, that Loves Christ; can find Joy in
his Presence, and Sweetness in his Supper.

This must by no means prejudice the testimony of Those, who have Tasted and
Testified the (to themselves inexpressibl, no less than to the Atheist
imperceptibl) joys they find in the holy Communion.

Whom shall we believ concerning the Beauty of the light? the Blind or the
Seeing? Whom concerning the Sweetness of Musik? the Deaf or the Hearing?

Should one of our Sensualists be informed, that at such a Tavern, is to be had
at the cheapest rate, and in the most plentiful mesure, the most spritely Wine
that possibly can be tasted; and This verified by such as swear that themselves
know the truth by their experience, as having be'n exhilarated by it; would
they doubt the truth of this relation, bicaus some other who knows nothing of
it, says it cannot be true? Would not a good fellow yield so much to the
Persuasions and Asseverations of a mouth witness, as to make trial of the so
much magnified Wine?

When Apicius heard of the exceeding greatness of the African Lobsters; he
packed up all his Goods, and made a voyage thither, with a resolution to dwell
there if he found the truth answer the report.

Well fare the man that is diligent in his business! His God was his Belly, and
He diligent and faithful in his Service: But better He, that is as Wise as
Diligent; that first enquireth in more fundamental questions; Whether there be
any flesh better than that of a Lobster? Yea, that goes yet deeper, and
enquireth, Whether there be any pleasures greater than those of the belly?

Did our voluptuary First State this, which oght to be the First Question; we
should find More Wine spent at the Lords Tabl, and Less at the Tavern. But this
is our fundamental folly; we will neither Believ what the most Credibl persons
speak, upon Their experience, nor seek the truth by Our own; nor be at so much
pains, as to consider, who ar to believed in Matter of Fact; Those who profess
to have tasted Both the rival Pleasures? or Those who confess themselves utterly
ignorant of That, which the best knowing magnify most? Had the Religios no
more judgment in Sensibl pleasures, than the Epicurean has in Spiritual; the
scales would be even: but since They have the same Palate for tasting, the same
By for seeing etc. as have the most Voluptuos; but the Sensual have not the
same preceptions of Spiritual pleasures, as have the Religios; now to believ a
negative Testimony in matter of fact, brought by Such as profess themselves
ignorant in the main Subject of the question, against Those who profess
themselves most Knowing; is a folly hardly to be matched, but in Those, who by
yauning in Ignorance, and Loss, of what they are Credibly Informed, and may
easily Experience, to be the greatest pleasure, they are Capabl of Enjoying.

But he that has learned how much the joys of the Spirit exceed those of Sens;
will easily be persuaded to proceed to a secund Lesson.

III. 2. THE pleasures of the Christain Religion exceed those of any other
Religion. Whether David knew more, I dispute not; certainly he said no more,
than Plutarch might have do'n. He does indeed declare himself dazeled with the
glory of Gods Love, both in the number and greatness of his benefits: Their
Number Ps. 139.17. etc. Their Greatness, Ps. 36.5. etc. Yet all this may be
subscribed by a good Philosopher, upon evidence of That witness, which God gave
them of Himself; Rain and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and
gladness.

And as were their Apprehensions of Gods Benefits; such were their Joys in their
Benefactor; incomparably Above those of the Atheist, but no less Below those of
the Christian.

God hung up the Sun in the Firmament, for a miroir of himself: but, bright as
it is, the best sighted Heathen might apply to themselves in comparison of the
knowledge of the Gospel, what the Apostl says of the knowledge we enjoy in
This life, in comparison of what we hope in the Futur; [we see him in a Glass
darkly] And as a child takes the face which he sees in a glass, for that of a
real man; so did the heathen mistake the Sun, for God himself.

The wisest indeed did not so: For Plato caled Light the shadow of God; and
thereby spoke more gloriosly of it, than it self can shine: But much less than
the Apostl says of Christ, That he is the Brightness of his glory, the express
Image of his Person.

How much more gloriosly therefore, Gods goodness shines in the face of Jesus
Christ, than in That of the Sun; so much must the joy of a devout Christian
exceed that of a mere Atheist, Jew, or Heathen; and may well deserv the title
given it by the Apostl, A joy unspeakabl and glorios.

IV. 3. THE Pleasures of This ar greater than those of any Other Office of
Christian worship.

Symmachus in Plutarch pleading that our Sea viands ar more delicios than those
of the Land, urges This as his main reason; that from the Sea we have Salt,
which quickens the gust of All other meats. Should we make the same question
between This and Other Offices of Religion, we must improve the Reason, For
This as it exalts the pleasur of All the Rest, so has it a proper one of
it is own, riseing from the above noted relation to our Lords Person.

1. It Is relation to our Lords Person is greater, and consequently it has a
greater sweetness! My Father's Picture has This right to my esteem, that it
gives me some kind of enjoyment of his Presence; And for This only do I valu
it, much above what a stranger can. But had he left it me for a Legacy, had he
indeared it to my affection, by recommendations, any way proportionabl to what
our Lord has do'n for This his Representative; I should certainly have parted
with whatever else he left me, rather than with It.

This is the joy of the Sacrificer (says Plutarch) that we have Assurance that
God is Present; But whereon is This so sweet Assurance bilt? It Is true, Jus
hospitii by the unanimos consent of mankind, begat an obligation of Friendship
between Host and Guest; and upon This common notion, was the rite of
Sacrificeing grounded: But Invented, Plutarch knew not When, nor by Whom; never
Stablished by Any Command, nor Encoraged by any Promis of the Gods they Fested
with; Whereas Here, we find, not only our Lord's Institution, but his Presence.

He promised his presence, even at our Common prayers; saying, When two or
three are gathered together in my name, there will I be in the mids of them:
Here, we meet not only in his Name, but upon his Invitation; In Obedience to
his Command, and in Love to his Person; we Commemorate the Sufferings of his
Human Nature, and we adore the Power of his Divine; we enjoy not only his
Representative, but his very Body and Blood.

In Sacrificeing said Plutarch, we convers intimately with the Gods. These
things, says St. John we write unto you that your joy may be full; -- that you
may have fellowship with Us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father and
with his Son Jesus Christ.

St. John probably in those words compares, Our God and Lord, with Those in
whose fellowship Plutarch placed his greatest joy: We may make another
comparison between the Fellowships themselves; yea, between the several kinds of
fellowships, that a Christian may have with his Lord. Several kinds of
fellowships? No, There is no other kind of visibl fellowship, but This one:
Other kinds of Worship there are; but no other Communion.

Whether we com to God with our Praises, or our Prayers; whether we com to Hear
him, or to call upon him; we keep an awful Distance: We Approach his Throne,
but do not Sit down in it. It is boldly said by Plutarch, In Sacrificcing Fests
we even touch the Gods; a Christian goes Higher: We do not Touch only, but
Eat; we receve our Lord, not Only in our Arms, but our very Bowels. We Fest,
not only With him, but Upon him: He mingleth Souls with us, and is no more Two,
but One Spirit.

We Fest upon his Flesh and Blood; which himself says ar Meat indeed, and
Drink indeed; and St. John adds, Here is Fellowship indeed; and what more
Need or Can be added to make our Joy Full?

If therefore there be any joy in the spirit, any comfort of love; what ever the
Voice of David could Sing, or his heart conceve; whatever the Light of the Sun,
or the Sweetness of Wine, or the joys of festing, can faintly shadow; ar Here
in the highest perfection, earth is capabl to enjoy: as much above the
pleasures of Sens, as the Firmament is Brighter than Earth or Sea; and as much
above other exercises, even of Devotion; as the Stars ar Brighter then the
interstellary Firmament; whose light while they Outshine, they Increas: Upon
which later account alone, we heard Symnachus give the Sea preeminence over the
Land, as mother of Salt, the Universal Sauce, exalting the Gust of All meats:
But

V. 2. SALT does not so much improve the Gust of meats; as does This Sacrament,
the Power and consequent Pleasur of other Religios Offices.

1. How the power of Preaching is thereby advanced we shall find another
occasion to consider, to which therefore we adjourn it and proceed to other
Religios exercises.

2. An Oath, when duly used is One kind of Worship of That God, when we thereby
Invoke; an end of All strife, and all suspicions among mankind; And its
Obligations at generally supposed more Indissolubl, when Bound with This
Sacrament, or taken at the Altar.

The Kings of France and Spain, and All Christendom with them, agreed in This,
that the Pyrenaean Treaty could not be more Inviolably confirmed, than by This
Bond. And if it have not proved Security sufficient; it is no exception against
it is force; but a proof of the invinciblness of That Falsehood, that will as
litl be Slave to the most formidabl Oath, as to a Word.

3. HOW great pleasur there is in PRAYER, we should better understand, if we
were better acquainted with it. The Stoiks believed our Pleasur to consist in
Freedom from Pain: It is plain, that Bodily Pleasur does so; and the
Satisfaction is pleasant, in exact Proportion with the Appetite which is
thereby satisfied.

It is some Ease to a wounded spirit, if it can but Bleed out it is troubles,
into the bosom of a Faithful friend; but much more, if That friend be as able
as willing to help.

God is indeed of himself more willing to hear than We to pray, for such
blessings as conduce to our True Happiness; but in Some Other kinds of Requests,
(which though they com not up to the highest dignity, we think worth asking) he
is Moved by Prayer; and so much the more, when it is Improved by the Manner and
Season of the address. Hester, the more effectually to prevail with her great
Ahasuerus, endeared her petition with a Fest: and This, we com now from finding
the Sens of mankind, in that universal rite of Festing upon the Sacrifice.

Indeed God is to be laid hold on by either hand: Fasting or Festing, upon
occasions respectively suitable, exalt the power of Prayer; the one, that we
may move Commiseration; the other, that we may obtain Bounty: by the One we
kill the Beast; by the Other we hold communion with God.

If therefore Hannah found her grieved mind so much eased, by having unburthened
it in prayer, improved by the holiness of the place; we must have so much more
title to the joys of Hope, by doing it in this exercise, as his Table is holier
than was Shiloh. And if Themistocles prevailed with Admetus by presenting him
his litl Son; how much greater confidence may We have, when we obsecrate by the
body and blood of Christ!

For the young Prince was a perfect stranger to Themistocles, came in his way,
and thence into his arms, by mere accident, without any thought of becoming his
Mediator: but our Lord came and dwelt among us, and was made sin for us: and
when we obsecrate by the mystery of his Incarnation, by his Cross and Passion,
by his precios Death and Burial: offering them to his Father, not only by
Words, but Actions, such Dramatical Actions, as in a manner Repete them; This
do'n by his Own institution, must needs add unspeakabl force to thc Petition so
presented.

Again, Admetus's child was wholely passive, joined not the least token of
consent with Themistocles's act, for his Body was offered without any
concurrence of his Mind: But This Supper is of our Lord's own providing: We
therein offer, not only his Body and Blood, but his Love and his Soul. Himself
taght us this singular art of wrestling with his Father: and having promised
that he would grant whatever two or three should agree to ask in his Name,
taght us further to invigorate our confidence by adding his Body and Blood.

HENCE it is, that in the Primitive Church the Prayers ever were attended with
This Sacrament, as we found them described by Justin Martyr; and Optatus
upbraiding the Donatists for breaking down the altars of Churches, told them
that thereby they did what they could to hinder the Churches prayers, for illac
ad aures dei ascendere solebat populi oration.

Hence is it, that in the Communion Service, we again pray for the same
blessings we had prayed for in the first: for the Church Universal, the Kings
Majesty, the whole Nation, etc.

Nor need we any other than our adversaries testimony: The Papists in ordinary
cases, think ordinary masses sufficient; but in their greatest extremities,
have recours to This, as a more powerful mediator than any their Ora pro
nobis's, I instance in the case of the Duke of Montmorancy; whom when the
incensed King could by no intercession be induced to pardon; a multitude of his
friends, after a solen Procession, receved the Communion in his behalf; as did
also the Cardinal de la Valette in a mass celebrated by the Bishop of Faviers.

Yea, Those very persons we dispute with, Those who neglect it all their lives;
ar careful in the End to obtain it. When they look death in the face, Then by
all means must the Minister be sent for, and the necessary two or three must
accompany the Sick person, however at that time most unfit, to receve the
hitherto neglected Supper.

Whence this new care, but from a persuasion, that Now more than ever, there is
great need of effectual prayer, and that this holy Sacrament is most efficacios
for enforcing it?

But have we no need of effectual prayer 'till we com to die? Need we no Pardon,
nor no Blessing? Ar our Lusts so mortified, our Graces so perfect, our
Salvation so secure, our Happiness so complete? Can we answer the kind offers
of this Sacrament, as the Shunamite did those of the Prophet Elisha, when he
asked what is to be do'n for thee? Do we so live upon our own, as to want No
Favor? Or have we No friend, No child, No relative, that needs our prayer? Have
we No petition to offer for our King or Country, Our Church or any Comember? Ar
all things so perfectly well within and without us, that we need no further
favor? If we think so, we need this Sacrifice to obtein pardon for That very
thought. And certainly the Continuance of so uniform and complete happiness, is
a blessing worth Desiring, and therefore worth Asking; and if so, the Sacrament
is worth Receving; that such Prayers may be more Prevalent, and our Minds more
Satisfied, as having deposited our requests in the most Succesful manner.

For if on our Deathbed we find comfort, much more reasonably may we hope it
in the mids of Life; as by the more probabl soundness of our Repentance, so by
the more efficacios virtue of the Sacrament; receved then with greater both
Worthiness and Appetite, than the Deathbed can promis; which can naturally
operate no better in acts of Spiritual, than of Temporal life; so much Less
Vigorosly by how much More against all Appetites.

VI. 4. IF the Pleasures of Prayer be so great, those of Thankfulness must
needs be much greater: For Prayer proceeds from sens of Want, Thankfulness
from sens of Abundance: That, is the work of the Indigent, This, of the Rich:
That is the happiness of the Earth, drawing down the former and later rain, to
satisfy it is drought; This the blessedness of Heaven, whose inhabitants have no
other Employment, nor greater Joy, than to bless God.

We cannot perhaps better understand the pleasures of Thankfulness than by
comparing it with That which of all others, the world thinks, both most
Pleasant and most Honorable; Revenge, above all other Human (if it be not wors
than Human) passions, may bost of the destructions it has wroght upon the
earth, of Persons, yea, of Families, yea of Nations; and He is branded for a
Coward, who will spare life Temporal or Eternal, when This shall require them
for Sacrifice.

Now Thankfulness is no other than White Revenge; more Glorios and more
Innocent. The One says as does the Other, I will Requite, I will do to him as
he has do'n to me, I will render to him according to his work, etc.

And is it not more Noble and Pleasant to requite Good than Evil? Are not the
satisfactions of Love sweeter than those of Anger?

Both, glory in Justice; but the One, while it pretends to Do Justice,
Violateth it; by invading Gods right, who has said Vengeance is mine: The
Other more than dubleth the glory of Justice, by the addition of Love.

TO THIS so excellently pleasant exercise is this Sacrament designed, St. Paul
caleth this the Cup of Blessing; The Fathers, the Eucharist; Our own Church
says, it was for a Thankful remembrance of the Death of Christ, and of the
benefits which we receve thereby, And requires Every communicant to receve it
with thankfulness. And since the Pleasures of Revenge, grow in exact
suitableness with the Resentments of the Passion, thereby gratified; and the
Passion, with the Injury offered; so also must the Pleasures of Thankfulness
answer the Benefit which gives it birth.

Whence it must necessarily follow that as the Benefits Here communicated, ar
the Greatest; so must This exercise be of All other the Pleasantest; especially
bicaus the very Passion is hereby most vigorosly excited: which is a dubl
advantage.

1. The Benefits hereby commemorated ar the Greatest. I hope This will not need
much proof: Since it cannot be imagined what our Lord could have do'n More,
than suffer the Death we hereby Commemorate. A Benefit, which as it Requires,
so does it Exceed our highest raptures of Thankfulness. Excellently well does
our Ingenios and Pios Herbert express this.

He resolves upon this noblest Revenge, Surely I will revenge me on thy Love,
And try who shall victorios prove.


He instanceth in several Benefits, finding ways of suitable Returns; but
coming to the Passion: First he adjorneth it as difficult* saying And for thy
Passion -- but of that anon,
When with the other I have done.


And at last after several Other instances, closes all by acknowledging it not
only Difficult but Impossibl, to answer it, saying Then for thy Passion: I will
do for that --
Alas! my God I know not what.


And begins his next meditation with the same acknowledgment.

I have considered it, and find
There is no dealing with thy mighty Passion.
But our Lord himself has be'n pleased to help us, as by his Death against our
Guilt; so by This Institution, against our Inability to find a way, wherein to
express our Thankfulness for That death: When our Best wits, and Carefulest
considerations cannot tell what to do: he bids us Do This.

Whether David Prophesied of it, is not so plain; as that he was very happy in
So speaking as if he had: for he pitched upon the same Answer to the same
Question, What shall I render (said he) to the Lord for all the benefits, that
he has do'n unto me? I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the name
of the Lord.

But with This difference; that All the Benefits which so posed David, came
incomparably short of our Lord's Passion; and consequently This Cup, as it much
better deserves the Title, so does it exceed in Pleasantness, That which he
styles the Cup of Salvation.

2. By this Cup our Thankfulness is most vigorosly incited. For as No benefit
can be greater than our Lords death, so cannot our Affections be more
powerfully stirred, than by This Representative; which assalts our very Senses,
and strikes our Hearts by the most Lively Representation, as we have already
seen.

Other Festers pretend no more than to provide Viands and Wine, as delicios as
possibl; Our Lord takes care that our Palates may be quickened; As he provideth
the Best Matter for our Thankfulness, so does he the Best Manner for exalting
it is Motions, and Pleasures.

Such a Commemoration improveth the kindness even of the Passion it self. He
seems to have contrived how he might make the Remembrance of it, as Sweet to
Us, as the Suffering was bitter to Himself. Certainly, showed the same Love, in
providing for our Joy, by This Communion; as for our Salvation, by the Effusion
of That Blood which we so Enjoy.

So that by Doing This, we do not only Render Thanks for that Greatest Benefit,
his Death; but Receve a New one; and feed our very Thankfulness, which
acquireth a New Obligation, and thereby new matter of Pleasure by endeavoring
thus to answer the Old: And we may still go on with David's question; What shall
I render for this cup of Salvation?

By how much therefore the Joys of Thankfulness exceed All other Joys: By how
much our Lords Passion, more exceeds our utmost Thankfulness, than could All
Those other Benefits, which so posed David; By how much This Office is more
Appropriate and Serviceable to it, than Any, yea than All other offices of
devotion: By so much More Pleasant must This be, than Any other Exercise, even
of Religion, yea even of Christian Religion.

And if there be any truth in what St. Paul (after the Prophet) professes,
that ey has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man
to conceve, what God has prepared for them that love him: If there be any
reason in his invitation, to quit the satisfying pleasures of wine, for the
more raptures inebriations of the Spirit; we must needs believ that our gracios
Lord had the same design in This Institution, as St. John professed in his
first epistl, which he ushereth with this declaration, These things I write to
you, that you may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the
Father and with his Son Jesus Christ, and these things we write unto you, that
your joy may be full.

Did Epicurus ever promis such Happiness? Did Lucullus ever make such a fest?
Did Petronius Arbiter ever invent such pleasures? That any one who has (I say
not any spark of divine life, but) any sens or desire of Pleasure, should
slight such invitations, is next to the Love that made them, the greatest
Wonder, and next to That of the Jews, the greatest Injury; since this is in a
manner to crucify the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame in
Effigy. Do we not put This his representative and therein Himself, to an open
shame, when we so slight it, as to postpone it to our more esteemed lusts and
idleness, as unable to match them in its offers of happiness?

VII. OF HAPPINESS! Yes, it serves not only our Pleasures, but our solid and
durabl Happiness. It is not our Flatterer, but our Friend. Flatterers often
serve men's Pleasures to ill purposes and mischievos consequences: This does not
more seek to Please, than to Benefit. As it is a Banquet to delight, so it is
both Food to nurish, and Medicine to cure. The gracios Author caleth it Meat
indeed and Drink indeed, bicaus the guest has not only present satisfaction to
all his appetites, but Everlasting life to his Soul.

This, 'thogh most worthy, I insist not upon, bicaus it is not only generally
acknowledged for a truth: but by our adversaries urged as the principal, if not
sole encoragement to the performance. They honor it as a most gracios
Invitation, though they deny it the authority of a Command: and while they unty
the force of the Obligation, make part of recompense, by motives of persuasion,
drawn from our own interest.

And no more than need, For it must be wholely insignificant, and totally
deserted, if unfurnished of all kind of arguments: and if it have none other
but such as plead our own advantages, they had need outweigh all the
difficulties we must encounter.

AND Now (Dear Reader) we are com'n to the Rode: You cannot fail of good
Company and good Guides: Variety of good books, both setting forth the Benefits
of the Lords Supper, and the Preparation requisite to capacitate us for them;
and Many also giving us their own good company, in Devout Strains helping our
devotions. And since I promised, not to repete what others have spoken; I shall
(do, as guides use to do) leav you to Gods blessing and the Conduct of others,
into whose company I have brought you, in a large and populos rode.

But Before we part, we may do well to sit down a while, and consider whether
the way we have passed, be as Right, as we have found it Troublsom. It has
be'n so Long, and so Universally deserted, so utterly Untroden for so many
generations, that there is not any appearance of a Footstep, much less of a
Path: This is sufficient to make us Doubtful.

But if the Learned and Pios be not only Silent, but Opposite: If they not only
neglect to Urge the performance as Necessary; but warn us from it as Dangeros;
it will certainly behove us to hearken to Such Persons, and consider their
Admonitions, and their Reasons.

After a brief Retrospect therefore upon the grounds we have passed, we shall
take a full vieu of what is offered on the Other Side; that so, weighing the
rival evidences, we may embrace what shall appear worthy.

WE have certainly taken the only Regular way to understand the Apostl's
meaning: not cut off some One, or perhaps Two expressions, neglecting All the
Rest, and the mind of the Author in the Whole; but carefully examined, first
the adaequate design of the Whole, and then every Part and Paricl, with their
Consent in serviceablness to it. We have found it absolutely necessary to fit
the important Demonstrative THIS with its proper Object: both bicaus in our
Lords Institution, it is the Subject of a Proposition, not otherwise to be
understood; and bicaus in the Apostls Dissertation, it is the hinge on which
his whole argument turns. We have found a Pios custom of the Jews very Fit for
this honor, and exactly Suited both to our Lords Institution, and the Apostl's
Comment, in every syllabl. In the Later, (I mean the Apostl's Comment) we have
met several odd phoenomena, highly worthy our Best observation, but never
honored with Any; No Other way accountabl; but this way most Clear, Pertinent,
and Necessary. We have found This same Apostl, in the Chapter immediately
forgoing, call the Lords Cup by the Jewish name; expressly saying This is the
same with That.

By this Light we have taken a careful vieu of That important clause, whence is
vulgarly derived a supposed liberty to do this As Seldom as we please; and
found that the Apostl was careful to insert Those words, upon a quite contrary
reason; proving it indispensibly required, that we do it as often as we meet in
Christ's publik worship.

From This discourse of One Apostl, we proceed to inquire into the practice of
All the Rest; and found Them and All their Disciples, and the succeeding best
ages of the Church; exercising Punctual Obedience to such a sens. We have found
our Own Church laboring what she can, to retrive the same.

From Obligations of Obedience, we proceeded to the cords of a man. Reason we
find requires, that the Badge of our profession should be constantly worn: and
Kindness obliges us to embrace an office, so Endeared as we find This, by all
incentivs of Love.

In the whole journey we have not found the least Inconsistence or Impertinence
of any One syllabl: but every Word, and every Order, yea every Disorder of
words, combine to declare This the true Key to Our Lords and his Apostls
meaning.

And I may Boldly Challenge any one of a differing judgment, to match This so
punctual Dissection, with any other that may suit his own Hypothesis with equal
exactness: but whether they make the least pretense to it or no, will clearly
appear by the examination of what they pretend the Apostl to have said to the
contrary.

PART V. Answers to the Vulgar opinion.
CHAP. I. Deference paid to the Former age, and to the Sacrament.
I. Former ages excused for advanceing Reverence, when there was no other
danger, but of Irreverence; and stateing preparation in such manner as might
best serve Piety. Reason to believ, that were they now living they would press
the Performance as earnestly as they have do'n Preparation. II. A Second
Protest against robbing the Sacrament. III. The Adversaries opinion set forth
in his own words; whereby almost all the World must be prohibited. IV. A
Warrant demanded. A confession that a good Consequence is Warrant sufficient.

SINCE it will be very hard, if not utterly impossibl, to dispute against
Doctrines without boldness toward their Authors; or to plead against One
extreme, without seeming to abett the Other; before I proceed to the ill-lookt
work, I think it necessary to enter a dubl Protestation against Irreverence,
either toward the worthy Persons whom I am to treat as Adversaries, or the H.
C. which I am to render less Dreadful.

1. Concerning the Pios, Learned Persons whom I am to oppose, though Truth will
not permit us to embrace their Errors, Justice will require us to excuse them,
because they Yielded to the then present Necessity, at a time when there was no
appearance of danger on the other hand.

When a City is Inaccesibl on the One side, and Assalted on the Other; the
defendants think themselves concerned to leav That side which seems safe; and
run to This, which needs their help; and though many an (otherwise) impregnabl
place, have This way be'n lost; yet still have the inhabitants be'n rather
pitied as unfortunate, than blamed as unfaithful.

The Ancient Fathers saw No danger of loseing Gonstancy in this duty, but Much
of loseing Reverence; and ar therefore to be Justified, because they applied
their labors to what appeared most Necessary.

But the Later Fathers brought That into Question, which their predecessors
thought above Any. Constancy first was balanced against Reverence, and then
made to Yield to it. St. Augustine first put the question, Whether it were better
to Communicate every day, or omit some days, that we might do it better upon some
Others? This question when it first appeared in the World, was no bigger than a
man's hand, though now it have overspread the whole face of the sky; It grew from
days to weeks, from weeks to month's: and the Church of Rome claims thanks for
having made it necessary Once in a Year.

This abuse was so gross, that the Reformers could not but correct: but they
did it with such aw both toward the Later Fathers, and toward the Sacrament it
self, that they seem to have be'n more careful to speak what they thought Best
than what they thought Truest.

To preserv the Sacrament from being swallowed up by the incorrigibl luxury of
Their times; the Fathers by way of necessary defense, asserted the Reverence
due to it, as the Body and Blood of Christ: and our Pios divines endevor to
advance it to a Power suitabl to That Honor; a Power of exalting the Spirit of
Christ, by help of such Examination, as must in all reason be That way most
serviceable.

Sure enough, our Lord can not but be well pleased, that This Representative of
his Death should second it, in That great and good design, for which he
suffered it.

Though therefore they saw nothing in Scripture, nothing in Tradition, yet seeing
in Reason great hopes of advantage; they thought best to lay hold on an
expression or two of the Apostl's, which (however otherwise intended) might be
made of excellent use This way.

He had spoken of the Danger of Unworthiness, and the necessity of
Self-examination for avoiding that danger: These two well twisted together, and
well bound on, may be of excellent use, to draw men to repentance, so much the
more speedy, by how much nearer the time appears of approaching the dread Table.

And how can this be better do'n, than by persuading men, that no man is fit to
Communicate, who is not fit to dye?

What injury to the Apostl, if useful words be not Confined to his Particular
intention in that One place; but Extended to a greater serviceablness to the
General design of All his Labors? or what to the Sacrament, if it be so Rescued
from Danger, as to be made Victorios, not only over That Intemperance which it
suffered at Corinth, but all other Sins of what kind so ever? Or what to our
Lord, if the Representative of his Death, be made to promote the good ends for
which he suffered it?

This could not seem more Rational, than Safe; The Commands of the Church made
it Criminal, Universal Practice made it Scandalous, to fail of appearing at the
holy Table, at least three times in the year; and in all appearance the
conditions of Preparation might be strained to Any height, with as great
Safety, as Rigor.

Our Gratios Lord justified Moses for compliance with the hardness of the
peopl's hearts in a case which in the beginning was not so. The Pios Fathers in
former ages, had cast Festing out of the Church, though This Supper were by our
Lords Institution appendant to it; and they had removed the Season from Evening
to Morning, though the very title of Supper contradicted: And why should not
such apparent Advantages on one side, yoked with such Security from any Damage,
on the other; make it reasonabl, to press Preparation in such manner, that
those who were not prevailed on with Other reasons, might be awakened by the
approach of the Sacrament, to betake themselves to That work, which otherwise
they would delay, till the approach of death.

When therefore we read what was written twenty or more years since; when the
Church had not yet lost her Power, nor the Peopl their Shame; when neither
Atheism nor Schism had taught it needless to Obey our Lords last command; when
that neglect was thought Incredibl which we now find incurabl; let us consider
as well the Reasons, as the Words of those pios Authors; and we shall not think
any thing more probabl than This, that were they now aliv, they would change
their Style with the so changed state of the Question; and Correct or Confute
whatever they have said in abatement of the Obligation to Constancy in the
performance.

For proof hereof I give you the words of the excellent Person, whom I have so
often created as an adversary. -- To such persons as these (he speaks of
Neuters in Religion, not so bad as to deserv Excommunication, nor so pios as to
be discernably in the state of grace) I can give no other advice, but that
every one take his mesures of frequency by the Laws of his Church; and add what
he please to his numbers by the advice of a Spiritual guide; who may consider,
whether his penitent by his conjugation of preparatory actions, and heaps of
holy duties, at that time usually conjoined, do or is likely to receve any
Spiritual progress.

And a few lines after. To such persons as these, the Church has made Laws for
the set times of their Communion. Christmas, Easter, and Witsuntide were
appointed for all Christians that were not Scandalos and openly Criminal by P.
Fabianus; and this constitution is imitated by the best constituted Church in
the world, our dear mother the Church of England; and they who do not at these
times, or so frequently communicate, ar censured by the Council of Agathon, as
unfit to be reckoned among Christians, or members of the Catholic Church. Now
by these Laws of the Church, it is intended indeed that all men should be caled
upon to discuss and shake off the yoke of their sins, and enter into the
salutary state of repentance; and next to the perpetual Sermons of the Church,
she had no better means to engage them into the returns of Piety, hoping that
by the grace of God, and the blessings of the Sacrament, the repentance which
at these times solenly begins, may at one time or other fix and abide.

By which and many other words of this admirabl person it appears, That though
he denied our Lords Institution to amount to a Command, lest the Sacrament by
too much Familiarity, might lose that Awe which he thought most useful to make
it Powerful; yet did he upon other grounds, suppose every one obliged to such
Frequency, as Wise and Pios persons judge most conductive to Godliness; which
as it was our Lords design in his Death, must needs be the best mesure of our
behavior toward it is Representative.

St. Chrysostom expressly declared, This I speak, not that you may absent your
selves, but that you may com worthily: And we may well believ the same to have
be'n the intentions of All our pios divines; were there No Other reason for it
but This, That otherwise Their Own injunctions must be as insignificant as our
Lord's.

For if it be not necessary for us to Receve the Lords Supper, neither will it
be so, to Prepare our selves in such manner, as they prescribe in Order to it:
And then, all those Cautions against Unworthiness, and Directions for
Self-Examinations, may be serviceabl (perhaps) to other purposes; They may be
useful to try the truth of our Repentance, when upon other reasons we may set
our selves to that work, but 'till then, may well be laid aside, notwithstanding
any obligations deriveabl from This Institution.

Since therefore All obligations, but such as ar bound upon us by our Lord and
his Apostl, ar too weak; since contrary to All Expectation, as much as All Law,
we have seen this greatest office of the Church, sequestered, but not restored
with it is Officers; Since the declared intentions of our pios Predecessors, ar
so grossly, not only Disappointed, but Inverted; that it is generally thought
as much more Safe, as more Easy, to Forbear the whole, than to venture upon
such difficulties and Dangers, as ly in the way to the performance; we may very
well believ them so far from fondness toward their formerly Hopeful, but now
Unhappy opinion; that they would be as forward as any of our present Divines,
to contribute to the remedy which the present state of the Church calls for.

II. 2. MY secund Protest is, That I am so far from any design to rob the
Sacrament of its due Reverence, that I have already said sufficient to secure
me from any such suspicion; were I not now obliged to speak such things, as
looked upon in separation from my task, may represent me half a Corinthian.

But this is the necessary consequence of opposing errors: For Truth is usually
seated like Virtue, between two Extremes; whereof whoever opposes the One, must
seem to defend the Other.

The zeal of some Fathers for Aw toward the H. St. is taken as an implicit
denial of our obligation to Constancy; and then improved, to a contrary
obligation to Forbearance: And while I renounce this Later, I may seem to break
those bonds in sunder, whose Obligations I do not pretend either to Break or
Unty; but only so far to Slacken, that they may not by too streght binding,
disable us from performing our necessary duty.

I therefore here invert St. Chrysostom's Protest. This I speak, not that you
may com Unworthily, but that you may com Constantly. I dash not One part of the
Apostl's cautionary precept against the Other, to the destruction of Both; no,
nor put asunder what he has joined together. But I endevor to show how he has
so fitted the One to the Other, that they are not only Consistent, but
Serviceabl each to other. For when he yoked [Let a man examine himself] with
[let him eat etc.] there was no strife between them; and some ages they drew
very lovingly and prosperosly together: But after ages made the former draw
cross, and too hard for the later.

The Greek Church appoints a Lent preparatory for every of the four Solemn
tides, whereon the peopl ar obliged to Communicate: And such among our selves,
as think it a necessary duty only upon those three great Festivals, which are
attended with their Octaves, suppose it Ushered with an Octave of preparation:
But the first ages, which celebrated it every Sunday and other Holidays, could
allow it no more than the 'foregoing Eve.

I deny not (for it cannot be avoided) that if we conform to them in the One,
we must also do it in the Other: More than every such Eve, the necessity of
most men's affairs will not allow; nor the constitutions of our Church be
satisfied with less: Whether this be more agreeable both to the Apostl's mind,
and the honor of the Sacrament it self, than either of the other, we com now
to consider.

And first we must see what is said on the other side.

II. THAT I may here again keep my self from any suspicion of injustice, I give
you our worthiest Adversares opinion in his Own words.

First; he lays down This for his foundation. [No man is fit to Communicate,
who is not fit to dy] And having thereupon raised several, completeth all with
This coronis. The sum of all is This; He that is not freed from the dominion of
sin: he that is not really a subject of the kingdom of grace; he in who is
mortal body sin does reign, and the Spirit of God does not reign, must at no
hand present himself before the holy Table of the Lord: bicaus what ever
dispositions or alterations he may begin to have in order to pardon and
holiness; he as yet has neither; but is Gods enemy and therefore cannot receve
his holy Son.

In These words, and indeed in the Whole Book, the excellent Person endeavored
to make, the Same mesures of Repentance, necessary for a Communicant; as in
another very Pios and Learned Treatise, he had proved necessary for Salvation.
And though he Express it not; yea, 'thogh he Intend it not, he must Imply such a
Faith also necessary for This Supper of our Lord, which every where else he
denies to be so, for. That in heaven, viz. An Assurance that he is in God's
favor.

For since upon these grounds, no man can Otherwise be Assured of the Lawfulnes
of this action, and whatever is not so of faith is sin; the want of such
Assurance, must be as strong a bar against the performance, as want of
Worthiness: So, Those Few only, Those very Few, who are not only in Gods favor,
but Above all Doubt of their being so, must presume to approach his Table.

Yea, if we will follow the conduct of the Position, as far as it will lead us;
we shall com to believ it less sinful to Die in such an estate, than to
Communicate. Because Death is Unavoidabl, and however it be damnabl to Live in
a state of Impenitency, it is no New sin to Die so. But here, we are told that we
may avoid the Lords Table without sin; and therefore must incur a Distinct guilt
by Coming; and that, not only if we be Really Unworthy, but if we Doubt whether
we are so or no.

And what a singularity it here! In every other controversy the Rival
Positions use to oppose one another as Positive and Negative in the same
Question.

Our present question is, Whether our Lords [Do this] amount to a Command?

We might in course expect no wors, than a Denial: And That very Denial too, we
might hope so Tempered, as to leav. Something Answerable in Some sort, tho not
fully Equal, to the usual import of the word. An Encouragement, or
Recommendation: an Invitation, or Intimation; Something of some savor; as Fit, if
not Necessary: At worst, if it do no way Oblige us; if neither Duty, nor
Kindness bind us; yet at least we should be at full Liberty to do it, if we
please.

But behold! We now find it a Command, but a Negative one. For every one is
bound to Forbear it upon Such Suppositions, as shall lay hold upon the far
greatest part of mankind. And if a Law be made for the Collective body; then
must This needs be a Negative one; bicaus not one of a thousand can escape the
Prohibition.

If it be said, That This Prohibition is but Suppositive; and between two such
Propositions there is no Inconsistence; That it may very well be true, that [If
we be not worthy, we must not do it] I confess it, nor do I accuse this
admirable person of Inconsistency with Himself; but his two Suppositive
Propositions of Conspiracy against our Lords Command. Bicaus the Former, if it
pretend to contein the whole Command, Derogateth from it; and the Later plainly
Countermandeth it. That, disableth it from Obligeing Any to Do this; And This,
makes it Oblige almost All men to Forbear it. The One falls unreasonably
Short of our Lords Command, and the Other more unreasonably Contradicts it.

IV. WE cannot now avoid the rudeness to demand a sight of the Warrant which
may authorize any one, not only thus to Limit, but Countermand our Lords Laws.
It is an undoubted rule, Ubi lex non distinguit, non est distinguendum. And
Those words which are accused of it, we have sufficiently cleared from any such
Crime. But to Countermand a Law, is much more than to Limit it; and for This,
we have not yet seen the least Appearance of a Warrant; much less, so Clear, so
Imperative, so Express an one, as may outvoice both our Lord and his Apostl.

Our Lords Command is Universal [Drink ye all of this] This Apostl's injunction
is equivalently indefinite [Let a man eat this bread etc.] It is probabl our
Lord admitted, (certain he Forbad not) Judas himself: And it is plain the
Apostl Prohibited not, but Commanded the Corinthians themselves, bad though they
were. And if Either of them did at any Other time, either Repeal such unlimited
Commands, or Prohibit their performance, to Any kind of Persons; when we see
it, we shall submit.

Yea, (though we have no such Commission) we will take the boldness to conform,
not only to an Explicit Prohibition, peremtorily saying, Do Not this; but any
such word, as by Clear and Necessary Consequence, must Infer it.

If I say either our Lord, or This, or any Other Apostl, ever dropped a syllabl
which is capable of being made a Medium, to forbid not only the Most, but any
One member of his Church to do this; though I shall think it as great a Miracle,
as Either of them ever wroght; yet I shall Admire only, not Oppose the
Conviction.

But there is No such danger, the wonder blows from another point, even from
the slightness of the Evidences (shall I call them) which are brought against
the whole weight of the Apostl's argument. Two loos words, cut off from their
fellow members, and miserably racked, that they may confess something against
His or our Lords design; a few precarios Allegories, and some shows of
Probability, that our Lords Supper would be more honored, and his Service more
promoted another way: These are the whole force we are to contend with, and
shall do it in the order now set down, beginning with, that which alone is
worth regarding, Scripture.

And here I deny not the truth of the Supposition; if the Apostl has said any
thing which by necessary inference will forbid any one to Do this; it is as
much as if he had said in express terms, [Do it not] But then the Inference
must be Unavoidabl; and the saying whereon it is grounded, Uncapabl of any such
sens, as may Comply with That Command, which it shall pretend to Weaken.

If once more we look upon the Apostl's dissertation, we shall find it to
consist of Two main limbs, Positions and Deductions, which Depending upon These
Positions, must by no means Contradict them.

The Positions (we have found) aim all at This, That Our Lord has so
inseparably inlayed His Supper upon all Church-meetings; that, as we May not;
so, if we would, we Cannot part them.

The Inferences ar Two.

1. From Constancy in the One, he infers Constancy in the Other. Bicaus in
All your meetings you eat This Bread, and drink This Cup, therefore in All your
meetings you show forth the Lords death by them. This Consequence we have all
this while be'n proving to be his aim.

2. The Other Consequence argues back again, from the Reverence due to our
Lords Person, to Answerabl Reverence due to his Representatives. Bicaus the
Lords Body and Blood ar concerned in it, therefore you must not eat This bread
and drink This cup Unworthily.

And this he presses by two important inferences; the Former setting forth the
Crime in the 27 verse. The Later prescribing the Remedy in the 28. Upon these
two, turn all the Interpretative Prohibitions, which must revers our Lords
Command to DO this, and all his own forgoing argument inforceing it.

For by the Former All Unworthy persons ar ipso facto excommunicated; and by
the Later every one is bound therefore to examine himself, that if he find
himself unworthy he may execute the sentence.

It must therefore needs be worth our Labor seriosly to enquire into the true
import of those two considerable words; which I shall do in their Order.

CHAP. II. Concerning Unworthiness.
I. What [Unworthy] imports. 1. In it is singl signification. 1. In Grammar it
is an Adverb. 2. In Logik a Relative. II. The degree of the Crime not
expressed, why? We need not be so fearful as the Papists. We deny not the Real
Presence. III. 2. The Aspect of the word upon the Apostls design. 1. Personal
worthiness dishonourabl to our Lord. 2. Different from the Apostls mesure. IV.
The Apostl oght to have warned the Corinthians of it. 1. For the Lord's Tables
sake. 2. For his own arguments sake. V. 3. For the Corinthians sakes, who were
such as oght to have be'n forbidden.

THE Former is set forth in verse. 27. He that eats This Bread, and drinks
This Cup UNWORTHILY, is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. And again,
verse. 29. He that eats [unworthily] eats and drinks damnation to himself.
In the 27. is declared the Guilt, in the 29. the Punishment: And Both of them
incurred by doing this UNWORTHILY.

Our main business therefore must be to mesur the import of the word [Unworthy]

And first we must view it, in it is Singl Interpretation, and then in its
Aspect.

1. It Is Singl import may be considered in Grammar and in Logik.

1. In Grammar we are to consider, the Root and the Termination.

1. The Root is [Worthy] which Rigidly imports an Equality of worth; but in a
Milder sens, is satisfied with some Proportion, though short of Full value.

The Chancery of the Gospel abateth much of what Strict Law requires; Is
satisfied with Suitablness, for Worthiness. This Allowance does it perpetually
give All such words as import Righteousness: And with This Latitude, does our
Apostl frequently use This very word. E. G. Ephesians. 4.1. Col. 1.10. These. 2.12.
etc.

For if any one think he can in a Proper sens, Walk Worthy of the Gospel,
Worthy of the Lord, or Worthy of God; That very thought will make him Unworthy,
of the mercy offered by That Lord, in That Gospel.

2. The Termination speaks it an Adverb, qualifying the Manner of the Action;
Not an Adjective, subjected in the Agent: It is not He that eats and
drinks, being [Unworthy] but he that does it [Unworthily] however his Person
be qualified.

The Difference between These two, is so Wide, so Evident, and (in This place)
so Important; that it could never escape such acute eyes, as some of our
adversaries enjoy, were they not muffled with that Proverbial partiality, which
makes None so blind, as him that will not see. For the first sight of it will
expose the impertinence (as to This performance) of all those Schemes and
Directories for Self-Examination, which are so carefully set forth; as if it
were the same thing, to do this in a Manner worthy of the Office, and to make
one's Self Worthy to be the Officer: This can never be too carefully observed.

I again insist upon it, that This Difference between UNWORTHY and UNWORTHILY
duly considered, will let in such light, as will abundantly discover, the many
and great flaws in That hypothesis, to which so many good and wise men have so
enslaved themselves, that they are sometimes (as we shall anon see a pitiful
exampl) forced to offer violence to their ingenuity.

2. In Logik, it is a Relative; wherein beside the now considered Relation and
Subject, is also considerabl, the Correlate, which is the Party concerned in
the Worthiness or Unworthiness of the Action. And this is Generally, Grossly,
and Unhappily mistaken for our Lords Person; whereas we have sufficiently
proved it to be [This Bread, and This Cup.]

Because so much depends upon it, I again desire is may be considered, that the
Apostl reproves the Corinthians; just as a sober person would a rude Bully, if
he should see him abuse a Justice of Peace, in execution of his Office.

Sir (might he say) Take heed what you do; you seem to take this Gentleman for
your Equal, or (perhaps) your Inferior; but then are you mistaken; for This
Gentleman, This plain Gentlman, what ever you think of him, represents the
Kings person; And therefore the Abuses you offer Him, are not private
incivilities to an Ordinary Person, but Publik Misdemeanors, etc.

In such an Admonition, Nothing is intended to be urged, but what needs it;
viz. The Character of the Officer; which once known, the Nature of the Crime,
and the Kings concern immediately appears.

II. THE Nature of the Crime; but it is Degree is not so plain: The Apostl in
This place, by a most unusual style, leaves it to our Own Reasons to judge. He
is guilty (says he) of the Body and Blood of the Lord, but whether of
Trampling it under foot, or only of Contemning it, or in what degree of
Affronting it; the strange Ellipsis has left uncertain.

This is very Certain, and no less Considerabl; That the affront which passes
through the Officers person, loses much of it is force There; and cannot strike
so strong upon the Kings, as if it were Directly and Immediately aimed at him.

The Character does indeed dignify the Otherwise inconsiderabl Person; But the
Person has it is Reaction upon the Character. We make great allowances for the
Meanness of the One, even when we pay our Honor to the Other. For we think not
the same Aw due to the Justice's Worship, as to the King's Majesty; nor do we
judge the Crime Equally great, in the affront offered him.

As the Corinthians Crime had be'n much aggravated, so had the Apostl's own
Argument be'n much strengthened; if he had not made This Bread This Cup, but
our Lords body and blood the proper object of the abuse.

Had therefore This Bread be'n the Proper Body, and this Cup the Proper Blood of
our Lord; he was now obliged both to Declare and Urge it. In a case so urgent,
an Omission is equivalent to a Negative.

It was his business so to set forth the Dignity of This abused Bread and Cup;
that by Proportion with it, their Guilt may be Aggravated. Would Truth have
Consented, his Design would have Required him, to have raised his voice Higher.

He must have said, he that Eats this Bread, and Drinks this Cup, eats
the body, and drinks the blood of the Lord; and not have com'n off with a
Cold, Indefinite Ellipsis; which not expressing in What Measure, makes nothing
plain but this, that it is in a measure much Inferior, and consequently his own
argument much Weaker, than if he had declared them guilty of contemt to the
body and blood of Christ immediately, by Using Them in such manner, as they did
This Bread and This Cup.

Those indeed who still believ This Bread and This Cup, not to be our Lord's
Representatives but Himself; may justly fear the Unworthiness, not only of
their Persons, however carefully Prepared, but of their Worship too, however
carefully Performed.

But we, who believ them no other than what the Apostl styles them, even Then,
when he most Studiosly* Recommendeth them to our Reverence; when upon due
Self-examination we find, how unworthy We are to Receve our Lords body and
blood; may check our fears, by considering, how Unworthy This Bread and This
Cup ar to Represent them; not doubting but the same goodness, which bestowed
such honor upon the unworthy elements; will pardon and accept of Us, if we
receve them in a Manner suitable to their Office, tho not in a Degree worthy of
his own Person.

Let me not be mistaken. I deny not the Reality of Christ's presence in the
Sacrament. When I call This Bread and Cup Representatives, I mean not, that our
Lords body and blood, ar thereby no otherwise Represented, than the Kings
Person is by his Picture; which are the proper goods of the Possessor, and may
be treated according to his pleasure; or than a King is by a Stage Player,
which only Imitateth, but Shareth not his power: But as the King is by his
Officer, who so Represents his Person, as to Execute his Authority; with whom
he is (tho not Personally, yet) Politikly present; Ratifying whatever he does
in his Name and stead.

This kind of Real presence our Lord himself promised, not to Affright but
Incorage us. When two or three (said he) ar gathered together in my name, there
am I in the mids of them, He meant doubtless no less than a Real presence;
which must needs be most Eminent in Such assemblies as ar gathered together,
not only in his Name, but upon his Invitation; And to make such a Promis, an
argument to fright men away, is a strange way of honoring the Author.

From this dissection of the very words, we find, them fall very short of the
force ascribed to them. They no way bar any man from Obedience, for want of
Worthiness; Require not a Legal Worthiness in the Person coming; Make not the
Person of Christ, the Object of the Worthiness required in the Performance. And
upon the whole, make not the guilt of the Unworthy Performance equal to that of
Disobedience; since This Directly affronteth our Lords Person, in his Command;
That, only Indirectly, in his Representative.

III. WE have said that the Anatomist is not only to vieu the Intrinsic
Texture of the part dissected, but it is Serviceablness to the Life: to what
therefore we have seen of the proper sens of the word, we shall add it is aspect
upon the Apostls design, which will be a Further Evidence that he meant not so
much as is generally believed, because such supposal of Personal worthiness
would have be'n, 1. very dishonorabl to our Lord, 2. very Deferent from that
Mesure, himself stateth it by; and 3. very Unfaithful to the Corinthians, he
requires it of.

1. It were a great DISHONOR to our Lord, to suppose it possibl, that any one
can be Worthy; yea, or com within any Nearer distance than Infinite
Unworthiness. For Worthiness is Relative; signifies, if not Full Equality, yet
some Proportion; between the Merit, and the Reward; the Fest, and the Guest:
And, take which of the Correlates you please, you find a Saint reproving the
concept.

To those that fear their Own Unworthiness, thus speaks St. Chrisostom, Thou
say thou art not worthy to Do this; neither art thou worthy to Pray, etc. We
may go on, neither art thou worthy to Hear; So far art thou from being Worthy
to take our Lords Body, that thou art not Worthy to take His Name into thy
mouth; so far from Worthy to enjoy his Blood, that thou art not so, to enjoy
the light of the Sun, the fruits of the Earth, or any of those sensual
delights, which Beasts may Enjoy, but not Abuse as much as Thou.

On the other side, to those who fear the Greatness of the Sacrament, thus
speaks another Saint, Thou abstainest from the Blessed Sacrament because it
is a thing so sacred and formidabl, that thou not think thy self worthy of
it: well, suppose That: But I pray', who is worthy? Is an angel worthy enogh?
No certainly, if we consider the greatness of the Mystery.

Let us well consider these two Sayings, and their Reasonablness, and then
judge of those so frequent phrases, A Worthy Communicant, A Worthy Guest, etc.
whereby many unwary persons, ar more Scared, than with any thing derived from
the word of God; which never taught us either to think so Slightly of our Lords
Blood, or so Highly of our Selves, as to believ it possibl by any endeavors to
become Worthy of it.

2. The vulgar sens is very different from that Mesure, the Apostl stateth the
reproved Unworthiness by. He expressly caleth it a [not discerning the Lords
body] (...), putting no difference between This, which our Lord declared his
Own Body, and Common bread.

Our Learned Mede very well confirms the Jewish definition of Holiness, that
it signifies Separation; We Sanctify what we honor with Discrimination; and on
the contrary we Profane, what we use as Common.

The heavenly vision confirms this, warning St. Peter from an Error in
opinion, analogos to this Crime.

What God has sanctified, that call not thou Common; To call Common, and
Unclean, was all one in St. Peter's sens; and not to discern the Lords body from
Common bread, is all one as to Desecrate it, in St. Paul's.

And this he so presses upon the Corinthians, as dubly to convince them. What
(says he) Have ye not houses to eat and to drink in, or despise ye the Church
of God and shame them that have not? Possibly he might urge this, not as
Another Crime, but as an Evidence of their unexcusablness in the Former.

They might (perhaps) plead Ignorance in That; but in This they could not: For
though (possibly) they might not understand that they were obliged to Discern
This Bread as the Lords body; yet must they needs know, they oght to Discern
the Church as his House. If they knew it not to be Sacrilege, to make the Lords
Cup an instrument of drunkenness; they could not but know it so, to make his
House a Tavern.

With what partiality do some (for some others do not) treat these two parts of
the Apostls reproof? With what Colossik strides do they reach both sides of
Superstition? On one side they dread the Lords Supper, for want of worthiness
in Themselves; on the other side, they fear to own any reverence toward Gods
House, for want of worthiness in It? How do they rob Peter and cloth Paul? make
the Lords House Common, that they may dubly Sanctify his Tabl? And all the while
the Apostl makes This the Corinthians crime, that they discriminated not the
Lords Body from Common Bread; and This, either another Instance, or an Evidence
of their Profaneness, that they discriminated not his Church, from their Own
houses.

But I may not now insist upon Any other error, than That of the Corinthians,
which the Apostl says consisted in This, That they So used our Lords Body and
his House, as if they had Both be'n Common.

He charge them not Here (though elsewhere he do) with any Other crime, but
such as Directly and Immediately, desecrate the One and the Other, and that in
This very exercise: Takes no notice of their Other habitual vices, confineth
his charge to This performance, in This place: Forbids not to approach
either the Lords Table or his House, bicaus they are intemperate at their Own.

Yea, he So expresses himself as if he would even Compound with them, indulge
them their Domestik debaucheries, provided they would forbear them Here.

Not that indeed he Justifyeth what he elsewhere plainly enogh Condemns; but
to aggravate This incomparably Greater wickedness; whereof the Sacrilege so
Exceeds, as even to Hide the Immorality.

The Glutton is guilty of the Flesh of his Beast, and the Drunkard of the Blood
of the Grape; but the Unworthy Communicant, of the Body and Blood of the Lord.

To be drunk with Common Wine in a Common House, is to abuse both Gods Benefits,
and ones Own Body; but to Desecrate the Lords House into a Tavern, and his Blood
into a Cup of Drunkenness; to make That the Instrument, and This the Scene of
Leudness; is a wickedness not only above Drunkenness, but even above Sacrilege
it self: As it has no Match, so it has no Name.

If therefore you will not divorce your beloved debaucheries, if you will needs
be eating and drinking intemperately; yet know your Place; do not heap
Sacrilege upon Lust, make not the Lords House, yea his very Body and Blood,
Servants to the leudness they would Check.

This is the Utmost reach of the Apostls reproof. It comprehends (indeed) not
only the Lords Table, but his whole House Yet breaks not open any Private one:
Judges no Other unworthiness but of This Performance; Requires a Difference,
not between one Communicant and another; but between This, and other Places,
and Suppers: and Consequently Forbids not Any Person to Do This, which we
have found All indifferently obliged to Do: but forbids Every one to Do It
in such a Manner, as shall make That Common, which our Lord has Sanctified.

IV. 3. THE Apostl must be mortally unfaithful to his Corinthians, if upon so
urgent an Occasion he did not warn them in Terms as Plain, as the Crime (if
any) must be Great.

I say [upon so Urgent an Occasion] for a most Urgent one it is, Whether we
look upon the 1. Lords Supper, which he professedly endeavoreth to rescu from
Profanation, 2. the Argument whereby he laboreth to do it; or 3. the Persons to
whom he addresseth all.

1. He professes to rescu the Lords Tabl from Profanation, and to That End, to
Close it with such a Rail, as shall Fence it from abuse: If therefore he leaves
that rail so wide, as to Admit Such persons, as he oght to have kept out; he
must be dubly and inexcusably unfaithful; both to the Lords tabl, which he
shall so have exposed to dishonor; and to All those souls, which finding no
contrary warning, may com to it, with as great Sincerity as Danger.

If I find this the Purlieus of the Corinthians guilt, that they Distinguished
not the Lords Body; then may I be secure of One of those Two; Either he who
distinguishes the Lords Body, is free from This, how full soever he may be of
Other Crimes; Or the Apostl must be More guilty than the most Unworthy
Communicant; since, professing to show the True Extent of the Danger, he warned
them, not to distinguish between Persons, Worthy and Unworthy; but between This
and Common Bread.

Were his words Ambiguos, yet must they here carry a sens usual; in a case so
Important, he oght to have Explained, how much they must Now signify, above
what at All other Times, and by All Persons, is ascribed to them, and which can
Intend No more but This: That every one is obliged, So to Distinguish between
the Lords Supper and his Own; as to shun Those indecencies, which are ordinary
in Private Houses.

2. He must be no less unfaithful to his Own Argument: bicaus contrary to all
Reason, he must have neglected to strengthen it with the most Considerabl and
Obvios Corroboration.

For if the exclusion of Unworthy Persons, were as agreeabl to our Lords
Institution; as the Consequence would have be'n serviceabl to his Own Purpose;
he Might, and therefore Oght, to have urged it, and so put the holy Sacrament at
the Greatest and Safest distance from profanation.

For if none must com to This Table, who abuse their Own; it will be out of
danger of any Other abuse, than Desertion: If none drink This Cup, who is ever
drunk with Common Wine; it will be secure from Promoting the Drunkenness which
it cannot Tolerate; If none Partake This Bread, who break not Their Own to the
hungry; there will be no more danger, that any one shall be hungry, than that
any other shall be drunken. And since the Apostl was now obliged to speak
whatever Truth would permit, we are reduced to This choice; whether He were falls
to the Lords Supper, his Own Argument, and his Disciples souls? or whether it
be (Not Forbidden to every Unworthy Person, but) enjoined to every one, though
as unworthy as were the Corinthians, to Do this.

3. The Persons to whom this reproof is addressed, were such as may induce us to
believ, that Gods Providence concurred with the Apostl's Words, to prevent any
possibility of believing what we now dispute against. For they were the
Corinthians, a peopl of all other the most Obnoxios, Proverbially Infamos for
debaucheries.

This City vyed with Sodom, as for fullness of bread, so for excess of Leudness,
and dismalness of Destruction. Yea, so strangely inseparabl was Luxury from
every thing of Corinth; so much more incurabl, than that strange Leprosy of
Jewish houses; that the very Burning of the City, did not Purge, but Propagate
it.

The confusion of Metals, melted by the raging flames from her multitude of
rich Statues, made That famos mixture, which by the luxurios Romans, was
preferred above Gold it self, as a more precios matter for their drinking cups;
and to be Supremely Luxurios, something of Corinth must contribute: Yet was not
Leudness conveyed away with her Metals, nor the Leprosy destroyed with her
Houses; when it had infected Rome her self, it still stuck to the very Site of
the place. For when the most advantageos situation temted Caesar to rebild it,
New-Corinth soon vyed with the Old, as in Riches, so in Leudness.

Look we no further than This Epistl; we find the Apostle endeavors to write as
Obligingly as possibl; yet constrained to take notice of more sins in Them,
than in any Other peopl.

Look we no furthar than This Dissertation; we find such Supremacy of
Profaneness, as may well be Yoked with their otherwise matchless Fornication;
Both of them such, as are not named among the Gentiles, not to be found, but at
Corinth only.

This so Debauched peopl how does the Apostl Reprove? How does he Warn them
from the Lords table? Now, sure, if ever must the sentence of Excommunication
thunder: Now must the Apostl plainly tell them, that unless they leave their
Riot, their Factions, their Fornication, and All Other their Carnalities; they are not Worthy, and therefore may not Presume, to taste of the Lords Supper.

But behold! the either Negligent or Ignorant Apostl, droppeth not a syllabl of
all this Unworthiness; Urges No other Profaneness, but what terminated in
This Performance, as it is Proper object.

What shall we now say? Were the Corinthians such Worthy Communicants, as
partook no less the Lord's Spirit, than His Supper? Yea, were Those very
Persons, Worthy to receve it, who receved it so Unworthily? Or was the Apostl
so Careful, to describe their Crime, and to assert the Dignity of the profaned
Sacrament; and yet so Negligent, as not to allow the least Mention, or so much
as intimation, of what was so Necessary for the due Understanding of Both? but
on the contrary so Bold, as to Urge them to com, when so many must by so doing,
become Guilty of the crime he reproves?

Where now? Where? Where ar those clear Prohibitions, that plain Counte^^^and,
which Now if Ever, must silence our Lords [Do this?]

Why does the Apostl take such Cold notice of their Notorios Domestik Leudness
as if he seemed to Approve it? Why did he in such Scandalos persons, censure at
This time No other sins; but such as they cemmitted in the very Church, at the
very Altar? Why did he not afford One poor word, to warn them of the Danger,
which himself Betrayed them to, if the Unworthiness of the Person could bring
them any?

I say if there were any such Danger, as is now believed; himself Betrayed his
disciples into it. For he was not only a silent Spectator, did not only Permit,
but Command, the most Debauched Corinthians, (whom he oght to have Forbidden)
without Warning them of any Other Danger, than they might well have avoided;
not by living Always Worthy, but by performing This One Action in a worthy
Manner; not by such Constant Sobriety as might enable their Own houses to
emulate that of God; but by behaving themselves so Reverently in the Church, as
to Discriminate It from their Own Houses.

CHAP. III. Of Self Examination.
I. How Self examination is usually pressed. II. The questi- is not indefinite,
but confined to the Present occasion; and the answer is dubl. 1. Negative. III.
2. Positive. IV. The true question concerning which we must examine our selves.

HAVING thus, upon full examination, found that the Crime lies not in the
Unworthiness of the Person, but of the Manner of his Performance; the Constancy
we plead for, seems already free, as well from the Second as the First
pretended Prohibition.

For if in That the Apostl did not warn the Corinthians from Doing This by
reason of the Unworthiness of their Persons; but only from doing it in a Manner
Unworthy of the Lords Supper; Then, in This, wherein Self-examination is
prescribed as a Remedy, he does not Therefore require us to Examine our selves,
that we may Forbear if we find our Selves Unworthy: But Therefore, that duly
weighing within our considerations the dignity of This Bread and This Cup;
which at That Time did, and at All Times oght to attend upon All Church
Meetings; we may Therein behave our Selfs with Reverence suitabl.

So that strictly speaking, our Self-examination is not to work Backward upon
what we have do'n, that so we may know whether we be worthy or no; but Forward
upon what we are now to do.

Yet because the Gramatical sens of the word [Examining a man's self] seems to
import More; and it is Utmost importance is bound upon us with all possibl
Rigor; That we may leav Nothing unanswered, let us hear how This is urged, as
an implicit Prohibition from the Duty who is Dignity it is to secure.

And here according to my wont, I shall give you the very words of the most
Excellent adversary.

To what purpose is it, but in case he find himself unfit, to abstain and
forbear to com. For if he comes UNWORTHY, he dies for it: and therefore to
examine, must signify, Let a man examine himself so, that he be approved, etc.

It Is worth both our Observation and Pity, how hard this worthy person is put
to it, to bend the Apostl's Words to a compliance with his Own Opinion, and at
last to Break a stubborn one, that will not be Flexibl.

[UNWORTHILY] is turned to [UNWORTHY] The Former was utterly Unserviceabl, it
must therefore necessarily be changed, that with it the state of the Danger, and
it is Remedy, i. e. the whole affair, may be Changed also.

This Sole consideration is enogh to ruin the whole superstructure; so that we
might well supersede any further enquiry. But we will leav nothing unanswered,
and therefore proceed to examine, whether the Bilding be better than the
Foundation.

I will not fence with the word (...). Let it (for me) signify as it is
translated, and the Most too, that so it can import. But what then? To what
purpose (asks our author) should a man examine himself?

I answer, that whether we look Far or Near, we cannot miss of Purposes
sufficient. If we look far off, to the days of old, Both Philosophers among the
Heathen, and Fathers among Christians, recommend This exercise, as most useful
to Excellent, though Other purposes. But we need not go so Far, nor any Farther
than the Same book which asks the question.

The end (says it) of Examination is, that 1. We griev for all our sins. 2.
That we resolv to amend all. 3. That we actually watch and pray against all.

And further, to recommend Frequency in this exercise, he reckons several
fruits of it, The oftener (says he) we recollect our selves, 1. The more
weaknesses we shall observe, and 2. more faults correct, and 3. watch the
better, and 4. Repent more perfectly, and 5. offend less, and 6. be more
prepared for death, and 7. be more humbl, and 8. with ease prevent the
contracting of evil habits, and 9. interrupt the union of litl sins into a
chain of death, and 10. more readily prevail upon our passions, 11. better
understand our selves, and 12. more frequently convers with God, and 13. oftener
pray, and 14. have a more heavenly conversation, and in fine 15. be more fitted
for a frequent and holy Communion. By This time one would think the Question
abundantly answered by the Proponent Himself: Yet may we go on, for 16. we
shall stand in aw of our selves and not sin in private, Ps. 4. and 17. we shall
rejoice in our selves and not in others, Gal. 6.4. and 18. searching our ways
turn to God, Lam. 3.40. and 19. by seeing our progress already made, take
courage to go on, and 20. Praise God for grace already receved, etc.

Now I hope we may take breath. It is not to Every question that we can give
answers by the Score. But This is so fruitful, that none can better Furnish or
Deserv a volum. And it might better be proposed negatively, if the answer be to
be difficult; To that good purpose does it Not serve?

All Wise men agree, that it is the proper exercise of Wisdom: all Pios men,
that it is the greatest promoter of Piety. It Weedeth out all wickedness,
Planteth and Waters all graces: Were there no other reason but it is excellent
Usefulness, had not our Lord injoined, nor the Apostl pressed Constancy, in a
performance to which so serviceabl an exercise is annexed; The very regard of
the many Purposes to which it serves, would have sufficiently recommended it.

II. BUT the true question at This time is, not Concerning it is Absolute
Usefulness at Any time, But it is Pertinence to This particular office.

To what purpose Now? Now above Other times? Before This, rather then Other
exercises?

My swer shall be dubl.

1. To show the weakness of the consequence intended, I answer Negatively. 2.
To clear the Apostl's meaning, I answer Positively.
1. NEGATIVELY, I answer, that to examine a man's self before he do Such or Such
an action, does not import a Forbearance of That action, if upon such
Examination he do not approve himself: And in the place now under ey, there is
not the least Intimation in the Words, nor the least Reason in the Context, to
make it probabl, that the Apostl So intended, but much to the Contrary.

And here I take our worthy Author at his word. It is a Relative duty and
nothing of it is self; for no man is the better for being examined if there
follow nothing after it. True, but we have found it attended with so Large and
Noble a train of good consequences, that we cannot say Nothing follows it, tho
Forbearance from this duty make not One in the number: Sure it is, the Apostl
has here no service for This Forbearance, but rather excludes it.

When Pythagoras again and again importuneth his disciples, that before they
suffer their eyes to sleep, they thrice examine themselves concerning the past
days actions; he was never thought to forbid them to sleep, unless upon such
repeted examination, they approved themselves Do you now ask to what purpose it
is So to examine? he swears by the highest, that it is the way to a divine life.

When Seneca gives account of his own constancy in this exercise, he expressly
declares the effect was to warn himself; saying, take heed, do so no more, for
this time I pardon thee. Do you now ask to what purpose? You see, not to
Condemn, but to Pardon and Admonish ones self.

What? Is there no other fruit of Self-examination, but Self-excommunication?
Does Religion, Does the pardoning Gospel, more disable us from Pardoning our
selves, than Reason did Seneca?

But what need we look so far? The Apostl is of age, let him answer himself.
Does he say [Let a man examine himself whether he be Worthy or no? and
accordingly Com or Fearbear?] Yea, does he speak in Pythagoras's style? Does he
say [Let not any man eat this bread, till he have examined and approved
himself.] This would sound so Like a Prohibition, that He might be excusabl,
who should so understand it:

And were we so to have be'n forbidden, it had be'n necessary (as we have
already pleaded) that the Prohibition should have be'n as express as our Lords
Command; and not so Ambiguos that an honest heart might miss it. But here is
nothing of such an aspect. Yea

He is equally positive for Both Performances, [Let a man Eat] is no less
Imperative, than [Let a man examine himself.] He Equally injoineth Both, and
therefore Both ar Equally Necessary; and any man may as lawfully forbear the One
as the Other; and Both, as Either.

What therefore he has so Joined together, no man may Put Asunder; yea, what he
has made Subordinate, no man may make Opposite.

For it is further considerabl, that Those two duties are not Yoked together as
Equals (which (yet) had be'n sufficient to forbid the One to draw contrary to
the Other) but ar Subordinate, as Lord and Servant.

Examination, however excellent a duty, has Here no other Place or Business,
but to serve This favorite exercise; and we may now take up our Saviors
argument; Eating was not made for Examination, but Examination for Eating;
wherefor Eating is Lord also of Examination: And that the Servant should drive
the Lord out of his Own doors and estate; is not more against Justice; than it
is against the Apostl's intention, that Examination should bar a man from
Eating.

If therefore any one persist in examining Examination it self, urging [To what
purpose?] This may well be the first claus of the answer, That it must Not be
to so unreasonable a purpose, as to Forbid the Performance it oght to serve: and
we may proceed to

III. 2. OUR Positive answer to clear the Apostl's meaning His Purpose is to
serve his main Design; to prevent the Sin, he Pleads against, and the Error,
he Disputes against.

If they knew not, that though Lords Supper was concerned in Those their
meetings; he warns them of the danger of omitting the indispensibl duty, by [So
let him Eat.] If they knew it, and yet feared not to Profane it; he warns them
of that That danger, by [Let a man examine himself.]

I ask not now [to what purpose] but Upon what Subject must we examine our selves?

It is [we ar told] a Relative duty; Whereto then must it Relate? Relata must
be aequalia; and for That reason we must Mesure the One by the Other.

If a Murderer be brought to examination, and the officer examine him concerning
Adultery, or concerning some School-probleme, etc. we might perhaps commend his
Diligence, but (sure) not his Wisdom.

That therefore we may duly perform This exercise, we must first examine the
Design; and then Our Selves, in order Thereto.

The Design is apparently the Prevention of That sin whereof the Corinthians
were guilty. That Sin was their [not discerning the Lords body] nor treating it
with such Distance, as oght to have be'n put between That and Common bread: but
abusing his Flesh and Blood in his Church, with the same rudeness, as they did
That of their Cattle and their Grape in theit Own Houses.

This was the Sore, and to This must the Plaster be fitted. Why must the
Plaster be so much larger than the Sore? Why must we examine our selves
concerning such Actions, or Worthiness; whose knowledge has no Aspect upon
this Performance, but only Opposite and Malignant? Such an Examination as shall
excommunicat, if not the Whole, certainly the Greatest part of mankind?

He that shall most carefully perform his examination; first in That manner,
which the Apostl prescribes, by Discerning the infinite Distance of dignity,
between the Lords table and his Own: and then in That Manner that our Worthy
Author prescribes, between our Lords Body, and his Own Soul; tho he be the
Best of his age, yea, the best (our Lord only excepted) that ever was, will
most clearly discover, not only that he is Now Unworthy; but that he must
despere Ever to be Otherwise.

Since then the Best Examination, of the Best Person, will carry him, not only
Beyond, but Contrary to the Apostl's Design; Since it will put such an
Inconsistency between the Two Precepts, that [Let a man examine himself] will
infer [Let him Not Eat] and since the Apostl does not in any kind Intimate,
that our Worthiness, but plainly Declare that our Differencing This from Common
bread and wine, is to be subject of our Examination;

IV. HIS Meaning in the words now under vieu, can be no More, nor Other than
This, Let a man examine himself, whether he well Understand, and Consider, what
he is about to Do? Whether he put the due Estimate upon what he is about to
Receve? Whether he put as great Difference between the Lords supper and a
Common fest; as there is between the virtues of a litl Common Bread and Wine,
and those of the Body and Blood of Christ? Whether he go to gratify his sensual
appetite, with Eating and Drinking? or to comply with his governors or
neighbors, in communicating with them? or to fest his soul with Thankfulness
and Love toward his crucified Savior, with Joy and Delight in Communion with
him, and such other acts of devotion as so Holy an office requires?

Let a man well examine himself concerning this, and So let him Eat, with
appetites suitabl.

This I say is all that the Apostl's Design can Permit, or his Words Declare
him to mean, by [Let a man examine himself] He requires us to look Forward, not
Backward; upon what we are Going to do, in the Church, not upon what we Have
already do'n there, or elsewhere; upon the Difference, between This and Other
Bread; not upon That, between Our Own and Other men's souls.

Yet to prevent misconstructions I add this Proviso: That I neither pretend to
disparage the most Severe self-examination, as it takes account of our Past
actions, and Present state of soul; (For I dare swear with Pythagoras, that it
is the highway to divine life): Nor to deny that our approach to This holy
supper, is the Most Proper season, for This most Excellent exercise (For he
that best performs the One, will undoubtedly best perform the Other.)

All that I deny is this, That the Apostl, in This place, sets up Examining
our selves, against Obeying our Lord; so as to Forbid any one to Eat, if upon
examination he find himself Unworthy.

And I further add (thohg I have no such need) that if it were Doubtful, yea if
it were highly Probabl; If he had so worded his precept, that in a Plausibl
appearance, it might signify some such intention; yet is not a Probabl Sound of
any One expression, worthy to be balanced, against so Express a command of our
Lord, and so industrious an Endeavor of the same Apostl to urge it, as we have
found in the Context. For it is Good Law, and Good Reason, that no Law can be
repeled but by Express terms; and therefore I still insist upon my demand; Where
is that Express [DO NOT] which may Countermand our Lords [DO THIS.]

CHAP. IV. Answers Reason, Objecting Allegories.
I. A Transition from Scriptur to Reason, and by the way notice taken of
Allegories of a midl Nature between both. II. The Allegory of Covenant and Seal
answered and retorted. III. The Allegory of Member likewise answered. IV. The
Allegory of Sons* and Enemies. V. A General answer to all objections of this
kind.

I. I HAVE now do'n what I proposed as Necessary, and all that I conceve
Possibl, for a full discovery of the Apostl's meaning, in That unhappy
discourse, which as it is the Only Comment we have upon our Lords Institution;
so has shared it is sufferings; sometimes Mutilated, sometimes Racked, sometimes
Robbed of it is due sens, sometimes Laden with more than it can bear; and by all
ways Tormented; that it may say something in Justification of That Omission,
which he designed to Prevent or Condemn.

I have given so regular and exact account of every Word, and every Aspect of
words; that as I am sure no man ever Has, so I may boldly believ no man ever
Will, match it with any other. I have acted Both parts, Opponent and
Respondent: On That side, I have traced the Process of his Argument, Viewed
every Design, and every Medium, and every Claus, as it servs either in the One
or the Other Office. On This side, I have reduced the Inferences from
Contradicting, to Serving the Positions they depend on.

I have shown, that as the Former half which contains Positions, has be'n
so Robbed of it is due, that it cannot make good the charge in the Universality,
wherein it is laid down; So has the Later half be'n Racked, that it may speak
more, than either the words can bear, or the Apostl's design suffer.

That he cannot intend to Forbid Every person that finds himself Unworthy; or
to make Self-examination an Hinderance to the Performance which it is to Serve.
And I may boldly say, that in the Former half, there is not a word which does
not Help; in the Later half, there is not any that Hinders the obligation of
Constancy in Every unexcommunicate person; obliged by Every word, disobliged by
None.

If therefore we will appeal to Scripture, and take the regular way to
Understand it; we are upon as Secure ground, as any Rules can make us, Yet shall
we quit This place of Advantage, and descend to the Plain field, allowing
Reason to plead, what it can to the contrary.

But before we can reach the Plain, we are encountered with a Midl sort of
Evidences (shall I call them) or Colors, laid upon Scripture ground; precarios
Allegories, improved to a pretense of Reason.

These, since they are mere Colors, no better Subjected, than in Allegories;
must for That very reason, be Insufficient to Convince us of Any thing but
This, that Those who make use of Such arguments, want Better.

II. SOMETIMES we are told that This Sacrament is the Seal of the New Covenant,
and we ought not to see Gods Seal to a Blank etc.

In this Plea there ar two terms, by explication whereof we are to understand its
force. 1. Covenant. 2. Seal.

1. COVENANT, This Notion we must not contemn, bicaus it carries our Lords
authority. This (says He) is the cup of the New Testament (or Covenant) in My
blood; plainly ballanceing the New Covenant, against the Old; and his Own Blood
against that of the sacrificed Heifer, which we find styled the blood of
sprinkling.

This therefore must be so Sprinkled, as That was, upon the Whole promiscuos
Peopl; not to distinguish the Elect from the Reprobate; but as Then the Jew, so
Now the Christian, from a Heathen, etc.

Even in the Old Covenant there was Flesh and Spirit, the Seed of the Loins, and
the Seed of the Faith. He was not a Jew which was one Outwardly, and
Circumcision was not of the Flesh, but the Spirit, whose Praise was not of Man
but of God.

Yet that outward Performance which had no Praise, if unaccompanied with the
Spirit, was Necessary, even without it; sufficient to Condemn if Omitted, though
not sufficient to Approve it Naked.

Thus was it in the Old, and thus is it in the New Covenant: The Sacraments ar
Outwatd badges; every Visibl Christian must wear them, that his Profession may
be Visibl; but No man may Rest in them, as sufficient for Salvation.

For Those only have a right to the Promises of the Covenant, who perform it is
Conditions: to All the rest, the Covenant is lost; and consequently, so ar the
Seals. Yet does This no more Prohibit, or Dispens, with a mere Outward
Christan, to receve the Sacrament; than it did a Jew, to receve Circumcision,
keep the Sabath, or wear any other Cognizance prescribed by the Law. And

2. TO SEAL a Covenant, imports an Obligation for the Future, not an Account
of the Past. The Apostl tells the Galations, that He that is Circumcised is a
debtor to keep the whole Law; not that he is discharged, as having Kept it.

We therefore most willingly grant what ever the Allegory demands, viz. That by
Doing This, we new Seal the Covenant made in Baptism. Repete all our Vows, New
tie all our Obligations, which our Corruptions or Infirmities, may have
slackened since the last Sacrament.

But to say, that bicaus This is the Seal of the Covenant, therefore none may
receve it, who has not already performed all it is Articls; is to say, that no
man may seal an Indenture, who has not already do'n what thereby he
Covenanteth to do. i. e. It is not Lawful, 'till it be Needless.

LET the otherwise minded be requested to consider. Are not all the
congregations promiscuos, obliged to make pubik profession of their Faith? And
does not Faith import Holiness? Where then is the Difference, what the Reason,
why he who is not in Covenant in the strictest sens, may not as well
Communicate in the Lords Supper; as he who has not Faith in the strictest
sens, may Profess his belief. I can show a reason why he may Better do it; but
can imagine none, why he may not do it as Well.

He that publikly makes Profession of his Faith, declares himself to Have
Faith: and if he have it not, he is a Liar, a notorios Liar, a solen Liar, in
the face of God and his Angels. But he that Receveth the Sacrament, makes no
such bost: Vaunteth not as the Young man in the Gospel, All these have I kept
from my youth up. Says not I have Paid, but I am a Debtor to the whole Gospel;
and thankfully embrace it is gratios offers, made by my Lord, and purchased with
his Blood.

This is plain Sens, and This is constant Practice. If therefore it be a kind of
Forgery, to set this Seal to a Blank; it is no less Criminal, to Tear it off
from our Lords Charter, which gives every Visibl Christian a Right to it.

III. AT OTHER times we are told, we are not to partake our Lords Body, if we be
not his Members; and his Members we are not, if we have not his Spirit.

Be it so, This will not exclude Any Christian; For St. John says: Hereby know
we the Spirit of God. Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is com'n
in the flesh, is of God: by which we perceive, what Latitude the word Spirit is
capabl of, and what force there is in the Allegory.

That the whole Body and every particular Member, must partake the same Flesh
and Blood, the whole Crearion forbids us to deny: That the Church is the body
of Christ, and every one of us Members in particular, the Apostl has expressly
taght us: The conclusion must needs be, that the celebration of This Sacrament,
is the Duty, both of every Church, and every Member.

The Administration of Sacraments is generally acknowledged an essential
requisite of a true Church; and it must be very strange, if the Reception of
them, should not be so of a true Member of such a Church.

BUT as it is in All Natural bodies, so is it in This Mystical. Every Member
must have both Outward Frame, and Inward Spirits, answerabl to its place in the
Body, and its relation to the Head. And every Member of Christ must answer it is
relation, both by an Outward Profession, and Inward Life; whereof though the
Former be Insufficient without the Later; yet is it Necessary, in Order
thereto. For by outward Offices of worship, we do not only Exercise spiritual
life, when we have it; but Dispose our selves to Attein it.

So there is a Two fold Membership: By the One we Ptofess our selves Christians,
by the Other we Are so: Yea, by That very Profession, we Are so far So, as to be
both Entitled to all Privileges, and Obliged to all Duties, which belong to
Members of Christ.

IV. AGAIN we are told, That This is the Bread of Sons and must not be given to
Enemies.

The Former claus, if the Syrophaenician woman has not answered, our Lord
himself has: For in directing us to call God Father, he has given as a right
to the Bread, as well as the title of Sons. And to the Later, the Apostl has
furnished us with an answer. For if when we were Enemies Christ died for us; if
our Enmity did not hinder him from giving us his Blood it self; much less will
it, from allowing us it is Representative.

Our Catechism teaches us to say, I was by Baptism made a Member of Christ, a
Child of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of heaven. And though we know
that the washing away of the filth of the flesh, will be far from Saving us, if
we answer it not by a good conscience toward God: Yet is every Baptized and
Unexcommunicate person, however unworthy, admitted to the privilege of joining
with the Church, in All such Offices, as call God our Father, and Christ our
Head: And All such persons ar honored by the title of Faithful, in the writings
of the Apostl's and Primitive Fathers.

Baptism is urged as necessary to incorporate into Christ's visibl body, even
those who are not capabl to understand it. Hearing is pressed as a duty upon
those who receve not the truth in the Love thereof. Prayer is required even of
those, who by their actions show themselves not to be the Sons of God, and
therefore when they pray may not properly say, Our Father.

This is no less a Sacrament, than Baptism; and more a worship of Christ, than
either Hearing or Praying. Yea, All other Offices put together, do not so much
advance his Personal honor as this One. And is it not strange, that when All
the rest ar required, This alone should be Prohibited? and That, upon no other
reason, but what is common to All? And being put home, will no less rob Christ
of All honor, than his Members of all Privileges?

V. THIS therefore is our General answer to All Objections of This kind. Many
ar called, but few chosen. Outward Offices belong to the Called, Inward
benefits, to the Chosen. The Former ar both ways condemned, whether they
neglect to join with the Church of Christ in open Profession, or by the
unsuitablness of their Lives, giv the Ly to That Profession.

And This differs no otherwise from Other Offices, but in This, That our
Saviors Person is more honored by it: and if it require so much the greater
care in the Manner, so does it also in the Thing; if we must be so much the
more careful How we Do it, so must we be, That do not Omit it.

And this is sufficient not only to Answer, but make Examples of all those
Allegorical Objections; which indeed I should hardly have taken such notice of,
did they not serve as Illustrations of our duty. For to no other purpose do our
adversaries produce them. These ar but their Velites, their main strength
follows.

CHAP. V. Reason (as the case now stands) forbids, to hazard the very being
of the Sacrament for advancement of Reverence.
I. A Descent from Scripture to Reason. The case now different from what it was
formerly. II. 1. Because the very Being of the Sacrament is hazarded. III.
Every step from Constancy, an approach to That danger. At first the Prohibition
lay only against singl persons, not qualities; and against Persons by sentence
of the Bishop. IV. From sins grossly scandalos a pass made to All sins. The
moderation of the Church of England. V. Motives to bring tepid persons to the
Sacrament, not potent. VI. A comparison of such Doctrines as endanger the
Being, with such practices as profane the Sacrament. 1. Something is better than
Nothing. More hope of reformation. A Protest against encorageing irreverence.
Three good ends laid down, which the Sacrament is fit to promote, but disabled
by disuse.

WHATEVER we have hitherto seen, either of Scripture or Reason thereupon bilt,
has be'n so short of worthy to be balanced against our Lords Command, his
Apostl's Explication, or his Churches Tradition; that I cannot think it
credibl, any one has thereby be'n induced to entertene a thought prejudicial to
them. But rather, that Pios persons finding the Sacrament to have lost much of
it is honor, and it is power, by so Constant exercise; conceving it might be both
more Serviceabl to Godliness, and more Esteemed it Self, if it had more Aw with
less Frequence; and encoraged by the exampl of Former Ages, who for the like
reasons had made great alterations: took Those Examples for their Guides, and
Those good Intentions for their Mesures; and were more industrios to interpret
the Scriptures by such good Ends; than to conform their Doctrines to the
Scriptures; now grown obscure, and hardly intelligibl, by loss of That Key
which alone was capable to unlock them.

It is therefore now made a point of Discretion, and that I may pay our Lord the
Honor due to his Wisdom, as well as the Obedience due to his Command; I must
from the undeniabl authority of Scripture proceed to consider what Reason will
determine.

I must therefore now suppose (what I have all this while be'n disproving) that
the Indulged sens of the disputed words, is the True one; that they give an
ampl Commission to govern our (Obedience I was wont to say, I now say)
Performance, by our Discretion. I must further grant (what I wish I could deny)
that we cannot be sure to preserv our Reverence to the Institution, without
quitting, not only rigid Constancy, but Tolerabl Frequency; and upon These
disadvantages com to this humbl question:

Whether the case standing as now it does, it will more conduce to the Service
of the Sacrament and it is Author; to receve it seldom, if at all; than
Constantly or Frequently?

I say [the case standing as now it doth] For I think I can never too often
profess, that I exalt not my self against those Venerable persons, whether of
the last or former ages; who were they now living, would (doubtless) change
their answer to the question, with the changed state of the Subject.

II. AND FIRST I take it for very considerabl, that the difference between the
State of the question Now, and Heretofore, is the same as Caesar declared
between the battle of Munda and Other battails; In Others, he fought for
Honor; in That, for Life. And questionless, Those who thinking it Secure from
total Desertion, thought fit to Hazard somewhar of Frequency; would not have
Exposed the very Being of so great a Duty, if they had imagined it in danger.

It is the singular unhappiness of This only Office; that it is laid aside
upon pretense it cannot defend it self. There is the same danger in Hearing or
Praying, as in Receiving Unworthily. That is by the Apostl declared a Savor of
death unto death; and This by the Wise man is styled an Abomination: Yet is
That still preached, and This still practiced. Be they never so ill used by
their Enemies, they are not therefore deserted by their Friends, bicaus
unprosperos.

If it be pleaded, that the Sacrament is not Laid aside as Useless, but Locked
up as Precios: I answer, that I very well remember, when to Secure a person
signified to Imprison him; and in This case, whatever the Intention be, the
Effect is the same. Action is the very Being of the Sacrament, from which if it
be locked up, it is lost, both to it is self, and all other purposes; which By
it, and not Without it, it is Appointed and Fit to promote.

Our Lord stamped it with his own Image and superscription; not that it might
be locked up as a Medal, but Used as Money; whose Office and Honor it is, so to
represent the King, as to answer all the needs and conveniences of the
Possessor. He therefore most honoreth ir, who so employeth it, as may best
answer our Lords good Ends; not he that locketh it up as the Miser does his
Gold.

We must therefore consider, there is an Extreme on That side also: if
Prodigality be a vice; So, and perhaps more than So, is Covetosness. Suppose
there be Danger, that the more we Use, the more we Spend it; there is another,
that the more we forbear, the less we enjoy it. And in This, the Prodigal is
justified above the Covetos, that though he spend his money, he does not destroy
it, but transferreth it to other hands: whereas the Covetos robs not Himself
only, but the whole Peopl of his Money, and the Money it self of it is Use.

We therefore grant it, There danger that Plenty may abate the price; but so
does Fullness bring Cheapness upon the very bread of life; yet do we not thence
infer, that it must be witheld 'till a Famine raise the Market. The Dutch in
time of greatest glut, do not burn All their Spices, but save sufficient to
keep up the Trade.

Still I say, Former ages saw not the Danger we ly under, of losing the Whole.
Had they seen it, we have no reason to doubt, they would have be'n as Zelos
against Desertion, as they have be'n against Irreverence. And since we have a
Tutor which they had not, Experience; let us thence learn how dangeros it is to
trust our own Wisdom, in departing from out Rule.

III. EVERY step whereby our Predecessors departed from Constancy, was an
approach toward this Danger. And those who first adventured to pass from
unworthiness in the Reception, to unworthiness in the Recever; so as to
prohibit scandalos Persons, as well as scandalos Behavior; opened a Sluice to
mischief they thought not Credibl.

Yet while the Prohibition was a point of Discipline, not of Doctrine; while it
lay only upon Individuals not Qualities; nor Individuals neither, 'till
censured by the Bishop; so that no man was allowed to do what he pleased; but
every one Required to com unless he were cut off from the body of the Church,
and thereby driven, as well from the Lords House, as his Tabl; not to be
restored, but after long penances, and bitter tears, and humbl prostrations,
and earnest prayers, all openly and constantly repered at the Church porch, for
several years; there appeared no danger, that any one would voluntarily absent
himself, thinking it indifferent to com or forbear.

Yea, This very Discipline may well be urged as an evidence to the contrary.
For the Sentence of the Bishop did not Direct what the censured person
voluntarily Do, but Inflict what he must Suffer: And as no Judge Commands any
Offender to Execute himself, so did none of the Fathers of those times ever
require any, however scandalos, to excommunicate himself; which would have be'n
looked upon as a dubl Crime, viz. Disobedience to our Lords Institution, and
Invasion of the Bishops Office, to whom the power of Excommunication belonged.

It was not therefore the Doctrine of Those times to teach it Indifferent to any
one to Com or Forbear at pleasure: but it was their Discipline to deny our
Lords Livree to such, as by his Stewards were judged worthy to be Driven out of
his house; until by the same Stewards they should be judged worthy to be
Restored, both to a Capacity and Obligation, of communicating in All Offices of
his worship.

But it is too frequent that Wickedness overcomes Law: and in process of time
and impiety, it so Overcame, as to take it is full Revenge upon This Discipline:
Excommunicate it, and with it all the power of Those severe words of the
Fathers of those times, which are to be mesured by it, as belonging to none but
Penitents, i. e. to persons censured, and therefore obliged to suffer separation
from That Altar, to which they had (for the time) lost their right by a
juridical Sentence.

The sum is this; The Discipline of Those times, and the Fathers who enforced
That Discipline, intended not to banish the Communion it self from the Church,
nor to Empower Any one to separat Himself from her Communion; but only to
deterr sentenced Persons from intruding upon it; and how great a gulf there is
between these, is sufficiently visibl.

Yet great as it is, we find it jumped over, the Rise taken from That
Discipline of the Ancient Fathers, and the well meant desires of the Later; who
loath to lose so useful a Curb, yet unabl to restore the Discipline to it is long
lost power, Interpreted the severe sayings of their Predecessors, not by the
Authors minds, but their Own: requireing every one to be a Bishop to himself,
to Excommunicate himself, if upon impartial Examination, he should find himself
Worthy of such a sentence: and This unhappily encoraged men to believ that it
was in their own power to Judge whether it were fit to Com or Forbear.

IV. THIS I say gave the Rise; but if we had staid here, no harm had be'n done;
since none but grossly scandalos would appear excommunicabl: For such sins stand
in a man's Way, stare in his Face, roar in his Ears, are Notorios to the Whole
Church; and therefore need none of those Schemes, whereby we are directed in our
Self-examination, to Search for Lurking sins, which are not to be Discovered,
but by the strictest enquiry.

And here I cannot but applaud the Wisdom and Moderation of our Church, who
does not (as some of her neighbors) Excommunicate, but Warn; not such Qualities,
as the Greater, and Less Scandalous, (and therefore not-upon-such-accounts
excommunicabl) part of the peopl, must upon strict examination, find themselves
in some degree guilty of; but such [Great and Grievos crimes] as the guilty
persons, yea all their neighborhood, cannot avoid knowing.

And such, I say, she does not downright Excommunicate, but Warn; the
Difference between which two Censures, may be understood by that, between her
Present and Former Style.

Before the Late and Litl alterations in our Common Prayer Book, she spoke
Copulatively; Bewail your sins [AND] com not; but now Disjunctively Repent of
your sins [OR ELS] com not: By which change, that she intends not to leav it to
our option as Indifferent, whether we will repent and Com, or remain impenitent
and Forbear; we have seen her to have sufficiently declared, by another
exhortation, wherein she clearly censures such a Forbearance, to be it self a
very Great and Grievos crime.

Had her best sons followed her Exampl, possibly the holy office might have
be'n a Gainer; certainly it had be'n Safe, as from Profanation on One side, so
from Desertion on the Other; and so had every good Christian be'n, both from
Disobedience and Unworthiness.

Some in St. Jude's time and account, were spots in the Churches fests of
charity, though indeed they were None of her Members; for they denied our only
Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ, yet is not the Church her self blamed for
not wipeing them out.

Again, there is great difference between Having a Spot, and Being One; and Yet
again, there is great difference between Spots; for the word of God himself
telling us, by way of discrimination, that Some men's spots are not the spots of
his children, Deuteronomy. 32.5. Plainly enogh intimates, that Others ar so: And
certainly those Spots which hinder not a person from being a child, must not
Disherit him from a Child's Portion or a Child's Duty. Yet still those pios
persons meant well, and saw no danger in their procedure; at least, none to the
holy Sacrament. The Dictates of the Church were Then Reverenced, and her
Injunctions Obeyed; yea the very Scandalosness of it in the eyes of the Peopl,
made it look like impossibl, that Any Person, much more that any considerabl
Number of persons, should sink into such nonconformity, both to our Lord's
Institution, and the Churches Constitutions; as to deny this poor Quitrent,
this slight Acknowledgment of Three times at least, which however short of the
full due, might yet serve to keep the right alive, and in some kind answer that
indulgent law of Moses, not indeed in the Cause, but the Event.

For That, upon pure Necessity, commuted Constant offering every beast they
eat, into Constant journying thrice a year to Jerusalem, thereby to recompense
loss in number, by improvement in solemnity. And our Church upon another kind
of Necessity, derived, not from the Impracticableness of the Law, but the
hardness of the peopls hearts, was fain to admit the same commutation.

Our Former Writers lived in such times, as never questioned the necessity of
doing so much at least, and suited their precepts to Their own times; not to
These Dregs of error and impiety, wherein our Lords remembrancer is it self
Forgotten, his Monument it self buried, and his whole Institution so
demolished, that we scarce see any Appearance of it, but in Books; and even in
Them, no appearance of Obligation to perform it.

It was indeed a very pios design So to manage Repentance and this Sacrament,
that by mutual circulation they might assist each other. That the Requisites of
Saving Repentance may bring men to worthiness of the Sacrament; and the
necessity of coming Shortly to the Sacrament, may cut off the delay of
repentance.

But toward the Later Part of the design, it was necessary, to assert the
power of the Command; That so the Sacrament may equal Repentance, as well in
Necessity as in Difficulty.

For it is incredibl that those who are not frighted to Repentance, by the
indispensibl Necessity thereof; should be so to this Sacrament, by any Less
potent motive, if there ly the same formidabl Difficulties in the way.

V. I Say Less potent motives, for I must not deny our worthy adversary This
right, that though he have loosened the Obligation of the Command, whereby the
Worst ar tied to the Performance, as their Duty; yet has he Recommended it by
such Incoragement, as must needs prevail upon all such as himself, i. e. all
true lovers of the Lord Jesus: though to lovers of their Lusts and Ease, they be
useless or wors.

For to invite a Carnal App tite to a Spiritual Fest, what is it but to fish
with a jewel, whose very luster will Fright the fish it should Allure?

Tell the man of Bottels, that he cannot drink the Cup of the Lord and the Cup
of Bacchus, but must be bound over to the languid dullness of Sobriety: Tell the
amoros Gallant, That this Flesh of Christ will rob him of all strange flesh,
and either confine him To One, or From All, his Loves: Tell the greedy Scraper,
that this Heavenly treasure must be purchased with some diminution of his
Earthly, and scatter a good part his heaps among the Poor, and bind his hand
ftom those Gainful exercises, whereby he Gathered, and might further Increase
them:

What ar These, and what ar All Other graces required to, or promised in This
Sacrament, to a sensualist, but so many Warnings to stand upon the guard against
such Robbers?

And what could have be'n more do'n or desired by it is mortal Enemies, toward a
total extirpation of Any office, than to render it at once, Difficult,
Dangeros, Needless, and Damageabl? All which concur in the Honor to which our
modern way of Reverence, has exalted the H. S. in the eyes of the far
greatest part of those who ar to receve it.

On the One side, a formidabl Gandelope, between the Great Troubl of
Preparation that we may com Worthily, and Greater Danger of coming Unworthily
after the most Laborios Preparation: On the Other side, all Necessity of
running it, taken away, by a Denial that we ly under any Command; and the
suppletory Motive which should encorage us, is to the much greater part of the
world, rather an Affrightment, than an Invitation.

When therefore we look upon the Advantages we may hope from streyning the
conditions of Worthiness, let us cast one eye upon the Danger of losing even
the Sacrament it self. When we hear the Opinions of Former ages, let us hearken
to the Experience of our Own.

The Apostl and Primitive Christians had Great need to contend for the Manner:
We have no Less, yea we have Gr ater, to contend for the Thing: I say we have
Greater, for if the Thing be lost, the Manner cannot but perish with it.

VI. IF therefore the Revers be unanswerabl, Then must Those doctrines be more
injurios to the H.S. which reach men to shun the Performance it self; than were
(I say not the debaucheries of the Corinthians, who so behaved themselves as not
to Eat the Lords Supper, but) Any such Less mortal Profanations, as may leav it
a Being, though less Honorabl.

And there are two great reasons (at least) to believ that (as any Landlord
would liefer have his rent paid in Base Money, than wholely Witheld; so) our
Lord would liefer have his Supper celebrated somewhat unworthily, than wholely
Omitted.

1. Bicaus Something is better than Nothing. No money so base as not to be
Somewhat worth: A Pepper-corn is somewhat in its self; and so much more in its
significancy, as the Right which it acknowledges is greater. The very
presenting our selves to the Lords table, is an act both of Worship and
Obedience; whereas those who turn their backs upon it, deny both Them, and our
Lords Title to Them.

2. Bicaus there is more Hope to Reform any Corruption in the Manner, than to
Retrive the Lost Thing. This is not so visibl in Any case as in the present.

Against communicating Unwhorthily, the Apostl has spoken so Much and so Loud;
that if Reason were Silent, yea if it were Opposite, we would not avoid the
evidence: But concerning our obligation to the Performance it self, though in
truth he spoke no less convictively to That Age, yet does not Ours so fully
understand it.

His argument needs more Strict and Skilful examination, than most men ar
able to make. Yea, his words (their key being lost) ar obnoxios to be
perverted; and that, not only by the Vulgar, but the Learned, to a sens quite
Contrary.

And therefore in This, beyond Any case, it is dangeros to let the duty fall
into Disuse; since the Lusts of the Peopl, will most readily concur with the
Error of the Priest, to bury it in deep forgetfulness; whereas Unworthiness in
the Manner, may easier find Practice than Patronage; since every one has
knowledge enogh to understand it uncapabl of Any.

THOUGH I have already said sufficient to the Candid, yet fully to secure my
self even against the malicios, I think fit more formally to protest against
encoraging Unworthiness or Irreverence.

Should I say that it is a greater crime to Murder, than to Maim a man; this
sure would not bring me under any suspicion of justifying that Great, (yet
comparatively Less) injustice: Why then should I be looked on as a patron of
Unworthiness, bicaus I say it is Less criminal than Disobedience: or of
Irreverence toward the Sacrament; though I say, we are no more to be frighted
from It, than from any Other worship?

Those who press Prayer as an indispensibl Duty, to be performed more than once
every day, ar secure enogh from any such charge: and whence comes it, than
there should be greater Antipathy toward reverence, in the One than in the
Other? Or why must This be more unable to overcom, and more obliged to yield
to, the corruptions of the votary, than That?

If we have such veneration to the Sacrament for its Own sake; let us consider
what shall it profit, if it gain all possibl Reverence, and lose its own Being?

If for our Lords sake; let us remember, that if we Forbear it, upon a Reason
which He thought not Sufficient to hinder him from Commanding it; we honor his
Representative above his Person, even by Neglecting it; and exalt our selfs at
once against his Authority, by limiting his Law; and Wisdom, by pretending we
know, better thin Himself, what is fit to be do'n for his service.

But here again we will continue our wonted Prodigality. And supposing that the
Being of the Sacrament is secured: will further consider that its Power is
weakened, (and consequently its Honor) in promoting all the good ends it is fit
and designed to serve: which for brevity I shall reduce to three.

1. The conversion of Sinners.

2. The Comfort of the Godly.

3. The Edification of the Church in Love.

CHAP. VI. The Sacrament made useless toward Conversion.
I. That it is made unserviceabl toward conversion of a sinner. Three
propositions. 1. To deny it a converting virtue is dishonorable to the
Sacrament, and more so to our Lord. II. No danger to the Worthy, but the whole
question is about the Unworthy: and concerning them there is more hope than
fear: five reasons why the hope should be embraced. III. 2. The Sacrament has
a converting virtue, Proved 1. by the joint authority of the Apostls, and by
consideration of this Apostl's argument. St. Augustine used the same argument
with the same unhappiness. IV. No fear that such stating the Argument, should
drive men as far from the Church as the Altar. V. 2. By Reason. 1. The Death of
Christ serviceabl to convert. That he suffered more for This end than any
other, proved by Scripture and Reason. VI. 2. This Sacrament sets forth
Christ's death more powerfully than Preaching. We may not imagine that he will
deny it his blessing. VII. 3. The converting power promoted by frequent
repetitions. A supposition that One solemn address may be worth Twenty,
examined. An hypotyposis of such a performance. 1. Fregment offers hit one time
or other. 2. Repetition adds new force to the former decaying act. 3.
Teaches to act better. So it will help, not prejudice the performance in
respect of the manner.

FIRST it is plainly made Useless toward the Conversion of unconverted sinners,
bicaus All Such ar Forbidden the use of it.

Yea, Not only those who have no good Inclinations, but those who have good
Beginnings, yea those who have made good Progress; if yet they com short of Any
qualification necessary to Complete saving repentance; ar therefore excluded
from all Benefit, bicaus they are so, from all Use of it, by this sentence,
Bicaus whatever dispositions or alterations he may begin to have in order to
pardon and holiness, he as yet has neither: but is Gods enemy and therefore
cannot receve his holy son.

To Such therefore, the Sacrament can have No other power, but to Fright them
away: or at best, if it offer any Invitation, it is such as Nurses use to
Fallen Children; Com to me and I will help thee up.

This is not to Help, but to Mock; and must suppose those to be very children
indeed, that can be incoraged by Such Exhortations, to Endeavor to raise
themselves, or Thank their exhorter.

For if Repentance must precede the Sacrament, then may it be the Cause but not
the Effect; and may Dispute against it, Thou bear not the Root, but the Root
Thee.

Other good fruits it may produce, Many and Great; but not This of conversion;
which it must not influence as a Root, but attend as a Fruit.

How injurios this is, I shall endeavor to show by three Positions.

1. It is dishonorabl to the Sacrament to deny it a converting virtue, and more
so to our Lord, to deny the exercise of such a virtue if it have it.

2. It has a converting virtue.

3. That virtue is better exercised by Frequent than Rare exercise.

FIRST, That it is dishonorabl to the Sacrament to deny it a Couverting virtue,
I might think the plainest proposition in the world; since it is thereby robbed
of the better half of it is power (for to have both a Converting and Confirming
power, is more than dubl to the Later, without the Former, which is far more
Gracios.) But This is yet plainer, that it is far less Sacrilegios to Rob the
Sacrament of such virtue; than to Blaspheme our Lord, with an imagination that
he should deny Them, the benefit of the Representative, for Whom he shed his
Blood it self; when by This the Salvation may be Promoted, which he purchased
by That.

What a wretched Baffle were this to the Apostls argument, whereby he pleads
He that denied us not his only Son, how shall he not with Him freel giv us all
things? How does it represent the infinite lover of mankind, as an envios
malicios enemy, both to Them, and his own Blood; by taking from Them the
benefit, and from This the virtue, which was to Them most Necessary, and to This
most Honorable?

This way of Honoring our Lord is but the revers of That, whereby his enemies
Reproched him. They blamed Him for Eating and Drinking with sinners; and This
doctrine forbids sinners to Eat and Drink with Him. And Both ar fitted with his
Own best answer, The whole need not the Physician, but the sick.

It is the Honor, bicaus the Profession of a Physician, to giv his company, Not
to those who most Deserv, but to those who most Need it.

Those who ar already in the state of Salvation, need not his Abilities as a
Physician, to save their lives; though they do his Bounty, as a Fester, to
cherish and glad their hearts: The Godly enjoy Many and Great, but Other
benefits; such as rather conduce to the advancement of their Happiness, than
their Safety, which is above such need: They are the Sick, they are such as ly in
a state of Misery and Danger, who is need cry loudest for his Saving power: And
to help such he Came into the world, traveled about it, went out of it, and
left this monument to continu in it, till he com again.

II. AND concerning Such, is our whole question. For that from the Godly there
is no danger to the Sacrament, and consequently that in Them, Frequecy is
commendable, is not doubted: The only question is concerning the Unworthy; but
we oght also to consider, that concerning Them is a counterquestion no less
important.

For when we inquire on One side, Whether there be Danger, that the Sacrament
may suffer dishonor by such men's Unworthiness? it is worth inquiring, whether
there be not SOME hope, that it may Gain Honor by their Salvation?

I say [SOME] hope: For if there be Any such Hope, however Short of such Fear,
in point of Probability; it will so exceed it in point of Valu, as abundantly
to outweigh it is defect in Bulk. For

1. The loss of Many Sacraments will be abundantly recompensed by the gain of
One Soul: Be the odds so great as in a Lottery; yet since One happy draught,
will more than answer a Multitude of Blanks; especially when there is nothing
to be Lost, but the labor of Drawing; it must needs more conduce to the honor
of the Sacrament and its Author, to adventure upon the Smallest Hope That way;
than to forbear upon the Greatest Fear the Other way.

2. The Salvation of One impenitent sinner is more valuabl than the cherishing
of Many already converted. The good shepherd will leav ninety and nine to seek
pasture, rather then suffer one strayer to perish in the wilderness.

3. The odds in point of number lies the other way: it were a happier world
than ever we are like to see, if there were but ninety and nine sinners for one
just person, that needs no repentance. Their very numbers wroght in our Lord
compassion to the Multitude, and it were strange if he should intend to let the
greater part of mankind perish for want of This food.

4. Here is no need to leav the Flock, for Salvation of the Strayer. Were there
not sufficient for Both, we might perhaps plead it unfit to take the childrens
bread and cast it to Dogs: but the Lords tabl is as capabl to receve All
comers, as was the wilderness to afford room for never so many thousands; and
the Bread is not like those two course loaves, but like That which came from
heaven, and covered the whole face of the earth: it has both plenty and virtue
sufficient to answer All Palates, and All Needs, however different; no less
Salutiferos to the Sick, then delicios to Healthy: and where there is enogh and
to spare, it were strange our Lord should intend any one should perish for
hunger.

5. Here is no adventure, but of the troubl to Take and eat. The shepherd needs
not toil himself with Wandering quest of the Lost sheep, nor with shouldering
home the Found.

Our Lord is not in danger to lose any more Blood; the greatest loss that can
com, must fall upon That already spilt; which at worst, takes no Life from our
Lord, though it bring None to the Recever.

No wounds or stripes can reach his Body, The greatest danger is, lest the
shadow of his body passing by, should (now as in his lifetime) fall upon some
Lepers and cleanse them; without Hinderance to his Progress, or Prejudice to
his Better disciples.

So that if there be any healing, saving virtue, in This other shadow of his
body and blood; to say he forbids Any to com within its reach, for This very
reason bicaus they Need it; is so far from honoring him as a good Physician,
that it represents him wors than his very Accusers, of whom he asked which of
You (of You my envios backbiters) Which of You having one sheep, etc.

If therefore our Blessed Redeemer have any right to what David said of the
Father, His honor is great in Our salvation; his Dishonor must be
proportionably great, if he deny so cheap a means of it, as shall not cost him
the troubl of a Journey to seek, but only the Mercy to Admit such as need it.

III. 2. SECONDLY, This Sacrament has a converting virtue.

This, 'thogh it need no other proof, but only the application of That general
rule, that In Religion That is always Truest which is Best; yet bicaus such a
work cannot be overdo'n, I shall further prove it, 1. By the Authority of the
Apostls: and 2. By Reason, showing that Morally it must needs be so.

1. If we consider what the APOSTLS thought of This Sacrament, we shall find,
they looked upon it as a Spiritual Panacaea for All distempers of Christ's
mystical body: a rich Treasure for All Arguments and All Characters.

When St. Jude would Character the worst men, he borrows his black from This
Sacrament, if not from This Discourse: These (says he) ar spots in your Fests
of Charity while they fest with you foeding themselves without fear. When the
Epistler to the Hebrews would set forth the gilt of Apostasy most graphically,
he does it by treading under foot the Son of God, and That, by counting this
blood of the Covenant wherewith they were sanctified an unholy thing.

In This Epistl St. Paul seems to affect this Topik upon all occasions: When
he would admonish them to put from among them the Scandalos person, Let us
(says he) keep the fest without leaven bicaus Christ the Passover is
sacrificed for us.

When he would dehort them from fellowship with Idols, he argues from the
inconsistency of the Lords table and the table of devils: When he would exhort
them to provide for the poor, he appoints the first day for the Offertory,
because consecrated to the breaking of bread: and Here, when he would reprove
them for their debaucheries in Gods house; to set forth the hainosness of the
crime, he proves that thereby they become gilty of the Body and Blood of Christ.

I say, when he would reprove them for their debaucheries in Gods house: for I
must now add to what I have already said, that as those Debaucheries were the
true Occasion of the whole discourse, so was the Lord's Supper employed as the
best Argument, whereby to convince them of the hainosness of That crime; that
whatever thoghts they might otherwise have had, concerning such Profaneness in
Gods House, they might by This new Argument understand it greater than they were
aware of.

And what better argument could he have urged in such a case? Should he have
empleaded them at the Moral bar? He knew them proof against such lectures of
their own Philosophers, strenuosly, but unprosperosly declaming against them.
Should he have pleaded Natural Religion? He knew that They and their Fathers
had, time beyond memory, do'n the same in their Templs. Should he then urge the
great difference in purity between the true God and Devils? This were proper,
but remote; the impression might be sufficient Plain, but not sufficiently
Deep: it might convince their Reason, but not so powerfully move their
Affections.

But This interest of the body and blood of Christ, as it was new and properly
Evangelical, so was it utterly unanswerabl upon any account, either of reason
or custom.

And that it was upon This Occasian and to This End urged, seems most plain
from the very Text: For their Coming together is twice complained of, before
the Lord's Supper is mentioned; and in the third place, This is employed only
as an Evidence of the Other: Whereas by the Laws of Reason and Custom, if This
had had the chief place in the Apostls intention, it must have had the same in
his Discurs; and not be'n put to wait behind, to com forth only as a valet to
perform service to it is principal.

This is worthy more observation than the world is aware of: For as the thing
it self is to a considering person very plain, so ar the consequences very
great; and That upon an account already cast up.

For if the Apostl make use of the Lord's Supper, as an aggravation of
profaneness in Gods house, and That for This reason, bicaus all the unworthiness
which we bring thither, is imputed to us as brought to his table; then must it
be the most potent argument that possibly can be draw'n, either from Religion or
Reason, to make us careful of our behavior in Gods house, and consequently every
where else; In Gods house, upon the Apostl's reason, bicaus of the interest of
our Lords table, which possesses the chiefest place there; and consequently
Every where else, bicaus of the preparations which we must carry thither, and the
good impressions which we must receve there, so much the deeper, by how much
better our self-examination has prepared us.

AND This very argument do we find used by St. Augustine to the same Purpose,
and with the same Unhappiness in his 252 Sermon de tempore, upon the
Anniversary of the Dedication of the Church or Altar. Beginning with the words
of the Apostl, The templ of God is holy, which templ ye ar; for a proof how
necessary it is, that we keep this Templ shut to the Devil, and open to Christ;
he persuadeth every one to examine his conscience; and lays do^n This for an
undoubted truth, Qui enim agnoscens reatum suum, ipse se humiliter ab Ecclesiae
altari pro emendatione vitae removere voluerit, ab aeterno illo and coelesti
convivio excommunicari penitus non timebit. Rogo vos fratres diligenter
attendite, si ad mensam cujuscunque potentis hominis nemo praesumit cum
vestibus conscissis, etc. and so goes on throghout the whole Sermon, arguing
against unworthy coming to the Lords Supper in such a style, that I verily
believ our divines take thence their confidence to write as they have do'n.

I answer not for his Doctrine, but I do for his Argument, as being the same
with the Apostl's, as above urged. Nor could he have argued better for care of
coming worthily to God's House, than by urging the hainosness of coming
unworthily to his Table; seeing it was as true in His time, as in the Apostl's,
that whoever came to the One, came also to the Other.

But if we mesur his Argument by our own Customs, then will it be as weak, as
the Supposition will be falls: For the Conclusion will exceed the Premises, and
fall short of the Fathers Design; since it will not fright any from
unworthiness in the Templ, but such as intend to com also to the Altar, i. e.
few or none.

Yet will not this Insufficiency be the worst of its falts; it will be so far
from prevailing with a profane man to quit his lusts, that it tends to harden
him in them. For when such a man shall hear so much spoken against unworthy
Communicating, and so littl, or nothing against unworthy Praying; how plausibly
may his willing mind infer, that there is as littl need for Him to fear the
later, as for his teacher to warn him from it.

I therefore offer it to most serios consideration, whether the almost general
looseness of this age, be not much incoraged, by the agreement tripartite which
we seem implicitly to have made, between Prayer, This Sacrament, and the
World; whereby it is agreed, that Prayer shall enjoy Frequency without
Reverence; This Sacrament, Reverence without Performance; The World, it is Lusts
without Disturbance from either of them.

Whereas were Worthiness pressed in the now mentioned figure, with half the
vigor that it is in the Vulgar; Were half of that which our Divines speak, of
preparation for the Sacrament in the abstract, applied to it in conjunction
with Common Prayer: Did we believ our selves to ly under the same Necessity and
Conditions of worthiness for Gods house, as we do for his Supper; then can we
not doubt it necessary so to live, that we may be capabl to com worthily to
Common Prayer, even for it is companion's sake.

IV. NOR is there any reasonable fear, lest this should have the same malignant
aspect upon the Whole, as we complain of in behalf of the Common-service; lest
in-stead of bringing men to the Church with greater reverence, it should drive
them quite away from it. This danger is sufficiently prevented by the Apostl's
Indicative way of arguing, which tells us that Christ imputes guilt to us,
not according to Our Performance, but his Own Institution: and This imputation
will reach us at Any distance, not only from his Table, but his House too.

For if it be no less our duty to com to God's house as often as the
congregation is held There; than it is to com to his Table as often as we com
to his House; and if God by his scientia media sees and punishes the
unworthiness which we would have brought to his Table if we had com'n to it;
Then to what distance soever we carry it, we are by God reputed to have brought it
both to his House and his Table, as often as his Church meets at the One, and
oght to do at the Other, bicaus we oght to have met it at Both.

What the Apostl says in another case of himself, we may apply to our selves in
This, I verily as absent in the body but present in the spirit, have already
judged as present: and again, When you ar gathered together and My spirit. If
the Acts of the Church might be authorized by the reputed suffrage of the
Absent Apostl, then may the Lords Supper be profaned by the reputed
communication of the Unworthy Absent; since every member no less concurreth
with the Church in Worship, than the Apostl did in Discipline.

And this is plainly enogh employed in that practice of the then Church, which
we heard testified by Justin Martyr, For sending to the Absent their parts of
Communicated bread and wine, they thereby owned them to have the same interest,
as if they had be'n present.

This rock therefore follows us as it did the Israelites in the Wilderness, to
what distance soever we eloin our selves: He follows us with imputation of
Receving even when we Refuse him, to condemn us if we receve him with unwashed
hands; and to condemn us dubl, if we therefore refuse him, bicaus we will not be
at the troubl to wash them.

The Necessity of the H. C. thus stated; Let the conditions of worthiness, be
multiplied and enforced with what rigor you please. Let them be more
intolerabl, than plucking out Both eyes, and cutting off Both hands, so they be
indispensibl: No reasonabl man will be thereby frighted from the Lords table,
but every one will be so from his sins, since he every where carries about him
the same guilt and danger, though he com not.

Nor will the Scrupulos be at all distracted with doubts whether it be best to
com or forbear, since this will be no other than to question, whether it be
best to be Singly or Dubly gilty. Singly, if he com with unworthiness; or
Dubly, if he dishonor the Lords table, both by Forsakeing and Profaning it; the
one in Reality, the other by Imputation.

And this must needs be the opinion of the good Almsgiver above-praised, who
would not suffer the peopl to go away without the Communion, but brought them
back when they were already go'n out of the Church: an importunity, which he
would never have used, had he not believed it more sinful to Omit the duty,
than to perform it, unprepared as they were; whereof no better account can be
given than this; that our obligation besets us behind and before, and lays
such hand upon us, that we cannot fly from it is presence; but must necessarily
fly from our sins, bicaus this is the only way left us, to escape the judgments
threatened to unworthy Communicants: and whether such an ordinance be a
converting one or no, I shall no further dispute from Scripture: but proceed to
consider Reason.

V. REASON will persuade that the Sacrament must be a converting Ordinance.

He that will deny this, must impute the Defect, either to the Unfitness of our
Lords Death, toward such an effect, or 2. To the Insufficiency of the
Sacrament, to set it forth, or 3. To our Lords denial of his ordinary Blessing.
In One, or All of These, must the Defect needs ly; for if they All concur,
Nothing is wanting to a saving efficacy.

1. The defect cannot ly in the Death of Christ, which the Apostl so often
tells us, he suffered to This very Purpose.

The Scripture speaks, I say not more Clearly, but (sure) more Frequently, of
his dying for our Sanctification, than for our Justification; to redeem us from
the Works, than from the Wages of Sin.

If it sound ambiguosly when the Apostl says he died to redeem us from all
iniquity, he clears it by an immediate explication, to purchase to himself a
peculiar peopl zelos of good works. What can be spoken plainer than this, That
he died to redeem us from our vain conversation; that he carried our sins in
his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin might live to
righteousness; to leave us an exampl that we should follow his steps etc.

And had the Apostls be'n silent, plain Reason would have taught it us, For as
in Law, without shedding of blood there was no remission; so was there no need
of more, than the mere death of the Sacrifice; so much the fitter for That
service, by how much more Pampered.

Why then must our Lord be so unhappily unlike his typical Oxen? why might he
not have be'n sacrificed like Them: by One blow and No pain; closing a Full and
Easy Life, with a Death as Easy?

What could the Law have expected from Him, beyond what the Jews expect in
their Messiah the Son of David; a Life Victorios and glorios, closed with a
Death suitably glorios in the Bed of honor? One Drop of blood (perhaps)
certainly the singl Death, however Easy or Honorabl, of a Person of infinite
valu; must in justice be sufficient to satisfy a Father so Willing to receve
satisfaction.

To what purpose then All the (this way) Needless, and to him incomparably more
Grievos, Other Sufferings? Why a Life so Poor, so Despised, so Hated, so
Laborios? Why a Death so Painful, so Shameful, so Intolerabl? Why? but for the
Apostl's reason; To leave us an exampl that we should follow his steps? which
as they showed us the way, so did they smooth it for us; that no man might
think much to take up his Cross, and follow such a Leader.

SUCH a leader as Caesar, who did not say to his Soldiers, Go, but Com; make,
them follow him, if not for Valor, yet for Shame: It became him who was to
bring many Sons to Glory, to make the Captain of our Salvation perfect by
sufferings; and such sufferings too, that none of his followers shall ever be
able to upbraid him, as requiring More.

To deny therefore that such a Death is fit to Redeem us, both from the Service
of sin, and Fear of suffering; is to giv the Scripture the Ly, and to take from
our Lords death it is Virtue.

VI. 2. AND Secundly to Deny this Sacraments sufficiency to set forth our Lords
death; is yet (if possibl) a greater affront, both to our Lord and his Apostl;
Both of them expressly declare This for it is Adaequate design. As often as ye
eat this bread and drink this cup ye show forth the Lords death till he com.
What the Apostl said to the Galatians, that Christ was evidently set forth
crucified among them; was not so much ascribed to Preaching, as to This
Sacrament; which so evidently sets it forth to All senses; that whoever
consideringly receveth it, may say, not only we have heard with our ears, but
we have seen with our Eyes, we have looked upon, our hands have handled, our
mouths have tasted, and our bowels have be'n strengthened with the bread of
Life.

What Orator can com near an ordinary Painter in setting forth a man's
countenance? By how much the Ey is tenderer than the Ear, by so much is the
Mind more affected by it: Now This Sacrament sets forth the Death of our
Lord, not to the Ear as Preaching does, but to the very Ey; and that not as a
Picture but as a Drama: it so Commemorates, as to Act the Tragedy; so
Describes, as to Exhibit it is Benefits.

How much more potent such visibl Rhetorik is than the most powerful Preaching,
Antony made a memorabl experiment: He employed all his Eloquence to stir up the
peopl of Rome, to revenge the death of Caesar: He magnified his Wisdom, his
Industry, and his Valor: he recounted his Victories, celebrated his Virtues,
lamented the cruelty of his Death; Then he recited his Testament, and from the
Legacies therein bequeathed, proved the greatness of his Love to them; in his
life their Champion, after death their Benefactor. All this the peopl heard,
though with Grief, yet with Patience: But when he produced his Robe, when he
showed the Holes and the Blood, wherewith the murdering Poniards had Pierced
and Stained it; then did those visibl Orators, not only Move them to Anger, but
Transport them to Rage; they snatched up Weapons and Firebrands; and missing
the Persons, destroyed the Dwellings of the Conspirators.

Such is the Design, such the Rhetorik of This Sacrament. When the Word has
prepared the Heart by the Ear; when the Understanding is Informed, and the
Affections somewhat Moved, with the recital of What our Lord suffered, And Why?
Then does the Sacrament complete the service, by showing to our very Eyes, the
Wounds, not of his Garments but his Flesh; and Those, not as long since made,
but as now in making, Represents his Sacred blood, not as dried up by time, but
as Now, even Now, streaming from his Heart. It so Commemorates his passion, as
to Repete it: and in the most inflaming manner presents to our Souls, all those
incentives against sin, which our Lords death, our Lords Present death, can
furnish.

He that considers, how the little sens of Religion yet left in the world, is
derived from the Frequency of Preaching; will find too great reason to bewail
the invaluabl loss it suffers, by want of so helpful an Attendant.

For if That (maimed as it is) do in Some (however Littl) mesure, prevail by
it is Singl and Deserted strength; how much more might we hope from their united
Forces, if Jonathan secunded his Armor bearer!

To say that we might Then sing of them, as the daghters of Israel did of their
victorios Princes, Preaching has saved it is Thousands, and the Sacrament it is
Ten thousands, would be but a cold Eulogy: We have no reason to doubt, that as
there is more than Ten to One, difference in their Powers, so would there be in
their Successes: Unless we will needs doubt of our Lords ordinary blessing upon
his so beloved ordinance; which we have far more reason to believe, he would
assist with the Spirit, not only of a David but a Samson; as being a Nazarite,
appropriat to himself. Therefore

THIRDLY, I shall say but this little to such a scruple: That as it would look
almost like a Miracle, if an Honest Constant Communicant should miss a
blessing; so we may be sure, that if there needed a Miraculos Power to bless
such an one, it would not be wanting.

For it is incredibl, that he who promised, that when ever two or three ar
gathered together in his name, there he will be in the mids of them, should not
be most Especially, and most Graciosly present with those, who meet, not in his
Name only, but at his Table, upon his Own kind invitation, to fest, not With
him only, but Upon him.

Of this I say no more, bicaus Those whom I dispute with, ar so far from
denying our Lords especial Presence; that they make it the Reason for Their
Absence, who most need it, but how much they thereby honor our Lord and his
Supper, let what I have above said declare: for I hasten to my third position.

VII. 3. MY THIRD Position is, that the Converting Power of the Sacrament is
better Exercised, and it is Honor more Advanced, by Frequent, than by Seldom
Celebrations.

The question is concerning the Greater or Less probability of the Conversion
of a Sinner: whom we must suppose arrived to neither of the Opposite
perfections; neither Worthy on the One side, nor Atheistical on the Other; but
in a Midl state; sensibl of his duty, both to our Lord and his Church; Willing
(or rather Submitting) to do, what he shall be convinced to be required of him;
but Wavering between his Obedience to our Lords Command, which seems to
require Frequency at least; and the Apostls indulgence, backed with appearance
of Reason, which recommendeth Aw and Distance, as necessary to preserv that
Reverence, which it is supposed will best advance both the Honor of the
Sacrament, and Benefit of the Recever.

For such an one may plead, that if I ow any person Twenty shillings, and pay
him One Guinny, I do better, than if I paid him Twenty silver shillings: So if
One Solen Address, be more worth then Twenty of the Constant; it will be better
to com One time for Twenty, With such Solennity, then Twenty times for One
Without it: And consequently, our Lord will accept of That, as more perfect
obedience than This.

At present we dispute not, that in This Institution, the Number of pieces is
the very Essence of the Obligation; but admit the supposed liberty of paying
One Golden performance, in lieu of Many Less valuabl; and upon This
Supposition, require that the Pretense may be made good: viz. That the One for
Twenty may be Such, as shall recompense by the greater Valu, the defect in
Number.

This One Solen address must have not only a plainer Stamp (as every new Coin
may have) but purer Metal; not only more Outward Solennity, but more Inward
Devotion.

For if a man bow the knee never so Solenly, and give the title of King never
so Formally; yet if in So doing, he put no better then a Dry, Hollow, Light,
Reeden Scepter into our Lords hand; he acts more like a persecuting Jew, than
a Loyal Disciple.

And in the present inquiry, Those who ar to make the Address ar supposed to ly
in a state of Enmity, and Need of Conversion, for concerning the Godly, there
is no doubt, but the oftener the better.

What ever Outward deference such enemies bring, if it have nothing of the
power of Godliness; it does not honor our Lord with his Own Scepter; For the
Scepter of his Kingdom is a right Scepter, a love of Righteosness, and hatred
of iniquity: What ever wants This, wants That Divine life, without which
the most Solen worship, is no better than a gay Pageant; who is Forced motions
pass for Solen, merely bicaus Unwieldy; the Absence of inward life giving the
Ly to them all.

That we may the better Compare them, it will be requisite we bring to vieu
both the Rivals.

And first let us bring forth that Show, wherewith our Lord is to be better
Served and Pleased, than with literal Obedience,

WHEN the Unwelcom season is now at hand, which Indispensibly exacteth the
painful task; the Unwilling votary (if he can deserv That name) finding No way
to escape it, forces himself to look Sadly upon his still Beloved sins,
Confineth himself for some tedios days, to the Lothed conversation of that
Troublsom stranger, his Conscience; wherewith he Communeth in such Awkward
manner, as plainly betrayeth his Unacquaintedness with it is language, not to be
supplied by the vainly courted assistance of those good Books, which at such
times only, he takes the Penance to read; and after the appointed days,
languished away in this heartless Exercise, which he calls Preparation; he
receveth (I say not the Lords Supper, but) the holy Symbols; with great
Solennity (we grant) but with as little Benefit or Relish, as Appetite; and
goes home with This only comfort, that the Tedios work is do'n; and the
Stately, Lifeless machin may be laid aside, till the Revolution of another
Solennity, call it forth to stalk abroad again, with the same Troubl, to the
same Little purpose.

Let our adversaries now deal freely; can they suppose such Pageantry acceptabl
to God? can such Counters as have something of the due Image and Superscription,
but nothing of the due Metal; not only pass for Current in the Kingdom of God;
but bear a greater Valu, than such pieces, as com out of his own Royal Mint?
can God be pleased with such performances as please not the Votary himself? can
he be so much Better pleased with them, that One of them shall be reputed
payment for Multiplied omissions of Duty?

Or (which is more pertinent to our present enquiry) can such an exercise
destroy the kingdom of the Devil in the unwilling Soul? etc.

I grant, Something has be'n do'n toward it, The man has be'n put in mind of
his need of Christ's blood, and the Love that first Spilt it, and now Offered
it; and This has somewhat awakened the sens of the Obligation he has, to Lov
and Serve him; which cannot but make some impression upon his mind, which for some
time, and in some mesure, may check his lusts, and quicken his care.

All this I hope, and for This very reason complain, that the good sparks
should die away; which by Repetition of the same exercise, might be blown up to
such a vigoros Flame, as might wholly Destroy those lusts, which are now a littl
Disordered, but not Subdued: For the Litl that this has do'n, is a sufficient
evidence how much More might be do'n; if so hopeful an exercise were duly
Prosecuted with such Constancy, as we have found required by our Lord; and
comes now to be considered by Reason, in counterballance to its rival
Solennity, and this we do by steps.

1. Multiplied repetitions one time or other will probably hit the mark. He who
is missed by Many a Sermon, and Many a Communion, may happily be struck to the
heart by the Next.

There was a time, when One Sermon converted Thousands, but miracles ar ceased;
and now Many, perhaps Thousands, of Sermons, ar necessary to convert One: Yet
can we not charge God, as wanting to Necessary means, since the Miraculos
efficacy is supplied by the Moral power of multiplied Repetition.

Too many of those who Separate These ordinances in their Practice, do them the
right to Join them in their Discourses; pleading the same color of reason
against frequency in Preachings and Communions; and those who do Not, but will
have These rare for reverence sake, and Those frequent for their effects sake;
need no other evidence of the Weakness of their Objection against Frequence in
the Communion, than its too great Strength; whereby it will cast down what they
would keep up; so that they are reduced to This choice, either that Preaching
must be Less frequent, for fear of the Objection; or the Objection renegued,
lest Preaching should be robbed of Frequency, for preservation of Reverence.

And as the Objection is equally Deficient, so is Frequency equally Useful to
Both. Who knows but That Sermon, or That Communion which he is forsaking, may
be the critical One, which is to convert him?

When an Affliction has bruised, or a Blessing melted the heart; When the man
has Lost a friend, or Escaped a danger, when a Neighbors unexpected death has
warned him of his Own frailty, or a good Angel has unaccountably stirred the
pool, and he is by some secret disposition (...) set in due order, and almost
persuaded to be a Christian; then the Sermon or Communion, coming upon him in
his soreness, prevails by nicking the critical Opportunity.

We know not the secret walks of Gods providence, nor the advantages of Some
seasons above Others, by influences imperceptibl: that therefore we may not miss
the Proper, but Unknown one, it will concern Every man, to say of Every one,
This is the day of the Lord, This is That singular hour, wherein I am to receve
That flesh and blood of Christ which must save me.

He that truly considers the valu of Salvation, and his own need of it; will
not think much to ly in the way that Jesus of Nazareth Passes by; or rather,
wherein he Comes on purpose, to heal and save.

2. Repetition both Preserves the otherwise decaying Power of former acts, and
adds new of its own. The sturdiest oak is felled by Many of those strokes,
whereof every particular one was inconsiderabl; but if they com at such
distance, that the scratch (rather than wound) which the first made, be healed
up before it be secunded; the tree may be a litl moved, but not at all weakened.

If a man be but Litl, yet if he be At all affected; if he do but consider,
What he Does, or Oght to do; if he think on the Death of Christ, and it is
Reason; if he endeavor to commemorate it in due manner, or but consider that he
oght so to do; These Acts of Consideration and Reflection, however weakly
performed, contribute their litl proportion, toward the great work; as every
stroke of the oar does to a long voyage, but will soon be carried away by the
contrary stream, if it be not quickly renewed.

For as in Bodies, so in Souls, there is continual Deperdition, and there
needs continual Reparation: The Symbols do as truly represent Our Need, as
their Principals Virtue: This Flesh is meat indeed, and This blood is drink
indeed, as in their Cherishing and Strengthening Virtue, so in the Constancy,
wherewith they are to be receved; and Those who ar so easily satisfied with far
Distant Communions, seems to Betray the Weakness of their spiritual Life, by
That of their Appetite.

3. Repetition will improve the power of Every Singl Act, by making the Agent
more expert.

No Tutor like Exercise. It teaches us to do those things, both Easily and
Perfectly; which to the inexpert, appear not only Difficult but Impossibl.

And upon this account, is Frequency so far from a hinderance; that it is of
all moral means, most Proper to bring us to Worthiness.

That Self-examination which all Christians confess necessary before we com to
the Lords table, is by the best Philosophers prescribed before we go to sleep:
and Seneca incorageth his Lucilius to the practice upon This consideration;
that Exercise will make it as Easy, yea, as Pleasant, as Profitabl.

For the same reason it is advisable, that we stablish several Periods: the
end of every Week for the past Week, of every Month for the past Month, of
every Year for the past Year, and every eve of the Communion for the Interval
from the Last: which Intervals, were they left to our discretion, we oght to
shorten as much as possibl, even for This very Reason; that by Frequence, we
may learn to examine our selves still Better: so that if we have no other
Obligation, nor no other Design, but to com as Worthily, we must com as
Frequently as Possibl.

So in the Result, Worthiness must not be Opposed to Frequency as it is Rival;
but Proposed, as it is Encoragement. For whether we ey the Honor of the
Sacrament in the Abstract; or the Virtue of it, in Reference to the Salvation of
mankind: They are Both promoted more by the Constancy of our Approaches, than by
the Awfulness of our Distance.

CHAP. VII. Wors than Useless toward comforting the Godly.
I. The second end, Comfort of the Godly. This Sacrament founded upon Festing,
the tessera of Love. II. The conscientious griped between a fear of
Unworthiness on the one side, and of Disobedience on the other. III. Hopes
mingled with Fears, a snare to the Godly, which the Ungodly escape. IV. The
Lords table more dishonored by such preparation, than by None.

THE Secund great and good End to which the Holy Sacrament is to be serviceabl,
is the Joy and Comfort of the Godly: and to This, the modern way of honoring,
has made it not only Useless but Pernicios.

That we may have the fuller vieu of the Former member of this position, it may
be fit to look a litl upon the Almost forgotten Significancy of Festing,
wherein this Sacrament is founded.

COMMUNION at Table has ever be'n looked upon, as an Obligation of mutual
kindness (among the whole company, but more especially) between Host and Guest;
Such an Obligation as created a right, Equal, and sometimes Superior, to that of
Blood it self.

Nether Consanguinity nor Affinity were sufficient to Hinder or Heal a breach
between Laban and Jacob, though Uncle and Nephew by Blood, Father and Son by
Marriage: But when That Quarrel ended in a Govenant of kindness; a Fest sealed
it, as more obliging than Both Those Relations.

Yea even Paternal affection, when it would exalt it self to the Highest
possibl rapture, caled in the assistance of This endearment. Take me some
venison (said Isaac to his Firstborn) and make me savory meat, such I love,
that I may eat [that my soul may bless thee.]

The venison was not only to strengthen his body, but heigthen his mind; the
Fest made a new relation, Host and Guest, signified something of addition to
Father and Son, and improved his title to Blessing. From this Jus Hospitii was
derived the Rite of Sacrifice.

When God accepted the Sacrifice, he signified his Love to the Votary, first by
some Other tokens, (as appears by the story of Cain and Abel) and then by
Entertening him at his Table.

For God was the Hous-keeper; the Altar, his Table; the Sacrifice, his Meat;
and the Votary, his Guest: Fested with That Flesh, whose propriety he had now
Transferred to his God; and again Receved from him, in token of Communion.

Nothing can be plainer than this from 1 Cor. 10. The same Persons, by the Same
Ceremonies, in the 20 verse. Offer Sacrifice to Devils; and in 21. drink the cup
of Devils, ar partakers of the table of Devils, and have fellowship with
Devils; and all this, as their Guests, treated by their Gods, with the
Sacrifices, themselves had offered to them.

Upon This account have we found Plutarch, in the best of his treatises, prove
the mirth of the Religios, transcend that of the Epicurean; and St. John
prefer that of a Christian, above that of a Heathen:

What behavior becoms a Guest at This table of the Lord, if we understand not
by what we have already said; let us learn by exampl. The Apostls and their
fellow commoners eat it with cheerfulness: the next and all succeeding ages,
style it the Eucharist: Our Own Church says it was ordained for a thankful
remembrance of the death of Christ, and of the benefits which we receve thereby.

How joyful an exercise Thankfulness is, he that understands not, may learn of
David. My mouth (says he) shall be filled with marrow and fatness when my
heart praises thee with joyful lips.

It is generally believed that the Pleasure of Drinking is greater than that of
Eating, and to this St. Paul inviteth us, saying Be not drunk with wine wherein
is excess, but be ye filled with the Spirit, singing and making melody in your
hearts to the Lord, giving thanks, etc. Meat, Wine, Musik: nothing now can be
wanting but Company; and that St. John promises, Truly our fellowship is with
the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ, and these things write we unto you
that your joy may be full: The word is (...), which signifies Communion, and
This alone of All religios exercises, have we found capable of That Name; and
This above them All, is best furnished for it.

Meat indeed, and Drink indeed, and Fellowship indeed, and the most intimate
Union; Whether we look to the Significance of Festing in General, or the Design
of This in Particular; Whether we regard the Exampl or Exhortations of the
Apostls, the Authority of the Church Universal, or our Own in Particular; which
way soever we look, we must expect a Desert suitabl to the other provisions.
The fruits of the Spirit must attend the Supper of the Lord, and what Those ar,
the Apostl tells us: The fruits of the spirit ar Love, Joy, Peace.

If therefore in stead of These, we are treated with Wildings, such as in stead
of setting our hearts on praising God, shall set our teeth on edge; whatever
thanks we owe to the Lord of the Table; there can be litl due to the Ministers,
either from Lord or Guests.

II. LET us then taste the Provisions, wherewith our modern divines treat us,
and see whether they can say with St. John, These things we write unto you that
your Joy may be full: If they can, we must borrow a gloss of St. Paul, who
exhorts to Rejoice in as much as ye ar partakers ((...)) Communicants, with
Christ's sufferings.

For they so set forth his sufferings, as to repete them upon his Guests. They
gave me gall to eat, and when I was thirsty they gave me vinegre to drink, said
David. The Letter was verified in our Lords Personal sufferings; and the
Metaphor, in those of his dearest friends, and at his Own table.

We may go farther, and say that as they are partakers of Christ's sufferings,
so ar they of his enemies curses too. For this their table is made a snare to
take themselves withal; and that which should have be'n for their wealth, is to
them an occasion of falling; which will be the more applicable to our unhappy
Communicants, if our excellent Dr. Hammond mistake not; who interprets the
[Table] in that place, to signify the Sacrificial; and (...), the votaries
portion.

For how is This Beatifik Wine mingled with Vinegre! This Bread with Gall! How
is This Joyful Table made a Snare, to Catch, Entangle, and Gripe, the most
worthy guests! And how does the tenderness of conscience give deeper reception
to the Snare, and acuter sens to the Torment!

How few ar they, that upon the required Examination, find in themselves a full
Assurance, that if they Die at the Table, they shall be Saved! And how must All
others (however worthy) be tormented, between hunger and thirst after the Flesh
and Blood of Christ, on the One side, and fear to be poisoned by them, on the
Other! On the One side, by fear of Eating and Drinking damnation, if they com
in That state of (doubted) unworthiness; and on the Other, of deserving it, if
they omit a Duty.

I say a [Duty.] and every true Lover of our Lord says the same. For whatever
Latitude the disputed words may be stretched to; they know, our Lord did not So
Institute and Recommend his Supper, only to be Neglected: But, if he required
Constancy; then is every Omission, a Sin by Disobedience to his Law: If Not,
then it is (if possibl) a greater one against Greater obligations of love.

For to a Loving, Generous Soul, a Trust is a Greater Obligation, than a
Command: and Thankfulness will pay More, than is Due.

And then, further considering the work it self, and it is fruits; they conclude
Constancy to be Due, if not to our Lords Institution, yet to their own
Interests; which Interests reciprocally comprehend our Lords honor: since they
cannot neglect his Blessings, offered in This Sacrament, without contemt to
That blood, which Once so dearly Purchased, and Still so kindly Offers them.

In these things no Divine is silent. All Concur in setting forth the
Blessings; and by Encoraging, Oblige every one that loves our Lords Person, or
desires his Grace, to lay hold upon Every opportunity to Worship the One, and
Enjoy the Other.

III. BUT when on the Other side, we are told that the Lord is no less present
as a Judge than as an Host: no less ready to Condemn the Unworthy, than to
Bless the Worthy: And that Those ar Unworthy, who com in any other state of
Soul, than they may safely die in: They now need be, not only very Good, but
very Bold, that shall dare to com upon such Dangeros terms:

For if the Person be never so Worthy, never so Safe; yet unless his Salvation
be as Certain to Himself, as it is with God; he may not presume to com, bicaus
he cannot bring with him a full assurance; and every Distrust will put him at
the same distance, as real Unworthiness.

YET seeing such persons have Hopes mingled with Fears; though they have no full
Assurance that they are Worthy, they have a good mesur of Hope, that they may be
so; These very Hopes beget Fears, that if they should Forbear the Lords supper,
they should disobey his commands, Because they have Doubts of their Worthiness,
they dare not Com, lest they should com unworthily; and bicaus they have Hopes,
they dare not Forbear, lest they should omit a Duty, by forbearing causlesly:
So they see danger on either hand; they dare nether Com nor Forbear, lest they
should do, either the One or the Other unworthily.

So their very piety and hopes of Salvation (thereupon bilt) which should be
their greatest joy, is to Them an occasion of falling into a most griping
Snare, which has no hold upon such as have nether hopes nor fears.

Let us now consider by what motives the Generality ar (Led shall I say? no, it
is the Goodness of God that Leads, but) Haled to repentance; even by chains
of fear forged in Hell fire,

Since those who ar most Religios upon fear of damnation, must needs be most
timoros: where can we hope to find (I say not That Family, or City, but) That
Kingdom, that can show us the scant number Three (which we have found Necessary
to make up a Communion) who can com with Confidence?

And what then shall That rare Phoenix do, which wanting neither Worthiness,
nor Confidence, must want Company?

I plead not now the danger of Solitude to the Table, but That of Torment to
the Communicant: God be blessed, some ar so Heroically pios, as to trust their
Saviors Goodness, notwithstanding their Teachers Rigors, or their Own Fears;
hoping their good intentions shall be Accepted, and their unworthiness
pardoned, if they com with Honest, though Unworthy hearts.

But upon every turn of the Wind, what Storms ar such good souls tossed with!
When they look backward, how do they fear lest they may have receved
unworthily! When they look forward, how do they fear lest they should do so
again, if they com; or as bad, if they forbear! How earnestly do they Labor
both for such Worthiness, as they are told is Necessary to avoid guilt; and for
such Assurance of it, as may make them no less Quiet than Safe! How often does
the very earnestness of the later, hinder them from obteining it! And how much
still do their flutterings entangle them!

How often does this wrestling with the heart, inrage the spleen! how often is
the blood sharpened by this contending against it is cooruptions! How often does
earnestness after Assurance kindl earnestness in Others passions, and then how
rigidly is This very effect of laboring for worthiness, censured as a symptom
of unworthiness!

I know an excellent Lady, troubled upon this very account; that none of the
meanest of our Divines (to say no more now) prescribed This, as One rule of
preparatory examination, that we examine the irregularity of our passions,
dissuading us from the Next communion, if we find not our selves to have gotten
ground of them since the Last.

And does not the Snare finely encircle us? Our very Endeavors after
worthiness, the more Eagre they are, the more they sharpen our Blood, and
consequently our Passions, and make us more Unworthy; and This sens of
Unworthiness obliges us to Contend with all possibl Earnestness, to master
those Passions, which by That very Contention, ar Strengthened:

We now need no less help of the Physician, to sweeten our Blood; than of the
Divine, to comfort our Conscience; and if the goodness of God help us not more
than Both; we must either live Excommunicate from the Lords table, or Endanger
our souls, by approaching it: And Either way, must be Griped with endless
fears, as having either Omitted the greatest duty of Love, or Performed it
Unworthily.

But all this is so inconsistent with the very nature of a Suprer, so contrary
to the gracios purposes of our Lord, and sentiments of best Christians; that I
am almost persuaded to say, that Such preparation dishonoreth the Holy table as
much as None.

The Mourning weed (sure) is no less unfit for a Wedding garment, than the
Soldiers Buff, or the Laborers Russet.

It is true, our Lord will never interrogate such guests, as did the King in the
parable, Friend how came thou in hither not having a wedding garment! Himself
knows, that the very Uneasiness of the garment is abundant evidence, that
their Affections ar as Honest as Unsuitabl, and their welcome shall be suited to
their Intentions.

But whatever Reward they shall receve hereafter, it is manifest that at
Present they suffer More, and more Grievos perplexities, from This which oght
to be the most pleasant; than from All other the most mortifying duties.

For in those, the greatest austerities ar sweetened by the pleasures of the
spirit, festing their consciences with this satisfaction, that they are doing
Gods work; whereas in This, they are not only robbed of That Satisfaction, which
is More properly due to it, but griped with Anxieties as intolerable as undue.

Which yet to Souls as considerative as pios, is less Afflictive; than the
Scandal thence arising, first to the Holy Table, and thence to Religion in
general. For it must add Shame to Grief, when they see the best Arguments for
Religion, that present Happiness can offer, retorted against it.

No greater joy (says Plut.) than that of Religios fests, wherein the
Epicurean has no part. No greater, nor more numeros troubles (says our
experience) than those which torment the Communicant, wherein those who forbear
have no part.

For the most worthy Communicant may be perplexed with fears, that he is one of
the unworthy, against whom St. Paul's threatenings ar leveled; but he that
absenteth himself, keeps the same distance, both from That danger, and the
troubl of preparation, as from the Table: For as is the Danger, so is the Fear
of it, Great, but Condicional:

Bicaus Great, it falls heavy upon the Obedient; because Condicional, it cannot
reach Others, who is neglect keeps them out of its sphaere of activity.

True: upon the whole complex, the Religios man's conscience is incomparably
kinder, even in its fears, than that of the Irreligios, even in his jollities;
but we now consider them, not in relation to our Lords Throne, but his Table:
And in This Precise respect, we think it plain, that as This duty is stated, it
must needs cause Great troubl to the One, and None to the Other.

For the Irreligios will therefore be free from any Troubl from it, if he
Forbear; because he believes himself so from any Obligation to Com: But the
Religios, whether he Com or Forbear, will hardly escape Disquiets, so much the
more Grievos, by how much the Duty is more Important.

Whether it were not better to Level This in equal dignity with other holy
offices of Gods worship (which is the utmost the Apostl pleaded for) than thus
to Advance it above them All; and for its maintenance in That height, put it to
exercise such unjust Tyranny, over its most loving and faithful subjects, no
less contrary to its Own Nature, than Their Happiness; If it be not already
plain enogh, it will appear more so, when we find This unhappy way of honoring
it, no less mischievos to the Publik peace of the Church, than to the Private,
of the best of its members.

CHAP. VIII. Pernicios to Charity.
I. Festing a bond of kindness among guests. Salt an emblem of Love. II. This
a Fest of Charity, seasoned with a kiss of Charity. The highest Communion.
Drinking and Pledging. Drinking healths. The Bride-cake. The Apostl's way of
Arguing our Union from this Communion. III. The kiss of charity translated
kissing the Pax, Panis benedictus, a mockery. The Sacrament not only disabled
from advancing Love, but turned to a makebate, 1. by taking away the necessity
of the Supper, we take away its power to make us One body. Our Saviors precept
of being reconciled before we offer our gift, miserably perverted. IV. 2. By
our too great aw, we not only disable the Sacrament from healing the least
breach, but make it an instrument of the greatest. 1. This multiplieth
questions. 2. Invenometh them. 3. Makes them incurable. V. Takes away the
very subject of the question: better the Sacrament had never be'n instituted
than so abused.

THE Third good end to which the Holy Sacrament is directed, is the cementing
of All Christians together in Mutual Charity.

A Festival board is a Corporation: the Communion holds, not only between
Head and Members, but between Member and Member too.

And it is Such, that our Lord reckons it among the Pretenses, that shall be
made to his favor at the great day. Many shall say at That day Lord, Lord, have
we not eaten and drunk, [IN THY PRESENCE] We see he reckons Eating and
drinking [in his Presence] 'thogh not at his Own table (for he made few fests,
but accepted of many) worthy to be ranked with Prophesying and doing many
wonderful works in his Name, as an equal token of favor, receved or deserved.

Salt was by Gods Law required in Every Sacrifice, and is so by Universal
Tradition, in Every Fest: We startl at the spilling of it, as an unhappy omen:
The reason given by some, is that it is the emblem of Love, and it is
authorized by our Lord, saying Have Salt (...) among your selves, and have Peace
one with another.

II. THIS uniting virtue is more conspicuous in our Lords Supper, than in Any
Other; and the Apostls seasoned it accordingly. Greet one another with [an holy
kiss] says St. Paul: with [a kiss of Charity] says St. Peter. And the later
seems to fit the Salt to the Viands, in Name as well as in Nature. St. Jude
caleth the Supper [a fest of Charity] The kiss therefore wherewith it must be
seasoned, might very properly be styled [a kiss of charity] That, was the
strongest Engagement; and This, the properest Seal. That, the Table; This, the
Salt.

The first time we find the Holy Supper celebrated, we find it deserv the name
which it afterward obtained: Well might it be caled a [Communion] for it was
the most perfect, that ever the world admired, Act. 2.44. All that believed were
together, and had all things common, and sold their possessions and goods, and
par^^d them to all men as every man had need, and continuing daily in the
Templ, and breaking bread in the common house ((...)) partook the norishment
with gladness and singlness of heart, praising God and having favor with all
the peopl.

And that we may not imagine those two Communions, of Goods, and of the Lords
Supper, to be fortuitosly met; the Apostl expressly tells us, that the One was
the cause of the Other: We being Many ar One Bread and One Body [For] we are all
partakers of That One Bread.

It might upon too frequent occasions appear considerable, that he puts an
emphasis upon the Universality, both in the Reason and the Consequence. [All]
ar One Body, because [All] ar Partakers of That One Bread.

I might further observe (from J. Martyr's testimony) how upon This account, the
Primitive Christians communicated even with the Absent, by sending them
portions of the holy Supper, as symbols of their interest, both in the Fest and
their Love.

And I might hence not improbably derive our own custom, of drinking to the
Present and the Absent, as a symbol of Love to Both: A notion so much the more
plausibl, because (after the Greekish mode) we have made the Cup aequivalent to
a whole Fest.

And among Us, to drink to any person, is so acknowledged a pledge of kindness,
that it passes in Law for a Releas, if pleaded to an action of Scandal or
personal injury: and he that drinks the so offered cup, is said to PLEDGE him
that began it: i. e. he accepts, and reciprocateth, or continues on, that
Pledge of love.

In the Greek Church, the Solemnities of Marriage ar closed with this ceremony:
The Priest blesses a cup of wine, and Bridegroom and Bride both drink of it.

And as in the Primitive Church the holy symbols were carried to the Absent, so
do we communicate our pledge of Kindness to our Absent friends, by
communicating it to them, and sometimes by drinking their healths; which can
have no wors meaning, than a declaration of our good wishes to them, and an
intention to communicate to them all that kindness which a Fest can signify or
exercise.

But since the Apostl draws not his Argument from the Cup, but the Bread; it
will be fitter for us to take notice, that Thence also ar drawn obligations to
mutual Kindness. Companions, (...), ar such as eat of the Same Bread. And
David's complaint that he that eat of his bread had laid wait for him, was not
grounded upon the unthankfulness of the beneficiary, as one whom he had
nurished with his bounty; so much as the incivility of his [Companion] that had
familiarly conversed with him at the same table.

Nor ar we short of the Greeks in our Bridal ceremony: For our Bride-cake
answers their Bride-cup: with this advantage, that when the New-married cople
have first taken their parts, the rest is communicated to other friends, in
pledge of a common affection among the whole Company.

But no Custom, Ancient or Modern, is so considerable, as the Apostl's way of
Arguing. He does not urge it as Probabl, but Contingent; Apt to produce the
effect, but Capabl to be disappointed; Does not say, It is Fit, or it is
Intended; we May, or Oght to be made One by it, etc. But we [Are] and For this
Reason we [Are One] Both the Effect, and the Reason are Actually existent, and
so, secure not to be hindered from being.

The Kiss of Charity was as certain an attendant upon This holy fest, as the
Fest it self was upon Every holy meeting. The Communicants parted with the most
Affectionate Kisses, the most Endearing Embraces, and all other expressions of
most Ardent Love: All this constantly repeted at every meeting, still feweled
their mutual love, and kept the divine fire alive, as did the daily Sacrifice,
That upon Gods holy Altar.

Such was the Significancy, such the Efficacy of This holy fest. As nothing
could be more Proper, so nothing could be more Prosperos. Behold (said the
Persecutors) how the Christians love one another! And behold (says the Apostl)
the Reason why they do so! It is bicaus they eat of That One Bread, That Fest
of Charity, seasoned with the holy Kiss of Charity.

III. BUT how miserably in our days is the Osculum Pacis translated into
Kissing of the Pax! Primitively, the Kiss was begun by the Priest, and carried
on through the assembly; Now, the Priest delivers some painted toy, to be
kissed by the peopl; and no other kiss thought on.

And for the Bread, what a fine trick do both Latin and Greek Churches agree
in, to mock its Charitifik virtue! They take a loaf, half consecrate it,
distribute it among the peopl, but not at the holy Tabl, and every one carries
his morsel to his several home, where he sometimes Eats and ofterner Keeps it:
Is not this to mock the Apostl? All ar perhaps partakers of That One bread; but
so, as Not to be made One body: For they do not so properly Communicate, as
Dispers it; render it rather an Emblem of Separation, than of Union; not of
One Body, but Many scattered Particles.

So we greet not one another (as the Apostl prescribes) with a kiss of
charity, but the Picture which we have made of the Lords Supper, with a kiss of
veneration; and That Picture no more like the life, than the Modern kiss is
like the Primitive: and the whole virtue is lost with all tokens of its uniting
power. And would to God it were no wors than lost.

Our abuse does not only falsify the unhappy Proposition, but Convert it with
that worst kind of Conversion.

We [Cannot be] one Body, because we [Cannot eat] that One Bread: A conversion
too properly per Impossible; because our many and irreconcilable contentions,
make That Impossibl to Us, which to the Apostl seemed Certain and Necessary, by
reason of This very bread: It is not a Fest of charity, but an Apple of
Contention; in stead of kissing, we bite one another, and turn the Peacemaker
to an Incendiary.

Litl did the Apostl think of this holy Banquet, when he said, Mark those which
cause divisions among you, and Avoid them. Yet this dubl plaint do we now put
up against the Modern way of honoring it: It first makes It to cause division,
and then causes Us to avoid it.

1. By taking away the Obligation to Eat this Bread, we disable it from making
us One Body, and so deprive it of the Blessing of a Peacemaker. 2. By too
superstitios fear of it, we not only disable it from healing the Least breach,
but make it an Instrument of the Greatest: and so make it a Curs instead of a
Blessing.
1. By taking from our selves the Obligation to Eat This Bread, we take from it,
the Power to make us One Body. This is as clear, as That common Axiom, Sublata
causa tollitur effectus.

We cannot (sure) doubt but our Gracios Lord designed as great Virtue to his Own
table, as to the Legal Altar; which by a Plain (though Suppositive) Precept, he
preferred to the Power of a Peacemaker; saying, If thou bring thy gift to the
Altar, and there rememberest that thy brother has oght against thee; leav
there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then com and offer thy gift.

But by our misapplication of the Suppositive Command, we have utterly defeated
the design of the Precept.

The Method we like well enogh, First to be reconciled, and Then to com; and
think we obey it sufficiently, if This be the Last action of our life; and
That, the last, save This One: Quite contrary to our Lords Precept, who for
avoiding delay, bids us, not carry back our gift, but leave it before the Altar,
as an earnest of our speedy return; which we cunningly escape, by not coming
thither at all.

We agree (indeed) with the best ages in the Antecedent, That none but the
charitable must communicate; but we thence infer conclusions directly opposite.
For They conclude Positively: Therefore I must be reconciled, that I may
communicate: but We, Negatively: Therefore I will Not Communicate, because I
will Not be Reconciled: They Therefore thought Charity Necessary, because they
thought the Communion so: and We taking away the Necessity of Communicating,
take away all its influence upon Charity.

When therefore we consider the vast difference between the Present, and
Primitive ages, in point of Charity; whatever cause we have to Lament, we have
none to Admire, unless we look upon it is Cause. For our neglect of the Lords
Supper, may well challenge our wonder; but that This should beget it is genuine
issu, is no wonder at all.

If it be pleaded, that our forbearance proceeds not from Neglect, but
Reverence; This will give cause of a yet greater complaint; for such is our
Second, viz. that

IV. 2. BY our too superstitios fear of This Bread, we not only disable it from
healing the Least breach, but make it an Instrument of the Greatest.

For it is but just, that if we commute Obedience for Reverence, we should make
the Compensation as great as the Loss; or at least, we should do our utmost, to
make it so; first by Thinking and Speaking most honorably; and then, by valuing
our Opinions in proportion to our Esteem of the Subject.

While therefore Some (in compliance with the Former) say more than Others can
Believ or Comprehend; and then (in conformity with the Later) think themselves
obliged to do their utmost, to bring All men to their own Sentiments; what
consequence can be more natural than this, that there be More, and more Aigre
contentions about This, than Any other Subject; which cannot either so much
confound our Judgments, by it is Mysteriosness, or engage our Zele, by it is
Worth.

What Reason would thus persuade us to expect, Experience compels us to see
and bewail.

1. This multiplieth questions. Our too much fear makes us therefore scrupulos
in every Litl thing, because the Greatness of the Subject makes nothing seem
Litl.

Whether the Bread must be Leavened or Unleavened, who would have imagined
worth disputing? yet was it thought not only worth a Dispute, but a Quarrel; and
that nether small nor short, but Fierce, and for several centuries of years,
between the Greek and Latin Churches. Whether the Table stand East and West,
or North and South, who would have thought worth a contention? and who would
think the posture of the Communicant, less inconsiderable than That of the
Table? Yet ar Those made matters, not only of Contention, but of Schism. In
Other offices of publik worship, who thinks himself a Judge either of Priest or
Peopl? but many scruple to Receve the Lord's Supper, either From an unworthy
Minister, or With an unworthy Communicant, etc.

2. As it multiplieth questions, so does invenom them; turns Questions to
Quarrels; and those Fierce, perhaps Bloody. What lamentable effects have we
heard, seen, and felt, of men's zele, more heated in This, than in Any Other
Furnace! Concerning Transubstantion and Single-communion, between Papists and
Reformed: Concerning Consubstantiation, between Lutherans and Calvinists:
Concerning Postures and Circumstances, between Conformists and Separists among
our selves.

3. As it makes controversies More, and Fiercer, so does it make them more
Irreconcilable. No part of the gulf so wide, between us and our adversaries on
either hand.

If we look upon the Papists, how near are the Jansenists Ours! and what
hinders them from being entirely so, but their zele for Transubstantiation!
The Religieuses of Port Royal ar by the Jesuits accused for Haeretiques; and
by the author of the Provincial Letters, justified by This, as an adaequate
evidence, that they daily adore the body of Christ in the Sacrament.

If this be an adaequate justification from the Suspicion, we may well conclude
it a competent hindrance from the Thing: so that were All other controversies
at an end (as in a manner they are) This One must keep the Schism incurable:
And That consideration is sufficient to discorage the endeavors of such good
men, as were those who Attemted, and in good mesure Promoted, the Universal
peace of Christendom, never to be accomplished 'till this bitter root be grub'd
up.

On the other side, if we look upon the Non-conformists, we find many among
them who join with us in All other offices, but dare not do so in This. They
think its extraordinary Sacredness requires extraordinary Caution; and every
step toward compliance with our Rubriks, looks like in devotion toward the
Mystery.

They think themselves obliged, to examine with all possibl rigor, not only
Themselves, but their Brethren, yea, their Governors too: and every appearance
of Unworthiness, whether in Persons or Ceremonies, is apprehended as infectios
and dangeros.

And of This what can be a more natural consequence, than that we should
exercise our zele for the Holy Institution; not by Performing it, but by
Declining it, and Complaining against both our Governors and Brethren, for so
blocking up our way to it!

Suppose we now all Other mountains leveled. Suppose the Surplice taken from
the Priests back, and the Ring from the Brides finger; Suppose there were nether
any swearing in the Litany, nor cross in Baptism: Yea, suppose All Liturgies,
Ceremonies and Rubriks laid aside, and the Holy Table naked, not only of plate,
but of cloth; yer while it is thought that a great part of the Sacraments Honor,
consists in being above all Human Power, in point of forms and circumstances,
and a great part of Our Duty, in refusing to submit to the prescriptions of our
Governors; This humor alone will turn it from a Fest of Charity, to a Rock of
Offense; since no wisdom of Man can contrive how to celebrate it in such a form
as shall please those, who cannot in conscience conform to Any.

VI. YEA, so Contentios is this Superstition, that it contends with the
Sacrament which it striveth to honor; treating it as Joab did Amasa, with a
kiss and a stab. For amids all it is care concerning the Manner, it destroys
the Thing, by denying our Obligation to the Performancc.

With what face can we condemn the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, upon that
absurdity which our selves maintein? How can we decry the doctrine of Accidents,
subsisting without their Subjects; while we labor so much about the Manner,
which is but an Accident, and take away the necessity of the Thing, which is
the Subject; and That for This very end, that the Accident may subsist the more
perfectly?

All other Controversies leav the Subject of the Question, and therewith a
possibility of accommodation: This takes away the One with the Other: To This
therefore above All other, is due that odios glory, which Lucan ascribes to the
litl Seps, above all other venomos Creatures: -- tibi palma nocendi:
Eripiunt omnes Animam, tu sola Cadaver.
This does not only turn the most gratios Institution to an Useless Carkas, by
robbing it of its serviceableness to Love, which is its life, but destroys
the very Matter of the Performance it self; yet so, as to leave it the
mischievos power of corrupting carcasses, which, while themselves perish, infest
the living.

This therefore is the sum of the great honor to which we advance the Sacrament:
It may very well be omitted in point of Performance, but cannot be hindered
from multiplying and perpetuating dissentions: And this consequently is the
honor, which we thereby pay its great and good Author; that since its
Mischievousness is apparent, but not it is Necessity, he had do'n us a greater
favor if he had never instituted it; and a yet greater, if he had so declared
his will concerning our obligation to the Performance, that we might have
escaped both Disobedience to himself, and Contentions in his Church, and yet
enjoyed the benefit of so gracious a Legacy.

For how can we justify his Wisdom or his Goodness, if he were so careful to
bequeath us such a legacy, so serviceabl both to his own honor and his Churches
happiness; yet so unkind as to clog it with such conditions, as must render it
Inaccessibl to the Most, Tormentive to the Best, Dangeros to every Single
person, Mischievous to the Church in general, and Necessary to None? whereas by
a plain determination of his will, enforced by his Command, he might have
prevented all Inconveniences, and promoted all Good effects.

Had it not be'n better, that the Christian World had never heard of it, than
suffered so many mischievs by it? What Fires has it kindled? What blood has
it drawn? What wounds has it made in the authors Mystical body, more grievos
to him, than those it commemorateth of his Natural? What member which it has
not tormented? What Church, what Person has escaped its mischievous influence?

And on the other side: Where ar its good fruits? Where is that Church? Where
is that Person that can in these last Ages boast of any so great benefits
obtained by it, as may in any proportion pretend to recompense so many and
great mischievs?

The Conclusion reflecting upon the whole.
I. All reduced to three questions. Qu. 1. By what Authority do we depart from
Constancy? By that of the Church of Rome. II. No Doctrine has so much Popery
as This. III. Qu. 2. With what Success? 1. By loss of Constancy we have lost
tolerabl Frequency. IV. 2. By too much advanceing Reverence we have made it
mischievos, 1. To the honor of our Lord, 2. to the peace of his church. V. Qu.
3. Upon what Need? No such danger as is feared, of loss of reverence: or if
there were any, it is much outweighed, both by prudential and conscientious
considerations. VI. The Reverence which is due to the Sacrament, is not such as
belongs to Gods Decrees, which require our Forbearance; but such as belongs to
his Laws, which require our Performance.

MAY not so many and great abuses make This holy Sacrament ashamed (as the
Prophet is described in Zachary) of it is Commission? May it not say of the
wounds in its hands? These ar the wounds wherewith I have be'n wounded in the
house of my friends.

They are, indeed, but in the Hands, not in the Heart; destroy not its Being,
but leave it such an one as Epicurus allowed God: incomprehensibl in Majesty,
Glory, and Idleness; exalted as much above our Concerns as our Understandings:
but wounded in the Hands, maimed and pained, unserviceabl and troublsom, to the
Church in General, and every member in Particular.

And This in the house of friends: Reverence for it is mysteries, Zele for it is
honor, Care for it is service; by being wise overmuch, and righteous overmuch:
Wise overmuch, even wiser than our Lord himself; and Righteos overmuch, even
more than can well stand, either with the nature of a fest, or the frailty of
mankind: By spinning our Lords institution to such fineness, as robs it of
it is strength; and straining the Apostl's discourse to such rigor, as makes the
duty impracticabl: By practicing upon the body of Christ, as Empiriks do upon
those of their patients, against all Rules, and often without any Need.

Yes, it is even so! The Sacrament they say was grow'n Plethorik, it must
therefore bleed away something of Constancy, for preservation of Reverence: and
these ar the wounds it receved from the hands of Chyrurgeons, exerciseing
Phlebotomy. But 1. By who is Prescription? 2. With what success? 3. Upon what
need?
ar questions so important, that it may be worth our labor, to sum up all that
we have said, or can be said, into those three enquiries.

1. By who is Prescription? What Doctor durst presume thus to practice upon the
Body and Blood of the Lord, contrary to his own Institution?

Were we to answer by conjecture, we should not long deliberate; but we have
better evidence than bare suspion, even as good as can be wished; the testimony
of an Historian beyond exception, who could neither dare to impose upon the
world, nor could himself be deceved, in matter of Fact, notoriously known, even
to the most ignorant.

We have already heard from Socrates, who made an end of his History in the
year of our Lord 441. and shall now again more heedfully take his report.

Whereas (says he) All Churches over the whole world, on the Sabbath days, in
every week celebrate the Mysteries; they of Alexandria and Rome, upon some
ancient Tradition; refuse so to do. But the Egyptians, who ar neighbors of the
Alexandrians, and the inhabitants of Thebais, do indeed meet on the Sabbath,
but partake not the Mysteries, after the manner of Christians: for after they
are filled with all manner of meats, about evening, they offer and receve the
Mysteries. And again, in Alexandria, on the fourth day, and that which is caled
the preparation-day, the Scriptures ar read, and the Teachers interpret them,
and all things belonging to a meeting ar performed, except the celebration of
the Mysteries.

As the first clause of these words speaks the Holy Sacrament constantly
celebrated every Sunday, so does the last, witness the same for every other
Holy Day: for by observing it as a singularity in the Church of Alexandria,
that their weekly Lectures were defective for want of This; he plainly
supposes it notorios, that it was celebrated every where else in all
Church Assemblies.

And concerning the Sundays-Sacrament, we must observe.

1. The Church of Alexandria was but Accessory, and that of Rome Principal. For
as the former furnished the later with her Corn, so was her self filled with
the Wealth and Merchants of Rome, for who is sake she complied with her customs:
But the voisinage, who had no such tentations, liked not the trade, but refused
to consent to their own Metropolis, in so gross an innovation.

Yea, they thence took such jealosie, as to stand the more stiffly to such other
customs of their Ancestors, as all the rest of the World thought fit to be
changed. Nor, indeed, could they well justify the One without the Other. For if
they refused to reneg constancy for This very reason, because their Ancestors
practiced it, then could they not deny the consequence which was pressed upon
them, that they must upon the same reason stick to the ancient, but now
generally disused circumstances, which made it the close of a Fest.

2. The Evidence, whereon This innovation was founded, was not derived from
Scripture or Reason, or any other competent Topik; but a pretended Tradition, a
private Tradition, a Tradition whispered to the Church of Rome and her Zany of
Alexandria, so close in the ear, that it could not be heard by any other Church
equally Apostolik: not more contrary to the practice of the rest of the World,
than to the very Nature of Tradition, which cannot be but Universal.

3. The vantage they have since made of This invention, has made it plain,
that they therefore were thus industrios to advance this Sacrament obove all
other offices of Worship, that they might thereby advance both their own Church
above other Churches, and their Priests above the Laity in their own: The
Former, by exalting this their proper tradition, above the joint practice of
all other Churches; and the Later, by putting the People at distance from the
Altar, and consequently from the Priest, who must needs appear more worthy of
reverence, by the privilege he had, to Partake the Sacrament, while the People
must only Adore it.

II. I QUESTION whether All their Doctrines put together, I am sure not any One
singl, has so much of Popery, both Form and Matter, as our modern way of
robbing the Lords Supper of due constancy.

1. This is the Soul and Life of Popery. To Equal Tradition with Scripture, and
engross to themselves the power of declaring what is Tradition; This is the
Pope's tripl Crown, by this he dominereth over the Conscience and Understanding
of the whole Christian world. And This Particular Tradition is the firstborn
of That invention, and the most valiant of the whole race. None like it in
Boldness, for it first durst openly affront the whole world; none like it in
Atchievments, for it has triumphed, not only over the Church Universal, but
over the Apostl himself.

1. With the Church Universal, she has hereby dealt, as her Nero did with her
Predecessor-city. Among all his pranks, none like That of firing the City, and
then enenlarging his House upon the ruins. If a City be to the whole World, as
a singl House is to a whole City; then to make a Private Tradition devour the
Universal Tradition of the whole World, was another kind of Neronian fire, and
the title of Roman Catholic, an exact tally of Roma domus fiet, etc.

2. With the Apostl she has dealt (if possibl) more rudely: turned his own
artillery upon himself, baffled him with his own weapon.

For He, that he might convince the Corinthians, that our Lord required
constancy; pleads a private Tradition, I have (says he) receved of the Lord
what I delivered to you. The Church of Rome employeth the very same evidence
(Truth only excepted) in direct opposition to This very Tradition of the
Apostl, receved and practiced by all the Churches of Christ: for having no
other pretense to rob the Lords Supper of This constancy, I have (says she)
receved it by tradition, that it is not to be celebrated every Sunday.

The Corinthians could not oppose any thing to the Apostl's testimony
concerning His tradition, without giving him the ly; nor was there any other
way for Other Churches to avoid This of the Church of Rome: And who durst be so
rude to the capital Church of the Empire? If All the Christian World have so
venerated that Imperial Church, as to sacrifice to her authority their own
eyes, who but a race of impudent Heretics, will question her veracity, after so
many ages of possession? And if in such a Question as This, the whole Catholic
Church yielded to her authority, with what forehead can any other Church, much
more any private Person, oppose her in any Other?

For if after such a concession, This same Church shall pretend a Tradition,
that it is the duty of every other Church to yield themselves up to her conduct,
by implicit Faith and blind Obedience, what is this more than is already
granted? He that has given up his eyes, so as not to discover the brightest
evidence, must contradict himself, if he believ them in any less manifest: For
it is to deny his own concession, viz. that the Church of Rome is to be
believed against all contrary evidences, whenever she shall declare tradition.
This therefore, as it was the First and Greatest essay, so it is the most
Prosperos that that the Church of Rome ever made or can make, of an unlimited
power over the Word of God, and the Understandings of Mankind.

2. This is the most Material Articl, the Greatest limb of Popery. Both sides
agree to make this Sacrament the adaequate Test, whereby to distinguish a
Romanist from such as they call Heretik; and This was the first step, whereby
it mounted to the controverted adoration.

When once it was obtained, that Other offices of publik worship might be
celebrated without This, it was not hard to gain one step more; for if it be as
Well in point of Duty, it must seem Better in point of Prudence, to make it
Venerable by Distance, than Cheap by Familiarity: And if it be Best to make it
Venerable, then will it be best to speak the Most, that can help to make it so:
and when once it came to This, that he speaks Best who speaks Most: what
wonder if Alexander claim adoration?

But to Adore the Sacrament, and Trample upon the Institution: To pretend that
This is but a Positive Law, and therefore subject to the Churches power; and
then with an express non obstante, not only to Universal tradition, but to our
Lords Command; to forbid the One half to the Peopl, exalting their own
Authority in the One, and their Wisdom in the Other against His: This was a
jump, which even the Church of Rome it self durst not make, but after long
exercise of omnipotence.

And as she herein exceeded all her Former Ages, so does she in This All her
Other Doctrines. In Other Doctrines they cheat men of their money, by scaring
them with Purgatory, soothing them with Indulgences, wheadling them with
Merits, cullying them with Absolution upon the Priest's own terms, fooling them
with Foppish ceremonies, etc. But by This, they pull out their very Eyes,
forbidding them to believe any of their Senses.

If countermanding that singular Law which is appropriate to our Lords own
Person; if tearing away that badge which himself made the cognizance of his
Church; if to affront him in Both his Natures, his Divine, by derogating from
his Authority; and his Humane, by defacing his Image, can deserv the title;
then must This above All Doctrines, be most worthy to be styled Antichristian.

In brief and plain: Either the Church of Rome is to be followed, in opposition
to the Church Universal, or the Church Universal, in opposition to the Church
of Rome: If the Church of Rome be to be followed, why do we deny implicit
Faith to any her Other traditions? If the Church Universal be to be followed,
why do we forsake her in This point of Constancy, which she paid the Sacrament,
'till the Church of Rome out-faced her?

III. WE have seen by who is Prescription this Phlebotomy has be'n exercised,
let us now enquire with what Success? And this will occasion another Question,
viz. Whether of the two we have more reason to be ashamed of? The Practice is
twofold, and either part is answered by its proper success. On the One side,
the Sacrament is robbed of Constancy, and That is followed by loss of tolerable
Frequency: On the Other side, That Loss is recompensed by Veneration, and This
is followed by as great Mischiefs as the Author designed Benefits.

1. By loss of CONSTANCY we have lost tolerabl Frequency. The Obligation ones
untyed, and Latitude allowed, without any other limit, but what love shall
prescribe; and the Performance dressed up in such frightful manner, as is more
apt to produce Dread than Love; what other fruit can reasonably be hoped for,
than what we see, that the generality should rather exercise their Aw by
Shunning, than their Lov by Frequenting it?

This was to some degree prevented by the Rubrikes of our Church, 'till they were
deposed from their Authority, by a sort of men, who making distance from Rome
their mesure of truth, must by That rule have restored the Constancy, which to
banish was the proper act of Popery: But Antipodes, while they stand in
greatest Opposition, dwell in the same Latitude; and so do these men with the
Church of Rome in some of her worst Doctrines.

For as they also call it the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, to advance the
Ecclesiastical Power above the Temporal; so do they endeavor to make this
Sacrament an instrument to subject the People to the Minister.

When they hoped to 'stablish their Discipline, how briskly did they summon the
People to the Communion! How insolently did they depose them All, even such as
were every way better than themselves, to the state of Catechumens! not
admitting them to the Lords Table 'till they had undergo'n Their examination.
But when they found that they could not prevail, either with the People
voluntarily to submit themselves, or with the Governors to compel them to it:
How quickly did they take pet! How sullenly did they cast away the Sacrament,
as Useless to Any good purpose, since it was So to their Own!

My banishment from the University cast me into a corner, where the Dispute was
publikly managed by word and writing, from the Pulpit and from the Press;
whether the Lord's Supper were to be celebrated in an unpresbyterated Church?
and the Negative so generally prevailed throghout the Land, that during their
whole reign, in some places the very Table it self, and in most others, the Use
of it, was quite cast out of the Church.

When the Church of England was about to be restored, and their Representatives
were desired to make their Proposals; that they might either hide or justify so
great a neglect, they moved to be freed from That Rubrike, which obliges the
peopl to communicate at least three times in every year: And to This day they
make it a distinct cause of separation; so that some who join with us in other
offices, dare not do it in This: And their greatest Champion, though he have his
proper Congregation, bosteth that he has not 'ministered it these eighteen
years; with no less Nonconformity to his own pretenses, than to the stablished
government.

1. One pretense is, that nothing must be do'n in the Publik worship of God,
without express warrant in his word: Then certainly much less, must any thing
be omitted, which his Command has made necessary. For the general Precept for
Decency, may virtually contein such Particulars, as our Governors shall judge
Decent; but nothing less than a Particular and Express warrant, can free us
from a Particular Institution, not only Expressly enjoined, but several ways
Inculcated.

2. Another pretense is, that our Church is not rightly constituted according
to the mind of Christ: And we have discovered by the Nature of the thing, by
the language of the Apostls, and by the unanimos consent of all the Christian
world, that the Sacraments ar indispensibl marks of a Christian Church; which
since his Congregation wants, by his own principless he must abandon it.

3. A Third great pretense is, that We have too much Popery in our Worship: And
we have found that robbing the Publik worship of This Sacrament, is the very
Soul and Body of Popery; but with This difference, that the Popish Doctors
intended to make it bleed away something of Constancy; and Non-conformists bleed
it to death.

WE see whence our neglect of the Sacrament took it is first Birth, and whence
it is Nourishment. Popery gave it the one, and Schism the other: Yet how many
among our selves cherish it, that renounce both Parent and Nurse! Glad of the
liberty which (right or wrong) they enjoyed during our confusions, and loath to
return to the troubl they suffered, from such a curb to their dear lusts and
ease.

They find that divines require no less for a worthy Communion, than for a
saving Repentance: Repentance they press as absolutely Necessary, but the
Communion they think not so: Who then can be so sottish, as to delay his
Repentance, without giving the Sacrament as long a day? Every man's Reason must
needs concur with his Sloth, to persuade him, that if it be a damnable Sin to
com Unworthy, but None to Forbear; then must it needs be his wisest course, to
avoid a task, dubly prejudical, first to his Ease, and then to his Salvation.

When our Lord commanded us to pluck out our eyes and cut off our hands, he
enforced it with a Reason, as cogent as the Command could be rigid: For it is
better to enter into life with One ey foot or hand, than to be cast into
Hellfire with two. But so to state this duty as to say, If you will do This,
you must quit your beloved lusts; but if you will not do it, you miss some
benefits, but incurr no danger; how few such a declaration will persuade rather
to renounce their lusts and ease, than This (Duty shall I call it? no, but)
Burden; Reason might have taght our ancestors to Conjectur, and Experience
compels us to bewail.

Experience, which many call the fools mistress, because those who apprehend
not other evidence, cannot avoid This: Experience which is many times the
Severest, and always the Best instructor; does so plainly and sadly reprove us,
that however excusable Other ages may have be'n, who thought themselves secure
from the ill consequences, our Own and Future times cannot be so, if we be not
convinced by them.

We sometimes see men encumber their lands, when they intend to grace them, with
Fair but Fruitless bildings, and then sell houses, land, and all, to pay the so
contracted debt: But we never see any so fond of such bildings, as to sell the
Land for their preservation, if by pulling them down, they can pay the debt
with the materials. Let us be as wise in our generation: our 'forefathers
thought (as such bilders usually do) that the Sacrament could well bear, and be
improved by the cost they put it to; that it would be more advanced both in
honor and power, than prejudiced, by abatement of constancy; but never thought
of staking its very Being, against any hopes whatever: That, they thought
secured by the Laws of the Church, and the unfailing practice of it is very
worst members; who for shame of their neighbors or fear of their governors,
durst not neglect it at any of the appointed seasons.

But now, that the late Schism has out-mischiefed all their fears, it is not
to be doubted, but those very writers, who heretofore discoraged the
performance by their rigors, were they now living, would no less industriosly
press it; had they no better reason than this, that the bildings go with the
land; bicaus those who think it needless to receve the Sacrament, cannot think
it necessary to examine themselves by way of preparation for it.

Let us then learn by experience: we have seen the trial of Both ways:
Primitive Christians practiced Constancy with as great Success as Obedience;
The Church of Rome first seduced the world from it, and thereby advanced
Themselves more than the Sacrament; Our Schismatiks out-shot the Church of Rome,
not only Abated, but Destroyed the Office, root and branch. What need we less
intelligibl comments, upon our Lord's or Apostl's words? our very senses inform
us what is to be do'n: And however former ages may be excused by the goodness
of their intentions, we cannot be so, if we refuse to be convinced by manifest
experience, plainly confuting their plausibl designs.

IV. THE other part of the practice, is the advancement of REVERENCE: for as
Frequency, for want of a Damm to fence it, is swallowed up; so Reverence for
want of one to restrain it, has swollen further and further 'till it came to
Adoration: and this is answered by a success so much wors than the Other, as a
Mischief is wors than Nothing: for it is mischievos both to the Honor of our
Lord, and the Peace of his Church.

I. To the HONOR of our Lord: because it restores Both those Religions which
he came and died to abolish; turning This, which he instituted for a livree of
Christianity, to a cloak both of Heathenism and Judaism.

1. Heathenism, by making it an Idol, much after the Old Pagan mode: For the
Old Heathen believed they could by force of words, bring their God to enhabit
the statu they consecrated to him, and then worshipped That statu, not a as
carved piece of wood, but as the body of the God; and the Papists believ they
can by like force of words, make bread and wine the Body of Christ, and then
worship it after the manner of the heathen; yet eat it too, and therein exceed
them.

2. Judaism, by burying true Spiritual worship under a heap of dumb ceremonies.
Our Lord gave This as a character of the Gospel Worship; God is a Spirit, and
they that worship him, must worship in Spirit and in Truth: But the Papists
have turned Spiritual worship out of door, to make room for a mass of
pageantry, who is Mysteries ar no more understood by the Priest, than is the
Language by the Peopl.

But though no meaning can be perceved in the Retail, yet This is plain in the
Gross; that the Sacrament is to be Admired, but not Understood.

II. To the PEACE of the Church, the Ten Persecutions have not be'n so
pernicios. The King of France after all his bloody atchievments, must yield it
a greater right to his vaunt, Behold what destructions I have wroght upon the
earth!

God be blessed, we ly not at present under such violent paroxysms as our
'forefathers suffered: Nether War nor Persecution rage among us, but we hear
of Oppressions among our Neighbors, Plots among our selves, Jelosies, Disputes,
Distractions, which though they do not utterly Destroy, do yet Disturb the peace
of the Church; as Fears and Perplexities of conscience do the souls of it is
best members.

These ar the fruits of our modern way of honoring the blessed Sacrament:
Neglect of Constancy has produced Constancy of Neglect; we have So put it at
Distance, as to put it out of sight. Yea, it is wors than Destroyed, for it is
made Destructive of that Spiritual devotion toward God, that mutual Charity
toward each other, that inward Comfort in our Own souls, which our Lord
instituted it to advance.

V. OUR THIRD enquiry is, What Need? For it oght not to be thought, but the
Necessity must be proportionate to the Remedy. Nice persons sometimes take
physik without need, only to prevent they know not what: in such cases the
Physician prescribes none but gentl medecines; such as may do no more, than
only purge the patient out of some of his superfluos money: Such a course therefore
as we find taken with This institution, must persuade us to expect some very
urgent Necessity, or some apparent and great Danger, no other way to be escaped.

And a great danger we hear of; A danger of contemt. But what contemt? Is this
holy Bread any where cast to the dogs? Is this Cup wors abused to drunkenness?
Is the whole Supper any where profaned as the Apostl testifies it to have be'n
the by Corinthians? or as their Persecutors slanderosly reported of the
Primitive Christians? All this were so much less than the abuses it now
suffers from the remedies, as Lust is less than Murder: but the Least of them
is incomparably more than our greatest fears.

For indeed there is no pretense of any other danger, than Negative or
Comparative: It will not be capabl of Adoration at Rome, nor of Veneration
among our Selves; 'twill be as cheap as Common Prayer, by too much familiarity:
it must therefore keep state like the Eastern kings, who preserv Aw in their
peopl by keeping Distance.

That Distance causes Aw, cannot be denied: This objection verifieth it. For
while we look upon it at distance, it looks dreadful as a Lion; but if we com
to a closer vieu, we shall find it a less formidabl beast.

To this end we have already distinguished the world into it is two parties, the
Godly and the Ungodly; and found that from nether of them was any such danger
to be feared: Not from the Godly, for no Constancy will make them quit their
Reverence; Not from the Ungodly, for they have none worth preserving.

1. The Godly will never quit Reverence upon any the greatest Frequency, as
plainly appears by their uniting Both in Prayer: Evening and Morning and at
Noonday will I pray, and that Instantly, said David. Not the less Instantly,
bicaus Constantly. Such Constant Experience oght to deal with this Fear, as its
patrons pretend Constant performance will with Reverence, Abate at least,
perhaps Destroy it.

2. That show of Reverence which Ungodly men bring to the Communion is not
worth preserving, much less is it worth purchasing at so dear a rate, as
disobedience.

We have p. 303.
lately examined the Pageant, and found, that however goodly show it makes in
the eyes of children and the populace, it must be contemptibl in the eyes of
God, who sees and hates it is want of inward life; which it Therefore wants,
bicaus it wants such Frequency as is most likely to beget it.

Since therefore True Reverence, which alone is Worth our care, Needs it not,
bicaus it is secure from danger; and that Empty show of revercnce which is in
danger, is not worth our care to preserv it; From This topik of Prudence, there
is not to be had one grain to turn the emty scale.

But on the contrary, in This very Topik we shall meet such considerations, as
without help from any Other, shall very much outweigh those fears.

1. It is much better run the risque of abating Reverence, than of Losing the
Sacrament it self. Something, however cheap, is better than Nothing; and
Obedience, than Sacrifice. But it is not singl Disobedience, when accompanied
(as here) with pretense of Prudence: which no less affronteth our Lord's Wisdom
than his Authority; oblikely intimating that he could not 'foresee or prevent
the danger.

2. Probability is much lighter than Experience. We do but Suspect the danger,
and we have Experience to the contrary. On One side; more than 400 years
experience, proved that Constancy and Reverence drew happily together to God's
glory and his Churches benefit: On the Other side, many hundred years
experience has manifested, that by their separation, a multitude of mischievs
have overwhelmed the world.

T. Livy said That Experience is the best judge and corrector of Laws: If it
may correct Laws, much better may it Disobedience to Laws.

3. This probabl Fear is answered by a more probabl Hope, that by their
reunion, Common Prayer would gain more than the Sacrament lose.

We have found that St. Paul, and after him St. Augustine, used this Sacrament
as an argument for reverence in God's house: and the Later went a step further,
improving it for Purity of life: if the Argument be good, why should it be lost?

Hnd not Jehoshaphat accompanied the Kings of Israel and Edom, in their address
to the Prophet, their three armies had perished: and how much of devotion is
lost, for want of joining the Lords Supper with other offices of his worship,
who can divine?

4. If Prayer and other Religios offices gain not altogether so much as the
Sacrament may lose; yet will the service of God be advanced by the Great;
because Frequency will abundantly recompense the disadvantage in the Particular.

Quick (though Light) returns make rich merchants: and a little gain repeted
every Sunday and other Holiday, will enrich piety, though purchased with greater
abatement from the Sacrament, as it is now rarely celebrated.

Thus our adversaries own Topik, Prudence will write upon their pretended
necessity for abatement of Constancy, Mean Mean tekel: how light then will it
appear, when so many and weighty obligations shall be weighed against it!

The Positive Command of our Lord, not only Expressly enjoined, but Carefully
Recommended, by the extraordinary season of the Institution, in the Last night
of his Life, and no less carefully interpreted by posthum revelations after his
death: The Singular worth of the Duty it self, appropriate to his Own Person,
the Livree of his Church, the Monument and Effigies of his Death and benefits;
The great virtues of the performance, the cement of charity among his members,
the Comfort of his faithful servants, the advancer of devotion in his worship,
etc.

Against so great a weight, nothing cast into the opposite scale, but the
mistaken sound of an unhappy word, misinterpreted and abused upon loss of it is
key, by Modern Doctors; but That mistaken Sound again infinitely outweighed, by
the Apostl's design manifestly employing That very word for enforcement of
Constancy; and the authority of Modern Doctors, out-voted by the unanimos
consent of more than 400 years universal practice of the Catholic church, which
having not yet lost the key, perfectly understood the Apostl's mind, by
uninterrupted tradition; not to be destroyed but by the Church of Rome, nor by
That, upon any other Evidence, than of a pretended Tradition; not to be
gainsaid, though not to be credited, by other less potent Churches.

VI. SO great a weight born up by an emty scale! This could never be, did we
pay This Sacrament That Reverence which is due to it.

I say That which is Due to it: For we oght to be careful in distinguishing:
There is One kind of Reverence Due to Gods Laws, and Another to his Decrees:
Moses long since and very clearly stated the difference, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret
things belong unto the Lord our God: but those things which are reveled belong
unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this Law.

Secret things to God, who has reserved them for his own Knowledge and
Execution: and the Reverence which we are to pay to them, requires us to keep
an Awful Distance; not to intrude, but to admire, and cry out Oh the depth of
the riches hoth of Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchabl -- But Those
things which are reveled belong to us: Faithful Study and Diligent Practice is
the Reverence they claim. Oh how I lov thy Law! All the day long is my study in
it, said David, in conformity to his character of the Blessed man Ps. 1.

And it is wonderfully unhappy that our most learned ages have most grossly
erred on Both sides. Concerning the Secret things that bolong to God, how
irreverently busy! To marshal his Presence and Decrees in due order, to
prescribe limits for his Justice and Goodness, to mesure the influences of his
Decrees and his Grace upon our Liberty, etc. is every one's work: While those
things which are reveled concerning this Sacrament, ar reverenced by being
treated as Mysteries, with an Awful Distance, with Admiration, Ignorance, and
Forbearance.

I am therefore so far from deposeing it from due Reverence, that my whole
endeavor has be'n to restore it from the grossest Contemt, which has so long
left it in the meanest state of Neglect, Unstudied and Unpractised.

Yes, it is Vnstudied: in the mids of that multitude of disputes, which have so
long and so much pestered the Christian world, concerning Sacraments in
General, and This in Particular, still our Lord's Institution lies Unstudied:
Unstudied as a Law, because Overstudied as a Mystery: Unstudied in what belongs
to Us, because Overstudied in what belongs to God.

What? can he be said to have studied the Law, that understands not it is first
Rudiments? That knows not whether it be a Law, or no? Whether it be a Law
Absolute, or only Condicional? Is he learned in a Law, that knows not how
far, or how often it obliges to Action? When, and in what cases the
obligation cease? etc.

If this be to Love a Law, what is to Slight it? If this be Reverence, what is
Contemt?

A Contemt so much the Greater, by how much Less labor the study requires. Did
it require the reading of many large volums, the loss of much sleep, the wast
of much time; the Neglect might be imputed, not so much to want of Reverence,
as of Courage: But All the words of this Law, were delivered by our Lord in one
Breath, and explicated by his Apostl in a Few Lines: and how can you pretend
Reverence to the One or the Other, if you let the least tittl fall to the
ground?

I pray' now, have you indeed studied All the words of this Law? Have you well
examined what bread and cup the Demonstrative THIS points at? or what is the
import of the Imperative DO?

Or have you studied All the words of the Apostl's comment? Yea, have you
examined All it is clauses, or the Design of them All? Why did he charge his
Corinthians with profaning the Lord's Supper in All their meetings? And how did
he make good That Charge? What meant he by such industrios inserting and
repeting a claus unmentioned by any Evangelist? and what standard does it
relate to? What is the intent of the whole 26th verse? how does it sum up the
evidence of the 'foregoing, or support the inferences following?

These and many other main limbs, Which of our assertors of Reverence have
honored with any enquiry?

If to Neglect the most fundamental clauses, and largest limbs of a Discourse,
so to handl a Law as to disabl it from obligeing, so to order a Duty as to
render it impracticable, be to pay Reverence, I cannot but confess my self
gilty of having denied it.

On the Other side I have be'n so bold, both with our Lord's and Apostl's
words, as to examine every syllabl and every look: taken them to a strict
account, what service they do to the author's design? What agreement they
maintein with their fellow members? what order they keep, and why? Traced the
diatribe through all it is turnings, and hunted out the reason of them all:
Suffered not the least Phoenomenon to 'scape the most rigid examination: and
over and above, compared all with the practice of the other Apostls and the
primitive Churches.

This I take to be the Best way of Reverence, except One, wherein I hope my
good reader will join with me; which is, to pass from Studying to Doing all the
words of This Law.

FINIS.

