THE Lords Free Prisoner.
MUch honored and beloved in our Lord, having been often put upon it by one
friend and another to give an account by word of mouth, of the case of my
present consinement, in Newgate-Prison, that when you hear a true Narration of
the matter of fact, you may be the better able to judge of the matter of right,
I therefore give this short History, of the Sum and Substance of my former and
present Cross for Christ, which I, through Grace, and Mercy, obtained from my
Lord, do take up, and bear for him, thus following him to fulfill after him.

This letter is a Word-Apologie under Patient-suffering For a faithful
Testimony, or a necessary Vindication, and a just Defense of F. B. As to his
Cases of suffering, Several Imprisonments, the cause of those sufferings, his
call to them, his carriage under them, to the honor of his Lord, to the
furtherance of the Gospel, and for the wiping off, of several injurious
Aspersions, and false Charges, which have been unjustly, and wrongfully cast
upon him. What my Call has been to the Ministerial Office I have in a small
Treatise, Entitled them Acher, a name an after one. a name a new on etc.
elsewhere published.

I am a Minister of Christ, sent forth by him, to bring in an open Testimony
for him, and for the glory of the latter day; I have for these last twenty
years especially, or more been honored with several imprisonments; for the
cause and sake of Christ, of the Gospel, and of Righteousness: to pass by some
of them, which were but short for some few days, I was eight years, and three
quarters of a ninth year, under confinement, at Dorchester Prison in
Dorsetshire, for Preaching, Praying, Reading, and opening, and applying the
Scriptures, and of singing Hymns, and such like parts of my office, and for not
Conforming to the corruption of the times in the matters of worship; during
which time, I had wonderful experiences of the wisdom, power, loving kindness
of Jehovah Elohim, and many other Covenant favors in special unto me, in
healing, stre ngthning, conforting, teaching, inlightning, in a peculiar
manner, and in diverse ways of spirit,-illuminations, whereof I have elsewhere
given an account. Upon my discharge from that confinement, without paying one
penny of that Fine which was laid upon me, I went on with my Mninisterial
Office and work as before, here and there, as I had opportunity and a call; but
I was quickly apprehended again, and imprisoned at Salisbury in Wiltshire for
about eighteen weeks, which filled up my Revel. 2. 10.
Ten days of Tribulation in the Letter of it, aday for an year, wherein I
greatly rejoice; it was for the same cause as is before mentioned, after that
Term of weeks I had my discharge from that confinement (without paying one
farthing of the Fine or Mulct) How much to be admired the appearings of Jehovah
Aelohim my Adonai, were in a very signal way and manner for me and against many
of my Adversaries in his just judgments, upon and against them, were worthy of
an Historical Narration; but I would keep within the compass of one Sheet.

Upon my release, I came to this City, London, for the further filling up of my
Testimony in and near it. At Bethenal-Green, my labors were neither
unacceptable, nor unprositable, where, with some who desired it, I had
Providential Communion for some time. After a while my Residence was more in
the City and Subburbs: having gathered a people unto Christ, who submitted unto
Believers Baptism, we passed solemnly into a Gospel way of Church State and
Relation, and full Communion, founded on these two great Principles, owning,
professing, of Jesus Christ, to be the one and the only Lord over our
Consciences, and Lawgiver to our Souls; and of the holy Scriptures of Truth,
being our one; and our only Rule of Faith, Worship, and Life. And thus my
liberty in preaching of the Gospel continued, for that very self same just
proportion of time, as my former confinements lasted, that is to say, full nine
years, and some part of a tenth; and this in direct answer to, Psalm. 90. 15.
That word seasonably suiteably brought in upon the hearts of my self, and of
my yoak-fellow several years since, Make us glad according to the days, wherein
thou have afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil.

About two years and a half since, my self, and the friends in
Gospel-fellowship with me, were to seek of a convenient Meeting Place, for open
worship, where all, whose hearts were made willing might have liberty to come
to join with us in the spiritual, glorious, heavenly duties of the new
Testament, Administration of Grace (for I was always for Christ's open
housekeeping, since I hadinner aequaintance with him) There were three places,
which particularly had in our eye, one at Great Morefields, a second at
Spittle-fields, a third at Pinners-hall: upon debate in Christian friendliness,
and love, and not being all of one mind, concerning any one of these three
places, at last as soon as proposed, we laid aside all our own prudential
determinings of 1 Cor. 14. 40.
this matter (Natural decency and Gospel Order, resolving, and determining all
our Cases, and the prudence of believers, consisting in this to find out, know,
choose and acquiesce, in the determination of the Alwise, Sovereign, Supreme
will of our Lord according to his word, in the way of his providence;) and we,
after we had sought the Faces of Aelohim to choose for us, did refer and
deliver the determining of it wholly unto him, accordingly the Prove. 16. 33.
lots were given forth, a several one for each of the three forementioned
places, one for Great More-fields, where I then lived, a second for
Spittle-fields, whither a little after I removed; a third for Pinners-Hall, and
a forth for elsewhere; we not being to limit the All-free Agent, the Faithful
Creator, the Gracious Redeemer, the Providential Governor, to some one of
these three, for, we knew not, till he gave forth the express signification of
his mind and will, whether any one of these three must be the place, or he
would design us elsewhere: having agreed upon one to draw the lot, we all
looked up to the God of Heaven, expecting his Allotment; the lot opened speak
Pinners-Hall to be the place of our solemn Assembling for instituted worship.
Upon this we rejoiced, and all our Spirits, as one united Spirit ran together
with Christ's Spirit in our thoughts and meditations into that place, choosing
over Christ's choice, sweetly delighting, and contentfully acquiescing, in that
place, resolving there to be whilst we had an Revel. 3. 8. Acts. 5. 20, 21, 25.
42.
open door there; and this the rather, because our Lord Jusus Christ had so far
honored us, as to entrust us with one of the most open noted places in all
London, where to be finishing of our witness for Christ and for the Truths and
Duties of the present Age and Day.

Having agreed with the owner, for the liberty of that place, we forthwith, on
the next Seventh-day Sabbath, entered that place of Meeting, I was directed
unto Zechar. 6. 9. -- 15.
that Scripture, which does speak of Christ's bearing the Glory, and wearing
the Crowns, which were to be, for a Memorial, hung up in the Temple of Jehovah.
Accordingly we did, in our Spirits, set up, as it were, Spiritual Crowns for
King Jesus, with which to honor him, if he would be the Glory in the midst of
us, and Spirit and bless his Ordinances in the Ministry of them. This he has
done, drawing many young men, and maidens, by the cords of his love, more
especially this last year. All the glory be to him, who has so powerfully, and
freely, exalted himself, and advanced, his rich Mercy, his abounding Grace, and
his free Love, which has been gathering in some of his Sheep, and Lambs into
his Flock, and brought so many of them into his Fold, which has so enraged the
Revei. 2. 10.
Grand Enemy of mankind, thus to smite one of Christ's under-shepherds, and to
cast him into Prison.

On the seventeenth day of the twelfth Moon, according to vulgar account, in
the year 1682. Whilst I was at our usual hour of convening, openly at my
Ministerial work in Pinners-Hall, Reading and Interpreting of Isa. 63. 1. -- 6.
the Scripture, a Constable, with his Staff of Office, attended with several
other under Officers, with their old rusty Halberds, rushed in upon our
Assembly, requiring, in the Kings Name, to give off and to come down, to which
I answered, I was there in the discharge of my Office, in the Name of the King
of Kings; he mentioned, that he had a Warrant from the Lord Major to disturb
our Meeting; I replied I had a Warant from Christ, who was Lord Maximus to go
on; and so keept on my work; he commanded one of the under Officers to pull me
down; I answered, out of that Scripture I was upon, that, Christ was traveling
in the greatness of his strength, he speak, in righteousness, who was mighty to
save, that, the day of vengeance was in his heart; and the year of his redeemed
ones was come; and that he would pull down his Enemies, this was, whilst the
under Officer was pulling me behind, from the place where I was speaking. This
is, in short, what passed there for the sum of it, for I write in this and in
what follows so far as I can well remember, though it may not be expressed in
the very same words.

From thence they guarded me, and about six more to the Lord Major's, Hall;
who, when we were before him, demanded of the Constable, and other Officers for
what cause, they had brought us before him? the Constable answered, they took
us at a Meeting, and that I would not give off, when he commanded me so to do.
The Lord Major applied himself to me, saying that we, and such as we, would
bring in Popery; I replied, that we, were more Christians, and more against
Popery, than those whosoever wrongfully accused us: for we owned Christ for our
one, and our only Lord over our Consciences, and Lawgiver to our Souls, and
the Scriptures of Truth for our one and our only Rule of Faith, Worship, and
Life; we declared against Popery, as being against God, against Christ, against
Christianity, against the Word of Christ, against the the Laws of Christ,
against Humanity. You speak great words for your selves, said the Major; Sir
said I, we are ready to proveall this, to any of your Chaplains, or any other
whatsoever, if we are called unto it: who shall be Judge said the Major? I
replied, Sir, we will refer the determination of it to your own Conscience, if
you will give us a fair hearing. What calling or profession are you of said the
Major? Sir, I am a Minister of Christ, and this also I am ready to prove, if
any question my call. Are you of any other profession or calling? Answer, no
Sir, nor never was. It Is. under a pretense of such private Conventicles, that
all the Popish-Plots are hatched and carried on. Answer, our Assemblings are in
one of the most open, public places in all London for such Meetings: where
both doors stand wide open for any to come, who will, and so it uses to be in
my private dwelling. Do you keep Saturday Sabbath? Answer, I observe the
seventh day as the weekly Sabbath day. Do you keep the Sunday, said one who
stood next to the Major? Answer. There is but one day in the week, that is the
weekly Sabbath Day. You break the Kings Laws, said the Major. Answer, we
observe; keep, and obey the Scripture-Laws of King Jesus, who is King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords: upon this I was bid to stand, or sit by.

Afterward they examined four who are in Church Fellowship with me; the Major
inquireing what their callings were, and where they lived, which the Clark
wrote down: and usually the burden of the Song was, Have you been at St. Omars,
as if we all had been Jesuitically educated, and principled, whereby to
insinuate, as if we were bringers in of Popery, the quite contrary,
whereunto is the Truth: Two others also were examined upon the same
Interrogatorys but well agreeing in the same Witness for the main with us: one
whereof affirmed, that he thought, there was scarce any one Congregation in all
London, that brought in a fuller Testimony against Popery, than our
Congregation did.

The rest of the Friends were bid to depart; when several of them, I think it
was reported were Fined Ten Pounds a Man: I stayed behind, but a little after,
I was told I might be gone: so I returned to my dwelling.

In the after noon I came to Pinners Hall again, at the wonted Season, we
having a Key unlocked the door, and some few of us went in; The Constable and
under Officers being very near, quickly hasted, and shut the doors upon the
rest, and required us to be gone, as before: we kept our places, and had
oppertunity to speak to the Consciences of the Officers, who all declared their
unwillingness to meddle in such work: one of our Friends demanded of the
Constable a warrant; he said he would go or send to the Major; we waited, but,
no fresh warrant that we saw came from the Major, then the Constable commanded
an under Officer to pull me from the place where I was: who at last, trembingly
and palefac'dly laid his hand upon me; thus they led us out: when we came out
multitudes were in the streets. I returned with the rest and a great Conpanie
to my house, where I read and expounded the word I preached, prayed, hymned and
performed my office to the Satisfaction and profit of many hearers; which
lasted until about that Hour, which they commonly call four of the Clock, and
so the Company peaceably withdrew.

Upon the next Seventh-day Sabbath the Twenty and fourth day of the same
forementioned month, I went at the accustomed time unto one of the doors of
Pinners Hall which being shut or locked fast, I went about to the other door,
where, having knocked, the door was opened, and those who were present went in;
Another Constable, with some under officers quickly rushed in at our assembly;
whilst I was in Prayer, the Conftable commanded us to depart; I kept on praying
as I was supplied and assisted suiteably; till an under officer pulled me away,
toward the shutting up of my requests.

So they carried me out of that place toward the Lord Majors. As I was guarded
along by the Officers, I carried my Bible openly in my Hand through the
streets, declaring practically, as well as verbally, that the taking away of my
liberty was for the cause and sake of Christ, and of the word of Christ. Thus I
marched a long; the Major, when we came to his Hall, was gone, as we were told,
to the Sessons; The Constable passed by some other Justices and Aldermen, but
would not carry me before them, but made me go in and out here and there
toward the Sessions; as I passed a long I was made a Gazing-stock, variously
reported, some against me, others for me, one calling me a Christian Jevv,
others saying, I went along with my Bible, as one of the old Martyrs: thus
through good report, and evil report, I trudged along (as they said of my Lord
and Master; some he is a good man, others, hay, but he deceives the people.)
great flockings after us there were to publish the Testimony the more the Lord
preaching to the Consciences of thousands; the boys in the street at last
pointed at one of the under officers and cried out, an informer, an informer,
pelting of him with dirt and stones; who had he not shelterd himself near me he
bad been in great danger: at last they brought me to the Sessions house where I
was led to a private Room. After a while, I was called up to an higher Room,
where were Three Magistrates, the door keeper saying, that none else should get
in but my self. I declared in hearing of the Magistrates that Courts of Justice
ought to be open, that I might have witness of what passed at examination, for
I knew not what some might swear falsely against me, but some friends got in;
one of the Magistrates asked the Constable, for what cause he had brought me
there; while he answered, I apprehended him at Pinners Hall and he would not
come down, till an officer pulled him down. I answered I was here for doing
work for my Lord Christ, for preaching, praying; as I was going on, one of the
Magistrates cut me off short, your praying is prating: I replied Sir, take heed
how you reporach that great ordinance of Praying; the God I pray unto is a God
hearing prayer, he has heard my prayers, and will; and as he has done it so he
can answer it terribly a against those who speak so reproachfully against such
prayer: another of the rulers spoke somewhat against dissenters, I answered,
whilst there was a Christ, in Heaven and a bible on earth, there would be
dissenters from them and from their ways; if so, said he, yet I hope, we shall
not be so troubled with dissenters as we have been; but this being a cause
depending upon the Law we will confer with the Recorder about it, and so they
withdrew.

After a while I was brought into the court of open sessions at the old Bailey,
where being charged with breaking the Kings Laws, and as if I would introduce
popery and might have been at Saint Omars; I held forth my Bible, declaring
aloud for my Lord Christ, and for his word, and Laws, and that, it was a maxim
in their own Law, that, the Law of God was the Law of the land; and if so, I
was ready to plead this cause; thus, as I could he heard, the Lord spirited me
to Psalm. 82. 1. etc.
be finishing my testimony for Christ; who as I told them was judge at the
sessions; I was more than once told, they would not hear me preach; I declared
against popery, again and again, as I could be suffered. Upon this the Recorder
called upon me then to take the oathe's: he being unknown to me before, Sir
said I, I suppose by your gown, that you profess knowledge in your Law; and by
that Law you ought not to put me to oaths; for my liberty is taken from me
upon another cause, and that must be first issued; so that, then, when an end
is put to that I may be at leisure to consider what answer to return. It was
askked whether, ever I had been at the Universities, and at what University,
and whether I had taken any degree; I answered, at Oxford, where I had taken
two degrees; by that the Recorder knew, that so many years (...) several Oaths
must have been taken by such; (Oh those University-Oaths, so many, and so often
multiplied by inconsiderate Students, how much guilt has been contracted
thereby!) yet notwithstanding the Recorder called for another answer from me; I
replied Heb. 6. 16.
An Oath was for Confirmation an end of all strife; which this, neither had not
would be: still he required the taking of the Oaths: I answered, I had given
him a Scripture answer, going it over a second time. Read, the Oaths to him
said the Recorder or some other upon the Bench: as they were reading, one
commanded me to pull off my Gloves, another to lay my hand upon their Book; I
having no Scripture Warrant and Law for either, kept on my Gloves, and did not
put my hand upon their Book. I overheard one of them say; his hand is already
upon his own Bible, read on. Hereupon I laid down my Bible as one was a
reading; they intending hereby as I gathered, that so holding up my Bible as I
did, one or other would have clapped my Bible to my mouth, and so have
interpreted it, as my taking the Oaths: but the Lord gave me to see the snare
was laid for me: upon this they concluded me resolute, and said take him
Jailor, or away with him, whereupon one of the Keepers of the Jayl led me to
Newgate-Prison, where my Lord is with me to the sweet feeding and full
satisfaction of my whole man, greatly rejoicing, overcomingly-Triumphing,
Abasing of self, and Advancing of Jehovah Elohim, in Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Those who honor me, they are the words of my Lord, I will honor, and those
who despise me shall be lightly esteemed. This is the filling so far of the
farther Testimony of Christ's servant and witness to the death.

Francis Bampsield.

LONDON Printed for W. T. and sold by L. Curtiss, where Mr. Bampfields works
may be had, 1683.


