THE TRUE STATE OF THE CASE OF John Butler, B. D.

A Minister of the true Church of England: In Answer To the LIBEL of Martha his
sometimes WIFE.

Treating of a Marriage dissolved, and made NULL by desertion.

AND OF a Lawful Concubinage in a CASE of Necessity: Wherein Lawful Marriage
conveniently, or possibly cannot be obtained.

Psalm. VII. IX. O let the wickedness of the wicked come to one (...) but
establish the just: for the righteous God tries the hearts and reigns.

Pro. XXVIII. XXIV. Whosoever robs his Father or his Mother, and says, it is no
transgression; the same is the companion of a destroyer.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1697.

TO THE READER.
WOE unto the world because of Offenses, (says our Savior) Mat. 18. 7. But woe
unto him especially by whom the offense comes. Woe is an harsh word, and be
speaks misery, and so much the worse, out of our Savior's lips, because his
words are never uttered in vain. That I am charged, and that deep and widely,
with great offense, hurts me not so far as I am innocent: But woe be to him or
her who is guilty, be the clamor most silent. Adultery is a foul crime, and
Fornication, a dangerous sin; and both these are laid at my door. And the smart
of this slander is so painful and sore upon me, that I feel it wherever I go:
For many very good christians, and holy people mourn for me I find, as if I am
so indeed. And two good men my Neighbors, and my brethren of the Clergy,
supposing me to be so indeed; most kindly befriended me with a Brotherly
reproof; for which as I had great reason, I was very thankful, and returned
them my thanks in an answer as I thought meet: Unto which I had no reply. But
others more barbarously have hag'd lying reports, and cherishing slanderous
clamours, have increased the noise. In the mean time suspecting that there were
snakes in the grass, I became patient with dum silence, and saying to my self,
that days would spoke, and years would teach Wisdom. Job 32. (...). For tho
much was said, and more was thought, much noise, and little music, loud
clamours, and small truth: Yet the testimony of my Conscience, concerning the
sincerity of my Conversation toward God and man, administered joy and comfort
to my Soul, in the midst of my wounded reputation, even as it were at the gates
of death, 2 Cor. 1. 12. And yet after more than ten years waiting for a trial
of truth, I found my self rendered a public shame, both among Clergy and
Laity; being wounded at a distance by barking Curs, who keeping out of
gunshot, wounded me in the dark, so as 'twas hard to say who hurt me: While to
my face all men seemed strangers, as if nothing ill had been once thought or
spoken against me. Hence was it trumpetted both in City and Country to the
ruin of my reputation, That I am or was a man deprived and cast out of the
ministry, and my benefice, for misdemeanors, and that I have two wives at once;
am a whoremaster, a contentious man, a bankrupt, and a beggarly fellow, an
enemy to the Government, and abundance of such like stuff, which was almost
every titile false. The first man who did me the kindness to say thus to my
face, was Mr. William Cuffe, my fellow prisoner in the common Goal at
Northampton. And verily I believe this innocent man spoke as he really thought
of me, being actuatedly my own most disobedient, and rebellious sons, to
believe such lies, of me. And tho he spoke with too much of keenness beyond
what became a man of his function; having no proof of what he spoke, but out
of bare hearsay, and common fame: Yet do I freely forgive his slanders. And I
do heartily thank him, that he gave me this first occasion to vindicate my
self. I have reason to believe, that the groundwork of all these slanders, was
laid by a more designing head, than that poor man's shouldiers were able to
bear. No doubt but a Diabolikal malice was at bottom of all, and at first
contrived, and started those false reports, which cherished by my two
rebellious sons, whereof one was a profess't Roman Catholic, who by the
principles of his religion was bound to seek all occasions he could imagine,
with safety to his own person to destroy me, as one accursed by a papal decree,
for anobstinate Haeretick; and for that reason I having disherited him of his
Birthright as my eldest son: He became so much the more embittered against me:
Insomuch as his mother thereupon deserted my bed, joining issue with this
rebellious and schismatical son of her delight, to divorce her self most
obstinately, maliciously, and absolutely from our marriage bed, after we had
lived together, much comfortably and happily for above thirty years as man and
wife in holy wedlock. God is my witness how unapt I always was to harbor an
ill opinion of this woman my sometimes, (as I verily thought) loving wife. For
tho there was just suspicion of her overmuch familiarity with other men, and of
her want of love to my self; because of a purloining knack she had of private
selling my goods, over and above her allowance, and by keeping up a private
purse; and by a coldness of affection, in case of any difference with her
intimates, or kindred, being all ways apt to take party against me. But
espcially for that, when by means of adverse fortunes in the world, I was
driven to lurk at some distance in remote places, for about three years space,
she never was the woman that gave me one visit, during that kind of restrained
exile; no, tho for near ten months of the said time I was a close prisoner in
the Fleet: And for as many months before that, had not so much as once seen
her face; and yet she knew well where I was, and wanted for no convenience to
come at me; and tho I often importuned her by letters, yet she would not regard
me, but seemed as if pleased with my absence, and as if at that time she had
begun to desert me utterly. And yet after all these things, when the storm of
my troubles was over, I came home to her and abode with her as formerly, as if
she had never given me any occasion of offense. And at length when she did
utterly deny any further duties to me in her marriage bed; yet still I used all
possible means to reclaim her, for one whole year and more, until I found her
past all hopes of reconciliation: And then I concluded with the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 7. 9. That seeing I could no longer contein, it was beter to marry again
than to burn, And now it is more than eleven years since she has thus deserted
me, and yet now at length she charge me with Adultery, or Fornication, or
Incontinency, or with all. And yet I thank God for it, who by his grace has
preserved me, that I never had carnal knowledge with any man's wife, before or
since I knew her, And never had a child by any woman but her self until above
one year after she utterly left me. And in attestation of these thing, and in
vindication of my proceedings in the whole matter, I have written this ensuing
treatise, in answer to her scandalous Libel. And in vindication of the Nullity
of our marriage by her desertion of me, of the lawfulness of an honest
Concubinage, in a case of necessity, where lawful marriage cannot conveniently,
or possibly be enjoyed. Unto which discourse, I refer my readers, as to the
malicious rebellions of both my sons, who were the chief incendiaries, unto all
the Evil that their said mother has acted against me. And yet I have great
reason to imagine, that the green heads of these infernally inspired villains,
had yet a deeper foundation then their own unripe pales to build upon. There
was among my pretended intimate friends, a certain Divine of the Church of
England as he pretended to be: And might a man of integrity be judged by his
hat and gown, and girdle he was so cap-a-pee. Or might a man be distinguished
by his graceful garb, a smooth tongue, affable discourse, and a courteous
presence; he could not be otherwise. But when we approach so near a man as to
find an Achitophel's head, Rabshakel's lips, and a Doegs hard heart, all met in
the presence of a stubborn Jew: And a church-man's habit upon the body of a
secretly resolved Papist; What can a man look for but a Beast out of a
bottomless pit, throwing about his firebrands, arrows and death, and saying am
not I in sport? What can a man expect otherwise, but infernally contrived
mischiefs, which without the gracious help of God above cannot reasonably be
prevented. I have received this sting at mine heart. And these humble papers
are intended as an humble Antidote against the poison thereof: And the good God
grant me his blessing therein according to my integrity. Let truth and
righteousness ever flourish; but let lies and slanders of the ungodly always be
detected, and come to naught. And the good Lord of his mercy justify the
innocent, and let me ever escape the malicious Plots and Contrivances, of the
venomous lips of Cham, Ham. And let not the innocent and godly sons of the pure
church, who have kept promise, tho to their hurt, be ensnared to believe the
gilded lies of a false brother.

Amen.
The true STATE OF THE CASE BETWEEN JOHN BUTLER, Clerk, AND Martha sometime his
Wife, in a Matter of Marriage, dissolved by Desertion. As it is now about to be
Controverted in the Honorable Court of Arches, by a Libel brought by the said
Martha against John, and the Allegation of the said John in Answer thereto, etc.
The Libel came to the Hands of this Respondent on the tenth Day of June 1697.
and says as follows. IN Dei nomine, Amen. Coram vobis venerabili and egregio
viro Georgio Oxenden, Legum Doctore almae curiae cantuar de Arcubus London:
Officiali principali legitime constituto, vestrove Surro. aut alio Judice in
hac part competenti quocunque, pars discretae foeminae Marthae Butler uxoris
Johannis Butler de Hammersmith in Com: Mid: cler contra and adversus dictum
Johannem Butler ejus maritum paroch. de Hammersmith predict. ac Con. and
adversus quemcunque alium five quoscunque alios per viam quaerelae ac vobis in
hac part querelando dicit allegat. and in hiis Scriptis injure proponit
articulatim, pro ut sequitur, viz.

Imprimis, That the said John Butler Clerk, and Martha Butler formerly Perkins,
Daughter of one Isaac Perkins, being free from all Matrimonial Contracts, were
on or about the seventh Day of May, which was in the Year of our Lord God 1651,
joined together in holy Matrimony, by a Minister in holy Orders, in the Parish
Church of Weedon in the County of Northampton, according to the rites and
ceremonies of the Church of England; and after such their Marriage, they did
live or cohabit together as lawful Man and Wife, and for, and as lawful Man and
Wife, they the said John Butler and Martha, were and still are commonly
accounted, reputed, and taken to be; and the said Marriage has been
consummated by carnal copulation, and he the said John Butler has had several
children born on the body of the said Mar ha his Wife, four of which (to wit
Simon, Alban, Annsusan, and Barbara) are now living, and were and are commonly
accounted, reputed the lawful children of them the said John and Martha Butler
his Wife; and the Marriage of the said John and Martha Butler does appear to be
entered in the Register-Book kept for marriages in the Parish Church of Weedon
in the County of Northampton aforesaid. Hoc que fuit and est verum publicum
notorium manifestum pariter ac famosum, ponit tamen de quolibet alio temporis
spatio majori medio vel minori, and ponit conj. and divisim and de quolibet.

Such is her first Article of her Libel. Unto which is answered by this
Respondent, That it is not altogether True, being stuffed with several
presumptions which cannot be proved, nor aptly be discovered.

And first, As to the pretended Marriage this Respondent says, That it was
really his desire, that such a marriage might have been effected as in the
Libel is pretended; but in the year above mentioned it was a time of Rebellion,
and of great disorders both in Church and State, and the lawful way of solemn
matrimony, according to the rites and ceremonies of the Church of England was
gainsaid, and ^^erly forbidden in those days, and forty shillings fine imposed
on every Minister as should marry by the Common Prayer Book and hence lawful
Ministers in benefice durst not perform lawful marriage, under the pain of the
said forty shillings (...). Wherefore this Respondent being ill willing to
submit unto a scismatical and new invented Form of Marrimony, was constrained
to make use of a stranger that he never saw before nor since, who was a man out
of benefice, and promised to marry us in due form in the Church, as in the
Libel mentioned. And in presence of witnesses did begin to read the form of
Marriage; but in the management, whether out of mistake or ignorance, or
willfulness, this Respondent cannot say; but so it was, That he neglected and
utterly omitted to use that most essential part of the marriage, whereby this
Respondent should have been betrothed to the said Martha the Complainant. And
although this Respondent did whisper and correct him by making known his mistake;
yet he amended it not, seeming as one confounded and in an amazement, insomuch
that the company burst out into a loud laughter. So as he did not take this
Respondent by the right Hand, nor cause him to take the said Martha by her
right Hand, and to say after him saying, [I John take thee Martha to my wedded
Wife, to have, and to hold, from this day forward, for better for worse, for
richer for poorer, in sickness and in health, to love and to cherish, till
death us do part, according to God's holy Ordinance, and thereto I plight thee
my troth.] Which passage thus utterly omitted, and at that time not to be
amended. Something was said of making us Man and Wife without it. And
considering the rudeness of those times, and the difficulty of Marriage to be
rightly obtained as the case stood: This Respondnt observing that the place was
thin of witnesses; and those who were present not so sufficicatly read as to
apprehend the deficiency, past over the matter with silence, and did cohabit
with the said Martha as his lawful wife; whence followed a common repute, That
the said Martha was his wife lawfully married to him, and he had carnal
copulation with her as with a wife, and did heartily love her, and owned her as
his wife for many years, notwithstanding the defects in the solemnity of his
marriage. And did humbly conceive as those times were managed That he was as
well married by taking a woman into his bed without other ceremony, as if he
had been married by the Directory then in use, or by the Justices; Forms of
marriage. utterly illegal, though countenanced by the Rebellion. And since by the
Act of Indemnity in the Reign of King Charles the II, this Respondent humbly
conceives his defficient marriage is become as legal and good in law, as if it
had been most truly solemnised. And he does heartily consent hereby that she
was his lawful wife, and that this Respondent had never denied her had not she
cast off him.

2ly As to the Marriage entered in the Register-book kept for Marriages at
Weedon aforesaid, as is alleged. This Respondent does farther say, That he has
seen such a pretended marriage entered in the said book, but withal, he
utterly denies that it was lawfully and orderly Registered, either by the
Minister that pretended to celebrate the Marriage, or by the Minister of that
Church, or by the Clerk of the Parish: but was put in by some stealth, or hired
to be done many years after: For that about five or six years after the
pretended time of marriage, at what time the strange Minister that essayed to
marry us was dead, this Respondent did purposely call for the said
Register-Book, and did plainly see and find that no such Entrance was made, but
afterward upon a new search he plainly found that there was such a marriage
set down; but then it was so as that it was plainly interlined, and written
with a strange hand, diverse from all the rest that were recorded therein.

3ly. As to the Children which were had of the body of the said Martha the
Complainant; this Respondent does farther say, That out of his abundant love
to the said Martha his pretended wife, he never doubted to own at all times the
children by her brought forth, as his own natural and well begotten children;
and doubts not but that all or most of them which are dead, were lawfully and
well born, and likewise that the two surviving daughters were so. And although
there have bin suspicious carriages sufficient to provoke Jealousies, and
giving just cause to recriminate the Libellatrice, and something thereof is
mentioned in this Respondent's Alligation put into Court: Yet in this public
Discourse this Respondent is willingly silent. Only as to the two Sons in the
Libel mentioned, called Simon and Alban Butler; such has been their undutiful,
disobedient, most abominably malicious. and Diabolically rebellious carriage
toward a pretended Father, that no rational man can imagine, that truly
natural and lawfully born children, can possibly degenerate so far as to be
guilty of such monstrous language, and Infernal actions as these pretended sons
have been guilty off against this Respondent. All neighbors can testify that
this Respondent has done his utmost duty by them, as a tender Father, to spare
for no cost to his utmost ability, in contributing to their health and
learning, and all holy nurture in the Lord. The youngest has enjoyed a fair
portion under him, and might have been settled as heir of all that this
Respondent is like to leave behind him, had he not burst out into inhuman
rebellions and base ingratitude. The eldest had several years in his hands the
management of this Respondent's whole estate, and did get or might have gotten
a sufficient portion under him, until first running into intolerable
debaucheries, and at last becoming a professed Roman Catholic he caused himself
to be discarded. The younger owes this Respondent at this Day 150 l. upon
Account, and yet pretends by a kind of a cheat that he owes nothing. Both of
them have used violence against this their pretended aged Father, have thrown
him down by violence in his own house and rifled him; have cheated him, robbed
him, slandered, reproached, reviled and upbraided him at a strange rare, in
presence of the Complainant Martha their Mother, who in many things was their
Abettor: They have threatened him with sword in hand, swaggering over him in
strange presumptuous postures: They have used all possible means to impoverish
him, to ruin him, and to starve him, by abetting enemies to overthrow him, and
have occasioned his imprisonment. And at this day by compliance with an horrid
Extortioner that has a mortgage upon his inheritance, these sons together with
the Complainant their Mother, are very unjustly in possession of the
inheritance of this Respondent who is constrained to sue in Equity to gain his
bread out of their rapacious teeth, while they use all possible means in these
hard times, playing upon his wants to rob him of all he has, in order by Law to
disable him from using a just defense. These humble complaints this poor
Respondent has uttered in the bitterness of his soul; upon the Words of a
Priest, and of such a Priest as has kept his Oaths and Promises to his hurt;
and God knows, who knows the secrets of all hearts, that he has uttered no
lie. And all who know him do know, and he presumes will restify to the
integrity of his reputation. It is written Deuteronomy. 27. 16. Cursed be he that
sets light by his Father or Mother: It is God Almighty has said it, and all
the world are bound to say, Amen to it. Is this Respondent Father to these
Brats? If so, How much good would their repentance avail him beyond their ruin?
But he leaves them as to that matter to God the avenger, who knows all things.
The same great God has determined it, Chap. 21. 21. That such wretches are to
be Stoned to death with stones, that all Israel may hear and fear, and that no
more such Presumption may be done again. And the Father a lone in this Case is
to be the Witness. But alas! as times go, rude villains find more friends then
innocent parents: God save all according to his just vengence, Amen. But what
shall be said? Are these children ill born Bastards? God knows! And if so, the
fault is elsewhere, rather than with this Respondent. However they are plainly
the Devils Brats, and none of God's Children according to the sense of the
Apostle. ^ John 3. 10, 11, 12. And thus they are Bastards of ungodliness, and
the discreet Woman their Mother, as the Libel styles her, by taking share in
their rebellions, cannot be thought so very faithful as is pretended. And now
come we to the ^d. Article, which says,

Item, That about 12, 11 or at least 10 Years since, one Mary Tomkins did live
in the House with them the said John and Martha Butler as their Servant, and
the said John Butler being unmindful of his conjugal vow, and seduced and
instigated by the Devil, did about ten Years since commit the foul crime of
Adultery, Fornication, or Incontinency with the said Mary Tomkins, his said
Maid Servant, and it being taken notice of that she was with child by the said
John Butler her Master, he the said John Butler and the said Mary Tomkins went
into Holland or some other parts beyond the Seas, where they lived
incontinently together for the space of two years or thereabouts, and the said
Mary Tomkins had there a Bastard child born, and begot by the said John Butler,
called by the Name of Mary, and for and as the base child begotten by the said
John Butler, on the body of the said Mary Tomkins, the said child Mary was and
is commonly accounted and reputed, and thereof there was a public Voice, Fame
and Report. Ponit tamen de quolibet alio tempore spatio, etc. and ponit ut
supra.

Such is her second Article; whereof her first charge therein is, That one Mary
Tomkins was a servant in the House of this Respondent; which be it true, yet
what matters it to her purpose? Except it be to call this Respondent to
remembrance, how that this Complainant before her pretended Marriage with this
Respondent, was her self no better but a mere Maidservant in the house of his
Grandmother in Law, who was then called Martha or Mat, and being sent out by
her Mistress to wash Daglocks, or the befould locks of the sheeps ^ils, at a
brook running by an open highway side, at which time this Respondent out of
tender love grieved at her disparagement, gave a groat to a poor woman to wash
in her stead, that she might be excused and she was so: She ought not therefore
to have envied, that he who had so much love for her self a Maidservant, had
some lawful kindness also for another of the same degree.

2ly. To her second Charge, That this Respondent as one unmindful of his
conjugal vow, and seduced and instigated by the Devil, did about ten years
since commit the foul crime of Adultery with the said Mary Tompkins his
Maidservant. This Respondent farther says, That this is a pernicious and
slanderous lie, invented by the Complainant Martha her self at the insinuation
and instigation of the Devil, and her foul mouthed sons. For as for matter of
Adultery, it is a thing utterly inconsistent with her own charge. For the said
Mary Tomkins being no man's wife, but a maidservant, as her own self avers,
and the said Respondent being no woman's husband as she also her self must
needs know, unless of the said Mary Tomkins; with what face of impudence could
she call it Adultery, had such a thing been done as she alleges? For the
Complainant her self has so often confessed it that it is out of her power to
deny it, how that above one year before, that ten years since, wberein she
charges this Adultery to be done, she had clearly Divorced her self from this
Respondent's bed by a malicious and obstinate Desertion, having utterly
dissolved all bonds of wedlock between this Respondent and her self by her own
Authority, by breaking her conjugal vows in wilfully denying the Duties of
Marriage required in holy Writ. And yet farther to satisfy all the world how
unjustly this Respondent is charged with this foul crime, he does hereby
solemnly protest and declare, and does hereby offer himself-before this
Honorable or any other Court, to take his Compurgatory Oath, That he never had
to do in a carnal manner with any Man's Wife breathing. And that he never did
deny Marriage Duty to the said Complainant his pretended wife, while she was
his wife, and that he had no Hand of contrivance in putting her away from him,
but that the separation which was made was perfectly and purely her own act, in
a free pernicious and obstinate refusal of her Marriage Duty.

3ly. As to the Fornication and Incontinency, wherewith this Respondent is
charged; he farther says, 1st as to Fornication, which is an heinous sin,
whereby a man is guilty of carnal knowledge or uncleaness with any Woman,
forbidden by God's Law, or by excess of carnal usage with his wife or any other
lawful woman: He says as to the last, he cannot deny but that he has been
guilty, and the first and greatest act of Fornication that his Conscience can
charge against him was with this Complainant Martha while she was his wife. And
that as for any other matter of Fornication this Respondent does heartily
protest in the presence of God, and is ready to take a Compurgatory Oath upon
the same, at what time soever it shall be lawfully required, that during all
the time before and after the day of his pretended Marriage with this
Complainant about the Year 1651, unto one whole year and more after the time of
Dissolution of the said Marriage, by means of the willful, obstinate and
malicious Desertion of this Complainant, he never had child by any other woman
besides the Complainant her self, and never in all that space went unto any
common whore. And tho this Complainant and her two ungracious sons, have often
upbraided, slandered, and reviled this Respondent, with most abusive raileries,
and have filled the country with many slanders and suspicious reports of matters
said or done above twenty or thirty years since, concerning what kindness this
Respondent might have shown to particular persons more than ordinary; this
Respondent does solemnly protest and declare that he never had carnal Knowledge
of any such woman, for whose sake he was aspersed, nor did he ever attempt or
desire such a thing of any one of them so spoken off. And as for the said Mary
Tomkins, this Respondent farther says, That until utterly relinquished by his
wife, and above one whole year after, she never had any child by him, nor was
she with child by him: And after that time he was guilty of no other nor
greater Fornication with her, than what our holy Father Abraham the Father of
the faithful was guilty of, when purely for issue sake, and not of any lustful
concupiscence, he went in to Hagar his Wives Maid, or unto Keturah his
concubine in the life time of Sarah his Wife. Now Abraham was not charged with
any thing of Fornication in that case, but rather was acquitted by God Almighty
as purely and truly Innocent, altho'he had done the very self same thing which
this naughty woman charge against this Respondent for Adultery or
Fornication; but the case of this Respondent is much easier than that of
Abraham, forasmuch as at the time aforesaid Abraham had a wife then in his bed
with him; but this Respondent had no wife, unless it may be esteemed that the
said Mary Tomkins was his lawful and his only wife, according to the sense of
holy writ.

Lastly, as for Incontinency, which in its self is no sin, unless it be
expressed in unlawful uses. This Respondent does confess and allege, that he is
one of those men, of whom our Savior has declared, saying, all Men cannot
receive this Saying, Mat. 19, 10. And of whom St. Paul has declared, Saying,
They who cannot contein, let them marry, for it is better to marry than to
burn. 1. Cor. 7, 9. Now this Respondent being not naturally endowed with the
gift of Continency from heaven, had license by God's Law to marry. And being
married his wife denied him her conjugal duty; that is, she did obstinately
deny him the use of her marriage bed. In this case what should this Repondent
do? To go in unto a Whore, he might not do. And to marry another wife, without
a lawful license from lawful Authority, it was not convenient because of a
statute law in force, that under a severe penalty, no man might have two wives.
And tho in the truth of this case, it was not having of two wives, for that the
marriage with the first was of course dissolved: Yet being under Judicature of
others, who might censure according to their own sense; there was danger of
being pinched by the Judge, tho not by the law, and therefore it was an
hazardous case. And in those days wherein this Desertion was made, Popery had
possessed the supreme Seat, and there were high Commissioners superseeding all
other courts in power, who acting in favor of persons Popishly inclined: No
sentence could reasonably be expected according to the Justice of holy writ,
wherein the Popish Doctrins clashed with the sense of the Reformed Church; they
holding marriage indissoluble, as one of their seven Sacraments, without a
Dispensation from the Pope: And these allowing a clear Dissolution thereof, in
case of a Desertion, according to the Doctrine of St. Paul, in 1 Cor. 7, 15. In
this Case therefore a Man's own Consoience was a good Judge in the case, at
least until contrary matters could be proved before a competent Judge. And the
testimony of holy writ was a sufficient law for Conscience to be guided by, and
this without the assistance of being backed by Authority, in a case where an
Authoritative sentence could not be had: As it was in St. Paul's time, wherein
the Magistracy being altogether Paganish, no such sentence was required as
needful. And as in the Marquess of Vicum's Case, wherein the supreme Authority
being Popish he married again with out such a sentence. It Is true indeed he had
a sentence by Authority from the Syndick of Geneva: But that was as much as
just nothing, for that first that Syndick had no Authority to summon his wife
to appear at their court, she being not under their Jurisdiction: And secondly
being aLay-Power, set up of their own accord, without power from God, or his
word, had not so much power as the one conscience of the Marquess himself. And
now as the case stands, this Repondent humbly presumes, that the honorable
Court of Arches, cannot and will not judicially reprove him, who has acted
nothing. but what is agreeable to holy writ, and a good conscience; and humbly
prays that this Pernicious Complainant may be called in to swear this
Alligation of this Complainant, and forasmuch as these secret dealings of the
marriage bed being difficult and doubtful to be made plain by eye witnesses,
that the said Complainant may be required to answer upon her oath; unto the
charge of this Repondent whether or no she has not thus (...), maliciously and
obstinatly denied unto him this Respondent her conjugal duties, and that tho
she was often (...) to the contrary, and all possible means were used, and that
for above a twelve-moneth, to wit, from the 12th of July 1686, unto the month
of September 1687, but she would not yield unto him. And this in trust that
upon her just confession and due proof hereof made, this Respondent may by
lawful Sentence of the said honorable Court, be declared quit and free, and
fully dissolved from all bands of marriage with this Complainant the said
malicious Desertrice; in order that he may lawfully confirm that lawful
marriage, which in part he has entered into with another woman. For this
Respondent humbly conceives that his first marriage with the Complainant being
by her default absolutely dissolved, and it being utterly unlawful for him to
go in unto a whore, that necessity required him who could not contein, and
conveniently could not marry with safety, to take another woman as he did,
after the manner of the faithful, and Holy Abraham, for issue's sake, and to
marry her, as well as reasonably could be done. And whereas this Respondent has
thus compurg'd himself, by his protestation of Innocence, and his readiness to
make oath of the same, and there appearing none the least clear proof to the
contrary; he humbly expects and hopes, that notwithstanding this impudent
slander of this wicked woman the Complainant his pretended wife, against him,
this honorable Court, and together therewith, the whole World will pronounce
and think him clearly Innocent; and that not only from the foul crime of
Adultery, but also from the heinous Sin of Fornication; and from all unlawful
Incontinency. But before this Respondent concludes his full and perfect answer
to this second Article of the Libel: He humbly thinks himself concerned, as he
is a Divine in holy Priestly orders, to argue for the better satisfaction of
this Honorable Court, and of all persons, Clergy and Laity, unto whose ear
this Case may perhaps arrive; what is to be done, in this case of desertion,
and what ought lawfully to be done in all respects. And that according to the
Judgment of the ablest and best Divines, in all Christendom, and according to
the Civil, and Canon Laws in these times of Reformation.

And first as to the true State of the Case of Desertion, whether made by the
Man or the Wife. St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 7. 15. If the Unbelieving depart, let
him depart; a Brother or a Sister is not under bondage in such a case: But God
has called us to Peace.

Next, Mr. John Diodali of Geneva, in his Annotations upon the place, writes
thus; 1 Depart, i. e. be Divorced for hatred to the Religion, or Marries
another: Or that all possible and reasonable remedies having been used, and a
conve^^^ time allotted for that purpose, the Unbelieving party cannot be
induced to a due conjunction. A brother, namely the believing party, is loosed
from the Bond, being thus forsaken by the unbelieving Party.

Johannes Wollebius, Dr. Theologiae in Acad. Basil. in compendio Theologiae,
Cap. XI. Fol. 245. Simply, Adultery, and malicious Desertion, do dissolve
Marriage. Either of them do make a Divorce.
[Scribit ut sequitur,] viz. Simpliciter conjugio repugnant Adulterium and
malitiosa Desertio Utrumque istorum parit divortium. [De desertione dicit.] 1
Cor. 7. 15. At si infidelis sese separet separatus esto, non est servituti
subjectus Frater aut soror in hujusmodi casibus.

Amandus Polanus a Polansdorf Syntagmate Theologiae Christiana, Lib. X. Cap 55.
Divorce is a lawful dissolution of the bonds of Marriage.
De Divortio conjugum. Scribit. ut sequitur, viz.

Divortium est legitima conjugii solutio. The causes of it are two only;
Adultery and Desertion. That is a malicious departure of one party from the
other, either of hatred to Religion, or out of Levity or impatience of the
restraints of marriage, or of any other unlawful Cause; refusing to perform
marriage duties.


Cause divortii duae sunt tantum: una Adulterium, altera Desertio, id est
malitiosa alterius conjugis disccssio, nulla justa causa, sed vel odio verae
religionis propter quam cum conjuge habitare recusat vel levitate, vel injusta
patientia fraeni conjugalis, vel aliis non justis, and sufficientibus causis, 1
Cor. 7. 15.

Inter has causas ea est differentia, quod Adulterium sit propria atque unica
causa dimittendi conjugem adulterantem, atque in eo casu proprie conjunx
innocens divortium facit, ac proinde aliquid agit, conjuge dimittendo. In
Adultery the innocent Husband dismisses his Adulterate wife. But in Desertion
the innocent Husband is passive, being deserted of his wife who leaves his bed.
In Desertione autem malitiosa and pertinaci conjunx innocens non agit, sed
patitur, aliud enim est dimittere conjugem Adulterantem, aliud a conjuge ultro
Discedente dimitti and deseri namqui a conjuge ex destinata malitia discedente
deseritur, is patitur and non agit, non dimittit conjugem, sed animo retinet,
and retinere cupit. Qua propter is maritus non potest dici secisse divortium
contra christi verbum, quod, Mat. 5. 32. and Cap. 19. 9. extat, qui injuriam
hanc ab infideli patitur; and qui manet in vocatione sua quantum in ipso est,
licet part altera discedente. In procedendo, si non procedit reconciliatio,
pars innocens non potest cogi ut recipiat ream.

Sed si persona accusans honest vixit, and petit ferri sententiam.
Pronuncietur hoc modo: In the process, if no reconciliation be made before, the
innocent ought not to be compelled to receive the guilty. But having lived
honestly, the Judge ought to pronounce him quit of the first marriage, with
free liberty to marry again.
Cum persona q^uae deliquit suo scelere dissolverit conjugium, judex
authoritate Evangelii personam innocentem pronunciat esse liberam, and express
ei concedit, ut pro sua conscientia pie contrahat aliud conjugium.

Wolfgangus Musculus Dusanus in Commen. in Mat. Evangel. Cap. v.

Necesse est ut certas causas statuamus ob We must show the certain cause of
Divorce by means whereof with a safe and quiet conscience a man may marry again;
of this kind are two, Divorce of Adultry and Desertion.
quas liceat usurpare Divortium etiam coram Deo, salva conscientia and pacata.

Hujus generis geminam invenio culpam per quam solvatur matrimonii vinculum.
Una est quam dominus hic ponit, dicens nisi causa stupri, etc. Altera est, quam
Apostolus assignat, 1 Cor. 7. 15. Cum dicit quod si incredulus discedit,
descedat. Non est servituti subjectus frater aut soror in Christ does not say
he who is deserted of his wife and marries again committs Adultry. But he who
dismisses his wife does so; for she unfaithfully Divorceth her self, and
therefore deserves no more Faith from her innocent Husband.
hujusmodi casu. Si infidelis cohabitare nolit aut reliqua conjugii jura
Religionis causa recusarit. His inquit Apostolus servituti non est Subjectus.
Quod ergo Christus non dicit, quisquis deseritur ab uxore sua quavis de causa
and aliam ducit maechatur: sed quisquis repudiaverit uxorem suam quavis de
causa, nihil ad eum pertinet; a quo uxor non dimittitur, nec ejicitur, sed illa
sese ultro persida separat, and discedit, mariti fidem obnoxium sibi jam
amplius non habet,

Ambrosius apud Musculum in eod. loco. Locum hunc exponens Ambrosus dicit non
debctur reverentia conjugii ei, qui horret authorem conjugii. Non est enim
ratum Matrimonium St. Ambrose is positive, that who ever relinquisheth her
Husband, has utterly dissolved the bonds of Matrimony, and that the
relinquished Sins not in marrying another.
quod sine dei devotione est. Ac per hoc non est peccatum ei, qui dimittibur
propter deum, si alii se junxerit. Contumelia enim Creatoris solvit jus
matrimonii circa eum qui relinquitur, ne accusetur alii copulatus.

Guiielmus Bucanus S. S. Theologiae in Acad. Lausannensi Doctissimus Professor
in Institutis Theologiae, seu Loc. Com. Christianae religionis.

Locus XIII.. v. Quot modis Consumptum A perfect Marriage may be two ways
dissolved. I when by Law it is in its self null or declared so to be.
Conjugium dirimitur? Duobus modis. I Cum id quod per se, and jure nullum est,
pro nullo habetur, vel ipso jure nullum esse dectaratur.

2. Cum conjugium quod ratum fuit and confirmatum, dirimitur legitimis de
causis. II. When for lawful causes it is made null.


. XII. Anigitur possunt Legitimis conjugia dirimi?

Posse, justis de causis, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. Et ex ipsius Christi verbis, Mat. 19. 8,
9. Our Savior's sense in Mat. 19. 8, 9. with St. Paul in 1 Cor. 7. 15, may be
thus reconciled.


. XIX. [Qua ratione cum Christo est Reconciliandus Paulus qui 1 Cor. 7. 15.
propter Desertionem divortium fieri possit, statuis inquiens, etc.]

Christus loquitur de faciente divortium, seu de eo qui dimitit injuste, de quo
tantum interrogatus Christ treats of one unjustly dismissing his wife,
according to the question asked. St. Paul teaches of one injustly dismissed of
his wife, in answer to the Question ask't him in case of an Infidel wife
deserting: Whether a believing husband be so strictly tied up, that he cannot
marry another Wife? To which he answer's, That after all lawful means used to
reclaim her, he may marry another wife.
fuit. Paulus vero de patiente, seu de eo qui injuste dimittitur; qui
interrogatus, an si infidelis fidelem deseret, fidelis teneretur sic astrictus
infideli, ut ad secundas nuptias transire non posset? Respondet si infidelis
discedat, personam desertam a servitute, idest a vinculo conjugii liber am
esse, post quam scilicet omnia expertus fuerit, ut infidelem discedentem
revocet ad officium. It a, quam Christus ostendit causam divortii faciendi;
Paulus vero causam divortii patiendi, and liberationem obtinendi propter
desertionem.

. XX. [Qualem intelligit Paulus Desertionem?]

Hinc est quod magni nominis Theologi infidelitatem And the same learned Author
says, that by an Infidel, St. Paul means every one who is a malicious and cause
less desertrice; according to St. Paul's sense in 1 Timothy 5. 8.
illam de qua loquitur Paulus, revocent ad genus videlicet ad quamlibet
malitiosam injustam and pertinacem discessionem, and desertionem; juxta illud,
1 Timothy 5. 8. [Qui suorum, maxim autem domesticorum our am non habet, fidem
abnegavit, and infideli deterior est.] Et videtur etiam idem Apostolus cum
dicit [non est servituti subjectus frater aut soror in ejus modi] paria peccata
intelligere.

. XXIX. [Quid si magistratus officium negligat?]

Valeat perceptum Apostolicum ad Titum. 3. 10. And he farther says, that if
the Magistrate neglect his Office; the innocent party is free to marry another
Woman without his Sentence, and to reject his Infidel Wife, as freely as he may
reject an Haeretick after once and twice admonition. Tit. 3. 10.
[Haereticum hominem, ergo and Atheum, Apostatum, and Blasphemum post unam and
alteram correctionem devita.] Et dictum Christi Luke 14. 26. [si quis venit ad
me, and non odit patrem suum and matrem, and uxorem, etc. non est me dignus.]
Et Mat. 18. 9. [Si oculus tuus scandalizat te erus eum.] Item, [Omnis qui
reliquerit agrum, domum vel uxorem, etc. Centuplum accipiet, Mat. 19. 29.]

Stephanus Szegedinus Panonius in Theol. Sincerae locis Com. Tab. XI. De
divortio scribit and de absentia conjugis.

[Quid de voluntaria and affectata absentia statuendum?]

Respondet Talis absentia pro desertione habenda This Author says, That an
affected voluntary absence of either party is to be taken for a malicious
Desertion.
est: Et est malitiosa.

Tria trium clarorum virorum memorabilia dicta.

Petri Mellii. In casu Criminis pro quo lex Dei hominem interfeci jubet,
divortium permitti potest: Si aliter reconciliatio inter conjugales stabiliri
neutiquam possit.

Stephanus Szegedini. Ibi inter volentes Matrimonium solvi potest, ubi fines
omnes conjugii impediti, ac sublati sunt preter adjutorium, quod etiam mendicis
ipsis debetur.

Alberti Bakonii melius est disitos Angelice, quam conjuncto Diabolice vivere:
etiam eos quibus nulla ratio And that the unbeliever deserting, does absolutely
dissolve the bonds of Marriage.
ad perpetuum suppetit divortium, and earatione pax magis colatur.

Tab, III. Si Infidelis fidelem conjugem Relig. causa repudiat: fratrem vel
Sororem, liberat a conjugii vinculo pertale repudium.

Such (as by these Quotations does appear) are the Doctrines of all the most
learned Divines of the Reformed Religion beyond seas, whether Lutherans or
Calvinists. And our English Divines do agree with them therein. Thus the
learned Dr. Hammond in his Annotations upon, 1 Cor. 7. 15. And so the Assembly
of Divines upon the same; only as to marrying again after Desertion they do not
so largely express their sense, as these others have done. Yet in his practical
Carechism, the Doctor allows clearly Marrying again in case of malicious
Desertion. Book 2. 7. And so Nicholas Bifield upon 1 Pet' 3. 7. Also the
learned Perkins, and diverse others. Now as for the learning of the Civil Law,
this Respondent cannot pretend to be so generally experienced: Yet in
confidence, that Reformed Civilians do agree with our Divines, He shall only
introduce one Quotation out of a very learned Doctor of the Laws, and of the
Church and Kingdom of Denmark, Melchior Kling in his Learned readings upon the
four Books of Institutions of Law, by the Emperuor Justinian, imprinted at
Leyden in the year 1582. and Dedicated unto Christian K. of Denmark, which
speaks as follows;

Lib. I. Tit. X. de nuptiis Fol. 32, Number. 1. Jus novi testamenti habetur in eo
quot ad This Learned Author shows, That the Law of the new Testament takes
place before all Canon and Civil laws, and that by Authority of the new
Testament without doubt. After Desertion the deserted is so free from the
marriage with the Desertrice, that he may take another wife.
divortia attinet. Enumer antur enim duae causae divortii, Prima est Adul. de
quo Mat. 19. secun. est si alter ex contrahentibus infidelis fuarit, and
noluerit habitare cum fideli, sed discesserit permissum est fideli iterum
nubere, 1 Cor. 7.

Fol. 33. Numb. 5. Certum est quod jus novi Testamenti Canonibus non cedit:
igitur jus novi Testamenti, incasibus in eo decisis simpliciter sine aliqua
mutatione sive limitatione servandum sit. Et in hoc casu sine dubio pugnae jus
canonicum cum jure novi Testamenti in multis. Item Utrum sola desertio conjugis
sine Adulterio sit causa divortii, and utum post divortium innocenti liceat,
altera perte vivente contrahere matrimonium? sed de his questionibus infra
decemus.

Fol. 34. Numb. 5. De divortio. Aut quaeras utrum Matrimonium propter Haeresim
vel talem errorem, in totum possit dissolvi ita quod fidelis, altera vivente,
habeat transitum ad secundas nuptias and hoc casu sine dubio, fidelis potest
nubere.

Now according to the sense of all these learned Divines, both at home and
abroad; and the sense of the civil Laws, which as it shall seem by this one
learned Doctor does agree with them in the same sense: It does appear that in
case of a Desertion made by the wife, the marriage with that wife is clearly
dissolved, she having divorced her self from her Husbands Bed; or rather as our
English Divines term it, she has clearly made Null and Void, by that act of
Desertion that marriage which was between her self and her Husband: And that
so, as by the holy word of God, the marriage is declared Null and Void in its
self without any farther sentence of the Magistrate. For thus says the Text,
If she will depart, let her go; there needs no sentence of the Magistrate in
the case, especially where on, Magistrate can be had in the case, or in a case
where the Magistrate either will not Act, or at least will not make sentence,
as the holy word requires. For so says the most Learned Bucanus; in such a
Case after convenient admonition, and means used to reclaim such a Desertrice,
and she will not be reclaimed: A good Husband may as freely and safely reject
her Society, so as never more to have to do with her, as he may reject an
Haeretick, so as never more to have to do with him, because he an is Haeretick;
and this he may do without any sentence or leave had of the Magistrate. Tit. 3.
10. Nevertheless for the convenience, and the well-being sake of the Case, the
sentence of the Magistrate is thought meet to be procured, were it for nothing
else, but to abide as a sure test that all matters in the case were rightly and
truly acted. For otherwise the Desertrice, may return again, be it only to
despite her wronged Husband, and denying the Desertion, may claim her old
right anew. And besides there may be controversies about allowance of
Maintenance, all which by ajust sentence may at once be stopped. Now this
Respondent allegeth, that in his case with his deserting wife, there was no
Authority but what at the highest was Popish, that he could any way appeal
unto; and the ground of the Desertion being chiefly and only for dis inheriting
his eldest son, who had left his Father's relig^on to become a Roman Catholic;
he could expect no remedy but what would be superseded by the
High-Commissioners, from whom he could expect no right done him against the
concern and interest of Popery. It Is true indeed, that it was alleged, as if
this Respondent should say, that he had another woman with child by him, at
that time, for-which cause his wife the Complainant pretended to have
relinquished him: And she alleges she can prove such words uttered by him. Unto
which he answer's, that true it is he was in a great passion, because of his
son turn^'d Papist, and his wife violently siding with him, to excuse and
justify him against this Respondent: And what words in the heat of passion were
utterd by him, he does not perfectly remember; it is a matter on her part to be
proved. But if some such like words dropped from him, he might be mistaken by the
hearers, and misunderstood, or was it true that he said so, be sure it was not
true that he said; and he is ready to make oath thereof when ever called there
to, that there was no such thing done, at that time, nor ever before, nor of
above a twelve month after, and there is no track, or appearance, or testimony
can be made of any such thing done as is pretended. But for a twelve-moneth
after her desertion begun, he did continually solicit her to be reclaimed, and
she would not, tho no sign nor token appeared, or was ever heard on, in all
that time, of any Woman with Child by him. But this Respondent is able to make
proof, by several suspicious tokens of her unsaithsulness, and by her taking
part with her kindred and acquaintance against him, and by secret parloynings
made of his goods, besides a constant allowance always made her; and by her
affected and voluntary absence from him for a whole year and half together, and
by continual and causeless quarrels against him, that it was a causeless
contrived malicious and obstinate Desertion made against him, propagated and
encouraged by her rebellious children. And now besides all these things it is
now above eleven years since her Desertion first begun, and yet in all this
time she has made no complaint. Moreover this Respondent has several times
offered her to refer all matters in Difference with her, and offering to be
concluded by reverend and holy Fathers in God the Bishops; and particularly by
the late Bishop of Bath and Wells, unto whom she was contented to refer her
self, and yet afterward would not stand to it, nor to any other Bishop, until
at this time, knowing this Respondent to be utterly destitute of maintenance,
she sued out Process in this Honorable Court, verily thinking to destroy this
Respondent, and to tread on him in his distress. And this notwithstanding he
has been hitherto so kind to her, as to allow her maintenance all these years
of his free good will, without any condition, until of late by means of false
friends and mishaps of fortune, he wanted daily bread for his own relief, and
could not allow her for want of wherewithal.

And now having answered her scandalous Charge, this Respondent is ready to
proceed to the matter of Fact. And farther says, that the said Mary Tomkins
together with this Respondent, and other Company, did go over into Holland,
upon a very lawful and good Account, having a license of Absence from his
Dioe^^san, but not as an Adulterer, or Fornicator, or Incontinent, or for fear
of any Discovery as this Complainant maliciously insinuates. For this
Respondent had a Cure at Delft in Holland, and lived there publicly, being
employed to Preach unto the English and Scots in a public Church in Delft for
most of the time he tarryed there, and held correspondence with Alban this
Complainants Son all the time, who from time to time sent Letters, and gave an
account of his rents, and had a continual course of Letters from this
Respondent. And there was no such thing as living incontinently with any woman,
much lefs with the said Mary Tomkins. And the said Mary Tomkins had no Bastard
Child born there, nither can any such thing be proved, nor was there any fame
of any such thing, or any repute of a Bastard Child born there. But true it is
that the said Mary Tomkins living there in Delft in good Repucation was
delivered of a Daughter who was Baptized, and Named Mary, born on the 26th Day
of June 1688. about nine years since. And of this child, this Respondent does
confess, he is (as he verily believes) the true Father. And he humbly conceives
it is a lawful anda well born (...) For that being deserted of this
Complainant, his pretended Wife, above two full years before this child was
born, It was lawful for him to join himself, unto another woman, as by all the
Testimonies aforesaid it does appear. And what ever child he had at this time,
was no wrong to her who had utterly forsaken his bed. And this child being but
newly Conceived at his coming away out of England, there could be no such thing
as she maliciously in her Libel suggests,; that it was taken notice of, that
the said Mary Tomkins was with child. Now true it is, that this Respondent was
not married to the said Mary Tomkins, according to the customs of the Church of
England, for reasons as aforesaid: And whereas many will be apt slanderously to
charge this Respondent as one keeping a Concubine, or living in Concubinage
with an unlawful woman: This Respondent humbly answers, that in a sense he is
lawfully married to the said Mary Tomkins, and that his Children by her are
lawfully born children, and no bastards.

Of a lawful Concubinage in a Case of Necessity; wherein lawful Marriage
conveniently or possibly cannot be obtained.
ANd to this purpose he humbly conceives himself concerned to make it appear,
according to Gods, Holy Word, and the English customs, and good Law of this
Land, there is a sort of most lawful and necessary Concubinage, that in many
cases cannot possibly be avoid. This first Wife this Complainant called Martha
Butler, being never lawfully married to him this Respondent could not be his
lawfully married wife; and yet both of us having done our true endeavors to be
lawful man and wife, it was no fault of ours that we were not so; for as the
time then reigned, few were or could be lawfully married. But we were in a fair
way to be lawfully married, and had been so, had not the mistake of the
Minister marrying, and unhappy accidents prevented us. Wherefore having done
what we could do, who shall blame us that we lived almost forty years together
in Concubinage, and were never truly married. Until by the Act of Indemnity at
the coming in of King Charles the II. our marriage, and a thousand more
unlawful marriages, were all made good in Law as if they had been the most
regular marriages all of them, that ever were made by a Minister in holy Orders
according to all the rites and ceremonies required by the Laws and customs of
the Land. Now all these thousands of marriages, which were made by the
Directory, and by Justices, and by Quakers, and many by taking one another
words, were all of them but mere Concubinages, and no more, but as if man and
woman had gone to bed together, and begot children without any Ceremony at all.
For our law calls all Bastards that are born out of marriage, and all
Directory, and Justice marriages, were as much illegal, as those wihtout any
ceremony at all, and were all equally fellows in Concubinage, until the said
Act of Indemnity set all strait, and made all good. Now by the said Act of
Indemnity of the XIIth of King Charles the II. it is expressed that any the
Subjects of the said King, or the heirs or Executors of any of them, shall not
be sued vexed or inquieted by or in behalf of the Kings, Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, in their bodies, goods, lands, or tenements, for any manner of
matter, cause, contempt, misdeameaners, etc. Or any other thing suffered done,
or committed, before the said 24th of June 1660, against his late Majesty, or
that now is, his Crown Dignity. Prerogative, Laws, or Statutes; any Statute,
Statutes, Laws, customs, or Usuages heretofore had, made or used, to the
contrary in any wise not withstanding. And that all the said Subjects, etc. may
plead this Act for their free pardon. Now setting aside Laws and Statues of
this Realm, according to holy writ, there is no more ceremony requird, but
consent on both parts, before Witness sufficient, and beding together,
according to Exodus 12, 26. without any presence nessarily required of either
Magistrate or Priest. And tho every one Man, was to marry but one woman, who
was to be Lady or Dame of the Family, yet God did plainly allow of a lawful
Concubinage, or addional wives for the bed, for Issue sake; the Issue whereof
are no where termed Bastards, either in old or new Testament; but upon all
occasions in case of heirs male wanting by the proper wife, the son of
Concubinage, became heirs. Thus Ismael Son of Abraham by his maid servant
should have been heir if Isaac had not been born of Sarah Genesis 17, 18. And thus
Rehoboam Son of Soloman by Naamah a mere Concubine, was his Heir unto his
Throne, for that he had no Son by his proper Wife: Yea tho Daughters, he had
several. And thus Jeph^bab Son of Gilead by a Stranger, or a mere Concubine,
became the Prince of the People, before any of his brethren, Born of the lawful
Wife, because of his Abilities above any of them. Judge. 11. ^, 2, and 11, which
had he been a Bastard could not have been. For a Bastard might not enter into
any office in the Church, to become so much as a Constable or a Churchwarden
much less a King or Judge, Deuteronomy. 23, 2. but was to remain a slave equal to the
Gibeonites a hewer of wood, and a drawer of water. And at this rate none were
esteemed Bastards but children begotten in Adultery or Whordom, of another man's
wife, or of a common Whore; and such could not inherit. Incest was a foul sin,
and yet the Children Born of Incest did inherit, and were not reputed Bastards,
as Pharez Son of Judah by his Son's Widow, and Janna Son of Joseph Arses by his
Nice: Both which were Heirs in the Genealogy of our Savior, and therefore no
Bastards. But the Pope made Bastords of such, which by God's Law are reputed
well born. And from the Pope, our Statute Laws still keep up the practice:
Declaring all childeren to be bastards, which are born out of marriage. So as
Childeren begotten out of marriage, was a sin against the King's Laws and
Statutes and yet no sin against God's Law. Now it happened that betewen the year
from Janu. 1. 1637 unto the 24 of June 1660. there were so many hundred
thousand children born out of marriage, because of the true Laws of marriage
put down, that there was no other remedy to heal so many disorders in
marriages, by sinning against the King's Laws, but by an Act of Indemnity; and
by that Act, all manner of sins against the King's Laws, in case of deficient
marriage, except some exceptions in that Act expressed, whereof this is none.
being pardoned. All sorts of coming together, by any single man and si, ngle
woman, and not disallowed by Gods Laws, and the children born of such a beding
together, are made as lawful to all intents and purposes, as if they had been
married in all things according to the rites and ceremonies of the Church of
England. And hence all manner of Concubinages between single persons during the
time aforesaid were made good in Law, by a Statute Law. And thus the marriage
of this Respondent with this said Complainant, became a lawful marriage by
Statute Law, as well as by Gods Law. And so it was also of all other
Concubinages of the same time, from 1637, unto June 1660. And the children of
such a bed were lawful born children, and no bastards, but were and are to be
taken, as the true and lawful Heirs unto their Fathers Dignities and Estates in
as much as if they had been born of lawful marriage. And now the second
marriage of this Respondent with the said Mary Tomkins, being a lawful marriage
according to God's word, barred of the benefit of the King's Laws only, because
of dangerous inconveniences in the way. And being in the same state as all the
Concubinages in the years aforesaid, laments only the want of the same remedy.
And being a lawful marriage before God, pleads for its self as a lawful and
innocent concubinage, tho not a good marriage according to the King's Laws.

2ly. This Respondent farther pleads, that tho the Statute Law of this Realm
seem to condemn this his deficiency of marriage; yet the customs of the Kingdom
do fully and plainly allow of it. For first whereas it appears by the
Chronicles of Scotland that Robert Stuart the next Heir unto David then King of
Scotland, as his eldest Sisters Son, lived with Elizabeth the daughter of Sir
Adam Moor, as his Concubine out of marriage, and had by her three sons, John,
Robert and Alexander; and afterward the said Elizabeth still living, he
Married with Euphame the Daughter of the Earl of Rosse, by whom he had two
Sons, called David, and Walter. And after that being Crowned King, Euphame
died, and he married his old Concubine Elizabeth: And being old he called a
Parliament of Lord's Spiritual and Temporal, to advise him which son of right
ought to inherit his Throne. And it was resolved for the eldest Son of the
Concubine, before the sons of his married wife. For that she had been a true
wife to him before God in all things, excepting the deficiency of the rites and
ceremonies of marriage. This therefore was approved of by all the wisdom of the
Realm to have been a lawful Concubinage. And insomuch as the Heirs of that
Concubinage are without any gainsaying admitted also to inherit the Imperial
Throne of this Realm; it is also become an allowed Custom in this Kingdom
also, That the Heirs of a lawful Concubinage may inherit the Patrimony of their
Parentage. Thus also in the case of William of Normandy, who was born out of
marriage, who was admitted, and his Heirs after him, to enjoy the Imperial
Throne of this Kingdom, and owned as a lawful King by all the Nobles and
Bishops of this Realm. Henry the Seventh also of this Kingdom was admitted and
allowed in several Parliaments, as the lawful Heir of John Duke of Lancaster;
although he was the Grandchild of John Earl of Sommerset, the Son of the said
John Duke of Lancaster by Katherne Swinford his Concubine, born out of
marriage; and as I take it, in the Life time of Constance his wife: And the
Heirs of these Concubinages do continue unto this Day. Now have Parliaments
admitted of such things as these as lawful and good Successions; and shall they
not be called the Custom of England: And if lawful Customs, then Custom pleads
to be of kin unto a Law; yea, tho ar the sametime it seems to clash with Law:
But we must distinguish between matters of Concubinage; for though some of them
may justly by Law be Condemned, yet some other of them in the mean while ought
to have a despensation against the perils of the Law. And among others, this
Case of the Respondent humbly begs a Reprieve, in as much as necessity for want
of the Power of Continency requirs an honest company of some Bedfellows; but it
may not be an Whore, and cannot with safety be a married wife according to the
Laws of this Land, for want of an Authoritative Sentence to acquaint him of his
former marriage, which when time was could not be gained; and thus between
three dangerous Rocks necessity has invited or rather thrust him into a bed of
Concubinage; which is unto him in all points as it were a lawful marriage.

But 3ly. This Respondent having made two such Marriages, and yet neither of
them of choice as to the manner, but both of them of a sort of necessity,
deficient of performance according to the good Laws of this Land, humble craves
of the good Reader his patience, to hear out the justification of his Innocence
in the last as well as in the first: And lest he may seem in the eyes of
ignorant and scornful men more guilty of rashness and incontinence, than of
honesty and innocence; he humbly prays it may be considered in the first place,
How apt a thing it is that many innocent and holy doctrines may be generally
cried down as gross Errors, which are quite otherwise? As for instance in the
Case of Priests Marriage, which is a matter wherein the Church is now perfectly
satisfied, that it is both an Honorable and a truly holy practice; and yet it
cannot be forgotten, how it was cried down in our grandfathers days as a most
pernicious, Hellish, and an Abominable Sin. And as it was with Priests
Marriage, I am of opinion we may find some other matters still spoken against,
that may upon serious consideration be found as innocent and holy as that is at
this day. And among other things I propose a lawful Concubinage, as in some
cases it may be required: And to this purpose it is written in the
New Testament, Heb. 13. 4. that Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed
undefiled: But Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge. Hence it follows
without dispute, That Marriage in its self is an honorable state, and that the
Bed undefiled is so too, and that in all things as in the case of marriage: But
then upon inquiry, whether in this Text, by the Bed undefiled, is to be
understood the self same thing with the Married Bed, or some other Bed plainly
different and distinct therefrom, is a matter disputable still. And now the
Words, (...) [and] or (...), as it is in the original, is a particle
copulative, which couples words and sentences together; and these words and
sentences ought properly in such a case of coupling together to be of a diverse
and dictinct signification; for that which is the same thing in sense with what
went before, needs no bond of copulation, being naturally joined therewith: For
in such a sense had this learned Author intended by these Words one and the
same thing, he would have written saying, Marriage (being) a Bed undefiled, or
(which is) or (if) a Bed undefiled is honorable; then had it been a plain case
what he meant by his words: But as the words run in the text, Marriage (and)
the Bed undefiled. This Bed undefiled according to plain grammatical
construction, must be aptly significant of some certain Bed distinct from the
Marriage Bed; or at least the words must start a Riddle hard to be understood:
It Is true indeed, that the word (and) is sometimes read as a Particle
Exegetical; as in Ephesians. 1. 3. it is written, Blessed be God and the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ; which Sentence by the same Author is written, 2 Cor. 1.
3. Blessed be God even the Father, etc. In which places the words God, and
Father of Jesus Christ, are plainly significant of the same Person,' yet
coupled together exegetically by the Particle (and) but that in this case, the
word (and) couples not Persons, but Relations together; for what God is in
himself unto all the world, is a distinct thing unto what he is unto Christ
alone; and in this case the word (and) is used as it were not properly in its
own natural sense, but is taken for the word (even) as the Author explains
himself in another place, speaking to the same purpose; but in this case the
words appear not in the same livery; for shall we read the words thus, Marriage
even the Bed undefiled is honorable, yet still there will be a riddle in the
case, as to the Authors meaning; for why did he make account that Marriage
could not be honorable, unless it were a Bed undefiled? No, that could not be,
for Marriage of its self is an honorable state in all cases and persons,
whether it be Holy or Profane, whether it be among Jews, Christians, or
Pagans; and therefore there needs not these words, [Even] the Bed undefiled, or
[being] or [that is to say,] the Bed, etc. And again, would we read the words
thus; then would it follow that all Marriages are even a Bed undefiled, which
is not so: For that there are many very Profane and unclean Marriages made,
whence follows therefore of necessity, that this learned and holy Author does
in this place clearly treat of a Bed undefiled, as a Bed plainly different and
distinct from the Marriage Bed, or of some Bed out of Marriage, that may be
truly styled a lawful and undefiled Bed. And as so he seems to comprehend all
those cases of difficient Marriages, between the year 1637, and 1660, in the
Act of Indemnity aforesaid, intimating that in those Cases where the lawful
ceremonies of Marriage could not aptly be had; yet those beds being honestly
managed, and undefiled, were therefore beds in themselves lawful and
honorable, if no such thing as the Act of Indemnity had come forth to confirm
them: And thus by the same rule and reason, this Respondent pleads that his
present beding with the said Mary Tomkins is a Bed undefiled, and therefore
lawful and honorable, even as the Marriage Bed, being made at a time when
lawful Marriage could not conveniently be had; for he having taken into his bed
an honest woman and no whore, and this without offense to God or to any man
breathing, and not for satisfaction of unclean Lust, but purely and truly to
avoid Fornication, and to procure of her body an holy seed to be educated in
the nurture of the Lord, in godliness and honesty, and true Religion: And the
Children he has by her do witness as much.

But may not the true and proper Grammatical construction of the word be
testimony sufficient of the true and proper meaning of the text, and of the
holy Author thereon. Let us next examine the custom and practices of the
persons concerned in the words, which must be a certain exposition what this
Author meant by the bed undefiled he wrote of. Now the Author of this Epistle
to the Hebrews, is commonly supposed to be St. Paul; some think it was rather
St. Luke, and others say it was St. Barnabas: This Respondent is able to make
appear that it was St. Barnabas; but these things need not here to be debated.
That it was one of the three is mostly agreed, and who ever it was, besure he
was a Christian Jew; and the Hebrews unto whom the Epistle was directed were
also Christian Jews, which things must unavoidably be allowed to be true; and
if so, then this bed undefiled must be necessarily understood as it was
commonly esteemed among the Jews; For had their customs and practices been
reprovable, this holy Author would have corrected them; but as he styles this
bed undefiled, as an honorable state, even in the case of marriage: so a bed
undefiled according the use and custom of the Jews at the time of this Epistle
written, is to be an infalliable testimony in what sense these words are to be
understood; and to this purpose we are to enquire into the custom of the Jews,
first before, and 2ly after Christianity bore date: Now before Christianity it
plainly appears, that the Jews had their Marriage beds. And there was always
allowed among the ancient Hebrews also a bed of Concubinage, which was also
held to be in it self a bed undefiled and honorable, and a lawful custom; and
at this rate the Patriarch Abraham, a man without exception for holiness and
honesty, had his married wife whose name was Sarah; and besides that wife he
had his Concubines Hagar and Katurah in his waves life time, by both which he
had issue, and that of a bed indefiled, and not at all tainted with the stains
of Adultery or Fornication: For had not his son Isaac been born of Sarah his
wife, his Son Ishmael by his bond maid had been his true and lawful heir, Genesis
17. 18. Which could not have been had he been born a bastard, as now a days
such a child is reputed to be: But God Almighty so fully attested the
Legitimacy of Ishmael's birth, by the blessing he gave him, as of a well born
child, v. 20. Does God usually give his blessing to bastards, who are utterly
barred thereof unto the tenth generation? Deuteronomy. 23. 2.

After the same manner also King David had Michal his married wife; and she
dead, he married Bathsheba his second wife; and besides these wives he had
several other women who were called side wives, of whom he had lawful issue.
And yet these secundary and inferior wives being none of them endowed were but
mere Concubines; and yet those Concubines were so far from being reputed whores
or unfaithful women, that God Almighty gave testimony to the contrary by
stiling them Concubines of God's own allowance, or proper gift, 2 Samuel 12. 8.
Does God patronise Adultery or Fornication by allowing of such a Conoubinage to
be a lawful and undefiled bed? Surely no; what God allows of therefore is no
Sin.

King Solomon had seven hundred wives, who were all kings daughters; and yet by
them all had no male-child: For his true and lawful heir was Rehoboam his son,
by Naamah an Ammonite his concubine, who was born before marriage and before he
was king: And Solomon dead, this son of a concubine born before marriage,
without contradiction, was accepted of by God and Man as Solomon's true lawful
and proper heir, notwithstanding that he had daughters by his wife or wives,
and had Nathan his royal brother, who or some of his issue were then living.

Hosea the prophet had also a married wife, whose name was Gomer, and she yet
living, by a special command from God, this Prophet did yet love another woman
whom he married not, but took her unto him for a term of years, months and
days, and (...) with her as his (...), having agreed with her for the term, to
be a true wife unto him at a certain price of reward: And yet this was
certainly a bed undefiled, obtained by a special appointment of the Lord, Hos.
3. 1, 2, 3, etc. Whence follows that in the Church of the Jews before Christ,
there was a custom and practice of an honest sort of concubinage allowed by
God's word, as an undefiled and honorable bed which cannot by any means be
denied; though some Divines of good reputation are not willing to allow these
things as well done.

But after Christianity came in, and the Hebrew church became Christian, it
remains yet to be debated whether this custom and practice continued also into
Christ's time in full force and power as before, yea or not? Unto which
question this Respondent says, he humbly conceives it does continue. For first
he reckons that all lawful customs and practices once allowed of by God's,
word and examples of holy Men, are not to cease until countermanded, or
otherwise ordered, repealed, or abrogated by as good authority of God's word
and good men, as at first gave them a being in the Church. And now to testify
that there never was any such repeal or abrogation of those ancient customs and
practices allowed before Christianty; this testimony of the Author to the
Hebrews is mine evidence: For the bed undefiled and honorable which he treats
of, being certainly to be understood of the ancient customs and practices of
the said Hebrews, unto whom he writes, which being no where in God's word
limited, repealed, or abrogated, or so much as once spoken against; he styles
at the instant time of his Epistle written to be a bed undefiled and
honorable. True it is indeed that those Hebrew customs do proceed farther
than to a bare case of necessity, which this Respondent is not concerned to
justify or to meddle with, excepting only thus far, That if ancient Concubinage
be justifiable at large, how much more is it clearly justifiable a Concubinage
in a case of necessity only. And thus far this Author to the Hebrews does
plainly justify, that an honest woman taken into bed purely and truly to avoid
fornication, and for propagating of an holy Seed, issue or offspring, tho out
of marriage in a case of necessity, may be a bed undefilled, lawful, virtuous
and honorable, and quit and clear of all Adultery and Fornication,
notwithstanding any papal decrees, Canon Laws or Statutes of any realm to the
contrary whatsoever; and such says this Respondent is the true state of his
case.

But yet to add still more light unto the sense of this holy Author to the
Hebrews, this Respondent brings in the Evidence of the sacred birth of the ever
blessed our Lord Jesus Christ for confirmation: Dares any soul upon earth be
so impudent as to defame the conception and birth of that most holy God Man,
who was born without Sin, by saying that they were stained with Fornication or
Incontinency, because performed out of marriage; and yet how shall any Man who
stubbornly persists to deny all lawful Concubinage, make out such his
sentiments without reflecting upon our Saviors conception and birth? will such
a Man think to be excused by alleging that this was an extraordinry work of
God? This answer will stain his lips more and more instead of wiping his Mouth;
for does God Almighty ever do any thing either ordinarily or extraordinarily
which he forbids us to do? Should God himself do that thing which in us is
called Adultery or Fornication, or any other Sin, he would cease to be God; for
Fornication in its self is an unclean thing, and Adultery worse; and should God
do one or the other, it would be doing an unclean thing, and to justify thatGod
can do such a thing is blasphemy; and to say that a Bed out of marriage cannot
be an undefiled, lawful and honorable bed is almost as bad: Let therefore
those wise and good men who have inconsideratly condemned the ancient holy
patriarchs for their practices of Concubinage, as guilty of sins which God
winked at in those days, bethink themselves anew, and perhaps they may be of
another mind. Conclude we therefore that what God Almighty has caused to come
to pass, was in it self an honorable, lawful and holy thing; and what God
accounts in its self to be good, neither Pope nor Parliament can make evil;
what God has proclaimed lawful and legitimate, it is past man's power and
authority to make illegitimate or a Bastard seed.

But this Respondent stops not here, for there is another material case,
testified by our Savior himself in the new testament, of a bed undefiled out
of marriage; and this was the case of the woman of Samaria, (Joh, 4, 10, etc.)
Of whom our Savior well knowing that she lived as a wife with a man who was
not her husband, and therefore in plain terms was his Concubine; yet unto this
woman in the very state, without any condition made in the case of
discontinuing her course of life, and without any the least reproof for the
manner of life she lived: Our Savior freely tendered her the water of life, or
the thing signified by baptism, saying unto her positively, that had she known
who he was she would have asked, and he would have given her of the water of
life; and after this he did tell her who and what he was; and she hearing did
believe what he said, and did ask for the water of life; and by consequence she
had it: And our Savior bad call her husband, whose Concbuine she was, and she
left her water-pot and went to call him; and as it shall seem she brought him
and many more neighbors with him, and he and thy were all or most of them
partakers of the same blessing, as by the effect appears. Now says this
Respondent, had this state of Concubinage been an unclean thing, or an
incontinent course of Life, as now a days it is reputed; this Concubine and her
man that kept her, could not aptly have believed in Christ, and been partakers
of the holy Ghost; as it appears they did, and were a Concubine, and yet endued
with the holy Ghost; a Concubine keeper and yet sent for to partake of the
water of Life, and yet neither he nor she at all reproved for the course of
life they lived in, saying, Sin no more, As our Savior in sinful cases was
always wont to say (as Joh. 5. 14. and Chapter 8. 11.) Say we then, and let all
candid hearted good men say with us, that the state of Concubinage in some
cases at least, is an honest, a believing, and a saving state of life.

And now having shown those two sorts of Beds which our Author to the Hebrews
commends as Honorable; Next I come to treat of those he teaches to shun as
dammable, and those are Whormongers, and Adulterers, whom God will Judge. The
Whoremonger is such a wretch, who tho allowed to Marry, or to keep his
Concubine, that is a Woman proper to himself, provided he do not multiply
Concubines, nor keep any woman unlawfully compassed unto any man's wrong, or to
that woman's wrong, and uses her not merely for his lust, in wantonness, or
uncleanness, but our of a pure desire of an holy seed by her. Yet not contented
with that lawful liberty of God allowed, chooses rather to spend the holy seed
of mankind upon common women, who sell their bodies to the use of every commer:
And thus exposes his seed to be murdered in the body, as whores use to do by
their conceptions, or to become a Bastard Brood, of whom no man knows the true
Father. And therefore the Mother of such is to be burned, but the Father God
will Judge. This is a crying sin which God hates. And yet at Rome, and in some
Reformed States, such whores are allowed and encouraged, while an honest
Concubinage is esteemed the worst of whoredom. The second foul crime is
Adultery, wherein a wicked man conceives more pleasure in another man's wife,
then in an honest woman. Together with this sin are companions, the sin of
Sodomy or uncleanness with mankind, the sin of Buggery or uncleanness with
Beasts, the sin of Incest, the sin of lying with a woman during her
uncleanness, and of giving seed to Moloch. Levit. 18. All these are great
abominations, which defile the Land.

And now having done with the testimony of holy writ, come we lastly to the
practice of the Primitive times, next after the Apostolical Age: wherein we
find that it was not, as it is now, holden in those days such an heinous crime,
to have children born out of marriage, especially in case wherein marriage
could not aptly be had. The first and most Ancient Laws or Canons we have of
those days are those styled the Canons of the Apostles. Wherein it is noted
that if a man go in unto a woman who is a virgin, and do in any wise deflour
her, Be she poor or rich, that man is either to make her his wife, or else he
is to have no wife so long as she Lives. This was the 66th of those Canons: And
it was confirmed for Law at the 6th general Council holden at Constantinople.
Now this Canon agrees nearly with the sense of holy Writ. In Exodus 21. 16, 17.
And shows that in those times marriages were ordered mostly according to holy
Writ: And Concubinage was in use as in the Ancient Jewish Church. For about the
Year of Christ 300, Constantius Chlorus had to wife Helena the Mother of
Constantine the Great, and in her Life time took into his bed Theodora the
daughter of Maximian, by whom he had Sons called Constantius and Anniballinus,
and Constantia his daughter. Now these three according to the Popes Laws, and
our present Laws, were esteemed base born: But in those days the Father of the
Church received them becoming Christians, into places of Authority, never once
scrupling that they were base born. Constantine also himself, the first
Christian Emperor, had to wife Minervina his lawful wife, by whom he had issue
Crispus Caesar his first born son; and also by Fausta his Concubine he had his
sons Constantine, Constantinus, and Constans; which all three lived to be
Christian Emperors, and yet were never any of them once questioned by any of
the Bishops of those days, for base born or bastard Children. Also Valentinian,
a very commendable and orthodox Christian Emperor, had Severa his lawful wife
by whom he had issue, Gratianus his eldest Son; and Justina his concubine, by
whom he had issue, Valentinian his younger Son. Him Gratinus succeeding dyed
without issue, and Valintinian son of the concubine was called unto the throne,
and was crowned by St. Ambrosius, the Godly and good Bishop of Millaine. And
yet neither St. Ambrose, nor St. Augustine, nor any of the Bishops of that age
did ever question the Emperor Valantinian the Father for keeping a concubine
in his wives life time, nor Valentinian the Son for being base born, and
therefore unfit to reign, because born a bastard. For had the Bishop once
questioned the matter. Theodosius the great, then reigning at Constantinople,
could, and would have put him down, upon a word speaking of St. Ambrose.

True it is indeed, that in the heat of zeal by good men in the Primitive
times, Virginity was buoyed up a great rate; in pursuit of which, many holy
Church customs became neglected, and in an heat were decryed. And hence Priests
marriage began to be in disgrace, and at length was utterly thrust out; and
hence concubinage also was spoken against. But this Respondent has not read of
any process against concubinage as a criminal thing, until the Papacy of Rome
being crowned heads, and became rampant, began to tyrannise at list. And the
first that this Respondent found upon record, was the case of Lotharius king of
North-France, who having a wife, kept a concubine in the IX Century, and was
first admonished, and then excommunicated by Pope Hadrian the II. unto the ruin
of that poor Prince. And since this beginning, the proud Popes have made
Decrees and Canons as best served their own avarice, even as they listed; and
darkened the brightness of the holy Gospel, out of all Men's light in a manner;
insomuch as in the days of Henry the VIII the King, Lords, and Commons
assembled in Parliament unanimously complained of the Popish encroachments in
the case of marriage, brought in for filthy luker sake, which the Churchmen
reapt thereby; by mean whereof so many ways were invented for bastardising of
children, that without a license of marriage from Rome, it was a difficult
thing for a person of any quality to have a lawful born Heir. Whence in the
XXXII year of Henry VIII. Chap. 38. a statute past, that all marriages shall be
lawful which are not in Holy-writ forbidden: And in that statute the Beding of
Women was stilled the Essence of Consummation of marriages: See we then whence
came up this custom of making base born children contrary to God's word; not
out of Holy-writ, nor lawful Church-canons, but out of the dregs and corrupt
laws of the worst of Popish times. And yet since that statute, we are not yet
come to rights, nor cleared enough of those old popish Corruptions.

And this Respondent humbly conceives, with submission to the most Pious and
Learned Statesmen of those Realms that were matters well weighed, the doctrine
of a Reformed Concubinage, as it was used of old by the holy and good
Patriarch's, might be found to be of sacred and holy use, to prevent the ruin
of Royal, Noble, and Generous Families, many of which have formerly Ship-wrackt
for want of a convenient remedy; and besides, it would prove an honest help to
destroy those foul and crying sins of Whoredom and Adultery, which ruins
Kingdoms as well as Families. Had it not been for this help of Concubinage,
King Solomon had utterly failed of that Royal race, whence our Lord and blessed
Savior Jesus Christ lineally descended. Consider we how many kingdoms have
been utterly ruined for want of an honest Concubinage to supply the defects of
barren and unhappy marriages. Had Alexander Scot used a Concubine, an Heir of
his body might have prevented those dreadful Wars which followed between the
Families of Bruce and Baylid for compassing that Crown. And had Richard the IId
of England been allowed an heir by a Concubine, the Wars of York and Lancaster
had never harrassed this kingdom as they did; which at last was not ended but
by a Son sprung from a bed of Concubinage: But happy was that Concubinage of
Robert the II of Scotland, which advised to by a Parliament of that nation.
gave birth to that Family of the Stuarts, which have made both England and
Scotland exceeding happy. And being grafted into the Family of the Welsh
Te^ther^ there is of the Royal blood of England, another Family sprung from a bed
of Concubinage, are to this day reigning over both kingdoms. Which if so, let
no Man by corrupt and unlawful comstoms go about to stain the Legitimacy of
such a race of Princes, as both England and Scotland have just cause to
remember, with Praise and Thanksgiving to God, and especially for Charles the
first of blessed and never dying memory, the gracious gift of God, for whose
blessed sake good things may justly be expected in time, both unto his royal
race, and these his kingdoms. And thus much may serve in vindication of this
Respondent, or bedding with Mary Tomkins, and in answer to her IId, Article.
The third says.

III. Item. That the said John Butler after having lived with the said Mary
Tomkins in the foul crime of Adultery, or Incontinency in Holland, or some
other part beyond the Seas, as in the present Article is set forth, he the said
John Butler with the said Mary Tomkins, returned into England, and bought or
took a House at Hammersmith, in the county of Mids. where they continued to
live in an Adulterous, Incontinant manner for many years together; and do still
live and cohabit together as man and wife, and she the said Mary has had four
other base children born of her body, and begotten by the said John Butler one
of which children is since dead, but the other three are still living, and are
called by the name of John, George, and Butler, and for as and the natural
children of the said Mary Tomkins, begotten by the said John Butler, they were
and are commonly accounted, reputed and taken, and therefore as also of the
said John Butler and Mary Tomkins, there living in Adulterous and Incontinent
manner together in Hammersmith aforesaid, there was and is a public and
notorious ponit tamen de quolibet alio temporis spa. and numero liberor. and
ponit ut supra.

Such is the third Article of her Label, which is forestalled by the Answer to
the second, saving that this Respondent says, he has lived sometimes in
Hammersmith, in good reputation with all good People in the Parish; who he
supposes cannot give credit to the Lies and Scandals of this Article: And that
she said Mary Tomkins does cohabit with him there in good Reputation, by the
name of Butler.

IV. Item, That the said John Butler has lately, to wit. withlast past turned
the said Martha Butler his wife out of doors, and left her destitute of
necessaries, whereby to support and maintain her self. Hocque fuit and est
verum, etc, and ponit ut supra.

Such is her IV Article; unto which this Respondent says, it is a mere forgery
of Lies, he having no such wife as Martha Butler? once he had such a Woman his
wife, whom he never turned out of doors; but she lived with him while she
would, and left him of her self, but lived upon his estate, eat and drank at
his charge, and lived upon his means, and does so to this day, and was never
denied support and maintenance, would she come where it is to be had.

V. Item. That the said John Butler has an estate to the value of 200 l. or at
least 185 l. per ann. Hocque, etc. ponit tamen, etc. ponit ut supra.

To which this Respondent answers, that once he had such an estate, but by the
ill dealings of the said Complainant Martha, and her sons by confederacy with
Nathaniel (...) the mortgagee he is deprived at present of his whole estate by
illegal and evil arts, and this Complainant and her Sons are in possesson
thereof.

VI. Item. Quod praefat. Johanes Butler suit and est paroch. de Hammersmith in
Com. Mids. ac ratione literarum requi^, ab Ordinario loc^prius obtent.
jurisdict. ^ujus cur^ Notor. subditus and subject, and ponit ut supra.

Hic Respondes de his nil intelligit.

VII. Item. Quod de and super premissis, etc.

Item. Quod praemissa, etc.

Negat Respondens.

FINIS.

