THE SEVERAL WAYS Of Resolving FAITH, IN THE ROMAN and REFORMED CHURCHES. With
the Authors impartial thoughts upon each of them. And his own Opinion at length
shown, wherein the Rule of Faith does consist. Which clears upon rational
Grounds the Church of England from criminal Schism and lays the Cause of the
separation upon the Roman.

YORK. Printed by Stephen Bulkley, and are to be sold by Richard Lambart
Bookseller in the Minster-yard. 1677.

THE PUBLISHER, To the Pious and Intelligent READER.
IF, Reader, thou be indeed so qualified, as the style I give thee, imports,
the following Treatise will, I am confident, find a very grateful acceptance
with thee. For as the Subject of it is Discourse is of highest Consequence, and
so esteemed by all who have a greater value for the Truth of Christianity, then
for the Concern of secular Interests and Enjoyments; so will the handling of it
be, with that impartiality, sincerity, and seriousness seen performed, that
thou wilt easily own it to be a Tract wholly designed for conviction and
satisfaction, not at all for contention or ostentation. This, it is true, makes
it appear in a plain and homely dress, the Author having purposely declined
Rhetorical Ornaments as fitter for an eloquent insinuating Harangue, then for
a controversiall strict Discourse, whose aim and intent should not be to
please the Fancy with gay and empty appearences, but to fix the Understanding
with plain and solid Truths. Whereunto how far this small Piece in what it
treats of, is conducible, I shall wholly leave to thy own impartial thoughts
to judge. Permit me yet (which with modesty enough, I may crave) to use the
freedom to tell thee, that the Way the Author takes for effecting his desire
(which is to be confirmed upon sure Grounds, What the Means instituted by God,
for attaining to the certain knowledge of Christ's Doctrine be) is such, that
nothing but very calumny can accuse him of any sinister or partial proceeding.
This although a Motive material for recommending the perusal of his Book,
especially considering how polemick Disputes are too frequently managed, yet
was my apprehension of the soundness of the Discourse it self, and of the great
assistance it brings to the rational defense of the truly Protestant
Profession (but not of whatsoever is so called by every Opinionist) the
principal Inducement that moved me (with my friends permission) to publish it.
I speak not this (Courteous Reader) to forestall in the least thy Judgment,
but remit thee to thy full liberty; and the rather, because to do otherwise,
were to offer violence to the nature of the Treatise it self, whose entire
complexion, in the whole and every part thereof, is ingenuous and free, looking
on whatsoever is within it is prospect with the most equal eye imaginable, and
yet passing over nothing of moment without a due inspection of it, as by an
indifferent view thereof thou will easily perceive. Farewell.

The Contents.
SEction 1. There is a Rule of Christian Faith, or a Way whereby to come to the
certain knowledge of Christ's Doctrine, instituted by God. Three different
Opinions among the Learned of the Roman Religion, where that Way is to be
found; or wherein the Rule of Faith (as it is called by Controvertists) does
consist.

Sect. 2. The Ground of the first Opinion of the Romanists (which places the
Rule of Faith in the Definition of a General Council confirmed by the Pope)
being this, That a General Council confirmed by the Pope, cannot err in
Matters of Religion, seriously considered of, and thought to be erroneous.

Sect. 3. The Reason of the second Opinion among the Romish Party, (namely,
That the Definition of a General Council conciliarly proceeding with, or
without the Pope, is the Rule of Faith) held to be, That a General Council
conciliarly acting is infallible in Catholic Points of Faith, taken into
consideration; and it is double meaning explained, the truth of which in one of
them only is here brought to the Test; the certainty of it, in it is other
sense, being left to be examined in it is due place afterward

Sect. 4. The Foundation, whereon we find the third Opinion of the Romanists
(to wit, that Oral Tradition, or the living Voice of the Present Church in
every Age is the Rule of Faith) to be built, viz. That Tradition is in Articles
of Faith perpetually the same in all Ages, well dived into, and more largely
(because of the present great vogue it has with the learned of the Romish
Profession here in England) insisted on, then the Grounds of both the two
former Opinions are.

Sect. 5. The Controvertists of the Reformed Church, make Scripture the Rule of
Faith. Two main different Opinions, notwithstanding in what sense it is so held
to be. The former Assertion, viz. That the Scripture is clear to every
understanding illuminated by the Holy Ghost, in all those things which are
necessary to salvation, thoroughly inspected and esteemed to be more plausible
then sound. A Sect, that holds private inspiration of the Spirit of God,
absolutely necessary, as well for knowing, as understanding the Word of God.
Another sort of People, who talk of a Light within them, to be their sole Guide
in Matters of Belief and Practice. Both these Pretensions fairly discussed, and
found to be Delusions

Sect. 6. The other Assertion which some of the Reformed hold, viz. That all
things necessary to Salvation, are clear in Scripture to every understanding,
impartially reflected on, and Reasons given why it is thought to be rather
popular and pleasing, then solid and satisfactory.

Sect. 7. Whether the Rule of Faith affords infallible, or but moral certitude
of Christ's Doctrine. Whether we may not now in our days have as great certainty
thereof, as the Disciples of the Apostles had. And whether the like certainty
which they had be not enough for the Church of the present and future Ages.

Sect. 8. By what Means the knowledge of a Matter of Fact (such as the
preaching of the Gospel by Christ and His Apostles was) may be perpetuated. An
examen of the force of the Romanists main Argument whereby they endeavor to
show, that Scripture cannot be the Rule of Faith. Whether the Scripture be not
as intelligent in Points of Faith as Tradition or the Living voice of the
Church is.

Sect. 9. What the Properties of the Rule of Faith be, and whether they agree
to Holy Scripture.

Sect. 10. An Enquiry, Whether Christ's Doctrine has been practically conveyed
without intermission from the days of the Apostles, unto ours. And of what
validity four grand Arguments urged against the indefectibility of Tradition,
are.

Sect. 11. What rational assurance we have, That Scripture is not corrupted in
Necessaries to Salvation. The way to know what Things have been ever Orally
taught. Two Reasons given, why Tradition, though it be of an indefectible
Nature, should not be the Rule of Faith. Whether a Fundamental Error, can ever
obtain a settled quiet possession in the visible Church? An offer from Reason
for the impossibility of the thing. Errors not-Fundamental, may overspread the
Church, or, at least, a great and considerable part of it, and why? Several
Instances of such Errors in the Roman Church.

Sect. 12. That the Holy Scripture, or Written Word of God, is the Rule of
Faith. That Tradition is a necessary means whereby to attain to the certain
knowledge thereof. That the Multitude, or weakest sort of Christians, are not
able of themselves, without the help of others, to resolve Faith aright, or be
rationally assured, what the Doctrine of Salvation is.

Sect. 13. The harm that may arise to the Church from the belief of an Error
not-Fundamental, to be an Article of Faith. The true stating of the difference
between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome. The Church of England
cleared from the guilt of Schism, and the Roman justly blamed for being Cause
of the separation. That the joint Concurrence of Scripture and Oral Tradition,
(or the practical Delivery of Christ's Doctrine) was recommended by the Blessed
Apostles to the Church; the Restoration of which Concurrence, ('it is humbly
conceived) would be a firm Foundation for re-uniting dissenting Christians in
Matters of Religion; and the Continuance of it a lasting Means for perpetuating
Christianity in i'ts Ancient native Purity.

Errata.
In the Contents, Sect. 6. l. 2. read for Reformed, Reformation. Sect. 8. l. 8.
for intelligent intelligible.

Page 9. l. 15. r. but impious. p. 17. l. last (viz. p. 31. l. 1. r. Canonical
Scripture. p. 32. l. 12. 13. r. Church diffusive. p. 40 l. 16. r. Efforts p.
47. l. 6. r. formerly. p. 62. l. 5, 6. r. to be performed, actually. p. 72. l.
7. r. so often as. p. 82 l. 2. r. as prone as possible. p. 91. l. 17. blot out
if. p- 97. l. 10. r. die. l. 11. r. sedet. p. 99. l. 1. r. de. scendit. l. 13.
r obtemperantibus. p. 100. l. 1. r. Act. 4. 12. p. 101. l. 11. r. nascetur. p.
106. l. 3. r. descendet. p. 112. l. 15. r. in Scripture, as. l. 16.
Traditionist. p. 113. l. 5 r. Traditionist. p. 121. l. 18. r. ascension. p.
122. l. 2. r. ascension p. 126, 127 r. of what validity Four -- are? p. 128. l.
3. r. thus; l. 14. those p 141. l 15, 16. r. in the Creed there set forth. l.
18 and that also. p. 142. l. 23. r. or it is not; p. 143. l. 14. r. Latins. l.
19. Lombard. p. 144. l. 4, 5. r. ineandem nobiscum. l. 8. unam eandemque fore
sententiam. p. 145. l. 1. r. Quaest. 36. p. 146. l. 5. r. diserte dicant. p.
154. l. 20. r. as an Article. p. 158. l. 7. r. superfluous. p. 161. l. 9.
soever there be. p. 162. l. 10. r. and not to be extended. p. 170. l. 2. r. in
such case. p. 171. l. 16. r. spilt. p. 179. l. 19. r. what they teach. p. 183.
l. 4. r. Distinction. p. 192. l. 10. r. Lawd. p. 195. l. 13. r. Polemical

The rest are more obvious literal mistakes, in appearences, yield, adhear,
oblid'g, Antichrist, Writting, all be it, vulger, with some small characters
for great, and great for small.

The several Ways of resolving Faith in the Roman and Reformed Churches.
With the Authors impartial thoughts upon each of them.

And his own Opinion at length shown, wherein the Rule of Faith does consist.

Which clears upon rational Grounds the Church of England from criminal
Schism, and lays the Cause of the separation upon the Roman.

SECT. I. There is a Rule of Faith instituted by God. Three different Opinions
among the Learned of the Roman Religion, wherein that Rule does consist.
SInce it was the Almighties good pleasure to create Man a reasonable Creature,
it became his Divine Wisdom and Goodness, not only to ordain an End convenient
for Him, with Means likewise available thereto; but also to constitute a Way by
which he might come to the certain Knowledge of both: for in vain would the two
former have been instituted without the last, when by this alone, both the
other were to be made known unto Him.

That therefore there is a Way ordained by God, whereby to understand aright,
Man's Chief End, and the proper Means available to it, remains without dispute.
Yet such notwithstanding is the difference and disagreement amongst diverse men
of greatest Wit and Learning about it, that through their subtle Arguments, and
eager Zeal to defend every one his espoused Opinion, not a few sober well
minded Christians are brought into a Labyrinth of intricate difficulties and
doubts what they ought to believe; whilst the Controvertists in Religion,
though in general they acknowledge, that the Gospel of Christ published to the
World, declares wherein Man's Felicity, and the Means thereof consist, yet are
at perpetual discord what the particular Doctrines necessary to the Salvation
of Mankind, contained in that Gospel or Revelation, be; and that, because they
cannot agree where the Way which leads to the certain knowledge of Christ's
Doctrine is to be found; or, as for brevity it is phras'd, what the Rule of
Faith is.

This gave the occasion of my undertaking the following Inquiry; the design
whereof, is to endeavor to the utmost of my power the gaining a well-grounded
satisfaction in a matter of so great Concern, as the Rule of Faith is to be
truly known. For the compassing of which longing desire of my heart, I judge
it the best expedient, I know of, to take an equal and impartial view of the
differing Opinions about it; that either, by comparing them together, I may be
enabled to make a rational choice of some one before the rest; or else to gather
from the whole disquisition that satisfaction is not to be expected without a
further enquiry to be made wherein the Rule of Christian Faith does really
consist.

The first difference worthy of notice about the Rule of Faith, or the Way
which guides and directs to the clear knowledge of Christ's Doctrine, is
concerning the nature of the assurance which it is to afford; some affirming,
that it ought to give infallible certainty: whilsts others say, that it needs
only yield a Moral certitude, or such an assurance, as is sufficient to remove
actual doubting, but not which renders it impossible to be deceived in Matters
of Faith.

Those that hold the Rule of Faith to administer infallible certainty of
Christian Doctrine are part of them of the Roman and part of the Reformed
Church. Those who maintain the contrary, are only some of the Reformed. As to
the merit of either opinion I Will leave the discussion of it to another place;
and at present show wherein the Romish Controvertists, of which there are three
distinct sorts, place the Rule of Faith.

The first sort maintain, that A General Council confirmed by the Pope, or (as
the Proposition is rendered by some) The Pope defining in a General Council
cannot err; and so make, The Definition of a General Council confirmed by the
Pope; or The Definition of the Pope, in a General Council, The Rule of Faith.

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

is the same thing with that which others of them name confirming, whilst both
place the supposed infallibility in the Popes assent; which assent those who
call it defining, think perhaps they make the Proposition more obviously
denote, that Prelates infallibility, as exclusive of all the rest thereby.

SECT. III. The second Opinion amongst the Romanists, viz. That a General
Council conciliary proceeding is infallible in Matters of Faith taken into
consideration, and it is double meaning explained; the truth of which in one of
them only is here brought to the Test, the certainty of it in it is other sense
being left to be examined in other Sections.
THis Assertion of the Second sort of Romish Controvertists, that A General
Council conciliarly proceeding cannot err in Points of Faith, may be taken in
a twofold sense, either as the words conciliarly proceeding include Tradition,
which the Traditionists say; and then the meaning of it is, That A General
Council defining according to Tradition, or the living voice of the Church
cannot err; in which sense, the consideration of it belongs to some following
Sections: Or else as they are intended only to denote the exclusion of all
fraudulent and forcible ways used to procure the votes of the Prelates, so as
that the Definition of the Council being left to it is own freedom will be
infallibly true, although the Means preparative to it, were not at all so;
Against

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

That whatsoever was delivered to the primitive Christians by Christ and his
Apostles, as a Point of Faith, has been perpetually handed down from time to
time without interruption till our days as such) and it is assigned proof, the
indefectibility of Tradition, I shall say nothing here, but remit the
discourse, I intend upon them, to another place; and at present enquire,
Whether the present Church of Rome does indeed depend on this Maxim, for the
certainty of the purity of her Faith, That Christ's Doctrine was delivered to
her, as descending without interruption from Christ and his Apostles. For if it
appear, upon trial made, she does not; then however indefectible Tradition be,
it may notwithstanding fall out that new Articles of Faith may be introduced
into the Church upon some other Ground, not firm and safe, such as the
Traditionists will, I know, grant, That the Definition of a General Council,
not founded on Oral Tradition, but on this Presumption, That the Bishops
effectually proceeding to define, are immediately inspired from Heaven, is. And
that the Roman Church does not rely on the mentioned Maxim for the certainty of
the purity and uncorruptedness of her Faith, I have something which seems
considerable, and of moment, to allege in proof:

It will not, I presume, be denied, That Cardinal Bellarmin, and the learned
Romish Controvertists, more generally taken notice of after him, ever since the
Reformation till Rushworths Dialogues came to light, (for all that they made it
their business to resolve Faith, according to the belief and practice of their
Church, did not conclude and averr Tradition to be the alone safe Means of
conveying Christ's Doctrine to the knowledge of succeeding Ages. And if such
great Lights among the Roman Clergy, mistook the Rule of Faith, how can we
reasonably think, that the inferior Pastors and Laics in their time, knew it
aright? And if they knew it not, neither could they rely on it as such. For
although it were granted (which some say) that Bellarmin himself, and all the
learned Clerks of the Roman Church, no less then the other Clergy and Laymen,
did practically rely on Tradition, in as much as they were Orally taught their
Religion by the preceding Generation; and that again by the next before it, and
so still backwards, one Age of another, ever since the very first beginning of
Christianity; yet unless they also knowingly did it, when once they came to
make enquiry upon what steadfast Ground the Christian Faith was to be embraced,
they would no longer rest upon the instruction they had when they first in
their younger years believed, if so be upon search made, they conceived (as it
seems the chiefest of them, besides many more, if not the generality, did) that
the certainty of Faith was not sounded on Oral Tradition, their first
Instructor in it, but on something else. Yea, I think, I shall not mistake the
truth, if, I say, that it was not the private opinion of some great Doctors,
and their followers only; but the sense of the Council of Trent it self also;
That Faith is not resolved into Tradition as it is adequate Rule; whilst in
consulting the first Decree of the fourth Session of that Council, I find two
Passages, which seem to make it out: The former of them is this, Sacrosancta
Oecumenica, and Generalis Tridentina Synodus, etc. perspiciens hanc (nempe
Christianam) veritatem and Disciplinam, contineri in Libris scriptis, and sine
Scripto Traditionibus, quae ex ipsius Christi ore ab Apostolis acceptae, aut ab
ipsis Apostolis Spiritu Sancto dictante, quasi per manus traditae, ad nos usque
pervenerunt, Orthodoxorum Patrum exempla secuta, omnes Libros tam veteris quam
novi Testamenti, cum utriusque Deus sit Author, necnon Traditiones ipsas tum ad
Fidem, tum ad Mores pertinentes, tanquam vel ore tenus a Christo, vel a Spiritu
Sancto dictatas, and continua successione in Ecclesia Catholica conservatas
pari pietatis affectu, ac reverentia suscipit, ac veneratur. The latter Passage
closes up the Decree thus; Si quis Libros ipsos integros (Scripturae scilicet)
cum omnibus suis partibus, prout in Ecclesia Catholica legi consueverunt, and
in veteri vulgata Latina Editione habentur, pro Sacris and Canonicis non
susceperit, and Traditiones praedictas sciens and prudens contempserit,
anathema sit. Omnes itaque intelligant quo ordine, and via ipsa Synodus, post
jactum Fidei Fundamentum sit progressura, and quibus potissimum Testimoniis, ac
Praesidiis in confirmandis Dogmatibus, and instaurandis in Ecclesia Moribus sit
usura. In both these Passages, Scripture and Apostolical Traditions are plainly
contradistinguish'd, as equally relating some way or other to Christian Faith
and Manners. And although in the former place, they seem to be principally
opposed, as the Written, and unwritten Word of God; yet not without this
apparent intimation also, that as the Books, or written Words called Scripture,
lead to the sense or Doctrine contained in them; so likewise the unwritten
words wherein Apostolical Traditions are taught, guide to the meaning couched
in them; so that as Scripture and Traditions taken in the former sense, are
held by the Council to be equally the Word of God; so are they moreover in the
latter sense held to be equally significative and expressive of the Doctrine of
Salvation delivered by them. But in the latter rehearsed place of the Decree,
Scripture and Traditions are chiefly to be understood of written and unwritten
words directing to the knowledge of the Objects of Faith; as appears by these
Lines here following transcribed from thence: Quibus potissimum Testimoniis,
and Praesidiis (nemque Scriptura and Traditionibus) in confirmandis Dogmatibus,
and instaurandis in Ecclesia Moribus, sit usura Synodus. For Scripture and
Traditions, cannot here be taken for Christ's Doctrine it self, but for
Characters and Sounds, apt to discover what is meant by them. From the whole,
therefore I gather, That the Council of Trent, resolves Faith into Scripture
and Traditions, when taken for the Word of God, or Doctrine of Salvation, as
into it is proper Object; and into the same Scripture and Traditions, when
taken, the one for a Testimony in Writing, the other for an Oral Testimony, as
into it is adequat Rule; saving what the Adverb potissimum, in the last recited
Passage of the Council may peradventure abate.

In hopes to enervate the force of this Discourse, 'twill not improbably, be
said, That Scripture and Apostolical Traditions, are granted to be held by the
Tridentin Council, the Totum or Extent of all revealed Truths; and
consequently, the Characters and Sounds, or the written and unwritten words,
wherein they are contained, the material Rule of Faith; but seeing it is Oral
Tradition that informs us of the sense of both, this alone is the formal Rule
of Faith, and that even according to the mind of the Trent Fathers themselves;
as the subsequent Passage of the second Decree of the fourth Session,
testifies; Ad coercenda petulantia ingenia decernit (eadem scilicet
Sacrosancta Synodus) et nemo suae prudentiae innixus in rebus Fidei, and Morum
ad aedificationem Doctrinae Christianae pertinentium, sacram Scripturam, ad
suos sensus contorquens, contra eum sensum quem tenuit ac tenet Sancta Matter
Ecclesia, cujus est judicare de vero sensa and interpretatione Scripturarum
sanctarum, aut etiam contra sensum unanimem Patrum ipsam Scripturam sacram
interpretari audeat.

In return to this, I shall not deny, but that if Holy Scripture were Writ, and
Apostolical Traditions expressed in Words, not plainly significative of one
determinate sense, but had their intelligibleness in Matters of Faith and
Manners from Oral Tradition, this alone would be the formal Rule of Faith. But
then, in case the thing were truly so, and the late quoted place of the
Council intended as much; I see not how that learned Assembly can be cleared
from contradicting it self; since Scripture, and Apostolical Traditions, if
mere unintelligible Characters and Sounds, without their supposed authentic
Interpreter Oral Tradition, would be so far from being two Witnesses, or
Testimonies of Christ's Doctrine, (which yet, as was seen, the Council solemnly,
and not transiently, calls them) that they would neither of them be any Witness
or Testimony thereof at all; the very nature and office of a Witness or
Testimony being this, to manifest, and render intelligible to those who are
immediately, concerned to understand it, what it bears witness or gives testmony
unto; immediately I say, concerned; but who those are, in respect of the Rule of
Christian Faith, I deferr the enquiry of to another place. At present, in
regard it will not, I prefume, be admitted that the Council contradicts it
self, the sense of the rehearsed Passage is far more obvious, then that which
has been mentioned, if not evident, to be this; That whenever the Holy
Scripture is through either weakness or wilfulness drawn to a wrong sense, it
of Right belongs to the Governors of the Church to declare the true sense
thereof; which the Council might very well think to be just and fitting without
supposing the words of Scripture to be unsens'd Characters, since experience
daily shows, that things easy to be understood, are often mistaken by the
vulgar, and very plain words and sentences, wrested by men of subtle wits, to a
perverse sense.

Two Witnesses then of Christ's Doctrine, viz. Scripture and Traditions, the
Council of Trent still seems to me plainly to assert. But besides these, let us
consider if there was not moreover a third, which the Prelates had an eye to, in
respect of something defined by them; for I cannot conjecture, what they should
mean by the Word potissimum, mentioned before, except this, That there are some
divine Truths, which are not so clearly contained, either in Scripture, or
Apostolical Traditions, as to be sufficiently attested by them, and that
therefore, they stood need of a further Testimony, to make them manifest; which
whether it was the unanimous consent of the Fathers, or the immediate assistance
of the Holy Spirit, or something else which the Council intended, I have no need
to be scrupulous about, since my business in this place, was no more but to
discover, Whether the Church of Rome (as it is affirmed by the Traditionists) do
really rely on this Maxim for her Faith, that it was recommended to her as
Orally descending by a continued succession, from Christ and his Apostles; or
that it is but a thing speciously pretended, on her behalf, to avouch her
Doctrine by; wherein, as the preceding Discourse has already shown in general,
so the subsequent will hereafter show in particular, what the truth to my
apprehension is; whilst that which has been said, concerning the Council of
Trents opinion in the Point, shall be further seconded and confirmed by several
Instances out of the same.

The first shall be, That it has defined Sess. 4 Decree. 1. What Books are
Canonical Sp^ture, and anathematizes those who will not receive them as such,
amongst which the Epistle to the Hebrews is one; and yet it has not always been
esteemed Canonical by the Western Church, as is granted by Cardinal Perron, and
others of the Romish Profession, that St. Jerome, whose testimony cannot be in
reason refused, affirms; for being in his time an eminent Member of the same
Church, he could not be ignorant of her practice, and that he would Write an
untruth, whereof he might easily be detected, is not at all credible.

The Second Instance is, That the Books Arocryphal, for which there is no
Universal Tradition, that they are the Word of God, as Dr. Cosins (late Lord
Bishop of Durham, in his Scholastical History of the Canon of Scripture shows,
are defined by the Council of Trent Sess. 4. Decree 1. to be Canonical
Scripture.

The third (and last Instance, which at present I shall produce) is to be seen,
Sess. 7. Can. 9. of the Trent Synod, where we find it thus defining; Si quis
dixerit in tribus Sacramentis Baptismo scil. Confirmatione, and Ordine; non
imprimi Characterem in anima, hoc est signum quoddam spirituale and indelebile,
unde ea iterari non possunt, Anathema sit. These according to the Traditionists
are the words, or at least, the sense of the words of the Church, diffusive
pronounced by it is Representative; by which it seems there is a Tradition, that
a Character or a certain Spiritual indeleble sign is imprinted in the Souls of
those who are baptized, confirmed and ordained. Now That the generality of
Pastors, Parents, Tutors, and Nurses (the sure Conveyers of Christianity, as
the Traditionists tell us, from Age to Age) should know what it is to have a
Character or spiritual sign imprinted in the Soul (and without that they could
not declare it in various forms of speech, as was requisite they should, in
regard, that one main reason given by the Traditionists, why Christ's Doctrine
cannot fail in the conveyance, is, because it is expressed so many several
ways, that the generality of the Hearers, cannot choose but understand it
aright) I see small cause to think, especially, when I reflect, That the great
Master of the Traditionary Disciples in his Institut, Sacr. Tom. 2. Lect. 4.
thus teaches; Ponere signa spiritualia, ie. invisibilia contra ipsam rationem
signi est, quod pro materiali oportet esse notum and visibile, pro eo vero quod
significat lateris, unde non nisi inter homines, qui colligunt scientiam ex
objectis, reperiuntur, and non possunt esse spiritualia, sed ex necessitate
sensibilia. And in the page following, the same learned Author asserteth; Ipsam
personam esse subjectum Characteris, cum actio sit communis corpori, and
animae, i. e. totius. If perchance it should be said, That the scope of the
Canon is only to declare, that there is an appropriation, or appointment of a
man's whole life, to some solemn Engagement or Action; as by Baptism to be a
Christian; by Confirmation to undergo courageously the Christian warfare; by
Order to Preach the Word, to administer the Sacraments, etc. so that not any of
them is to be iterated, and this Christians generally know; for who is
ignorant, that none used to be Baptized, none confirmed, none ordained, more
then once? I reply, If the Tradition of the Church be placed wholly in that;
then in case the Council has defined more, it could not ground the same upon
the uninterrupted delivery thereof. And that the Council has defined more,
appears from this, That the Canon further declares two things, which whosoever
denies, incurrs an Anathema; the one is, That the Character given in the three
nominated Sacraments, is a spiritual sign; the other, That the soul (alone) is
the subject thereof, (for although the word alone be not in the Canon; yet it
is necessarily implied, because a spiritual sign cannot be imprinted in a
corporeal substance) and therefore, as to these, the Council could not ground
the Definition upon Tradition.

SECT. V. The Controvertists of the Reformed Church, make Scripture the Rule of
Faith. Two main different
(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

tion is a like impossible; as that multitudes of people should not in every
Age be truly desirous of their own, and their Posterities everlasting
Happiness, seeing (as I have showed) it is a thing easy and necessary to
Salvation to be performed, to prepetuate Christ's Doctrine by a continued
practical Delivery of it, till the Consummation of all things.

However clear the truth of this may seem, yet in regard I meet with four grand
Arguments urged stiffly against the indefectibility of Tradition, two of which
are thought (by some) to be grounded on firm Reason; the other two on certain
Experience; 'twill be requisite well to consider of them, and to try their
strength.

The first is, That Moral Causes work not necessarily, and therefore it cannot
be certainly concluded that however strongly the Motives for the practical
continuance of Christ's Doctrine be applied to the mind, the Will will
undoubtedly embrace them, and act according to them. This first Argument is
sufficiently (I think) answered, Section, 7. yet for fuller conviction I will
add this here, that the same Argument if applied to Scripture, would prove as
much every jot against Scriptures preservation, as against the continuance of
Tradition. If it be replied, that Gods Goodness is engaged for the preservation
of Scripture; I grant it, if man use his own endeavors, otherwise, God is not
(I conceive) concerned to preserve it; for I presume no man of sound Reason
will say, that God is obliged by his Goodness immediately to save it Himself, or
to commit the safeguard of it to the sole care of Angels, when Men, whose
Concern it is to preserve it, are sufficient (if there be no default in
themselves) for the work. If Man's endeavors therefore for the conservation of
it be free in that sense which the Objection supposes every action of Man to
be, there will be no more certainty of the continuance of Scripture, then of
the practical Delivery of Christ's Doctrine throughout all Generations; and if
the Church should at any time be without it is Rule of Faith, 'twould either
dwindle away to nothing, or become a mere Babel of Anarchy and Confusion.

The second Argument to prove, That Tradition is not of an indefectible nature
is this; If men be not free, it is no virtue at all in them to be wrought upon
by Moral Motives; for what virtue can it be in any man to entertain the
Christian Doctrine, and adhere to it whether he will or no? I willingly grant,
it is no virtue in any man to do a thing whether he will or no; for to do a
thing whether a man will or no, is (according to the common use of the Phrase)
to do it against his Will, which as to the actus elicitus of the Will, involves
this manifest Contradiction, to will and nill at once the same thing. The words
therefore, whether he will or no, must be interpreted, to mean, here in the
Objection, no more then necessarily, or rather, in propriety of Speech,
certainly; for, I take a necessary effect in the most strict and proper notion
of it, to be an effect wrought in a Subject wholly passive; whereas the Will is
an active Principle, and always determines it self, however powerfully the
Motives work upon it. Whence it is, that even the blessed Saints and Angel's in
Heaven, though their affections be most strongly and unalterably fixed on God,
are not necessitated thereto without their own great good-liking, and active
tendency to the enjoyment of their Sovereign Good. If then the fruition of the
very End, be so voluntary, that the Will is active therein, it is certainly so,
in respect of the Means conducing to it, to the choice whereof, deliberation is
prerequir'd; the office of which deliberation, is to consult what means will be
most available to obtain the designed End by; the principal of which in Morals,
is Man's Summum Bonum, or sovereign Good, namely, the fruition of God whereunto
as well the Moral as Theological Virtues, are conducible Means; so that to be
actually virtuous, is to act for the enjoyment of the Chief Good, in a way
proper for the attaining of it; which to do the more steadfastly, constantly,
and certainly, were not, I should think, to, do less, but rather more
virtuously, yet without infringing the Liberty of the Will, which retains
always it is native power, when it so likes, to do otherwise. But in case the
habit of Virtue in any man grow so strong and potent, that it perpetually
incline him to pursue his Chief Good, I hope, the enjoyment of God, will not be
made such a necessary effect thereby, as that he will enjoy God, whether himself
will or no. The certainty therefore of a thing wrought by Moral Causes, is no
evidence that Man is not endued with Free Will, but only shows that the Motives
act so vigorously and powerfully considering the present disposition of the
Mind, and the Circumstances a man is in, that the Wills native indifferency to
will or not to will, is cast by them on that side, which makes for producing
the Effect, but yet so, that it is the Wills own choice to do it, which
determins itself by reason of the present agreeableness and gratefullness of
the Motives thereunto. For unless we'll deny the constant Experience of all
Ages, we must needs confess, that there is a certainty of diverse Effects in the
course of several things in the world (such as were mentioned Section 7.
besides many more not spoken of) which flow from Moral Motives; so that it
would be more tolerable if there were no way to reconcile Free Will, and that
certainty, to make doubt of the former, rather then of the latter; but we see,
by what has been said, That a certainty of effects proceeding from Moral
Causes, and the native Liberty o^ Man's Will; may well enough consist together.

The other two Arguments brought to prove, That Tradition is defectible are
Founded on two Instances, the former of which is this; The Tradition of the one
true God was in a short time so defaced and corrupted, that the world did laps
into Polytheism and Idolatry, although it was settled in the heart of Noah, and
firmly believed by him to be the way to Happiness, and the contradicting and
deserting this to be the way to Misery; and this Doctrine according to the
Traditionists, must be supposed, to have been so taught to his children, and by
them also to their Posterity. To this I answer, first, that there is not the
like reason why a Doctrine committed only to three Families, should be so
permanent, as that which is entrusted to millions of people, allbeit the
Motives for the preservation of it were the same. But I secondly answer, that
the Motives for propagating Christianity are far more excellent, then the
Motives whith Noah and his Sons had for the continuing the belief of the one
true God. For the express motives in ancient time, both before, and under the
Law, were only temporal rewards and punishments, which because they were seen
to befall the bad and good promiscuously; in that some of both sorts abounded
with Riches and Honor, and others had their afflictions; it is obvious to
conceive, considering the frequent tentations to Ambition, Luxury, and Avarice,
that men would be far less intent to regard Truth, and exercise acts of Piety
and Virtue, when everlasting Bliss and Misery were only gathered by Consequence
to be the final Portion of good and evil men; then when in express words they
were constantly pressed, and inculcated as Motives, the one to incline men to
embrace Truth and Goodness; the other, to deterr them from Error and Vice, as
since the Preaching of Christ's Gospel they have ever been. Neither, which I
thirdly, and lastly Answer, will it be granted, That the Tradition of the one
true God ever faild, or was totally lost, till it appear that Abraham and Lot,
had not knowledge of Him from Sem, or some of his Progeny. Could Abraham (says
Dr. Stillingfleet, Origin, Sacr. Book 2. Chap. 2. Sect. 9.) when he was
contemporary with Sem, be ignorant of the Truth of the Flood, when Sem, from
whom he derived himself, was one of the Persons who escaped it in the Ark?
Could Sem be ignorant of the actions before the Flood, when Adam, the first
Man, lived some part of his time with Noah? And could Noah then be ignorant of
the Creation, and Fall of Man? The same Learned Author in the same Sect. a
little before, writes thus; Adam conversed sometime with Noah; Sem his Son,
was probably living in some part of Jacobs time, or Isaacs at least; And how
easily, and uninterruptedly might the general Tradition of the ancient History,
be continued thence to the time of Moses, when the number of Families agreeing
in this Tradition was increased, and withal incorporated by a common ligament
of Religion? I demand then (says the Doctor) where can we suppose any
ignorance, or cutting off this general Tradition, in so continued a Succession
as here was?

The latter Instance offerr'd to disprove the Indefectibility of Tradition by,
is about the Procession of the Holy Ghost, which the Latin Church (says the
Objection) affirms, is from the Father, and the Son, and a nenessary Article of
Faith; the Greek Church holding, That He proceeds only from the Father, and not
from the Son, disowning any such Doctrine to have been delivered to them by the
precedent Age, or to any other Age of their Church, as the Doctrine of Christ;
and yet no question can be made, but that if the Procession of the Holy Spirit
from the Father and the Son, be an Article of Faith, it was taught in the
Greek, as well as in the Latin Church; and therefore the Non-belief of it in
the Greek Church, is an evident Argument of the actual failure of Tradition in
this Point, and of the possibility of it is failings in others also.

To this, I return, That seeing the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, and more
especially of the Holy Ghost was purposely handled in the Second General
Council held at Constantinople, which was principally called for confuting and
condemning Macedonius, who denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, and that
nevertheless, no mention is made in the Creed there set forth of his
procession, save from the Father, (...), and also the same Creed was not only
received but continued likewise a long time after in the Latin Church, without
the addition of (...) it seems strongly probable (at least) that the procession
of the Holy Ghost from the Son, was not thought by the Constantinopolitan
Fathers to be an Article of Catholic Faith, seeing it was so obvious, so
easy, and one would think so opportune also; after (...) to have added (...),
if they had indeed believed it to be an Article of Faith. The excuse that some
make why they did it not, which is; that there was none as yet who denied the
procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, seems trivial, since it was the very
Divinity of the Holy Spirit that Macedonius opposed, which alone therefore, if
the excuse were good, should have been asserted by the Council; and the
contrary opinion thereto only condemned. But whatever was the cause or the
occasion why (...) was omitted (which I wave) this is certain that the Doctrine
of the Holy Ghosts procession from the Son, is either an Article of Catholic
Faith, or it is not; if it be not, Tradition is no way concerned, let the
Greeks and Latins too hold whether way they please about it. If it be an
Article of Faith, and that the Greek and Latin Churches agree in the substance
and sense of it, and differ only in the manner of the expression, there has
been no failure of Tradition in the Greek Church concerning the procession of
the Holy Ghost. Forasmuch then as it remains only to be known, whether the
Greeks and Latins agree in Sense, though they differ in words, or the Greeks
(...), per Filium be the same in effect with the Latin (...), a Filio, let us
see what the Roman Doctors (who we may be sure will be no more favorable to
the Greeks then is fitting) say to it. Peter Lombert, writing of the Procession
of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, says; Sciendum est quod Graeci
confitentur Spiritum Sanctum, esse Filii sicut and Patris, quia and Apostolus
dicit Spiritum Filii, and Veritas in Evangelio Spiritum Veritatis. Sed cum non
sit aliud Spiritum Sanctum esse Patris vel Filii, quam esse a Patre and Filio,
etiam in hoc in eandem, nobiscum Fidei sententiam convenire videntur, licet in
verbis dissentiant. Unde etiam quidam eorum Catholici Doctores intelligentes
unam eandemque, fore sententiam praedictorum verborum, quibus dicitur Spiritus
Sanctus procedere a Filio, and esse Filii, professi sunt Spiritum Sanctum etiam
procedere a Filio, Lib. 1. Sentent. Distinct. 11. D. E. Where the same Author
goes on, to show, That several eminent Greek Fathers, Athanasius, Didymus,
Cyrillus, and Chrysostom accord even in expressions also about the Procession
of the Holy Ghost. Aquinas propounding the Question, Utrum Spiritus Sanctus
procedat a Patre per Filium, concludes affirmatively, and answers Objections
made to the contrary, as is to be seen Part prima. Quaest. 26. Artic. 3. Yea,
and Mr. White, however in the Apology for Tradition, he calls the Greeks
assertion, concerning the Holy Ghosts Procession, (as is truly said of him) a
mere negative Tradition, or a Denial that they have any such Tradition, that
the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son; yet, explicating else
where, the sacred Mystery of the Blessed Trinity, averrs it to be a more
significant Speech to say, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father by the
Son, then from the Father and the Son, which in illustrating the Doctrine of
the Trinity by Cognitum, Cognitio and Amor, he thus shows; Patet vim motivam
quae est in Bono cognito, esse totam in ratione Boni, rationem vero cognitionis
non esse, nisi conjunctionem hujus virtutis ad movendum; quare alio modo
dicitur tertia Persona Procedere a Patre, and alio modo a Filio; and quasi
direct and principaliter a Patre, and a Filio, non nisi concomitanter seu
tanquam a modo Causae. Unde non mirum, si Christus Dominus, and aliqui Patres
diserte, dicant eum procedere a Patre, sine mentione Filii; unde intelligitur,
quod sit magis expressiva locutio dicere, quod procedit a Patre per Filium;
quam quod procedit a Patre and Filio. Cum enim per quasi viam, and medium
denotet, impossible est procedere per Filium, and non a Filio, quia omnis pars
viae respectu termini, habet rationem termini a quo and principii, unde ly per
explicat and esse a, and a non primo principio.

SECT. XI. What rational assurance we have, That Scripture is not corrupted in
Necessaries to salvation. The way to know what things have been ever Orally
taught. Two Reasons given, why Tradition, though it be of an indefectible
nature, should not be the Rule of Faith. Whether a fundamental Error, can ever
obtain a a settled quiet possession in the visible Church? An offer from Reason,
for the impossibility of the thing. Errors not-fundamental, may overspread the
Church, and why? Several instances of such Errors in the Roman Church.
THe practical delivery of Christ's Doctrine never (as has been seen) failing;
it may, by carefully searching the Scripture, be known, what things contained
in it are of necessity to be generally believed and practiced (because no more
is so, but what has been always believed, and practiced by Christians) provided
assurance may be had, what has been ever practically delivered; and that
Scripture is not corrupted in such places of it, as contain the Necessaries to
salvation, or Articles of Catholic and Apostolic Faith.

For the latter, (which I Will first insist on) That Scripture is not corrupted
in necessary Points, I shall briefly say but this; Since the actings of Gods
Providence are not known to us, but as they are seen in second Causes, the most
rational account we have, That Scripture is come safe to our hands, without
Corruption in all things of necessity to be generally believed, and practiced,
is from hence; that Scripture being constantly read by multitudes of Knowing
Christians, could not possibly be corrupted in Texts containing such things as
were perpetually taught, repeated, and practiced in the Church (of which sort
the Necessaries to Salvation are) without being taken notice of, and if
occasion required, rectified.

As for satisfaction in the other difficulty, viz. What things have been ever
orally taught, this in general, from what has been said, appears certain, that
no Point of Christ's Doctrine shall ever fail. And although in this or that
Place, the continuance of Christian Faith be not necessary, yet where ever
there has been a visible great Society of Christians, wherein it was once
firmly settled, and which has had a constant succession of Pastors continued in
it, nothing held by that society to be an Article of Faith, could totally cease
to be so esteemed, unless so vast a Body (in which there would be in every Age
a considerable number of wise and pious men) could either be universally
imposed on by fraud, or forced by violence; or that all it is Members would
carelessly neglect, or wilfully forsake, what they believed to be a necessary
Means to save themselves, and their Posterity from endless Torment, and to
bring them to everlasting Jay. Universally then such a Body could neither
desert, nor loose it is Faith, in any necessary Point. And in case any
remarkable Member, or Part thereof, should ever do it, 'twould be known, and
presently opposed by the sound Part adhering to the Truth, as constant
Experience has made evident in the timely resisting of all Heresies. This, if
granted to be true, plain reason will enforce our assent, that the Latin or
Western Church, being such a Society, as is before mentioned, did at the
beginning of the Reformation, and still does hold and maintain all the Articles
of Catholic and Apostolic Faith.

Objection, If the Latin, or Western Church, when the Reformation begun, did
really hold all the Articles of Catholic and Apostolic Faith, by virtue of
Oral Tradition communicating the same unto it; what good cause can be shown,
why Tradition should not be the Rule of Faith, even without having the Doctrins
it delivers confirmed by parallel Texts of Holy Writ?

Answer, since the Rule of Faith must doubtless be that, into which it is
ultimatly resolved, as the best and highest Means of ascertaining Christ's
Doctrine to Mankind; and that the same must contain in it no Error; this
Inference (I think) will be clear; that in case Oral Tradition, or the Living
voice of the Church, either be not the best and highest means whereby to
ascertain Christ's Doctrine to Mankind; or that it may deliver, or teach an Error
under the notion of an Article of Faith, it cannot be in justice esteemed the
Rule of Faith. And that Oral Tradition, or the Living voice of the Church, is
not the best, and highest means whereby to ascertain Christ's Doctrine to
Mankind, the following Paragraph (I think) will make good.

Where two Testimonies both averr and attest the same thing; if the one be of
Divine, the other but of Humane Authority; the Testimony that is Divine ought
of Right to have the preeminence, and the relyance for the verity of what is
witnessed by them, is to be ultimatly cast upon it. Seeing then the Testimony
of Scripture is Divine, as being, ex confesso, the Word of God; and Tradition
but an Humane Witness, forasmuch as it is said to be the Delivery of Christ's
Doctrine in the various expressions of Pastors, Parents, Tutors, Masters of
Families, and Nurses, it is most reasonable, that Faith should be finally
resolved into Scripture, (and not into Tradition) as it is Rule. Yea and albeit
Tradition may peradventure in some things be thought more plain then Scripture;
(as for example, suppose in the Point of Christ's Divinity, these words of the
Nicene Creed; Deum de Deo, Lumen de Lumine, Deum verum de Deo vero; genitum non
factum, consubstantialem Patri per quem omnia facta sunt;) yet that Scripture
should be still esteemed the Text, and Tradition but the best, and most certain
Comment upon it, I gather from hence, That it cannot well be otherwise thought,
but that even the Disciples of the Apostles after the Books of the New
Testament were published and received among Christians, would themselves
confirm to their Auditors, what they told them they had been Orally taught by
the Apostles, out of the written Word; because the very sayings of Christ
himself, and his divinely inspired Apostles, would in common prudence be
thought to be of greater weight and authority with them, then their own;
although believed to be esteemed by the people, as true and certain, as any
whatsoever, not of more then Humane Authority.

Having found then (I suppose) one reason, why Tradition ought not to be held
the Rule of Faith; I Will make trial if in another sense also, it be not
incapable of being justly so reputed; for if the present Church of any one Age,
can teach us an Article of Faith what is not so, but indeed an Error; then is
not Tradition the Rule of Faith. Now to find out, whether the Church, in any
one Age, can do so, or not, this will be a sure way, to try, if discovery can
be made. That any Error has been ever taught by the Catholic Church, or by any
known, and acknowledged Part of it, as an Article of Faith; for if that can be
done, the possibility of the thing, is put out of doubt thereby.

To make a clear discourse on this subject, 'twill be expedient to consider,
That there be two sorts of Errors in Matters of Religion; Fundamental, and not
Fundamental. By Fundamental, I mean, such as either immediately and directly,
or, at least, by necessary and apparent Consequence, contradict some Articles
of Catholic Faith; by not-Fundamental, I mean, such as evidently do neither.
This Distinction premised, and allowed of; since it is clear (as I take it) by
what has been said of the Motives and Means of perpetuating Christ's Doctrine in
the World, that no Article of Catholic Faith can ever perish or cease to be
believed; 'twill follow, that no Fundamental Error can at any time get a settled
and quiet possession in the Church, but shall always, after it is taken notice
of, find opposition by Orthodox Christians, because they cannot choose but see,
that the embracing of it would necessarily destroy the contrary Divine Truth
firmly held (by so many, at least, as rightly consider the matter) to be
necessary to Salvation. Of the assured certainty of this, we have a famous
Instance in the Arian Heresy, which though eagerly promoted by the Wit and
industry of most cunning and restless Heretics, and stiffly backed and
countenanced by the Authority of several great Prelates, assisted with the might
and power of Temporal Potentates and Princes; yet was still opposed; and when
fraudulent and violent means had tired and spent themselves, the opposite Truth
prevailed, and showed it self more glorious then before. But as for Errors
not-Fundamental, or whose opposition to any Article of Faith is not seen,
because too remotely contradictory thereto to be easily discerned; if such once
come to be received as pious Opinions, and promoted by the Schoolmen, I do not
understand, why they may not in long continuance of time, be advanced to the
repute of being esteemed Articles of Faith. For proof of the truth of which,
I Will produce some few Instances in the Doctrine of the Church of Rome.

The first shall be this, That the Council of Trent has desin'd Sess. 7. Can.
9. That there is a Character, or certain spiritual sign, or mark imprinted in
the souls of all that are Baptized, Confirmed, and Ordained, which yet I find
disproved by an eminently Learned Gentleman of the Romish Church, (if I
understand the Council and Him aright) in his Institut. Sacr. Tom. 2. Lect. 4.
Page 32. as was shown before in Sect. 4. of this Treatise, and so superfluously
to be here again set down.

A second Instance, is the Belief of freeing souls from Purgatory, and bringing
them thence to Heaven before the day of Judgment, which Opinion, the last
mentioned Author, Thomas Albius in his Book, De medio animarum statu, has
proved to be erroneous. It Is true indeed, he says, That it is no Article of
the Roman Faith; and I find the Trent Council, in disertis verbis, to affirm
only this, Purgatorium esse, animasque ibi detentas fidelium suffragiis,
potissimum vero acceptabili Altaris Sacrificio juvari. Decret. de Purgatorio,
Sess. 25. But the Popes granting InIndulgences, and Priviledg'd Altars, Priests
saying of Masses, and the Peoples praying, and giving Alms for the delivery of
souls out of Purgatory, should better (an indifferent person would be apt to
think) expound and declare the Churches sense, (or intention of Pastors,
Parents, Tutors, Master of Families, and Nurses) of the word juvari, then any
private Doctor whatsoever. Yea, and if Master Whites Adversaries in this Point
should urge, That there is a plain practical Tradition for the truth of the
delivery of souls from Purgatory before the day of Judgment, by the help of
Indulgences, Masses, Prayers, and Alms, it would have some difficulty in it to
disprove them. For that the Members of the Roman Church, do not only generally
use those things to that end and purpose, but were also taught by the preceding
Age to do so, will not (I presume) be denied; so that unless they were told by
the Recommenders of the Practice, that it was the Product of a pious Opinion
only grounded on probability; (which I cannot conjecture any likelihood of
being done by Pastors, Parents, Guardians, Masters of Families, and Nurses, who
most commonly, rather press the necessity of what they teach, then otherwise) I
apprehend not how they should embrace it, save on the same Terms they did other
practical things of their Religion which they judged to be of Catholic use and
necessity.

A third Instance, shall be the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which if it
necessarily imply a Contradiction, is doubtless an Error; and to prove it does,
I will, of many Arguments that might be urged, make use only of two, when I
have first set down three things, which by the Traditionists, I am sure, by
some of them, will be granted, to be all of them truths. The first is, That
Transubstantiation, is a conversion of the Bread into the Body, and the Wine
into the Blood of Christ. The second is, That a Body has extension, or parts
extra parts. The third thing is this, That How many Hosts, or conconsecrated
Elements soever they be, Christ's Body is nevertheless but one. These three
Propositions presupposed as true; I argue, That the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation implies a Contradiction, in manner following.

Whosoever teaches, That one and the same Body, may be equally extended; and
not equally extended, at one and the same time, teaches, in effect, a
Contradiction to be true.

But whosoever teaches the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, teaches, that one
and the same Body may be equally extended, and not equally extended at one and
the same time. Ergo,

Whosoever teaches the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, teaches, in effect, a
Contradiction to be true.

The reason of the Major is this; Corpus and quoquoversus extensum, vel quod
habet parts extra parts, signify the same thing, and to be equally extended,
and not equally extended, is one with this, to be extended to one and the same
degree, and not be extended to one and the same degree, which to befall one and
the same thing, at one and the same time, is certainly contradictory; since (in
regard a Body and a Thing every way extended differ not) it is in effect to be
one and the same thing and not one and the same thing at once, or the same
thing not to be the same thing with it self.

The evidence for the truth of the Minor is no less then for that of the Major;
for since according to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Christ's Body is every
where one and the same Body, and the consecrated Elements are many, (either
Substances or Accidents) 'twill follow, That as often as the Elements are at
the same time of different sizes or bigness, the Body of Christ, which is
neither more nor less extended on the Altar then the Elements, must be of an
unequal bigness at the same time; or be equally, and not-equally, or just to
such a degree, and not just to such a degree of bigness extended in one moment
of time; For example, The Body of Christ under the Elements extended in one
place to two degrees, and the same Body under the Elements extended in another
place to three degrees, would be at the same time extended just to two degrees,
and not just to two degrees; and likewise just to three degrees, and not just
to three degrees; which to suppose a truth (seeing a Body, and a Thing every
way extended is the same) were to put a thing to be not the same thing which it
is.

Another Argument is offerr'd against Transubstantiation thus;

To affirm Christ's Body to be greater and less then it self at the same time,
is, in effect, to affirm a Contradiction true.

But to affirm Christ's Body to be in two or more distinct places at once, (as
those who will defend Transubstantiation must do) is to affirm it to be greater
and less then it self at the same time: Ergo;

To affirm Christ's Body to be in two, or more distinct places at once, is, in
effect, to affirm a Contradiction true.

The truth of the Major, is clear from hence, That it is the same for a Body
(or a thing extended) to be greater and less then it self at the same time, as
to be, and not to be the same with it self; which is impossible.

And the Minor is equally certain, for since two distinct places are of larger
extent then one, and that locus and locatum are commensurat; if one Body fill
distinctly and apart one place, and yet, at the same time, fill another also,
it will, of necessity, be greater and less then it self, whilst filling only
one place, it will be less then it self filling two; and filling two, it will
be greater then it self filling only one.

Some Romanists I know will make light of all this I have said against
Transubstantiation, and think to confute it by flatly denying, that a Body and
Thing extended is all one; but of such I would fain learn, what a Body then is,
or how a corporeal substance, as such is distinguished from an incorporeal, a
material from an immaterial, otherways then by extension, or having parts
extra parts, by which it is contiguous to the several distinct sides of the
ambient Body or Bodies that encompass it; whereas an incorporeal or immaterial
substance having no such parts, is of necessity all together wheresoever it is.
If it were said, that a material substance is not of necessity actually
extended, yet naturally capable of being so, which an immaterial is not; I
desire to be resolved, whether by nature, and creation, there be or ever was,
any material substance in the world without extension; if they yield (as I
assure my self they will) there neither is, nor ever was; I shall take their
concession for a grant, that it is a natural and innate property of matter to
have extension; and consequently from thence infer; that if Christ's Body, in
the Eucharist be unextended, it is either an immaterial substance, that is, a
Spirit and no Body; or else a new kind of Being, which is neither materal nor
immaterial, since by Creation, all substances were either the one or the other,
had quantitative parts or had not. If reply were made that Christ's Body is
miraculously present in the Eucharist by way of substance, (as Aquinas and
others say it is) not including material nor immaterial, but abstracting from
both; I would rejoyn, and say, That the existence of such a Being is (to my
apprehension) impossible; for although in Metaphysics, Philosophers speak
abstractedly, first of a substance, and afterward difference it by corporeal
and incorporeal, yet such discourse, does not at all intend or suppose, that
there either is, or can be, a substance really existing, which is neither of
the two; no more then from saying animal est rationale, vel irrationale, it can
be presumed, that an animal does or may possibly exist and be neither man nor
brute. The design of inventing such general words as substantia, animal, homo,
was not to make signs of any real or possible Being to be signified by them,
but to contract, and abbreviate men's discourse for the more ready understanding
of one another; as for Instance, when we would signify in short, that Peter,
James, John, and every other individual person in the world is of the same
nature, to wit, a creature compounded of soul and body endued with sense and
Reason, a word is framed to comprehend and import all that, which is, Homo,
Man; and then we affirm of Peter, of James, of John etc. that he is a Man in
stead of saying he is a Creature compounded of Soul and Body, endued with Sense
and Reason. When again it is observed wherein Peter, James, John, etc. agree
with every singular Brute, a word is devised to denote that agreement, to wit,
animal. And since it is found that not only all these, but that also every
corporeal and spiritual Thing whatsoever accords together in this, that they
have a Being subsisting of it self, a word is used to show that, which is
substantia a substance; to avoid therefore the trouble of saying, Peter, James,
John etc. this horse, bird, fish, etc. is a Thing that has a Being of it self,
we contract it into this, Peter, James, etc. this horse, bird, fish is a
substance; since then we see, that a Substance abstractedly taken, is not only
void, but even incapable of all kind of existence, to say, Christ's Body is
present in the blessed Sacrament after the manner of a Substance, is to the
same effect, as to say, That it is neither corporeally, nor incorporeally there
present, that is, in verity not at all. But suppose we that Christ's Body were
present in the Eucharist without extension, and no other substance for the
Accidents of Bread and Wine to subsist in; the Accidents, in such a case, must
either subsist in Christ's Body, and so extension be in a Subject unextended,
which is plainly contradictory; or else, they must subsist of themselves without
a Subject, which is equally impossible; for if we duly reflect, we shall find,
That an Accident is not any Thing really differing from it is Subject, but a
mere Mode only, or manner of it is Being, or an appearance of the Subject, under
some particular consideration, as will (I think) by the following Instance
evidently be seen; Take a piece of Paste, and mold it into several forms one
after another, making it now long, then round, afterward square, and twill be
no thing all the while, but the very same Paste still, under various
appearances, which for distinction sake, we give different appellations to; so
that to suppose length, roundness, squareness, (or long, round, square, take
whether we please) really to exist, without some Thing which we denomintate
long, round, square, is to suppose the mere mode of a Thing, not to be the mere
mode of a Thing, but a Thing of it self, which is utterly impossible. Many
strange incredible things beside would follow, upon the supposal of the
Accidents subsisting without a Subject, as that they are apt to do and suffer
all things, which the Bread and Wine before their Transubstantiation were
liable unto; as to nourish the Body, to be broken, to be split, to be
corrupted, to be turned into ashes, smoke, etc. which seem to involve in them a
contradiction also, in that a mere accident, which is nothing, should do and
suffer something.

SECT. XII. That the Holy Scripture, or Written Word of God, is the Rule of
Christian Faith. That Tradition is the best, and safest way and means, whereby
to attain to the certain knowledge thereof. That the Multitude, or weakest sort
of Christians are not able of themselves, without the help of others, to
resolve Faith aright, or be rationally assured, what the Doctrine of Salvation
is.
NOw, at length, having mastered all the difficulties in my Way; I see nothing
of moment to obstruct or hinder me, why I may not from the premised Discourse
securely infer, That the Sacred Scripture, (i. e. Such places of it as contain
the necessario credenda, and agenda of Christ's Gospel) is the Rule of Christian
Faith; yet so, as that without the help of Tradition, it can neither be known
to be the Word of God; nor when, in general, it is known so to be, any rational
assurance can be had, That the Texts containing the Necessaries to Salvation,
remain incorrupt, but by the same Tradition; nor lastly, That those Necessaries
to Salvation, can be manifested what they are, save as Tradition guides unto,
and gives notice of them. All which, if I have been clear in the proof of, he
that goes about to seek for the Rule of Faith and makes not Tradition his chief
and best Assistant, shall never have any rational ground of certainty, that he
has met with it, and explicitly knows the Contents of it, even though perchance
he have really and indeed found it and peradventure explicitly believes
whatsoever is contained in it.

If it be so difficult a thing, as it seems to be, by what has been said, to
resolve Faith aright, or to make such use of Scripture, as to be certainly
informed by it of Christ's Doctrine, without danger of erring or being mistaken,
it might be demanded, how the generality of Christians should be able of
themselves to do it. True, but such demand, as it would be reasonable and
pertinent if the Multitude were obliged to learn the Christian Religion of
themselves, immediately from Scripture; so on the contrary, if they have no
obligation to do it, it is neither the one nor the other. And that no such
obligation lies upon them, the unpracticableness (to say no worse) of the
thing, manifested in the sixth Section of this Treatise, sufficiently testifies.
We must then, would some say, pin (it seems) our Faith on others sleeves. To
wave that catachrestical effeminate speech, let us put the Question more manlike
and fairly thus, Whether the generality of the People must not of necessity
rely on others Learning and Fidelity, in coming to the knowledge of Christ's
Doctrine; And my Answer then is, That there is no possible way of avolding it
without a continued Miracle of immediate Revelation, but that most certainly
they must, and 'twas and ever will be so. For first, if we look back toward
the beginning of the Gospel, we shall find that the New Testament was writ by
the Apostles and Evangelists in Greek, which Tongue, though granted to have
been the most generally known of any one, then in the Eastern Part, yet, that
every third Christian understood that Language, is not at all to be thought on.
Secondly, Nor was the Scripture presently Translated into every Tongue, where
there were those who embraced Christianity. Thirdly, Neither could poor
Mechanics, Laborers, Servants, and Slaves procure it, when Translated, before
the ready way of Printing was Invented; because, 'twas not formerly a little
money that would buy both, or even one of the Testaments. Fourthly, Neither
yet, if all Christians had had wherewith to buy, would there have been, till
the Art of Printing was found, Books enough for half, or a quarter of them.
Fifthly, Suppose we now, that by means of the Press, every one has, or might
have, a Bible in their native Tongue; How is it possible, that the vulgar
should know of themselves that it is the Word of God? that it has been kept
free from corruption in things of necessary Belief and Practice? that it is
faithfully Translated out of the Originals? that considering what variety of
Doctrins are in it; and in how many places dispersed, they should be able, and
at leisure, to cull out of it a Summary of Fundamentals, (in case the thing it
self were attainable without other helps besides Scripture) seeing millions of
them are necessitated to spend their whole time almost, to get a poor
Livelihood for themselves and Families? that they should be able to compare
places of Scripture so effectually, as rightly to compose seeming
Contradictions in Points of Faith, thereby, when not without difficulty they
are got to understand, but ordinarily well; even plain and common things? Who
so shall seriously reflect on these matters, will doubtless think it strangely
unbecoming Man's most gracious Maker, and Redeemer, to require at the hands of
the poor ignorant people to pick out their Religion of themselves from Holy
Scripture, or to depend upon their own weak performances, for finding out the
true sense and interpretation of it. For (over and above what has been already
shown for the unreasonableness of the thing) after this be first well weighed,
in the balance of sound Reason, that the Multitude must of necessity trust
others, for the truth of the Translation of Scripture, let an irrefragable
Reason be given by any that can, why they should not as well, and might as
safely give credit to those for the sense of it, who are in prudence to be
entrusted by reason of their Knowledge and Honesty for recommending to them the
sincerity of the Version, since it is to be presumed they understand it to be a
true translation no further, then they know the sense of the words translated.
Notwithstanding the plain verity of what has here been said, it is not unknown,
how frequently and vehemently some popular men use to cry out to the people
from the Pulpit, Believe not us, believe the Scripture, as if the meanest of
their Auditors were thought by them to be the proper Judges of the Scripture
sense, amongst the rest. But though their words seem to import as much, if we
look to the bottom of the business, we shall discover, That even these
Preachers must acknowledge, they intend otherwise; or else confess their design
in doing it is unlawful. For when they say, Believe not us, believe the
Scripture; they either intend the Texts they quote for a Proof of what they
touch, or they do not. If they intend them for a Proof, their meaning must be
this; believe us, yet not for our own sakes, but for the Scriptures; that is,
believe us, because we teach the very same Doctrine which the Scripture does;
or believe the Scripture to the same intent and purpose, or in the same sense
we allege it, for to believe it in any other, would not have the effect of a
Proof with them. But if they have no intention to use the Scriptures they quote
to prove what they Preach, let them inform us to what other good intent they do
it, for I cannot think of any. To several bad ends, it is obvious enough to
conceive how it may be done; as out of covetousness, or through the desire of
applause, or for promoting a faction, to humor and gratify the people they
Preach unto. But for none of these ends will they yield, I am well assured,
they do it; and therefore I see no way to avoid it, but that the Quotations
must be granted to be produced for Proofs, and consequently, that the persons
using them have no real design by saying, believe not us, believe the
Scripture, that the truth of their Doctrine should stand, or fall, accordingly
as their Auditors judge it consonant, or disagreeing to the places of Holy Writ
which they are directed to, for examination and trial of the verity of what
their Teachers deliver, as they themselves often (I believe) apprehend; but for
Proof and confirmation indeed of the Doctrine taught, according to the
intendment of the Preacher.

Some perhaps would here be encouraged to assert, that this which I have last
discoursed, concerning Holy Writ, (viz. that the Multitude cannot without
better help then their own, make right use of Scripture, as it is the Rule of
Faith) makes for Oral Tradition, which instructs every one from the Prince to
the Peasant in all the Articles of Christian Faith. To such I should answer,
That Tradition could no more be made use of as the Rule of Faith (supposing it
were so) by the People, without the assistance of some more skilful then
themselves, then Scripture can. For first, They must trust others, that what
they are instructed in by their immediate Teachers, is the sense of the present
Catholic Church. Secondly, They must have it from better Arguments then
themselves can frame, That the Doctrine of the present Church is the very same
with the Doctrine of the Church in all foregoing Ages since Christ. Thirdly,
They must believe others, That Tradition is the alone Rule of Faith, for the
Multitude (I may safely say) is not so quick sighted, as clearly to see, that
there is no other way to come to a right knowledge of Christ's Doctrine, but by
an Oral Delivery of it. So that in fine, I am much assured, That the Rule of
Faith was never intended by God for the Multitude to resolve immediately of
themselves the Christian Faith into; and that therefore the Destinction of
Ecclesia docens, and discens is good, yea, necessary to be practically
maintained and upheld among Christians; To the former of which (I mean the
Ecclesia docens) consisting of Prelates and Pastors, the Depositum, or Rule of
Faith, is principally (not solely, because it is lawful for any to make good
use of it that can) entrusted; for that in reason, the Clergy is justly
presumed to be fittest, both for Skill and Will, to understand it aright, and
to employ it to it is due End, whilst they can want no Helps possible to be had
for gaining the true sense of it; and that it is the Main of their Employ, for
which they are called to their Sacred Office, to use and exercise the same to
it is proper End; whereas others, generally speaking neither, have the like
advantages to understand it as it ought to be, nor so great Motives and
Obligation to promote the true intendment and design thereof.

Have not then the People, even every particular person of them, it might well
be asked, a Judgment of Discretion in the choice and matters of Religion? If
by Judgment of Discretion be meant, That they are to do nothing, but what they
themselves approve of; I readily yield they have. But in case they set
themselves to oppose their own Judgment to the Judgment of the Clergy in
Matters of Faith, their Judgment will be found a Judgment of intolerable and
pernicious Indiscretion. For to make a true discovery of an Error in Faith, the
Rule of Faith must be well consulted, and the Point in question duly applied
to it, to be tried by it; so that if either the Rule it self be mistaken, or the
Thing to be regulated by it, be not rightly applied, no Doctrine concerning
Faith can rationally be discovered, whether it be an Error, or a Truth. And
it is ridiculously absurd, to think, that the vulgar sort consisting of
Servants, Laborers, Mechanics, and others, generally busied and spending
their days about Temporal affairs, should be more sufficient, and able, to
understand the Rule of Faith aright, and to apply things doubted of thereto, so
as truly to determine of their rectitude or obliquity by it, then the grave
and Learned Prelates, with the profound Doctors, and others of the more Ancient
and Reverend Divines, who have spent many of them thirty, several of them
forty, and some amongst them fifty years, or more, in the study (for the most
part) of sacred Learning, being legally also called to the Office of teaching
and directing Mankind as Christian, by a Mission successively derived from
Christ and his Apostles, which none besides the Clergy, how Learned or Pious
soever, can justly make claim to. Would it not then astonish, and work
compassion in any man of sobriety, to see the ignorant people grossly misled,
to believe, They are able enough of themselves to understand the Scripture, in
all things necessary to Salvation, when as it is principally for instructing
them aright in those very things, and keeping them to the due observance of
them, that they have spiritual Guides and Governors set over them by God, and
his Holy Church? Which yet they are many of them poor souls, being strangely
infatuated with a conceit of their own endowments, so far from having any
regard to, that although they daily see before their eyes, That the wise and
gracious God, in the Economy of his great Family, the World, has provided and
placed several men skilled in several things; some in Civil Government, some in
Laws, some in Physic, and others in other Professions, all for the Good of the
Community in assisting men in those things, wherein they are presumed not to
have skill enough to do the best for themselves; yet nevertheless, they will
not understand and discern a necessity of some skilfuller then they themselves
be, to advise, direct, and order them in those grand Matters, which are of more
Weighty and lusting Concern to them, then all the things in the whole World
besides; but in contradiction to the Analogy of Providence seen round about
them, despiseing those, who ought to have the oversight of their Belief and
Manners, make themselves their own Instructors and Rulers in the Learning and
Management of those things, wherein if they finally miscarry, they are ruined
to eternity.

SECT. XIII. The harm that may arise to the Church, from the belief of an
Error not-Fundamental, to be an Article of Faith. The true stating of the
difference, between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome. Whether or
no the Church of England be justly accused of criminal Schism? That the joint
Concurrence of Scripture, and Oral Tradition, (or the practical Delivery of
Christ Doctrine) was recommended by the Apostles to the Church; the
Restoration of which Concurrence ('it is humbly conceived) would be a firm
Foundation for re-uniting dissenting Christians in Matters of Religion; and the
Continuance of it a lasting Means for perpetuating Christianity in 'its ancient
native Purity.
I have now only one Scruple more remaining, concerning Matters of Faith, and
it arises from what my self concluded before, which was, That no Fundamental
Error could ever get a settled footing without disturbance, but should
perpetually meet with opposition from Orthodox Christians, so that all
necessary Truths, shall be continually nourished in the Bosom of the visible
Church. In which if I have said right, what harm, may it with great appearance
of reason be asked, can be found to accrue upon it, if an Error, not
fundamental chance to creep into the Church, and grow by degrees to be held at
length an Article of Faith, seeing the belief thereof is not in it is self
destructive of Salvation? I answer, there is this great harm in it, if no
other, that in case it at any time come to be discovered, and National Churches
be thereupon divided about it, one holding it to be an Article of Faith another
taking it to be an Erroneous Doctrine, there will unavoidably a Schism happen
upon it, because that Church which thinks it to be an Article of Faith, will
conceive herself obliged to deny Communion to the other, which rejects it as an
Error; and that other which rejects it as an Error, must needs judge it to be
an heinous Sin, to acknowledge and profess that She believes a Doctrine to be an
Article of Faith, which in truth she holds to be an Erroneous Opinion; and yet
without such acknowledgment, and answerable profession, she cannot be admitted
to Communion with the Church, that believes it to be an Article of Faith. Upon
this very account it is, that the Divisions between the Church of Rome, and
Church of England, as to the Doctrinal Part of Religion are continued; for I
find, that the most cautious and wary Vindicators of the English Church from
the guilt of Schism, which the Romanists incessantly accuse her of, allege in
excuse for her Separation, that the Church of Rome requires as necessary
Conditions of her Communion, the acknowledgment of some erroneous Doctrins to
be Articles of Faith, together with a public profession of them; which
Doctrins, although not damnable in their own nature, because not directly
repugnant to any Fundamental Truth, yet would become damnable to those who
judging them to be Errors, should acknowledge and profess them, contrary to
their Judgments, to be Articles of Faith. To this purpose writes the learned
Bishop Montague, the renowned Archbishop Laud, Doctor Fern, Doctor Hammond,
the late Lord Primat of Ireland Bishop Bramhal, with others, whereunto I Will add
one Cantrovertist more, of the present time, Doctor Stillingfleet, of which two
last mentioned (not to multiply needless quotations about a thing so well known
I Will here transcribe two Passages; It was not (says the learned Primate) the
erroneous Opinions of the Church of Rome, but the obtruding them by Laws upon
other Churches, which warranted a separation. Bishop Bramhals Vindication
against Mr. Baxter, Page: 101. This is clearly the state of the difference,
(says Doctor Stillingfleet) between the Church of Rome, and Church of England.
The Church of Rome imposes new Articles of Faith to be believed as necessary
to Salvation, as appears, etc. But the Church of England makes no Articles of
Faith, but such as have the Testimony and Approbation of the whole Cbristian
World of all Ages; and are acknowledged to be such by Rome it self, and in
other things she requires subscription, not as Articles of Faith, but as
inferior Truths, which She expects a submission to, in order to her peace and
tranquillity: Thus the ingenious Doctor in his Rational account of the Grounds
of Protestant Religion, Page 54. The Church of England then by this, holding
nothing to be an Article of Faith, but what Rome it self acknowledges to be so;
it is evident; That if the Church of England believe all the Articles of
Catholic Faith, as she professes she does, the Church of Rome does likewise
the same; and consequently, since every Fundamental Truth is an Article of
Catholic Faith, that she believes all Fundamental Truths, no less then the
other does. So that the true and real difference between those two Churches, is
not about Fundamentals, but Superstructures, which if they be Errors; or any of
them; (as I think some of them are proved to be in Sect. 11. and if it were
necessary, others, I conceive, might be) the imposing of them as Articles of
Faith by the Romish Church lays the guilt of Schism at her door. But that it
ever will be granted by the Romanists, while they esteem the Living Voice of
the Church the Rule of Faith, and hold the Council of Trent to be a true
Representative of the Church, that she proposes any Errors as Articles of
Catholic Faith; is not to be expected. And that they will yield to change their
pretended Rule of Faith, there is small encouragement yet to hope, since it is
true as well of them, as of too many others, what the rational Animadverter upon
the Pamphlet entitled, The naked Truth, rightly observes, That Political
Authors commonly oppose those Passages in their Adversaries Books, which are
ready to fall of themselves, and pass by those which urge and press them
harder. If it were not too truly so, 'twould be a matter of great amazement to
me, That Scripture and Tradition should still be cried up one against the
other, and made to look as if they were at enmity, when it is manifestly clear,
that God at first joined them amicably together, in that the Blessed Apostles
and Evangelists recommended the Holy Gospel, or Revelation of Jesus Christ the
Son of God, both in Writing, and by an Oral Delivery, and practical Profession
of it to the World, designing them, no doubt, to go hand in hand for
Instructing, Confirming, and Regulating Men in the Belief and Practice of
Christianity, till the end of all things. And therefore, till their joint
Concurrence be restored to the Church, I see not what great Good we can
rationally expect by Controversy; whereas, if due respect and regard were had
to both, the Issue and Event thereof would, as it appears in reason to me, be
this, That nothing fathered on Scripture could be assented to, and received as
a Catholic Point of Faith, unless there were likewise found a practical
Tradition of it in the Church; nor any Doctrine be taken and held for a
Catholic Tradition, but what was evidently seen by the Chief of the Clergy at
least, to have a real Ground in Holy Writ; whence the Christian Religion ('it is
humbly conceived) might be in a certain way (whenever Interest or Passion
prevented not) to be secured from Error and the Church from Schism.

FINIS.

