XIII SERMONS: Most of them Preached before His MAJESTY King CHARLES the II. IN
HIS EXILE.

By the late Reverend HENRY BYAM, D.D. Rector of Luckham, Canon of Exeter, and
one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

TOGETHER With the Testimony given of him at his Funeral, by Hamnet Ward, M. D.
Vicar of Sturminster-Newton-Castle, and one of the Prebendaries of the
Cathedral Church at Wells.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1675.

TO THE Right Honorable HENEAGE Lord FINCH, Baron of Daventry, Lord Keeper of
the Great SEAL of ENGLAND, AND Of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
THese Sermons having been, many of them, preached before his Majesty in the
Isles of Scilley and Jarsey, and much approved and accepted of by him, I cannot
think to whom they may be more welcome, under that qualification, than to Your
Lordship; Your Goodness likewise giving me a confidence of Your Acceptance,
Your Greatness of their protection. That is not only known, but admired too by
all that indeed know you; This, as I long since had the good fortune luckily to
foretell, so I do now most heartily congratulate. Nor had I need to erect any
other scheme for this prognostic than that of Your own Countenance, -- vultus
portendebat honores, When You were yet young, the traits of Honor were there
fairly visible to any discerning Eye, which now by the accession of His
Majesty's favor are grown so eminent, that he that runs may read Your yet
increasing Grandeur and Felicity. May Heaven add its blessing to all your
Enjoyments here, and prepare for You hereafter such as Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive. These, My
Lord, as they are my earnest wishes, so they are my real hopes; for the
accomplishment whereof his Prayers shall uncessantly be poured forth, who
humbly begs leave to subscribe himself,

My Lord, Your Lordships daily Votary, and most obedient Servant, Hamnet Ward.

TO THE READER.
I Shall not commend these Sermons to such as had the happiness to be
acquainted with the Author. It Is sufficient I know, to them, to be assured that
they are his. And to such as were strangers to him I shall need say but little,
only what was once spoken to a Holy man in a Vision, concerning the Scripture,
Toll, Lege: Take up and read, take up and read. Whoever does but diligently
peruse them cannot but both like and admire them. And sure if a work may
receive a real addition to its worth from the reputation of its Author, this
may challenge as great an advantage as any; since I can boldly say, that for
Learning, Piety, Charity, and Loyalty, the Age he lived in scarce afforded his
equal. He that desires to be yet farther acquainted with the transactions both
of his Life and Death, I refer him to what was delivered as a Testimony to him
in a Sermon at his Funeral, by him who highly honored his person when living,
and does now reverence his Memory being dead:

H. WARD.

A SERMON Preached before His MAJESTY, King CHARLES the II. In the ISLE of
JERSEY.
DEUTERONOMY. XXXIII. 7. Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah, and bring him unto his
people; let his hands be sufficient for him, and be thou an help to him from
his Enemies.


YOu expect a Sermon, and I am come with a Prayer: But so the fitter for the
place: Domus Orationis, this is the House of Prayer. And so the fitter for the
Times: Molesta tempora, perilous times; as the Apostle spoke of them. And so
the fitter for the Persons: Orate pro Regibus, One of our chiefest Duties is to
pray for Kings, and all that are, or should be in Authority.

Sermons offer themselves to the Ears, and perchance find thence some further
passage to the Heart: But Prayers pierce the Heavens; yea, Coelos Aereos, when
they are Brass. Oration Justi; a good man's prayer finds a good and speedy
passage through those obstructed passages and walls of Brass, James 5.16. Deuteronomy.
28.23.

Now here you have not only a Prayer, but a Good man's prayer, the Meekest man
upon the Earth, Numb. 12.3. and he a King too, but two verses before the Text:
A King in Jesurun that is, amongst all good and godly men, a King, and so
esteemed: or, Rex apud Rectissimum, as the Vulgar has it. God and all Good men
acknowledge him for such.

And so you have the Prayer of a King for a King, or rather for a Race of
Kings. Though a Benjamite, the Son of Belial, blow the Trumpet, and say, We
have no part in David: David of the Tribe of Judah; yet, Non, non auferetur
Sceptrum de Judah; the Prayer is for the Sion of Judah, and that Royal Race.

Again, It Is the Prayer of a Dying man, which commonly does most affect. The
las^ Words leave the deepest impression behind them. Extremum morientis munus,
non extremum munus: And we would willingly preserve a Legacy, especially a rich
one as this is; and which like the River of Paradise, does part it ^f into four
heads. First, Hear Lord the voice of Judah. Secondly, Bring him back unto his
people. Thirdly, Let his hands be sufficient for him. Fourthly, And be thou an
help to him from his Enemies. Every one of these does properly subdivide it
self into four parts also, that so we may have (...), every way a Cube full of
it self, able to subsist upon his own Basis.

Audi Domine vocem Judae, etc. Or you have here, First, A Prayer in general; a
Two-mens-Prayer, Moses and Judah, which like the stem of a Tree, breaks forth
and parts it self into three Branches. Secondly, The Prayer speciallized, or
those special Branches: First, for Reduction, Bring him back. Secondly, for
Sufficiency, Self-sufficiency, Let his own hands do it. Thirdly for Assistance,
Heavenly-assistance, the prime Branch upon this Tree, And be thou an help to
him from his Enemies.

I shall handle the Words in their order, and with what brevity I may. Hear
Lord the voice of Judah. O, now for some Moses who might fully express the
drift of Moses! He would tell you, We are not born for our selves alone: King,
Country, Friends every one requires some special duty at our hands. He would
tell you, The Care of Governors does extend it self in Nondum Natos. 'Twas a
wretched wish of his, who with himself would have the World dissolved, that
they might perish together.

But Moses knowing his day of Dissolution to approach, prays for a perpetuity
of happiness on his Country; especially on Judah, who was to sway the Scepter.
Hear Lord the voice of Judah. You may call it a Legacy, a Prayer, and a
Prophecy, for it is all these; and what is here given, prayed for, and foretold
in Earth, was all ratified and confirmed in Heaven. And this Blessing is
conveyed to Judah in a Prayer, because Oration is Clavis Gratiarum, the Key
which opens a door to all our happiness. And therefore Christ proposes a
Parable, that we should always pray, Luke 18. Prayers are Arma Christianorum,
as Tertullian. And I fear those weapons have been too often wanting in our
Armies. I am sure they were the weapons, the best weapons in Moses days. And
you may see what made Joshua conquer Amalek; and what put life into the Camp,
whiles Moses, Cruce and Prece, prevails with God, Exodus 17.11, 12. And the
Apostle does perchance allude to this, 1 Timothy 2. when he requires men to pray,
Lifting up pure hands every where: much more when we expose our lives to the
Casualties of War. When the Host goes forth against thine Enemies, then keep
thee from every wicked thing, Deuteronomy. 23.9. then especially, then or never. When
Judah is in Captivity, or danger, then pour out thy soul in Prayer to God; and
then especially, then or never.

Audi Domine; the second thing observable; To whom Moses does direct his
Prayer; Hear Lord; not hear Abraham, hear Isaak; or if those Patriarchs were
then in Limbo, as our Neighbors tell us, yet methinks they should have another
conceit of Enoch, whom God took away, Genesis 5. nay translated him, that he
should not see death, Heb. 11.5. And yet, it is not Hear Enoch, but Hear Lord.
Unto thee will I direct my prayer, Psalm. 5. Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
Psalm. 73.25. To him therefore, to him let us make our Addresses in all our
Troubles, for He calls, He commands; Venite ad me. And doubtless that of Isai,
Chap. 63. is sound Divinity in the New Testament also: Abraham is ignorant of
us, and Israel knows us not. And those Saint-Servants may remember what
Tertullian upbraided the Heathen withal in his days. Vos Irreligiosi qui eam,
that is, health and help: Quaeritis ubi non est, petitis a quibus dari non
potest, praeterito eo in cujus potestate est. God is a Jealous God, and will
not have his Honor given to another.

Now, as it is Hear Lord, so it is Hear Lord the voice of Judah. Moses the
Magistrate, or, if you will, Moses the Priest: For Moses and Aaron among his
Priests, Psalm. 99.6. Moses prays for Judah; that is not enough, Judah must
pray for himself also: whether it be Judah the Warrior, or Judah the
Lawgiver, Psalm. 60. In War, in Peace, Judahs Prayer must be heard: Hear Lord
the voice of Judah.

St. Peter bid Simon Magus repent, and pray to God, Acts 8. But what says
Simon? pray ye to the Lord for me. It Is true; Abraham's Prayer is heard for
Abimeleck: Moses is heard for Phara^h: Micha is persuaded of Gods favor for
getting a Priest into his house: Obed-Edom thrives for giving harbor to the
Ark: And the Shunamites Cost bestowed upon Elisha was not in vain. It Is true,
Oration Justi, oration efficax, multum valet, as St. James said; The fervent
Prayer of a righteous man avails much. But, Pray ye to the Lord for me, is
not enough: Your own Repentance must make way for the Priests Prayers, and your
Prayers must go along with Theirs. Judah's voice must be heard, as well as
Moses's Prayer: His heart is not enough, God requires his voice also.

I hate those Pharisaical Long-prayers, and those cryed-up Bablers of the
times: so much say I of our Hypocritical Zealots, whose House-reading is
Roaring, and their loud Prayers give Alarums to their sleeping Neighbors; and
what they do is to be known of men. Intra in Conclave, says our Savior,
Matthew. 6. When thou prayest, retire thee to thy Closet, and shut the Door, etc.
That Is for thy private Prayers; but in the Church, do the Works of the Church.
If thou be of the Congregation, bear a part with the Congregation: Let thy
tongue tell me thy hearts awake.

I know Hannah prayed with the heart, her lips only moved, her voice was not
heard. Her Sex perchance required that Modesty: And she well knew the place she
prayed in. But surely the Godly cannot always contain themselves. They will,
they must break out. Tears and Desires will seek for vent. Concalvit cor meum
intra me, says David, Psalm. 39. Mine heart was ho^ within me, the fire
kindled, and at the last I spoke with my tongue. And in this posture shall you*
most while, find the Saints in their Prayers* Moses cries to the Lord, Exodus 8.
Samuel crie^ to the Lord, 1 Samuel 7. Thus the Israelites; thus David almost
every where, Clamavi ad Dominum.

In the 142 Psalm 2. v. I poured out my Complaints before him: so we read. The
Tremel^ian reads it, I poured out my Meditations before him: not Quicquid in
Buccam venerit; not those sudden Raptures, and ex tempore-long-winded-prayers
of our New-gifted Pharisees. But, I poured out my Meditations. I durst not
offer any indigested, unpremeditate-Prayers. I Conclude this part, Non vox, sed
votum. The Heart, as it is the principal part of the body, and seat of life, so
is it the principal part and life of our Prayers: wherefore the heart must in
no case be away: But, as our Savior said upon another occasion, These things
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone: Heart and Tongue, let
both in Gods name go together. Give him both that made both. So will God hear
the voice of Judah.

The Second part follows; And bring him unto his people; or as the Tremellian
reads it, Reduce, bring him back: Bring him home again unto his People. Who
has not read the misery of Kings and Princes in all Ages? Their Captivities,
Banishments, and unthought-of Deaths! How many have attended the triumphant
Chariots at Rome? Or who has not heard of Bajazets Cage, or Sapor's
Footstool? Many have gone forth, but vestigia nulla retrorsum. They wanted
this Blessing of Judah: God brought them not back unto their People. But I
shall keep my self to Israel and Judah, those great Examples of Gods Justice
and Mercy. The Rebellious Israelites did a long time prosper; at length, losing
their Religion, they lost withal Gods Favor, and their dearest Country. They
were totally Conquered, made Captives, and A never to Return, did seal up their
sorrows. They left the Commandments of their God, and their God left them. He
was angry, very angry with Israel, so that the Lord removed them out of his
sight, 2 Kings 17.18. They lost not only their Power and their Country, but
their Name also: None left but the Tribe of Judah only; in the same place. And
Moses's Blessing did not depart from Judah. Still a Duc and a Reduc followed
him. God brings out David from the Philistines, and Joash out of the Temple:
Manasseh is carried into Babylon, yet God brought him back again, 2 Chronicles. 33.
And Jehoiachin, after 37 years Captivity, comes out of Prison to a Throne.
Still God rememembred Judah. Afterward follow those Indulgencies of Cyrus and
Darius: Judahs full Restorement. They to their Country, and one of their own to
govern them. Moses's Prayer still takes place, Judah was brought back unto his
People.

We have the same Prayer to make for our Gracious Sovereign, after so many
pressures, places and strange People. O Lord, bring him, bring him back, bring
him home. But, where be those People of his he must be brought unto? Amon was
an Idolater, and one that forsook the Lord: His Servants conspired against him,
and slew him in his own House. The people of the Land slew all them that had
conspired against the King, and made Josiah 's Son King in his stead, in the 2
of Kings 21. We had no Amon, no Idolater, but A Defender of the Faith, and for
that very cause Martyred by his own Subjects, and in his own House, as the
other was. But where are Populus suus? those People of the Land to kill the
Conspirators, and Crown Josiah? Where be those his People we would have him
brought unto?

Shall the Presbyterians be the men? 'Twere strange they should. They that
brought the first Fuel to that prodigious Fire: They that swore against him,
fought against him, betrayed, sold their Innocent Master: They that disavowed
that Cement, by which the Church of Christ has been firmly knit together ever
since there was a Church Apostolic upon the Earth; I mean Episcopacy.

The Independents can be none of them; they have cut themselves off from all
Communion with the Holy Catholic Curch by their professed Factions, Fractions,
and Independencies. They cut off that Sacred Head, and Quantum in Ipsis, all
future hopes, that Root and Branches should ever bud forth and sprout again.

Both these have sold themselves to work wickedness: And though their heads
look several ways, like Samsons Foxes, yet each carries fire in his tail to
burn the Church and Commonwealth. Manasses against Ephraim, and Ephraim
against Manasses, yet both against Jadah: Both Anti-Monarchical, and the
Kingdoms Bane: Both can agree together to divest the Sion of Judah from his
innate and just Authority. To give these men the Right hand of Fellowship, to
join with either of these, were to partake of their Sins, and render our selves
guilty of that Sacred Blood their hands have spilt. To join with them, were to
Justify all their Infernal and unparalleled Actions. O my Soul come not thou
into their secrets. O God, Divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

Where are those People then our Judah must be brought unto? What? to Complyers
and Compounders! whose Moneys have fomented those Wars; and their Examples have
encouraged the Rout of Rebels in their wickedness! I fear, I fear these are
some of Gomers Children in the first of Hosea. Sure in that glorious Martyrs
phrase, if not imbrued, yet are they besprinkled with Royal Blood. Let no man
tell me, He gave but a Little, or he gave unwillingly. A little Leaven
leaveneth the whole Lump. And there can be no pretext for Sin.

Marcus Arethusius, an holy Bishop, had caused an Idol-Temple to be overthrown
in Constantines days; afterward, when Julian came to be Emperor, He commanded
the said Temple should be built again at the cost of the Country: and because
the Bishop would Contribute nothing thereunto, the People launced his Body with
Pen-knives, and anointing him all over with Honey, they set him naked in the Sun
to be stung with Wasps: At length they offer him Life and liberty, if he would
give never so little, if but one halfpenny to the Work; nor would he give that
Halfpenny to save his Life.

Cicero tells us of one Philoxenes, A Courtier, A Poet; that chose rather to be
condemned, in Lapidicinas, to live a Slave, a Quarry-man, rather than he would
speak against his Conscience, in favor of Dionysius. And Papinian, the
greatest Lawyer of his time, chose rather to die than to defend Caracalla for
murdering of his Brother Geta. O poor Compounders! I pity their Case. God give
them Grace to Relent, Repent, and make their Composition with God too. But
truly they are at present in a sad Condition. Laodiceans; nor hot, nor cold.
Vestertilio's or Bats; nor Mice, nor Birds: Men, and no Men: You know Panarchs
Riddle. Tytides in the Trojan War, or as Suffetius in Hostilius's days, Populus
and no Populus; I am sure not Populus suus; never cut out to be Martyrs for
Religion, nor truly Loyal to their Sovereign.

And, yet has our Judah his People, a truly Faithful and Religious people,
such as much scorn to bow the Knee to those Rebellious Monsters. Such as abhor
all Covenants and Negative Oaths. Such as with Arethusius will lose their
Liberty, Livelihood, Lives, and All, rather than Compound, contribute, or give
one Penny to that cursed Crew, who have destroyed their Country, Religion,
Monarchy; And that King, Quo non surrexit melior -- After-Chronicles will speak
Him the best of Kings: worthy of better Subjects, a longer Life, and a more
timely Death. O Lord, bring our Judah back to that People, that faithful,
Conscientious, and oppressed People.

Methinks I hear a voice, like that of the Vision, Acts 16.9. Trajice in
Macedoniam: Come over, Come over into your own Country, and to your own People,
and help us. These are they of whom may be said what St. Paul's Nephew said of
others, Acts 23. They are ready, and look but for an Opportunity. And, I hope,
we shall find that true of them, which Tertullian spoke of the Christians in
his days: Singuli magis Noti quam omnes. They are a Numerous People: Good and
Many. And as Joab said, 2 Samuel 24. The Lord God add unto the people (how many
soever they be) an hundredfold: and that the Eyes of my Lord the King may see
it. And to this People, His People, Reduc eum, bring him back speedily, and in
safety too.

The Third part follows: Let his hands be sufficient for him. What is meant
by Hands in Scripture you well know, Psalm. 78. They remembered not his Hand, nor
the day when he delivered them from the Enemy. Psalm. 80. Let thy Hand be upon
the man of thy right Hand. Psalm. 144. Send thine Hands from above: rid me and
deliver me out of the great waters, from the Hand of strange Children. The Hand
being the Instrument of Power and Execution. Hence say we, that, Milites sunt
Manus Imperatoris: The Soldiers are the Generals Hands. And Manus Militum are
a Band of Men. So then, Let his hands be sufficient for him: Let him have Force
sufficient of his own, to defend his Right, and beat down his Enemies.

To implore Foreign Forces has ever been usual, and yet more usual than safe:
But, Necessitas cogit ad tristia. Alphonso, King of Naples, had recourse for
Aid to the Great Turk: The Council of Mantua resolved to flee thither in Favor
of their Marquess kept Prisoner by the Venetians. And some such thing is said
of our King John. Periculosa Remedia; and one main cause of the Ottoman
Greatness.

Many with Adoniah have craved a Boon, but to their own Destruction, and called
in those they were never able to drive out again. Thus did the Roman State, in
former times, restore diverse Kings to their Dignities; but still they pared
away somewhat of their Kingdoms. Modicis Regni terminis Vterentur: or if they
honored them to be their Socii, that sweet word enslaved them to assist in all
offensive and defensive Wars.

Lodowick's Force lost his own Dukedom, by calling in the French into Italy.
Quae Regio in Terris, Where Is that Country that cannot afford us Examples in
this kind? I shall add but one, and that of no great Antiquity: An. Dom. 1534.
Two Brothers contended for the Kingdom of Algiers; One of them craves Aid of
one Horuc (at that time a famous Pirate on the Seas:) Horuc comes accordingly
with two thousand Men. They join Battle; The Enemy Competitor was slain: Then
falls Horuc upon the other Brother which called him in; and having likewise cut
him off, and the Country being quite wearied and spent with their Intestine
Wars: He, and his Brother after him, invade, enjoy that Kingdom. So dangerous
is it to call in those Foreign Succors, which men cannot Master, and drive
out again. And therefore it is a good Prayer: Let Judahs own hands be sufficient
for him.

But may we not lawfully crave Foreign Aid in such tempestuous times? Sure,
Yes. It Is sometimes necessary, commendable, and successful too. What were to be
wished, and What is to be done, are two things. Here that saying, Fathered upon
Luther, is true, Vxor si nolit, Veniat Ancilla: And the King is the
Commonwealths Husband. If your hands will not, cannot; Veniant Conductitiae:
We must drive the Nail where 'twill go.

The Bulgarians restore Justinian. Our Black-Prince another in Spain. The
Assyrian, as he was Virga Furoris, the Rod of Gods Anger, and carried his
People into Captivity, Isai. 10. So was Cyrus, Christus Domini, who restored
them to their homes again, Isai. 45. And sure, ours is Communis omnium Regum
Causa, as Darius said of his own, All Kings are nearly Interessed in this
Business. The striking off of the Head of One, has wounded All. And therefore,
while they do revenge the wrong done us, they do in that secure their own
Estate; and punishing Rebellion abroad, they do suppress the growth of that
Evil weed at home.

O! but where are our Hands and Hearts the while? Our Hands have been Tenaces,
rapaces, languidae and remissae Manus. Our Hands have been Tenaces: Miserable
Wretches! We lost All, while we were loath to part with Any. We who cried We
were All for the King, were loath to part with a small part for the Kings
Service. And how many have paid thousands for their Compositions, who would not
lend some Hundreds to advance the Common, and that Rigbteous Cause? Our Hands
have been Rapaces too. Though it be true in those days what Elisha said of his:
This is no time to take Bribes. Yet our Hands were full of Bribes; selling
Offices, Towns, Castles, Every thing. Captain-Collectors and Plunderers were
the bravest Fellows. Last of all, Our Hands have been Languidae and remissae
Manus; we have showed our selves Cowardly and faint-hearted Creatures. No
strength, no Courage, but oft-times stricken with a Panick-fear; We were afraid
where no fear was (as the Psalmist said.) In pedibus spes non in lacertis fuit:
Our feet oft-times served us better than our hands.

We have forgotten our selves, our Gracious God, our Injured Sovereign, the
Goodness of the Cause: All is forgotten. We do despair, and despair binds Gods
hands. We do forget how many Victories have been achieved beyond hope and
belief. Even Restoration has sometime made way where it could find none. We
have forgotten, That with GOD it is all one to save with Many or Few. And that
of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. God has chosen the weak things in the world, to
confound the mighty.

I pass by Vasques, Numes, and Hernando Cortes. The Venetians will tell you of
one Mark a Shoemaker, the Preserver of their State. The Romans cry up their
Coeles, that kept a Bridge against Porsenna and his whole Army. One Man, one
day, one hour has made incredible Alterations.

Our Times will tell of all Portugal lost in one Month, and regained in less.
Lodowick's Force lost his Cities, Castles, Country, in eight Days. One Night
put an end to the Danish slavery in our Land. The Bruit of Henry the Eighth,
his coming into Lincolnshire, drove twenty Thousand Rebels out of the Field. A
Word mistaken has rent the Victory out of the Conquerours hands. You know what
was said of Sisera, Judges 5. The Stars fought against Sisera. And King Philip
said as much of his Armado in 88.

But Seven years before that, an Army of Mice destroyed a whole Country. Mice
were too hard for the Philistines. Lice for the Egyptians. And Frogs forced the
Abderites (a People of Thrace) to leave their Country. In a word, No Creature,
but, if God say the word, will plead our Cause, and fight our Quarrel against
the Mighty.

And therefore the Fourth part makes all Cock-sure. And be thou his help
against his Enemy. Mark: Our Hands, and then Gods help. Not, Lord, help, and no
more. That Is a good word, but it must not be misplaced. First, Do we our parts;
and then Succurre Domine. Thus David undertakes the Quarrel against Goliath,
Armatus non tam ferro quam fide, as St. Augustine said: Takes his Sling, but
trusts in God. Qui confidit in Homine, Confidit in Vmbra transeunte, says the
same Father. That Rule is General, Without me ye can do nothing: Our Saviors
words, John 18. Except the Lord keep the City, Psalm. 127. Except the Lord go
out with our Armies, Psalm. 60. which if He do, how easily shall Gideon prevail
against the Midianites? and with an handful of Men overcome a numerous Army? He
breaks the Counsel of Achitophel. He frees Samaria from the Syrians. He makes
Senacheribs huge Army an heap of Corpses. And that knew well the first King of
the Tribe of Judah, Psalm. 44.6. In nomine tuo conculcabimus: Not my Bow, not my
Sword; But in thy Name shall we tread down those that rise up against us.

'Twas the saying of a Madman in Sophocles (Ajax) Let Cowards cry to the
Heavens for help, we could overcome without a Deity. And you have read of
Timotheus, that noble Athenian Captain, who in all his Enterprises did still
return Conqueror, till puffed up with many Victories, he looked on himself as
more than a Man, and cried out, Hoc ego feci, non fortuna; but he never won
Battle afterward. God will no longer help, than he is magnified for his help.
And therefore, God be Judahs help against his Enemies. Nor is this the least of
Gods Titles to be an Helper: An helper in Need. An helper in Adversity. An
helper of the Poor, and Fatherless. Adjutor meus, faith the King of Judah of
the God of Judah. When formidable Monsters sought after his soul, The Lord is
my Helper.

GOD works all in all, and yet is God said to be our Helper only; That we
should (as I said) use our best Means; and yet, in our greatest Extremities,
Lift up our eyes to the hills, from whence comes our Help. Do our best, but
trust in God. When all other helps fail, then is God our Helper. The Lord saw
the Afflictions of Israel, that they were very bitter, For there was not any
shut up, nor any left, nor any helper for Judah, then he saved them by the hand
of Jeroboam, 2 Kings 14.26. Look on us, say those two Disciples, Acts 3. yet
were they but the Instruments only, and they confess it, v. 12. Look on him who
is both able, and willing to help all those that faithfully call upon him. Then
may we say with David, with Paul, and that with confidence, Heb. 13.6. The Lord
is my Helper, I will not fear what Man can do unto me. It Is taken out of 118.
Psalm. v. 6. And it is remarkable, at the 10. v. All Nations compassed me about;
Philistines, Syrians, Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites; and yet it is but, Quid
mihi faciat homo? a Man, nay one Man. Psalm. 90. A thousand Years are, with GOD,
but as one day; and a thousand Armies as one man. So for St. Paul: He was
oppressed by men; fought with Beasts, 1 Cor. 15. wrestled with Devils, Ephesians.
6.12. yet still it is but Quid mihi faciat homo? All these are but one man, in
comparison of him that made Man. And therefore, I speak confidently, says St.
Paul, I will not fear what Man can do unto me.

And this is Judahs Case. Let his Enemies be never so many, never so mighty,
and so malicious: yet if GOD be his Helper, he need not fear what Man can do
unto him. Nay, let them be worse than men (if ought can be worse,) for Homo
homini lupus; Let them be the worst of Beasts, unreasonable, indomitable, and
perversely violent; yet Lysimachus was not the first that slew a Lion, David
will tell you so, and others after him: Heb. 11.33. Men, Beasts, and All will
come under, if GOD be our helper against those Enemies. Let them be Devils too,
if they be, yet with Devils must the Christian man encounter. Et hoc genus
Daemoniorum: Let them be the worst of Devils, Matthew. 17.21. yet naught but
Incredulity can retard our Victory over those most malicious and incarnate
Devils.

Si Deus nobiscum: Romans 8.31. If God be for us, who can be against us? O
therefore, Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah, be thou his help against his
Enemies. All the Blessings which Jacob the Father bequeathed to this Son, Gen
49. All those Blessings light upon our Judah. Let his hands be in the neck of
his Enemies, verse 8. Let him be a Lion whom none durst rouz up, v. 9. Let the
Scepter never depart from him, till Shiloh come again, v. 10. All peace and
plenty be to him and his, v. 11.12.

And that I may conclude with Moses's Words, with Moses's Prayer: Hear Lord the
voice of Judah: His Prayers, and our Prayers. Let our Cries find entrance to
the Throne of Grace. Bring him back unto his People. And they that will not be
his People, O, let them not be a People at all: Cut them off from the face of
the Earth. Bring him back unto his People; that People who with us have born
the burden and heat of the Day: Who cut of holes and Prisons peep out for a
Redeemer and a Deliverer. Who pray for Judah, and will fight for Judah: To this
People bring him back. O be his Hands, his own hands sufficient for him. Let no
Foreign power say, Ego restitui. This is thy Title to make, and un-make Kings.
O therefore, strengthen those Hands of his: Make all the World see, that this
is Thy work, and that Thou LORD have done it. And therefore, Be thou his help
against his Enemies. TV DVC: TV REDVC. And, as the Vulgar reads it, TV
INTRODVC, Bring him home, Bring him in: Give him Livery and Seisin: His Kingdom
here, and Thy Kingdom of glory hereafter. Propter JESUM CHRISTUM, Dominum
Nostrum.

AMEN.
A SERMON Preached before His MAJESTY, King CHARLES the II. In the ISLE of
SCILLY.
ACTS III. 17. And now Brethren, I wot that through Ignorance ye did it, as did
also your Rulers.


LET it not seem strange, that I bring Pascha and Advent so close together, and
speak of Sorrow so shortly after Joy. But so it is. Extrema gaudii luctus
occupat. And our Savior was no sooner Agnitus quam Agnus, A Lamb appointed for
the slaughter. And Herod sought the Babes life. Yea, the first moment of his
Incarnation, was also the first degree of his Exinanition. The greatest Birth
was followed with the greatest Murder. The First was Opus Spiritus Sancti. The
Second had a Vos fecistis; Men are the Actors. In the first the Angels sing; in
the second, Heaven and Earth, and All did mourn: The Temple rent, The Sun
obscured, etc. Of the first the Prophet says, Quis generationem ejus
enarrabit? of the second the Apostle, Quis ad haec idoneus?

'Twere no wonder to hear of Murder, but such a Murder, and in Domo sua with
Amon; and by his Friends, those friends whom he came to visit, to serve, to
save: And in so barbarous a manner, with such a superlative Cruelty; Be
astonished ye Heavens: And all you that pass by, look and see if there were
ever sorrow like this sorrow! If ever Murder like this Murder!

Now, If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him, but if a man
sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2.25. None to plead the
Jews Cause, Jer. 30.13. Their wound is incurable. Yet here is one found that
dare plead their Cause, and seeks to Cure by Compassion, scio fratres: by
extenuation, quod per ignorantiam: by God's praeordination, v. 18. 'Twas
foretold by all the Prophets, and must, be fulfilled: Then follows a
Resipiscite ergo, the way to make it an absolute Cure, by bathing their Sins in
that Blood they had spilt. But I must keep me to the 17 verse, and see what
Ignorance can do; for take away Ignorance, and the Sin must needs be incurable:
A sin against the Holy Ghost. And therefore we must see what hopes this Door of
Ignorance will open to us.

I know, Brethren, that through Ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers.
Where you have, First, A Compellation, or Title which St. Peter gives those
Jews, Brethren. Secondly, The Sin that he lays to their charge, Fecistis ista,
ista praedicta; Betraying, Denying, Killing the Lord of Life. Thirdly, A
mitigation or extenuation of the Sin, You did it of Ignorance. Fourthly, The
extension of the Extenuation; to the Rulers as well as to the Inferior sort:
You and your Rulers did it through Ignorance. There are two other little words
in the Text, (...), which maybe referred either to what went before, or to that
which follows after. First, Et nunc, after all this. Those Sins of yours,
though they be Capital and scarlet-Sins, yet were they done through Ignorance.
Secondly, or And now, what remains, but that you should Repent, and be
Converted, that you may find favor and forgiveness?

I begin with the Compellation, Brethren. I remember the Counsel a Monk of
Bangor gave his Fellows, who were to appear before Augustine, another Monk sent
from Rome by Gregory the Great. Hereby, says he, you shall know whether he be
a Good man, and sent from God, If he be Affable? Courteous, and does Rise-up
when you come before him. Affability and Gentleness get ground upon men, and
creep into their Affections. A soft tongue breaks the bones, says Solomon,
Prove. 25.15. St. Peter shows himself a cunning Surgeon. Though the wound
were deep, and might seem to require Corrosives; yet applies he Lenitives
withal. Reproves, but with the spirit of Meekness.

St. Stephen went another way to work: You stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in
hearts and ears, ye always resist, etc. But what was the issue? When they
heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and gnashed on him with their
teeth, Cry out, stop their Ears, and stone Stephen. But Peter takes another
course, and with better success. In the 2. Chapter Viri Israelitae, Viri
Fratres: And his hearers began to melt; they cry out Quid faciemus? In this
Chapter at the 12. verse, Ye men of Israel why wonder ye? and here, I wot
Brethren. You know the Fable of the Sun and Wind, and which of them made the
Traveller forgo his Cloak. It Is true, the Jews violence and cruelty deserved
all bitterness, and they worthily hear; ye have betrayed, ye have denied, ye
have killed. But here is sweet and sharp tempered together: Ye men of Israel;
and I wot Brethren. He acknowledges them for Brethren, and wishes they might
prove such by Grace as they were by Nature.

But what hear I? Is not Peter a saucy Fellow? that poor Fisherman that said
but even now, Silver and Gold have I none, and by and by taxes so bitterly,
and salutes so unmannerly; I wot Brethren. Is there not? must there not be a
difference amongst men? In giving Honor go one before another, Romans 10.12.
And, Render every man his due, Honor to whom Honor? Romans 13.7.

There is a fourfold Nobility: Mundana, Philosophica, Christiana, Judaica. The
common Honor of the world consists in Ancient Riches. Let a Pander, an Usurer,
a Traitor, or a Devil be our great Gransier, and leave these Monuments of his
Philargury (as Chrysostom calls them) to his posterity, though his Offspring
be scurra, Cynaedus, and the wine of Naples run in every vein, yet this man is,
and must be so esteemed, An Ancient Gentleman. The Second is Philosophical:
Here Genus, and Proavos and quae non fecimus ipsi are out of date. A Just,
Honest, Valiant man must go for Honorable.

Nobilitas sola est atque unoica virtus. Thus did the Romans look upon
Terentius Varro: his Father a Butcher, and he a Consul. And on M. Scaurus,
whose Father was Carbonarius, a swarthy Collyar. Each History is full of these
like Examples. The Third is Christian Nobility: where, by the way, I approve
that saying of His, He that pays most Subsidy to the King is the best Subject;
And, he that gives most Alms to the poor is the best Christian. As for their
Nobility, He is best that does best. This man knows there is one God and Father
of all, Ephesians. 4.6. one Mother, the Church; one Livery, Baptism. He that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all one: for which cause he is
not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2.11. And, he has taught us all to
pray, Our Father which art in Heaven. The Fourth is the Jewish Nobility, and
that w^nt by the Tribe: whereupon Saint (...) doubted to call Joseph a
Nobleman, because he was of Judahs Tribe: Et Faber, and Nobilis. And St. Paul a
Nobleman, because he was of the Tribe of Benjamin. Gloriosa tribus e qua
primus Rex, and quae praestitit in sua Nobilitate, etc. A glorious Tribe, out
of which came their first King; A Noble Tribe, when all the rest forsook their
King, that Tribe stood firm and Loyal; Inconcussa Nobilitas, says he; no
Cross-Bar, or Arms reversed: Always Loyal to the Crown. However, All Jews
acknowledged themselves for Brethren. Ye are Brethren, says Moses to two in
Egypt. And, non licuit foenerari fratribus, Deuteronomy. 23.19. And, Eligendus Rex e
fratribus, Deuteronomy. 17.15. And this were enough to free Peter from all arrogance
and incivility. But there is more. Peter speaks to the Vulgar sort, and Common
People. The Text is plain, You and your Rulers. Thirdly, Peter is to be looked
upon not as a private person, but as an Apostle and Ambassador for Christ, 2
Cor. 5.20. And therefore must speak according to his Commission, downright in
simplicity and truth. No respect of Persons with God, or in Gods Errand. No
sowing of Cushions. No base Flattery. No palpable Insinuations. Si ita: Tollet
me, Qui fecit me; God would soon take me away that made me, and put me out of
Commission that sent me: Elihu's words Job 32. At other times Honor,
Magistracy, Age, look for some Respect and Reverence but here, Speak Exhort,
Rebuke with all Authority, Tit. 2.15. Nathan may say to David, Tu es, 2 Samuel
12, Elijah to another, Tu, and Domus tua, 1 Kings 18. And the very first words
in our Liturgy of the Exhortation, seems to carry all men in the same Chariot,
to the same place, our Heavenly Jerusalem.

Now come we to the second part, the Sins laid to their charge; You did it.
Where you have the Deed, and the Doers, Vos fecistis: All this I have said;
Quantum, Quantum, so foul, so fearful, so bloody: you did it all. You have
betrayed, denied, killed. And will you know whom? His Son Jesus, v. 13. That
Holy and Just one, v. 14. The Prince of Life, v. 15. Prodidistis, not a common
Man, or a Servant, that were no wonder; for Quem non Prophetarum? Matthew. 23.
the Servants have all found bloody entertainment. But you betrayed the Heir
himself, The Son of God. Abnegastis, not one of the scum of the people, not a
base deboist Varlet, but that holy and just One, who went about doing good, and
healing all, Acts 10. Trucidastis, not some tumultuous Thief and Murderer; not
a Barrabas, but a Prince, The Prince of Life.

Prodidistis, we are wont to say of Judas, when we name him Judas the Traitor.
But here we have many Traitors: And some of them worse than Judas. He went no
further than Tradam vobis, Matthew. 26. But here is Betraying, bribing, buying,
selling, nor is there an end there, but Abnegastis also: And thus far Peter
went. Non novi hominem. He returned, and these go on. They do it in the
presence of Pilate when he was determined to let him go; and they prefer a
Murderer before Innocence it self. The Judge labors for his Deliverance: The
giddy and bewitched Multitude, they thirst after Blood, after his Blood.

There is a saying in Philosophy, that violent motions slacken by degrees, the
longer, the lesser, the softer. These men impugn the very principles of Nature,
and their violent motions grow more violent. A malo ad pejus. Betray him, deny
him, and kill him too. In the 19. of St. Luke, the Parable goes no farther than
Nolumus hunc Regnare: Fare-him-well: He might live; but he must not be their
King. But these men cry, Nolumus hunc vivere, Cut him off, he must not live.
Deprivation of a Crown is not enough, unless it be of Life too: No, nor is it
enough to kill him: He must die of all Deaths, the most disgraceful and
ignominious Death. For, whereas the Jews had four kinds of Death appointed for
Malefactors: Stoning, Burning, Decollation, and Suffocation: None of these will
serve the turn, and therefore they deliver him over to Pontius Pilate, that he
might die that worst of Deaths; that death the Romans inflicted upon the basest
sort of People; the bitterest and the basest Death. Vt simul honor and persona
Christi Crucifigeretur, as St. Augustine says: They would kill his good Name
as well as his Body.

Constantine the Emperor, did afterward forbid this kind of Death should be
inflicted upon any, Ne salutare signum serviret ad pernitiem; so Sozomenus. And
this is all I shall say of the Fecistis, the Did it. VOS FECISTIS follows: You
Did it. You as well as your Rulers: You the Common sort of People: You that
cried, Crucifige, Away with him; Crucify him. You killed him, in that you
Cried to have him Crucified, to have him killed: You are guilty of that blood
the Soldiers shed. And though they were loath to hear it, Acts 5.28. God
forbid this man's blood should be laid to their Charge: Yet, Vos, and primores
Vestri: Rulers and People, all were involved in the same Sin. Interficiebant
quem interficiendum offerebant; as St. Augustine said. They who conducted him
to Pilate, and they who cried for Justice at Pilates hands: All Murderers,
Guilty All.

O wretched, World! They who flocked to him from all parts, who followed him by
thousands, who climb Trees to see him, Untile houses to come to him; who say,
Never man did as this man did: They who cut down Branches, spread their
Garments in the way for him to tread upon: They who sang Hosanna's with a
Benedictus to him, Mark 11.9. These are that VOS, the self-same Men who
presently after, within the compass of a week, call for Justice at the hands of
Pilate, and naught but that Innocent Blood can quench their thirst. Constat de
Facto, They are All guilty: You did it. And yet, I wot (says our Apostle) that
through Ignorance ye did it.

If one man sin against another, the Judge shall Judge him; but, if a man sin
against the LORD, who shall entreat for him? Ely's words, 1 Samuel 2. Now these
men sinned against the Lord of Life; and who does first plead for them, but the
Lord of Life? Nesciunt quid faciant. Father, forgive them, they know not what
they do. Luke 23.34 They did it through Ignorance; so Christ. And St. Peter
after his Master; I know that through Ignorance ye did it; mitigating,
extenuating; and directing them to a Resipiscite: the only salve for that soar.

Let us see then, First of Ignorance, what it is. Secondly, of these Jews
Ignorance. Thirdly, how far this Ignorance of theirs might excuse them: Ye did
it of Ignorance. The Schools distinguish of Nescience, and Ignorance. Nescience
is simplex scientiae Negatio, or Negative Ignorance: and this may be, nay is in
Saints; in Angels. A finite Nature cannot have an infinite power, and therefore
of necessity must be ignorant in many things.

Ignorance is the privation of Knowledge, and it is twofold; Lawful, and
Unlawful: Of those things which we may know; and of those things which we are
bound to know.

We may know many things which we are not bound to know, but may be ignorant of
them without sin. Aristodemus the Philosopher, bestowed many years in searching
out the Nature of the Be, which yet he could not compass; so Augustine.
Another in Tertulllian, Sexcentos execuit, ut Naturam hominis inveniret,
Anatomized six hundred men, to find the Nature of Man, and he came short of his
desire. In the Day of Judgment, men shall not be judged and condemned for their
Ignorance in Logic, Astronomy, Music, and the like; but for the neglect of
that Duty they were bound to perform; so the same Augustine. Now, in those
things which we are bound to know there is a double Ignorance; The one they
call Simple the other Gross, or Affected. The first, Quo simplicior eo tutior;
The more simple, the more pardonable. Of this St. Augustine, Temeritas poenam
habet, Ignorantia promeretur veniam: Resolved, rash, wilful undertakers must
expect a plague, when honest Ignorance will find favor. And this I take to be
St. Paul's Case; A Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and Injurious; but all through
Ignorance, 1 Timothy 1.13. And therefore, says he, I obtained Mercy. And being
better informed, you have him by and by a Better man; and no way disobedient to
the Heavenly Vision. There is another which they call gross or affected
Ignorance: When he that is ignorant, will be ignorant still. He does quench the
motions of the Spirit; Slights the dictates of his own Conscience; Neglects to
enquire, or use the means whereby he may be better informed. Thus the Sadduces:
They did err, not knowing the Scriptures, Matthew. 22.29. They would not know
them: But as the Psalmist says of such like; They know not neither will they
understand, but walk on still in darkness, Psalm. 82. From these men's Ignorance,
The Lord Deliver us.

Now, which of these was the Jews Ignorance? Our Savior tells us, Matthew.
13.14, 15. The Heart of this people is waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of
hearing, and their Eyes have they closed; least they should see with their
Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them.

Occaluerunt, Romans 11. stark, stupid and senseless men! They know not the voice
of the Prophets which are read every Sabbath day! Acts 13. No excuse here: And
therefore they are not only said to kill our Savior, but Manibus sceleratis,
by wicked hands they killed and Crucified him. Pilates, or worse than Pilate:
He feared Caesar; these men feared not GOD! A Sin; a monstrous, malicious,
matchless Sin!

Most gross Ignorance, but still Ignorance. Scio quod per Ignorantiam: and
Ignorance Repented shall find favor. Nay, every pardonable Sin has some
Ignorance or other annexed to it. Either they examine not the greatness of that
Sin they do commit, which diverse Circumstances do aggravate and make greater:
As, The Party against whom we offend; The Example we give; The Scandal we
leave; The small Reason we had to do it: nay, The strong Reasons we had
against it. Or, they do not consider the Justice of that Righteous Judge, who
brings all ad Stateram, Thoughts, Words, and Works: All must be weighed in the
Balance. No, nor think they of that Day so near at hand. All Ignorant; but
some more, some less: But all Ignorant. Maxima pars eorum quae scimus est,
minima pars eorum quae nescimus. I hope the great Rabbis would not away with
this Doctrine. What? Are we blind too? John 9. I, God help; All blind! Vos and
primores vestri; Blind and Ignorant; and through this Ignorance ye did it.

See we then in the next place, how far this Ignorance will excuse. Christ
says in the fifteenth of St. John, Non haberent peccatum: If I had not come
and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: Not that sin of Incredulity, says
St. Augustine. 'Twas spoken by a (...), says Beza. Our S^viour does expound
himself: They should have had some cloak for their sin: They might have
pretended Ignorance.

The simple Ignorance deserves more pity, and the gross more punishment: But
both excuse, A tanto, non a toto, as the Schools speak. Gross was this Jewish
Ignorance; they might have known Christ, both by the Testimony of John, by our
Saviors Works, and by the holy Scriptures. You have all these, John 5.36, 39.
But wilfully blind, they shut their Eyes, and Ears and All. Coccineum Peccatum,
they might have known, they were bound to know: And yet even here this wilful
and gross Ignorance admits of a Resipiscite. So St. Pet^^ to Simon Magus, Acts
8. Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray to God, if perhaps the thoughts of
thine heart may be forgiven thee. Perhaps indeed whether he could Repent. But
if he Repented, then No perhaps, but he should be forgiven. And therefore I
have read how the Devil hasted to take Judas out of this world; left by
Repentance he might find Grace, and Favor in the world to come.

Erubescit, salva res est. It Is so here: Resipiscit? Salva res est. He that can
repent, cannot but find mercy and forgiveness. I shut up this Point in these
five Conclusions. First, Habet aliquid boni carentia boni. Ignorance if it has
stripes, yet has it not many stripes: Luke 12.47. Secondly, All Ignorance, I
speak of that we are bound to know, is dangerous; being both a sin, and a
punishment for sin. Thirdly, This sin is ferax, fruitful, and the mother of
many other sins. Affectata inficit, Neglecta interficit. Fourthly, Gross and
Affected Ignorance is no unpardonable sin, and therefore is in it self no sin
against the Holy Ghost. Last of all, If Ignorance make a man so capable of
mercy (yet understand it for sins committed through Ignorance) and what is this
to all other our audacious sins, malicious sins, and such as we wilfully plunge
our selves into, and oft-times with much reluctance of Conscience: Be not
merciful to them, Qui operantur Iniquitatem, Psalm. 59.5. That offend of
malicious wickedness: Perfide, sum operantur, says the Tremellian: One
Adverb would not serve his turn. Their whole Aim and Endeavors were by what
means soever to destroy poor David: And therefore Be not merciful unto such.

And now how willingly would I say to my Countrymen, what St. Peter did to
his: Scio Fratres: I know that through Ignorance you did it. A Did it, sure
enough, and a Bloody Did it. I leave the Parallel to those who have undertaken
it. The Books are extant, and for the Persons, Christ, and Christ's A^^inted,
Non tam Ovum ovo simile: Never shall you find another pair under the Sun that
have run so clearly parallel. I shall only remember you of what concerns our
selves, and that by way of Application. And now Brethren; Brothers indeed, I
and younger Brothers too, for ought I see. When Nobility must stoop to
Baseness: A Lower House eat up the Higher: The Aequaliferi cry out for Parity
in Church and State. A Gulbron of Vri amongst the Swisses shall require as much
honor to be done his Bonnet set upon a Pole, as is by us done to the Chair of
Estate: yea, and a Gentleman of good quality and courage must receive a strange
punishment for his neglect of duty to the Pesants Hat. Brethren may be a pretty
word in such a State. But lest that familiar Compellation should offend, I
shall grant you a double portion. You have Prerogatives, and not a few; More
liberal Education, more glorious Examples, more careful Monitors, a longer
Line, and unspotted Pedigree. But oh beware, do not Cateline-like, shut up the
glorious day of your Progenitors in a misty, dismal Cloud. But as St. Paul said
of himself, Philip. 3.5. Hebraeus ex Hebraeis: So be you Generosi ex Generosis;
truly Noble in your selves as well as in your Ancestors. -- Virtus decurrat in
ipso --
Sanguine venarum. --
Convey to your Posterity the honor you received of them which went before.
Chrysostom will tell you, and prove it too; The Wicked are not men, much less
Gentlemen. And therefore in the Apostles phrase, Viriliter agite, play the men,
and act those parts become your places. Disprove that Proverb, Exeat Aula qui
vult esse pius.

But I must follow my Text, which, next it self, will lead us to the foulest
Fact the Sun did ever see. You must have it the self same words, I cannot give
it you in better: Prodidistis, Abnegastis, Trucidastis, betraying, denying,
killing the Lords Anointed: More Traitors than Judas: More Denyers than Peter:
More Killers than Pilat. And all under the cloak and vizard of Religion. A
Cloak, and a short one, it is not ad Talos, none of those (...), the Scribes did
wear, or if it be, A cloven Foot will be seen under it, and too much of the
Devil will appear. The Clo k is Religion, but such a Cloak, such a Relig on as
is pernicious and destructive to Church and Monarchy. All O^naments, Do^^^ves,
All (...). All Consecrated ^^^gs, those which the very Heathen did (...), or
smart for, these All have the pre^^^ers to this new reformed refined Religi^^^
zed upon. I speak not yet of Episcopa^^^ and yet that is the great Eyesore,
though ^postolick, and for such approved by the ^^nstant practice of all
Christian Churches ^^om the Apostles down to these very days: ^et do our
Hesterni cry down this for Anti-^hristian; and suppressing one Pope at Rome,
^^^y labor to erect a world of Popes in every place they Domineer in. If my
words smell sower, I must tell you they are gathered out of a sweet and Royal
Garden.

And this is the Religion, the reformed, refined, and new Religion. A Religion
but of yesterday, however they pretend to the Apostles days. But 'twere very
strange It has much out-slept Endimion, and the Seven Sleepers; And fifteen
hundred years could scarce awake it.

Well, it is up at last: And no sooner up, but up in Blood. Bred and fed with
Treason and Rebellion. I might call Germany and Geneva to be witnesses, but we
have many nearer home.

Begin with Knox and Buchanan, who transplanted that Weed into their own
unhappy Country: And be pleased with an indifferent eye to look upon the
Sequel ever since. You shall see a Noble Queen deprived and banished by her
own Subjects: A Child crowned to dethrone the Mother: A King persecuted (he will
tell you so) from his very Cradle: And unless he could have made his part the
better, must have gone the way his Mother did.

The next in order is our First Charles, whom Prodiderunt, Abnegarunt,
Trucidarunt, hunted him as a Partridge on the Mountains, And at length by
Traitors put to a Traitors death: Tantum Religio potest suadere malorum. And
these are the Fruits of this pure refined Religion: To which Kings must bow
their Scepters: A Religion which takes away the Kings Negative Voice: And he
must know he has a Kirk above him, which can both Excommunicate and dethrone
him too. There Is the Deed, next see the Doers. Vos fecistis: You that first
courted the Country to send up Factious Puritan Burgesses: You that called in
the Scot: You that made the Apprentices come, and welcome: You that drove so
many worthy Gentlemen from the House. You that cried down Bishops: That took up
Arms: That contributed Weapons and Money. You that fought against your
Sovereign. You that countenanced so many scurrilous and hellish Libels. You
that sold your King: And you that cried for Justice.

And who these are you know; Prodiderunt, Abnegarunt, Trucidarunt. Some body is
loath to be thus far guilty: they never intended thus far; Nay they do acquit
themselves: The Independents are the only men cut off that Sacred Head. But you
have heard St. Augustines verdict of the Jews; An non interficiebant, quem
interficiendum offerebant? They killed him who delivered him up to Pilate: Or
if St. Augustines Authority sway not, St Peter's must: You killed him (says he)
as well as your Rulers.

And these are they who build their Piety on the ruins of Loyalty, and hew out
their Reformation by the Sword; and would now make the Churches write after
them in bloody Characters. You know whose words these are.

And now how willingly would I go along with St. Peter, and say to my bewitched
Countrymen what he did to his, And now I know that through Ignorance ye did
it. I assure me, There are thousands like those in Absoloms Rebellion, who went
in simplicity, not knowing any thing. Such Ignorance deserves both pity and
pardon. But what shall we say to those Princes, the Rulers and Ringleaders in
those grand Rebellions?

There are certain Ingenita Principia, as they call them: As twice two makes
four: Ab aequalibus aequalia si demas, etc. things undeniable by the Light of
Nature: And such are these, God is to be worshipped: The King is to be
honored! Thou shall not kill: Suum Cuique: Do as you would be done unto. To go
against these, is to sin against Conscience, Nature, and the very Dictates of
Reason. And yet even here should we breath with the Spirit of Meekness. And I
would willingly say, That even these men, what they did, They did through
Ignorance. Ignorance I say, if not of the Premises, yet of the sad
Conclusions: And therefore wish I that they may repent, and be converted, that
their sins might be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from
the presence of the Lord.

That they may Repent, I say, and that speedily, or let them know that God is
not mocked, but he will surely wound the heads of such his Enemies, and the
hairy scalps of such as go on still in their wickedness.

A SERMON Preached before His MAJESTY, King CHARLES the II. In the ISLE of
JERSEY.
PSALM. XXXVII. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: For the end of
that man is peace.


WE are all Pilgrims and Travelers, and that not only Coram Deo, Psalm. 39.12.
in regard of God, but Coram Mundo too: The World sees it. And we may well say
with Jacob, Few and evil have the days of the years of our life been: We have
no settled nor abiding place; But with those Heb. 11.14. Patriam quaerimus. We
are (the more the pity) Seekers: Not, with these Upstarts of Religion; (I hope
we shall preserve that Jewel entire) But we are Travelers, and seek a Country;
A lost, and longed for Country. In the mean time let us do as Travelers use to
do, Qui si tardius forte surrexerint, cursu corrigunt tarditatem: If they have
overslept themselves, they go the faster to recover what was lost before. If we
have let slip many a fair opportunity of honoring God, of bettering our
selves, Arise, arise, Let us make haste to redeem the time, for the days are
evil. A good Use. There is yet another: Travelers observe the Castles, Forts,
Shipping, the Manners of the Men, the Commodities of the Country, and their
Laws, their Liberties, and suck like. Nay he were not worthy, as some think,
the Name of a Traveller, that could not tell you of Hunniades-Zisca, a
Tamberlain, or a Castriot. Goliath, or an Evans shall be looked upon for his
Stature: A Pigmy or Geffry for his Dwarfishness. And the Italian, when he came
home, could report much of the French-Court, the Dames in one place, the Wives
in another; yea, the very Funambuli were not forgotten; But as for poor Bernard
and his poor Abbey of Clare vall, 'twas not worth the while to stop there: This
were too much beneath his proud thoughts. Thus did the greatest Traveller in
the world over-leap Job, till God did wrest out mention of him much against his
will. Have thou not considered my Servant Job? A perfect and a just man. But
the Devil cares not for such an one: He is not (...), not worth the writing
down in his Table Book. And this is the fashion of the World: Mos Mundi, sed
non Coeli. David gives you another Lesson; Observa integrum, and considera
rectum, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; If you meet with such an
One in your Travels, pause a while, he is worth the notice; and therefore mark,
observe, have such an one in estimation: Be his Person never so contemptible,
and his Condition never so poor; his Enemies mighty; his Miseries many; yet
Finis hujus hominis pax: His best is to come, The end of that man is peace.

I did instance in Job, I cannot in a better. He was perfect and upright: The
middle part of his life troublesome and tragical; A man of Sorrows: But finis
hujus hominis pax: His end was peace. Thrice in two Chapters he is said to be
perfect and upright. And yet this perfect and upright man suffers Afflictions:
No man more, no man like: In his Family, in his Goods, in his Body, Wife,
Friends; All serve to increase the heap of his Calamities. But Novissima ejus
pax; The end of that man was peace.

Examples sway much: Nay, Vivitur exemplis, we most while live by Examples. In
Julius Caesar's days, all Warriors: In Augustus's days, all Scholars: Nero
fills the City with Swash-Bucklers: Bassianus with Whoremongers: Julian with
Atheism. Regis ad exemplum -- was the old Saying: Men are led by, men live by
Examples. And those are some pernicious, some glorious, some dangerous and
destructive: And others set down for imitation. I have given you an Example,
says our Savior, John 13.15. Take me for an example, says St. Paul, Philip.
3.17. And St. James, Take the Prophets for an example, James 5.10. Examples of
Affliction, examples of Patience. And my Text leads you to an example, to a
gracious, glorious example: Observa integrum; Mark the perfect man, and behold
the upright, for the end of that man is peace. Such an one is worth the taking
notice of, and well worth your imitation: And therefore mark him. A good
Example -- A glorious object. They say, Quae rara, chara: If Rarity commend,
here is one very rare and seldom seen. His Goodness consists in two things:
First, He is perfect. Secondly, He is upright. I cannot admit of a Pleonasme or
Tautology in so few words: Let the two words point us out two Duties: And
therefore I conceive, First, Perfectness to be in homine: Secondly, Vprightness
to be ad homines. The first points us out a Lesson, what we should be in our
selves. The second shows u^ what we should be toward others. Integri Domi:
Recti foris. And both of these must concur in one man: Distinguish them we
must: Separate them we may not. For though they be two Offices, yet it is Finis
hujus hominis -- One man owns them both, is both. Nay, one of these without the
other will not stand. It Is impossible that man should be just, who is not in
some measure perfect. An ungodly man may sometimes pronounce just Judgment, and
deliver sentence according to Equity: But most while he is overswayed by hope,
fear, favor, or some by-respects. Propter Buccellam panis deficiet talis: As
Solomon said of the (...), Proverbs 28.21. for a piece of bread that man will
transgress. And therefore mark the perfect man, Qualis est in se: And behold
the upright, Qualis erga alios. First, Perfect in himself. Secondly, Just or
upright toward others. And then thirdly, Mark his End, not the middle. A
thousand Miseries may intervene, and one Calamity may follow close upon the
back of another, like Jobs Messengers; and 'twas Job's case: But mark his end,
his last end, Novissima ejus pax. They say, All is well that ends well: The end
of that man is peace. Here Is his Life: And here is his Death. First, The
Righteous man: And secondly, The Righteous man's Reward.

And first, Observe Integrum; Mark the perfect man, There Is Integrity or
perfection of the body, when there is no member too many, none too little, and
every part is sound and able to that use or office 'twas ordained for: And such
an one we call a perfect man, a perfect and sound man: But it is 'not this.
Secondly, There Is Integrity of Conscience when the heart is sound, and our
Inclination good. This Abimelech pleaded for himself Genesis 20.5. In the
integrity of my heart and innocence of my hands have I done this. And St Paul,
Acts 23.1. I have lived in all good Conscience before God until this day. But
another Conscience is to us a secret: And secret things belong to God. Let the
Anabaptists press into Gods Cabinet, and pass judgment upon their poor
Brethren; This man is a Child of God, That man a Reprobate, and a Castaway.
Christian discretion moves in a lower Orb: And I shall only call you to what
your Eyes behold, Mark the perfect. I, and here I shall be deceived too, if I
expect to find a man without spot or wrinkle; every way absolute. If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, 1 John 1. Nemo qui non peccet; All sinners,
2 Chronicles. 6.36. We say therefore, There Is Perfectio partium, non graduum, in
some measure, not absolute. Quum contenditur ad perfectionem, when men labor
to be good, and do their best.

Integer est omnis qui integer esse cupit. And therefore mark such an one, such
an one whom no fear or favor, no by-respects can draw away from doing his duty
to God and Man. Ita ero integer a Superbiis ne Dominentur mihi. Psalm. 19.13. So
(says David) so shall I be perfect and innocent from the great transgression:
from malicious and presumptuous sins. And such an one is said to be Custos
Legis, in Gods Book; with Zachary and Elizabeth, to be perfect before God. Not
that they could fulfill the Law of God, but they conformed and squared their
actions according to that Law; And were therefore Acceptative integri;
Comparative integri: And in the Schools phrase, pro statu viatorum. Mark this
perfect man: He Will not say with Naaman, God be merciful to me in this sin: It Is
true, it is a sin, and I acknowledge it, but I must do it, and I will do it; No,
but he strives to be every way sound and perfect. It Is said of many Kings in
the Old Testament, That they did many brave things: But there came in a But
afterward that spoiled all: But the High Places were not taken away: But the
Calves in Dan and Bethel stood still: But he departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam, etc. Still one But or other did mar all.

Naaman homo magni, sed Leprosus: Naaman was a gallant man, but he was a Leper.
Suffetius was a brave Fellow, but he stood wavering between two Opinions. Tully
a good Commonwealths man, but he sat upon two Stools, he knew not which part
to take, Caesar's or Pompeys. The Israelites Claudicant inter duo: They would
willingly serve the God of their Fathers, but withal were loath to offend their
Neighbors: and therefore make a Covenant with them, interchange Marriages with
them, learn their Laws. These men are men, and no men: Sure not integri, no
sound men: (...), divided, defective, and much imperfect.

But he that will be himself, and play the man, that holds out in Constancy and
Resolutions, that endeavors to grow up in holiness and Religion, that will not
sell his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage, nor stupifie his Brains with Pot
and Pipe, nor spend his purer Spirits in the bosom of Harlots; nor give
himself up to the Cares of this Life, and thoughts of Ambition: That has
learnt (with the Apostle) in what state soever he is to be content. This is
Homo quantumvis pretii, A man well worth the noting: Mark such an one. This
were a work beseeming a Traveller, and not feed their eyes, and fraught their
discourse with Coriats Gallows: The Tun of Heidelberg: The Venetian Curtisans:
The Stews at Rome: or that Charitable provision made for Bastards: And yet are
these the chiefest Observations of many a frothy Traveller, bringing home
little else unless it be a rotten Carcass, corrupt Manners, a wounded
Conscience, or some Fantastic fashion of Attire.

But wiser men have wiser thoughts; They Will mark the perfect man: Yea, and with
Herod, they will observe him too: Mark 6.20. Highly honor him for his Goodness
sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.

And thus the Baptist leads us to our second part: And behold the upright. He
was a perfect man, and Herod knew it, but that is not all, He was Rectus, An
upright man too: And he did smart for it. And he might have slept in a whole
skin, as we say; If he could not flatter, yet he could hold his peace: He might
have chosen whether he would have come in with his Non licet. And he that takes
upon him to reprove great Men, must expect no great thanks afterward. It Is true
indeed; But how should he be a good man then? how should he be upright?

The man you are to mark, must be, Bonus sibi, aliis benevolus: Good to
himself, Good to other, Just to both There Is a double Uprightness or Justice;
Of the Person, and of the Cause. We would have both: And yet may a Wicked man
have a good Cause, and a Good man have a bad Cause, or a good Cause badly
prosecuted or acted. But I shall leave this. The uprightness in my Text is in
relation to others; To render to every man his due, Romans 13. First, to God:
Secondly, to Caesar: Thirdly, to our Fellow Subjects. Our first care must be
Religion and Gods Glory. Our second, Loyalty, and the honor of the King. Our
third, Suum cuique, To do as we would be done unto: To live in peace and unity
with our Neighbors. The first is Religion: David thought it a proposterous
Course, to beautify his Palace, and leave the House of God neglected; That he
should dwell in an house of Cedar, and the Ark of God lie within Curtains, 2 Samuel 7. That Cardinal saw his Error too late, who first finished his Kitchen,
then sets upon the College, and reserves the Fabric of the Church till last.
Not so, Not so: The upright man will be sure in the first place to preserve his
Religion entire, Give God his due, abominate all Heathenish Sacrilege. And yet
why call I it Heathenish? The very Heathens will rise up against the men of
these days, and condemn them: They by the very glimmering light of Nature held
this sin in detestation, and have recorded to Posterity the fearful punishment
from God and Man upon these kind of Malefactors: But yet withal, the wisest of
them came short in giving God his due honor, whiles they attributed too much
to their own Industry, Fortune, and Policy. Thus Atticus, Aristides, Scipio,
Socrates, and that noble Athenian Captain, who in the midst of his Conquests
cries out, Hoc ego feci, non Fortuna. His unfortu^ate Enterp izes ever
afterward may teach us more Christian Moderation and Acknowledgment. The sword
of the Lord, and of Gideon, Judge. 7. Gods sword i^ the first place, and he must
have the first honor. I will honor those that honor me, and they which
despise me shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. And therefore Behold the
upright: They who cry out with David, Quis ego: and with the Baptist, Non sum
dignus. Our chiefest care must be to preserve Religion. Fear God: and then in
the next place, Honor the King: Just to him too. A Duty taught by Christ both
by Precept and Example, Matthew. 22.21. Matthew. 17. the last; St. Paul, St. Peter,
All require it. And though these days breed men of another temper, who can
distinguish between the Person and his Authority; yea, and upon causless
pretenses separate them, each from other; bringing the Person into contempt,
and transferring his Authority over to the Sword or Frantic People: Yet I make
no question, can we but have patience, and use we but the probable and lawful
means for our Restorement: God will raise up his Power and come amongst us. The
Righteous shall not always be forgotten, and the patient abiding of the M^ck
shall not perish for ever. O therefore fear thou the Lord, and the King, and
meddle not with those who are given to change. Fly from those Amphisbaena's
double-headed, double-hearted Serpents Those Despisers of Government, as St.
Peter calls them, and such as speak evil of Dignities, 2 Pet. 2.20. That curse
the King, not in their thoughts a love, but in words and works too: Men like
the Stagg, who shelters himself under the leaves of the Vine in a time of
trouble, and (such is his requital) he gnaws and rents those leaves which
protected him, when once the danger is over. And thus has Sovereignty been
dealt withal: Those very men who were laden with Favors, graced with Offices,
raised to Honors, those have been the foremost men to pluck him down who
raised them up. And what was said of Joab, 2 Kings 2.5. They have shed the
blood of war in the time of peace: And therefore pereant, let not their hoary
head go down to the grave in peace. But for the Religious and Loyal man, Behold
him: And he that cries Vivat Rex, long may he live, cum Rege, sub Rege, in
despite of all Enemies and Opposition.

The third mark of the upright man is, to give every man his own. He can say
with Samuel, Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I
defrauded? And with St. Paul, 2 Cor. 7.2. We have wronged no man, we have
corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man: And this is the upright man which
we seek, and having found, we behold him with admiration.

I fear me there are not many of those black Swans in those blacker days; when
the world is so full of Oppression, Circumvention, and Fraud: Frater fratrem (a
token the world draws near to an end) one brother cuts the throat of another;
one friend supplants another: Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur;
that was the old saying. But Court and Camp and all is alike; yea, and
Honestissima nomina rebus turpissimis imponunt, as the Orator said. Cheating,
Lying, Whoring, Painting, are entertained under the cloak of Wit, Policy,
Kindness, Care. Honesty and Religion are dull Ceremonies: unless with
Aristippus we can wear all colors, and change our Religion as we do our
Garments; or unless we will speak placentia, run with the Times, and court the
Ears of our itching Auditors, our Company may well be spared. Now amidst so
many dangerous days, and such prodigious Impieties; amongst so many corrupt
People, and so abominable in their doings, Considerate rectos via, at the
fourteenth Verse of this Psalm, consider, respect, imitate those that be of a
right conversation

If you can see a Samuel, if a Paul if one that has two Coat-ready to impart
to him that has none, If your Publicans, Scribes, Clarks, exact no more then
is appointed them, If Soldiers contented with their Allowance, If a Lawyer
that will not entertain every broken Cause for his Fee. If a Toby, who if he
hear the bleating of a Kid, cries read, away with it, restore it, no stolen
Goods shall come within his Doors; If a Timothy, who will be sure to keep his
Faith and a good Conscience; If a Licurgus, who contra Gentes will restore the
Crown to the right owner, and be a faithful Subject, rather than a perfidious
Usurper; Mark such, and considerate, Behold them thoroughly; such just, such
upright men; for the end of such men is peace.

Which is the second General; Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for
the end of that man is peace. Here Is the Reward of his Integrity and Holiness:
Here Is David's Beatus vir, Psalm. 1. As for the ungodly, it is not so with them,
but they are like the chaff which the wind scatters away from the face of the
Earth. Psalm. 73. Ponuntur in Praecipitiis, They are set in slippery places, and
in a moment brought to desolation: Cut off from the Earth, and rooted out of it
for their transgressions. Prove. 2. the last Verse, Their memory all shall rot.
But finis hujus hominis pax: He may encounter with many difficulties in the
course of his life, and many miseries may intervene; But (...) pax, His last
end is Peace.

In the ninth of St. Matthew you have one twelve years diseased; at length a
Physician was found who could, and did cure. In the fifth of John one lies
impotent thirty eight years at the Pool Bethesda, at length comes one, who with
a Surge makes him sound. Another blind from his Nativity, with an easy remedy
came seeing, John 9. So (as I said) the good man meets with many difficulties
in the course of his life: But Finis pax; All Is well at last, his end is happy.
I see Abraham driven from place to place, at one time ready to starve; another
time his wife in jeopardy to loose her honor; crossed in his Children; unhappy
in his Friends, Kindred, every way; and yet his Bosom now a receptacle for the
Saints of God. As much might I say of Moses, Elias, and many others: Yea, John
the Baptist, whose head was smitten from his Body, yet was not that his last
end; But that which was said of him, Multi in ejus Nativitate gaudebunt,
afterward came to pass; the day of his Birth was made sacred to all Posterity,
and was solemnized by the very Heathen themselves in St. Bernards days.

Take heed therefore what Conclusions you draw from the present condition or
success of things. Thus did Shimei deal by David, Nunc ad calculos redactus
est; Come out thou bloody man, thou man of Belial; now thou pay^st for all the
blood that has been shed, 2 Samuel 16. Yet shortly after you have him on his
knees, and begging pardon: The King is restored; the Rebels perish. Thus did
the Barbarians pass sentence on St. Paul, Acts 28. A murderer, whom Vengeance
suffered not to live: Yet shortly after their minds are changed, and they take
him for a God.

Thus do our Adversaries, who, puffed up with their success, and our
misfortunes, conclude thence (as the Turk may do as much) the goodness of their
Cause. But stay, our last end is not yet come; no, nor theirs neither. Ante
obitum nemo, etc. You know what Solon said: And though I undertake not to
Devine, yet I dare say with him, Number. 16.29. If these men die the common death
of all men, then the Lord has not sent me. However, there is an end, and a last
end; and that Balaam saw, when he would have his last end like the Israelites,
Numb. 23. And Amalek might die in his bed, but his last end was to perish
everlastingly, Numb. 24. And therefore in Moses's words, and Mose's wish, God
make us wise, and that we may consider our last end. (...), I am sure 'twill go
well with the perfect and upright man at the last, his end, or his last end
will sure be Peace.

There is a fourfold peace. First a Peace from War; and that is the peace of
the Commonwealth. Secondly, the Peace of the Body* the Eucrasie and
temperature of the Humors: A peace from Sickness and Diseases. Thirdly, The
peace of Conscience: a peace from sin, and sins deserved punishments. Fourthly,
A Peace supra pacem, such a peace as never shall be taken from us in the
highest Heavens, eternal peace. First, The Peace of our Country and
Commonwealth were a Peace much to be desired.

-- Pax optima rerum
Quas homini novisse datum est, pax una triumphis
Innumeris potior. -- Silius.
It Is bonum desiderabile, as she said of the Tree, Genesis 3. O those blessed
days, when men might sit down under their own Vine and Fig tree, and might eat
the labors of their own hands: When they were not awaked with the Drum and
Trumpet, nor terrified with the clashing of Armor, and the violence of
Soldiers; Veteres migrate Coloni was not heard in our Streets: But the
Mountains did bring peace, Psalm. 72. The barren Mountain requited the cost
bestowed on them plentifully: A blessed peace: and this by Gods grace we shall
have in the end. And yet, secondly, Behold a better, Pax Corporis, The peace of
the Body. Abraham was much disquieted for want of Children, Genesis 15. Ahab for
his Neighbors Vineyard. Haman at the very sight of Mordecai, Hoster 5. So much
troubled, that neither his Riches, Children, nor Honor, naught could do him
good, as long as he saw Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings Gate: And if he
had his purpose in this too, yet what would all avail him, if he could not have
his health? The gouty Cardinal would give his Cardinals Cap a thousand times,
that he might be freed of his Disease. Let him speak who has the Stone or
Strangury, nay be it but the Toothache, his courage, strength, appetite, all is
gone. The Valetudinary man is like St. Paul's widow, Vivens mortua, 1 Timothy 5.6.
as good as dead, while he is alive. So that Pax corporis, the health of the
body is no small blessing: and God has blessed the most of us with this. And
yet is not this Pax illa. Thirdly, there is another and a better peace, The
Peace of Conscience: and this may he have, who with Lazarus sits at Dives gate,
or with distressed Job lies stinking on a Dunghill: He fears not, though the
Earth be moved, and the Mountains carried into the midst of the Sea. This
Peace had the Saints and Martyrs in the height of their Torments. Now begin I
to be Corn for my Savior, says one: And verte aliud latus, says another,
rosting on the Gridiron. There was Justitia causae, and justitia personae both;
the Cause was good; the Sufferers perfect and upright, and therefore all went
well, whiles the Mind and Conscience was at peace. This made David say, I will
lay me down in peace, and sleep; yea, even then when his Enemies compassed him
round about: Psalm. 4. Whereas the wicked are like the troubled Sea that cannot
rest, and there is no peace to the wicked, says my God, Isa. 57. the last
verse. Sure if we would look upon the ends of many of our Incendiaries and
bloody Traitors, slain, shot, hanged, or otherwise cut off, we might see with
what fears and terrors of Conscience they took their parting. Their Souls were
required of them, as 'twas said of his, Luke 12. God knows, much against their
wills.

But for ours, with what undaunted Courage did they tread the Scaffold, and
look grim Death in the face? with St. Stephen, obdormierunt, they fell asleep:
And with Simeon, They did depart in peace, So then, look upon both; look upon
the end of both: And finis hujus hominis pax; their Life good, their Cause
good, and the End of them was peace. Their Enemies might do their worst, but
Animae non habent quod faciant, as Bernard said of the seduced Prophet, slain
by a Lion. Their souls were safe, and being justified by Faith, they had peace
with God, Romans 5. which brings us to another peace; the best of all:

Fourthly, Pax illa vera, and Hereditas Christianorum, as St. Augustine said. A
peace which no man can take from us; Peace in Heaven Luke 19. A peace which
passes all understanding. Phil. 4.7. Now the Lord of peace himself gave you
peace always, and by all means. 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. Peace, from Men; and peace,
from Devils; Peace from Sickness; Peace from Sins; The Peace of Conscience; and
the Peace of Heaven: Such Honor have all his Saints God make you perfect and
upright, and you shall be sure of peace at the last.

Seek you first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and then caetera
adjicientur, the rest will follow. And no good thing will he withhold from them
who live a godly life. I have no more to say but what St. Paul said to Timothy,
1 Timothy 6.12. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust. Keep your
Religion; keep your Loyalty. Look upon those who are gone before: Let your
Travels tell you that Man is a Pilgrim, and a Traveller upon Earth, and we have
no continuing City; but we seek one to come. O God, grant us so to seek, that
we may find. Let us keep innocence, and take heed unto the thing that is right:
For that shall bring a man peace at the last.

A FUNERAL SERMON ON PSALM. XXXIX. the last Verse.
PSALM. XXXIX. the last Verse. O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I
go hence, and be no more.


HOW hard it is, for the very Saints themselves to keep a measure in their
fearful Trials and Adversities; Job, David, and the very best of men do show.
'Twas said of Job a good while, In all this did not Job sin: At last, Homo
erat, and the very pattern of Patience falls into Impatiency, cursing the Day
he was born, and the night that could speak a child conceived. And as for
David, A long time he held his peace: At length, Locutus sum lingua mea,
Complain he does, and that bitterly.

Who ever thinks him to speak Rhetorically, or, what some dare say,
Hyperbolically: Had they his Trials, they would better be persuaded of his
passions. Many were his Afflictions, and deep were his draughts out of the Cup
of Gods wrath: But Patience and Penitency never loose their reward. Many are
the troubles of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all.

The way to this Deliverance is by Prayer. Invoca me; and pray he did. And this
his Prayer is composed into a Psalm, and commended to Jeduthun a chief
Musician, a Church Musician, to be sung to their Instruments of Music, in
their Divine Service. So that Church-Musick is old enough, and useful too: As
Athanasius and Marcellinus; that men by Music might be put in mind to be
musical in themselves, and learn to compose their Affections: Not to think
well, and do ill: Not like Pilate, Speak well of Christ, but give Sentence
against him: This were Discord indeed. And for this cause, amongst others, in
the ancient and best of times, He was thought scarce fit for any Christian
Company, that could not in some sort bear them company in the Quire: And the
Psalms were Quotidianae Lectionis, Repetitionis, Decantationis: They were ever
a chief part in all their Liturgies: Unhappy those days that would it
otherwise. Well, if we may not keep our Quires; God grant our Churches stand:
And if we cannot say Cantemus Domino, with our Prophet, yet let us say, Oremus:
Come let us pray together, and magnify his holy Name, etc.

O spare me, that I may recover strength: before I go hence, and be no more,
Psalm. 39. ult. verse. The words are David's: Of whom I may say what Chrysologus
does of John the Baptist; That he was Fibula Legis and Evangelii: here is Mercy
and Truth; Law and Gospel; Fear and Hope, all knit together. First, he sees his
Sin: Secondly, then he trembles under Gods Judgments: Thirdly, not yet as one
without hope: He sins; he suffers; he sues for mercy.

The words contain, First, A Request: Secondly, A Reason. Each double, if you
will: First, Spare me: Secondly, So spare me, that I may recover strength;
There Is the Request. Secondly, For I must shortly hence, I shall no more be
seen; There Is the Reason.

The Request or Prayer is of that kind which we properly call (...): A
Supplication, to be delivered out of his Troubles.

The Reason is drawn from the frailty of man: He must away, and away for ever:
no returning back again.

I shall take the words in their order: which seem to make four Stops or
Pauses: The first of which is, Desiste a me; O spare me: Words, which bid us
look back upon his Sin and his Punishment, at the tenth and eleventh Verses:
The sin great (whatsoever 'twas) for great was the punishment: I am even
consumed by the means of thine heavy hand, thy heavy stroke: But so 'twill be;
When thou with Rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to
consume away, like a moth, etc. And this my case; But spare me: O spare me a
little: Where we have two things chiefly observable; First, the confession of
his sin: Secondly, his imploring pardon. I begin with the first, his Confession.

How willingly do we plead, Not guilty; denying, transferring, extenuating our
offenses? The Heathen would plead Fate for their Defense: The Heathen, do I
say? Yea many Christians do as much. Gallinae filius albae, The Founder of
Reformation, as some honor him, John Wickliff said as much; and John Hus his
Disciple, after him. The Priscillianists thought the Stars had a compulsive
power: Not to incline only, but to force men to do wickedly: Making the twelve
parts in the Zodiac to overruled the twelve parts in Man's Body; So they number
them. Our later Masters have gone beyond all those: making God the cause of
sin, as sin: And not permissively only, but (as they speak) effectively. So
that the Author of sin is the Punisher of sin: And man, poor man, must suffer
for what it lay not in his power to prevent: Not so, Not so: But God made man
upright, and He has found out many Inventions, Eccles. 7.29

It Is true, it is Amos; Shall there be Evil in the City, and the Lord has not
done it? Amos 3.6. No sure: But they are mala ultoria, non peccatoria, as
Tertullian said: Poenae, non Culpae: Supplicii, non Delicti. Sin, as Sin, is
ours. The Evil of Sin is from our selves, the Evil of Punishment from God.

Ferdinand, King of Naples, in that miserable flight of his from his Country
(driven out by the French) lays the whole cause of his Miseries and loss of
his Kingdom, upon his Parents and Ancestors. My thoughts (says he) were never
subject to motions of Ambition: my Mind, never defiled with inclination to
Cruelty: my own sins bring me not this Affliction: But by a Divine Justice I
suffer for the wickedness of my Parents. Ah poor King! But here is a King will
read us another Lesson: He Will make another manner of Acknowledgment, and tell
you, Ego peccavi, I have done amiss, and dealt wickedly: And therefore Deliver
me from all my transgressions: v. 8.

This is the first step to Penitency, Confitebor: Nay, Dixi, confitebor, Psalm.
32.5. I said I will confess my transgression unto the Lord, and thou forgavest
the Iniquity of my sin To have but a Purpose and Resolution to confess, finds
favor.

Secondly, Desiste a me: As he acknowledges his own sin, so does he likewise
Gods Justice in punishing him for his sin: Not attributing ought to the bright
Stars, blind Fortune, or any other untimely Accident: But Tu fecisti; God made
the Gourd; God sent the Worm, Jonah 4. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes
away, as Job. If therefore the destroying Angel come, we know who sent him, and
for what: And he can say, and he alone, Hold thy hand. He lengthens the day to
Joshuah: Quenches the violence of the Fire to the three Children: Stops the
mouth of the Lions for Daniel: Adds fifteen years to Hezekiah: Wealth,
Children, all to Job. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none on
earth in comparison of thee. And therefore Desiste a me; Good Lord spare me.

Thirdly, as God does punish, so does he punish even Kings themselves. No
partiality or respect of persons with the highest. David, Vnctus Domini: Servus
Domini: He, whom the mouth of God pronounces upright, save in the matter of
Vriah, 1 Kings 15.5. Yet he smarts under the Rod. Kings are not exempted for
their Eminency, nor dispensed with for their Potency. Reges in ipsos Imperium
est Jovis: Great they are, and yet behold a Greater. Pharaoh may cry out, Who
is the Lord that I should fear him? Caligula may tell his Grandmother, All
things are lawful for him, who does rule and command all: And wicked Julia may
buzz into the Ears of Caracalla, That he is above the reach of Laws. But he that
sits in Heaven does laugh them all to scorn: He calls the Chiefest, the
Greatest as Stewards to account. And in much rigor and severity are they
oft-times punished.

You that know the miseries of Flight, and what it is to be made Exiles; you
will say so; when you shall see a King fly from his Royal City, and with his
handful of men, all weeping, seek for shelter in the Wilderness. You that know
the sacred tie of Friendship, and what it is to be betrayed by your nearest and
dearest Friends; you will say so: when you shall see a man, a good man injured,
persecuted by those he loved best, and did most esteem. You that have Children,
and thereby know (what none else can) the love that Parents bear unto their
Children; you will say so: when you shall see a Father robbed, and despoiled,
and deprived of his Children by his Children. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not,
and will ye take Benjamin away also? Tamar is defloured; Amnon is slain;
Absolon, O my son Absolon; Absolon come to a fearful and prodigious end.

O Lord, spare me. Surely Seneca said much in few words, Bonun incogritum
carere liberis: An unknown, and unimaginable good to have no Children. Well,
whether 'twere this, or whatsoever else besides this, 'twas Plaga, a Plague;
and a sharp one too, that made him cry out, He was even consumed by the means
of Gods heavy hand. But that will read a lesson to Rulers, 2 Samuel 23. He that
rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God: If he do otherwise, he
must expect a blow. He may rise with the Sun, but his day will not be without
Clouds. As secure as many a Great Man thinks himself; God keeps his Circuit,
Visitation, punishing their Offenses with the Rod, and their Iniquities with
Scourges.

But, fourthly, here is a special and reserved Case; Spare me: Nay, Tu desiste,
Do thou spare me, who only have power to punish me. None but the King of Kings
may punish or take account of Kings: Tibi peccavi, Tibi soli, Psalm. 51.4. David
had sinned against men too, by private injuries, by public wrongs, by general
scandal: Ask poor Vriah and Mephibosheth, and the thousands of Widows and
Fatherless, 2 Samuel, the last Verse. Yet Tibi, and Tibi soli. As a King he was
exempted from the punishment of men.

The lesser are blessed of the greater, Heb. 7.7. So the lesser punished by the
greater: And as Joseph said, Genesis 39. There is none greater in the house than
I. None is greater in the Kingdom than the King. A Deo Secundus: Solo Deo
minor: That the Doctrine and Belief of the Primitive times.

Fifthly, well now, What shall we poor souls say? Our Fathers had the happiness
to see better days, and were carried to their Graves in peace, and had that
unspeakable blessing, to have their Children bury them, as Isaac had, Genesis 35.
the last Verse. Our miseries increase at home and abroad; and what their end,
or when their end, who can tell? But yet Kings and Prophets have drunk, we see,
of the same cup before us; Are we better than they? O Lord, I know the way of
man is not in himself; It is not in man that walks to direct his steps. O
Lord, correct us; but, ad modum, with measure, not with rigor, as Jeremiah
said, Chap. 10. at the end, Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that have not
known thee, and upon the Families that call not upon thy Name: For they have
eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his
Habitation desolate. Let us not fall into the hands of men, wretched, cursed,
and malicious men.

And thus are we come to our first Stop or Pause; O spare me: And spare me that
I may recover strength That of the Poet is known; and it has sometimes
staggered the best of men: Qui cum res hominum tanta caligine volvi
Aspicerent, laetsque diu florere nocentes
Vex arique pios, etc.
David's case, Psalm. 73.17. vexed at the heart, to see the ungodly in such
prosperity. But when he went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood he the
end of these men: They do but treasure up wrath against the day of wrath: And
often times they perish, and come to a fearful End in this life also. The
Righteous shall rejoice when he sees this Vengeance, he shall wash his feet in
the blood of the wicked; so that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for
the Righteous: Doubtless there is a God that judges in Earth, Psalm. 58. the
last Verse.

Pompey, after the Pharsalian Battle, disputing with Cratippus of his
overthrow, did thence conclude against all Providence: Because (says he.) his
Cause was good, and his Success naught. But we have not thus learned God
(however he sometimes suffer us to be oppressed.) And we assure our selves he
will deliver and refresh us: But as God told Abram, when the Iniquities of the
Amorites is full, and our sins fewer. And that day, we hope that day is coming.

In the mean time, Spare me: Vt recreer, ut roborer, against Infirmity, that
under the burden of Punishment I sink not: Against the violence of Affliction,
that I despair not: And against Desperation, that I totally perish not. But he
cannot perish that cannot despair: He cannot despair that sees a Door of
Comfort open in the midst of Sorrows. No man brought so low but he may rise
again. I am consumed, says he, quite consumed, verse 10. Yet no Disease but
may find a Physician a Cure. Ask that Woman in the Fifth of St. Mark, that had
an Issue of Blood twelve Years, and had suffered many things of many
Physicians, and had spent all that she had; and was nothing bettered, but
rather grew worse and worse. Or another, Luke 13. That had a spirit of
Infirmity eighteen years, and was bowed together, and could by no means get
help. Or a third, in the Fifth of St. John, that had an Infirmity thirty eight
years, comfortless and friendless too. Yet Insperatum auxilium (as he said in
his Emblem) All of them found unhoped, unthought of Comfort, and were
delivered. Thus one in the Whale; another in the Stock^; a third in the Den:
yet refreshed, and restored again. Yea, the Lord blesses the ^^ter end of
many, as well as of Job, more than the beginning. And poor David, after a
general revolt of his Subjects, after his miserable fear and flight, finds a
sudden and strange alteration in the affections of his People, 2 Samuel 19. at
the ninth Verse; All the people of Israel were at strife, the one laying the
blame of this Rebellion on the other: and all accusing themselves of slowness
in making satisfaction for their fault, and to make some part of amends,
striving who should do the King most Service: And at the fourteenth Verse, He
bowed the hearts of all the men of Judah: so that with an unanimous consent,
they all profess themselves the Kings Servants, and desire his speedy return
unto Jerusalem.

And is it not possible? Why may we not live to see our Israel and Judah, after
their so general a Rebellion, do the like? Why may not England and Scotland do
as much? Accuse each other of the sowing the seeds first of this unnatural
Rebellion? Strive who shall be the first with melted hearts to make amends for
their Disloyalty? And with a general consent bring up the so much, so long
injured King to his Jerusalem, Amen, Lord Jesus. O spare us, that we may
recover strength, that we may see those blessed days again. Peace within our
Walls, and plenteousness within our Palaces: The King glorious: The Kingdoms
flourishing: Our Forces formidable to Foreign Nations: But all at unity amongst
our selves.

But stay: The Ark must back again as well as the King: Nay the King prefers
the Arks safety before his own: Carry back the Ark again, 2 Samuel 15.25. And
indeed Currus and Auriga Israelis: There lies our strength. Till the Ark be
brought back again: Till Religion be restored: And the Church re-beautified:
And her Revenews recovered out of the Ha^pies Claws: No hope or strength and
full Recovery.

Peace without this is but a painted peace, the Commonwealth a Corpse which
must be animated by true Religion: And true Religion is that which maintains
the Worship of God, the peace of Conscience, and the love of Christians one to
another. Or in other words: That which gives most Glory to God, most Alms to
the Poor, and most endeavors to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
Peace. Now the Lord spare us that we may recover this strength: That the
Lissomes of this three-twisted, strong-twisted Cord may never be broken. Vt
recuperemus vires; That we be not oppressed, either with the burden of sin, nor
the punishment for sin; neither smiting our knees together with Baltasar, nor
turning our face to the Wall with Hezekiah, but with a cheerful confidence we
may say, Come life, come death, etc.

It Is too true; The best of men cannot so curb and conquer their Affections at
all times but that sometimes their Passions will find vent; And poor Clay dares
adventure to expostulate with the P^tter. But here is one teaches us after such
a slip, to implore strength for a Recovery: Neither to turn Stoics, and be
insensible: Neither to faint under the burden of our Afflictions, and grow
desperate: Neither to rely upon our own Abilities, and become insolent: But to
make our address to him, who only can cure and comfort us. And this was Job's
Case, Job 10.20, 21. Are not my days few? Cease then and let me alone, that I
may take comfort a little, before I go whence I shall not return; even to the
Land of darkness, and shadow of death.

And here make we our second Stop and Pause; That I may recover my strength.
The third comes in, Before I go hence: Recover, and recover speedily: Before I
go hence; Mors Medicus, a sure Physician; he cures all Diseases; all bodily
ones. But here is one seeks a salve before he go hence; for hence he must. The
Walls of Purgatory were not built in those days. He must recover before he go
hence, or not at all. He was a King and a rich King too. He might have had
Prayers enough, and Doles enough after his Obit and Interrment; but he dares
not venture on that Cure. And though he knew a locum refrigerii after this
life, yet he sees, and shows us out the way thither by a recovery here, before
he go hence, to get remission, and refreshment afterward. Recover here to do
well afterward. The refreshment which he here craves, is from the pain and
trouble which he suffered for his sins. Yet this good do his troubles work upon
him, They withdraw his mind from the Vanities of this World; make him meditate
upon the ^railty of this life, and the certainty of aproaching Death.

There was a time, when 'twas otherwise; Dixi in prosperitate mea, etc. Psalm.
30.6. I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved: I made all cock-sure. I
thought the World had been mine eternally. But now in his Affliction, he is
better informed; and he that thought he should live for ever, does tell you of
his going hence. The Wise man's counsel is, Memorare novissima: the thinking
upon Death is the ready way to Life. And here is one takes that course,
meditating on another World, before he be compelled to leave this. Many cast of
these thoughts as too dull, sad, and melancholy. None so old, as the Orator
said, but he thinks he may live one year longer. And that is the Millstone that
has sunk so many souls into the Abyss of Hell. Senex volo, intermortuus volo:
I may repent in mine old Age, and on my Deathbed. A late Repentance will serve
that God, who has promised to accept of any: At what time soever, etc. Sure we
are afraid to be too good, or to be too great Saints in Heaven. And I may so
often say, I will, and I will, till God say, I shall not. I who have had so
long a time, and do neglect it, may chance hear the Angel swearing, That there
shall be no longer time. Solomon tells us of Evil da^es that ae to come. Old
Age are those, and Sickness are those, and Casualties are those. The Scriptures
tell us of an Hodie, a time, and an appointed time, when we should repent, and
when God will surely hear. But if we let slip that opportunity, we may call,
and knock too, with the Foolish Virgins, and yet the Doors of Mercy be shut
against us.

But what does this concern the young man? He has many fair years to tell: And
those young Saints are never good. Such indeed they may be: But young Devils
are always naught. And truly they set not the right foot before, whose
Rhetoric is Lies and Oaths: Their Music a Baudy Song in their lips, and a
Prayer Book in their Pocket: (The greatest Discord in the World.) Their
Devotion, I am sure their Gesture, yea and in Loco Sancto too, is Antic,
Baptick, any thing but what they should.

Their knees without joints, they cannot bow: Their hands indeed sometimes
lifted up, but it is to whiffle their locks, or advance their Mustachio's: Their
eyes are rolling and adulterous eyes, as St. Peter calls them, and the whole
model of their Carriage such, as St. Paul said of some Jews. They please not
God, and are contrary to all men, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15. And do such Gallants think of
going hence? Do they dream of that Dance they must shortly dance? That loath to
depart. Do they believe their own eyes? Youth has no privilege: As soon the
young sheep comes to the Shambles as does the old: as soon indeed, and
oft-times sooner too: Nay, for one old man, dye twenty young. Ego ludebam foris
in platea, and intus in Conclavi ferebatur super me judicium mortis: Then
wallowing in the sink of sin, when the dismal Sentence of Death is pronouncing
against them. Well, Youth gives these men no protection.

No, nor Greatness neither: And therefore David thinks of going hence: Reads to
himself and others that Lecture of Mortality. Mors aequo pede pulsat pauperum
Tabernas, Regumque Turres. Many are the privileges of a King: But none against
Death: And therefore the Heathen gave it and their supposed Fate the same
Epithites; Ineluctabilis, Inevitabilis: No wrestling against that Enemy.
Canutus may as well forbid the Sea to flow, as any man can stop or turn back
Death. I must go hence: And man is always going; A fasciis ad ferela linteum:
From the Womb to the Grave he is always keeping on his progress. St Gregory
compares him to a Passenger or Merchant at Sea; Stet, sedeat, etc. Let him eat,
drink, wake, or sleep, whatsoever he do, the Ship keeps on his Course unto the
Harbor, Et nos impulsu navis ferimur: The Gale is strong; the Passage short:
and what our Merchandises will be, God knows. I fear many of us shall come
short in our accounts, and bring home stubble and straw, Apes and Peacocks
instead of Gold of Ophir, 1 Kings 10.22. And what must our hope be? What, to
make a better Voyage next? No, no: our Ships will prove like Jehoshaphats
Ships, they will all break at Ezion-Gebe^. No hope for a second Voyage, or another
Return. If once we go hence, we shall be no more.

And here make we our third Pause, which has brought us to the end of the
race, the visible race. Now follows the last, which brings us to the land of
Forgetfulness, as the Psalmist calls it: If once we go hence, we shall be no
more.

There is hope of a Tree, says Job, if it be cut down, that it may sprout
again; and by the scent of Water it may bud, and bring forth Boughs like a
Plant: But man dies, and is cut off, he gives up the Ghost, and where is he?
Jobs first Quaere was, Quid est? What is man? A poor, silly Creature, of few
days, and full of trouble. A flower, a shadow a nothing. His next Quaere is,
Vbi est? What becomes of him? Where is he?

The Widow of Tekoa said much, when she compared man to water spilt on the
ground, which cannot be gathered up again. But Job likens him to a flood
decayed and dried up: no moisture, or vestigia left. For man lies down and
rises not till the Heavens be no more, They shall not awake, nor be raised out
of their sleep, Cap 14. v. 12. And this is David's, Be no more; no more a Man of
this world: No more in esteem: no more to repent, and find Grace. For as the
Tree falls, there shall it be, Eccles. 11. And therefore lay no more upon me,
than I can bear. For I am a man, and man is nothing: I must away, and be no
more. I go, from whence I shall never return again. O, would our sons of Anak
think on this! who have sold themselves to work wickedness, and drink up
iniquity as Beasts drink water. Their eyes swell with fatness, and they do even
what they list: or (as our last Translation reads it) they have more then heat
can wish. They murder the widow and the fatherless, and put the innocent to
death.

Those men have their Day, but it is a short one: Adhuc pusillum, and we shall
see them no more. No more, till we see them dragged to a worse Judgment then
they now hale others. Well, if they will not think on it, God grant we may. Our
Goods, they were but lent us, and the less we have, the less we have to answer
for: we can but go out naked as we came in, and so shall all. Our Afflictions
will not last for ever: and be they never so many, and sharp too, yet are not
our sufferings worthy that glory that shall be revealed. And at most, those
Lions can do no worse by us, than did that Lion by the man of God, 1 Kings 13.
kill the body and gaze upon the Carcass. But Animae non habet quod faciat, as
Bernard said; the best part of us is without the reach of the Lion and Dragon
too.

You know that story of Anaxarchus, when the Cyprian Tyrant caused him to be
pounded with brazen Pestles in a Mortar; Tunde, says he, Tunde sacculum
Anaxarchi, Pound, pound the bag, the Case of Anaxarchus, himself you cannot
hurt. They may have that power upon us, as the Devil had upon Job: we may
suffer in Children, Goods, Body: There Is one part of us they cannot hurt. Keep
we our Conscience sound, and God will preserve our soul entire. In the mean
time their day is coming, when they must hence, and shall be no more: Yea,
happy they, if they might be no more indeed; if soul and body might perish
everlastingly. But they must know, a Day of Retribution is at hand, when God
shall render unto every man according to his works. Return they shall, but not
to life: Not to those Monuments of Blood, Avarice, and Ambition, which by their
Cutthroat cruelty they shall leave behind. Those places from which they must,
shall see them no more, Psalm. 103. What say we then to Apparitions? To the
raising up of Samuel at the instance of Saul? etc. 2 Kings 4. A Child, 2 Kings
13. A man restored to life again. A thing frequent in the New Testament, and
afterward. One in the Bed; another in the Bier: Lazarus from out his Tomb: And
after the Passion of our Savior, the Graves were opened, and many Bodies of
Saints, which slept, arose, and came out of the Graves after his Resurrection,
and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many, Matthew. 27.52.53. Some body
tells us of one Curma sent b ck again from the Judgment-Barr, because Death (or
the Angel of Death) had mistaken him for another of the same Name. And a
Jesuit tell us of one, who, a good wh^le dead and buried, by prayers and
permission came back again, enjoyed his wife, and kept his former habitation.
To these two last my Answer is, No Scripture, no Belief. I may call these men's
return from Hell (or wheresoever 'twas) a Fable, more safely, than does Beza
call the Descent of our Savior thither, Fabulam, and Fabulam: a Fable, and
again (says he) a Fable. I do not belly St. Beza: you shall find it in his
greater Notes upon the Twenty seventh Chapter of St. Matthew, Verse 53.

As for those frequent Apparitions, there may be such, Sed non ego credulus
illis. But these are, most while, pretended for the Soul alone. Though I deny
not some such power to the Devil, as to put on what shape he please, For he
that can transform himself into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11 14. may easily
make or take some body at his pleasure: Though most times I conceive such
things to be Illusions. And some such thing was that of Samuel. God forbid we
should once imagine any such skill or prevalency in Witches, or their great
Master either (by whom they work) that they should have any power upon the
Souls of the Godly that are departed out of this Life. No, no; The Scriptures
tell us, They are in the hand of God, and no evil can touch them.

As for those others restored to life by Elisha in the Old, or our Savior in
the New Testament: Quod lego, credo. And God forbid any man should stagger at
such plain Evidences. Christ has the Keys of Hell and Death, Rev. 1.18. And he
can open and shut at his pleasure. But this takes not off that General Rule,
Hebr. 9.27. It Is appointed unto men once to dye: where (...) must be understood
(...); once, and once for all. One Death, one Judgment for all men. Yet Enoch
and Elias were excepted; as also these others in the Gospel. A few Privileges
or Exceptions break not the General Law. But what is this to David? and to us?
We must go hence, and shall be no more: No second Return.

And therefore, as our Savior said, we must agree with our adversary quickly
and while we are in the way. We have Adversaries enough, and too many, God
knows, and some of them will not agree with us: But do we our best for
Reconcilement, especially at such a time as this, and such Adversaries, as by
our doing injuries we have made such.

There are some Adversaries we may not agree withal: No casting in our Lots
amongst the Wicked: no shaking hands with those whose Religion is Rebellion:
And therefore no peace with such, unless we will be at Enmity with God; and
there were an Adversary indeed: It Is good agreeing with him, and that quickly
too: no delay; and while we are in the way. For once gone, and no returning
back again. Si Deus nobiscum -- If we can get him our Friend, no matter if all
the World be our Enemies.

O Lord, do thou pardon and forgive; Do thou return and refresh us. O Lord
spare us, that we may recover our strength, before we go hence and be no more.

Deo Patri, etc.
A SERMON Preached before His MAJESTY, King CHARLES the II. In the ISLE of
JERSEY.
2 TIMOTHY IV. 10. Demas has forsaken me.


I Shall rather be persuaded, esse Lunares Homines, quam Joculares Daemones. To
be for Signs and Seasons, Genesis 1. does not exclude those capacious Bodies from
other purposes. And I know what Heraclides, Cardan, and others have said
touching those (...), Creatures of a middle condition between Men and Angels:
As also what Hermes, Apollonius, and Plotinus have said for the Genii. These
may be the fancies of men. But sure wherever Cornelius a Lapide found his Merry
Devils, I am confident he could never find any well-affected to Mankind.

The malicious and wrathful Dragon is ever at war with the seed of the Woman;
and that same Ponam inimicitias, is almost as old as Adam. If once the Woman,
the Church, or any Child of hers do parere masculum, any virtuous and masculine
work, that old Serpent is ready with his flood of poison to destroy both Root
and Branch. His first attempt is to stifle it in the birth; if he fail there,
then by allurements to make it Deviare in its calling and subjection: If he
prevail not here, then una eurusque notusque ruunt; Earth, Water, and all must
conspire its utter ruin and destruction.

Take for this St. Paul's example, and where should a man find a better? First
he is armed with Authority and Commission against the Church: A shrewd
Temptation, which once over-blown, and the sometime Persecutor become a
Preacher: Next, there is a plot to kill him in Damascus: at Lystra he is
lapidatus: scourged and imprisoned at Philippi: His death sworn at Jerusalem:
suffers shipwreck at Malta: at length post varios casus, he comes to Rome,
lives in an hired house, and has his Friends about him: Afterward he comes to
his Answer; and now is the time to know his Friends. In prima mea defensione
nemo mihi adfuit; every one fled to corners, and shifted for their own safety.
Only Luke is with me, and therefore have a care to come to me speedily. For
Demas has forsaken me.

Simplex miseria non sufficit; One Calamity follows close upon another. Squama
squamae, fluctus fluctui; The wages of well-doing is Injury: And all that will
live godly shall suffer persecution. But, (...), what must Brutus make one
amongst the rest to stab his Caesar? Thou my familiar Friend and Companion,
says David, Psalm. 55. What none but Judas the oeconomus Christi, none but the
Purse-bearer to betray his Master? And will Demas show his heels, fly, and
forsake that heavenly Mercury, and Truths Trumpetor, who took him, taught him,
and instructed him the way to Heaven? This Demas did, and did it in the worst
of times, a time of need. When his Friend was in misery, and a little Comfort
might have been worth a World to persecuted and distressed Paul Yet Dominus
mihi adfuit, says the Martyr, when all the World forsook him, God did not: But
corroboravit me, It Is a Meditation for men in distress: Aderit Dominus, and
corroborabit. But my undertaken Task calls me back to Demas: Demas has
forsaken me.

Thus take the words, and it a Complaint: Take in (...) and it is a Reason: Have
a care to come quickly unto me; for Demas has forsaken me. And thus you have
three things: First, The best men are driven to their Streights. Secondly, the
ungodly fly and forsake their best Friends in their greatest need. Thirdly, the
Godly must and will assist one another. Take it as a Complaint, and so it is
too; and you have three things also. First, the Inconstancy of Friends:
Secondly, the bewitching Pleasures of the World: Thirdly, the Miseries of
Persecution.

But with Demas must we begin. He parts first, and he parts from Rome, from
Paul, from God. First, from Rome; nay, that may be well done, Exeat Aula, Qui
vult esse pius: No man could deem it a fault to fly from Nero's Court. And this
is that so much commends Moses, That he forsook the pleasure of sin, Pharaoh's
Court, and chose rather to suffer Affliction with the Children of God. But
secondly, Demas forsakes Paul too: And that might be excuseable in some Case
also: For Barnabas and Paul exacerbati, not without some bitterness depart one
from another. Or, last of all; He might secedere ad tempus, leave St. Paul for
a time, and upon better thoughts return again, as did Onesimus to his Master
Philemon. And Beza is of that Opinion; Videtur ille postea resipiscens ad
Paulum revertisse: But his Opinion stands upon two, but too weak Grounds: The
first, that Timothy was never at Rome, but once; which were much for such
Friends, and in so long a time. The second, Probabile est, That the Epistle to
Philemon was written after this Second Epistle to Timothy. All is but videtur,
and probabile; and under correction, I shall say, Videtur quod non: For first,
for Paul's going from Barnabas, as also of Onesimus from Philemon, 'twas but
(...), a parting or separation. Here is a plain Dereliction: And secondly, read
but this Chapter, and you shall see 'twas written very little before his Death:
Ego jam libor, verse. 6. I am ready to be offered up, and the time of my
Dissolution is at hand. But in the Epistle to Philemon, Para mihi hospitium,
verse. 22. He was in hope to escape and come amongst them. And so it is here
spoken of Demas his Dereliction, when Paul was ready to suffer, but no where is
mention of Demas's Return.

And therefore I add in the third place, That he forsook God too. Rome, Paul,
and God too. For in this verse, three things are witnessed against him: First,
Demas has forsaken me. Secondly, has embraced the present World. Thirdly, He
is gone to Thessalonica: He had made merchandise of his Soul before, and is now
gone about his other Merchandise: or he goes far enough from Rome, lest some
good Friend or other should labor to reclaim him. And now because order
carries some help to memory, though in the weakest Endeavors: Out of all this
Chaos I shall select some few Particulars to be insisted on, in this order.
First, You shall see an Inconstant Friend. Secondly, A Faithless Steward or
Minister. Thirdly, The Motives which induce him to forsake his Friend, his
Office, his God.

Demas has forsaken me: Demas my supposed Friend; For a prosessed one till now
he did appear: But what says Be^-S^i^ach, A Friend cannot be known in
Prosperity. When Paul had entertainment as an Angel from Heaven, multitudes
weeping for his departure; Men, Women, and Children accompanying him to the
Ship; The Galatians ready to pull out their eyes to do Paul good: The Priest of
Jupiter bringing out (...), Bulls in their Garlands, ready for Sacrifice, to do
him honor; When a word from his mouth, or a Napkin from his hand could cure
the sick, and revive the dead; when a Lycaonian cry was heard, Gods are come
down among us; 'twas a brave World: and who would not strive to make one in
such a gallant, glorious Company:

But the Case is altered now with Paul: His power is (it seems) eclipsed: He
that could cure others, cannot now free himself: Sistitur ad Tribunal Caesaris;
and he must answer for his new Profession. He shall find his Sect every where
spoken against. That, Si Tibris ascendit in Moenia, si Nilus non descendit in
Arva: Si Fames; si Lues; Statim Christianus ad Leones: No Calamity in East or
West, but 'twas all imputed to their toleration of this new Religion. And
therefore no favor is to be expected now for Paul, or Paul's Profession.

No wonder then if Demas has given the slip, and left this miserable Prisoner
to shift for himself. Friendship is like Corn in stony ground, ten to one if it
gather root. Friends for the most part are like Swallows, they love our Houses
all the Summer time, and seem a part of our Family: But when once Winter comes,
farewell Swallows.

These are the Rats and Mice who love to repose them, and take up their rest in
the fattest Barns, and best inhabited Mansions: But if the Edifice begin to
totter, and the Buildings shake, farewell Rats. And this is that made Solomon
say, Prove. 17. A Friend loves at all times, and a Brother is born for
adversity: Then were the Nunc or Nunquam to do good. But then indeed the Vizard
is plucked off from most men's faces, and false friendship shows it self in its
own Colors.

And that you see by Demas, who will be sure to look to the time, and provide
for a sore finger in season. There is a place in Scripture (which amongst some
other) has found several Readings; it is Romans 12.11. Origin reads it, Be
fervent in spirit, se^ving the time: A brave Text, say the Time servers, and
inconstant Friends: (...). And in these latter times, Erasmus with some others,
sticks to that Reading. But we will say with St. Hierom of old, Illi legant
tempori servientes; nos legamus, Domino servientes: (...), not (...): Serve the
Lord. Let them serve the times that will, we will read, We Will follow, we will serve
God and the King. And yet if the other reading were admitted, 'twould little
patronize the Changerlings of these days, the fickle, faithless, and
inconstant Friends. For by serving the time, what were we taught, but to submit
to the time, and take Gods visitations patiently: Or serve the time; that is,
be ready to help and assist your Neighbors, Friends, and Brethren at all
times, on all occasions: As St. Paul became omnia omnibus; all things to all
men to do them good. But sure the world is cast in another mould now; The major
part so serve the time, that they run with the time: (...), as one said: So
often turning and returning, that you know not where to find them. Similes
Ericio, like the Vrchin or Hedghogg, who has always two holes, to which he
does apply himself, according to the Winds. Such was Tydides and his Followers
between the Greeks and Trojans, (...). Such was Cicero, demurring between
Caesar and Pompey: And therefore Luberius Mimus told him truly, though tartly,
That he was wont, Duabus sellis sedere; He sat upon two stools. O (Beloved)
how many Tullies and Tidides has this Land afforded? in those latter days,
Men, and Women: Like Panarchs Riddle; R^ts, Bats, Neuters, and more treacherous
than Ziba: Non Hospes ab Hospite tutus, Non socer a Genero. So little do men
now-a-day regard the sacred tie of Friendship, or the many, many Obligations in
which they stand engaged.

The Sarmatian, if once he swear by the Blade of his Sword, 'twas as good as a
Persian Law, unalterable. The Canter, if he swear by Solomon, you may believe
him: If those of Vlster swear by St. Patricks Staff, you might be bold on it.
But now God, and Gods Bible, all the Obligations and Oaths of Allegiance in the
World cannot keep the graceless Multitude within the Pale of their Obedience
and Fidelity. You have a Proverb, Over Shoos, and over Boots. And the
Philosopher tells you, Concatenata sunt vitia. Though it may be said of a
Solitary man, Aut Deus, aut Demon: A Solitary man, or most Solitary men are
most while Evil; yet Evil it self is never Solitary. Vices grow like Grapes, by
Clusters. And therefore when you see Demas forsake his best Friend and Tutor,
you may not think he sets up his rest here: Plus ultra is his word, his work,
and one sin begets another. Chrysostom gives Instance in a Lie, which does
oft-times procure Swearing, Forswearing, and Cursing too: Augustine in
Drunkenness, which caused Adultery and Murder too: How David fell from sin to
sin, the holy Scriptures testify, as likewise Peter. And I would we had not in
our days the cursed Fruits of Disobedience: And how Discontent did hammer out
the Sword of the Covenant, to cut asunder the Gordian-knot of all Obedience and
Religious Duties in Church and State.

Here Demas goes from Rome, from Paul, and from God too, which is the second
thing we would observe; That he is not only an Inconstant Friend; but a
faithless Steward or Minister.

Pars secunda: We did look upon him but now under the common notion of a man,
or at most an obliged man: Now behold we him a little as a Minister, for such
doubtless shall you find him. For in the Epistle to Philemon, verse. penult.
Marchus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, (...): Two of them Evangelists; And he
amongst the rest a Fellow Laborer with St. Paul, a gallant Title, but quickly
lost.

But may not a Minister in any case forsake his Calling. I know the Papists
resolve in this point, who though they teach the Character of Priesthood to be
indelible, yet they tell us, There is a Superlative Power in the Pope, who can
dispense with any thing In ordine ad melius, or Communius Bonum: And many a
Cardinal has enjoyed that privilege.

In our days (when every harmless Ceremony is looked upon as a Monster in the
Church) some have thought it lawful to quit their Callings rather then Conform,
others laudable, and some with the rigid Flaccians, proclaim it necessary. But
the greater and better part, old and new, truly tell us, That for a full
Minister (as some speak) for a Priest to forsake his Calling, what were this,
but to put his hand to the Plough, and look back? He is (...), separate to the
Gospel of Christ; and what were this Desertion of his Calling, but to separate
him from Gospel, God, and All. Vae mihi si non Evangelizem, 1 Cor. 9.16. But
what cares Demas for this? What does St. Paul's Vae trouble him, who had left
St. Paul and his Religion too? O but there may be many faithless Stewards who
do not quite renounce their Stewardship: They write down fifty instead of an
hundred; lessen or excuse sin; sow Cushions; bid Achab go up and prosper. There
are too many of this untimely brood, such as are become Nobiles in scelere, as
Hierom spoke of Helvidius, men without Note, Learning, or Merit, who by their
libelling, railing, and complying, are cried up and commended to the World, for
the Grandees of the time. Nay, there are some of Eminency and good Parts, whom
St. Paul might sometime have owned for his Fellow Laborers; Yet these men do
not always set the Right-foot before; they turn Ephraimites, starting aside
like a broken Bow. I knew the time when those Sons of Thunder would have
preached Obedience, and have told their Auditors what 'twere to resist the
higher Powers: But the wind is turned; and see what Reputation, Applause, or
some other worldly By-respect can do. These with Demas forsake Paul, Paul's
Doctrine, and by Consequent Paul's God too: Nay truly, some man would speak
them worse then Demas; for I take Demas to be a new Convert, lately, and but
lately warmed with the Sunshine of the Gospel, not thoroughly grounded, and
therefore the more apt to make Relapse into this Paganism.

But these men (I fear some of them, not without reluctation of Conscience)
withhold the truth in unrighteousness, and wittingly, willingly oppose that
self-same Religion in which they were born, which they ever did profess, and of
the truth of which they are reasonably well persuaded, if I say not fully. O
would to God these men would seriously consider what it is to rent the seamless
coat of Christ: And whilst they do pretend the Fear of Idolatry, they become
not flat Idolaters themselves: For what else is Will Worship, and Invention of
Man's Brain, but mere Idolatry? Aliena Dogmata, Alieni Dii, as said Lyrinensis.
And whilst they pretend to make a through Reformation (as their phrase is) they
aim at a through Destruction of Church and State. This is not Reformare, but
Innovare, as Maximilian the Emperor said; this is not to mend, but to mar all.

The Lord has given us a Rule in Jeremy, and we will hold us to that Rule, Ask
for the old way, for that is the best way, and walk in it, and you shall find
rest to your souls, Jerem. 6.16. If we preach our selves, and not Christ: If we
set the world together by the ears with our new Opinions, as Erasmus said of
some: If, with Isaiah, Cap. 8.20. we do not keep us to the Law, and to the
Testimony: If we speak not according to this Word, receive us not, say not to
us, God speed, 2 John.

But when men grow weary of the old ways, and seek them out By-pathes to
wander in: When the Primitive Church is counted but an Embrio, which must be
lickt into a better Form by future Ages (vide Calvin.) When the best of the
Fathers are but Dishclouts (an homely phrase in a Scholars mouth) when men gape
for new Doctrines, as the Oysters do for new tides: When the Precepts of God,
and the practices of men do clash; Beware of such Prophets, and be ye not
carried away with every blast of Doctrine. Take heed how you forsake St. Paul
with Demas. Obedite praepositis vestris, Hebr. 13.17. Be subject to the higher
Powers, Romans 13. Kings and Bishops both must have our Prayers and Obedience:
And they who fail in these, forsake St. Paul.

The last Part follows: The Motives which induced Demas to forsake St. Paul:
And they are two, employed in the word, me. First, Me, under the Rod of
Persecution: Secondly, Me, who am in penury or want. And both of these
expressedly in this Chapter. He suffered multa mala, v. 14. And Nemo adfuit, v.
16. few Friends, and many Troubles: And this were enough to make a Demas
forsake Paul: many weak in the Faith to stagger; many worldlings to fall away.
But we have not so learnt Christ. The Servant is not above his Master: And our
Master has left us an Example, and we must tread in his steps: For if we
suffer for doing well (...), 1 Peter 2. And this made so many Martyrs so
prodigal of their lives (if I may so speak) so ready to suffer, so willing to
die: Many offering themselves to the Fire, even to the amazement of the
Beholders: Not to speak of Adavetus-Romanus, or St. Laurence and his Grid-iron:
And in the Arian Persecution at Edessa, Modestus the Governor did wonder to
see not only the constancy, but the forwardness of the Martyrs; Women hastening
with their Children to the Fire, to the astonishment of the Tormentors. They
went (says one) tanquam ad Nuptialem Thalamum, as joyfully as to a Wedding
Feast, or to a Bridal-bed.

Since the beginning of those late miserable Confusions in our Land, how many
good men have been cut off in Ships, Prisons, and the Royal-Scaffold? And many
poor Widows and Fatherless do yet cry out, and cry up for Justice at the hands
of Heaven?

If Christ should say Sequere me, as he did to Peter, Go follow your Friends,
your Leaders, your Betters, and drink of their Cup, What should we do? We must
do that, or do worse: And therefore where St. Paul's Sword does come, God give
them St. Paul's Courage.

But all who suffer are not Saints, nor are all Martyrs who die by the
Hang-mans hand for their Religions sake. What think you of Baals Priests, that
did slash and cut themselves: or Cybiles Priests that did gueld themselves?
What of those poor Children made to pass through the fire to Molock? or those
Bohemian-women who suffered so much, so miserably for the Opinion of the
Adamites? To these I might add whole swarms of Marcionists put to death for
their Religion: And the like might be said of most Sectaries and Seperatists.
And (what is observable by the way) not an Heretic, not a Schismatic, but
have Scripture at their fingers end, and all pretend Conscience and Religion.
John of Leiden, Clement Ravilliack: All Usurpers, Rebels, Monsters, take
shelter There. Yea, he who called the Scripture Nigrum Atramentum, or another,
A dead Letter, or A Nose of Wax, yet all these fly to Scripture and Conscience,
as to the Shoot-Ancre in a Tempest. They who crucified our Savior did as much.
Yea, the Devil had his Scriptum est to tempt him. All I shall say to this, is,
The Scripture must be sane Intellecta, the Conscience must be been Regulata;
they miss in both. And so do all those, who would be thought Martyrs for their
Disobedience. They forget St. Peter, Let no man suffer as an evil Doer, or a
Busie-body. They forget St. Paul, who suffered for Christ's sake, 2 Cor. 12.10.
And vestro commodo, for the good of the flock, Col. 1.24.

The last thing which caused Demas to forsake his Friend and Master, was (I
told you) Paul's Poverty: If Paul could have left some great Legacy behind him,
I know not what Demas would have done. A golden hook, they say, will catch any
fish. But Paul is poor, and must be beholding to his Friends for Maintenance:
And therefore the less wonder if Demas do as the young man did in the Gospel:
He would follow Christ wheresoever he went, till he saw no hope of profit,
pleasure, or preferment in the World; the chiefest mark the most do level at.

I think the Millenary took his Rise from hence, No life to this life: And that
made him dream of Wealth and Wantonness in his New World. Ah poor Christian,
what can that New Earth be in comparison of the Old Heaven? Or what comfort can
it be to be kept out of the Caelestial Paradise? yet the Millenary makes that a
step to his future Felicity? It Is his Mount Nebo to see a better Canaan. But
we, fading we to dote upon this fading World, to crave a Knife to cut our
Throats, and tie a Millstone about our Necks. To talk of Heaven, and yet make
provision only for the Earth: O wherein do we, do such surmount the Beasts that
perish? Nay, Beasts do like Beasts, and perish like Beasts: But Man, Divinae
particula aurae, to whom the blessed Deity has given a Jewel invaluable, a
Soul so capable of eternal Glory; for Man so much to un-man himself, and make
this World his summum bonum; Angels and Saints, I think the Devil himself does
wonder at it.

When Lot went out of Sodom, and was now upon his way to Zoar, his Wife looked
back again upon her wealth she left behind; There lay her heart. When Demas was
in a fair way for Heaven, he looks back again upon the World; There lay his
hopes. Nazianzen said of her, That she was (...), an immortal Pillar, set up by
the hand of Mercy to give a Caveat to all future Ages: Beware, look not back.
And thus stands Demas registered in Gods Book, a warning for the wretched
Worldlings: Take heed, look not back Value not those (...), the Dirt and Dung
of this World, at so high a Rate. There Is pain in the getting, care in the
keeping, grief in the loosing: And besides all this; there is (...), Mark 4.19
Riches are a slippery and deceitful thing: They have wings, as Solomon said,
Eagles wings, and oft-times quickly gone, and gone for ever. I could remind you
of Bajazets Cage, Sesostris Chariot, Chraesus Pile, Cyrus Tub, Marcus Crassus
among the Parthians, and Baldivia among the Americans drinking down Ladles full
of melted Gold. I could fetch Sejanus from his Closet, Seneca from his
Orchards, Bassianus from his Fishponds; Tigillinus, Plautian, Atabaliba,
Metezuma: These and millions more, as well as these, have from Darlings of
Fortune been quickly turned into Foot-balls, and nothing left of all their
Greatness but their Name. A warning piece for future times. I was nothing: I am
nothing: I shall return to nothing* or in the words of Solomon, Vanity of
Vanities, All is Vanity, says the Preacher. Honores mundi, Tumores Mundi,
Adams Apple, or Sodoms: Esau's Pottage, Jonathan's Honycomb: All dulcia in
aspectu, laethalia in gustu, as said Arnobius. These all do but fill our mouths
with Gravel, and we shall never be satisfied, till Gods glory do appear,
Satiabor cum apparuerit Gloria Tua. The King of Spains Motto was, Non sufficit
orbis. And I believe the greatest part of the World approve it. The World
cannot content a worldly minded man; He has the Dropsy, the more he drinks,
the more he thirsts.

You have heard of Lysamachus and Saleucus, two of Great Alexanders greatest
Commanders; Cum orbem Terrarum Duo soli tenerent, augustiis sibimet inclusi
videbantur. Vt Justin. lib. 17. And only Death could put an end to their
Ambition.

All I shall say to shut up all, is, Optimum est insania frui aliena: Seeing so
many men are mad with Demas let us be wiser, and reap some benefit by their
madness. Let us learn to make Treacle of Vipers, and by the fall of other men
to beware: And come Life, come Death, let it never be said, that for the
embracing of a bad World, we should make shipwreck of a good Conscience. Let us
never forsake God, and Gods Word, our Courage, Calling, and Profession.

Let us beware how we do Idolize the Covenant, which binds Kings in Chains, and
gives stop to the Subject to demurr upon Oaths. And for the Hierarchy and
Government of the Church: Let those, who seek Nodum in scirpo, take heed of
Crysippus's Pride, and Palaemon's Arrogance.

Let us lay before our eyes the harmony of the two Testaments, the general
practice of Antiquity: The Consent of Fathers, Councils, all the World, till
those worst of Times. And for those who are otherwise minded, God reveal it to
them, and make us all of one mind, that we may unanimously with one mouth
glorify God.

THIS SERMON Was Preached at St. HILIAR Before the KING In his Exile, Sept. 23.
1649.
PSALM. CV. 12, 13, 14. When they were a few men in number, yea, a very few, and
Strangers in the Land.

When they went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom, to another People.

He suffered no man to do them wrong.


SET Service in the Church is out of date. Church-musick is an Irreligious Ragg
of Popery. And for our Solemn Feasts, the very Name must be expunged, and the
People must forsake, detest, and forget all. Thus he, who said I am wiser then
my Teachers, must (if now alive) be set to School again, turn a new Leaf, or be
shut out of the Synagogue of these Saints. David kept his Festivals; had
Set-service; blessed God with Music, Church-musick, Vocal and Instrumental
both. And on that day, a great Festival-day, David delivered first this Psalm,
to thank the Lord, into the hand of Asaph (the Precentor) and his Brethren, 1 Chronicles. 16 7.

So that if you fear God, this Psalm was made to thank him: If you honor
Kings, a King made it. If you approve Festivals, at a great Feast 'twas first
given and sung: When the Ark, after so many tossings and tumblings, was with
much solemnity brought home, and settled in Jerusalem. So that without
straining, the Text may prove tuneable; and though Asaphs mouth be stopped, and
his Cymbal broken, yet this may be the dawning of that day, when we shall all
sing, Haec est dies quam fecit Dominus, etc. make it our Festival, Solemn and
Annual, and for such, warrantable by the practice of the Jewish Church and
Primitive Christians.

But we must travel awhile with Abraham, before we can sit down in David's
Quire, and with the poor Israelites, hang up our Harps upon the Willows, ere we
can frame our selves to sing those Songs of Sion: Meditate a while upon our
miseries, and afterward come in with a Psalm of Thanksgiving for Gods Mercies.

And this is the Order of my Text, a Text Historical, it relates to a Story,
and the Story of no small Antiquity, it goes as high as to the Father of the
Faithful. His, and his Sons troubles present themselves in the two first
Verses; Gods mercy and deliverance in the third. These are the two General
Parts of which I am to speak. Vtinam pro dignitate.

Roscius would feign himself that Party whom he was to personate; and the
Orator would have his Pleader make the Case his own, the better to express his
Clyents passions. We shall need none of those helps. We (sure in some sort) we
are the men we are to speak of. In eadem Navi, embarked in the same Ship, and
therefore sharers in the same Fortunes. Non tam Ovum Ovo simile. I am sure it is
so for the first part, that of Troubles: And I hope it will prove so in the
second also, that of Protection and Deliverance.

But we are the Children, and it is fit the Father should have the precedence;
we shall therefore first begin with Abraham. Abraham and his Family: When they
were but a few men in number, yea very few, and Strangers in the Land.
When they went from one Nation to another, etc.


I may well call it the Pilgrimage of the Patriarchs, Abraham and Isaac and
Jacob, for so it is.

The old Proverb or Epistichium was -- (...) And here are three PPP's,
Peregrini, Pauci, Pauperes, all miserable, but the misery ends not here. In 2
Cor. 4.17. there is excellenti excellentius, a super-superlative Glory: So here,
a super-superlative Misery. One much worse then the rest.

1. Pilgrims. Strangers that went from one Nation to another.

2. Their Paucity; They were few in number, yea very few.

3. Their Poverty; A Rolling stone (they say) gathers no Moss, They went from
one Kingdom, to another People.

4. That super-superlative, that worse then worst, The People to whom they went
in their distress, Egypt and Palestine. Here Is squama squamae, trouble upon
trouble: These in the first place.

In the second, there is somewhat will make amends for all, the Providence and
Protection of God. He suffered no man to do them wrong. I cannot present them
to you in a better dress, nor in an easier way for method, memory, and a plain
Expression.

1. Pilgrims. 2. Their Paucity. 3. Their Poverty. 4. The People, whither they
were driven. 5. And then last of all, comfort amidst all, He suffered no man to
do them wrong. Gods gracious protecting them.
1. I begin with the Pilgrims. And where can I begin better, then where the New
Testament began with David, and Abraham? A Psalm of David concerning Abraham,
and his Posterity. And in seeing what befell him him and his, we may know how
to bear our own Calamities the better.

The Jews ask Christ, Art thou greater then our Father Abraham? John 8. I hope
no man thinks himself better then Abraham; And Abraham was a stranger. And this
I take the first degree of his misery.

You can tell me of the treachery of Companions; the Churlishness of
Innkeepers; the Dangers of the Way. Sparta would hardly give a stranger any
admittance: the best place in the world for old men, one of the worst for
strangers. The Chinois kept them all out. The Scythians slew them all, and hung
their heads upon the doors of their Idolatrous Temples. Diomedes fed his Horses
with the flesh of Strangers.

Some will say this was done in the days of Ignorance, which as it is true, so
it is not all. Ezekiel will tell you, 'twas one of Israel's sins; They oppressed
the Stranger wrongfully, Cap. 22.29. And the Psalmist, how they murder the
Widow and the Stranger, and put the Fatherless to death, Psalm. 94. This made
the blind Poet term Ulysses (...), one that would sail with every wind, and
wear all Colors. Indeed, they say, the Stranger must have three things: The
Eagles eyes, the Mouses ears, and the Fishes mouth.

Audi, Cerne, Tace, cui Publica contigit Vxor. Said one of the Wittal. Audi,
cerne, tace, for the Stranger too; see, and see what he would not; hear, and
hear what he should not, and still as mute as a Fish.

Let his God, his King, his Religion, or whatsoever else is nearest and dearest
unto him; let them be dishonored never so much by blasphemy, slanders, and
reproaches, yet must he hold his mouth as with a Bridle, Psalm. 39. And thus was
Lot (one of this small Company) vexed with the filthy conversation of the
wicked, in seeing and hearing, he vexed his righteous soul from day to day,
with their unlawful deeds, 2 Pet. 2.8. But if he once speak, let it be in the
most submissive terms and offers, beyond belief to flesh and blood, yet shall
he hear -- This fellow came in to sojourn, and will he needs be a Judge? He
shall surely pay for it.

This is the condition of Strangers, and such you see were these in the Text.
Yet God suffered no man to do them wrong.

But all Strangers are not of one condition. Some are such voluntary, others by
constraint. Some only Strangers; others Strangers and Exiles too. I call all
those Exiles, who by Sword, Famine, or pretended Laws, are driven from their
own Countries. And such are these: They must fly or starve. A Famine, a
grievous Famine forced them from their Country, or place of their Habitation.
So Abraham's c^se here, and Isaac's Cap 26. the one flies into Egypt, the other
to Abimelech the King of P^lestine.

Now the Exi^^ will find, be his Religion never so good, and his Integrity
never so great, yet periculosum est in tot humanis erroribus sola Innocentia
vivere, his Innocence will do him little good.

In Quintilians days, Tace Exul was enough to daunt a Gallant. A base
Parasite, a Slave with that one word stopped his mouth, at whose very sight
another time, and in some other place the Slave would tremble. But what shall
we say? Where the Style is low, every one will leap over.

Omnibus invisus quocunque accesserit Exul
Semper erit: semper spretus, egeusque jacet.
Nullus Honor generi est, etc. --
His Honor will hardly buy him a meal^ meat, or a good word.

Now amongst Exiles all things befall not all alike. Themistocles continues
with the Persian; And Hannibal finds some repose in Bithynia. But Abraham and
his handful went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom to another
People: From place to place, (...), as St. Paul said of himself, and the rest
of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.11. having no fixed or certain abiding place.

But the more like their Savior, who could say, The Foxes have holes, and the
Birds of the Air have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head,
Matthew. 8.20. yet wheresoever these poor Pilgrims went, the Providence of God
went along with them, and he suffered no man to do them wrong.

2. The second thing we look upon is their Paucity: They were but a few, a very
few. We use to say, The more, the merrier, and I think that Proverb very true:
Solamen miseris -- Socios habuisse. You know the Story of Earl Godwin, One leg
will help another. And that of Solomon, Prove. 18.19. Frater qui adjuvatur a
fratre, est quasi Civitas firma vel munita; so the Vulgar. Or if you like not
that Translation; yet two are better then one. Vae soli. Eccles. 4.9, 10. And
Christ commended to us this mutual comfort in our Pilgrimages, in that he sends
out his Disciples Binos and Binos, Luc. 10. But he that has his Quiver full
shall not be ashamed when he meets with his Enemy in the Gate, Psalm. 127.

Multorum manibus -- Sure if heart and hand go together, a multitude will do a
multitude of business. A Quiver full, says the Psalmist. Seylurus Quiver.

We see what Multitudes may do in the Tartarians, Scythians, Goths and
Vandals, who made way where they found none, conquered Kingdoms, and in
despite of Opposition, planted themselves in the chiefest places of Europe and
Africa. Our Country can say as much for Danes, Saxons. On the contrary, you
know the event of those, who Dum pugnant singuli, vincuntur universi. Many
petty Armies because disjoined, destroyed, and we smart for it. Divide and
Destrue.

Our Pilgrims therefore here were exposed to many dangers, and destitute of
much comfort, seeing they were few, and very few too. Abraham and his Wife and
his Kinsman Lot, not many more at first, for many Servants were given him
afterward by Pharaoh. A small beginning, few, and very few, unable to defend
themselves in case of any offered violence.

But thus 'twas ever, and ever will be, -- Credentes, pauci numero, few
believers, and few loyal; and this very thought of Paucity makes so many run
with the Multitude into the common Errors of the times.

The Jews Argument against Christ; Do any of the Rulers or the Pharisees
believe on him? The Papists Argument, Universality. The Westminster Argument,
the major part is ours. I, the more the pity. All Forts, Castles, Ships, all
ours. I know what Masters they serve the while: He that cried, 'Twas all his,
and he could give it to whom he would.

Again, as the Church has been from time to time pusillus Grex, harmless and
armless too, yet must it not be dismayed. Fear not thou worm Jacob, Isai.
41.14. A worm which every one is ready to insult over, and tread upon: yet fear
not, I will help thee. Be they Pilgrims, be they few, yet suffered he no man to
do them wrong.

3. The third thing is their Poverty. Strangers, few and poor too. Much misery,
sharp arrows and coals of Juniper, Psalm. 120. But methinks, I hear some men
say, He cannot find Poverty in the Text, and I know not how to keep it out: Or
if I find it not there, I am sure we find it here in these times; Times, which
will set Porphyry to School again, and tell him Poverty is Accidens
inseperabile; I am sure if the Text could shift it off, there is many a poor
Exile cannot. But let me see! While they were yet but a few: and these, they
were such as could say with Bias, Omnia mea mecum porto, and he that would not
be enriched by a King of Sodom, afterward was glad to receive gifts of the
King of Egypt, and so did Isaac of the King of Gerar. And Jacob could say, With
my staff came I over this Jordan, and did serve for wages. So that hitherto you
have them poor, few and poor. Take one more, and you have all the Company,
except Servants, and that is Lot. He and his Daughters dwell in a Cave, Genesis 19.
no House nor Home but a Cave to dwell in. And there the story leaves them, and
so must I, and return to the rest of this sm^ll Company, this poor Company, for
such you see them, and therefore the more unfit for travel.

Strangers at the best find poor Entertainment; but such poor Pilgrims, where
shall you find an Eye to pity them. Money is one of those (...), a Principle in
the trade of Traveling, to be supposed and not disputed, it is that holds soul
and body together, as he said, (...), Money must be had. Oportet habere, as old
Ennius, (...). Our best Friends look a squint on Poverty. What then can be
expected at the hands of Strangers.

I remember a story of one Cosmus Bishop of Constantinople, who when he saw the
Church and Commonwealth torn all in pieces, all Discipline in the one, and
Government in the other, brought to confusion, and (as he thought) quite past
recovery; he relinquisht his Bishopric, and bidding adieu to that Royal City,
he took along with him only one Servant whom he commanded, to carry with him of
all his Wealth, nothing but the Psalms of David. If he took no better Viaticam
with him in these days, he might quickly dye unburied, unlamented.

St. Austin was much of this man's mind; and he tells us, Paupertas foelix est,
si laeta est. But by his leave it is not so toothsome, it is but a Pill at best:
And I cannot but remember the counsel St. Paul gives Servants; If thou be a
servant take it patiently: but if thou can be free, utere potius, 1 Cor. 7.
So of Wealth; if it cannot be had, take it patiently; but if thou can
honestly compass it utere potius. Sure begging is the worst of Trades. Et non
levi mercede emitur quod rogatur.

4. But all men are not of one mind, and some Countries are more charitably
affected then others are. See we then in the next place, The Country whither
they were forced to fly for succor and relief: It Is said from one Nation to
another, from one Kingdom to another People. Genesis 12.20 26. chapter design the
places, from Caldee to Canaan, from Canaan to Egypt and Palestine.

I know Arguments taken from names are not demonstrative, yet some would hence
conclude their Cruelty; Mitsraim signifying Streights or Tribulations.
Whereupon is that (I conceive) of Isidore, Egyptii, hoc est, affligentes. St.
Bernard, that it signifies Tenebrosum: And after him Scaliger (...), idem est
quod niger.

-- Hic niger est, hunc tu Roman Caveto. Others fetch it from (...), a
Vulture, a Bird of prey, all comes to this. Egypt was a fierce, afflicting,
cruel Nation. And so for Palestine, it signifies (they tell us) a bruising,
hammering, and braying as in a Mortar, to show us, 'twas a hard-hearted and
malicious cursed people.

But let their Names say what they will, I am sure their Actions cry louder.
They speak them the greatest Enemies the Church of God had, and for their
Religion Idolaters. The Egyptians (I dare say) of all the World the greatest.

-- Quae non Aegyptus
Portenta colit --
And for the Philistims, Abraham tells Abimelech to his face, he did believe
the fear of God was not in that place, Genesis 20.11.

What brought this handful of Believers thither then? What make the Sons of God
amongst the Miscreants? Sure matter of pity rather then wonder. That which has
made in our times Children eat their Mothers; Mothers eat their own Children;
Men to drink their own blood. A man, a moneyed man to hang his wife and two
daughters, and last of all himself to complete the Tragedy. The Famine was
grievous in the Land they dwelt in, and necessitas cogit ad turpia, ad tristia.
And therefore abroad they must, or starve at home. Abraham and Jacob got them
into Egypt for succor, and Isaac into Palestine to King Abimelech.

Here was bona terra, though mala gens. For Egypt, Moses describing the
fruitfulness of Sodom and Gomorrah, before the stood of Fire fell down from
Heaven, tells us 'twas like the Garden of the Lord, like the Land of Egypt,
Genesis 13 10.

And for Palestine; Isaac sowed in that land, and received the same year an
hundred fold, Genesis 26.12. But as 'twas said of Sodom, the men were exceeding
sinners against the Lord. So that the worst people have oftentimes the best
Land, the richest Country. Full fed and wicked go much together. The belly and
some other thing near Neighbors, St. Hieroms observation. These poor Pilgrims
had much ado to keep their heads from Horns in both places. But God suffered no
man to do them wrong. The second Part;

2. Eliphaz charge Job wrongfully, as that he should think how God sitting
super cardines Coeli, could not through the thick Clouds see what was done upon
the Earth, Job 22.14. Yes, yes, he sees, orders, disposes, and delivers,
as it seems him best.

Here Is a sealed Protection; He suffered no man. Pharaoh and his House are
plagued with great Plagues. Abimelech's Court is strangely punished. The King
is told he is a dead man, if he restore not the man his wife. I kept thee,
says God, from touching her. And for his Posterity afterward, Joshua 24. when
the Israelites were in distress, and made their complaint to God, he protected
them. Take one place for all, or rather one Psalm, for there is a toties
quoties in that Psalm: As often as they cried unto the Lord, he delivered them
out of their distress, Psalm. 107.

Now let us view our selves a little while in Abraham's Glass.

And by what befell him and his Family, we know the better what to hope in our
own Case.

We have here a Company of Pilgrims also: And these but few in comparison of
the many left behind; and these few and poor to. And the fewer and the poorer,
the more subject to many miseries and inconveniences. But the Righteous did I
never forsake. God make us righteous, and then we need not doubt the second
part, for his Protection.

Omnium Calamitatum materia est homo diu foelix. The Land was flourishing in
which you dwelt; Your Places honorable; your Friends great; your Means usque
ad invidiam, every thing did speak you happy. Now Crosses fall bitterly, where
a continued prosperity went before. For miserum est fuisse -- A sudden tempest
followed this glorious Sunshine, and you have been driven from one Nation to
another, from one Kingdom to another People. But the more Abraham's Children.

You are Pilgrims and Exiles too. I need not tell you many of the best
Commanders in the world; Graecians and Romans, have been such, and many of them
dyed in Banishment, whereof three in one year; Philopaemen, Hannibal, and great
Scipio. But I call to mind that saying, Exulerat Christus, Comites nos Exulis
hujus
Esse decet, cujus nos quoque membra sumus,
we are the Sons of Abraham, the Servants of Christ. So then no other then our
Father and our Master were. But what will you say, if they which forced us to
sing Canticum Domini in terra aliena, and have sported themselves in our
Banishment, what will you say if they be Exiles too? worse Exiles then our
selves? They cannot breath one gust of free Air. Nunquam minus Domi quam cum
Domi. That which men did use to call their Castle is now their Prison, and
their Country is a Wilderness of wild Beasts. The Cynicks Lanthorn to find a
man, an honest man: Can any one there say, His Goods are his own? Can he tell
of what Religion he is to day, or must profess to morrow. Can he find him
(after such liberal and rich promises) can he find him any Rules or Statutes,
by which he may frame himself to walk in some Security? Is there any face of a
Church or Commonwealth left? Nay, Can he find one corner in that Hell of
Confusion, where he may sit down, and without fear of a Committee-bloud-hound,
lament the times? No sure. And they think it strange if every man run not with
them to the same Excess of Riot, as St. Peter said. So that we may say with
Themistocles, Periissem, nisi Periissem. If we had stayed with them, we must
have strayed with them; and whilst we sought to keep our Homes, we might have
lost that Home, the Saints did seek for and enjoy. And therefore as matters go,
I am of P. Rutilius's mind, who when he was called home from Banishment, chose
rather to remain an Exile.

O! but to be Exiles, and poor Exiles, with that great Duke of Exceter, to be
unmonied and unpitied too: first by Injuries, and next by Miseries to be made
Contemptible. What greater misery, then for an Ingenuous man, out-living his
Means, to spin-out a lingering loathsome life in Contempt and Penury.

Where shall you find in these worst of Times, An Abraham sitting in his
Tent-door? Or a Lot in the Gates of his City? Or a Cymon of Athens, not more
famous for his Arms then Alms-deeds? Or a Johannes Eleemosynarius? and some
more such there have been, and may be now. And say some Hand of Providence
should lead us thither.

Ah miserum est Patria amissa laribusque vagari
Mendicum: and timida voce rogare Cibos.
St. Augustine said, Magnae virtutis est (...) s^licitate luctari: magnae
foelicit^^ (...) non vinci. He that could wrestle (...) Prosperity was a
gallant fellow. But by (...), I think him that can wrestle with ^^^erty, and
come off without a Foyl, the better Wrestler of the twain.

Of all Sects of Philosophers, I would not be a Pythagorist. Of all Heretics,
I would not be an Adamite. Of all Fraternities, I would not willingly be a
Mendicant. But say there be no remedy: why then we must endeavor to act that
part upon the Stage of this World we are called unto. Has not the Potter power
over the Clay? Sure yes: And non est invidentiae sed Providentiae, as Bernard
said. God best knows what is for our Good, and that he will give us, or give us
Patience to endure that which we account worst.

Mean while remember in what Condition our blessed Savior was upon the Earth.
Call to mind the Apostles, of whom one of the chiefest could say, Silver and
Gold have I none. Think of St. Paul's hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness, 2
Cor. 11. The Martyrs misery, Heb. 11. who were destitute, afflicted, and
tormented. In a word, no temptation has or can befall us, which is not common
to man, 1 Cor. 10. And most while to the best men, as says the Psalmist, Psalm.
73.

Seneca said (and you know his Religion) Digni visi sumus Deo in quibus
experiretur quantum humanae naturae potest pati. We may not say so: there is a
plus ultra, and we have not as yet resisted unto blood, as the Apostle speaks.
And for Seneca's one Nero, we have many, who have wript up the very Womb of
their Mother, and trampled on those they were forbid to touch. Curae leves
loquuntur; and in comparison ours are no other; if we think on the some-time
Chariots and Horsemen of Israel; Potentates, Princes, and the best of
Sovereigns.

Well therefore may the low Shrubs suffer, if such Cedars fall: For my part,
come what will come, Statutum est deficere, potius quam desperare. I may sink
under the burden, but I shall never despair. I know who brought water out of
the Rock: who provided a Whale for Jonah: Ravens for Elija; and Oil for the
poor Widows. And I shall never forget the Pease in Suffolk, the Muscles of
Rochel, the Cobweb at Paris.

(...), we serve a God (and I pray God we may serve him aright) who is able to
help in time of trouble.

There is another thing that would be thought of; and that is our Paucity. Few
of them, and few of us too, yea very few. But the way is broad that leads to
destruction, and the multitude run that way. In St. Hierom's time, Totus mundus
miratur se factum Arrianum. How suddenly is our Land turned Anabaptist,
Atheist, and I know not what.

Elijah cried, Ego solus: Blessed be God we need not say so; we amount to
thousands: and as Tertullian said of the Christians in his days, Singuli magis
noti quam omnes: Could we take a view, there thousands might amount to
millions, such as (whatever their knees have done) their hearts never bowed to
God-Parliament. But what are these to many millions? So many, so suddenly
fallen off from Religion, Loyalty, Friends, Faith, and all that good is.

But the Devil is a cunning Fisher, and has baited his Hooks thoroughly with the
fat Lumps of Bishoprics and Cathedrals, and least that should he too little
for the Maws of those Cormorants, there is more bait, Forrest-lands, Ships,
Offices, and I know not what.

And now have they verified that old Proverb, No Bishop, no King. But God bless
them both. I hope he will suffer no man long to do them wrong.

There is one thing yet remains, and that is the Place, whither our Pilgrims
went. But I remember that saying, Vivorum difficilis censura, it is dangerous to
censure living men, much more whole Countries, specially where the Censor is
nec beneficiis nec maleficiis cognitus. But something does misg ve, where the
sweet Innocent Dove finds no rest fo the sole of his foot; I hope he shall ere
long, and an Olive Branch too.

But you Worth^es, and the rest of my dear Countrymen: In Joshuah's days one
A^h^^ was the overthrow of an Army: The Theft of Achan. Afterward in Jeroboam's
days (the Son of Joash) one Jonah, w thout a special Providence, had been the
total ruin f a Ship and all the Passengers: The Disobedience of Jonah. In
Christ's days, one Judas dissolved the best Society that ever trod upon the
Earth: The Treason of Judas. Is there no Achan, Jonah, Judas, amongst us? God
grant it. You have gone from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom to another
People, and are you all sound at the heart? none tainted with the Vices of
those Countries you come from? Let no Amasiah bite the lipp, and tell me this
is Bethel, I know it well. But where was God more dishonored then at Bethel,
which became Bethaven? And who has more betrayed a glorious Cause for King,
Country, and Religion, then some which were the sometimes Grandees of the
Court, and the pretended Servants to the same? And who has more disgraced,
dishonored, blasphemed the Name of Christ, and his Religion, then those that
do profess themselves the Reformers and Refiners of Christianity.

You know the Macedonians in Babylonia, Carthaginians at Capua, and the French
at Naples; what they found, and what they learnt, and what the end of it was.
If any one be tainted, yet there is a Salve for that soar, there is a Noli
amplius. O sin no more, least a worse thing happen. Give Glory to God with
Achan. Cry tollite me with Jonah: Or if that be hard, then say with David,
Toll, or Dele; blot out my unrighteousness till thou find none.

I conclude with the words of St. Paul, Romans

10. My hearts desire and prayer to God is, that they may be saved. And that as
Israel, you may have power, and prevail with God and Man. Be of one heart and
of one mind. Pour out your souls in prayer for all men, for Kings, for our
King. O Lord deliver him not over unto the will of his enemies, and let not
those who c^^selesly and maliciously persecute him; let them not longer triumph
over him. Cloth them all with shame, but upon himself let the Crown flourish.
May we live to see the day when we shall sing with Moses, Surge Domine: Rise up
Lord, and let thine Enemies be scattered. Nay; Return O Lord, return to the ten
thousands of Israel (Numb. 10. ult.) With David I began, with David I must end.
Arise Lord, into thy resting place, thou and the Ark of thy strength. Let him
find a resting place. Let his golden Pot of Manna be all glorious without, and
gracious within. Let Aaron's Rod bud, blossom, and yield Almonds. Let the
Tables of the Covenant be preserved entire in despite of all cursed
Covenanters: And let him who is utriusque Tabulae Custos, find favor in the
eyes both of God and Man. Amen.

A SERMON UPON 2 KINGS IV. 1, 2.
Now there cried a certain woman of the wives of the Sons of the Prophets unto
Elisha, saying; Thy servant mine husband is dead: And thou know that thy
servant did fear the Lord: And the Creditor is come to take unto him my two
Sons to be Bondmen. And Elisha said unto her, what shall I do for thee? tell
me, What have thou in thy House? And she said, Thine Handmaid has not any
thing in the house, save a pot of Oil.
DEATH, Sorrow, Penury, and Fears begin the Text; Compassion, Deliverance, and
Plenty end it. Here Is a Story fraught with much variety. Many are the Miseries,
and yet a Salve for every Sore. After Poverty comes Plenty: unexpected Mercy
follows cutthroat Cruelty; Fear and Danger find Deliverance.

You have here the brief Relation of a Man and his Wife; of a Widow and her
Children; of a Creditor and his Debtor; Of a Prophet and his Client or
Petitioner.

The Woman acts the greatest part, in whom you may observe three things: Her
Distress, Her Address; Her Redress. 1. What she suffered: 2. To whom she
applied her self: 3. What the Issue was. Her Distress is fully showed in three
respects. 1. In the loss of a good Husband. 2. Ecce Creditor, she is like to
loose her Children after. 3. Her poverty and inability to relieve her self, or
them.

We shall begin with the Husband: He is said to be Filius Prophetarum, and a
good man, and therefore the loss the greater. Where (by the way) those Prophets
were not only such as did foretell things to come, and are often called Seers
in Scripture, but also such as did interpret and expound the Law, teach and
instruct the People, and pray for the Congregations.

Now Filii Prophetarum were such as were bred up in Learning, and fitted to
succeed the Prophets, either at Jerusalem in the Temple, or in the lesser
Synagogues abroad in the Country. And we shall note in them three things:
Cohabitation, Subordination, Preparation. First, their Cohabitation in the
Schools and Nurseries of Learning. Secondly, their Subordination and rising by
degrees. Whence the younger are called Filii Prophetarum. Thirdly, their
Preparation and fitting them to the work they were to be employed in, not
leaping into the Ministry, but acquiring some competent knowledge and measure
of Learning, before they presumed to offer themselves abroad unto the World.

First, For their Cohabitation in certain Schools and Nurseries of Learning,
read but 2 Kings 2.3. at Bethel; verse. 5. at Jericho; 2 Kings 4.38. at Gilgal:
Unto which add 2 Kings 6.1. Acts 22.3.

Secondly, For their Subordination and Degrees. You have Aaron and his Sons;
Priests and Levites. Principes Levitarum; and Principes Princip^^^, Numb. 3.32.
In the New Testament we have our Savior the High Priest, twelve Apostles,
seventy Disciples, Luke 10.1. After his Death, Apostles, Bishops, Deacons.
After the Apostles days, Bishops, Priests, Deacons. I too well know Hesterni
Illi, as Tertullian called Praxeas. Some later Writers have had their newfound
and different thoughts touching those Church-Degrees and Hierarchy. But the
Consentient Judgment of Antiquity, and universal continued practice of the
Church shall ever be reputed by me, The best Interpreter of Scripture.

The third thing is their Preparation. The two first make good the last. And we
must be Discentes antequam Docentes, as Bernard said; Learners before we can be
Teachers. They tell us greater Gifts were reserved for these times, and those
days of Ignorance are past; Amen, say I. But what if our Gifts be less, and
our Presumption more? They tell us of Jeremy and Daniel, both Children; of Amos
an Herd-man; of Elisha (this Elisha) taken from the Plough.

But sure Jeremy was Propheta Natus, Jer. 1.5. yet was afraid to undertake the
Calling till he had a command, and a promise, and a touch too, v. 9. Daniel was
bred up a Scholar, Dan. 1.4. and at v. 17. God gave him knowledge and skill in
all learning and wisdom. And Amos had his special call from God, Amos 7.15.
etc.

I have read indeed of Learning gotten without Learning. Archippus Ingenio pro
Libris utebatur. Anthony had the Heavens for his Schoolmaster. Nepotianus his
memory alone made him learned; so that from a Soldier he became a Priest.
Johannes Trajectensis Episcopus a Plaustro ad Pulpita ascendit, Divinitus
edoctus. Nay, I have read of one, Qui omnium Linguarum notitiam ex morbo
adeptus est. An happy Sickness. What shall I say of these, but that Spiritus
ubi vult spirat, John 3.8. The Creator of Spirits can inspire how, and when,
and whom he please. And these and the like Examples are not for Imitation, but
Admiration.

Solomon has a good Rule, Prove. 24.27. Prepare thy Materials, and then build
thine house. First get Learning, and then expect a Call. It Is St. Paul's Rule
too, 1 Timothy 4.13. Attend Lectioni, and v. 15. Give thy self wholly to it. v.
16. persist, continue.

But beware of those Clouds without Rain, that boast themselves of their false
Gifts, Prove. 25.14. Who instead of dividing the Word aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. do
slice and chop it out without Rules, Method, Matter, any thing, full of
Battologies, Tautologies, vain Repetitions, tumbling out Nonsense with
incredible Confidence.

The second observable thing: This Filius Prophetarum was Vxoratus, a married
Man. We meet with three sorts of men: The first are Enemies to Women: The
second to Marriages: The third to Priests marriages. As for Women-haters in
general, I could willingly let them pass by as unworthy to be thought upon, but
that some of them think it their greatest praise when they can wittily
dispraise that Sex. I can think them no better then Cowards that are sure to
strike when they cannot be stricken again.

Doubtless there is many a Jezebel, Herodias, Messalina, and those Jones of
Naples: There are many such as Bernard stigmatizeth, Mulier secularis Organum
Satanae: But it is Secularis then, it is a bad woman must be so bad an
Instrument. Tertullian cries out, Tu es Diaboli Janua, Tu es, etc. But I see no
reason why one Eve should make us angry with the whole Sex, more then one Adam
who did personate and represent Mankind, and by his Transgression conveyed sin
to all his Posterity.

And though the Apostle some where lays the blame on Eve for the priority in
the Transgression, Adam was not deceived, but the Woman, 1 Timothy 2.14. Yet for
Natures Gangreen, and Sins Transmission, the same Apostle sends us all to Adam.
Omnes in Adamo, 1 Cor. 15.22. All died in Adam.

I might hear bring in Cyril speaking but untowardly of Women; but he elsewhere
gives them their Right again: And the like does Hieronimus: Tertullian after so
many shrewd speeches, yet he allows them a place in Heaven; though not as
Women, for he thinks they must change their Sex into that of men. Idem Sexus
qui est viris. The Turk in his Alcoran shuts all women out of Heaven; But let
him go for a Turk.

Some may think better of him who gave the Gods thanks that he was not born a
woman. But I am sure he had never been born without one.

We must pass from Women-haters to Wedlock-haters; Such as like the Sex, but
not the Knot. They can love a Woman, but not a Wife. There are perchance too
many Libertines of this Opinion in these days: of old, the Adamites and
Albanenses: of late, the David-Georgians taught Matrimony to be evil in it
self: The Tatians, nil differ a Scortatione: Durand de Waldach; Matrimonium
nil aliud esse quam occultum Meretricium.

O Enemies of Mankind! O Doctrine of Devils! Foretold, condemned by St. Paul, 1 Timothy 4.3. Matrimony instituted in the time of Innocence, and honored by our
Saviors presence in the Gospel, 2 John.

Well, if not all Marriages, yet Priests-Marriages are cried down, hewed down
by a stronger hand. Indeed they be, but yet with greater strength, justice,
reasons, powerfully maintained: I shall but touch this string: It Is a common
question between us and the Papists. It Is sufficient, that amongst the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and ancient Bishops and Fathers of the Church
we still find married men, who lived more chastely with their Wives, without
Concubines, then these now with their Concubines without Wives. But above all,
we have the Apostles warrant for it, Marriage is honorable in all, Heb. 13.4.
And the Son of the Prophet here was a married man.

The third Observation: He was a good man; He did fear the Lord. Yea, will some
body say; So did the Devils also, Ja. 2.19. Nay, not so; It Is (...) there, they
do more than fear, they tremble, and always tremble: A word taken from the
waves of the Sea, that are never at rest: No Lucida intervalla, no hope, no
intermission: Non est pax impiis -- Less Diabolo.

The usual distinction of Fear is, into Filial and Servile Fear. Fear to
offend, and Fear to suffer. But Devils fear, Timore Desperationis. And good men
fear, Timore Venerationis. So is Fear taken in this place for the Worship of
God, Veneration and Piety. Moses will tell you that to fear God is, To keep his
Commandments, Deuteronomy. 6.2. The Psalmist will tell you, He that fears the Lord
does delight in his Commandments, Psalm. 112.1. Solomon, He that fears the Lord
will depart from evil, Prove. 3.7. and Chap. 14.2. He that walks in
Vprightness fears the Lord. St. Paul sums it up in three words, Titus 2.12.
Sobrie just, pie. Those three duties concern God, our Neighbor, and our
Selves. Piety is for God: Justice for our Neigbours: and Sobriety for our own
selves. And these make a man good indeed. These are like Solomon's three-twisted
cords, not quickly broken, Eccl. 4.12.

Religion consists not in Lip-labor, nor in hanging down the he^d, or rolling
up the eye, nor in tumbling of the Bible (though all these may have their Uses)
a Pharisee, an Hypocrite, a Time server, an Anything may do all these and more
too.

Thus have we gone along cum Filio Prophetarum, A well-bred man, a married man,
a good man, that did fear the Lord, I, and yet a poor man, a miserable poor
man: He lived poor, and he died poor. His Inventory was quickly made: One pot
of Oil, and little more, verse. 2. But this is not the worst: Ecce Creditor: He
had bound his Sons for default of payment, to be the Usurers Bondmen: O hard
Condition! He forfeits his Bond: They their Liberty. Well, I see then, Piety
and Poverty may dwell under one Roof, ay, or woe the while.

Not to speak of Philosophers, who found no greater sweet then in their
Poverty. Woe to those Primitive times when men sold all, and felt a great deal
of felicity in disburdening themselves of those Cares which brought so many
thousands unto ruin. Woe to the Martyrs and Confessors, Antiquos-Hodiernos, who
preferred a Good Conscience before all the Riches and Pleasures of the World;
who left all to follow Christ. Vade, Vende was our Saviors Lesson, Luke 12.
And to the Ruler, Chap. 18. Sell all. His own Possessions were none at all: He
had not where to lay his head. And St. Peter could say, Silver and Gold have I
none.

The Conclusion must be: Man's Life consists not in the Abundance of those
things that he possesses, Luke 12.

Nay, but what oftentimes falls out, Pecunia tua tecum pereat, as the Apostle
told Simon Magus. Many men perish with their money. Vere miserabiles: Bis
miserabiles: Twice miserable; for their too much Care, and their too little
Conscience.

St. Bernard will tell you that wicked men ace not Rich: Chrysostom, That they
are not men: And how the Devil is Divitum Canis; The Devil, like a Dog, does
wait upon them ( ad Pop. Ant. Hom. 53. One says ( Ber. de mod. vivendi ad
Sororem, Sermon. 8.) Nullus administrat res terrenas sine peccato; He makes them
all unjust Stewards. St. Hierom has a saying, Dives aut Iniquus, aut Iniqui
Filius: The rich man must either be an unjust man, or the son of one.

Our Savior goes beyond them all: It is harder for a Camel to pass through the
eye of a Needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God: And in
his mildest terms he leaves them to a Quam difficile: Mark 10. It Is a very
difficult thing to be rich, and righteous too. And yet here lies the Totum
Hominis: most men's chiefest care is, How they may leave golden Children, and
vast Revenues, and call their Land after their own Names, Psalm. 49. But those
very Names in time are lost. Houses and Lands find new Names, new Lords, and
oft-times are possessed by our mortal Enemies. But the sins, the sins by which
those Lands were gotten, they stick close for many Generations, like Leprosy
to the wall.

So that in the second place; Riches are no Argument of Man's felicity or Gods
favor: no Concluding Argument.

I know Abraham, Lot, Isaac, Jacob, Job, Ezechias, and a world beside, were
Good and Great; Rich and Righteous too: And little Zacheus is a Child of
Abraham, Luke 19. But the having of Wealth makes not up the Conclusion. For all
things come to all alike, says Solomon. And no man knows Love or Hatred by all
that is before them, Eccl. 9. Wherefore as the Apostle said of Meat, 1 Cor.
8.8. Meat commends us not to God: And Wealth commends us not to God. All is in
the Use.

The like by Poverty, which as it oftentimes befalls Gods Children, so is it
(and that not seldom) A portion for the wicked, Prove. 30.8. Agur deprecates
both Poverty and Riches as two Extremes; Give me neither Poverty nor Riches,
feed me with food convenient for me: lest if he were rich, he might grow proud,
if he were poor, he might fall to thieving, etc.

One compares Poverty to the River Rhenus, Et quos nascentes explorat gurgite
Rhenus.

Claudian.

It tries what Metal men are made of. And sure it is a very hard thing for a
man in want not to envy or grudge, or cheat or steal. And few men have learnt
that Lesson of St. Paul; I have learnt, says he, in what state I am, therewith
to be content, Phil. 4.11.

You have here a poor Prophet, and a godly Prophet: And first this Poverty of
his might proceed from the hard-heartedness of the Jews, and their Impiety; who
withheld their Tithes: For of this does God complain, Mal. 3.8.

Secondly, Perchance he was not called to any public Office in the Church, but
had bestowed his Means and Patrimony in his Breeding; and yet Preferment came
but halting on. It has been a Disease of those later times. Many men spend
many years in the University, and are driven after all to set up their Rest
there: or marry some broken Chambermaid; or serve for Micah's wages, Judge. 17.
And leave the rest to their worshipful Patroness to buy Lace and Painting.

Thirdly, This Story fell out in a time of War, and a bloody War too, as you
may read in the former Chapt. And the no wonder to hear of those Miseries that
do follow War. One of our Henry's said, that Bellona had three Handmaids;
Fire, Famine, and Sword: But our woeful Experience has found out many more,
Tortures, Butcheries, Ravishments, and a thing they call Living by Discretion,
or Free Quarter, with Plunder to boot. So that if any one wonder that the
Prophet had but one pot of Oil, he may rather wonder that any one was left him;
And he might well be poor.

Once I am sure 'twas not his prodigality, or any other debauched Course of his
that made him poor: For he did fear the Lord: And Tu nosti, says the Widow to
Elisha, the man of God did know so much: And without this, Poverty may be as
damnable as the most cursed Riches in the world. And therefore Gregory the
Great said true, That some men are his Miserabiles: Hic ob Inopiam rerum, illic
ob nequitiam Meritorum. None so poor as he that wants Means and Grace too: He
is sure to suffer here and hereafter also.

Now come we to the Height of all her Misery: Ecce Creditor. She has lost her
Husband: A good Husband. She is left poor, very poor. All her Comfort is in her
two small Children: And lo, the Creditor is come to take them away, and make
them his Bondslaves.

Of all losses the loss of Liberty is one of the greatest. There was no hope of
one Jew sold unto another, till the Year of Jubilee came; And then if he had a
Wife and Children in the time of his Slavery, they must be none of his. For
this very Cause many chose rather to continue Slaves for ever. The Affection
they bare to their Wife and Children made them forget their Father, and their
Fathers house, and they became Bored Servants for the time to come, Exodus 21.
Nor was there any hope of Freedom afterward.

No marvel then if the poor Woman cried; Clamavit mulier. There is a saying,
Curae Leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent: Light Sorrows speak when greater
silent are. And it might seem then somewhat to lessen her Sorrow, that she
could, and did Cry. It Is true; In some sudden and unexpected Misery, Vox
faucibus haeret, the unexpectedness and greatness of Sorrow does stop the
Floudgates, and there are found those, who could neither weep nor speak for a
while: But violent Motions are not lasting, and the thickest Cloud will be
broken, and the Rain will fall. Tears and Words will find vent. Tell me ye
Mothers, tell me what you would do if you should see the merciless Officer or
Soldier seizing on your Child for his prey, if but one Child? But Vtrumque
Filium! Both, All, and All without hope of Redemption! Not one left to comfort
the poor Mother in her Calamity!

Me thinks I see Rebecka's swollen heart ready to break, Genesis 27. when she
counsels Jacob to fly from the fury of his Brother Esau, who had sworn his
Death. O why should I be deprived of both of you in one day? And that witty
Complaint of the Woman of Tekoa did pierce David's heart: Thy Handmaid had two
Sons; they strove; they fought, and one is slain: The Kindred call for Justice;
and lo, they will quench my Coal which is left: O King, without thy help and
pardon, I shall be deprived of them both.

Here Is a widow, a poor widow deprived of her best Comfort, and now like to be
robbed of her Children also. Well might she have borrowed Jerusalem's mournful
Complaint out of Jeremy: O ye that pass by, behold and see if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow. Let Fathers speak, who exeunt hominem, leave off to
be men, if they leave off natural affection. Let Mothers speak (if Schools
distinguish right) their Love is more fervent, though the Fathers love be more
constant. Let all those speak who are so much troubled at every common Cross,
Loss, or Affliction. What would they say if Mephibosheth must loose all? If
they must go hand in hand with Job? If with this poor widow, Goods and
Children, and All must be lost, and for ought they know without the hope of any
Jubilee or Restitution.

Here we may see the affection of Parents toward their Children. How many
years does Jacob lament the supposed death of his beloved Joseph? How bitterly
does David bewail the untimely death of his ungracious Absolon? Anna calls
young Toby (sorrowing for his Departure) the Staff of her old Age, the Staff in
her hand that she went by.

Stories will tell you of some Fathers that have given their own eyes to save
their Sons; of those who have resigned their Crowns, their Loves, their Lives,
and all to do their Children good.

I will add but one Example more (though of many in that one) in the third
Punick War, when the choicest young Noblemen were sent away Hostages into
Sicily: The Mothers accompany them to the Ship with all expressions of sorrow:
Thence they get up the top of the Rocks, and at their going out of sight, the
Mothers (many of them) cast themselves headlong into the Sea: A sad farewell.
Yet were their Sons sent away for Hostages, and not taken away for Slaves.

And thus does Love descend in a full carrier from the Parents to the Children.
But I fear the Motion is very slow in rising upward from the Children to the
Parents. Sure this Motion is against the Hill: we pause too often. The Poet
said true Filius ante diem --

And many say in their hearts what Esau did Genesis 27.41. The days of mourning
for my Father are at hand. He cannot live long. And then a sad Suit, and a
merry heart: But beware of that Lex talionis: As sure as a day they are paid
again in their own Coin: Besides, the sting of a guilty Conscience is sure to
follow them as long as they live.

O that Children would but think upon the many Cares, and Fears, and Cost that
Parents are put to for their Children, and with what neglect, contempt, and
disobedience it is ofttimes repayed: But take heed; remember that of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 6.1.2. Filii obedite, etc. Honor thy Father and Mother, which is
the first Commandment with promise. The Promise is long life, which all
desire: And our undutifulness to our Parents cuts of the thread of life, and
sends men headlong to the grave, etc.

Now come we to those Horse-Leeches, whose Teeth are spears, as Solomon says,
And they devour the poor of the earth, Prove. 30.14.

Ecce Creditor: The Father is dead: The Mother almost distracted: The Children
in despair. The whose little House naught but Tears and Terror: And in comes
this Moth-of-men, this Canker that has eaten up many good Houses and their
Masters to boot: In comes the Usurer, one qui laetatur de lachrymis proximorum:
when all weep, he laughs. He hopes to gain wherever the loss fall; and he
rises most while by the ruins of the poor.

Of all Virtues Mercy is the best; It conforms us to our Maker, and has the
promise of a reward, both in this life, and in the life to come, Matthew. 5.7.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall be sure of mercy.

The object of Mercy is Misery. To him that is afflicted, pity should be
showed, Job 6.14. So David, Psalm. 41. Blessed is he that considers the poor
and needy. And Solomon; He that has pity upon the poor lends unto the Lord;
and look what he gives, God will pay him again, Prove. 19.17.

Now of all People in misery, God regards none so much as the Widow and the
Fatherless: And therefore one special Branch in Moses's Law was a Proviso for
them, Exodus 22.22. Ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child And when
ye make a Feast, call the fatherless and the widow, Deuteronomy. 16. Nay, thrice in
that Chapter you are bid to rejoice in your Feasts, but call the fatherless and
the widow: No good feasting without them.

So likewise at Harvest-time; at Olive gathering, and Grape gathering, still
Remember the widow and fatherless, Deuteronomy. 24. And one of the Charges which Asaph
gave the Judges, was to help the poor and fatherless, Psalm. 82.3, 4. When
Eliphaz thought to load Job with Reproaches, he tells him, he had sent away the
widows empty; and he had not relieved the fatherless, Chap. 9 And in Psalm. 94.
one of their crying sins was; They slay the widow and the stranger, and put the
fatherless to death.

Well then, see here one that regards nor God, nor Man, nor Widow, nor
Fatherless, All Is fish that comes to his Net: He Will have away the Children: And
let the Mother break her heart; All Is one to him.

The Debt could not be great: But the Forfeit was too great. The Debtor was a
good man, and therefore would not borrow, what in all probability he could not
pay again. For it is the Note of an ungodly man to run into Debt, without any
care how he may get out, Psalm. 37.21. And therefore the less the Debt was, the
greater was this Monster.

The Text (or the Translation rather) calls him Creditor. The word indeed does
signify a Creditor, an Usurer, and a Biter too: Now it is to be supposed, A
good woman would use the mildest term: And next, The Jews were forbidden to
take Usury one of another; they were indeed; that was the Law: But the practice
was quite contrary. They did take Usury, and exact it too. Nehem. 5.7. You
exact Usury every one of his Brother: So that it was a common sin, And
afterward Ezekiel 22.12. Thou have taken Usury and Increase, and thou have
greedily gained of thy Neighbor by Extortion, and have forgotten me, says the
Lord God. Every word carries force with it; Usury, Increase, Extortion,
Greedy-Extortion, And have forgotten me and my Laws.

Gods Laws cry it down directly, and in terminis. Man's Laws at most do but
tolerate it, prescribing bounds to insatiable Avarice. One says, Vsura
aliquando tolerata, nunquam approbata; that it has been sometimes tolerated,
but never approved of.

I, but says the Usurer, If it be evil, why is it permitted? Nay, there needed
no permission, if 'twere not Evil: it is suffered as the giving a Bill of
divorce, Matthew. 19.8. only for the hardness of men's hearts.

All Countries, all Laws have cried the Trade down (for to that Credit it is
now gotten) one speaks it as bad as Murder, it is Cato. Another calls it
Statute-Thievery. By the Civil and Common Law, they are Inter Vivos Maledicti,
Inter mortuos Insepulti; cursed alive, and not be buried being dead.

One tells us, Solon in Athens, Lucullus in Asia, Caesar in Spain, did as much
good in their days by putting down Usurers, as did our Christian Kings that
expelled the Jews (those old Usurers) out of their Dominions. Boterus.

I might say much more out of our own Countrymen and late Writers; but to what
end, as long as the Laws permit. There is no doubt but the Jews will find
Scholars enough to learn their Trade.

Now come we to the second General Part, Her Address. To whom she makes her
Complaint: She cried unto Elisha.

Here we are taught then to whom we ought to address our selves in time of
Adversity. This widow directs us ad Elisham. What, to the Prophet? I, to the
Prophet. That Course is safe and warrantable that is taught by God. Genesis 20.7.
God tells Abimelech that Abraham was a Prophet, and should pray for him: And
verse. 17. Abraham prayed, and Abimelech was healed. In the second of Joel,
verse. 17. we find that the Priests and the Ministers of the Lord were to pray
for the People: And then verse. 18. The Lord promised to have pity upon the
People.

In 2 Kings 3. Elisha procured water to save three Kings and their Armies from
perishing; and the Victory besides. In 2 Kings 5. Naaman is cured of his
Leprosy by Elisha. In 2 Kings 8. The King of Syria being sick, sends to
Elisha. Nihil inconsulto Sacerdote. In War, in Peace, in Sickness, in every
thing, still the Prophets were consulted with, their counsel, their prayers
ever in most esteem.

Nor was this Course in the Old Testament only, but 'twas the constant and
appointed Course in all Ages, and to the end of the World. Ostende te
Sacerdoti, said our blessed Savior, Matthew. 8.4. Go show thy self unto the
Priest. Or if that refer to Moses Law; yet are the Ministers of the New
Testament called Pastors, Teachers, Guides, Fathers, Angels. Their duty too is
to pray for the People, to watch for men's Souls, Heb. 13.17. And therefore they
must be called upon, and sent to in times of affliction and distress, James
5.14. Is any man sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and
they shall pray over him, etc. Not Lay Elders (I warrant you) but the Elders of
the Church, such as are put into the Ministry, 1 Timothy 1.12. Ordained Preachers,
1 Timothy 2.7. such as must feed the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. But now what St. Paul
foretold 2 Timothy 4.3. The time is come, when men will not endure sound Doctrine,
but after their own Lusts, heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears,
turning away their Ears from the Truth, and hearkening after Fables. Instead of
the Levites, Oxen now carry the Ark again: And men seek to Diotrephes,
Hymeneus, or Alexanders, factious and seditious Spirits, rather then with the
widow here, to the Prophet, to Elisha.

But what Redress could this widow in her condition expect from Elisha? He was
poor himself, and therefore in all probability unable to succor her against
her greedy Creditor.

But what says St. Paul, 2 Cor. 6.10. of himself, and of his Fellow Laborers:
Though they were poor, yet they made many rich. And so did Elisha by this poor
Widow in the Text. Though, I presume, 'twas the least of her thoughts when she
cried unto the Prophet. Potuit emollire creditorem. The utmost of her hopes
was, that the Prophet might prevail with her Creditor to gain some farther
time, or some easier condition. But here you see how God provides for his;
Exceeding abundantly, says the Apostle, above all that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3
20. Thus was it with Abraham, Gen, 17.18. O that Ishmael might live in thy
sight; And lo God gives him a Son by old Sarah. Thus David, Psalm. 21.4. Petiit
vitam, and dedisti longam vitam, etc. So the lame man, Acts 3. he expects but
some poor Alms, and he hears, Surge, ambula, Arise, and walk. And so this
widow, she desired but only to ease her grief, by opening it to the Prophets,
or at the most, that he might obtain some favor for her from the Usurer, and
she finds wherewith not only to discharge the whole Debt, but a sufficient and
plentiful livelihood for her self, and her Children.

Thus does God give men, good men, aut quod petunt, aut quod expedit, what they
ask, or what is better, that which he in his Wisdom knows most needful for
them. If they ask Stones, or Serpents, such things as may hurt them, they may
be denied; but if they ask (...), good things, things may tend to their real
interest and welfare, they are sure to have their Petitions granted. For God
will give Grace and Glory, and no good thing will he withhold from such as lead
a godly life.

THIS SERMON Was Preached at DVNSTER UPON Thursday the 19th Day of March, Anno
Dom. 1656. at the Christening of T. L. Son and Heir to Fra. Luttrell of
Dunster-Castle, Esquire. By H. B. D. D.
St. JOHN III. 5. Verily, Verily, I say unto thee, Except a Man be born of
Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.


THE Text is part of a Dialogue. The Interlocutors are our Savior Christ and
Nicodemus the Pharisee. The Question is concerning Regeneration. The Doubt made
by Nicodemus is, How can a Man be born which is old? Answer is returned by our
Savior -- Verily, Verily, I say unto thee, Except a Man be born of Water, and
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

You may here understand the Sacrament of Baptism, with his parts, Water and
Spirit.

Secondly, His Benefits, To regenerate, and give us a new life.

Thirdly, The Danger in omission and neglect. Without it, no entrance into the
Kingdom of God.

Fourthly, The Result. He that believes, and is baptized, is made a Member of
the Church, and shall be (if he continue faithful) partaker of Eternal Bliss.

The Exposition which many of Ours do make upon this place, runs another way:
That our Savior speaks not here of the Sacrament of Baptism. And therefore, by
Water they understand not material water, as Willet Synop.
: or the Element of water, as Zanchy De tribus Eloi. l. 4. c. 5.
. But the purifying Grace of Christ, which is called The water of life (or
living water) John 4.11. and is here an Epithet of the Spirit.

So that, To be born of Water and the Spirit, is with them no more, then to be
Regenerate and born again of the Holy Ghost.

I dare not condemn this common received Opinion among the Protestants. And yet
I know Exam. Council. Trid. par. 2. p. 20.
Chemnitius and Loc. Com. loc. 47.. 4.
Bucanus (with many B. Andr. in Or. Dom. Ser. 19. p. 132. D. Feat. in Dippers
dipped. page 10. Confer. at Hampton Court. p. 17.
others) are of another mind. And what do I speak of these? The Ancient Cyril.
l. 1. in Isai. c. 3. Aug. Ep. 23, etc.
Fathers (I think all) understand the Text of Baptism. And the Council of Trent
pronounces Anathema to all those who shall make any Metaphorical Construction
of these words: but we fear not that Thunderbolt.

Yet whiles the many of Antiquity have run this way, I hope it will not seem a
Deviation to any indifferent Hearer. I am sure there is no Danger, and I may
safely tread in those steps, where the best of men in the best of times have
gone before. And the Analogy which in a Sacrament is required, is here every
way answerable to the full.

Here are two parts. Terrena and Coelestis: Visible and Invisible; Water and
Spirit: an outward Washing, and an inward Ablution: one of the Body from Filth,
and the other of the Soul from Sin.

And both these are necessary: both necessary here, Water and Spirit. Abesse
non possunt, alterari non debent. Or these must be, or we must perish.

For verily, verily, etc.

I am not so quick-sighted, or so Eagle-eyed, as some men are. I cannot find an
Oath here, as they have done.

A Protestation, an Asseveration I see, and such as does command attention and
belief. I shall only pass by it with the words of Bernard. Amen, Amen -- Verbum
Confirmationis praemittitur, magnum esse noveris quod sequitur. Where such an
emphatical and significant word, as Verily, verily, does go before, there is
without doubt some great matter following after.

There is indeed. For Water and Spirit must oo before, or Heaven and Happiness
will not follow after. This is The Way, this the Door through which we enter
into Life. For,

Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God.

And here is the Answer to Nicodemus, and a full one too.

First, It Is possible to be born again: and How.

Secondly, It Is Necessary: and Why.

Again, you have here

The Duty -- and Direction. The Peril -- and Prevention. What to do -- and what
to hope for.
First, Man. Except a Man. Incola Mundi. All Men next. Water -- be born of
water King on Jonah. 26. l^ct. p. 345. Anton. A. Bish. of Florence, part. 3.
tit. 22. c. 5.. 1 4. and Bell 's D^fiance to Popery, c. 3. p. 7.
. Cingulum Mundi. All Waters. Then the Spirit: And that is Anima Mundi. A
Platonic phrase; but such as may well beseem a Christians mouth. That Spirit
that enlivens the whole world: That Spirit that moved upon the face of the
waters, Genesis 1, 2. Nay, incubabat, cherished and gave life; must do the like to
the water ^n the Text: the water in Baptism.

Thus Heaven comes down to Earth,
That Earth may ascend to Heaven.
Me thinks I am got to the top of a Mount, from whence I have a goodly
prospect, a world of variety offers it self. But it is Mount Nebo, from whence I
may behold more then I may enter. I must content me with a little out of much.

And I shall only Answer five Quaere's.

1. What Baptism is, and of its parts? 2. To whom it appertains to Baptize?
3. Who they are, which are to be Baptized? 4. What peril they are in, who dye
without it? 5. What benefit they receive, who are made partakers of this holy
Sacrament?
1. There is in Baptism, as in every other Compound or Material, a co-union of
Matter and Form, which Two concur as parts essential of the thing. The matter
here you have expressed, Water and Spirit: not Fire; not Blood. Ga. pratec^.
Hermian. etc.
There were certain Heretics of old, who instead of water did use fire,
branding the Baptized with an hot Iron in the Forehead: because forsooth it
was said Matthew. 3.11. That Christ should baptize with the holy Ghost, and with
Fire.

Ib. tit. Flagell.
There were the Flagellantes (those a later Crew) who instead of water did
baptize in blood: And those had Scripture for it also. For Christ had said,
Luke 12.50. That He must be baptized with a baptism, and he was much troubled
till it was ended. And in Mark 10.39. he tells the Sons of Zebedee, They should
drink of the Cup that he should drink of, and be baptized with the baptism with
which he should be baptized. By which the Fathers all do understand A bloody
Baptism.

But my Text tells you, that it must be water: And not my Text alone, which
has received (you heard) a metaphorical Construction, but all along from John
in Jordan, down to the Eunuch and Cornelius. Yea, long before praefigured in
Noah's flood, in the Red Sea, and the River Jordan; and ever since in all
Orthodox Congregations or Churches. The outward sign, the Visible or Element
was Water.

Yet Sursum Corda: Here Is a slippery Element to stay in. And therefore not
Water alone, but Aquae usus, or Aqua taliter applicata, says one. What can
water do to the washing away of sin? No, no, Christ has given himself for his
Church, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it, by the washing of water,
but through the Word, Ephesians. 5.26.

And now are you clean (says our blessed Savior) now are you clean through
the Word, which I have spoken unto you, John 15.3. Upon which words thus Tract.
in Joh. 8.
Augustine some-where: Why (says he) did not Christ say, You are clean by the
Baptism wherewith you have keep washed? but you are clean by the Word, etc.
Nisi quia and in Aqua verbum mundat. Surely (says he) because the Water of it
self cannot cleanse us, but it is the Word: the Word in Water. Detrahe verbum --
take away the Word, and what is Water, but Water? Accedit Verbum ad Elementum,
and fit Sacramentum?

So that Word and Water, the outward Element, and the inward Spirit to enliven
it, must go together: Titus 3.5.

The Form of Baptism you have fully and in terminis delivered, Matthew. 28.19. In
Nomine Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Canus a School m^n cannot tell,
whether the Apostles did use those very words, this very Form or not, because
some places in the Scripture seem to say the contrary, as Acts 2.38. Acts 8.16.
They are there said to Baptize only in the Name of the Lord Jesus. And in Acts
10.48. Peter commands Cornelius, and his Household, and Friends, to be baptized
In the Name of the Lord.

The Catech. ad paroch.
Council of Trent tells us, That the Apostles did indeed, for some time,
baptize In the Name of Jesus Christ only; That by this means, in the Infancy of
the Church, The Name of Jesus Christ might become more famous and renowned. And
that they did this Afflatu Spiritus Sancti.

Ambrose and Basil interpret the words, In the Name of Jesus Christ, to be
nothing else, but non in Baptismo Johannis: Not in the Name, or with the
Baptism of John. But this can no way satisfy those, who take the Baptism of
Christ and his Forerunner to be all one.

Some tell us, In the Name of Christ implies the whole Trinity. The Anoynter,
the Anointed, and he per quem, the holy Ghost. Others, In the Name -- that is,
By the power and authority given by Christ.

Calvin denies those places to be meant of the Form of Baptism. Anw Mr. Gill.
spy in Aarons Rod. l. 2. c. 7. p. 238. and so Mr. Rogers in Bethshemesh, l. 2.
c. 4. etc. 9.
Writer, distinguishing of Words and Actions, tells us, That in Baptism Christ
does not command us either this, In the Name of Christ, or that other In Nomine
Patris, etc. Matthew. 28. But we are commanded to do the Thing.

Sure we are -- and as the Thing, so the Words also.

I willingly here omit those strange Baptisms in Irenaeus, lib. 1. cap. 18. nor
will I trouble you with those Opinions of Cajetan, Victoria, and Pope Nicolas:
and what miserable shifts the careful Canus is driven to that he might save and
salve the Credit of his Pope.

Again, I shall forbear to speak of those Accessories in Popish Baptism, as The
putting of Salt into the Mouth of the baptized: The anointing of their Ears and
Nostrils with spittle: The Chrism for the crown of the head: A burning
Wax-candle for the hand: The Alb, Milk, and I know not what.

These may have (I confess) certain significations not unprofitable. But the
Burden of Ceremonies was long since buried. And we may justly fear that of
putting to -- Deuteronomy. 12.32. or that in Isai. 1.12. Who required this? And
therefore we content our selves, as with the Form, so with the Formalities
prescribed u^ by our Master. And Scriptum est, must be our Guide. Yet if ought
conduce to Decency, we are content, we do embrace it. But with the Law of
Liberty, which teaches us to make a difference between the Necessity of
Obedience, and the Necessity of the Thing commanded.

Something here might be said touching Immersion and a plunging in: Effusion,
and a pouring on: Or the Aspersio Aquae (now most in fashion) the but
besprinkling of the water on the parties which are to be baptized.

So likewise touching that other Quaere, De unica and trina, etc. Whither this
diving, dipping, pouring, sprinkling, call it what you will, must be done
Thrice, or but Once?

How eagerly here, have I heard some Men to plead against Antiquity, abusing a
Spanish Council to that purpose: The fourth of Toledo. Our Conclusion for this
time shall be that of Gregory the Great, Atque ita Cyprian. l. 1. Ep. 6. ad
Magnum,
approved by Calvin in Acts 8.38. Sive una, sive trina, etc. Whether it be done
once or thrice, the Baptism is good. And as Josephus Angles, Mos cujusvis
Ecclesiae servandus est. In things accessory and indifferent, alterare iterare
-- The Church may alter, add any thing, so it be done with Decency, and for
Orders sake.

Part 2.
To whom it appertained to Baptize?

J. Angles q. 3. de Ministro Baptism. Art. 1. di. 1.
The Papists tell us roundly, To All. To Priests, to Laics, Women, Heretics,
Turks, Jews, and All. All in some Cases may baptize. Quicunque, cujuscunque
Conditions in extreme Necessity, and (as they call it) in Articulo Mortis.

But I demand whose that Office is? and to whom was that Authority given?
Doubless to those, and those alone, to whom 'twas said, Go and teach all
Nations, Matthew. 28.19. Go and teach: Go and baptize. Teach and Baptize go
together. He whose calling is not warrantable for the one, cannot doubtless,
without a grand Impiety, presume the other.

What should any one object to us, the Example of a Frantic Woman, that of
Zipporah, Exodus 4. who in a rage cutteth of the Foreskin of her Son? whiles we
as well might urge the Example of a fearful or forgetful man, who had so long
been so remiss and negligent in the performance of so great a Duty, and that
strict Command.

But doubtless neither should be urged, because neither may be followed.
Examples without Precepts, Non cogunt.

There is a Canon in the fourth Council of Carthage, Mulier baptizare non
praesumat; Let not a Woman presume to baptize. And says not the Scripture the
same? 1 Cor. 14.34. 1 Timothy 2.12.

Indeed, Solis Presbyteris convenit solenniter, say their Schools. Angles ubi
supra.
None but a Priest can do it solemnly. And I say, none should do this solemn
work but solemnly; much less a Woman, and least of all a Turk or Jew, however a
Pope approve such Baptism.

But one Opinion begets another, and whiles they show themselves such Duri
Patres Infantum, as 'twas said of the August.
best of them, such bloody Censurers of all unbaptized Children, they forget
the tender Mercy and Compassion of the Almighty, etc.

That supposed absolute Necessity of Baptism which wrung so many tears from so
many millions of Mothers eyes (whiles their poor Babes dyed unbaptized) made
men invent that comfortless Comfort of baptizing by Women, nay, by Infidels in
Case of Necessity.

The Scripture is plain; Ite, baptizate. They must be sent that do this work.
They must have a Mission and Commission. They may not run, before they be sent
nor go before a Call, and a lawful Call: least they offer strange fire, with
Nadab and Abihu: or with Vzza, perish for touching the Ark.

Part 3.
Our next Quaere is; Who they are, which are to be baptized?

Except a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, etc. The School Axiom is; An
Indefinite Proposition in things Necessary, makes or matches an Universal. If
therefore Baptism be necessary for all, A man in my Text must be All men. And
so our blessed Savior, Teach All, Baptize All, I, this is that which some do
look for; Therefore, say they, Teaching must go before Baptism. Which, because
Infants are incapable of, therefore Baptism must be deferred till they come to
years of Discretion. And so Mark 16.16. He that shall believe and be baptized,
shall be saved. Belief must go before Baptism.

Some Answer, That the first place is not well translated. The words go thus:
Go; make all Nations my Disciples, baptizing them: and then follows, (...),
(...) 20, teaching them, etc.

August: l. 1. de peccat. merit. c. 25. Decret. l. 3. tit. 42. c. 3
Some have said, That Newborn Babes have the use of Reason. Others tell us,
That they believe, not by the use, but by the habit of Faith, which they
receive in Baptism. Some say, Tilenus.
They have the Seeds of Faith. Some, That they have Fidem inclinativam. So
Vrsin and Paraeus. A late or now-Writer tells us, The Case of Infants is
obscure. Mr. Baxt. in Confess. p. 204.
And so are all those Answers, under Correction.

In D^cret. ub^ supra.
Innocentius the Third, says of these Texts, Intelligendi de Adultis:
Teaching, is for those of Discretion. But Children have a Privilege or
Dispensation. Now if the Answer for the Authors sake must be rejected,
methinks that saying of Augustine is full and satisfactory, Qui peccat in
altero, credat in altero. Can ought be more agreeable to Justice? As another
Sin is made ours, so let another Faith be ours also. Quod sine Consensu
contrahitur, Gregor. in Decret. p. 297. b.
sine Consensu remittitur. Why may not a Child be saved without his consent, as
well as sin without his consent? I add that of Bernard, Infants are saved per
fidem non suam, sed alienam. Surely (says he) Gods Goodness is such, that
whereas Age has denied Faith of our own, we should enjoy the benefit of
another Faith.

And Crysologus proves it out of Mark 9. where a poor Father desires help for
his Son, who had been vexed with a Devil from his Childhood. Christ tells the
Father at the 23. verse, If thou can believe it. All things are possible to
him that believes. The Father of the Child cries with tears, Lord, I believe.
Pater credit, and Patris liberatur fide, qui Patris fuerat Infidelitate
damnatus. Christ required not Faith in the sick Son, but in the sound Father.
The Father believes, and the Son is delivered.

So likewise Jairus believes, and his dead Daughter is restored to life, Mark
5.

And thus have Babes, the Faith of the Parents, and the votum or desire of the
Church: I add, The Covenant which God has made with the faithful. And these
all give them a right or title to Baptism.

Many more are the Arguments our Men do use, and those (for ought I see)
unanswerable As how Baptism came in the place of Circumcision. How our Savior
commanded young Children to be brought unto him, etc. How the Children of the
Faithful are holy, etc.

I shall only add, the practice of the Ancient, Primitive Church, which I take
to be the best Expositor of Scripture. The Scripture tells us of whole
households baptized, Acts 16.15, 33. 1 Cor. 1.16. But I cannot prove there were
young Children there: and who can prove there were not?

Go we then to those who were Contemporary with the Apostles, and whose Names
are registered in Holy Writ. And you have two of them speaking of Paedobaptism,
as of a thing practiced in their days. And these are Clement and Dionysius.
But some may tell me, These have gone under the black Rod: The Books either
none of theirs, or else corrupted. Perchance corrupted: yet not in that of
which there was no doubt or dispute in those days.

Come we to the next then. In Origens days in the East: In Tertullian and Ep.
59. ad Fidum.
Cyprians days in the South: In Iren. l. 2. c. 39.
Irenaeus days in the West: In Europe, Asia, Africa, in all the Christian World
they did baptize Infants.

And In 6. ad Romans
Origin tells us, That the Church has ever thus received and done, from the
Apostles themselves down all along to his days. And De pec. merit. l. 1. c. 3.
33. contra Donat. l. 4. 3. 13. and lib. 10 de Genesis ad lit. c. 23. lib. 4. de
Bapt. Infant. etc. and vid. Dippers dipped. p. 53.
Augustine says, That Infants should be baptized, and that, being once
baptized, they are to be reputed among the number of the faithful. Vniversae
Ecclesiae clamat Authoritas: This is the joint Cry and Consent of the
Universal, and holy Catholic Church. Mark this: This was the Opinion, this the
practice of the whole, and holy Catholic Church.

Good Children will own and honor the voice and authority of the Church, their
Mother: and he who will not hear Her, must be (some will say) a tanquam
Heathen, and a Publican. But God forbid I should set my foot upon Mount Ebal:
They shall have my pity and my Prayers, whom the distractedness of the times
have drawn away: and those Labyrinths of Opinions have rendered dubious.

Next come we to speak of the Peril those are in who dye unbaptized.

Our Savior says, John 5.28. The hour is coming in the which all that are in
the Graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and shall come forth, and
they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have
done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation.

Out of which words Gregory Nyssen concludes, That the unbaptized Infants shall
rise again, but whether they shall appear in Judgment, he cannot tell. His own
Opinion is, They shall not. Augustine resolves otherwise. First, That they
shall appear in Judgment. Secondly, That they shall undergo the Sentence of
Condemnation. And thirdly, Torquendos esse, 5. Adv. Julian.
poor Creatures, they must be tormented.

Tom. 2. l. 2. de vocat. Gent. c. 8.
Ambrose at the first, does flatly shut them out of Heaven. Neque credi fas est
-- 'Twere with him a kind of Heresy to imagine, They could be partakers of
eternal life, who were not partakers of this Sacrament. Ambros. tom. 4. l. 2 de
Abraham. Patriarch. c. 11.
Yet afterward he speaks somewhat more moderately, Nisi quis renatus fuerit --
etc. You have (says he) the Scripture: Except a man be born of Water, and the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Here Is no exception of any, no
not of Infants, no not in case of Necessity. But doubtless they shall feel no
pain. Nescio an habeant Regni honorem. But he cannot say, They shall enter into
Heaven.

Thus far Ambrose, and it is well, he will conclude with Nescio. He cannot tell.

But the common Opinion of the Papists is peremptory; That all Infants dying
without Baptism, are shut out of Heaven into a Limbus, an imagined place of
theirs, where they shall feel no pain at all; no poenam sensus, but poenam
damni: No Torments, but the Torment of Loss, which (they all say) is the
greatest, to be deprived of that visio beatifica, the sight of God.

The farther opening of the Text, will open a way to answer all their
Arguments, unless it be those from Authority.

Now that the Fathers should be so violent in this matter, we shall not wonder,
if we consider, The frailty of men, and how far the heat of Opposition does often
times transport us.

How have we seen Authority idolized by some, and submitted to with blind
Obedience? whiles others cry down all Magistracy and Superiority, as unlawful
unsufferable in Christian Societies. Some in some Cases do patronize perjury --
Jura, perjura -- etc. Others condemn all Oaths, as simply unlawful, though
before a Magistrate, and for the testifying of the truth.

In the Observation of the Lords Day, because Some require a Jewish Rigor, and
such a strictness as cannot suit with Christianity, Others let loose the Reins
to all Intemperance and Profaneness.

And thus have we gone from a Superstitious Lenten-fasting, to feasting on the
Passion Friday: From praying over the Graves of the Dead, to cry down all
Decency in Christian Burials.

Sic trahit in vitium Culpae fuga -- God help: I can be too copious in this
Theme. And therefore to return to the Fathers. They were men also.

Vigilantius undervalued Virginity, and Hierom to cross him, speaks
disgracefully of holy Wedlock. The Manich^es take away all Free Will from Man,
in Morals, in Naturals. Many of the Fathers in heat of opposition cry it up too
fast.

Pelagius held the Baptism of Infants a thing needless, useless. The Fathers
again and against him, so far urge the Necessity thereof, That they exclude all
Infants, dying unbaptized, from the hope of Heaven.

But will the Scripture say as much? They say it will: and the Master-Argument
is this of my Text. Except a Man be born of Water and the Spirit -- that is,
Except a Man be baptized, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

You heard before what Answer most of our Side made unto this place: That
nothing less is here intended than the Sacrament of Baptism. But we have
granted it: And yet the Universal Negative shall not hold Universally.

You have such another place, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. Except a Man will work, he must
not eat. And shall an Infant then be kept from Meat, because Impotency disables
them to work?

Again, it is said in sixth of John, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink his blood, you have no life in you. And must all perish who do not
partake of that other Sacrament of the Supper. v. Aug. contra 2. Epist.
Pelagii, l. 4. c. 4. and in Ps. 64. and l. 1. de peccat. Merit. c. 20. and
Cypr. de lap. etc.
Indeed the Fathers some of them, were sometime of this Opinion: And therefore
did they moysten some little portion of the Bread, and so imparted it unto the
Little ones. Stillantur quaedam de Sacramentis.

This Opinion is long since exploded: And Except ye Eat, must suffer an
Exception. And why not here as well! Except a man be born of water!

lib. 4. did. 4. ^.
The Master of the Sentences understands it of those who may, and do contemn to
be baptized. And the whole Schools except many. They tell us; The Baptism of
Blood will suffice a Martyr. They tell us, Votum sufficit in Adultis. If they
come to years of Discretion, the Desire of Baptism will suffice.

Now then, if the words of my Text be not so General as to exclude All
absolutely (that dye unbaptized) why shall poor Innocent Babes be here
excluded? If some may be received into bliss without Baptism, Why should any
Man tie the Mercies of God to second Causes in the case of Innocents?

Absit ut Vniversi parvuli pereant, etc. Innocent. 3. Decret. l. 3. tit. 42. c.
3.
They are the words of Innocent the Third, in favor of Innocents. God forbid
that all those poor Souls, those harmless Babes (which daily dye) should perish
everlastingly, but God has allotted out some means to bring them also to
Salvation. Where though he understand the Means or Remedy to be Baptism, yet I
may s^y the same of other Ways, if Baptism cannot be had. God forbid, That all
those should perish, those Newborn Babes to whom that Sacrament is wanting,
they are not wanting to the Sacrament.

Epist. 77.
Bernard tells us, there were other Remedies in elder times. To Abraham and his
Seed was given the Sacrament of Circumcision. The Gentiles (many of them) were
saved by faith and sacrifices: And for their little Ones, Solam profuisse, imo
and suffecisse parentum fidem. 'Twas enough and enough to be born of faithful
Parents. The faith of the Parents did suffice for the Children. And this (says
he) endured till the time of Baptism. An vero ultra, penes Deum est, non meum
definire. But yet he concludes with the rest, That Infants dying without
Baptism go not to Heaven.

But I would ask him: The Faith of others shall suffice the Infants which are
baptized, and why not those, which born within the League or Covenant did die
without it? when not the Contempt of the Sacrament, but the Article of
Necessity excludes the Mystery?

Augustine himself will tell us, That in others the Visible Sacrament is then
supplied invisibly. De Baptis. cont. Donat. l. 4. c. 22. Epist. 77. nd Hug^n.
vict.
And why not here? Me thinks in Bernards words, it stands well with the
gracious Mercies of the Almighty, That where age alone has denied faith of
their own, there Grace should accept the supply of faith from another.

I farther add (what all Men grant) That Baptism came in place of
Circumcision. Now David's Child dyed without Circumcision, yet could the Prophet
comfort himself with that Heavenly Resolution, I shall go to him, 2 Samuel 12.23.

Besides, the Little Children slain by Herod, some of them (as it is granted by
Bellarmin and others in all probability not eight days old, and therefore by
the Law not Circumcised; yet are these Little Ones enrolled by their Church
into the Alb of Saints.

Again, That Circumcision was not simply and absolutely necessary (which had
yet as absolute a Command as this of Baptism) those forty years will testify
in which it was omitted in the Wilderness, Jos. 5 5. Genesis 17.14.


Besides, Jeremy and John Baptist were both sanctified in their Mothers womb:
And who then durst cut them off from the hope of Heaven, if they had missed the
cutting of their Foreskin? And so likewise in the New Testament, many are said
to receive the Holy Ghost before they received Baptism. Wherefore as St. Peter
said of some of them, Act. 10. Can any man forbid Water? I may say, Could any
man forbid Heaven, if they had died without Water?

If any say, Vid. Dom. Soto in 4. Sent. did. 5. q. unic. art. 2.
The Votum or desire might suffice them because they were Adulti, and come to
years of discretion. Let them know, here could be no Votum, because no
knowledge. And ignoti nulla Cupido.

In Comment. in 2 Pet. 3. and habet Sixth. Senens. bib. lib 6. Annot. 340.
Ambrosius Catharinus is more favorable to Infants; He thinks they shall live
in that New Earth (which shall be at the end of the World) in all pomp and
jollity, and shall there praise God for ever.

Thus do our Adversaries pass their Judgment on holy Innocents, and that Rule
of their Aquinas is forgotten, Deus non alligavit gratiam suam Sacramentis:
Gods hands are not bound, nor has he tied his Mercies, or confined them to the
Sacraments.

The Conclusion of this point is: That Baptism is the ordinary appointed Means
for our Salvation: And therefore neglect it not. Yet has God his special
favor, and his extraordinary Grace, saving, often times saving without Means,
where the Means cannot be had.

Vid. Mortons Apol. not. 6. c. 41. p. 121. and jos Angl. par. 1. q. 1. de Bapt.
art. ult. con. 3.
And many learned Papists, as Cajetan, Gerson, Gabriel are of our Opinion: and
vid. Dom. Soto in 4. Sent. did. 5. q. 1. art. 2. ubi and de Aliis.

Part 5.
The Benefits obtained by Baptism, and how they are conveyed unto us.

Vide Chemnit exam. Council. Trident part 2. p. 20.
Many Schoolmen (attributing too much to the outward Signs) tell us, That Grace
is given in them and by them, not only Instrumentally, but either Effective or
Dispositive, by an inherent virtue in the Elements.

You heard of some in elder times, Vid Danaeum in Aug. de haeres. in fin.
who did wholly slight this Sacrament. The Socinians have done as much in our
days. And some have done but little better, whilst they make the Sacraments
distinctive only, naught but bare Signs or Notes of our Profession, whereby
from Jews, Turks, Pagans we may be discerned.

But we acknowledge Power in these holy Mysteries, and that they are not merely
significative, but exhibitive also; Offering and conferring Grace, Sed ex
Institutione, promissione, etc. Not of themselves, but by the mercies of God in
Christ, they carry and conveigh the blessings of our Redemption, and seal unto
us those Promises which God has made, and Christ has purchased with his
precious blood.

Thus Augustine: Tract. 80. in Joh.
How and whence comes this power to the Water, that touching the Body, it does
cleanse the Soul? The Word, the Word, sa th he, is cause of all, not because
spoken, but because believed.

And thus Cyril of the Pool Bethesda, Joh. 5. Tom. 1. in Evang Joh. l. 6. c. 14.
That it did cure Diseases, not by its own Nature, for then it should have
always done it, but only at the coming of the Angel. It Is so (says he) in
Baptism, where not the Water, but the Water sanctified by the Holy Spirit does
wash away sins.

In Nazianz. tom. 1. Orat 6. de Sp. Sanct. and ipse Nazianz. in funere Caesarii
fratris: (...), etc.
To these I add Elias Cretens. in Nazianz. He tells us, How the Water does renew
us unto Regeneration, but the Grace and Blessing comes from above.

And thus have you the fruit, the benefit of Baptism. It Is Opus Spiritus
Sancti: It Is a work of the Holy Spirit. Enough were said and say no more, but
it does offer and confer Grace, wash away sins, and cleanse and sanctify,
Ephesians. 5.26. It Is Janua Ecclesia. Janua Coeli; The Door through which we pass
into the Church Militant, and from thence into the Church Triumphant. It Is our
New Birth; our Second Birth.

There is a double Birth: From the first Adam as Sinners, from the second Adam
as Saints. By the first we are liable to Death, by the second we have a right
to Glory. In the first we come crying with that of the Apostle, Quis me
liberabit? Wretched Men that we are, who shall deliver us? In the second we
come with Gratias in our mouths. Thanks be to the Lord who has so graciously
bestowed upon us that worthy Name, that good Name by which we are called, James
2.7. Christians, Christians --. All saving Graces, all our Comfort, all our
Hopes are comprised within that Name.

Our next care must be to walk worthy that Name. We must be New Creatures, 2
Cor. 5. for as the Apostle said of Circumcision, Gal. 6. we may say of
Baptism: Baptism or no Baptism, all is one, unless we become New Creatures.

'Twas one of Jovinians Errors, August. de Haeres. cap. 82.
That the virtue of Baptism could not be lost. Homines non posse peccare. Men
could not sin: Ergo, Men could not perish. And we in our Catechism say, That
we are made Members of Christ, and Children of God. But rotten Members must be
cut off; and disobedient Children must be disinherited. If you will hold of the
head, you must hold with the Head. Do what he commands you. Do as you have seen
him do, John 13. Are ye Christians? Live like Christians.

Remember what John Baptist told the People when they came to his Baptism,
Luke 3. The People (all of them) must be Charitable. The Tax-gatherers and
Excize-Men must be no Exactors The Soldiers must be content with their Wages,
and do violence to no man. And all this under the Law.

And does our Christianity require less? No sure. New Men; New Manners. And he
that said, Discite a me, Math. 11.29. sends us elsewhere to School amongst
those Little Children, Learn of them. Math. 18 3. Except ye be converted and
become as Little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. And so
Peter, in the first Epistle, second Chapter and second Verse, As New born
Babes, (...), desire the sincere Milk of the Word. I, so do you. Sermons,
Sermons, All for Sermons. And that is well done. but that is not all: Look what
follows and what went before. First lay aside all malice, guile, hypocrisy,
envy, and the like (the very sins, the reigning sins of those times.) Be
Children in Malice, 1 Cor. 14. And as the same Apostle elsewhere, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
Let no man oppress and circumvent his Brother. No Oppressing, that is for the
Gentlemen: No Circumventing, that is for the Chapmen. Here be Children, here be
Innocent.

This is the way, Ambulate in ea, the ready way to Heaven. I spoke but now of a
double-birth: Lo here is a Third. The last day will be our best day: The day of
Death, the day of Life. Natalitiae Sanctorum. So did the Fathers call those
days, in which the Saints and Martyrs gave their farewell to this World,
Natalitiae Martyrum. A birth indeed, a happy birth, to be carried into
Abraham's bosom by the hands of Angels.

Our first Birth is into this World. Our second into the Church. Our third into
Heaven. Behold a Sinner, a Son, a Saint. In the first we come to live: in the
second to live hopefully: in the third happily.

Our first is (...), A life, and that is all; scarce that: and were there not
another Hope, a better Hope, we might with Job and Jeremy, Curse the day of
this Nativity.

But if we once obtain the favor of the Font; if we be born again of Water
and the Spirit, Ecclesia uterus: Our Womb's the Church. And as we believe the
Church is holy, so must every Member endeavor to be holy and unblameable. Away
with that praecipice of presumption: I am a Member of Christ: Quis me
separabit? I am a Son, and who shall disinherit me? O beware! Thou art now upon
the pinnacle of the Temple, as Bernard said of some; The Way is anceps and
praeceps too. Many rubs, many turnings, and therefore Attend pedi, as Solomon
said, Look to thy foot; and last of all, beware of weariness; walk, and walk on
to the end of the race that is set before you.

Many, too many are like the Galatians, of whom 'twas said, They did run well:
That begin in the Spirit but end in the Flesh: that make a goodly show, but
fall away and wither with the untimely Corn on the housetop.

Alexander and Lucullus were admired for Temperance in the beginning. Nero and
Domitian, famous for their first fruits of Clemency. Nicholas and Demas in
great account with the Apostles, but Cui bono? You know what John was bid to
write to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna: Be thou faithful to the end, and I
will give thee the Crown of life. It Is the End that makes or marrs all.

And therefore run with patience the race that is set before you. Conscience be
your Guide, Heaven be your Hope, Job 18.14.
and the terror of Kings, The king of Terrors, shall never hurt you. Death
will be your (...), the Midwife to bring you to your Third birth.

This is that (...). The true life, the only life; when all our sorrows shall
be turned into joy, and God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes.

FIAT, FIAT.
A Return from ARGIER. A SERMON Preached at MINHEAD In the County of Somerset
the 16. of March, 1627. at the readmission of a Relapsed Christian into our
CHURCH. By H. B. B. D.
REVEL. II. part 5. verse. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do thy first works.


I Shall be forced to do what Israel promised Sihon King of the Amorites, Numb.
21. pass through his Country, without turning aside into the Fields or
Vineyards: Or as your Saylors, whom time forbids most while to draw
Landskips, but with a Sea-mark or twain, they make directly for the Harbor. He
whose Name is Wonderful, Isai. 9. Heb. 1.6.
and whom all the Angels of God must worship, Alpha and Omega: Bids John write
in a Book what he saw, and send it to the seven Churches of Asia, cap. 1. verse
1. and here unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write. I pass by that
strange assertion of some men in favor of unwritten Traditions, that tell us
the Apostles received commandment, Vide Chemnit. exam. Council. Trident. part
1a. de Epistolis Apostolorum.
not to Write, but only to Preach: and yet Saint Peter, Paul, James, Jude,
write, and Saint John is bid Write. I must leave on one side, the dignity of
the Pastors, and their duty on the other; and how what is written to the
Churches, must be sent to the Pastor of each Church; either because as Anselme
will, Lauduneus. in loc.
their sins, their Souls shall be required at his hands; or, because the
Priests lips should preserve knowledge, Mal. 27.
and they should seek the Law at his mouth. Yet many, with another spirit than
was his who spoke it; say, They are wiser than their Teachers; and for the
Scriptures, praesumunt, Hieron ad Paulinum.
lacerant. O what senceless sense do those presumptuous Ignorants ofttimes
impose upon it? But the wisest will remember they are but Candlesticks, and
because they do remember it, Cap 1 v. ult.
they are golden Candlesticks: but the Candles, the Stars themselves which give
the light, are the A^gels of the Churches, those whom God has singled out and
set apart to teach his people.

The Letter to the Church of Ephesus, does follow: I know thy works, and thy
labor, etc. The first part whereof may be divided into a Proof, and a Reproof.
First, What God approves and commends: Secondly, What he dislikes and
discommends. Many were their good works, especially their undergoing the Cross
and Persecution patiently. They made a difference between weaklings, and such
as offended presumptuously; they could not forbear them which were evil. Though
they were ready to bear home the straying sheep upon their shoulders, yet the
incestuous Corinthian must be cut off. 1 Cor. 5.5.
Their Pulpit was not open to every title-less wandering Preacher, but his
Calling must be known, ere his Doctrine must be heard; and therefore they did
examine such as came unto them in the name of Apostles, And all this did they
for the Name of Christ: and what makes much for their commendation, they did
all courageously, they fainted not. And yet after all this, In Genesis Homil 30.
comes in a nevertheless, and they are reproved. Nevertheless I have somewhat
against thee, because thou have left thy first love. Chrysostom speaking of
the Pharisee in the 18. of St. Luke, that did pray so earnestly, and fast so
strictly, and pay Tithes so conscionably, and yet had a poor Publicane
preferred before him; tells us that he suffered a strange kind of shipwreck. He
had made a good voyage, and lost all at home in his own harbor: this can
self-conceit do. I may say as much of these Ephesians. They had made an
excellent voyage, and were laden with many gracious commodities, and lo one
leak in the harbor did endanger all. This can the want of love do. Thou have
left thy first love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do thy first works.

The parts are two 1. An Exhortation, 2. A Direction. The first discovers the
wound, the second declares the remedy.



Or here is Remember for the time past. Repent for the time present, and Do the
first works for the time to come.


Or here is 1. Their misery or sin. They are fallen. 2. The height or greatness
of their sin. Whence and whither they fell. 3. The salve. Repentance. 4. The
Roll which ties it on, or the application. Do thy first works.


1. St. Bernard has a true saying; He that knows not his own misery, is
incapable of Gods mercy. And the Laodiceans in the next Chapter were in a woeful
case, that said, they were rich, and needed nothing, and yet were wretched,
miserable, poor, blind, naked. The first step to repent, is to know our
offense; and the way to arise, is to know our selves down. The whole need not a
Physician, but they that are sick; Luke 5.31.
and the sinsick Publican call^ for mercy. Romans 3.23.
Indeed we have all sinned, as St. Paul tells us: All in many t^^^gs as St
James. cap. 3.2.
A^^ though Noah w^^ (...) upright man, yet it ^^s but in sua (...) ^^^one, in
regard of the time wherei^ ^e lived, and comparatively. And Zachary and
Elizabeth were just before God; that is, sine fuco. What they did, they did
unfeignedly, and yet just by the favor of acceptance, not in the rigor of
examination. We may not therefore wonder that these Ephesians fell, and that
their silver was mixed with some dross, which could not endure the fire. Nor
may we think their fall little, whom so severe a Commination does attend, as is
the removing their Candlestick out of his place.

2. The sin laid to their charge, is the leaving of their first Love. St. Paul
tells us, Ad Ephesians. cap. 1.15, 16.
that he ceased not to give thanks to God for them, because they had faith
toward Christ, and love toward all his Saints. St. John tells us, 1 Reg. 7.21.
they were fallen from this love: their faith is not questioned. These are the
two pillars Jachin and Boas, which bear up the entrance or porch into the
Temple. Faith and Charity must go together, Tertul. advers. prax. of the
Trinity.
and must be numerus sine divisione, distinguished they may be, divided,
sundred they cannot be, and be at all. And therefore it is not said, They were
fallen from love, for so they must have come within the compass of St. Paul's
Nothing, Lyra in loc. Zanch. tomo 7. de perseverant. Sanctorum,
1 Cor. 13. but they were fallen from their first love, a tanto gradu, from
that fervency which formerly they had. Either they loved not all the Saints, or
they loved them not in that measure: they were partial or they were cold in
their affections.

This is that sin which called for so heavy a punishment, and without
Repentance and Returning to their first estate, would (notwithstanding their
many other religious actions) bring on them an everlasting misery. And yet do
we scarce love any Saints, much less all; and we never did esteem that doctrine
which teaches us to loose our purse-strings, and pour out. We have fed our
Auditory so long with Sola fides, that Charity is frozen amidst the fire of our
zeal, and Lazarus is dismissed with that cold, comfortless Alms in St. James, 2
Cap. 16. Ambrose, a Hip. a Pap.
Depart in peace. And most of us are become Custodes non Domini, slaves to god
Mammon; we have not power of our own. And if any be so tender hearted, as to
relieve, restore, compassionate his brothers misery; some shall untruly judge
him for no true Christian; and other new Reformers shall near challenge him of
old Religion. Thus dare presumptuous impiety fall not only from her first
love, if she had ever any, but from love it self, and yet shall challenge
heaven for her inheritance. She shall add sin to sin, Ecclus, 7.8. Prove. 5.22.
and bind many together, and yet forget her self to be holden with the cords of
her own sin. She shall fall, never any Ephesian worse, few ever like, and yet
persuades her self she stands upright.

The Church of Ephesus is only taxed for defect in love, but many of us are
like Mephibosheth, lame in both feet. 2 Samuel 9.13.
We are fallen, we are fallen not only from love toward all the Saints, Romans
8.35.
but from the faith we had in the Lord Jesus. Persecution can separate us from
the love of Christ, and the blast of affliction can make us throw off the
shield of Faith. Yea, Ephesians. 6.16.
many times we fall away non persecutionis impetu sed voluntario lapsu, the
demand of a doorkeeper, or the voice of a Maid, will terrify us, as it befell
Peter; and we are prone upon the least occasion to renounce, disclaim, defy
that excellent Name by which we have hope, the blessed name of JESUS. Phil.
2.10, 11.
A Name which every tongue must confess, to which every knee must bow, then
which there is no other Name under heaven whereby we must be saved; and of
which a Heathen could give this testimony, Vt uno verbo exprimi non possit. Cic
in Verrem. lib. 2. of Sotor.
It is a name of wonder.

But some have thought it tolerable, if not lawful, in time of persecution to
deny Manente apud animum proposito: Tertul. ad (...). 27.
so the mind be free. Indeed what have not some thought, or what monstrous
opinions were there ever heard of, but could find some one or other to defend
them? One commends the quartan Ague, another writes in praise of Folly;
Anaxagoras thinks the Snow is black, Danaeus in cap. 4. Aug. de Heroes. Gab.
Prateolus.
and Catilina, si judicatum erit meridie non lucere certus erit competitor. He
will swear the Sun shines not at noon day. The Basilidians, the
David-Georgians, not only defend that damnable opinion of denying, but (so
commonly does one absurdity, one sin beget another) they scoffed at, they
scorned, they cried shame on all the holy Martyrs for their sufferings. But we
have not so learned Christ. Those Chameleons live not in our Element, nor come
they within the verge of the Church. Omnis Aristippum decuit color. He is none
of ours. No, no: the resolved Christian will scorn to bow his knee to Baal. He
knows there is a woe to him that has a double-heart, and is faint-hearted.
Ecclus. 2.
He knows we may not take the Name of God in vain, much less deny him. And that
we must not fear those which kill the Body, and are not able to kill the Soul:
Math. 10.
but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell: and
that whosoever shall deny his Savior before men, shall one day be denied
before God. This makes the School-man resolve, Thom. Aquin. (...) q 3. art 2
that upon pain of damnation, we are bound in some cases to abide the trial,
and confess our faith, when it shall conduce either to the honor of God, Math
10 2^. B King, on Jonas, Lect. 29.
or the profit of our Neighbor. And that indulgence of our blessed Savior, of
flying from City to City, is neither for all men, nor all times. This made the
Saints, the servants of God, not only not deny, but to proclaim themselves
Christians, and to run upon those unsufferable torments and jaws of death,
Aquin 2.7. q 124. art. 3.
Ex zelo fidei and charitate fraterna, etc. says Aquinas. Out of the fervency
of their faith, and to hearten and encourage their Brethren; The Martyrs have
often come forth and offered themselves to the fire, or other fury of their
enemies. Apolog. cap. 1.
This made Tertullian cry out, Christianis quid simile? etc. What may be
compared to the Christian? question him, and he is glad: accuse him, and he
says guilty: adjudge him to death, and he will give thee thanks. This made
Antonius Pius give a liberal testimony of them in his time. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist.
lib. 4. c. 13.
It is their desire in Gods quarrel rather to die than to live.

Not to speak of Isaiah cut in twain, Sixth. Senens. lib. Sanct. l. 1.
Jeremy stoned, Ezekiel beheaded, Daniel in the Den, and his three companions
in the Oven: and indeed which of the Prophets have not been persecuted and
slain? Act 7.52.
nor of Eleazar beaten to death being fourscore years old and ten? 2 Machab. 6.
ibid. c 7.
nor of that honorable Woman, and her seven Sons, enduring to the am^zement of
the Tormentors. And though it be most true as one says, Erasmus virginum and
Martyr. comparat.
Parents atrocius torquentur in liberis quam in seipsis: The poor Mother
suffered more Martyrdoms, than she had Children, and every stripe their backs
felt, went to her heart, yet she exhorted every one of them, with a m^nly
stomach, and prayed them all to die courageously, never deplori^g that she had
brought them forth to such misery, but overjoyed that she should be the Mother
of so many Saints.

And though I know it to be true what the Orator has, Cic. 3. in Verrem.
Vetera exempla pro fictis fabulis jam audiri: Yet will I touch at a few of
those holy Saints and blessed Souls in Heaven, who willingly, joyfully,
constantly yielded up their spirits in his quarrel, who first trod out the way,
and shed his blood for them. ^
Policarpe, when many urged him to deny his Savior and s^ve himself, answered
resolutely, fourscore and six years have I served Him, neither has he ever
offended me in any thing, and how can I revile my King who has thus long
preserved me? And when the Proconsul threatened to burn him, his answer was;
Thou threatnest fire for an hour, which lasts a while and is quickly
quenched, but thou art ignorant of the everlasting fire, of the day of
Judgment, and of the endless torments which are prepar^d for the wicked. And
being now come to his last, he turns from (...) Persecutor to his Maker: O
God (says he) I thank thee, that thou have g aciously vouchsafed this day and
this h^ur, to a^lot me a portion among the number of Martyrs and Servants of
Christ Ignatius ^hen he was sent from Syria to Rome to be meat for wild Beasts,
Idem lib 3. c. 32. Gr. ^5.
Now (says he) do I begin to be a Disciple, I weigh neither visible no^
invisible things: Let Fire, Gallows, Violence of Beasts, bruising of Bones,
racking of the Members, stamping of my whole Bod^, and all the plagues Satan
can invent light upon me, so I may win my Savior Christ. Fox in tertia
persecution^.
Simeon, Bishop of Jerusalem, being an hundred and twenty years old, was
scourged many days together, and at last Crucified. Peter, a Noble man of
Nicome^ia, Eusebius. Eccl. Hist lib 8. cap 6.
had his body rent in pieces with the Lash, afterward, Vinegar mixed with Salt,
was poured into his wounds, and last of all he was fried to death upon a
Gridiron. Sanctus, Idem l 5. c 1.
one that would neither confess his Name, Kindred or Country, but only that he
was a Christian, had his body fired, feared, scorched with hot plates of brass.
Forty Martyrs, young Gentlemen, Fox in decima persecat. ex Basil.
for professing themselves Christians, were in the depth of Winter compelled to
stand in a Pond all the night, and in the morning taken out and burned. Take
one Wom n among the rest, Blanaina, Eusebius lib 5. a 1.
who was tormented from morning till night; the Executioners tormenting her by
turns, and after a world of Cruelties, she was wrapped in a Net, and tumbled
before a wild Bull, which tossed her too and fro upon his horns; and for a
farewell, she had her Head divided from her Body. I have read of some, Jaques
de Lavardin Hist. of Scanderbeg. lib. 11.
and those some of the valiantest the World did see within their Age, who,
after all kind of Ignominy and Turkish cruelty practiced upon them, were flead
alive by little and little, for fifteen days together. Heb. 11.32. Eusebius lib.
6. c 40. Gr 41. Ibid cap. 41. Gr. 42. Ibid. cap 40. Idem. l. 5 c. 1.
And (to borrow the Apostles words) what shall I more say? for the time would
be too short for me to tell how some had their eyes pricked out with sharp
quills, as Metras: some were beaten to death with Cudgels, as Ischyrion: some
had all their teeth beaten out of their head, as Apollonia. And what should I
speak of the setting them in the Stocks, Fox decima persecut.
and stretching their legs unto the fifth-hole? or of the Iron Chair wherein
they sat broyling to death? of holes made in their necks, and their Tongues
drawn out backward? their Eyes pulled out, and the hollow places seared with
hot Irons? D King on ^onas, Lect. 24.
pownding in Mortars? rolling in Barrels armed with pikes of Iron? D Benefi^ld
on Amos Lect 7.
Women's breasts seared? Sab. Prateolus lib 7.. 7.
Virgins faces whipped? their whole body abused, prostituted and tormented? I
am faint in telling, and you be weary in hearing, but they unterrified,
undaunted, endured all courageously. Erasmus vi^ginum and Martyr comp^rat
Tertul Apol. cap 50. Hemming in P^^l. ^4 7. Na^anz: Oat (...) de Machabaeis.
Hosius. Confess fidei cap. 6 8. Nasianz: Cygneorum Carm. lib. and Orat 3^ de
Machabeis. Heb. 2 Moses and Maximus, etc. 26 Ep. inter opera Cyprian^.
Tyrannorum ingeniosa crudelitas, says one. The bloody Tyrants set their wits
on work to invent torment, but nihil proficit exquisitior quaeque, says
another: the more the Torments, the more the Martyrs. Their blood was like corn
sown, one brought forth many. Yea, the Persecutors themselves were astonished
to see their constancy, and how they went to their Martyrdom, tanquam ad
epulas, tanquam ad de licias, tanquam ad nuptialem thalamum, they went to the
fire as to a feast, as to a dainty feast, as to their bridal bed.

Wherefore let us also, seeing that we are compassed with so great a cloud of
Witnesses, cast away every thing that presses down, and the sin that hangs
so fast on. Let us remember from whence we are fallen, that so we may repent,
and do the first works. We can offer up no greater Sacrifice to our Master: We
can purchase no greater happiness to our selves: We can leave no better example
to others: We can bring no greater comfort to our Friends, then under the hand
of the merciless Executioner undauntedly to acknowledge whose Servants we are,
and with a free, though fading spirit, to confess our Savior.

First, We can offer up no greater sacrifice to our Master: You shall first
understand who ought properly to be called a Martyr. Cyprian makes two sorts.
The first of them who shed their blood, Cypri ep st. 9. and Ep^^t 25. etc Lib.
de Dupl^ci Martyrio in ter opera Cypriani tomo tertio Zanch. tomo 6. in cap. 2.
ad Philip v 30. apud Aquinam 2^. 2^. q. 124. art. 4.
the second of them who are ready so to do for Christ's sake: And to those last
torments were wanting (says one) they were not wanting to the Torments.
Zanchius a knowledgeth that the Curch did usually call this later sort
Confessors, yet he will have Epaphroditus a Martyr, and Hierom does somewhere
call the blessed Virgin a Martyr, quamvis in pace vitam finicrit, and
Po^icrates Eusebius. l 3. c. 28. G. 3.
calls John the Evangelist a Martyr. And Chrysostom tells the people of
Antioch, that a man may always be a Martyr, for Job was one and suffered more
then many Martyrs did, says Bernard in his Sermon of Abbot Benedict. Homil. 25.
pretily differenceth Martyrs from Confessors, and somewhere else tells us of
three kinds of Martyrdom without blood: We must first conclude with Cyprian and
Augustine: In Senten. Gab. Prateol. Flench He^es lib 3.. 5
The Cause, not the Suffering, make a Martyr. We disclaim the Campates a kind
of Donatists, who would have all voluntary Deaths Martyrdoms. I think St.
Augustine calls them Circumcelliones. August. de Haeres c 69. Prateol l 13. ^6
Zanch tomo 6. in epist ad Phil cap 1. Id^m ib d August. ^om^ in Psalm. ^^.
And l kewise Pelibianus who taught them to be Martyrs who sl^w themselves in
detestation of their Sins: But ^o (says one) Judas should have been a Martyr.
Secondly, As Talis Causa, so Talis Poena. They are Martyrs who testify the
Truth Vsque ad mortem, even sealing it with their (...). The other whom the
Church calls (...), are ^e^^de (...) Martyrs, aequivoce Martyrs, so Zanchius:
Vbi Supra in c. 2. v. ^0. in secundam secundae q. 124. art 4. Apud Zauch. ubi
supra in cap 1.
Designati Martyrs so Tertullian: Interpretative, inchoative secundum qu^d,
and mental Martyrs, so Cajetan. And therefore we may be bold with St. Augustine
to blot out some, and question other some, even the holy Innocents themselves,
question I say not their bliss, but their testimony that the dignity of
Proto-Martyrship may remain unto St. Stephen, The sum of all is this: He is
properly a Martyr, who is tormented to the death for the Word of God, and for
the testimony of Jesus Christ. Revel. 1.9.
Of King Henry and Queen Mary's Martyrs, both for the honor of the dead, and
the peace of the Church, I say nothing. Academ. quaest. Cic 1. Officiorum.
Perchance the question then was, or most while was for bounds, as Tully
speaks, but now it is for the whole possession and inheritance. Nay it is Vter
esset non uter imperaret. I am sure Heaven cannot hold us and Mahomet, and
blessed is he that shall lay down his life in so good a Cause. A cup of cold
Water shall not lose his reward. Math 10.4^.
Whosoever shall forsake Houses, Mark 10.3^.
or Brethren or Sisters, or Father or Mother, or Wife or Children, or Lands for
the Name of Christ, shall receive an hundred fold more for the present, and in
the world to come eternal life, What shall he have that forsakes all? He that
offers praise and thanksgiving honors God. Ps^. (...) ver^. (...)
He that gives his bread to the poor members of Christ, feeds his Savior, but
he that gives himself, his life, his b^^^^, does give all, and therefore more
then all. He that gives his life can give no more, John. 15.13. Remember
therefore from whence thou art fallen: thou could offer no greater sacrifice
to thy Master.

Secondly, We can purchase no greater happiness to our selves. I should much
wrong you if I should labor to prove this. If Heaven be better than Earth: if
the Crown of life, better than the pains of death: if things eternal, better
than temporal: if to be always happy, better than ever in hazard, in fear, in
trouble, then he that suffers for the Name of Christ, does to himself
purchase Name, Fame, Heaven, Happiness; and with Mary has chosen the better
part, which shall never be taken from him: then he that loses his life shall
find it, Math. 10.39. and he that dies with Christ, shall live with him, shall
reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.11. and the momentany afflictions which he does here
endure, shall cause to him (...), a more excellent weight of glory, 2 Cor.
4.17. In a word, participes passionis shall be gloriae participes (as says
Chrysologus) If we share with him in affliction here, Chrysolog. sermon 40
Calvin. in^titut. l^b. 3. ^ap. 8. sect; 7
he will impart to us blessedness hereafter. So happy are these men whom God
vouchsafes that special honor as to die for him. Write them bles^ed a^ the
voice said, Revel 14.13. no men more, no m^n like. And therefore r^member from
whence th^^ a t fal^en. Thou could purchase no greater happiness to thy self.

Thirdly, We can leave no better Example to others. St. Paul, Philip. 1.12, 14.
tells us that his durance turned to the furtherance of the Gospel, insomuch
that many Brethren in the Lord were emboldned through his bands, and durst more
frankly speak the Word. In Ecclesiastic History you shall read continually,
how one Martyr led the way to another, and the noble resolution they showed in
their Death, made hundreds then alive to take the same course: yea so powerful
is Example in this kind, that the very Heathen not only gave them testimony of
Courage, but were won to the Faith, and sealed the same Testimony with their
blood. Beda Hist. Angl. lib. 1. Palatina, and the 3 Convers. of England, part.
3.
So did St. Alban beget his Headsman to the Faith, and had him his Companion to
the Kingdom of God. So did the Constancy of Pope Sixtus the second, strengthen
St. Laurence; and St. Laurence brings Romanus from a persecuting Soldier to be
his fellow-Martyr. Tryphon did the like, and almost who did not? The
Phoenix-ashes (some say) yields another Phoenix: but the Martyrs by life and
death beget many. Tertul. apolog. c. 50.
Semen est sanguis Christianorum. Now, if they that turn many to righteousness,
shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12. How happy are those
faithful Witnesses in Heaven, whose holy lives, and unterrified, unappalled
deaths did strengthen some, and raise up others, and draw thousands from the
very sink of Atheism and Infidelity, to know and acknowledge their most
gracious Redeemer? And therefore remember from whence thou art fallen, thou
could never leave a better Example to others.

Fourthly, and last of all, We can never bring greater comfort to our Friends.
The Heathen when his Child was dead, comforted himself with that inexorable,
unavoid^ble law of Mortality, scio me genuisse mortalem: but what unspeakable
comfort would it be, to say, I know I have begot one who is now a Saint in
Heaven? 3. Convers. of England, part. 3. Chrysolog sermon 134, etc.
This made those three Mothers, Felicitas, Simphorosa, and that other in the
Maccabees, to encourage each of them their seven Children in their torments;
and the comfort they received in their Childrens Constancy, was much more than
the pains they endured through the Tyrants fury. This made the Mother of
Simphorianus run after him when he went to h^^ Martyrdom, still crying out,
Son, Son, be mindful of everlasting life, Histor. Eccl. lib. 4. c 16.
look up to Heaven, etc. And this made that Woman in Theodoret, renowned for
her care, as well as constancy. When Valens the Emperor had threatened death to
all un-Arrianized Christians at Edessa; and Modestus the Governor with his
Soldiers, stood ready in the Marketplace to execute the Decree; a Woman
leading her little Child by the arm, broke through the press, and labored to
get in among her fellows. The Governor demanded her, whither she went: she
tells him, She would drink of the same Cup the rest did. And being further
demanded what her Child made there, and why she had brought it; Her answer was,
That he also might die that blessed death. Indeed great was the joy of the
whole Church, Erasmus v^rginum and Martyr. Comparat. and Cyprianus de lapsis.
tom. 2.
Vbi Martyr constanter exhalasset animam pro Christo. Great was their joy if
any died courageously; and great their sorrow their grief, if any fainted
cowardly, wretchedly, wickedly. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen:
Thou could bring no greater comfort to thy Friends.

Tertullian writing to the imprisoned Christians, whom he calls Martyrs, Cap. 4.
exhorts them to endure constantly by the Example of Lucretia, Mutius,
Empedocles, and such others, who suffered much to little purpose, only to get
a terrene fading feign among men. Tanti vitrum? Ibid.
quanti verum margaritum? If they did so much for glass, what should we do for
gold? If honor were bought at so dear a rate, why should we grudge upon the
same terms to get Heaven? Cygneorum Carm lib. page 1051. a.
Nazianzene s m^where tells us, that the Heathen were only valiant, when the
danger could not be shunned, it was much if it were so. But what bad Scaevola
burn his right hand for missing in the murder of Porsenna? Cic orat. de
Provinc. Consul.
or if he stood in danger, what is that to Lucretia? or to those Noble Virgins,
who threw themselves headlong into Wells to save their Virginity? Who made
Brutus and Torquatus kill their Sons? Who compelled Regulus to return ad
crudelissimum hostem, Cic. 3. officiorum.
ad exquisita supplicia, to those mercisess Enemies, to that strange death of
his at Carthage? And what made the Stoics so prodigal of their lives, B King,
on Jo^as, Lect. 27.
that they little regarded the very extremity of Tortures? and when they were
upon the Rack, they would cry out, O quam suave! as if it were sport? Surely
nothing, but a thing of nothing; Honor, and a Name amongst men, while the
noble Martyr shall have the acclamation of the Angels and an Euge of his
Savior. Heaven is his; 2 Samuel 12.8.
and as Nathan told David, if that be too little, he shall have more; his Name
shall never perish from the Earth. As Cicero said of Metellus, Pro domo sua ad
pontifices.
Calamity has made them immortal, even here also. Their Prisons were visited
as places made holy by the Inhabitants. Men, Women, young, old, did kiss the
Chains, in which they had been fettered: preserve the swords for Relics by
which any had been deprived of their life: their Ashes sacred: their memories
blessed: their Anniversaries kept, the day of their Death being their
Natalitiae, the first of time in which they began truly to live. And what could
be wanting, where Miracles were plentiful? God even at those very places where
the Martyrs lay, witnessing their blessed state by many Miracles: but I
forbear. As St. Ambrose said of one of them, De virginibus, lib. 1.
Appellabo Martyrem and praedicavi satis. The Name of a Martyr is a whole world
of Commendations. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent,
and do thy first works.

But this is not all, here is a Quo vadis; here is, a whither we fall, as well
as whence we fall; and a Terminus ad quem. As God said by Jeremy, Cap. 2. v. 13.
The people have committed two Evils, They have forsaken me the fountain of
living waters, and have dug them pits, even broken pits that can hold no
water; and as elsewhere: They have forsaken me, 1 Samuel 8.8.
and worshipped other gods, no Gods; They have gone from Christ, to Antichrist;
from God to Mahomet, that same inimicus home, that has done so much mischief
to Gods Vineyard. Wherefore as Pilate sometime said of him, in whom he
confessed, John. 19.
that he could find no fault at all: Ecce homo: I shall say to you of this
cursed Caitiff, and scourge of Christendom, in whom I can find nothing but
faults, and those monstrous ones. Ecce homo, Prateolus en Rinoldo Haeres. lib.
2. in Bayras Polidor Virgil. de invent. lib. 7. cap. 8.
take a view of him. And though I cannot affirm, whether he were genere admodum
vilis, as some: or nobili genere natus, as others: Whether he were descended of
Noble, or obscure Ancestors: nor whether his Parents were Jewish or Pagan, or
both, or neither: nor whether he were an Arabian, or a Persian, or neither: nor
whether he was buried at Mecha, or Medina, or at neither, but devoured of Dogs
(the hellish history of his Life and Death being as obscure as Hell. Purchase.
lib cap 3. In Verrem 3.
) yet all accord that he was what Tully said of one, Immensa aliqua vorago aut
gurges vitiorum turpitu^inumque omnium, the very puddle and sink of sin and
wickedness. A Thief, a Murderer, an Adulterer, and a Wittal. And from such a
dissolute life proceeded those licentious Laws of his. That his followers may
avenge themselves as much as they list. Ph. Morney de veritate Christian. relig
c. 33.
That he that kills most Infidels, shall have the best room in Paradise: and he
that fights not lustily, shall be damned in Hell. That they may take as many
Wives as they be able to keep. And least insatiable Lust might want whereon to
feed, to surret, he allows Divorce upon every light occasion. He himself had
but eleven Wives, Purchase l. 3. c. 9. sect 5. An^ Guevarra epist. ad Comitem
Myrand.
besides Whores; but the Grand-Signior in our days kept three thousand
Concubines for his lust.

Licurgus, his Laws allowed Manslaughter: Phoroncus permits Theft: Solon
Solinus toler^teth Adultery: Numa Pompilius makes it lawful to Conquer and
keep: The Lydians and Baleares suffer, nay, command what I shame to speak: And
even he whom we must acknowledge the first and greatest Lawgiver under God;
Moses himself will suffer something propter duritiem cordis: but take the worst
out of all the^e, and out of all other the worst of all; 1 Reg. 12.10.
and Rehoboams little finger shall be bigger than his Fathers loins. The
wickedness which Mahomets Laws alone maintain, are more and more monstrous than
them all.

Not to tell you of the Angel he met ten thousand times huger than the whole
World: Hemming, in Psalm. 84. c. 8.
nor of those Angels that lusted, now hanged in Iron-chains till the day of
Judgment: nor of their fair Hostess taken up into Heaven, and made the
beautiful Day Star: Nor of Seraphiel his Trumpet, which is as long as a Journey
of fifty years, Purchase lib. 3. cap. 5.
some say, five hundred: and that is more suitable to some of his relations; as
namely of an Ox so huge, that it is a thousand years journey from one of his
Horns to the other; and of a Key seven thousand miles long (the doors
themselves must needs be great) and of the Bridge that is made over Hell; and
of the resurrection of Birds and Beasts: and how death shall be changed into a
Ram, Cornelius Agrippa de vanitat. scient. Purchase lib. 3 c 13.
and what that Atheist Agrippa said for the Ass, this damned Circumcised
Miscreant dare say for his Ram, and that the Ram (more charitable then his
Masters) does pray for his Persecutors, for those which sacrifice him. I should
be loath once to mention those Whet-stonelies of his, but that you may see what
a jolly Fellow those men serve which fall away and turn Turk. And therefore let
it not distaste if I add, How Hali his Sword would cut Rocks asunder (but you
must understand 'twas an hundred Cubits long) How Mahomet found the Sun where
it l^y resting it self in a yellow fountain. How the Moon brake in two pieces,
and fell upon the Hills of Mecha, but Mahomet made it whole again. How he tells
of an Vtopian Land white as Milk, sweet as Musk, soft as Saffron, and bright as
the Moon: yet this is nothing to his Paradise, Hemming in Psalm. 84. c. 8.
the ground thereof is Gold, watered with streams of Milk, Honey, and Wine. How
there his Followers after the day of Judgment, shall have a merry mad World,
and shall never make an end of eating, Purchase lib. 3. c. 5.
drinking, and colling wenches. And these (if you will believe it) are sweet
Creatures indeed; for if one of them should spet into the Sea, all the waters
thereof would become sweet.

This is a taste of his infernal Doctrine, of those strange Lies and strong
Delusions with which he has bewitched the World, and led men hood-wink't into
the Abiss of perdition,

This is, or is like that Dragons-tail, Revel. 12.4. So Denis in his treatise
against Mahomet printed at London, 1531.
Which drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and cast them to the Earth;
this is that same Abaddon and man of Sin. This is Mahomet, one that has
brought more Souls to Hell, then all other Sects and Heretics besides. I take
that saying of a Reverent Divine (whose memory I honor) to be spoken somewhat
in heat of opposition and forcedly: Whitaker against Campian. in his answer to
the tenth Reason.
That the Romish Antichrist alone has more enlarged the infernal Kingdom, then
all Jews, Nero's, Mahomets, Arrians, Nestorians, Macedonians, Euticheans, and
the rest. Truly I confess (as things now go) Many a Pope is rather a Bite-sheep
then a Bishop (so one terms him) and much is the woe and wisterness that Rome
has brought upon Christendom. D Fulk. in 2 Cor. 2. sect 7.
Many foul, false, frenzie-ful positions has she obtruded to the World on pain
of damnation to be believed, and so great is her Merchandising that she dare
set Heaven it self to sale. But if Turk and Pope together cannot make up that
one Antichrist, and he may not be both of these, Mr. Mountag. appeal. c 5. and
8.
nor yet a third out of both these, I add, nor a third besides these: I should
rather probably conclude with learned Zanchius, Tomo 7. de perseverant.
Sanctorum. and ib. tract. de fine seculi, and tomo 8. Respons. ad Arrianum.
and others more, The Turk is he. The Turk is he who though he profess himself
the Prophet of God, yet exalts himself against all that is called God, and
does most blasphemously deny God, neither acknowledging the Trinity, nor that
holy One, the power of God. The Turk is be who reigns in that seven hilled
City of Constantinople, and sits in the vary Temple of God. Jerusalem is
his, and a great part of the World runs after him. The Turk is he, who as
Hannibal was said of Rome, or Scipio of Carthage, is the very Scourge and
plague of Christendom, and Hammer of the World: Cic. Philip. 4.
An enemy implacable, who does count it his greatest sport and recreation, as
one said of Anthony, to mangle, murder, wallow in the blood of Innocents: yet
with that Strumpet in the 1 King. 3. is content to share the prey, but it is
with the Devil. The one seeks the body, the other the soul.

Jaques de Lavard^n History Scanderbeg. lib. 6.
Good God, is it possible that the great Princes and Monarchs of Christendom can
so long endure both to hear and see this extreme misery! And cannot the
intolerable servitude of their Christian Brethren, their chains and bonds so
hideous and shameful, their Complaints so many, their Torments so merciless,
their blood ^anctified by Baptism, less valued then the blood of Beasts: Cannot
these kindle in our hearts the holy fire of Compassion, and whet our Swords
against that Common Enemy? Cannot this put an end unto those woeful Wars of
ours; Lucan. lib. 1.
-- Nullos habitura triumphos? Where one Member wounds another to the hazard of
the whole Body? that so we might avenge the blood of Gods Servants, Revel. 19.2.
which has so long time called, cried for revenge; and set a bound to Turks
pride, and propagate the glorious Gospel of our Savior. While now our discord
is his advantage, and our Wars his opportunity.

There was one Luther. vid. ubi supra.
who sometime said: So Fran, Oliverius (...) ^pud (...) lib 14. (...) Poli^or
Virgil. ^ib. 7 c. 8.
We might not wage Wars against the Turks, and that it was no Christian war
fare; Aliquid humani passus est. He was a man and so he spoke. O might I live
to see the time when our Roberts, Godfries, Baldwins would set foot in stirrup
again! and might I be one of the meanest Trumpetors in such an holy Expedition.

But we must leave the wound and him that gave it, Prateol. Haeraes. lib. 11.
sect. ^8.
that we may provide a plaster. The Montanist like a timid Surgeon does
forsake the Cure, and the merciless Novatian does not only pass by the wounded
man, with the Priest and Levite, without reaching an helping-hand: But
Ingeniosa and nova crudelitate, as says St. Cyprian, wickedly, though wittily,
kills outright. Indeed that impure Puritan Novatus was all for Judgment, and
would not afford one drop of Mercy to those miserable wretches who in heat of
Persecution fell away. No tears, no submission, no satisfaction, no possible
Repentance might serve the turn, whereby they might be reconciled, and received
to the Church again. Tomo 7. de perseverant. Sanctorum.
Now Zanchius is of opinion, that the Novatians were not so unlearned or
unskilled in the Scriptures, but that they knew, At what time soever a sinner
repents of his sins, from the bottom of his heart, God would forgive; but
they verily believe, That such as committed those grand sins as to deny their
Faith, their Savior, could never have the grace of true Repentance. But we
have Promises and Examples to confute their Errors: And the Church did most
worthily exclude and banish them, Lactantius, lib. 6. c. 24.
who were so difficult and inexorable to receive others. God commands not
impossibilities, but such is his goodness, knowing the weakness and frailty of
man, he has left a door open whereby man having gone amiss and returning may
enter in. To think God cannot forgive, In Homil. Marianis Sermon. 15.
is against his Omnipotency; To think he will not forgive, is against his
Goodness; To doubt of either is against his gracious Come unto me, Math, 11.28.
Prove. 28.
etc. For he that confesses, and forsakes his sin shall obtain mercy. And he
that taught us to pray for remission and forgiveness, intended (who dares doubt
it) to forgive.

But there are sins, and there are crying sins; (...) 18.14, ^ John 5.
(...) and (...), sins and audacious sins; and sins to death there are indeed;
and to deny our Faith is none of those little ones and peccadillio's: But he
that loves friends, lands, life, more then Christ is unworthy of Christ, Math.
14. And how detestable such offenses are, they may testify whom a present
vengeance has seized on, and who in the midst of their escape have felt the
powerful revenging hand of the Almighty. De Lapsis.
Cyprian will tell you of one stricken dumb, and of another who presently
possessed with an unclean spirit bit her tongue in pieces: Poena inde coepit,
unde and crimen. And diverse such like. In a word, it is a Millstone-sin and sin
of offense: and woe to him by whom offense comes. Math. 18.6, 7. Buc. loc. 17.
Althamer. in council. loc. script 12. Vid Aquin. s cunda secund^e q. 14. art. 1,
etc. And Zanch. tomo 4 lib. 1. cap. 9
But it is not a sin against the Holy Ghost, though it come near to that sin,
nothing nearer when it is not done, Animo peccandi, willingly, wilfully, and
maliciously. An^ so did Theophilact plead for St. Peter In Luc. 22.
, that he had, (...), the seed, the root of Faith was left behind. And Gregory
Apud Zanch tomo 7 de perseverant Sanctorum. In Homil. Marian. Sermon 15. Platina
Carranz. etc. Cyprian.
that some sin of Ignorance, so Paul; some of Infirmity, so Peter; and other
some out of a desire and malicious propensity to sin. To the prince of the
Apostles I may adjoyn that prince of Peace, Solomon that great one, who fell
into so great Idolatry. And Manasses who exceeded all men in abomination of
sin, yet is he afterward numbered among the friends of God. And Marcellinus the
Pope, who burnt incense, yet at the last suffered for the Faith, and Casta and
Emilius, and a world beside, who first fell, and then repented, and so
repented, that they not only obtained pardon of the Church in Faith, but the
glorious Crown of Martyrdom in heaven. Yea, I know some that tell us, how for
this very cause the Devil hasted to take Judas out of this life, In Homil
Marian. ubi supra.
least knowing that there was a way to turn to Salvation, he might by penance
recover his fall. I press it not; Cyprian.
but yet Novatus must hear will he nill he; that the Church was ever ready to
receive those which return; Her arms are open, her breasts naked, and she
cannot forget her Child, and if she could, yet I know who cannot. And
therefore, though this sin of thine be a scarlet-sin, yet will I not say to
thee as some, St. Peter to Simon Magus, si forte remittatur. Acts 8.22.
Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray to God that if it be possible thou
may be forgiven, yea I know thou will be forgiven. But thou must repent, and
do thy first work.

Canus, Bucanus, Alsted. etc.
I cannot but approve their saying, who derive Penitency from Poena, sorrow
within, and shame without; but this is not enough, it must be (...), a godly
sorrow which does cause a gracious repentance. 1 Cor 7.
Fear and grief does accompany the damned; but a religious Soul begins in
sorrow, walks on in hope, resolves on Reformation, adds wings to his
resolution, and to finish and perfect all labors to do The first works, the
works of Grace. Herman Colon^ensi ^^t. convers a peccat.
This made one define Repentance to be, An earnest, hearty, serious sorrow
(...) our sins, ^nlive^ed with the hope of pa^d^^, and are (...) with a firm
purpose of amendi^g what (...) a^^^^. Thi^ made another say that to Repent is
justitiam denuo operari. Lactantius, lib. 6. c. 24. The Book of Common Prayer
in Princip ex Mat. 3 2.
Not only to be sorry for what is done, but seriously to intend, purpose, and
live a better life, and accordingly has our Church somewhere translated
Penitency into Amendment of life. However the Rhemists, Rhem testament. in Mat.
11. sect. 3.
have found a knot in a Bulrush, and dislike what they can never amend. The
common division of Repentance is into Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction;
but many think it more common then safe, and in detestation of Auricular
Confession, or for fear the All Sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction were hereby
questioned, they cannot once endure the name of Confession or Satisfaction.

And yet the Papists make them not Essential parts but Integral; the Materials,
Council Trident sess. 14. sub Julio tertio, sess 4. Can 3
or quasi materia: Either as something of, or something belonging to
Repentance; either as parts of Penitency, or Ibid. and Council. F^orent.
acts of the Penitent; necessary either ut praecepta, or media, Council Trident
in ^atechist ad parochos, in sacrament poenitent.
as things of nature, or conducing to the perfection of Repentance. Many of
them have said no more, and for ought I see we may as much; for when no stone
is lest unmoved, and sick man-like we have tossed us from side to side, we are
still in the same place: We admit them all in some cases As for Confession to
the Priest, our Church approves and presses it Book of Common Prayer.
: indeed as B Usher in answer to the Jesuit, challenge, p 92.
Medicinal not Sacramental, and though the Keys be grown rustie yet are they
rich. But we have not now to do with any secret sin, Canus part quinta de
relict poenitent.
but with a known Capital offense. And though with the Greek Church we content
our selves oft-times with confession to God alone, yet here together with them
we do admit, approve, urge a public Exhomolegesis, open Confession and Church
discipline.

S. Thom. ex Anselmo, Satisfactio est compensatio Offensae prae teritae ad
aequalitatem justitiae.
As for Satisfaction, our intent is not to make level with the Almighty for our
sins. We know the disproportion between Man's weakness, and Gods justice. Dr.
Fulke ad 2 Cor. 2. S. 6. in Rhem. Test and against Stapleton Fortress 10.
difference.
But public offenses may not be smothered privately; and he that has given
scandal and offended the Church, must to the Church give Satisfaction. Said I
that he must? nay he will, he will willingly. He will cry ignosce pater for his
Sin, and ignosce frater for his Example. All his grief is that he did sin, and
not that he does suffer, and freely and ingeniously he will confess, That
whatsoever is laid upon him, whatsoever his penance be, either for the
humbling of himself, or for a terror unto others, it is all too little. Lib. 1,
c 9.
Irenaeus will tell you of a Woman seduced by Mark the Heretic, which did
spend her whole time in bewailing her offense, and of others which did, Ibid.
in manifesto exhomoliges^n facere, publicly acknowledge and lament their sins
and wickedness, Lib. 5 c 26.
Eusebius will tell you of an Heretical Bishop, Natalis, who clad himself in
sackcloth and ashes, falls down to the feet of the Bishop, and with a world of
sighs and tears, craves pardon, Socrates will tell you how Ecebolius for
renouncing his Faith, Lib. 3. c. 11.
lay along in the Church Porch, and cried to such as came in, Tread me, Tread
me under your feet, for I am the unsavory Salt. Lib 1. de poenitent c. 16.
And Ambrose will tell you of many who did even plow-up their face with tears,
wither their cheeks with weeping, prostrate themselves to the feet of the
passengers, and with their continual abstinence and much fasting, they made
their living bodies the very Image of Death. I might add unto all these old
Origin, In Suida, and inter sua opera post libros (...).
that Library of Learning, and Ocean of woe. But we will pass from voluntary
submission to Canonical satisfaction.

And here give me leave to say somewhat of the Laws Ecclesiastical, and
punishment inflicted by the Church, that which many ignorantly condemn, and
many most maliciously hew at. Lib de poenitent.
Tertullian will tell you, that such like Offenders as these must, pastum and
potum pura nosse. Bread and Water must be their diet, as the Prophet David
said: My tears have been my meat day and night. That they must pray, and sigh,
and weep, pray to God, humble themselves to the Priest. St. Augustine will tell
you, De mirabil. Sacrae script.
that they must never think their penance enough, they must always sorrow,
always cry peccavi, life and lamentation must end together. St. Ambrose; De
poeniten. lib. 2. cap. 1.
The more a man throws himself down by sorrow and submission, the more abject
he is in his own sight, the more accepted shall he be in the sight of God. But
this is general.

The Church did appoint certain forms of penance, according to the quality of
the offenses, and for denying the Faith, Grandem redeundi difficultatem sanxit
antiquitas, Apud Carranz cap. ^7. ejusdem Contil.
it is a Canon in the Agathon Council about a thousand years agon. Our
Forefathers (say they) did command and enjoin a bitter penance to all such as
had denied the Faith. Indeed some (as 'twas said of Novatus) would admit no
reconciliation, some would receive only once all such as fell after Baptism.
The usual practice was to enjoin a three years penance, at the least, to such
as did in time of Persecution, and against their will deny: some had their
punishment prolonged, even unto eight or nine years, or more; Carranz. in Conc.
Ancryan. Can. 6. Ibid. Can. 1.
and some were put off ad magnum diem, even till the hour of Death, or day of
Judgment. And if he were a Priest tkat fell, he lost his Orders, nor might he
ever recover his former state, but by enduring the brunt of a second
Persecution. Lib. Eccles. Hist. 7 cap. 2. tom 1. ep. 10. Pysh Alloy in
Miscellan names four sorts ex Conc Nicen. Moses and Maximus, etc. inter opera
Cyprian. tomo 1. epist. 26.
And last of all, If any were restored, either of the Laiety or otherwise, it
must be done by laying on of Hands, and Confirmation of the Bishop. And this
Eusebius calls the ancient Custom, and Cyprian, that to do otherwise were to
ruinate and not restore. Now during the time of these long appointed Penance,
some were Audientes, and might only stay the Sermon: other were Orantes, and
might be present at Prayers, but must depart when the Eucharist was to be
administered. To admit them to the Communion, was to give that which is holy to
Dogs, some some, and to press to the Altar was Domini corpus invadere. De
Lapsis. Exam. Council. Trident. part ult. de Indulgentiis.
So Cyprian; yet all this while there were Relaxations, Moderations,
Mitigations, or as the new word (after Chemnitius) has it, Indulgences from
that rigor and severity, and there was a peculiar reserved power in the R. R.
Bishop Council Ancyran Cau. 2. and 5. F Th Gavius, de contrit.
, he might either lengthen or shorten the time as he saw cause. For as one
says out of Hierom. Apud Deum non tantum valet mensura tempoporis quam
doloris. God regards not the length of the Penance, but the Contrition of
the party; not how long, but how heartily we humble our selves.

This was the Discipline of the Primitive Church, this was the remedy they did
provide against those crimson Capital offenses, that as the Orator said, 2 in
Verrem.
They might Cure not cover the wound, and labor to profit, rather then to
please the Patient. So Clerus Romanus ad Cyprianum inter ejus opera, tomo 1. ep
^.
That neither the wicked might be encouraged by their Facility, nor religious
minds disheartened by their Cruelty: and yet of the twain, it was better with
Domitius to be thought severe in punishing, then dissolute in praetermitting,
passing by the wickedness.

Thus were some strengthened in Faith, and armed against Lapses; others were
made to see the greatness of the sin, and terrified against Relapses. All were
framed, ordered, tuned to a most wished happy harmony, in the Church of God.

Reply, p. 41.
Yet Mr. Cartwright, that disturber of Sions peace, will cry out against the
Churches severity, extreme, excessive severity: and though he somewhere tells
us, That Murderers, Adulterers, and Incestuous persons must die the death; the
Magistrate cannot save them (such is this mild Moses's mercy toward those) yet
here pardon, Ibid. p. 36.
pardon, pardon. And lest he might seem any way to favor the proceedings of
the Roman Church, though when she was younger by fourteen hundred years, then
now she is; Ibid. p. 149.
He tells you, That if Offenders be not meet to receive the holy Sacrament of
the Supper, they are not meet to hear the Word of God, they are not meet to be
partakers of the Prayers of the Church; and if they be for one, they are also
for the other. But this is he who thinks it more safe for us to conform our
indifferent Ceremonies to the Turks, Ibid page 131. Calvin. Institut. lib. 3.
cap. 3. sect. 16. Ibid lib. 4. ^. 12. sect 8.
which are afar off, than to the Papists, which are so near. Indeed his Master
tells us, That the Church did use too much rigor: And would know, Si Deus tam
benignus est, ut quid Sacerdos ejus austerus vult videri? God (says he) is
merciful and gracious, why should his Priest be so austere and rigorous? Ibid.
lib. 3. c. 4. sect. 10. Art. 33.
And yet Calvin here in our case, will have the Sinner yield sufficient
testimony of his sorrow, That the scandal which the offender has given, may be
obliterated and taken away. And it must be palam in Templo: and so does our
Church teach, The Offender must be openly reconciled by Penance.

Indeed we might be as unreasonably plausible as other some are, and with those
Hesterni, as Tertullian calls Praxeas, Cyprian. tomo 1. epist. 10. Prove. 22.28.
we might remove the ancient bounds which our Fathers have set. We might be as
unhappily, undiscreetly merciful as Foelicissimus in Cyprian, or another, if it
be true, Tom 1. ep 40. lib. 6. cap. 9.
in Socrates; we might after a welcome-home, admit them to the Church and
Sacraments, Cyprian. de lapsis.
but it would prove a worse persecution then the first; and we should call them
A medela vulneris, Idem tomo 1. ep st. ^^. Sermon de Benedicto Abbate.
it were the way to kill outright, and not to cure the disease. Quae nimis
propere minus prospere The words are Bernards, but it is a Proverb of our own:
More haste than good speed. This made some Holy men of old pray; That those
which had fallen, might know and acknowledge the greatness of their fall, that
so they might learn non momentaneam neque praeproperam desiderare medicinam.
That they might with all fearful humbleness expect, Clerus Romanus ad Cyprianum
inter ejus opera tomo 1. epist. 31.
and not audaciously presume a pardon. But to soder those rents, to daub the
breach with untempered mortar, to incarnate on the splintred bones, to cry
peace, peace, in a present peril, and the greatest danger; what is this else,
but to precipitate and plung a poor distressed Soul into a more perplexed case
and desperate disease? It is a terrible lenity, as says St. Augustine;
Terribilis lenitas, blanda pernicies, stulta misericordia. Bern ser. 24. super
Cantica.
a courteous mischief, as St. Cyprian; a foolish pity, as St. Bernard:
Misericordiam hanc ego nolo: God keep all poor sin-sick-souls from such
Physicians. Let the righteous rather smite me friendly, and reprove me; but let
not their precious balms break my head. Let me know my danger, and whence I am
fallen, that I may repent, and do the first works.

If much be remitted of the ancient severity, as we see there is, and the
punishment be much less then those primitive Times did usually inflict: it is
not because the Sin is now less, or the Compassion of the Faithful greater; for
that ancient discipline is to be wished for again, but these delicate Times
will not suffer it. And the Church is forced to condescend to the weakness of
her Children. Church-book ante Comminat. Tertul de poenitent. cap. 1.
Many men are become pudoris magis memores quam salutis. They will rather
hazard the loss of Heaven, than endure disgrace (so they account it) on earth.

And this is the very cause why many, and as I am informed, many hundreds are
Musmans in Turkey, and Christians at home; doffing their Religion as they do
their Clothes, and keeping a Conscience for every Harbor where they shall put
in. And those Apostates and circumcised Renegadoes, think they have discharged
their Conscience wondrous well, if they can Return, and (the Fact unknown) make
profession of their first Faith. These men are Cowards, and flexible before the
fall; careless and obstinate after it: but what good will it do them, says
Lactantius, Bern. in Psalm. Qui habitat. sermon. 11. l. 6. c. 24.
non habere conscium, and habere conscientiam? To have no witness without, and
one within? To hide their sins from men, and to appear as they are to the
righteous Judge, from whose eyes nothing is hid, nothing is secret? To be
baptized with Simon Magus, and yet live in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity? Cyprian. de lapsis.
These are those cursed wretches to whom proprius interitus satis non fuit: who
will not perish alone, but both by their example, and their exhortation, draw
others into the same pit of perdition also; who do add sin to sin, and multiply
and aggravate their offenses, by hiding, denying, excusing, translating sin. So
that they may be Men here, they care not to be Devils afterward. If any such be
here who has received the Mark of the Beast, and lives unknown; yet for Gods
sake, for his own sake, for that sweet Name by which he is named the Name of
Christ: by the hope of Heaven, by the fear of Hell; by his Friends on Earth,
and the holy Angels in Heaven, who joy at the Conversion of a sinner; by
whatsoever is dearest unto him, Gregory Nyssen in the end of his Homil. of
Repentance. Si vis curam, agnosce languorem. P. Chrysolog. sermon. 30.
and nothing should be dearer than his Soul: I shall, I do beseech such an one
to be merciful to his own life. (...), etc. Get thee to some learned Priest,
open thy grief to the Physician of thy Soul: He will compassionate thy case
with a fatherly affection: show unto him without blushing, those secret sores
of thine: and he will (or be he branded for ever with the ignominy of
Irregularity) he will save thy credit, and salve thy wound. Credit? alas, alas,
What Is Credit if the Soul must perish? or what is Reputation, which cannot
compass one drop of water to cool a flaming tongue?

And you whom God suffered to fall, and yet of his infinite mercy vouchsafed
graciously to bring home, not only to your Country and Kindred, but to the
profession of your first Faith, and to the Church and Sacraments again; Let me
say to you (but in a better hour) as sometime Joshua to Achan; Give glory to
God, sing praises to him who has delivered your Soul from the nethermost Hell:
Magnify him for his unspeakable goodness and mercy toward you: labor not
either to cover, or lessen your offense.

When I think upon your Turkish Attire, that Emblem of Apostasy, and witness
of your woeful fall; I do remember Adam and his fig-leave Breeches; they could
neither conceal his shame, nor cover his nakedness. I do think upon David clad
in Saul's Armor, 1 Samuel 17.
and his helmet of Brass: I cannot go with these says David: How could you
hope in this unsanctified habit to attain Heaven? how could you, clad in this
unchristian weed; how could you but with horror and astonishment think on the
white-Robe of the innocent Martyrs which you had lost? Revel 6.1^
How could you go in these rewards of Iniquity, and guerdons of Apostasy? and
with what face could you behold your self and others?

I do assure my self, the torments you endured, were grievous, and the hope for
your delivery, was little or none: but Seneca puts it down for an Axiom; That a
man cannot be much grieved, and long together; and that the pains will be
either sufferable, or short: if it be not always so. Yet what says Cicero of
Trebonius miserably slain by Dolobella? Ep. 97. Philip. de^^ma.
Sickness does often times punish many of us here, as much and much more, then
stripes could torment you there. However the longest day has a night, and the
Torments and Tormentors cannot last for ever: but Montes uruntur and durant.
Tertul. 76.
Etna and Vesuvius burn and continue. We should think upon the pains of Hell
which last for ever.

I know you were young; so was Daniel and the three Children: Eusebius. lib. 6. c
40. Gr 41. Eusebius. lib. 5. ca. 1. Fox Zuinger.
so were Dioscorus the Confessor, and Ponticus the Martyr: add (if you please)
our English Mekins, who all at fifteen years of Age endured manfully whatsoever
the fury of the Persecutors pleased to inflict upon them. I might adjoyn to
these some of ten years, old, and Vitus of seven. And (though we call them the
weaker Sex) yet has the Church her Women-Martyrs, not a few, who have endured
as courageously as ever any then did. Witness St. Agnes at 12 years old;
Ambrose de virgin. lib. 1.
Cecilia, Agatha, and a world besides.

In a word, Youth and Torments, and whatever else may be alleged, do somewhat
lessen and extenuate the sin, but they cannot clear the Conscience We are bound
without fainting to resist unto the death

I would be loath to break a bruised Reed, or add affliction to affliction. Let
not what is said or done, encourage any of you to rejoice in your Neighbors
fal^, nor triumph in his misery. Far be all unchristian upbr^idings,
reproaches, twictings, from your Christian hearts; but as St. Paul said of
Onesimus; Receive him as a beloved Brother for ever, and do it with the spirit
of meekness, considering your selves, lest you also be tempted. God forbid that
any of you should grieve his Soul, Gal. 6.1. Illo hodie ego cras, so ^lle apud
Ber^ de resurrect. Dom. sermon. 2.
for whose return the Angels do rejoice in Heaven. Prophets, Patriarchs,
Apostles, Angels, have fallen, and who is he that is assured of his strength?
or who can say, He shall stand fast for ever? Though you traffic not for
Turkey, yet may you be Apostata's at home, Tit. 1.16. 1 Timothy 5.8.
denying in deeds, and worse than Infidels.

But you that go down to the Sea in Ships, and occupy your business in great
Waters (for the State of the World cannot stand without Buying and Selling,
Traffic and Transportation) what shall I say of you? Pittacus reckons you
neither amongst the dead, nor the living. The Grave is always open before your
face, and but the thickness of an inch or twain that keeps you from it: One
breath, flaw, gust, may end your voyage. But if Paul escape drowning, yet he
sees a Viper on the shore; and if all dangers of the Sea quit you, yet a
mischief from the Land may overtake you. That African Monster, to which so many
poor Souls have been made a prey: The Turk (which God forbid) may bring you
under his Lee: And as our Savior said of Peter, John 21.18.
you shall stretch forth your hands, and he shall gird you, and lead you
whither you would not. If such a calamity should ever befall any of you, yet
remember your first love, the God of love, your blessed Savior: 1 T m. 1.
fight a good fight, keeping faith and a good Conscience. So shall Christ hear
when you call, and shall deliver you in the needful time of trouble: He shall
bring you back unto your home in safety; and as you have confessed him before
men, so shall he confess you before his Father which is in Heaven.

The first works come now in the last place to be spoken of; this is one of the
lissoms or twists of that cord which will hardly be broken. Remember, repent,
and do the first works. Eecles. 4.12.
Works must be one, or it will never hold, but add them, and you shall make St.
Bernards Rope; Sermon. 16. in Cantica.
strong enough to draw Souls out of the Devil's Goal. I should here tell this
poor penitent, what one tells the Citizens of Luca. P. Martyr.
It behooves him to make good what he has formerly and faintingly denied. He
must cast off his barbarous Barbarian habit, and putting on a Christian
resolution, he must boldly confess his Savior in the same place, where he did
first deny him; or because Durus est hic sermo, as they say in the 6. of St.
John, This is an hard saying; and it is indeed, and requires a special
fortitude and most heavenly resolution: and non omnes capiunt; it must be given
them from above: yet in the whole course of his life, let his repentance be
made manifest, and let him ingrave in his heart those words of the Apostle,
(...) Nor death, Romans 8.38, 39.
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor Turk, nor Atheist, nor any other
Creature, shall be able to separate him from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

And I should say somewhat of the Ephesians of them, and to them; for I fear me
they have a populous posterity, even in our own Land. Heb 11 6. Jam. 2.17.
Works without Faith are unprofitable; and Faith without Works is dead: nor
will every work serve, but there must be Romans 12.
fervency in prayer, 2 Cor. 9.7.
cheerfulness in giving; a Titus 3 1.
promptness, Coloss. 1 10.
fruitfulness, and an 1 Cor. 15. ult.
abounding in every good work: 1 Cor. 9.26. Jam. 1.22.
so run, so fight, SPERO MELIORA must be your Motto. Do what you can, yet know
you can never do enough. Lip-Religion does but set an edge upon Gods anger, and
make man the more inexcusable; and therefore see that ye be Doers of the Word,
and not Hearers only, deceiving your selves: And so Hear, so Do, as men that
strive for the Mastery: they do it, 1 Cor. 9.25.
as the Apostle says, to obtain a corruptible Crown; and the height of their
hopes is but unius herae hilaris insania: I went by, and lo they were gone;
Psalm 37 37. In Homil. Marian. sermon. 16.
but you shall escape that strange, dark, durable fire of Hell, where the worm
dies not; and shall be received into your Masters joy; into the blessed
fellowship of Saints and Angels, into the glorious liberty of other the Sons of
God: as Children, Heirs, Coheirs with Christ, you shall be glorified with him.
To whom be ascribed all Honor, glory, power and praise for ever, AMEN.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral OF Mr. Humphry Sydenham.
GOD be merciful to me a Sinner. Here Is my (...) and (...) This is my Wish;
this is my Prayer; and this must be my Text, written in the 18. Chapter of St
Luke and 13. Verse, GOD be merciful to me a Sinner. This is the last Legacy of
a dy^^ (...) commending his Soul to God, and (...) to the Earth; from both
which both came. This is the Vltimum Vale of a penitent Christian, leaving
behind him a memorial of his Faith, and an Example for all Believers. This
Task, and this Text, were committed and commended unto me by that Mouth which
has now breathed his last, whiles in the conflict it had with Sin and Death,
amongst many other gracious Ejaculations it shed forth this, which you have now
both heard and read: God be merciful to me a Sinner.

Eccles. 4.12.
We are bound, Triplici funiculo qui difficile rumpitur: we are laden with the
weight of Sins; sins of Impiety against God, sins of Iniquity against our
Neighbor, and sins of Impurity against our selves: And therefore O wretched
men that we are, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver us from the body of this death? But God has promised,
Christ has purchased, the Prophets and Apostles all have preached Remission
and forgiveness to the Penitent. And therefore, Agite poenitentiam, this was
the first lesson John the Baptist taught, Math 3.2. This was the text to our
Saviors first Sermon, Math. 4.17. And this is the second Means God has
afforded the Sinner to lay hold on and, climb up by unto the Throne of Grace.
Repentance, Li^. 4. Insti^. ^. 19. S. 17.
says St. Hierom, is Secunda tabula post naufragium. Mr. Calvin does somewhere
nibble at this. But there is a double shipwreck: One traduced, the other
perpetrated; one transmitted, the other committed: One as we are in Old Adam,
the other as Old Adam is in us. Baptism is Tabula prima, and relieveth us
against the first; and Penitency is Secunda, and restores us after the second.
But as Aliena praevaricatio, first enthralled us, first plunged us; so Aliena
justitia, must bear us up amidst those waves, and bring us out, and set us
free. And therefore discerning our own Inability, we disclaim our selves, and
Peccavi is our only plea. Peccavi with the Prodigal, or Miserere with the
Publican in my Text. God be merciful to me a sinner.

Here Is a gracious and acceptable Text, pleasing to GOD: A piercing and
winnowing Text, differencing Men: A cutting and reproving Text, unmasking
Monsters. Monsters who affect to spuddle in the dung of infirm Offenders, and
preventing Gods secret Counsels, sit down in Judgment, and dethrone their
Maker, justifying themselves and condemning others; forgetting that in the 7.
of Matthew, Judge not; but taking up the first stone to cast at the Adulterous
woman, Joh 8.

My Text is a Prayer, a Prayer short and sweet, made by a Publicane, and
directed to God. He hops not to be heard, More Ethnicorum, for his much
babbling, Mat. 6.7.
but petitioneth much comfort in few words. It contains in brief his
Heaviness, and his Hope.

Me a sinner -- Here Is his Confusion.

Deus miserere -- Here Is his Consolation.

A sinner -- yet Miserere.

No despairing, no presumptuous sinner.

Here Is the Physician -- Here Is the Patient.

Here Is the Soar -- and Here Is the Salve.

The Physician -- is GOD.

The Patient -- the Publicane.

The Soar -- is Sin.

The Salve -- is Mercy.

God be merciful, etc.

1. GOD: Ergo potens est. He needs not to be rouzed up with Baal, nor taken up
with Dagon, nor assisted with Bell. He only is, and is All-sufficient of
himself. He can. 2. Be merciful: Its His property to be merciful, and to
forgive. Ergo, Vult: He can, and He will. 3. To me: What were the whole World
to me if my Soul must perish? and therefore To me. God be merciful to me who do
humbly crave it. 4. To me a sinner: A sinner; I confess it; but there are Micae
Catellis, there are Crumbs for Dogs. And therefore, GOD be merciful to me A
sinner. 1. Again: Many dig unto themselves dry pits, which will hold no water.
Petitis a quibus dari non potest, Apol. c. 29.
praeterito eo in cujus potestate est, as says Tertullian: Therefore GOD. 2.
Many ask and receive not, because they ask amiss; like those Sons of Thunder,
in the 9. of Luke: Therefore God be merciful. 3. And now, because Amor omnis
incipit a seipso: and very Nature teaches every thing to affect and desire its
own good: Therefore To me. God be merciful to me. 4. Last of all: God resists
the proud, and boasting Pharisees are rejected. He that fails in one
Commandment, in one point of the Commandment, is guilty of all: James 2.10.
and he that kept all, yet lacked one thing, Math. 19.21. When we have done all
we can do, yet shall we do too little: And he that does best is but a Servant
unprofitable. Therefore, To me a sinner. GOD be merciful to me a sinner.

1. Thus lie the Words, and thus lie they in their own order to be handled: and
first for the Physician, that Shepherd and Bishop of our Sculs, as St. Peter
calls him: GOD. 1 Ep. 2.25.
There are two ways especially by which miserable man does dishonor his
Maker, and rob him of his Glory. The one is by taking from, the other is by
adding to the Sacred Deity. Of the first are those Irreligiosi, who strike at
the Divine Majesty, and either acknowledge none, or such an One as, by
dis^bling Him, they m^ke none. Of the second are those Superstitiosi, who (such
is their Holiness) acknowledge a God, yet afford him (for which they shall
never receive th nke) certain Coadjutors: this same Deos populares, or Mi^orum
gentium: Angels, or Saint, or Stocks, or what they most fancy, and unto these
in all Necessities do these miserable wretches address themselves. Of the first
sort was Diagoras, and he flatly denies a God: secondly Protagoras, and he is
doubtful and makes a question whether there be a God: thirdly, I add unto these
both another as bad as both, David's Fool, Dixit insipiens in cord: Psalm. 14.
and 88.
The fool has said in his heart there is no God. This is some religious
outside (of which, God help, the World is too full in these days) who together
with his Dog comes to the Church, and perchance dares stare the Preacher in the
face. He will tell you there is a God, and a Religion, after which that God is
to be worshipped; and perchance he shall talk and tumble out as much Divinity
as may win him the Name and Reputation of a Zealous Gentleman: but Dixit in
cord all this while. He can distinguish of Quota pars to rob the Church: And
as the Jews could plead a Law to put Christ to death; Joh. 19.7.
We have a Law, and by our law he ought to die: so can he find Law to manacle
those hands which reach to him the Blessed Sacrament, and find a Law to
dishonor those the Sacred Writ pronounced worthy of double Honor. 1 Timothy 5.
As much will he do by Fatherless or Widows, or ought else; accounting
(whatsoever his pretenses be) (...). 1 Timothy 6.
His Gain is his Godliness, and his Revenues his Religion.

After this Fellow comes there in another, and he Confesses, and with halting-
Agrip^a is half-perswaded of the matter. His heart tells him there is a God:
But what Eli^haz casts in Jobs teeth, Epicure-like he proposes to himself;
That God, walking in the circle of Heaven, cannot through the thick Clouds see
our misdoings. And therefore after his Master Ennius he concludes, Ego Deum
esse genus semper dixi and dicam coelitum, -- sed eos non curare --: Either for
their Greatness they may not, or for their Goodness they will not, behold the
things that are done here beneath upon the Earth. His Gods are Gods upon the
Mountains, not in the Valleys; Gods in Heaven, and not in Earth. Gods only
somewhere, and therefore no where. Gods so confined to places, and Cases, as he
is yet to seek for his Religion. And therefore with the Samaritans, 2 Kings 17.
He dares be of any or of all Religions; yet Lions taught them a lesson how to
fear God: and that roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. will teach him when it is too late
to acknowledge Gods Providence. In a word, to him and all the rest, I say no
more but what Michaiah sometime did to Zidchiah: The day is at hand, and you
shall see in that day, when you shall go from Chamber to Chamber to hide you;
when you shall say to the Mountains fall on us, and to the Hills cover us. You
shall see there is a GOD who beholds all that is done here beneath upon the
Earth: Bern.
You shall see there is a GOD too great to be terrified, too wise to be
deceived, too Just to be corrupted; when your selves against your selves shall
be forced to confess, Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous, doubtless
there is a God that judges the Earth Now after Irreligion steps forth
Superstition, who believes a God, and a Righteous God; yet with Jacobs, How
should it, has not yet learnt to put away those Deos alienos, those strange
Gods, other Gods, no gods, which He and his Father worshipped. He has found
out for every Town, and every Trade, and every Sickness, and every Any thing, a
god, proper and peculiar to that purpose he would employ him in. St. Gallus
shall keep his Geese, St. Wendolin his Sheep, St. Eulogie his Horses, St.
Anthony his Piggs. One is good for the Toothache, another for the Plague: One
is for the Mariner, another for the Tanner, etc. In a word, He has his Angelos
Tutelares, and his Sanctos Tutelares; and nothing makes me more wonder, then
that so many dear Friends will after all this suffer his poor Soul to fry in
Purgatory. Well, I say no more but with the Apostle 1 Cor. 8. Though there be
that are called Gods, whether in Heaven or in Earth (as there be many Gods, and
many Lords) yet unto us there is but one GOD, which is the Father, of whom are
all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things,
and we by him. But every man has not knowledge; the Publican had, and
therefore does he invocate God alone: GOD be merciful to me a sinner.

And indeed, thus must He, thus must all do; whether we regard his Mercy or his
Justice: the favors he has bestowed on us, or the punishments he may inflict
upon us. This made David somewhere cry out, Tibi soli peccavi: it is in that
penitential Psalm of his after his Murder and Adultery; Against Thee only have
I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. Bathsheba is dishonored, Vriah is
murdered, David's posterity disgraced, the whole Realm endangered; yet Tibi
soli, Against Thee only have I sinned. O my God, though my Sins be never so
many, never so bloody, never so hellish, never so execrable; yet Tibi soli
peccavi: The Sin against Thee alone is more than all the rest; more many ways,
more infinitely. I have offended Thee my God, my good and gracious God, I have
offended Thee, who might justly expect much of me, to whom thou have given
much. Thy eyes cannot behold Vanity, and lo thou spiest out all my ways. I
could blear others Eyes, Thine I cannot: For thou, O Lord, know the very
Thoughts of my heart long before. Thou have, -- (...). Homer.
Thou art, Oculus ille insopitus, Thy Eyes will neither slumber nor sleep: but
every Creature is manifest in thy sight, Heb. 4.
and all things are naked and open unto thy Eyes, with whom we have to do.

(...). Hesiod.
And therefore Deus, quasi (...), thereby intimating that Fear and Reverence
due to so infinite a Majesty; of whom the Prophet David somewhere says, Psalm,
34.9.22.23.35.8.
Fear the Lord all his Saints, fear him all ye seed of Israel. And in another
place, Let all the Earth fear the Lord: Let all the World fear him.

But I must look a while from the Physician to his Physic, from GOD to his
Attribute, which is MERCY. God be Merciful.

2. This is not so light a thing, as many may suppose, to cry for Mercy. Many
palliate their sins, hide them, lessen them, deny them, justify them, and
therefore Healthy as they are, they need no Physician. Adam had not learnt this
lesson, when he tranferred the fault on Eve; nor Eve when she laid it on the
Serpent; nor Saul in that expedition against Amaleck, 1 Samuel 15. nor the Jews
when they put their trust in Neighbor Nations Jer. 2.35 nor Jews nor
Christians. How many spoil God of his Tithes and Offerings, and yet stricken
with a most palpable Egyptian darknes^, they can see nothing? Yea, they cry out
with those in Malachy, Wherein have we spoiled thee? How many increase their
Me^ns to maintain in their Pride? wrack their Tenants (...) their Rents, grind
their poor Neig^^^^^ and yet flatter themselves with Peace Peace. How many
persecute God. (...) ^d Servants causlessly, and yet (O st^^^^^^um!) think they
do God good service? How many justify their miserable vvretched, sordid
Covetousness with the Propriety of their Goods? As their Goods are their own,
they came lawfully by them, and they may lawfully keep them: To whom, Bernard
makes this short and sharp answer; Enimvero non pascetis in cruce corvos:
Indeed, says he, so you may escape the Gallows. Dives could say as much as
you, but this is no privilege nor plea against Hell: No, no, these all must
learn another Lesson of our Publican, to cry, God be merciful, and that
speedily too, while they may be heard, or else they will howl with Dives in
Hell fire, Father Abraham be merciful, when 'twill be too late.

The Pharisee here in this Chapter is one of this Crew, and yet why should I do
the Pharisee wrong? His whole life may be a School of Virtue to these Villains.
But the Pharisee, in his gesture insolent, in his thoughts proud, in all
malicious; because he was not sicut caeteri, absent; nor sicut hic, present;
all, all in comparison of himself are set at naught, because he had not learnt
this Lesson of Humility, and began not his Devotions with miserere. He made
Shipwreck (says Chrysostom) in the Harbor, and lost the rich reward of a
laborious voyage. This was not to do what he came for, (as St. Augustine said)
he went up to pray, this was not to pray, but to praise himself: Such is thy
case, whosoever thou be, that hear me and imitatest him: Be thy Honors
never so great, nay be thy Virtues never so great: Be thy Honor anciente, then
the Normans and let thy good Deeds tell the hours of the day; yet if thou ^o
magnum quid de te sentire, Chrysostom st.
if thou presume on ought else, but the Arm of Mercy to bear thee up, down down
thou tumblest with Icarus from the very Gate of Heaven to the nether most Hell.

Look and learn: In comes the Publican, and he comes to pray, and pray he did,
and he stands afar off, and hangs down his head, and he beats his breast, that
Shop of sin wherein 'twas first hammered, and got its being: He is swollen as
big with sorrow, as the Pharisee is with pride, at last out comes this
Miserere, God be merciful. Breve verbum (as St. Augustine said of Peccavi)
Breve verbum, sed portas aperit Paradisi: His words were few, but sorcible; not
many, but effectual, projicit ampullas. Here Is no ago gratias but miserere: If
thou O Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may
abide it? but there is Mercy with thee, and therefore, O Lord, be merciful.

Herein (says he) lies my hope, Ego perdidi quod erat filii, ille quod patris
est non amisit; (so Chrysologus of the prodigal) I am unworthy to look up, but
God looks down, I dare not go, but God calls me; I am a sinner, but he tells me
redire vult impium, non perire: If I will turn, he will forgive. His Mercys is
that Ocean, which will quite quench the fire of my sins, be they never so
many, or never so great: And he has promised to send into the World that
immaculate Lamb, who by his blood shall take away the sins of the World;
Scultet.
and therefore (...) propter futurum (...) filii^ui, forgive me even for his
sake whom I expect and long for: God be merciful.

Again Miserere, not Retribue. Here Is no Merita, or propter me, but guilty,
guilty; If thou O Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord
who may abide it? No, no, as Daniel said in the 9 Chapter, O Lord unto us
appertains open shame, but unto thee compassion and forgiveness: If the best
of our works should be weighed in Baltashers balance, they will be found too
light; and therefore nothing can do us good, nothing can stand in the gap,
nothing can salve our inveterate Canker, but only Mercy; nay we cannot beg for
that neither but it must be Gratia illius, Ambros.
qui sedet in th^ono gratiae, it must be Gods only Mercy and Grace, that gives
us Grace to cry for Mercy: wherefore with the Apostle in the 4. of Hebr. 16.
Let us go boldly unto the throne of Grace, that we may receive mercy, and find
Grace to help in time of need: why should we fear? Tul. 2. de not. deor.
Jupiter a majoribus nostris dicitur optimus maximus (says a Heathen) and
quidem ante optimus quam maximus: God is good and great, but good before great,
and merciful before powerful; his Mercy is above all his works; he has put his
Bow in the Clouds, but it is a Bow without an Arrow, and his Mercy shows it self
even amidst, and above his Justice: Let us therefore draw near, and open our
grief; let us humble our selves and acknowledge our wretchedness: Tam pater
n^mo, tam pius nemo, Tertul,
as a father pitieth his own children so is the Lord merciful. Psa 103.13. And
if a Mother can forget her child, yet God will not. I^ai. 49.15. When father
and mother and all forsake us, the Lord takes us up. Psalm. 27.12. Wherefore
let us go, and let us go boldly with our Publican unto the Throne of Grace: And
let every faithful Soul apply those gracious promises to himself, and say Lord
be merciful unto me: which is the third thing to be handled.

3. The Publican was an Officer among the Romans, a Collector or Receptor of
those taxes, which were laid on other Nations subject to the Roman Empire. They
were Homines honestissimi and ornatissimi, as the Orator says, in his Oration
pro Lege Manilia: Men of worship and good esteem, yea in his defense of
Plancius, Flos Equitum Romanorum, etc. They were the very flower of the
Gentry, the Ornament of the City, and the very strength of the Commonwealth:
Such an one was the Proto-Evangelist St. Matthew, and Zachaeus in the next
Chapter, nay he was (...): Such a One (if I mistake not) as was called
Decumanus, in 2. contra Verrem: An Officer over those Officers: now whether
this was Zachaeus, or another besides Zachaeus, I cannot say. He was a Publican
and his prayer was, Lord be merciful unto me.

In the 9th. Verse of this Chapter it is said, That the Pharisees trust in
themselves, that they are just; not so I (says he) nihil mihi arrogo, I crave
Mercys, I will not speak of Corah and Dathan those wretched Rebels; nor of that
poor man, whose stick gathering, or rather Sabbath breaking was punished with
so exemplary a death: No, nor of Sodom and Gomor those Registers of thy
displeasure, nor yet of that pillar of Salt, that (...) (as Nazianz. calls it,)
which proclaims to all passengers thy Justice; yet each of these is enough to
strike terror into the flinty heart of the most obdurate and benumbed sinner:
But O my God thou did destroy a whole world for their vvickednes^: Thou
gave a whole Nation into Captivity: Meek Moses and holy Aaron were in thy
displeasure kept out of that wished for Land of promise: David a man after thy
own heart, felt thy fury: And thou would not spare Coniah, though he were
the Signet of thy Right hand. And whither then shall I turn? vvhither shall I
look? vvhither shall I run? O God be merciful unto me.

It is most true; I am not summoned to give up my account, and, for ought I
know, I may live many fair years, and take these dumpish, melancholy, hateful
cogitations into my consideration at my best leisure: But I know not how, There
is something within me troubles me: Vt furiae, sic meae mihi recurrunt
injuriae, A thing they call Conscience does bear witness against me, and my own
thoughts are ever accusing or excusing, it is so, it is so.

Juven.
-- Prima est haec ultio quod se
Judice nemo nocens absolvitur --
But I am rich and vvealthy, why may I not then say to my Soul, Soul take thy
ease? surely, me thinks, 'twere not much amiss; but I have read In Solomon's
Proverb. 23.5 That Riches have wings and will fly from us, or we shall be taken
away from them. I was told of late by one, Hor.
Linquenda tellus, and domus and placens
Vxor; neque harum quas colis arborum
Te praeter invisas Cupressos
Vlla brevem Dominum sequetur.
I must leave all behind me Lands and Houses and Wife, and all; and of all my
Groves and Gardens I shall have nothing but a few boughs or flowers to
besprinkle my Grave. Nay there died the other day ('it is before in the 16.
Chapter) there died a noble Gentleman and a gallant House keeper, great Dives
that was clothed in purple and fine Linen, and fared delicately every day:
And, they say, that now in Hell he is no more regarded then the poorest slave,
or most debauched Rascal in all the world, yea he cannot get one drop of water
to cool his tongue. And therefore I shall never forget what I was taught of
late, Luke 6.
Woe be to you rich men, for you have received your consolation: And therefore,
my prayer shall ever be G^d be merciful unto me.

It Is true, I am in health, able to go to Church, able to go up to Church, at
the 10th. verse.) But what is health? To day a Man, to morrow none: To day
well, to morrow dead; I am in Authority; but this is as uncertain as Health or
Life: for 'twill enter into no Covenant, but be gone at his own pleasure;
besides they say potentes potenter, in the 6th. of Wisd. and 8th. ver. That
mighty men shall be mightily punished, and the greater we are, the greater our
account must be: Indeed, I am any thing befriended of Caesar, favored at
Court, feared at home, I am any thing, yet am I nothing, Vanitas Vanitatum, and
omnia Vanitas: Vanity, Vanity, and all is Vanity; and therefore, God be
merciful unto me

Surely these are the words of great Humility, God be merciful unto Me: He
says not To Us, to Us Sinners; but to Me: What have I to do with other men?
They are all just and righteous in comparison of me; and therefore to Me, not
disclaiming that mutual bond or debt of praying one for another, but
acknowledging himself unworthy to be ranked together with others. I see here
before mines eyes a famous Pharisee, and one who has done many good works,
and lives that strict life (...) (read Act. 26.8.) a strict and rigorous kind
or life, Act. 26 5.
his works are many and manifest: But what have I done? What have I to boast
of? An Exactor, a Briber, a merciless Oppressor^, but God be merciful to me a
sinner. This is the last point of my Text, and to be considered.

4. A Sinner, alas I am a Sinner, not only Theologically, but Philosophically
also; I have gotten the very habit of Sinning: My Sins increase, and a^ with
many little brooks into one River I overflow the Banks; and therefore mihi
peccatori: I know nothing in my self worthy the name of a Man: I am not worthy
to be called thy Son, my fittest Title is the fowlness of my life, I am a
Sinner, totus peccator, I am sold under Sin; if I had any thing whereof to
boast timeo tamen omnia dixit, I may have too well a vveening of my self, and
if I could say Nihil mihi conscius sum, which alas, alas, is quite contrary;
Chrysol. Job. 25. Isai. 64.
yet could I not thereby be justified: No, no Moses dubitat Aaron deviat, and
the Saints, the Stars themselves are impure in thy sight: But as for me, I am
all of me an unclean thing, and all my righteousness is as a fi^thy clout.
Moses rod in his hand was a rod, but when he cast it from him it became a
Serpent; while I lay slumbring in my sins, and delighted me in my wickedness,
'twas the Rod in Moses's hand, I thought all was well, but now I hate them, I
fly them, they are Serpents, and I shake at the very sight of them. So a
Sinner, but a repenting Sinner. He knew the way to Remission and Forgiveness
was by Submission and Acknowledgment: But to ask pardon for his sins, and yet
to lie vvallowing in his sins, would avail nothing, or if avail to his f^rther
Condemnation: And therefore he will not with the Dog to his vomit again; but
either with St. Matthew he forsook the Telonium, and came not to his place of
Receipts again, or if he did, 'twas but to make friends of his unrighteous
Mammon, and either he did restore, or Dispersit, dedit pauperibus: You know
Zachaeus course in the next Chapter of Giving, and of Giving back too. And then
shall Zachaeus be the heir of Salvation, then shall he be the child of Abraham.

Take him as a Publican, and I will not except as much as Sicily with the
Orator; 2. In Verrem,
but all the World will hate him: But take him as our Publican, an humble
penitent Publican, and the God of all the World will love him, will call him,
will dine with him: He shall no sooner say with David, I have sinned; but he
shall hear how God has put away his sins: He shall no sooner say, God be
merciful to me a Sinner, but he shall obtain mercy.

This is to agree with thine Adversary quickly, while thou art in the way with
him: This is not to post off Repentance from day to day, and slip that
opportunity which can never be recovered: Remember that of our blessed
Savior, in the 9th. of John, Nox venit, etc. The night comes, when no Man can
work any more: I must work the works of him that sent me while it is day. O my
Christ! While it is day? Can the day fail thee that made it? What shall then
become of us? I am sure the day may, the day will fail us, if we embrace not
proferred Grace: The time will come when there shall be no longer time; believe
him that has sworn it in the 10th. of the Revelat. No longer time to repent
in; no longer time for Reconciliation: Heb. 12.
But Esau shall be rejected though he beg the blessi^g with tea^: And many
shall strive to enter in at the straight g^te, which shall not be able. This is
the ju^t Judgment of God, says a father, ut moriens obliviscatur sui qui
vivens oblitus est Dei, He that thinks not upon God in his life, does commonly
forget God and himself at his death. O therefore, Hesiod.
-- (...): It Is no bad Counsel the Poet gives, make your Nests, build your
Houses, Summer will not last for ever. Set thy house in order, set thy self in
order, this seasonable time and opportunity will not last for ever. Thy
clothes wear, thy buildings vvear, Iron vvears, Time vvears, 2 Reg. 18.
and do thou stand at a stay? No, no, I have read of Asahel, 2. Sam. 2, that
could run as fast as a wild Deer, yet could he not run from Death: Of
Senacherib, that overcame the God of Hamah, and the God of Arpad, and so forth,
God after God; yet Diaboli conjux the Devils Wife (so Chrysologus calls death)
could easily overcome him. Ser. 118.
I have read of one who dined with the King to day, and ere night was hanged by
the Kings command, Est. 7. And what should I speak of Sesost^is Chariot? Of
great Bajazet led about by Tamberlane in a Cage? Of Valerianus the somet^me
Emperor of Rome, used as footstool for Sapor the Persian, to get to horse by?
All proclaim the mut^bility of the Creature, the inconstancy of the world, the
uncertainty of this life, and the unavoidableness of Death; so does the tallest
Cedar, and the strongest Oak, which though they were never so long in growing,
yet are often times felled in an hour.

And now what follows, unless God be merciful to the sinner? Let St. Gregory
tell thee momentaneum est quod delectat, aeternum quod cruciat. Thy joys
vanish, as if they had never been: Thy pleasures go before thee to the Grave:
Thy Executors triumph in the goods thou leavest behind thee: Thy friends Si
modo de multis unus and alter erit. Thy Friends can do thee no good: And for
thy Sin Non potes avelli simul hinc simul ibimus inquit: O that Companion worse
then Death! 'twill never depart from thee, but hangs fast by that Hangman of
thine, thy Conscience, which together with the Fiends of Hell drag thy poor
Soul before the Tribunal Seat, where we must leave it; and yet it cannot stay
the^e, for after this, comes that Ite Hence, depart into everlasting fire;
which that we may escape, O merciful Savior! let us learn the Prayer of this
Publican, God be merciful to me as Sinner: Let us learn the practice of the
other Publican, who willingly forsook all, and underwent all difficulties to
follow Christ: O my God! We might learn of the Emmet, the Crane, the Swallow.
-- The Seaman provides for his voyage: The Husbandman lays up against Winter:
The Plowman commits his corn to the ground in hope; we only we with the chaff
make our nest in the Steeple, and are not terrified with the Bells, ring they
never so many Knells: We sit abrood on our Goods; we fear no chang; we forecast
on nothing; And yet we know Deus salva veritate miseretur: Chrysol.
As God is merciful so is he just; And Christ is a door, but we must come
while the door is open; and Christ is a Bridge, but a Draw-bridg, passable in
the day, but lift up in the night; and Christ is a way, but a narrow way, and
few there be that find it: O therefore, while the Door is open, and the Bridge
down, and the way made plain before our face; let us come, let us come, with
the penitent Publican, nor let it suffice us if we pray at home, or in our
Sickness, but in our Health, and in the Temple, privately and publicly: Let us
praise our God, and let our prayer ever be, God be merciful to me, a Sinner.

AND now, I make no question, but many in this great Assembly have brought
with them itching Ears, and are troubled with the Athenian Disease. Act.
17.21. They came not so much to learn how themselves might live; but how this
Gentleman died, whose Funerals we now celebrate: And if I should say no more at
the end, then has been spoken in the beginning: This was the Text which
himself gave, and is indeed an Epitom of the frequent and fervent prayers,
which he used in his sickness; If I should say no more, this were enough to
give ample Testimony of his faith, and satisfaction to the Hearer: But I obey
Custom, and am ready to render a more full account of what I have both heard
and seen.

As for his Life, He was a Man, and I have no reason to justify him, who in
all humble contrition did condemn himself; yet Aliud requirit Dei justitia,
a^iud hominum charitas; it is one thing to judge our Neighbor, according to the
rule of Gods Justice; another to examine him by the Law of Christian Charity:
For the first thou may not meddle with it, without dethroning thy M^ker; and
for the second remember that of St Ambrose, Judicet de alteri^s errore, qui non
habet quod in seipso condemnet: who dares take up the first stone? or, who
can forget that of the Apostle, Gal. 6.1. Consider with thy self least thou
also be tempted: The Truth is, we pass rash Judgment on others, because we
pay into their sins, and are too well conceited of our own Righteousness;
whereas we ought chiefly to condemn our selves, and with the Cloak of Love
cover, or interpret charitably the scapes of other; I will say no more, but
with the Apostle, 1. Tim. 8.24. Some men's Sins are open before hand, and go
before unto Judgment, and some men's sins follow after: You shall have many a
glorious Pharisee at that day, when the works of all men shall be laid open,
and the hearts of all men shall be disclosed: Ye shall have many a close
Villain, many a seeming holy Hypocrite shall be unmasked at that day, when God
shall judge the World by Jesus Christ.

Come hither, therefore come hither, thou fault finding Pharisee, that see
not, Manticae quod in tergo est; and Lamia-like layest down thine eyes, when
thou come home: Come hither, and tell me, whose Ox has he taken? or whose
Ass has he taken? or to whom has he done vvrong? or of whose hand has he
received any Bribe to pervert Justice? when did any Tenant complain of his
Landlords cruelty; But his Annulus was testis voluntatis suae not Minister
alienae: His Seal was your security, and his Grants were like the Acts of
Medes and Persians, they should surely stand: His Revenues were mighty, and
his Estate honorable: He was Mantuan.
Dives agri, dives pecorum, ditissimus auri; as one sung of another George: He
had what that gaping Cormorant, Covetousness, or a dainty, curious stomach
could vvish: The full and the fine of every thing, and yet could he Pindar.
-- (...), which the Poet vvanted in Tantalus: He could digest his great
wealth and worldly felicities: He was Dominus, not Custos; a Stewar^, not a
Slave to what he had; I may call for vvitness Sea and Land, this very place and
others near adjoining; And for the poor I may justly say of him, what was said
of St. Geo^ge to whom Antiquity has consecrated this day -- inops nunquam
indonatus abibat
Nam Pietas homini semper comes, Mantuan. vt supra.
inter egenos
Effundebat opes, etc.
The stones in the street will cry out, if I should hold my Peace: He was eyes
to the blind, Job. 29.
and feet to the lame, and a Father to the poor, nor would he eat his morsels
alone: and therefore, multis ille quidem flebilis occidit: Job. 31.17.
Many lament this Sunset of his, and more would, but that they look to the Sun
rising.

I should much forget my self, if I should forget his Love to the Ministry: He
honored the the Calling in his Life, and he remembered some of them with
Legacies at his Death, Large, Learned and Living Legacies.

I will come with the end of my Sermon to the end of his Life; when his
Physician dealt in genuously, and bad him prepare for another World: after many
and earnest prayers made to God; he addressed him to some Friends of his, then
present, and desired them to beware of Usury: It Is a Sin, which, I presume,
none here will tax him with, but Love, and somewhat else made him say so. The
Odiousness of the Sin, and the discharge of my duty makes me say more An^ere.
(...)
(...)
(...), etc.
If Money could buy Life, I would address my self, and counsel all my Friends
to that execrable Trade; but if it make your life no longer, and your sins the
more; if your present gain be future loss, and often times loss of Soul too;
learn to be righteous Usurers of Solomon's Prove. 19.17. He that has mercy upon
the poor, faeneratur Domino, he lends his Money to God upon Usury; for I cannot
away with this late new-name of Rent. 2. in Ver.
Honestissima nomina turpissimis rebus imponunt; They call their ill-gotten
Increase, Rents. Read the 15 Psalm. the 18. of Ezekiel. and 8. ver. and many other
places, and you shall find an Amplius, a word of increase will increase your
danger. I return again to the Bed of the sick; How often did he wish there
might be Peace amongst his nearest friends, when he was gone? What Fatherly
Love did he show his Heir? What heavenly Counsel did he give his Servants? And
now because I am to bear a part, in the last Act of his Life; let me farther
tell you, how he desired and prepared to receive the holy Eucharist, an awful
reverence made him defer the taking for a Season, and his increasing Sickness
kept him from the Sign for ever. I say the Sign, for Qui habuit Spiritum tuum,
quomodo non accepit gratiam tuam? as St. Ambrose said of Vale^tinian the
Emperor, dying with the desire of Bapti^m, but without it. Will any man tie
the Sacred Deity to sic and nunc? or consine his secret will to second Causes?
If Votum in adultis be the Tenent of the Schools for Baptism, and that first
Sacrament may be dispensed with, and the will or holy purpose shall suffice?
How much more in this shall our desire supply the want; which not a
dis-esteeming or neglect, but humility, and afterward infirmity keeps back? I
hope this may suffice you. He could and did satisfy himself with that saying
of St. Augustine, Creed and Manducasti: yet not determining but crav^ng my
Resolution Nor in thi^ alone; but pressed with the weight of sin, he betook him
to that well-approved medicine of Confession; and therefore commanding all out
of the Chamber, he laid open his Grief; and to use Tertullians phrase, Lib. de
Poen.
he made a publication of himself: nor was he Pudoris magis memor quam salutis.
He did what he went to do, and what the issue was I leave to God, who has
promised to ratify in Heaven what we shall do upon the Earth. But alas this
accersat Presbyteros, J^m. 5.14. is most where quite forgotten, or slighted, or
condemned rather, and therefore most-while that Remission of sins in the 15
verse is not obtained.

The Fathers were not all out of their wits in this point, and the Jacobites
and Albanenses are of two late a strain to cross the current of the Primitive
Times, and purer Antiquity. And therefore Confess, and confess (...), Man to
Man, Sinner to Sinner, Penitent to Priest. Surely this is the way to save Souls
from death. But still the Rainbow is in the Clouds, Reconciliation it self
comes from above: And therefore Remission, Jam. 5.15. Joh. 20.23. Math 18.20.
there is the Blessing: Remiseritis, ye forgive, there is the Bringer: In nomine
meo, there is the Donor: and therefore Accersat Presbyterum, but God be
merciful. God be merciful to me a sinner. Thus did I begin, thus must I end;
for thus made he his end, and with his hand in the Priests hand, having said
the Lords Prayer, Obdormivit.

Alas my Brother, so said one Prophet of another lying dead before him, and
slain by a Lion. Alas my Brother. The Devil is called a Lion in the Scripture,
ever seeking for his prey. He mist it here. Death is another Lion and stronger
then the Devil; for resist the Devil and he will fly from you, a good man will
send him packing: But Death will have no denial; good and bad, little and
great, all are fish for his Net; and he pleads Law for it too, Statute Law, Heb
9.

The Time, the Man, the manner of his Death; these all concur to make it the
Innocents Christmas: Let not the word offend: I come not to chant a Mass, or
sing a Dirige at these Funerals.

A SERMON Preached at Brushford in Somersetshire, At the FUNERAL OF Colonel
Edward Deyer, 12th. of MAY, 1654. By Henry Byam, D. D. and one of His MAJESTY'S
Chaplains in Ordinary.
ECCLES. XII. 7. And dust shall return to the earth as it was, and the spirit
shall return to God who gave it.


IN the 9th. Chapter of St. Matthew our Savior tells us, that he came not to
call the Righteous, but Sinners to repentance: Not that there are any Righteous
amongst men, for we have all sinned, and all gone astray, but thus we are given
to understand, that all those who do think themselves Righteous, can have no
benefit by Christ's Righteousness. He came not to call the righteous, those
that are just in their own eyesight; but the sinner, that has a feeling of his
sins, and is sorry for them, and does repent him: The whole need not the
Physician, but they that are sick. All those therefore that do hope for benefit
by Christ, must confess their own unrighteousness, and that they cannot be
saved without Christ's. All those that hope to go to Heaven must acknowledge him
righteous, and him only that came down from Heaven.

The Angels fell in Heaven, and Adam fell in Paradise, and all Men cannot but
fall that live upon the Earth; but happy is he that offends least. Now as
touching Angels, but some fell, and some were punished; but as for Men (as
graft^ from the same stock) we have all of us an inbred-Corruption derived from
the loins of our Father Adam, and should die for that: And we have a^ ^dded sin
to sin, actual to original, and should die for that.

But Go^ being Mercy as well as Justice, has granted unto miserable Man that
which he ^enyed the Angels, The opportunity of returning to his first estate; a
way to Salvation, a means to come to Heaven. And what is this but only our
Repentance? This did Christ preach, Mark 1. This Christ's forerunner, John the
B^pt^st did p^each, Mat. 3. Repent. And this Repentance is twofold, by
Aversion, and Conversion; by shunning evil, and doing good. This is that which
Solomon presses us to with a MEMENTO, Remember thy Creator; remember thy
Creator Now, now betime, now in season. But though there be never so many
motives both Legal and Evangelical, both Threats and Promises to rouse us up,
yet wretched Men that we are! neither the hope of Heaven nor the horror of
Hell; nor the love of God, nor the fear of Devils, can ought prevail with
worldly-Men. Like him who sets the greatest burden on the weakest Horse, we
reserve all Reformation and Repentance till our old, decrepit Age: Till those
days, those evil days come, in which we can take no pleasure. And as those in
Malachy, The worst of the flock must serve for sacrifice: That only do we allow
for our deepest sigh^, and best Services of the Almighty: that part only of our
life which is distracted with Cares, plunged with Distrusts, rent with
Maladies, oppressed with Miseries; the vilest, weakest, worst of all.

And will the Almighty accept of this? We that Grashopper-like have spent the
Summer of our life in pleasure and wantonness, shall we find relief in the
Winter of our Old Age? And will our late compelled Sacrifice be accepted of
that impartial Judge, that weighs the words and works of Malefactors in
Baltasher's Balance, and is, as Bernard says, Too Great to be terrified, too
Wise to be deceived, too Just to be corrupted? May we serve the Flesh, the
World, and the Devil, and having all our life time been most unworthy of the
Earth, shall we expect an Hodie mecum, and with the repenting Thief to be by
and by transported into Paradise?

O therefore Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, ere sickness
approach, and thy senses fail, and thy sins oppress. There is a time coming
(yet scarce two of a thousand live till that time) when the keepers of the
house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves: When the legs
shall grow weak, and the eyes hollow, and the Almond-tree shall flourish, our
white-heads will tell the winter of our life is come.

The dust must return to the earth as it was, and the spirit return to God who
gave it. Here Is a praeterit, and a sic praeterit a moritur, and sic moritur.
Here Is that we wish for, and would fly it; pray for it, and loath it; and after
many windings and turnings in the wilderness of this wretched life, we are like
the Reubenites and Gadites that will not venture over Jordan.

But dust must return to the earth as it was, and the spirit must return to God
who gave it. Will thou know what thou art? Dust, says the Text. Will thou know
what thou shall be? why Dust too. Thy Body must to the Earth; O be not proud.
Thy Spirit must to GOD; O be not careless.

That must be dissolved. This must be judged. Both must return.

Here Is the Vnde, or what thou were, Earth. Here Is thy present condition, what
thou now art, Earth. Here Is thy future state, what thou shall be, Earth.

Why then, as the Prophet said. O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the word of the
Lord: for when that which was made of Earth, and is now no better, then Earth
shall return to the Earth; The Spirit returns to GOD that gave it.

Here Is Man in his Mould: and Man in his Majesty: and Man in his Mortality. Man
what he was: Man what he is: and Man what he shall be.

And how the Body must be dissolved, and how the Soul must be convented. And
within these bounds I shall confine my Meditations.

And for the first.
1. Man in his Mould, or what he was. Let us make Man, Genesis 1. God that framed
and fashioned all other Creatures with a bare Fiat, let this or that be so, and
it was so, yet when he comes to make Man, the whole Trinity seems to make a
consultation, and that indivisible Godhead seems to divide his work in parts:
Let us make him thus and thus.

His Body is framed of the dust of the Ground, and God breathed in his face the
breath of Life, and out of both results a living Creature, made ad Imaginem and
similitudinem Dei, in our Image, according to our likeness, says the Almighty.
Which, whether it was meant by way of excellency, or for his Sovereignty; or
because the Soul does consist of as many parts as the God head does of Persons;
or because Anima is tota in toto, every where in the Body, as God is in the
World; or for his holiness, or for his immortality, or in every one of these
respects this Image and simi^itude be understood: Do you not, Do ^ou not deform
this Image.

Thou were made to God's likeness; where is thy Integrity? Of the dust of the
Earth; where is thy Humility? If to God's likeness* why do thou sin? If of the
Earth; why do thou boast?

De pulvere, of the dust of the Earth, quasi quis dicat tenuissimum, and
vilissimum, says Chrysostom. It Is not said of the Earth alone, but of the
dust of the Earth; as if it had been said of the shortest, meanest basest of
the Earth.

And yet are we proud of that we have lost, and boast of that is taken from us.
Our Sovereignty is lessened: Our righteousness is gone; and only one thing
remains as fully ours, The Sin of Lucifer.

We would be thought to be what we are not. We ride upon the Clouds of Honor
and Vainglory, and that heathenish foolish thought o^ Betterness has made
such deep impression in the heart o^ Man, that forsooth our Blood is better
then the Multitudes, our beginnings more honorable, our flesh more precious;
and as the Pharisee said, we are not as these Publicans: And yet were we all
cast in one Mould, and had all one Father, and have the same hope, and serve
the same God.

And whereas God made many Fowls, and many Fishes, yet made he but one Adam,
and one Eve, the Parents of all, that Man, in time to come, might not make a
difference, where the Almighty had made none.

I speak not this, O Worthy Brethren, broaching Anabaptism, and condemning
Magistrates, whom I honor; or favoring Community, which I abhor: I know the
Laws of God and Man require a difference. Yet it is an Accident, and Policy must
have that of force, which Nature well could be without.

But let not, O let not those Ornaments of Nature, nor those endowments of
Fortune; or to speak as a Christian, those gifts and blessings of the Almighty,
of Wealth, of Beauty, or ought else: Let them not make us unthankful to God; or
to forget our selves; or to despise our Brethren.

The worst came from the Earth, and the best had no better beginning.

The second Part.
Now follows Man in his Majesty. Methinks I hear one say, What we were is past,
and it is a madness to perplex us for the things to come. The Sea yields us
Pearls, the Earth yields Gold, and what though our beginnings were from thence,
yet now we are Lords of all, and he is unworthy any thing, yea the Name of a
Man, that will not know himself. Was not Valde bonum at our Creation? and did
not Gods own mouth proclaim a DOMINAMINI, at our Inauguration? When other
things were made, 'twas only said of them that they were good; but Man being
once made, they were pronounced very good. And Man is he, and Man alone, to
whom 'twas said, bear Rule.

It Is true indeed. But over Fish and Fowl, and Beasts of the Earth. Mistake not
me, nor your selves.

These are the words of man, forgetting himself to be a Man, who with the
Fig Leaves of Honor and Authority seeks to cover his nakedness, and his
infirmities; and yet fode Parietem (as the Prophet said) dig through the thin
Walls of his Carcass, and you shall find him eat as a Man, and purge as a Man,
and sleep as a Man, and (in a word) to be nothing else then that which every
Man is: Earth, or Dust of the Earth.

These are the words of Man, who will not see his weak condition, but all this
while does cherish and support his greatest Enemy, The Flesh, The Flesh, as
Bernard says, born in sin, and nuzled in sin; bad of it self, made worse by
Custom.

These are the words of Man: who will not look into the many Woes, and Cares,
and Miseries that do attend the greatest Man, and mightiest Monarchs of the
Earth, and how Post Equitem sedet atra cura. The strongest Armor, the richest
Curtains cannot keep out Care or Death.

As for Beauty, though it be amiable, yet God-wot it is not durable: and Honor
is a Wind (as Plutarch says) Venerabilis sed instabilis, of some delight, but
of no certainty: and Riches are sometime a torment, most time an occasion to
sin, always a burden: and got with pain, kept with care, and lost with sorrow.

And is not there many a Noah persecuted by Idolaters? and many a Joseph made a
slave by his Brethren? and many a Job tormented by Friends as well as Sickness?
Should God deal with us, as he did with Abraham, whose ten Temptations are as
famous as were those ten Plagues of Egypt remarkable and prodigious. Or who can
once remember, without astonishment, those bitter Miseries that befell King
David? The Sword (says Nathan) shall never depart from thine House, and God
will raise up evil against thee out of thine own House, and will tak^ thy Wives
before thine eyes, and give them unto thy Neighbor, etc. Absolon was this man,
this Neighbor; wret^hed Absolon, whose miserable end you know, and ^^^^spiring
to the Kingdom. Thamar is defloured, Annon slain, Shimei curses, Adoni^^h
rebelleth: O who can but recount the M^series befell this man! That his Son,
should be Murderers, Rebels, and incestuous, and (which is worst) finish their
lives without Repentance? That his Daughter should be a Whore? His Subjects
Revolt? and He himself be forced to fly from place to place to save his life.

Suppose that ^^^e of these Calamities fall to thy ^ot, Let thy Riches match
the bounds of the Sea, and thy Honor acknowledge no bounds but fly over; Let
the strength of Sampson, and beauty of Absolon, and all things else thy heart
can wish concur in thee as in one Person; yet one knock breaks this goodly gi
ded Earthen-pot in pieces. In the mean time would thou but consider, Quid
per os, quid per aures exit, etc. and vilius sterquilinium non vidisti: Filth
from thy Nose, stench from thy Mouth, and from those other Parts some other
Excrements, will force thee to confess with David, That every man living is
altogether vanity: Yea, Omnis homo stans, as Pagnine does translate that place;
Every man standing, take him, take him in prosperity and at his best; yet such
a man, every man is vanity. His strength decaies, his sight grows dim, his
blood corrupts, his body wears, his days consume as does a Garment.

And yet all this is Man in his Majesty; and yet Man in his Majesty is all
this: He is Earth, the dust of the Earth; weaker than the worst and weakest of
the Earth; which Bernard proves by a Glass, etc.

Now if Man in his Majesty be no better, what is he in his Mortality? if this
be his case while he is a Man, (and as he thinks himself) a jolly Man, O what
shall be thought of him when he shall cease to be a Man? when dust shall return
to the Earth as it was: for this dust shall return to the earth as it was, and
Body and Soul must part their fellowship.

The third Part.
The Laws established by Parliament say (where the order of State requires a
difference, and mortal Powers claim a privilege) Let no man presume to kill
Patridges, Pheasants, etc. at length; except they be Earls, Barons, Knights, or
any other that can thus and thus dispend. But the Great Lawgiver gives no suc^
liberty; his words are general, All Men must die.

Though with Asa we run to the Physician, 2 Chronicles 16. or with Saul we seek to
Witches, 1 Samuel 28 or with Maximus his Father, we beg for mercy at their hands,
who never knew what Mercy meant. The story is recorded by St. Gregory. Yet, nor
the Physician by his application and lawful means; nor the Witches by
stipulation, and ungodly compact; nor the Devil by his long experience and
accommodation, can lengthen man's life? Let the Physician pardon me for his
being knit up in this triplicity; I honor his Skill, and if he be a good Man,
I honor his Virtue: ease me he can, but lengthen my days he cannot.

I have read Bevenovitius, who has left no stone unturned to maintain their
Power, and when all is done, that in Job stands as a firm Maxim or Conclusion:
His days are determined, the number of his months is with thee; thou have
appointed his bounds which he cannot pass, Job 14. verse 5. In Noah's days
some went into the Ark, and some were kept out: In Joshua's days some went
into Canaan, and other some remained beyond Jordan. In the Circumcision Women
were privileged. In the Wars Levites were excepted. In Egypt only the
Firstborn perished.

But here is a general Decree of Death, an universal sentence is past upon all
flesh. All Men are Dust; and all dust must return to the earth from whence it
came.

The Sun did once stand still at the prayer of Joshuah; and once went back in
the Dial of Ahaz; and Death did once depart again for fifteen years, at the
earnest Prayer of Hezechia's: But the Sun returned to his course again; and
Hezechia's Plaster could not prevent a second sickness. Once these things
were, to show GOD is above Nature, and these things were but once, to show
Nature is the handmaid of God: Once these things were, that we might
acknowledge a God above; and these things were but once, that we might not
forget our selves beneath.

The first Garments our first-Parents wore (Fig Leaves excepted) might read us
a lesson of our frailty and mortality, those exuviae mortuorum, those Skins of
Beasts taken from the Dead to cover those that could not live for ever. But he
is now worse then a Beast that needs a Beast to be his Teacher. Adam, and all
Adams Posterity unto this day do speak as much.

Our Life is like Jonah's Gourd, which a little Worm could smite and make it
wither. Our Life is a shadow, which every cloud of Sickness can take away. Our
Life at best is but a Sun, which if it can hold out till the Afternoon of
Old Age, yet at length it does decline, and set, and shrink away. Said I a Sun?
or like the Sun? No, no; Soles occidere and redire possunt; the Sun does set
and rise again, and as he goes he comes again: But Man, if once he sets he sets
for ever. Dust does return to the Earth as it was, and all corrupts, and all
resolves into that Element from whence it came. All that was Earth returns to
the Earth.

What says the Jewish Sadducee, or the Seleucian Heretic, is there therefore
no resurrection of the Flesh? Can these Bones live? Ezekiel 37. and can dead
Earth revive again? Surely those Bones did come together, and live, and stand
up: And Aarons dry Rod did bud: And a Virgin did bear a Child. Why not as well
a Resurrection of the Flesh? Yea, why not rather a Resurrection than a
Creation? -- facilius est restaurare, quam a novo and nihilo facere, Tertul.
Apolog. cap. 48. Though to God it be all one, it should seem in all Humane
understanding a great deal easier to recollect what is, then to Create what is
not.

I might argue from the Justice of God, and from the Resurrection of Christ,
and from the Renovation of the Phoenix, and from the Resuscitation of Lazarus,
and the rest: Or which our eyes daily behold; from the Corn in the ground,
which is not quickened except it dies: Or from those industrious subtilties of
the Alchimist, who by his Calcination dotb pulverize his Metals, and by his
Congelation does restore them much more perfect then before. But we believe,
and therefore I return to Solomon: The Spirit returns to God that gave it.

Returns to God? and to God that gave it? Why then, the Soul of Man was not
Created by Angels, as the Enthusiasts and Seleucians have foolishly imagined:
Nor does the Soul die together with the Body, as the Albians and Trinitarians,
would fain persuade themselves. Neither have we a Catabaptistical sleeping
Soul: neither have we a Papistical walking Soul. Neither said the Pythagoreans
true, there was a transmigration into Beasts, nor the Tertullianists, how the
Souls of wicked men are converted into Devils.

No, The Spirit returns to God that gave it. Those Spectrum's, those
Apparitions of Men departed, how are they of the Body which returns to the
Earth? how of the Soul which returns to God?

But it is not mine intent at this time to handle Question^, or compound
Differences. Only my desire is hereby to excite us to Repentance: That seei^g
our Body must to the Earth we be not proud, and seeing our Spirit must to GOD
we be not careless: that we acknowledge our weakness in that we must die here;
and by a good life labor to prevent all danger that we may live hereafter.
That since our Body and Soul are come as Friends together, Friends meet and
part, and so must they: Since life cannot be kept, death cannot be avoided; and
since our Soul must needs appear before his Maker, before his Judge, to have
its private Trial, and particular Judgment, according to the things it has
committed in this life, good or evil. O listen we not to those Sirens Songs,
that cry Peace, Peace, all is well. Be we not like frozen and benumbed ones,
that have no feeling. Suffer we not our selves to be lulled asleep in that
pernicious Cradle of Security, as if one Sigh, one Groan, one Domine or Mercy
LORD, should by and by transport us into Paradise.

The Devils did believe, and Judas followed Christ, the Pharisee did good
works, and Ananias gave half of that he had unto the poor. Balaam did pray; and
Cain repents, and Judas restores. O GOD help us, we are not gone as far as
these in the way to Heaven; and how shall we escape their punishment who have
matched them, and I fear over-matched some of them in our sins and wickedness.

O therefore here make a stand; yet now begin to provide Oil for your Lamps;
now learn of Joseph to lay up against those years of Famine; now bethink of
your Wedding Garment. GOD is Just and will not be mocked.

LIFE is frail, and will soon be ended. The BODY is dust, and must be
dissolved. The SOUL returns, and must be judged.
O therefore make use of that little time is left you. Defer not your
Repentance from day to day. Say not to morrow I will do thus and thus. It Is Vox
corvinae, as St. Augustine said; it is harsh, it is hellish to say thou will to
Morrow, and appoint a day to save thy Soul, who art not sure thy Body has one
hour to reckon. Of this thou art surr, That many millions perish in their sins,
who had they known what now they feel, they would have repented long agone in
sackcloth and ashes. Of this thou art sure, The longer thou continuest in sin,
thy Case is the worse, thy danger the greater, and thy return will be more
difficult. Of this thou art sure, That late Repentance is seldom true
Repentance: and as one says, Percutitur hac animadversione peccator, ut
moriens obliviscetur sui, qui vivens oblitus est Dei. It Is a just Judgment of
the Almighty, That he that would not remember God in his life, should forget
himself at his death.

The Stork, the Turtle, the Crane, the Swallow, these all observe their times,
Jerem. 8.7. and shall Man that was created Lord of all, be more ignorant then
them all? shall he fore-slow the time given? and reject the Grace proffered?
Nay, shall he make the times, and observe the seasons in every thing but what
concerns his Soul? Sow in season, and reap in season, and plant in season? and
shall the hour for our Repentance allowed be unseasonable?

There is a time for all things, says Solomon, and shall we never find time
for this? Thus, thus it is, and thus it follows, That many are Called, and
few are Chosen.

In the general Deluge Noah only, and his Family, escaped drowning. At the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, Lot only and his Family escape the fire. At
the overthrow of Jericho, Rahab only and her Family escape the Sword. Here is
Antefactorum narratio and futurorum Prophetia, as Irenaeus said in another
Case. Those fearful Examples, those handfuls of People that were exempted from
the common Calamity, they tell us not only what befell them, but what assuredly
shall befall others, when those that will not now, and cannot then repent must
look for naught but woe and misery; a rejection, a separation, an Ite maledicti
away for ever.

Leave we the Impenitent in his sins, and leave we the impenitent to his
sorrows; for Tophet is prepared of old, a place is made ready for them who will
not make themselves ready for God.

And let us trace another while the steps of him, who, as Chrysostom said,
has made that voluntary, which he knew necessary, who could welcome Death
without fear, and bid adieu to life without sorrow: Yet by David's judgment he
had not attained the half of Man's life, and by our account had Youth and
Strength, two promising supporters in time of need.

O come hither and behold, for here he lies, here he lies whose hands were not
hound, nor his feet tied in fetters of Brass: his grinders did not cease
because they were few; nor were they grown dark that did look out at the
windows; he arose not up at the voice of the bird, the daughters of Music were
not brought low, the Almond-tree had not yet budded, etc. And lo, Earth is
returned to the earth as it was, and the Spirit is returned to God who gave it.

Well then, what if he were prevented by Death? What if his days were not so
many? or life so long? had he not the better gale of wind to bring him to his
harbor? Yes, yes, and was old enough. Quicunque ad extremum fati sui
pervenerit, hic moritur senex: the honorable Age is not that which is of long
time, neither that which is measured by the number of years, but wisdom is the
gray-hair, etc. therefore, verse 13. though he were soon dead, yet fulfilled he
much time, for his Soul pleased God, therefore hasted he to take him away from
wickedness. De medio iniquitatis: from Sin, from Sinners.

O Noble Israel, how are the mighty overthrown! tell it not in Gath: O yes,
tell it in Gath, and publish it in the streets of Ashkelon. Let the Philistians
see, and the uncircumcised hear. Si sic in viridi quid fiet in arido? If a
young Plant in the prime of his years, and the most flourishing time of his
life be thus taken away, why do we live as if we had made a Truce with Death?
or as if this World should last for ever.

We have a Consumption as well as He; his was patens, ours latens, and the more
dangerous; his in Januis, ours in Insidiis; his was open, ours in secret, and
yet not so secret, but every man may run and read the Characters of DECLINING
writ in our Foreheads; and every Limb can tell, there is something works within
it to our end; and every day can tell another we are worse then when he found
us.

That Death then may not come suddenly, let us amend speedily. LOOSE NO TIME,
was Great Caesar's Motto. Naught is more dangerous then Delays. Cur non hodie?
cur non hac hora? Why then this day, why then this hour begin we to amend our
lives.

Say we as sometime Balaam did, but with a better resolution, If Balack would
give me his house-full of silver and gold, I will not do thus and thus: If I
might win an house-full of silver and gold, I will not do as I have done. I
will not grieve the holy Angels, nor re-Crucifie my Savior, nor hazard my
Soul, nor offend my God: I will not oppress where I am the stronger, nor
undermine where I am the subtiler.

I see Man's life is in his Nostrils, and he is quickly gone. I see the World is
deceitful, and can give no true content. I see that blessedness is reserved
till another World.

BEATI MORTVI QVI IN DOMINO,

Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, etc.

So let us die, O Lord; and so let us live that we may so die, Sweet JESUS,

AMEN.
Reverendissimo In Christo Patri ac Domino, DOMINO SETHO, EPISCOPO
SARISBVRIENSI, Et Nobilissimi Ordinis Periscelidis Cancellario, HAMNETTUS WARD
Clericus, Longaevitatem pancraticam, dignitatis sastigium, and vitam aeternam
ex animo optat.
DVO sunt, Pater, Praesul dignissime, quae homini famam optimam apud posteros
conciliare solent, and debent, been facta scilicet, and been dicta. Vtcunque
tamen been dicta quaeque fuerint, vel facta, nisi etiam literis committantur,
plerumque incassum pereunt. Nam quae per (...) traduntur (nescio quo fato) vel
lubricis hominum memoriis excidunt, vel linguis vary referentibus vitiantur,
vel post multorum annorum decursum in omnimodam (...) deficiunt. Sola quae been
scripta sunt interitum non sentiunt. Optime igitur optimi hujus Authoris
memoriae posteri ejus consuluerunt, scripta ejus typis mandari curantes. Cui
ego saltem non minus contulisse mihi videor Paternitati Tuae ea inscribendo, ut
sic etiam nominis Tui aeternitate quodammodo fruantur, and dignissimum ei apud
bonos Patronum, apud improbos fortissimum Vindicem conciliarem. Nec sane si
alias quaesiverim, invenire potui cui hoc opusculum magis vellem, magis deberem
offerre quam Tibi; Vellem, quia inter concionatores optimos primum locum facile
obtinuisti, ut qui sacrum hoc concionandi munus magno bonorum omnium applausu
and admiratione administraveris; Deberem autem, cum propter illustres, and in
ore omnium Tuas virtutes, quibus certatim doctrina and pietas lucem affundunt,
tum ut delato hoc munusculo gratititudinis meae propter Tuum erga me ultro and
immerito collatum favorem testimonium aliquod public afferrem. Exile igitur
hoc observantiae meae pignus columnis Tuis SETHIANIS nunquam ruituris appensum
patiaris oro; and inter integerrimos Paternitatis Tuae cultores numerari
digneris

Servum Tuum obsequentissimum, magnique Tui Nominis ^vanidam prorsus and
indignissmam umbram, HAMNETTVM WARD.

Osculum Pacis. CONCIO AD CLERUM Habita EXONIAE, IN Trien. Visit. R.P. ac D. D.
JOS. HALL Episcopi Exon. Ab H. B.
S. MAR. cap. IX. v. ult. Habete in vobis-ipsis Salem, and Pacem habete inter
vos mutuo.


POST angustias persecutionum, amissam libertatem, vulneratam existimationem,
post improperia and suggillationes. Sancti Matthew. 5. sequitur, Vos estis Sal:
and hic post detruncationem manus, abscissionem pedis, and vulsuram oculi,
sequitur Textus, Habete Salem. Ita formati sumus a natura, ut fastidium pariat
omnis Difficultas. Jacturas and dispendia aliorum tanquam ex Arce intueri
cupimus ipsi Lucriones and incolumes. Nec patitur ferrea haec Generatio Mammoni
emancipata Apostolicam illam perfectionem de Relinquendis omnibus propter
Christum. Sin autem ad illud Bernardi deveniendum sit ure, seca: Si dilanianda
caro, dilaceranda ossa, si carcer, si equuleus, si Tortor: pellem pro pelle, ut
juratus ille nostri generis inimicus, cum Titanibus ipso Olympo bellum
indicimus: architectabimur voluptates, and ruat Coelum. Et tamen qui non
accipit crucem suam, and sequitur Christum, non est Christo dignus; and qui
praesenti vitae consulit, Mat. 10:
perdet futuram? Durus sermo, levidense ferculum pro collapso stomacho, and tam
insipidum esculentum deposcit Salem: Nihilosecius si pro grato velimus nos
haberi Sacrificio, Igne, sumus saliendi, quomodo Omnes Sale Oblationes in Lege
Mosaica. Et quod Psalmista, Transeundum per ignem and aquam ut educamur in loca
refrigerii. Et siqua spes est perveniendi ad Coelum in Curru, igneus erit ille
Currus, quomodo Eliae, 2 Reg. 2. Sanctis Paulo and Barnaba attestantibus, per
multas tribulationes oportet nos intrare in Regnum Dei. Verissime tam acetosa,
qualis haec, Doctrina dubias animas and instabiles anhelare faciet, si non
refer pedem, cum illis in sexto Sancti Johannis verse. 66.

At ego aliam vobis Salituram commendaturns sum, eamque igneam. Ignem veni
mittere in terram, S. Luc. 12. Sanam scilicet doctrinam, and sinceram verbi
promulgationem. Quare legimus Sp. Sanctum apparuisse in forma Ignis, Actorum 2.
qui consumere solet and decoquere, perpurgare, illuminare, and quod magis
accedit ad naturam Salis, a tabe defendit and putredine. At Textus.

Habete in vobis Salem. Salem, non Ignem, ne plus satis incalescatis.

Et tamen Igneam salsuram, ne infatuati ad nihilum valeatis.

1. Salem, ne parasitemini seu palpetis. 2. Pacem, ne admordeatis.
Utrumque in Textu, Salem, Pacem.

1. Salem, (...). 2. Pacem, (...).
Salem ad exsiccandum foeces peccati.

Et tamen Pacem ut omnia fiant in spiritu lenitatis.

Primum, excitat remissos and jacentes.

Secundum instruit, dirigit excitatos.

Habete salem, clamitate, intonate, 2 ad These. 3.
coarguite, corripite, sed (...), sed omnia in pace, omnia propter pacem.

Scriptum est, S. Matthew 5. Vos estis sal terrae, ac si dixisset salvator,
Estote Mundo quod sal est carni. Aeternitatis estis salitores (ut loquitur
Hilarious) condite ergo; voce and vita exsiccate humores carnalium operum,
antevertite foetoribus, compellite sapiant quae sursum, nam estis Sal, and
Textus. Habete Salem.

Imo illud Habete non sufficit, nec Habete pro aliis. Quamvis Candelae instar
conficiatis vos and conteratis, nihil non agentes pro conditura Hominum and
salute: sed Habete in vobis-ipsis. Quomodo postea Apostolus, Artende tibi and
doctrinae nec sis 1 Timothy c. 4.
-- vice cotis acutum.

Reddere quae valeat ferrum exors ipsa secandi. Judas ejicit Doemonia: Balaam
vaticinatur; and multi multas virtutes possunt edere in nomine Christi, quibus
nulla pars, seu sors in meritis Christi. Habete ergo Salem in vobisipsis: nec
satis sit cum Scopulo vel Indice aliis monstrasse viam, sed sitis praevii, sed
ductores. Exemplaria estote fidelium in sermon, ad Tim. c. 4.
in conversatione, in cha^itate, in spiritu, in fide, in puritate.

Post semper primo loco appositum Salem sequitur pax tanquam ferculum. Habete
pacem: imo illud Habete de vi verbi diminuit (...), id quod Beza alicubi
convertit in pace agite. in 2 Cor. 13.11.
Nostrates etiam In pace degite. Denique ut oportet pacem habere, and (...)
agere. Ita and Habere inter nos mutuo: Romans 10.15.
sive prolatare quis velit ad Domesticos fidei, sive restringere ad Legatos
illos quorum speciosi pedes eo quod evangelizent pacem. Si fieri potest quantum
in vobis est cum omnibus hominibus pacem habete. Ad minimum (...).

Semel and summatim. Habemus hic facultates and (...) pastorum: Habemus etiam
utilitatem and profectum Auditorum. Quales in Nobis-ipsis. Quale erga alios, ut
and nos-ipsos servemus, and eos qui nos audiunt.

-- Haec meta: hic terminus esto. In 2. Levit. Tres Regulas statuat Deus
Sacerdotibus Sacrificaturis observandas. Primo, non assumerent Fermentum, cujus
ea est natura ut inficiat and subacidam reddat totam Massam. Quare Salvator,
impiam and contagiosam Pharisaeorum doctrinam, quorum Scholia and commenta
(vere commenta) saepius corruperant, Legem Dei and violaverant Fermentum
appellat.

Nec Acredinem solum inducit, sed and turgere facit and intumescere. Ergo
Christus S. Mar. 8. videte (inquit) and cavete a Fermento Phariseorum, quorum
eo usque gloriosa sese extulerat arrogantia, ut omnibus aliis detraherent,
suarum laudum praecones acerrimi.

Secundo interdictum est Mel. De nullo melle adolebitis. Sane quamvis dulcescat
in Ore, amarescit in Stomacho, and Choleram gignit. Choleram dico, illum illum
suavissimae pacis implacabilem inimicum. Et probabile est Salomonem id
recogitasse, Mel multum comedere non est bonum. Prove. 25.
Debinc quamvis ea sit natura Mellis ut computrescere corpora haud facile
sinat, Lect. anti. l. 21. c. 3.
and multi eo solum nomine (test Coelio) evaserint Polychronii quod Mellis
cibo assidue uterentur. Cedat tamen necessum est antiquo illo Amicitiae
symbolo, cedat divino Sali, Ib. l. 12. cap. 1.
cujus unius open putrescentia corpora per secula aliquot quasi sarta tecta
perduraverint.

Et hic admonendus est mihi qui foris est Gnato, ille glabrae linguae
pellicator, admonendus est, ut pro Melle apponat Salem Convivis suis. Desinat
per Christum consuere pulvillos sub axillis populi, Eze^ 13.18. Isai 30 Hier. 6.
loqui placentia, promittere Pacem. Non fermentum, non Mel, in Mosaicis
Sacrificiis assumere licuit, sed Salem Quicquid obtuleris Sacrificii Sale
condies. In omni oblatione offeres Sal.

Vos optime nostis quantilla sit differentia illa veteris novique Testamenti:
and quod Zeno ille dixit de Artibus, vetus compressis dig it is pugnoque simile:
Novum palmae vel manui dilatatae. Vetus est novum involutum, complicatum. Novum
est vetus replicatum, expositum and enodatum.

In Ceremoniis illis plane videbimus esse aliquid infra corticem, nec ita
institutae erant, ut in tempore penitus interirent, (cum nec umbrae adventu
solis evanescant) sed significativae erant sed praenunciae. Mortuam dicimus
illam Legem in quantum Lex; sed vivit, efflorescit tanquam Dux and (...) ad
Christum adducens.

In Lev. prin.
Theodoretus ait, ideo precepisse Deum Sacerdotibus Sacrificia Sale
conspergenda, ut inde discerent dijudicandi Artem: Hoc est Discretionem and
Prudentiam suum cuique tribuendi: Deo optimo maximo maxim optima offerendi. Et
hoc (inquit) Sale carebat Sacrificium Cain, non excerpsit, non selegit quae
oblaturus erat, non quomodo frater suus, qui de pr^mogeni^is and de Adipe
obtulit, scilicet De optimis optima, ut Chrysostomus: sed qualiacunque qui^quid
prius occurreret, and ille facilius comparceret. Quare ad coercendam hanc
Mortalium socordiam tenacitatem and sordes, Deus in Lege sua edixit Salem, Hoc
est discretionem and judicium, sine quibus fatua redduntur and insipida quanta
quanta Sacrificia.

Et hunc Ego Salem vobis commendaturus sum, Apostolicam illam sapientiam,
coelestem philosophiam, solertiam officio nostro congruam and congruentem, ne
Convivae nostri aut dimittantur jejuni aut pascantur siliquis.

Habete Salem. Mare suppeditat, terra suggerit Salem copiose. Quamvis Hilarious:
Sal, inquit, In S Maecan. 4.
ut arbitror Terrae nullum est, Quomodo ergo Christus Apostolos suos Sal Terrae
nuncupavit? Sed pace tanti viri, Plinio, Chromatio, experientiae credendum est.
Sicut e Salinis, ita and Salem fossilem habemus. Recolo igitur. Mare
suppeditat, Terra suggerit Salem copiose. Sal autem ille Discretionis and
Judicii quem noster Ordo postulat and Officium optandus alicubi facilius quam
inveniendus est.

Habemus, id quod Antiquitas noluit, expuit, condemnavit, Habemus nonnullos ad
Sacros Ordines, sine Titulo, sine merito promotos, Adolescentes, inflatos,
barbaros. Sed nihil est audacius ignorantia. Quare isti pulchrae virtutis
pessimi pictores (...) in Scripturis inflectunt and detorquent perdite. N^z^an.
2 Pet. 3.
Isti Classicum canunt cum Bichri, and quoniam omnes aditus ad Ascensum sibi
praeclusos vident, Reliqua spes est in turbidis Aquis expiscandi. Isti venenum
Cleri lues Ecclesiae, vel si placet, Homines praetenerae Conscientiae (quamvis
hoc vulgari nomine contentus vix sim) Isti inquam, far non debent, perpeti
non possunt Pallium Sacrum Episcopi, superpellicium Presbyteri, Annulum,
pileum, and multa alia Antiquitatis symbola, sint licet prorsus innocua,
nonnunquam significativa, saepissime splendida signa, addo and necessaria
Graduum, Ordinum, and Hierarchiae in Ecclesia Christi. Verba quae dixit
Nazianzenus de Discordia, Tom. 1. Orat. 7.
in hac hominum calluvie hic habetis. Hoc illud est quod ut plurimum membra
divulsit, disjunxit fratres, urbes turbavit, furiavit populos, Nationes
armavit, Reges, Sacerdotes, Parents excitavit, etc. Hic apud se sunt. Hic
dominantur. O Latera! nil videmus nisi Salem. Imo quod Rex ille Ezrae. 7.
Argentum, triticum, vinum, omnia in numero, pondere and mensura: sed Salem sine
mensura dedit. Isti Salem suggerunt, Massam Salis, fed amarulenti, rancidi,
infatuati, and praeterea nihil.

Sed mittamus hos aliquantulum.

Ad vos me converto.
-- Quibus art benigna:
Et meliore luco finxit praecordia Titan.
Qui and Salem habetis, and insulsos plebis mores Sale vestro condire soletis.
Qui vosmet instar Salis eliquatis, and more Candelae conficitis ut Gregem vobis
commissum a tabe defendatis, e tenebris Ignorantiae eruatis, and tanquam puram
and castam Virginem sistere Domino vestro valeatis. Vos nostis and agnoscitis
illud Chromatii, I^ 5. cap. S. Mat.
Sal Terrae indiscrete omnibus inservit. Regi, subdito, Diviti, pauperi, servo,
Domino. Sic and coelestis sapientiae verbum omnibus est ad vitam necessarium:
nam omnes egent Gratia Dei, etc.

Imperii vestri terminos, vel, si vultis, Ministerii, calletis optime: pax, pax
non erit vobis pro Themate. Mercenariorum est illa provincia and Palponum, qui
caemento rudi and insulso parietes obducunt. Quare comparatis and virgam
Discretionis and Mannam dulcedinis, cum S. Gregorio. Mor. l. 3.
Et Sermo vester cum Gratia semper and Sale conditus est, and scitis quomodo
oporteat vos unicuique respondere: Facto ejus, si verbis tacuerit, ut Anselmus.
Comprobatis dictum illud (licet Jansenii) non opus est multo Sale sed efficaci:
virtus concionis non consistit in verborum multitudine sed pondere. Tenetis
illud Sancti Hilarii, In S. Ma t. can. 4.
Sal in se uno continet ignis and aquae elementum, and est revera unum ex
duobus: Hoc est, quid tertium ex utroque co^litum. Est Aqua, ne plus satis
incalescamus; est Ignis, ne tanquam frigore obtorpeamus. Qui Sal^m habet; --
Omne tulit punctum. Ergo, Habete Salem.

Sed and illud Habete (ut diximus) non sufficit: nec Habete pro aliis: sed
Habete in vobis ipsis. Audistis modo quid Apostolus praecepit suo Timotheo,
Attend tibi and Doctrinae. Simile illud est quod Ephesinae Ecclesiae
Presbyteris edixit discessurus. Act. 20.28.
Attendite vobis-ipsis and toto gregi in quo vos Spiritus Sanctus constituit
Episcopos. Vobis-ipsis and toto Gregi. Ego solum dicam quod S. Ambrosius and
suis verbis dicam. De dig. Sacer. c. 1.
Non mihimet praerogativam Scientiae, si haec meis consacerdotibus Charitatis
intuitu praerogem, vendicabo: aut vitae perfectae me esse profiteor, cum de
vita perfecta alios moneo. Sed potius cum haec ad illos loqui audeo, Cap. 3.
simul cum illis quae, loquor, audiam. Et paulo post, Quod sumus professione,
Action demonstremus: ut nomen congruat Actioni, Actio respondeat Nomini, ne
sit Nomen inane and Crimen immane: Honor sublimis, vita deformis: Deifica
professio, illicita Actio: Religiosus Amictus, irreligiosus provectus: Locutio
Columbina, and vita Canina, etc.

De Offic.
Idem alibi. Non agnoscent superiorem Consilio, quem vident inferiorem Moribus.
Imo ipse Orator ex naturae promptuario non dubitavit dicere, In Ver.
Nihil minus ferendum esse quam rationem vitae ab alio reposcere eum qui non
possit suae reddere. Quare nos colligamus, and qui simus, and quid facere
debeamus, consideremus, ut homines nos non solum audiant, verumetiam libenter
studio seque audiant. Legantur Consilia nostra non in verbis tantum, sed in
moribus. Et quod Nazianzenus de Magno Basilio, Orat. pro M. Celio.
Doceamus vel tacendo. Denique ut Ille, praebeamus nos viros Bonarum Artium,
Bonarum partium.

Sinite Monitorem.
Qui monet ut facias quod jam facis, ille monendo Laudat --
Ita praeconem habetis Laudis vestrae, non calumniatorem seu incusatorem
socordiae.

Sed ad alteram pensi partem contendendum est. Habete Pacem.

Non immerito queritur Magnus Ille Augustinus, Habere multos linguam auream and
cor ferreum. Et clarissimus Ille Clarevallensis Abbas, non pacidicos sed
pacificos commendari: non blaterantes Pacem sed actitantes, Coronam vitae
reportaturos. -- Quoniam isti primum and ultimum, salve and vale, Epilogum
illum discedentis, ac etiam Exordium redeuntis Christi pensitant and meditantur
pax vobis.

Profecto pax est (...) ut Elias ille. Apud Nazian. tom. 1. orat. 10. tom. 4.
Ep. 7. ad Cler. Constant.
Et Cyrillus Discordiam nil aliud esse quam Mortem merito profitetur. Sed
Duplex est Pax, and neutram plane volumus. Pax impiorum and Pax cum impiis.
Hanc periculi plenam, Illam insaniae videmus. Hanc dubiam and culpabilem, Illam
alteram odiosam and detesta. bilem.

De Pace impierum quid dicemus? Illi nusquam Gentium magis sunt Inquilini quam
domi apud se. Et siquid Gratiae fideive habeant (quod non potest non esse
perexiguum) tantillum id facilitati and Clementiae aliorum, non Conscientiae
propriae aut rebus been gestis ascribendum est. Flagitiose vivunt and secure;
etiam sponte obcaecati and ipsa Senecae puella caeciores non cogitant:
imminentia mala and calamitates brevi adventuras non prospiciunt. Resp. ad cap.
Gal. c. 6.
Amant (inquit Prosper) languores suos, and pro sanitate habent quod aegrotare
se nesciunt. Tales expergefacere, excitare non contendimus. Cauterio resectam
habent Conscientiam, cui preciosissima malagmata mederi nequeunt. Formam hic
quandam videmus Pacis sed fucosae, brevis and perluctuosae. Cic. Orat. pro domo
sua.
Imo quod Ille Stupor non virtus est. Nil magis dissidet a pietate quam Cor
lapideum. Hic habemus illud Hieremiae pax pax and non pax. Non illam Salvatoris
pacem relinquo vobis. Pacem illam meam do vobis; non illam Sancti Pauli (Dei
dicerem) quae omnem superat intellectum, sed qualem Mundus dat fallacem, vanam,
brevi perituram.

Quare Habete pacem, sed non Mundi. Nec illam Impiorum, nec hanc cum Impiis, de
qua modo dicturi sumus.

Non tollo penitus omne consortium aut commercium etiam cum sceleratis and
flagitiosis hominibus. Alioquin scilicet e Mundo exeundum esset (ut Apostolus
ad Corinthios) Itaque non sine foro, 1 Ep. 5.10.
non sine macello -- caeterisque commerciis cohabitamus in hoc seculo.
Navigamus and nos vobiscum, and militamus and rusticamur and mercamur. Miscemus
Arts, opera nostra publicamus usui vestro. C^p. 4^
Ita Tertullianus ad Gentes.

Imo adsumus illis, and ad sumus in conventu frequentes, sed quomodo Prosper;
Spe correctionis, non consensu malignitatis. Plus dico, Amamus. Sed Gnari
naturam errantem dividere a vitiis. Omnia suscipienda, peragenda Amore
compassionis non Approbationis. Quantum ad sustentationem naturae non ad
fomentum Culpae, ut Aquinas. 2a. 2ae. q. 31. art. 2, ad 1.
Si fieri potest (inquit Apostolus) quantum in vobis est cum omnibus hominibus
in Pace degite: Quantum scilicet proposito vestro and fidei vestrae convenit;
ut Origines: Quantum Dei Gloria, In Ep. ad Romans l. 9. c. 12.
professio nostra, and Religio Christiana patietur. Habete Pacem.

Nihil hic mihi de exterraneis calamitatibus dicendum est, and quomodo Equus
ille rufus jamdiu exiit ferociens citatis greffibus, cujus Moderator districto
Gladio Pacem e terris sustulit. Imo quod Abrahamo accidit conflagrante Sodoma
intueri possumus fumum vicinarum Regionum ascendentem sicut fumum fornacis,
Vrbano illo alicubi folles arrip ente scintillas saevitiae and feritatis
suscitante, inflammante. Sed hoc nomine, ut multis aliis, maximas tibi Omnes
gratias agmus, Amplissime Praesul, majores etiam habemus, quod tantam --
Inurbanitatem suggillare, contundere, oblidere non dubitasti.

Sed mittamus exterraneas illas Calamitates, quamvis etiam ex illis uberrimam
nobis exultandi, ac etiam Gratiarum agendarum Segetem comparemus. Cum videamus
tanquam jamdudum decantata illa Trojae incendia, Aedificiorum subversiones,
Agrorum depopulationes, Virginum ac M^tronarum stupra, promiscuae plebis
trucidationes, Gladiis and incendiis undequaque truculenter grassantibus.

Nos interim -- O nos faelices!
-- Bona si sua norint
Angligenae --
Nos secure consedimus sub vite nostra and sub ficu --

Horat.
-- Et Deus obtulit
Larga quod satis est manu. --
Filii nostri sicut plantae generosae, filiae sicut anguli politi in structura
Templi, Promptuaria plena, oves feracissimae, Boves praepingues, nulla
irruptio, nulla eruptio, denique nulla querela in plateis nostris. Beatus
populus cui ita est. Beatus populus cujus Jehovah est Deus. Attamen Nos inter
Nos officium illud Pacis and Concordiae exequi and tueri debemus.

Habete Pacem inter vos mutuo. Sic sane. Nihil Mortalibus a Deo immortali
praestantius dari, nihil ab ipso homine optabilius expeti, quam pax, potest.
Sed quae pax illa erit? vel quomodo pax, cum, ut Jehu, Scortationes Iezabel and
veneficia ejus abundent plurimum? Cum Praepotentes and Subdoli, Opulenti and Vu
pini, Venator Nimrod and veterator Achitophel fratres suos inescare, praedari
and obruere allaborent?

Ita Inimici hominis domestici ejus. Et non tam extraneus seu transmarinus
hostis aliquis pertimescendus est, quam sint illi, quibuscum vivimus and
victitamus, praecavendi. Suffitum illum qui Vespasiani matulas edulcavit pro
tam grato habemus thymiamate ut omnem arbitremur quaestum esse pietatem. Et
Vectigalia pro Diis colimus and veneramur.

-- Sic pars vilissima rerum
Certamen movistis Opes. --
Atque eo insaniae processit pars hominum maxima ut sese emancipare non
vereatur Generationi cujus Dentes sunt Gladii, Prove. 30.14, 15.
and cultri Molares ejus; seu Sanguisugae cujus duae filiae nil nisi Affer,
Affer, clamitare didicerunt. Cic.
Bulbus aliquis seu Stalenus tertiam Haeredii partem deportabit, vel altera
illa Reipublicae pestis.

Non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo. Foenerator potius quod reliquum
est praedicrum deglutiet, quam quis Alicui in Aliqua re cedat, quam ulciscendi
libidinem remittat, quam fraterne agat and candide: Sed morose, injuriose,
crudeliter omnia. Ita non potestis dicere Pax huic domui, Can. 10. in S. Mat.
aut Pax Dicta erit, non Data ut S. Hilarious. Quoniam ad vos revertetur, quibus
dictum est, Habete Pacem inter vos mutuo.

Quare, Ad Aream Ecclesiae accedite, and siqua spes Pacis and Concordiae in
Loco Sancto commoretur, stud^ose diligenterque circumspicite. Videte mecum si
(...) and Impietas sacra Majorum Monumenta cum vi and impetu non harpagaverint.
Si veneranda patrum Donaria violenter non arripuerint Si Augusta and sacrata
Pietatis Legata, immunitates and privilegia non deturpaverint. Si ullum sit
Officium tam sanctum atque solenne, quod incredibilis non-nullorum Avaritia
comminuere atque violare non est ausa.

Cic. Orat. post Red.
Ita, Nobis quicquid potuit vis, and injuria, and sceleratorum hominum furor
detrahere, cripuit, abstulit, dissipavit.

Horat.
-- Fuit haec sapientia quondam
Publica privatis secernere, sacra profanis.
At hodie Canes venatici odorantur, venantur, devorant omnia. Ipsa Delubra
(instar Verris) depeculantur. Atque Ornamenta Templorum, quae non solum viscre
sed and venerari Patres nostri solebant, auferentes, Sua facere, hoc est,
exaugurare non verentur.

Lactant. l 2. c. 8. A. Gel. l. ^. cap. 9.
Nemo mihi posthaec de Appio Claudio, Fulvio Censore, Pyrrho Rege, aut Q.
Cepionis exercitu ad Oppidum Tholosanum renunciet, quorum nesatia facinora
instans and memorabilis ultio subsecuta est. Multis nostri Sacrilegiis
Occalescunt. Vindictae dilatio audaciores reddidit, adeo ut omnes mortales
compilationis and Impietatis jam non Vestigia, 2. In Ver.
sed ipsa Cubilia videre possint.

Quid dicam de Resectione vestium ad nates, and Ammonitica barbary? 2 Samuel 10.
Quid de Invidentia illa and Odio plusquam Vatiniano, quo tanquam tempestate
abrepti quidem Homines, insaniunt, insurgunt, insectantur Justissimas
Reverendorum Praesulum Jurisdictiones and Censuras? Amplitudines Basilicarum
and proventus? Geminatam Graduum mercedem, Gemina Parochorum Sacerdotia?
Adhaec, Orat. pro Rosc. Amer.
post multa vulnera C. Fimbria Scaevulae Diem dicit quod non totum Telum
corpore recepisset. Tantillum id praesidii quod nobis ad commode vivendum
superest, and quod multis (proh dolor!) locis consistit in tenuioribus
Salariorum Reliquiis, hoc est raris post copiosam messem Spicilegiis: Tantillum
id satis superque judicat Invidia. Imo and egregii isti Decimatores expectant
gratias: and nos habemus; sed quales olim Romany Antiochus Rex, Orat. pro
Deiotar.
cum magna Regni part cedere jussus est. Benign, dixit, sibi a Populo Romano
esse factum, quod nimis magna procuratione liberatus Modicis Regni terminis
uteretur.

Profuit olim dicere Civis Romanus sum, and Apostolus Paulus, Act. 22. huic
legi Porciae non nihil debuit. Sacerdotum Indulgentiae long plures erant, and
multo aequiores, si ad Patrum Consilia, Regum Diplomata, and ipsas Orbis
consuetudines provocare liberet. Hoc solum dicam, non est ulla sub Coelis
Natio, non est Populus aliquis, quem magnus ille Mundi Oculus suo perlustret
ambitu, non est Ethnicus, non est Mahumetanus qui suos non revereatur
Sacerdotes, qui eosdem in magno non habeat honor and admiretur. Cum illos
ipsos pro quibus nos quotidie oramus, quibus Pharmacum illud Animae and
Corporis Sacrosanctam Eucharistiam porrigimus, quorum Saluti pro viribus
consulentes, ad multam saepe noctem evigilamus, quos volumus and cupimus, aeque
ac nosmetipsos incolumes and Regni Coelestis cohaeredes; Illos, inquam, ipsos,
obtrectatores famae, Direptores praesidii, perturbatores Pacis nostrae habeamus.

Veniamus igitur ad Tribum (ut dicitis) nostram; Hoc est ad clerum, and Legatos
illos quorum speciosi pedes, eo quod evangelizent Pacem. Pacem in Christo,
Pacem Conscientiae and Remissionis. Et videamus, number Legati ipsi habeant hanc
nostram Pacem, Pacem Concordiae and Conversationis. Number ita in Pace Christo
serviant, ut grati sint Deo and probati hominibus, number quae ad Pacem faciunt
sectentur, and mutuam aedificationem.

Habete Pacem inter vos mutuo. Quae Deus conjunxit, Homo non separet. Habete
Salem, Habete Pacem pari passu ambulent. Sal symbolum est Amicitiae (ut Coelus)
unum ex multis coalitum Aquis. Lib. 12. c. 1.
Pax filia ejus, unum ex multis coalitum Animis.

Sed dic age quid fiet cum Vulpibus illis quae faces in caudis portant?
Capitibus licet disjunctae sint and discriminatae Sententiis, concinere tamen
and quasi conspirare in Ecclesiae tranquillitatem videntur. Manasses Ephraim,
Ephraim Manassem, simul isti contra Judam. Qui Primus in acie Exercitus and
procinctu stat, cum juratissimus sit Hostis, and aperto Mart praeliari
consueverit, minus habet periculi, minus facessere nobis negotii potest.

Cum Circulator ille Pontificius Universalem requirat Obedientiam sub
Anathemate; hoc est aeternae salutis dispendio. Cum Veros adulteret Patres, aut
supponat Spurios. Cum solvat seu liberet Subditos Legibus, Juramentis, atque
aliis quibuscunque Religionis aut communis vitae Vinculis, facile deprehenditur
Cujas sit, ipsa vox prodit, and qu^ non talpa caecior, hunc Minorem natu
fratrem esse and Tyronem manifesto comperiet. Glorietur de Vetustate, jactitet
de Apostolicis suis Traditionibus, and sub specie tam acceptabili imponat
filiis suis quos Vino fornicationis inebriavit. Nos tamen actutum indagantes
Proteum hunc, and larvam detrabentes, esse eum (quod Tertullianus de Praxea.)
Hesternum aliquem manifesto videbimus.

Sed instat infestissimus ille Pacis nostrae perturbator, and quas eluere non
potest sordes, occulerce elaborat, id agendo ipse bonus ut videatur, cum alios
mordacitate sua and contumeliis inquinaverit. Hinc illa Heshusii, Lindani,
Praterii, Bosquieri and Aliorum; Lutherum incubo Daemone esse progenitum:
Saepius fuisse colloquutum cum Diabolo, ab coque edoctum. Calvinum Homicidam,
virgis insuper caesum, and Stigmaticum gessisse in humeris inustum Galliae
Lilium. Bucerum non agnovisse Iesum pro Messia, sed alium cum Judaeis esse
expectandum. Bezam Epicureum, blasphemum Scurram, plane Atheum, illos vere
beatos praedicantem -- Qui -- Metus omnes and inexorabile fatum
Subjiciunt pedibus, strepitumque Acharontis avari
Angliam oppletum Bestiis Saltum Monstra alere humana specie. Esse Nos Bonorum
Operum expertes, interim caelitus securos de Salute. Insignes cum Mezentio illo
Divorum contemptores, haereticos, furias, omnia.

Atque ita inter Nos and illos (...) est, and (...), nec possumus illis Dextras
dare Societatis. Nulla hic Pacis conditio esse potest.

Sed geminae erant (ut diximus) Voragines scopulique Ecclesiae. Par illud
Simile, Par dissimile. Nihil unquam fuit tam nobis contrarium, tam dispar sibi.
De Pontificiis diximus. De istis quid statuendum sit, videte.

Scimus omnes quales homines videri volunt and haberi. Sed quia tam acriter
nobiscum dimicant, De rebus modicis and indifferentibus, Quomodo ipsi
indifferentes sint and moderati plane non video. Et tamen Potestatem Regiam,
Hierarchiam Ecclesiae, Ordinationes Episcoporum, impositionem manuum, and hiis
similia nemo sapiens in numero Indifferentium recensebit.

De caeteris, in Apostoli verbis, Testimonium illis perhibeo, quod zelum Dei
h^beant, sed non secundum scientiam. Quorsum enim illae Academiarum
obtrectationes? Patrum fastidia? Homiliarum contemptus and despicatio? Non Nemo
est qui Accurata Antiquitatis scripta pluris non aestimat quam Penicillos. Qui
Disciplinam Ecclesiasticam humani Cerebelli inventum autumat. Qui Sacrarum
Precum Lectionem Theatro seu Ludis Scenicis postponit. Qui ementitur (sit Verbo
venia) in sacros (...) nostrae Codices, continere eos Multas tolerabiles
ineptias. Sed hinc lachrymae: T.C.
Hujus Praesultor Turbae (ut erat oculissimus) vidit magnum Rituum nostrorum
numerum e Romano Breviario desumptum esse. Pius erexit Baptisteria. Adrianus
instituit Superpellicium. Higinus voluit Baptismi Sacris interesse Susceptores.
Honorius imperavit Genuflectionem tanquam decentissimum Statum omnibus ad
Sacram Mensam accedentibus. Demus omnia. Atque ita Novus hic Terminos quos
Antiqui Patres posuerunt non est veritus transilire. Et Majorum monumenta ipsa
canicie veneranda, and quae Omnes pii in magno semper honor habuere, inaudita
arrogantia flocci facere non dubitavit.

Atqui Ego sic statuo, Amplissimi viri, Nomini unquam longius recedendum esse a
Romana Ecclesia, quam ipsa eadem recesserit a Christo. Et ad veritatem hujus
Conclusionis doctissimi viri Bucerus, Gualterus, Martyr nobis suffragantur. T.C.
Quare librum ejus flammis, Autorem ipsum Oblivioni devoveo, qui maluit
Mahumetanae Synagogae quae procul, quam Romanae Ecclesiae quae prope est in
negotio Rituum and Ceremoniarum adhaerescere.

Et ne in pari scelere dispar sit conditio, idem esto Judicium de praecipiti
illo Homulo: vel si mavultis, precamini illi mentem sanam in corpore sano, D.H.
Ep. Exon.
qui Amplissimum Praesulem (cujus virtus in causa Religionis nunquam
contremuit) palam lacessere non erubuit. Tract. de Justificat. Z. Vid. f^n.
post Judicium Cassandi E^ul. in Apocap. ^5. Sermon. (...) 7 Col. Ep. 104 ^.
Survey of the pretended holy Discip. etc. R. Hook.
Hookero, Zanchio, Bullingero, Calvino, nube Testium, imo Orb Christiano
Assertionem indubiam comprobante, Ecclesiam Romanam esse membrum Catholicae
Ecclesiae, infirmum, morbidum, putridum, Membrum tamen.

Atque Ego non dubito esse plurimos in medio Romae, quorum Genua non
curvaverunt se Baali. Eorum autem qui ceu impetu quodam and torrente opinionum
abripiuntur, non idem de omnibus Statuendum est. Sed inter Rastra and Rostra,
inter Plaustra and Pulpita, inter simplicem Credulitatem and affectatam
Ignorantiam, inter Stivae incumbentem, and magnum illum Semideum in Arce Sancti
Angeli intonantem discernendum est. Quod siquis, tenuissimo licet filo, ipsum
fundamentum amplectatur, huic ego, omnem spem salutis praecidere non audeo, aut
Januas coelestes obserare. Atque hic sane Rivulus non e Charitatis solum, sed
and Veritatis font profluxit ac dimanavit.

Absit, Absit, Ego pro Impietate Patronus ut prodirem, aut Officium, tam Deo
hominibusque invisum, in me susciperem. Romana Ecclesia suos habet naevos,
errores, scelera. Laborat, and acuto morbo laborat. Sed Excessit medicina
modum. Fere dixeram, nec sine comprobata Authoritate, Survey, page 9.
Excessit medicina Malum. Non est hoc instaurare Sion, sed multiplicare ruinas
in Jerusalem. Et egregii isti Reformatores viam Pacis non cognoverunt. Quare
videntes and vitantes geminos hos scopulos, inter nos mutuo Pacem habeamus.

Atque hic (proh dolor) nescio quis torrem aggescit, and ex specu ac Barathro
Discordiae, Spiritum Contentionis excitavit, quem haud scio an quis facile
sedare and sopire queat. Hic monstrat, remonstrat Alter, and fortassis acrius
utrinque quam par est, decertatur. Cum magna certe Animorum vi, nec sine
stomacho ab hominibus alioqu^n prudentissimis res agitur.

Multum, fateor, arridet mihi illud Oratoris: Aut vndique Religionem toll,
Philip. 2.
aut usquequaque conversa. Quid non debemus facere pro tuenda fide and pietate?
Sed multa saepe ferenda, quae non laudanda sunt. Multa plus Disputationis
habent quam Pro M Ca^.
Atrocitatis. Multa ad Structuram magis quam Fundamentum pertinent. Voss.
Multa Academiis relinquenda, non ventilanda Pulpitis. S. Aug.
Multa cum discrimine definiuntur, quae sine discrimine nesciuntur. Vultis
planius de causa quid cogitem? praeclusit mihi os Authoritas: Amor Pacis non
patietur reserari.

Interim quis dabit Capiti meo Aquam, and Oculis meis fontem lachrym^rum? Quis
satis deplorare potest humanae mentis caecitatem? caliginem Intellectus? and
per totam vitam nostram in rebus tum agendis tum credendis fluctuationes,
perturbationes, and impotentias?

Audivimus reviviscere Praedestinatos, and quod magis est dolendum
reflorescere, quibus ipsa de Aeterno Dei Decreto atque immutabili persuasio
prodigiosam intulit incuriam and securitatem: Ita ut flagitia non obesse,
bene-actae vitae Conscientiam non prodesse stulte ac dementer praedicent.
Audivimus Godscalci Scholam reaedificatam iri, and jamjam abundare Discipulis,
qui quidem ausi sunt Abyssum illum Misericordiae divinae sua orgya dimetiri,
and angustis humanae praesumptionis terminis coercere. Audivimus etiam
nonnullos tanquam ad commune incendium advolasse, sed magno suo labor nil
egisse aliud quam (quod est in proverbio) Clavum Clavo.

Mihi quidem cum Labieno videntur Omnes Causam suscepisse antiquiorem memoria
sua, Orat. pro C. Rabirio.
quae Causa ante mortua est, quam illi nati essent. Sed (quod Beatus Job)
lignum habet spem: Si praecisum fuerit, rursum virescit, and Rami ejus
pullusant. Truncus ille mortuus, si tamen mortuus, novos indies emittit
surculos. Irridetur (inquit S. Bernardus) simplicium fides: Ep. 188.
eviscerantur Arcana Dei: quaestiones de Altissimis rebus temerarie
ventilantur: insultatur Patribus, quod eas sopiendas potius quam solvendas
censuerint. Ego autem in verbis S. Hieronimi, Dignabor ista nescire. Tu
rationare, S. Aug.
Ego mirabor. Tu disputa, Ego credam.

-- Quid aeternis minorem
Consiliis animum fatigem? Hor.

Quod siquis aliter apud se statuat, fruatur per me Opinione sua. Imo tam Alta
tam Abdita perscrutanti per tot difficultates and praecipitia gradienti sanum
progressum, foelicem exitum comprecabor. Vos interim exoratos velim, quamvis
Velle parum est, quare precor, deprecor, obtestor. In calamitosa hac
combustione and incendiis, ne asportetis, ne funditetis Oleum. Sed cum omni
modestia, mansetudine, and animi lenitate tolerate, Alii alios per Charitatem.
Cogitate Fratres vestros non cupiditate alqua seu pravitate lapsos, sed
Opinione tantum, eaque stulta magis aliquando quam improb^. Quare Voluntate
simul sitis, quamvis Sententiis dispertimini. Si fieri potest and quantum in
vobis est Cum omnibus hominibus Pacem habete.

Vetus est apud Judaeos Prophetia, vel (si vultis) Diverbium; Elias corriget
omnia difficilia and dubia. Quod Ego Aenigma, Apostoli verbis sic explico. Modo
ex part cognoscimus, and ex part prophetamus, and ex part omnia agimus;
postquam autem advenerit quod perfectum est, tunc, quod ex part est,
abolebitur. Interim per Dominum Christum, and si fieri potest, Habeamus Pacem
inter nos mutuo.

De modo hene vivendi, ad Sor.
Memini quia S. Bernardus, Nil prodest si nos contineat una Domus, and separet
Voluntas diversa. Plus Deus diligit Unitatem Animi quam Loci. Ecce sumus in
Domo ista multi Homines, diversi Mores, diversa Corda, diversae Animae. Ita
ille Avertat Deus hanc pestem, ne ipsis militibus ferociores inconsutilem
Christi Tunicam dilacerare, Lib. 4. cap. 62.
Imo quod Irenaeus, Magnum and gloriosum Corpus Christi conscindere and
dividere, and quantum in nobis est, interficere laboremus. Quod fi cui, instar
Scurrae, Convicium pro deliciis suerit (quamvis nemo aliis maledicere didicit
qui prius ipse non male vixit) huic Ego Sapere and Valere.

Agite ut omnia quasi dispersos Flores in unum fasciculum colligemus. Tenetis
quid Christus Leguleio S. Lucae 10. Quid scriptum est? quomodo legis? vade and
tu fac similiter. I Would Ego pace Christi, pace vestra in hoc Pacis negotio
dicturus sum. Quid Scriptum est? quomodo legitis? and vos etiam similiter
facitote. Notum est illud S Augustini: Summae Religionis est imitari quem
colis. Intuemini itaque Salvatorem, and totum vitae cursum intuemini. A
praesepi ad patibulum, A fasciis ad Coronam spineam: Ab ipsa Incarnatione ad
Glorificationem, and omnia suaviter Pacem redolent, Omnia ad Pacem provocant.

Natus est Emmanuel Salvator noster in auspicato, Pacis, tempore, ^lut.
cum Augustus (...) -- -- Vacuum duellis. Hor.

Janum Quirint Clausit.


Angeli feciales denunciant Pacem, Gloria in Altissimis, Pax in Terra Christus
Legem Pacis sanxit: diligatis invicem. Moriturus Legavit Pacem: Pacem relinquo
vobis. Resurgens Pacem pro Strena obtulit, Pax vobis. In veteri Testamento
inscribitur Princeps Pacis. In novo Author and Deus Pacis. Quare Beati
pacifici, Beati vos.

Quod superest Patres, and Fratres Valete, instauramini, vosmet consolamini,
idem Sapite, Pacem habete.

O Spes and Salus Israelis, O Deus Misericordiarum, immitte Gratiae tuae Radios
in Corda nostra, jacentes excita, la^guentes incita, Currentes dirige. Bonum
Opus, tuum Opus in nobis perfice usque ad D^em Jesu Christi, cui, etc.

Nativitas Christi. CONCIO In Aedibus Sanctae MARIAE OXON. Habita pro gradu,
An. Dom. 1612.
MATTHEW. cap. I. verse. 18. Jesu vero Christi nativitas ita fuit. Quum matter ejus
Maria desponsa esset Joseph, antequam ipsi convenissent, inventa est uterum
far ex Spiritu Sancto.


POST molestam Mosaicae Legis servitutem, austerum Veteris Testamenti vultum,
and crebriores Prophetarum minas, ex nobis tandem nova quaedam Evangelicae
gratiae lux, nova serenitas, and (quasi inversa mundi scoena) nova rerum facies
exoritur.

Liber primus veteris Testamenti Genesis, Liber primus novi Genesis; illic
creationem Mundi, hic reparationem, ibi hominem factum and infectum, hic de
novo factum and refectum intuebimur. Illic generationem hominis, hic plusquam
hominis JESV CHRISTI.

Aggressus sum, ut videtis, miraculum omnia excedens miracula creationis, omnia
complectens reparationis. Cum enim nec Deus solus sine homine, nec homo solus
sine Deo subvenire homini valuit; quando nec Deus sine homine mori, nec homo
sine Deo vivere, vitamque sibi caeterisque mortuis largiri potuit; inde, inde
coelum cum terra filius miscuit, Deus in hominem sese infudit, ipse (...), ante
jacta mundi fundamenta praeordinatus, a lapsu Adae promissus, Sanctis
repromissus, Patribus and Patriarchis in Sacrificiis praefiguratus, a Prophetis
praedicatus, ab omnibus desideratus, and jam tandem in ipsa temporum
plenitudine natus and incarnatus, est vere homo, de nostra carne caro, and os
de ossibus.

Et quid nunc mihi tantillo misero percatori in tam arduis versanti, tam
sublimia pertractanti, ima superis, coelestia terrenis necessario miscenti
sperandum est? Ah, ah Domine Deus, ecce nescio loqui, puer ego sum, quod and
Elihu in Job, parvus sum diebus, vos vero senes and maturi; timui, horrui
interponere meas cogitationes: non enim in populi foece, sed in Platonis
politeia dicendum est. Sed cognita mihi bonitas vestra scrupulum hunc fere
eximit, and ipsa rei magnitudo magnam praebet consolationis segetem. Quid enim
vel laborantibus conscientiis opportunius, vel doctis ingeniis gratius
obvenerit, quam in eo doctrinae genere philosophari, quae latissimos divinae
gratiae sontes aperiat? Neque enim res alia ulla est, in qua vel potentiam suam
Deus expressius exercuit, vel justitiam illustrius patefecit, vel sapientiam
luculentius ostendit, vel denique omnes misericordiae sinus, omnesque gratiae
suae copias in nos opulentius effudit, quam in hac ipsa filii sui incarnatione,
Cujus nativitas ita fuit, etc.

Totum ego negotium ad haec pauca reducam Capita: Primo, ut ostendam qui natus
sit. Jesus Christus. Secundo, ex qua. Maria matre, Maria Virgin. Tertio, per
quem. Spiritum utique sanctum: aliis intervenientibus circumstantiis temporum
and personarum: quae omnia ad suos locos reservabimus.


Nativitas Jesu Christi. Dominus Jesus dulcis est in voce, dulcis in facie,
dulcis in opere, dulcis in nomine: dulce enim nomen and suave JESUS,
consecratum ab aeterno, nunciatum ab Angelo, prophetatum Solomonis oraculo: ita
Bernardus in coena Domini, ser. 2. JESUS nomen est misericordiae and Salvatorem
sonat; ita Angelus, hujus capitis versu 21. and hinc est quod multi qui
Israelitas libera^unt a suis periculis and servitute, Salvatores s^ct^ sunt.
Ita Othniel, in tertio Judi^^^^: and ^lius Jehosedech, Aggaei 1. and Josua a
Paulo ad Hebraeos capite 4. and versu 8. JESUS dicitur. Sed isti omnes and
quotquot praeter istos omnes umbra, signum, typus sunt nostri JESV, and typus
tantum.

An filius Jehosedech Salvator, quod Templum (non sine multis ad opus
concurrentibus) reparaverat? quanto magis hic noster Christus, qui Templum, qui
solus, Templum Deo nostro extruxerit? nec illud materiale quoddam ex calce and
lapidibus, quem enim coelum and coeli coelorum non continent in manufactis
Templis non habitat, sed vivum, spirituale, and quale Paulus testatur
Corinthios fuisse, omniumque coetum fidelium: Templum Spiritus sancti.

An Othniel, Salvator, quod Israelitas totos jam octo anno; oppressos servitute
liberaverat? quanto magis hic noster Christus, qui totum humanum genus multis
vexatum miseriis, perpetua attritum servitute, post multa tandem annorum millia
e manu non dicam Aramitae, sed Diaboli, e potestate tenebrarum and faucibus
inferni vindicaverit.

Et Josua, magnus ille dux Josua, Salvator erat, sed quam iniqua comparatione?
Quid Josua ad Jesum? Quid salvator ille ad suum salvatorem? si conferantur,
nihil est. Tuetur Josua suos contra Cananaeos: Jesus suos contra Carnem,
mundum, tenebras, tartara. Praefuit dux ille duodecim Tribubus: at Noster
praeest long pluribus, multae turbae, quam nemo potest numerare, ex omnibus
gentibus, and tribubus, and populis, and linguis: Apocalyseos septimo. Eduxit
ille suos ad rivos aquarum, sed sitierunt iterum: producet nos Noster Dominus
ad vivas and perennes aquas, e quibus quisque biberit non sitiet in aeternum,
Johan. 4. Ille Israelitas in terram optatam: hic nos omnes ducet in terram
optatissimam: Amen.

Hic insurgunt increduli Judai, and quibus cordi est Gentilizare potius Athaei
fabulosi, duabus ut arbitrantur sagittis totum salutis nostrae corpus
perfodientes; utraeque ex una ea demque pharetra depromuntur. Esaiae 7.
vocabitur Immanuel, quid ergo nobis cum nativitate Jesu? ad haec ego cum
Tertulliano, subjuncta est interpretatio hujus vocis Immanuel (viz.) nobiscum
Deus, ut non solum sonum nominis expectes, sed and sensum. Ita ita Judaei
perfide in nono Capite, vocabitur Admirabilis, Consiliarius, Princeps pacis,
etc. si verba tantum consideres, ubi nonomen? si sensum, ubi non nomen? Aut
Spiritum Sanctum tenuit oblivio nescio quae, and incuria singularis, aut idem
sonant ista nomina; sed illa, sed ista uno ore intonant JESVM.

Atqui Esaiae 62. vocabitur tibi novum nomen, non quale filio Nun, aut filio
Jehosedech, aut illis quorum sub nomine prodiit.

Liber ille cui titulus Sapientia, sive Ecclesiasticus vocabitur tibi novum
nomen. Ad haec Aquinas, hoc nomen JESUS aliis conveniri propter particulare
aliquod and temporale suum commodum populo praestitum: sed ratione spiritualis
and universalis salutis esse CHRISTO proprium, and proinde novum; and Bernardus
illi (inquit) illos quibus praecrant ab hostibus defendebant, sed numquid
salvabant a peccatis eorum? Is autem noster Jesus, and a peccatis salvat
populum suum, and introducit in terram viventium. Haec illi animo (putem) bono
sed non pari successu: ad quid enim diversas praetendunt operationes, salutes,
commoda, si (de quo quaeritur) idem nomen illis cum Christo competat? Aliud
ergo huic malo remedium Hebraicae linguae peritiores adhibuerunt, differentiam
nescio quam in literis and punctis jactitantes: quod aliis nomen JEHOSVA, i. e.
Deus salvabit, sed Christo nomen Jesua, Salvator; sed date veniam veneranda
canities. Ego, ut tantorum virorum authoritate non nihil commoveor, ita tam
apertas de Messia praedictiones obliterari sine causa justissima non patiar:
and plus apud me, valebit unus Paulus, quam centum Pagnini aut Jansenii. Ad
Esaiam ergo ceu potius Esaiae inimicos respondemus. Verba illa de Christo non
intelligi, sed de toto populo Israelitico. Ergo NOVVM NOMEN, Nova, scilicet
Facies reipub. and inaudita gloria; aut novum denique, pro Israelitis Judaei,
pro Judaeis Christiani dicendi sint.

Atque haec de nomine JESV, praeter quod nullum est aliud nomen sub coelo per
quod oporteat salvari, and ad quod omne genu flectendum est, coelestium,
terrestrium, and subterraneorum.

Jam huic proprio nomini additur appellativum (...), quod unctum sonat: ergo
credimus esse Regem, non mundanum qualem Judaei expectabant, sed coelestem, qui
suos and possit and velit liberare a mundo, morte, and Diabolo; and credimus
esse sacerdotem, qui unum obtulit sacrificium; neque illud hircorum aut
vitulorum, sed semet-ipsum, semet pro omnibus, ut multorum peccata tolleret,
and aboleret: and denique credimus esse Prophetam, magnum illum Prophetam qui
venturus erat, nec quis alius expectandus est. JESUS est ergo volens, CHRISTVS
est ergo potens: quia Jesus, vult facilis and libentissime, quia Christus, vult
suaviter and mitissime, and ut Bernardus, non utens cauterio, sed unguento, non
ustione, sed unctione. Huc ergo huc flectamus oculos, hic miseri figamus
anchoram, ad hunc portum appellamus naufragi. Jesus est, qui justificat, quis
est qui condemnet? filius Dei qui exaltat, quis est qui humiliet?

Ejus vero nativitas ita fuit. Quam Matter ejus Maria. Hic ego non pauca
Haereticorum genera sub Antichristiano vexillo militantia ad certamen provoco.
Abstulit Manichaeus Christo corpus (si tandem denegare sit auferre) abstulit
inquam, and omnia sub inani nescio qua conclusit imaginatione. Cui ego ut
Christus olim Thomae incredulo, Infer digitum. Appelles corpus comedit; sed
aereum dote subtilitatis praeditum, and tanquam ipso Proteo versatilius, ad
omnes formas paratum, per uterum Virginis tanquam aqua per tubam, aut canalem
traductum. Macedonius permittit corpus, and solidum quidem, sed (quo nihil
potuit absurdius) cum Valentinianis a coelo allatum asserit. His addo Anonymum
nescio quem ex Bernardo, qui Mariam parvulum non peperisse, sed reperisse
sibilabat. Sed hic, ille; alter, omnes audiant, quod matter ejus erat:
quapropter Paulus ad Galatas 4. Postquam venit plenitudo temporis emisit Deus
filium Suum, factum ex muliere: materiam enim illi matter dederat, quae materiam
simul cum forma ab illo acceperat.

Et huc usque habeo Apollinarem confitentem, sed ita ut, Mariam corporis
matrem, non Christi diceret: atqui Matthaeus, Jesu inquit Christi Nativitas:
non belluae Augustino cujusdam, non materiae nescio cujus informatae, non
corporis solius absque anima, sed Jesu Christi. Etiam in hoc ipsius Originis
pseudophilosophiam prorsus excludere, and opinionis fundamentum in homine
opiniosissimo desiderare cogor, qui animarum antequam corporibu, insererenter,
non solum vitas, sed and diversas fuisse asseruit actiones.

Angosco Deum ante natam matrem, ante factum mundum, ante omnia principia; sed
aut animam in coelis cum Origin, aut carnem a coelis cum Macedonio non
agnoscam.

Cloacam vocitent uterum tanti animalis, i. e. hominis producendi officinam.
Cloacam, inquam, cum Marcione blasphemo, qui illud ex ore suo ausus est,
persequantur and partus immunda, and pudenda, torments, and ipsius exinde
puerperii spurcos, anxios, ludicros exitus, tamen cum omnia ista destruxerint,
ut Deo digna confirment; non erit indignior morte nativitas, and cruce
infantia, and matre paena, and carne damnatio. Tertullianus libro tertio
adversus Marcionem.

Quid si coelestis illa anima, Doctor gentium, lingua orbis, prima ad Corinth.
15 statum resurrectionis plenissime percurrens, apertam posuit ant^thesin inter
Adamum and Christum, quod ille de terra terrenus, hic de coelo Dominus: An ergo
a qualitatibus and conditionibus ad ipsas rerum substantias argumentari quis
debuit? aut si de corpore dictum putem, an quae ratione communicationis
Idiomatum de toto Christo praedicantur, ad alterutram partem proprio quodam,
and quasi suo jure transferenda sunt? Atqui mentio corporis nulla est, imo
mentio hominis, secundus homo. Dominus ergo a coelo, homo a terra.

Atqui Christus ipse Matthaei 12. Mariam matrem aperto ore denegavit, Quae est
matter mea? audite Marcion, and Manichaei, vox est ista objurgantis, non
negantis, ut Tertullianus lib. de carne Christi: and 4. adversus Marcionem: Aut
si ista non arrideant, vox est praeponentis patrem, non inficiantis
nativitatem. Non debuit, non potuit, non enim venit in carnem, nec habitavit in
carne, sed factus est caro. (...), ut habet Athanasius, ex ipsa matris
substantia, caro de carne, and os de ossibus.

Et nunc mihi dicite, Vos O Pomposi and Luciferiani milites, ad quid ipse
caelorum Dominus ad tantam descenderit paupertatem? Cur spretis tot principum
aulis, relictis dominis and matronis ad tam pauperis tygurium divertere
dignatus est? O ubi nunc humanae carnis fastus, ubi superbia, postquam ipsum
carnis universae principem, coeli Dominum, Dei unigenitum, in tanta nos
praecedere humilitate, and paupertate advertimus? cui non jam cristas and
supercilium deprimet mitissimi Domini tanta dejectio? quem non a pecuniis
corradendis revocabit tantae paupertatis tantus oeconomus? Non Regis apud illum
major gratia, non barbari alicujus imperiosa laetitia, non dignitatum, aut
natalium cujusquam discreta merita: omnibus aequalis, omnibus Rex, omnibus Deus
and Dominus est.

Atque hactenus de Maria matre; pauca adjicienda sunt de Maria Virgin, de
Maria desponsa. Quum matter ejus Maria desponsa esset.

Hic ego cum Bernardo dicam, quod mihi, imo quod ante me patribus visum fuit,
and dicam breviter. Christus ex desponsa Virgin, sui, matris, nostri causa
natus est; ad tutelam pueri, salutem virginis, and utriusque existimationem: ut
credamus Josepho testimonium perhibenti, obediamus Christo matrimonium
confirmanti, compatiamur Judaeo per ignorantiam peccanti, and denique ut partus
iste ex Virgin Diabolo celaretur: Ita Ignatius, and post illum, Theophylactus:
Sed non mororista, neque hic ego de Nicolaitarum, and Gnosticorum impudenda
haeresi quid adjiciam, neque Graeci Socratis and Romani Catonis de publicandis
uxoribus exempla proferam: ad alia festinat oration mea, ne dum veteribus
eradicandis totus haeream, novis zizaniis aditum patefaciam.

Pontificii perpetuis ignibus fumantibusque sacrificiis altaria Vestae
onerantes; justissimis autem Hymenaei laudibus plus aequo detrahentes.

Virginitatis supra quam par est admiratores stupidi, matrimonii vero supra
fidem vituperatores stolidi, Mariam fulminant perpetuam Deo suo vovisse
Virginitatem. Jeremias in utero matris sanctificatus matrimonium contrahere non
debuit. Johannes Baptista non voluit. Maria Virgo non potuit.

Omnes in utero sanctisicati, omnes Virgins. At quae prima in terris Angelicam
proposuit ducere vitam Maria erat, quae prima emii^t votum castitatis Maria
erat, quae prima exempla praebuit tot sanctis Virginibus and sanctimonialibus
Maria erat. Pulchre admodum, sed scitis qui? prudentibus viris non placent
phalerata, sed fortificata. Qua authoritate, quibus innixi rationibus haec
propalastis omnia? scilicet quoniam, inquit Virgo, virum non sum cognitura.
Revera virum non cognitura, quae tantam apud Deum invenerat gratiam, ut in
utero conciperet, and impleto tempore Jesum pareret magnum Dominum Altissimi
filium: Sed quid hoc ad votum virginitatis? quid hinc ad institutum Monalium
stabiliendum expiscentur adversarii? imo Thomam audiamus, non illum Christi
incredulum discipulum, sed nimis credulum Pontificiae saecis propagatorem.

Augustinum enim missum faciam, cujus ego quam humillime pedes deosculor, and a
quo sine causa justissima ne latum unguem non discederem. Thomam ergo audiamus.

Maria promissae Virginitatis non immemor, audito filii nomine, interrogat
Angelum, quomodo fiet istud? nam voverat.

Quando? quo voti genere? Ante desponsationem conditionaliter, post absolute:
Absolute Virginitatem antea non vovit, simpliciter non vovit: Quid hoc?
scilicet vovit sub condition si Deo placeret: peractis autem sponsalibus
absolute vovit dempta condition. Diis putem vel invitis: O egregium in genere
illo moroso cavillatorem! Quot diverticula? quot miseras distinctiunculas ad
Doctrinam perfectionis and vitae monialis stabiliendam excogitavit? quot
decipulas te^ere coguntur qui contra veritatem obduruerunt.

Atqui ut Tertullianus adversus Praxean, probare debuit tam aperte ex
scripturis sicut and nos Sponsalia legimus, and virum Mariae ab Angelo
admonitum, and id genus plurima. Quid quod lex in plena sua potestate erat
Crescite and multiplicamini, neque adhuc post natos homines quid piam in sacris
scripturis legitur, quod huic doctrinae Pontificiorum favere videatur.
Provocent ad Paulum licet 1. ad Timotheum capite 5. de prima fide. Et demus
tubam illam coelestem de voto coelibatus loquutam, quod tamen nunquam probabunt
Pontificii, Quid hoc ad votum beatae Virginis? aut quod tantopere cupiunt, ad
vitam monastic^m, ad l^castas moniales? Diaconissas vult Paulus, sed viduuas,
sed sexagenarias: nunc autem intra monialium septa includuntur mis^rae
Virgins, vix pueritiam egressae, vix ingressae adolescentiam. Et quorsum ^^ta
omnia, nisi quod sanctissimum matrimonii statum devoverunt perditi, hoc ipso
nequiores quod in tanta otii and rerum affluentia ipsa incontinentiae voragine
absorbeantur penitus. A ducendis interim uxoribus sic abhorreant, ut quicquam
libero lectulo negent esse jucundius cum tamen e multis vix unum reperiatis
liberum lectulum, nisi hoc sit esse liberum, onerari meretriciis complexibus,
premi concubitu Sodomitico, contrahi libidine incestuosa: Deus bone! quot cum
Haereticorum patriarchis pep^gerunt faedus? Montanis, Talianis, Manichaeis,
etc. verbo complectar omnia.

Vxorem habendam non putat Quizinalis,
Cum vult habere filios and invenit.
Quanto foret consultius si ad Apostoli verba aures arrigerent aliquando?
Quisque suam uxorem habeat propter fornicationem: si exempla Patriarcharum,
Prophetarum, and Apostolorum sibi ante oculos proponere non dedignarentur,
Quorum vita fuit melior cum conjuge, quam nunc
Nostra sit exclusis thalamis and conjugis usu.


Atqui in ipsis etiam thalamis (proh dolor) quam multi quam multis errarunt
turpiter, nec cognationi, nec religioni, nec aetati quicquam tribuentes miseri!
Jam, o jam divitiae, and praeter divitias nil quaeritur amplius! Quid habeat,
quantum possideat, de moribus ultima fiet quaestio; pro pecuniis, and
possessionibus dimicatur vehementius, quam pro aris and focis. Jam nec una
India nostrae satisfacit cupiditati, nec unus orbis explet habendi insaniam,
acsi ad omnia potius, quam ad illud Pauli attenderemus de nubendo in Domino, de
fugien a divitiarum cupiditate: Quin potius demissis cristis, agnitaque nostra
and nostrorum fragilitate, sub potenti manu Dei humiliemur; nubamus, sed in
Domino, Joseph cum Maria, Justus cum justa, Catholici cum Catholicis, ut simus
in connubio Dei pariter, in Ecclesia Dei pariter, Deo inservientes, bonis
operibus invigilantes, ad Dei gloriam and commodum proximorum. --

Sequitur
Antequam convenissent, inventa est uterum far.
Helvidius homo ille turbulentus, and de Ecclesia Dei male meritus, textum
hunc, ut multa alia, non sana fide exponens benedictam in mulieribus Mariam,
modo caeterarum vere conjugem esse docuit, conjugio quidem rato and consummato
in Templo and in toro, and quod Christus est primogenitus non solum inter
multos fratres qui sunt per gratiam, sed and primogenitus inter multos, quos
habuit fratres, secundum carnem. Ecquid simile haec verba sonant? annon
Virginem intactam, immaculatam, illabatam evincunt penitus? post sponsalia non
convenisse? Joseph Mariam non cognovisse? gravidam licet, at sine viro gravidam
fuisse? Atqui illud Ante terminis reciprocis aliquid, Post factum vel faciendum
ingerat necessum est. Belle quidem and Philosophice. Audias igitur ipsissimus
locutionis formulas. Antequam in portu pranderet ad Aphricam navigavit (i. e.)
sine prandio. Moriebatur antequam poenitentiam egerat (i. e.) sine poenitentia.
Judicarunt Judices antequam causam cognoscerent (i. e.) causa incognita.
Antequam convenissent (i e.) sine al^quo congressa and commistione carnis.

Desponsa erat Maria, non tamen in concupiscentia juncta: ibi nuptiae, sed ibi
nuptialis concubitus non fuit: matrimonium sed copula conjugali, non carnali.

De fide itaque credimus and contestamur Christum natum ex Maria Virgin,
Virgin ante partum, post partum Virgin, and semper Virgin. Annon ista cuivis
sanae mentis Christiano sufficient? Sufficerent proculdubio, sed antiqua illa
Serpentis filia Curiositas discordiarum semina and litis materiam undique
seminans, Hominem novitatis avidum ad vias Dei impervestigabiles perscrutandas
excitavit, fabulas, (...), stultas quaestiones, contentiones vanas and mutiles
excogitavit.

Omnes hodie Theologorum centuriae clauso Virginis utero Christum prodisse
volunt, ita Rhenanus: negat Tertullianus. Ego mihi obstetricis parts non
aslumam, nec tantis componendis litibus operam dabo. Videant tantum Pontificii
si non and Valentinianae haerese^^ rei sint. Christum per Mariam tanquam per
fistulam pertransisse: eo enim res redeat necesse est, dum suam de sole per
vitrum transparente similitudinem amplectuntur. Atqui Virginem dicemus, aut
corruptam; aut more caeterarum non peperisse, aut more caeterarum Virginitatem
amisisse.

Iniquus es Aquinas, and inconsiderate callidus; ac si parere Jesum esset
corrumpere Mariam; aut Aperire filii perire matris denotaret. Vide potius ne tu
justissimis Mariae laudibus, quam injuste detrahas qui mavis virginem quam
matrem perhiberi, aut si matrem quod portaverit non quod peperit Christum
Dominum.

Sed missa haec faciam, quid enim nobis cum topicis Scholasticorum argumentis?
cur tam strenue pro aris and focis discutienda, quorum nec cognitio ad mores
informandos, aut ad haereses extirpandas, aut ad divina Scripturae theoremata
enucleanda quicquam proderit.

Atque utinam apud nos non haberemus plurimos, qui ob modicas quaslibet causas
and contentiones, scindunt and separant unitatem Ecclesiae, inconsutilem
Christi tunicam, fere dixeram gloriosum Corpus dividentes.

His ita explicatis eo jam tandem provecta oration est, ut quod in ultimum hujus
Concionis locum reservavi, de Spiritu Sancto aliquid adjiciendum sit.

Inventa est uterum far ex Spiritu Sancto. In paucis verbis quam multae
sententiae elucent? quot miracula and praedictiones attinguntur? quantus
misericordiae thesaurus and abyssus latitant? Deus homo: Virgo matter: Creator
creatura: profecto quod caecus ille a nativitate, Johan. 9. a saeculo non est
auditum, and aetas postera simile non dabit. Quod ille Deus and factus est
homo: illa virgo, and peperit hominem (...)! Quis tandem homo, quis Propheta,
quis Angelus plane plene istam enarrabunt generationem?

Esaias Propheta, sed non potuit, cap. 53. liceat enim mihi (multi licet
reclamitent) non sine multis consentientibus, de hac Christi nativitate
Prophetam intelligere. Esaias Propheta, sed non potuit.

Johannes Baptista plusquam Propheta, nec ille valuit: Vox illa clamitantis tam
alte clamitare non didicerat.

Gabriel qui mysterium hoc multos ante anno, Danieli praedixerat, and dum haec
geruntur ad beatam Virginem nuncius advenerat, Gabriel (inquam) quaerenti
Virgini, Qui fiet istud? ulterius respondere non potuit, quam virtus altissimi
obumbrabit.

Et tu O Matthaee, nativitas Jesu Christi sic fuit? dicat licet Evangelista,
sic fuit, atque sic tantum potest dicere Inventa est uterum far ex Spiritu
sancto. Homines, Prophetae, Angeli amplius dicere non possunt. Homines,
Prophetae, Angeli, amplius inquirere non debent.

Dicam ergo quod Tertullianus, quis revelavit quod Deus texit? unde
sciscitandum est? praestat ergo per Deum nescire, quia non revelaverit, quam
per Hominem scire, quia ipse praesumpserit. Aut quod Augustinus, in rebus
mirabiliter factis, Tota ratio facti est potentia facientis.

Facessant hic Philosophi cum natura specifica, and natura determinata, cum
potentia generantis ad rem genitam, and genitae praeviis ad suam formam
dispositionibus: cum sub his terminis and primus Adam e rerum serie eximendus,
and primus motor ad ipsam seriem restringendus sit; and (quo magis (...) dari
non potest) natura naturans ipse Deus in angustias ipsi naturae naturatae non
competentes redigeretur.

Facessant Theodosion Ephesius, and Aquila Ponticus, de quibus Irenaeus, lib.
2. cap. 24. Facessant (inquam) cum omnibus suis Judaeis vanis, impiis, and
incredulis; non opus est ut sit adolescentula, si Virgo sufficiat: fert enim
uterum ex Spiritu sancto. Quid ego hic turbam illam Haereticorum in scaenam
producerem Spiritu erroris agitatam? Cerinthum, Ebionitas, Photinianos,
Eunomium, and Nestorium? quorum haereses vel nominare, esset opera abuti and
oleo* Ecclesiae credant, vel loquenti Angelo fidem adhibeant: Evangelistam sine
praejudicatis affectibus and contradicendi studio legant, perlegant. Maria
inventa est uterum far ex Spiritu sancto.

Non ergo Christus filius est Josephi.
Nec filius Dei per adoptionem tantum.
Nec habuit Deum factum sibi comitem.
Nec quid aliud, ut autumat antiquorum prophanitas.
Sed filius altissimi, conceptus ex Spiritu sancto, natus ex Maria Virgin. Et
adhuc desiderat incredulus rations? Qui scripsit lapideas tabulas sine stilo
ferreo, ipse gravidavit Mariam Spiritu sancto: Qui fecit mundum ex nihilo,
formavit Christum in utero: Qui os aperuit loquentis asini, and ventrem aperuit
concipientis Virginis, and adhuc desiderat incredulus rations? dicat ergo mihi
quomodo Aaronis virga, arida Aaronis virga in unica nocte floruit, germinavit,
and matura protulit amygdala? quomodo sol stetit tanquam immobilis pugnante
Josua? aut december gradibus reversus est petente Ezekia? aut denique nullo
interveniente lunari corpore obscuratus est perpetiente Christo Domino? Accedam
propius -- Dicat de solis ortu and occasu, de terrae faecunditate, temporum
vicissitudine, and multis id genus millibus auditis, visis, and quotidianis. Si
ad haec vacillet, titubet, obmutescat humana ratio, number comprehendat magnum
illud mysterium de modo impraegnationis Mariae, aut incarnationis Domini? ah
nihil minus aut cedat ratio, aut cesset ingraculum.

Et jam quoniam ad radios solis hebescunt oculi, paulisper si placet ad umbram
remeemus, hic videbimus illam de qua diximus Aaronis virgam aridam and
faecundam; rubum ardentem, sed non comburentem: lupidem abscissum, sine manibus
abscissum lapidem; and denique florem campi non horti, florem inquam campi,
sine omni humano florentem adminiculo, non seminatum ab aliquo, non inpinguatum
fimo, non defossum sarculo; nolo plura quia non possum satis.

Est enim aenigma quod ipse Sampson non potest explicare; est nativitas quam
homines, prophetae, Angeli non possunt enarrare, puteus est altus, and in quo
hauriam non est mihi.

Habetis nunc commissae nobis legationis summam, verbis quidem perpaucis
expositam, sed quae reipsa immensam praebeant consolationis materiam. Quomodo
filius altissimi Dominus Jesus a throno patris sese demiserit ad uterum
virginis, nostram operaturus salutem and redemptionem, idque sine ulla operum
praecedent um, comitantium, subsequentium ratione; quomodo incredibili
communione divinam naturam and humanam in unam simul personam consociavit, ut
just victus esset inimicus hominis, factus homo; and denique quomodo Judex
ille cujus in manu vitae and necis potestas inclusa est, per omnia excepto
peccato nobis similis factus est. O quanta in his verbis misericordiarum
abyssus? quanta oppressi; conscientiis reposita spes? quanta post crebras hujus
vitae calamitates and multiplices miserias veram agentibus paenitentiam emersit
consolatio? Verum si quid laetioris aurae nos afflaverit, siquid gaudii nebulas
doloris and aerumnarum dispulerit; siqua faelicitatis expectatio languentes
animo, solata est, rerum meliorum successu ne insolescamus cum Epicureis, sed
in timore and tremore ambulantes nostram operemur salutem; hoc est sine
vanitate and arrogantia in justitiae stadio currentes fortiter operam demus
bonis operibus, ut quae emblemata sint salutis and praecursores gloriae, rami
paenitentiae, fructus fidei, ne cum Atheis pariter scortatoribus and adulteris,
qui Deum in hoc mundo, ejusque Religionem, qui Christum ejusque incarnationem
risui habent and contemptui, e sublimi praecipites subito in profundum exitium
and miserias sine fine duraturas abripiamur; sed quaeramus ante omnia regnum
Dei and justitiam ejus, and Christum ejus, Dei filium Dominum nostrum, cui cum
patre and Spiritu sancto sit omnis honor and gloria in secula seculorum.

FINIS.
The Testimony Given to the Reverend Dr. HENRY BYAM, AT HIS BURIAL IN THE
Parish Church of Luckham in the County of Sommerset.
-- UNto which blessed and happy estate, I doubt not but the soul of this our
Reverend Father here deceased is already arrived, whose body is now returning
to the earth from whence it came. But there is a box of Spikenard to be poured
upon it before it goes; and there is none here so much a Judas, I hope, to
account it wasted: For since the Wiseman tells us That a good Name is better
than a precious ointment, it were great injury to defraud him of that now he is
dead, who was so careful to preserve it whilst he was living: Especially since
this, and our tears, is all that is left us now to bestow upon him. But I know
that by my endeavoring to rehearse his due praises, I cannot but aggravate
that loss whereof I find you already but too too sensible: I shall therefore,
in pity to my self and you, be as brief in the relation of them as I can. And
though his whole life were like a garden of Spices, replenisht with all the
Graces and Virtues that can adorn a Christian; yet I shall only lead you
through some passages of it, where by the way you may gather your selves such
Posies of spiritual flowers, as may serve to perfume all your Actions as long
as you live.

I shall use n^ mystical order in composing them, but bind them up all
together, that so (as flowers do) they may yield the sweeter smell the one for
the other. But -- Inopem me copia fecit, which to pluck first I know not; like
a curious appetite at a sumptuous feast, I am puzzled with variety. And sure I
am, the Character I shall present you will be no more fit to be compared with
him for worth and excellency, than his Picture now taken by an unskilful
Painter, would be like him when he was flourishing in his perfect health and
vigor: But such as it is, drawn as well as I can, in watercolors you shall
have.

As his Body was Ex meliore luto, -- of a most excellent frame and
constitution, of a Temperature well nigh Ad pondus, so he had a Mind as near Ad
justitiam, most richly endowed: which portion of natural parts he improved so
well, that by the advantage of an ingenious and liberal Education, joined with
his own diligence and industry, he soon became in his younger years one of the
greatest Ornaments of the University; -- monstrari and dicier hic est, a man of
most excellent and polite learning; which seconded with Judgment and
Experience, after he began to serve at the Altar, made him like a burning and a
shining light, looked upon as the most acute and eminent Preacher of his time.
Witness those exquisite labors of his yet extant, and those other most
elaborate pieces which I have seen fairly written, and (if his Executor will so
far oblige us) ready for the Press. Witness his being chosen by the general and
unanimous consent of the whole Clergy of this Diocese, to serve at the
Parliament for their Clerk of the Convocation. Witness his most honorable
attaining of the Degrees of Batchelour and Doctor of Divinity; and last of all
his being advanced to serve near His Majesty's Person, as his Chaplain in
Ordinary, his Majesty doing him the honor to be his constant Auditour,
admiring equally his Learning and his Loyalty.

And in which of these he excelled most it is hard to speak: for during the time
of the late unhappy Rebellion, what could he do? how could he suffer more than
he did? at his own charge (as far as he was able) raising both Men and Horse
for the King, engaging his five Sons (all that he had) in that just quarrel;
exposing all his Estate to rapine and plunder, his Children to distress and
danger, and himself to many grievous shifts and exigencies: hunted up and down
by his and the Kings enemies as a Patridge upon the mountains, foret to fly and
hide himself in by-places and corners of the Country: And at last at that great
Age to cross the Seas for the safety of his life.

And all this he did only that he might keep a good Conscience, not out of any
base or greedy desire of Reward: For after his Majesty's return, when he might
easily have obtained what he would have asked, he contented himself only with
what his Majesty was pleased freely to bestow upon him; but had not his own
modesty stood in the way, it is well known his Majesty's bounty toward him had
not rested here, but he must have died a Bishop.

Come we now from the Court into the Country, where we shall find him as much
in the affections of the People as in favor with his Prince: Respected by the
Nobility and Gentry, honored by the Commonalty, reverenced by the Clergy, and
generally beloved of all. And good reason there was, for besides his excellent
good, sweet, and obliging nature and disposition, which drew to him the
affections of all that had the happiness to converse with him, his free hearty
entertainments and constant bounteous hospitallity challenged a respect from
all: Semper aliquis in Cydonis domo, may truly be applied to him; for his house
was Bethlehem, a house of Bread, where the rich were sure to find
divertisement, and the poor relief.

Yet was he as far from a wastful prodigality, as from a base penuriousness.
His Bounty was allayed with that Vetus parsimonia, so much heretofore esteemed,
and still exercised by all wise and sober persons: After he had taken enough
for himself, his Friends, and his poor Neighbors, he carefully laid up the
remainder, wherewith he has made a competent provision for his Family: which
being so honestly gotten, and so honorably saved, will doubtless carry Gods
blessing along with it as it had his.

Nor was his Religion toward God less than his Loyalty to his Prince, or his
Charity to his Neighbor; it lay not so much in the tongue as in the heart. He
manifested his Faith the surest way, by his Works. He was no Pharisaical
Christian; he did not blow a Trumpet when he gave Alms; not tell the People by
his looks when he fasted, nor call for a witness when he prayed. He had got
such an art in Giving, that one hand know not what the other gave. He had a way
to conceal his Fasts, by the cheerfulness of his Countenance, and he cared for
no other eye to behold his Devotions but Gods and his holy Angels.

And as he had God for his Father, so he had the Church for his Mother, which,
next to God, he still respected and reverenced, sympathizing with her in what
condition soever she was in. If she wept, then did his eyes gush out with
water; if she rejoiced, then was his mouth filled with laughter, and his tongue
with joy. How have I seen him droop at the news of Gods Ark being in danger to
be shaken? and how would his spirits revive again at any good tidings of its
peace and settlement? how did he hate all those that had evil will at Zion! yea
he hated them as David did with a perfect hatred. And how did he delight in all
such as did seek the peace of Jerusalem! In a word, they that were friends to
the Church were his friends; and he had no enemies but her Adversaries.

As to his dealings amongst men, they were all square, and above-board. He was
a perfect lover of Justice, and hated falsehood more than death. His love where
he professed it, was without dissimulation: He was a true Nathaniel, in whom
there was no guile.

And have you heard of the patience of Job? why such was his: I can compare it
to no other: As they were both upright men, and such as feared God and eschewed
evil; so was God pleased to afflict them much alike. Job was cast out of his
own house, and so was he: Job was plundered of his Cattle by the Sabeans, and
so was he of all that he had, by worse than the Sabeans, if possible, by the
rebellious Sequestratours: Job lost his Children, so did he; only in this his
misery was not so great, Jobs Children were taken away rioting in a
Banqueting House, but his died honorably in the service of their Prince: Job
was afflicted in his Wife too, and so was he; but in a quite contrary manner,
Job in having the worst of Wives, He in losing the best: But the manner of his
losing her could not but add much to his sorrow; for she was snatched out of the
world in a tempest, and swallowed up quick by the merciless waves, having all
the remainder of the treasure he had about her, to a very considerable value;
and a far greater treasure in her arms then that, even his (...), his young and
darling Daughter, who chose rather to embrace Death, than leave the embraces of
her tender Mother; and so both sunk together, with a Maidservant that attended
her, into the depth of the Sea. There are some, as I think at this time
present, who were then with her, who remain the Monuments of Gods mercy in
their deliverance, and faithful Witnesses of the truth of what I speak. Whose
Courage, whose Constancy but Jobs or His, would not have staggered at such a
shock? whiles he like Job (having the Anchor of his Hope both sure and
steadfast) stood like the Center unmoved: And in the midst of all these Crosses
and sad events that befell him, he looked upon the Divine hand invisibly striking
with those sensible scourges, against which he durst not either Rebel or
Murmur. All those extremities did but exercise his Faith, not weaken it, which
like a well wrought Vault, grew the stronger for the many pressures which were
laid upon him. In all this he did not sin against God by his Impatience, nor
charge God foolishly, but (with holy Job) resigned himself wholly up to Gods
will, saying with him, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be
the Name of the Lord.

Nor were they more unlike in their Deaths, than in their Lives. The Lord
blessed the latter end of them both, more then their beginning. Job died being
Old and full of days, and so did he; so full of Days that he was satisfied,
if not weary with long life, desiring rather to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. And so he died with Moses at the mouth of the Lord: God gently drew out
the breath which he had breathed into him; quietly impinn'd his Tabernacle, and
so took him to himself in peace.

And now I find my self like to that bad Orator, who could not desinere, knew
not how to make an end; which I cannot but be the more unwilling to do, because
I know that as soon as I have finished my discourse, he will be carried from us,
into the silent retirement of the Grave, and will be no more seen. And methinks
it is some comfort to enjoy him even thus: But we must part. The Grave beckens
him, and methinks I see him beckning us to follow him. O my Father, my Father
--! Nature would speak more, but Religion commands me silence. Could our
Prayers have prevented his death, we should have sighed out our Souls to God to
have begged his life; and could our tears yet restore him, I see by those
watery planets in your eyes, we could command a deluge, like to that in the
floor of Atan, or that of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo. But he cannot
come to us, and that is his happiness; but we shall go to him, and that is our
comfort. Let us not mourn for him therefore as men without hope. It Is but his
Body that is dead, his Soul is still alive, as well as ours; but far more
happy: being already free of the glorious Company of Saints and Angels. And we
shall meet again (I trust in Glory) both our Souls and our Bodies; where all
sorrow shall be wiped from our eyes; where there shall be no more fear, nor
death, nor sin; but we shall be all as the Angels of God.

And so Lord thy Kingdom come; so come O Lord Jesus, come quickly: In the hour
of Death, and in the day of Judgment, good Lord deliver us. Give us grace so to
live in thy fear, that we may die in thy favor, that so after this mortal life
ended, we may be received by thee into those heavenly habitations, where (we
trust) the Soul of our Dear Father here departed, together with the Souls of
all them that sleep in the Lord JESUS, enjoy perpetual rest and felicity. Unto
which, GOD of his infinite mercy bring us all for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

FINIS.

