A NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings of the COMMISSIONERS Appointed by O. Cromwell,
For EJECTING Scandalous and Ignorant MINISTERS. In the Case of Walter Bushnell
Clerk, Vicar of Box in the County of Wilts. WHEREIN IS SHOWED That both
Commissioners, Ministers, Clerk, Witnesses have acted as unjustly even as was
possible for Men to do by such a Power: and all under the pretense of Godliness
and Reformation.

Thou shall not raise, or receive a false report, Exodus 23.1. Si falsus testis
perit qui injuratus testimonium dicit ( --) Deuteronomy. 19 16 ad 21. Quid nostris,
qui iurati testimonum dicunt, fict^? Et si (...) testis perit, quid judici
iniquo obveniet?^ Printed for R. Clavell at the Stags-head in S. Paul's church
yard, 16^^

To the Honorable Sir Anthony Ashlie-Cooper, Knight and Baronet, And John
Earnly, Esquire Knights of the Shire for the County of Wilts: As also to the
Honorable the Citizens and Burgesses returned for this present Parliament for
the respective City and Buroughs of the same County.
Renowned Gent.
I Am not so short-sighted, but that I foresee to what exceptions, and censures
I expose my self, both by publishing such a Discourse as this, at such a time
as this; as likewise, that I should so far imbolden my self, as to prefix your
honored Names to the Dedication. As first it may be looked upon as a very
unhandsome attempt (to give it no worse a word) in me to be unseasonably
ripping up old sores, and out of some private animosity, to be blowing up those
coals which I should cover, and kindling that fire which I should quench, at
such a time, when as all men should contend for unity and concord; and strive
who should be the forwardest to forget and forgive injuries, from the Command
and Example of both our God and our King. As 2. it may be looked upon as a very
great (if not an unpardonable) presumption in me, to present a discourse of
such a Subject as this unto your Honored selves, whose utmost and unwearyed
care has been (and may it still continue to be so) to compose the desperate
divisions, and to close up the even mortal wounds of our languishing both
Church and State.

Be pleased therefore to hear my Apology, as well as my charge. For the first;
I conceive it to be a duty incumbent upon every man, (and necessarily so) to
vindicate (by ways lawful and just) his own reputation, when it shall be
grossly defamed, or notoriously slandered: otherwise all infamous reports would
be taken for truths; by our silence we confessing our own guilt, and
acknowledging both the truth of the charge, and the justice of that power which
has rendered us as scandalous. This being (as I humbly conceive) rationally
premised, will be I believe as easily condescended unto: and then I shall take
the boldness to add, that pure Necessity enforced me to this Publication. For
so it was, that some of the Commissioners, Ministers, witnesses, and others,
who have eaten my bread (bel^ke thinking, that they had not yet enough undone
me) have, and still do, upon all opportunities offered, or sought, report me to
the world for such a one, so scandalous, so ignorant, as altogether unfit
either to return to mine own living or to be admited to any other: and that
(whatever there might be wanting of power in them to inflict such a sentence on
me, yet) there wanted not crime enough in me to deserve it. In short, they
stand it out, in asserting their own justice and godliness, and would have the
world believe, that I am altogether such as they have labored to represent me
to the world. Now the design of this Narrative, is to let the world know, that
these Commissioners and Ministers, whom I shall name by and by, have been as
unjust toward me, as they were incompetent in Law. And (beside, that their
Commission was derived from an usurping power, and Tyrannical) that their
Actings by that power were far more vile and odious, then their Ordinance gave
them license unto.

And for the 2. That I make my Application to your honored selves: it was not
only for this, because you are the worthy Representatives of that County, where
these things were transacted, and so no doubt would be most ready to appear in
the behalf of any one whose trust you have undertaken, so far forth as justice
and equity were on his side: But also for this reason; because I have heard
that some of those who have not done me the least wrong, have in a kind of
menacing manner reported it, That they would acquaint your Honorable Court with
the Depositions which were taken against me: Which should they have done, I
could expect no other from them but that they should act after their old
fashion; and if so (considering the conditions of those Commissioners,
Ministers, Clerks, Witnesses, and how they had dealt with me before) they might
have presented me to the world, as a person notoriously infamous. Had the
Nobles of Jezreel, that were his Judges, or the sons of Belial that were the
witnesses against him, been the only reporters of the story of Naboth; none
would have said that Naboth had been put to death unjustly. I have therefore
presumed to publish to the world a report of their proceedings in my case, even
as they were: tracing of them from day to day, from the first to the last; and
all along keeping my self so close to that Copy of the Depositions, which I
received from their Clerk, as that I have not willingly left out, altered or
added so much as one word unto them. Beside which (if you please to read this
Narrative over, or but a few lines in my precautions to the Reader) you shall
find me charging them, both Commissioners, Ministers, and Witnesses, with such
crimes which are not only odious in men as Christians; but with such, which
were looked, upon as vile and odious, by the more civil sort of Heathens. And
yet I have not charged them with a syllable which I am not able by proofs to
make good upon them. And now let them publ^sh their Depositions, when, or
present them to whom they please. I wish that they may present them to your
Honorable Court: having a confidence, that there we shall find such Judges who
are both wise and just. If they present the same which I here mention, (which
were all I could get from their Clerk) you have here answers unto them. If they
present other Depositions, those will be matter of charge against none, but
themselves.

And here I cannot but wonder, that such men as, these should presume so far as
to talk of acquainting this honorable Court with their proceedings; or indeed
dare to think of Parliaments but with trembling, or expect any thing from them
but punishment: since these very men (as to my business) then acted by that
power, and were very zealous for that power, and were very bitter against those
that did not own that power, as they would have them. (One of their chiefest
Articles against me, being this, That I was disaffected to the present
Government) when as it was by that present power (which they did then so much
adore, and endeavored so much to establish) That our late gracious King was so
barbarously murdered, and his Parliament ruined. And when I said, I cannot but
wonder at these men, my meaning is not only the Commissioners, but Ministers
likewise: some whereof (if I have not been misinformed) have had it in their
thoughts, to Petition your Honorable Court, that they might be confirmed in
those Livings into which they unjustly intruded themselves; and as unjustly
dispossessed others of. These Intruders having been their Judges, or else having
had some other hand in ejecting them; and their crimes published abroad for
infamous, and called by the names of Insufficiency, or Scandal; when as the
greatest, if not the only scandal was, that they would not be Traitors, or
engage themselves to break their Oaths, as many of them had done. What was
this, but to Petition your High Court to confirm those wrongs and grievances
which you came to redress? Nay more, what was it but to beseech your Honors to
own and countenance that Power which had endeavored the utter ruin of both
King and People?

But your Heroic and matchless actings (for which our cheerful, although yet
feeble Nation, does honor and bless you) have I think, taken from some such
their hopes, and from others their fears. Go on Renowned Patriots, go on. And
here let my humble lines address themselves to each Member of your Honorable
House: and not only so, but let me be pardoned my boldness, if I presume to
knock at the door of the other most Honorable House likewise. My business is
the same to both, it is but short, and a Petition, but not To, but For you. May
all your consultations be such, as the great God may bless, and prosper. May
they be for him, for your King, and for your Country; the happiness of all
which are so far from being inconsistent with each other, that they thrive the
better for being subordinate. To your everlasting Honor, you have let the world
see, That the happiness of the whole, and of every member consists in this,
that every one is restored unto, and injoyes his own. And doubtless our good
God meant it for a signal favor to you, not only that you were the Instruments
whereby he wrought his wonders, nay even his Miracles for the deliverance of
this Land; but that you should so willingly, so speedily, so unanimously, even
run and fly upon this employment, (and this it is which makes you the happy
instruments) and with such haste bind up our wounds, that we may say, That you
have removed the Iniquity of the Land in one day. And whereas it is usually
seen, that those who are for desolation and ruin, make most haste; a single
person in an hour overthrowing that, which many cannot repair in many days; it
must be recorded to your Renown, that you, by your happy faculty in reparation,
have far outgone the pace of ruin: you having in a day rebuilt that stately
fabric of Englands Monarchy, which many a one for a long time have been
pulling down. I shall add no more, but only this; He that with his Pillar of
fire, and a Cloud, conducted Moses and the Israelites through the Sea, was ever
with them, and assisted them to overcome the difficulties of the Wilderness.
May the same merciful power, which at first took you by the hand, always lead
you on your ways; that you may happily finish that great work which you have
so successfully begun, and made so fair a progress in. This shall be the daily
Prayer of

Your most humble Servant Gualt. Bushnell.
Jul. 24. 1660.
To the Readers.
WHom I shall precaution in some few things. As 1. when they meet with the word
Commissioners, they are not to understand me, as intending thereby all those
Gentlemen whose names were put into the Ordinance; as charging them with those
unworthy and unjust proceedings. Many whereof (as to my business) never acted;
yea further, I desire them to know, that some of those who sometime acted, I do
hereby acknowledge and report for Gentlemen of much Civility and Moderation.
But the Commissioners and Ministers which I here speak of, are those that made
ejecting of Ministers a kind of a Trade: And questionless to themselves it was
a very beneficial one: such who were constant, and frequent, and furious in the
business, and were these, Mr. Blisset, Mr. Thomas Bailey, Mr. Hunt of
Marlborough, and of the Ministers, Dr. Chambers, Mr. Byfield, and one of
Marlborough, I think they call him Mr. Hughes. Understand me to mean these
especially; when you meet with any hard words uttered against the
Commissioners, I say especially; for although some others acted to my
prejudice, yet because they never appeared but once, and then, (as it was
conjectured) upon the solicitation of these men, Mr. Ludloe of Claringdon.
James Hely of Sarum.
according to whose influences they acted, I shall for the present, only point
to them in the Margin.

And these respective persons I shall charge, and make good this charge upon
them. 1. The Ministers that they were ever meddling with that, which they had
nothing to do withal. And 2. the Commissioners for often violating that
Ordinance by which they sat, and according to which they were to act, and that
in many particulars. As in admitting and countenancing such to swear, (if they
appeared against me) which their Ordinance excepted against. In excluding such
witnesses, if appearing for me, (yea after they had been sworn) which by their
Ordinance they were to admit of; and at last making a Peremptory Order, That
such as would might appear against me, but no more in my behalf. I charge them
again for endeavoring to suppress many Informations which were taken upon
Oath, and discountenancing, interrupting, and thwarting with many witnesses,
who would have deposed to the infamy of their witnesses. And their Clerk (Mr.
Blissets son) I charge for entering many Depositions by halfs; for confounding
the Order in which they were taken; for shuffling up two Depositions into one;
for leaving out very material clauses, which might have been to my behoof; for
endeavoring to insert such words which the Deponent never spoke, which might
have been to my prejudice; for leaving out in his Copy delivered to me, a
whole, yea a very material Deposition, notwithstanding he had formerly taken
it, together with the subscription of the Deponent: And I charge them all,
Commissioners, Ministers, Clerk, for countenancing and encouraging infamous
persons, such who had forsworn themselves, and touching some of themselves, in
their hearing. Such as appeared out of malice by their own confession, and were
proved guilty of suborning, and of being suborned, to their faces: Yea, and
such as we should have proved guilty of forgery likewise, had not these
Commissioners and Ministers by a notorious piece of injustice prevented it: so
that possibly the Readers may say, that they have met with a story somewhat
like to that of Naboth. Such Judges, such Witnesses, such a sentence, and such
a Malefactor: The Judges, although most unjust, yet pretending not only to
Justice, but Piety likewise. The witnesses most infamous, and yet countenanced
and made use of by these Judges, although they knew them to be such. And
(although the sentence be not altogether the same, yet) the Malefactors crime
being either the witnesses malice, or else that he held something which they
were sick for. These things being premised by way of Caution, I take my leave.

Gualt. Bushnell.

THE TRANSACTIONS at the time when first I appeared before the COMMISSIONERS
sitting at the Bear in MARLBURROUGH, FEBRUARY 14. 1655.
BY virtue of an Ordinance of OLIVER called the PROTECTOR, and his Council,
entitled, An Ordinance for the Ejecting of Scandalous, Ignorant and
Insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters, bearing date Aug. 29. 1654 wherein
certain Commissioners with Ministers assistant were empowered to proceed
according to several Instructions therein specified, as by the said Ordinance
(whereunto for further satisfaction I refer thee) appears: I was by Warrant
from Marlburrough delivered unto me by Tho. Cox bearing date Jan. 21. 1655.
under the hands and Seals of Tho. Bailey, Tho. Hunt, Gabriel Martin, William
Shute, William Blisset, and Richard Phelps, summoned to appear before the said
Comm^ssioners at Marlburrough on the 14 day of February then next following in
these words.

WILTS, By the Commissioners for the ejecting of scandalous, Ministers, etc.
sitting at Marlburrough, this 21 day of Jan. 1655.
THese are to will and require you Walter Bushnell Clerk, Minister of Box, to
make your personal appearance before us at the Sign of the Bear in
Marlburrough, upon Thursday come three weeks, the 14 day of Febr. next coming,
to answer to a Charge of Articles, purporting matter of scandal* and
insufficiency, before us this day exhibited against you. Hereof fail you not at
your peril.

Given under our hands and Seals, the day and year abovesaid.
To Walter Bushnell Clerk, these.
On the outside, Mr. Bushnell of Box.


Eight of the Clock at night, I received a Copy of the Charge in these words.

WILTS ss. A Copy of the Charge against Mr. Bushnell, exhibited Januar. 21.
1655.
1. That the said Mr. Bushnell is guilty of profaning the Sabbath day.

2. That he is guilty of frequenting Inns, and Alehouses, and drinking to
Excess.

3. That he uses the Form contained in the Book of Common Prayer, and
Baptizeth with the Sign of the Cross.

4. That he is guilty of playing Cards and Dice.

5. That he is guilty of several attempts by him made on his servant woman to
have committed uncleanness with her.

6. That he has expressed his disaffection to the present Government, in
associating himself with several persons who were chief Actors in the late
Insurrection.

Ex. per me William Blissett.
Vera Copia.

To these Articles I pleaded not guilty, which I subscribed at the foot of
them, adding further to Mr. Shute, and Dr. Chambers (the only persons that to
my knowledge I had ever seen before) that if those Articles were true, then was
I notoriously scandalous; but if false, then were the Informers Notorious
Slanderers, or words to that purpose. To which Dr. Chambers replies to this
purpose, That the several parties should be brought face to face. So that
waiting only for a Copy of the Articles, for which I gave the Clark, (Mr.
Blissets Son) 2 s. 6 d. I was at that time dismissed until further summons.

Articles were exhibited by one John Travers of Slaughtenford, commonly then
called Captain Travers. This Trade of Information and such unworthy shifts
being conceived to be almost all that he had to live by, he being looked on as
a Fellow merely Mercenary, framing Complaints against men for no other cause
but that he might be hired to hold his peace: and endeavoring to displace
Ministers, for this reason, that he might have his reward for making room for
others to come into their Livings. And I make no doubt of it, but that as it
was hope of reward which moved him to act, so at first it was indifferent to
him from whom he had it. A good Crust would have so charmed this Cerberus, that
he would not have opened his mouth unless it had been in my behalf. Nor do I
make a question of it but that as some reward from me would have kept him
quiet, or made him for me, so that he had some promises given him, or somewhat
assured him in case he would appear against me. The man whom they have put in
my place has complained of the Charges be has been at in getting of it; He
told me it cost him 80 l.
(one must have 20 l. another 10 l. another 10 l. and 10 l. it cost him in such
a business) now there is no doubt but that John Travers had his share in this
Dividend as well as in the Service: Neither can I think that Mr. Stern would
have beknaved him (ask William Blisset the younger, and Tho. Cox how) as he did
some others, if John Travers had travailed and swore for him upon his own
Charges. And for some such kind of man was he looked upon by Mr. Chambers
himself, when he first delivered in these Articles against me; who (as he has
reported) called for the Articles with a purpose to have torn them, because
they were Exhibited by such a hand.

Articles, and the person that delivered them in, and the entertainment which
they were like to find from Mr. Chambers because they were delivered in by
such an hand; let me now tell thee what (as he has reported it) was the cause
which made the Doctor forbear tearing of them, and that was because he saw
there the Names of many whom he knew, and took to be honest men. And here (for
an Introduction to the honesty and discretion of the Dr.) I shall observe this
unto thee, that (as I have been told) he observed it, that although there were
several names subscribed, yet they were all written in the same hand, from
which it must needs follow, that by the Doctors confession, the whole writing
both Articles and hands might be all forged as indeed they were; so that me
thinks the Doctor has very much overshot himself in point of discretion, for
he looks upon the Articles the more, because subscribed with such and so many
names; and yet 2 he acknowledges all the names to be written with one hand
which would have made any sober man the more to have suspected it. But yet the
Doctor had an evasion for this, for at my appearing before them at Caln some of
those whose names were subscribed, desired a sight of the Paper that they might
know who had thus abused them which they could not obtain; yet the Dr. (that we
might not prove his Friends guilty of Forgery) endeavors to preserve their
reputation with a Salvo to some such purpose, That their Names were written
only by way of a Memorandum, that in case they were called upon, they could
depose to these Articles, that that might be done without their knowledge: I
think he added, That it was an usual course in the proceedings of these
Commissioners. But now I must tell thee, that many of them whose names were
subscribed to those Articles, did touching my self first under their own hands,
certify to these Commissioners the quite contrary to these Articles, and
afterward being before them and sworn, were so far from testifying any thing to
the sense of the Articles, as that all they said was to my vindication, all
which was industriously declined by the Dr. and his Commissioners, for although
there were many of them before them, who said much, yet we have not so much as
their names in the Depositions. So that this Salvo of the Doctors although with
him it be but Gl^ssa Ord^noria, yet is it after the rate of some of such
Principles who draw up their Memorandums as they quote Texts and Authors to the
quite contrary of their intents.

John Travers, the reason which (beside common report which renders him such a
man) moves me to think in this particular that some feeling would have stopped
John Travers his mouth, is this: Sometimes before he delivered in these
Articles to the Commissioners, he did several times, and at several hous^s,
Alehous^s and others, speak of them, yea and read them to several Companies,
which I believe he therefore did, that the report thereof might come to my
ears: and that that report might alarm me to make in, and to take some timely
course that this storm might be diverted: But now I considering, that he who
goes about privately to practice with an Informer, does first on the matter
confess himself guilty: Next that, he does reward him for one Crime, and
thereby encourage him to commit another: I considering again, that such sort of
fellows will be no longer quiet then they are fed, and that they have (as
strong stomachs, so) quick digestions: Considering again that the Crimes which
I was charged with, were gross and scandalous, and if true, deserving a
greater punishment then Ejectment: Considering again that the Commissioners
mentioned in the Ordinance were many of them Gentlemen of eminent rank, and
looked upon as men of discretion and integrity; and considering that the
Instructions by which these Commissioners were to proceed were such that had
they been duly observed, it was almost impossible that a person not guilty
should be prejudiced: For they were to examine witnesses upon Oath on the
behalf of the person Charged, and the proof of the Charge was to be made by
credible witnesses, (the sequel will show thee how they observed or kept to
their Instructions) being confident likewise of mine own innocence as to those
Crimes which were there charged upon me, and persuading my self that I should
find nothing but Justice allayed with Equity and Candor in my Judges, I say,
considering these things, I cast my self upon my trial. But now how much I was
mistaken in some of these men, how disproportionable their proceedings were to
the Ordinance by which they acted, how little justice I found where I expected
Lawful favor, this ensuing Discourse shall acquaint thee. And indeed calling
to mind that abundance of Godliness which some of these men pretend unto,
making that the Symbol to difference themselves from other men, and yet
observeing their actings and proceedings I cannot but say as Solomon did, Eccl.
3.16.
And moreover I saw under the Sun the place of Judgment that wickedness was
there, and the place of righteousness that iniquity was there.

The Transactions at my Second time of appearing before them, at the Antelop in
Lavington, April 28. 1656.
February, 1655. until the 24 of April, 1656. at which time the^e came a
Soldier to my House and delivered me a piece of Paper in these words.

Mr. BUSHNELL,
I Am commanded by our Commissioners, to let you know, that they expect your
appearance before them upon Monday next at the Antelop in Market-Lavington,
where they will examine the Witnesses for proof of the Charge against you; if
you intend to make defense thereunto you are then to bring your Witnesses with
you.

Per me William Blisset, Clerk.
Newsarum 31 of March, 1656.To Mr. Bushnell, Minister of Box, these.

As I said before, I received not this Paper till the 24 of April, (for his
pains the Soldier required and received 2 s. 6 d.) And notwithstanding I could
then easily have absented my self, and justified my nonappearance, both
because the Monday next after the 31 of March, on which by this Warrant I was
to appear, was April 7. and so elapsed more then a F^^tnight before the Paper
came to my hands: as likewise because I had not five days warning before hand
as the Ordinance injoyns. Yet because the Soldier told me that the Monday next
mentioned in the Warrant did not refer to March 31. on which it was dated, but
unto the 24 of April, on which he delivered it, and so must be April 28. as
also being unwilling to move a Question, whether by five days mentioned in the
Ordinance were to be understood five days inclusive, or exclusive, I say I
being unwilling to make use of such po^^ shifts, which might rather render me
suspected then any way vindicate me, and desiring nothing more then a fair and
speedy hearing I repair to Lavington accordingly: I shall observe this unto
thee from the last clause of their Warrant, that they command me to bring
Witnesses for my defense when as none had deposed against me, and yet afterward
when they had received Depositions against me, they rejected whom they pleased
of my Witnesses, and at last made a peremptory Order, that no more of my
Witnesses should be admitted, of which more hereafter.

Lavington there appear as Witnesses for the Commonwealth (for that was the
name by which they were called) William Pinchin, Peter Webb, Thomas Powell,
Mary the Wife of Henry Workman, and Jane Hendie Widow of Box, and Obadiah
Cheltenham of Ditcheridge, who being all sworn, were required to speak their
knowledge touching the Charge against me. I must tell thee, that William
Pinchin (as I take it, before he was sworn) desired to be excused in regard of
some near relation of Kindred which was betwixt us two; but this I opposed,
knowing it to be a piece of himself; he I knew for a long time had been the
prime Contriver of all; and that the others who appeared there, were there by
his procurement; and that some of them acted according to his Instructions. I
conceived likewise that this might be to gain the greater opinion from the
Commissioners that he seemed thus to hang back (for in such cases forward
Witnesses, even amongst Heathens, were not so well thought of) and therefore he
pretends an unwillingnesse to that which he most desires; Capt. Scotton, Mr.
Blisset, Mr. Hely, Oliver's Commissioners for Decimation.
for I am assured, that he would never have gone about so to excuse himself, if
he had believed that such an excuse would have been accepted of. Somewhat it
was which Mr. Blisset then spoke unto him, that he had been lately sworn before
other Commissioners (yea and there he approves himself a Valiant Knight) which
I conceive was spoken either out of wonder, that William Pinchin should now be
so calm who was lately so fierce, or else by way of invitation to encourage him
to go on.

William Pinchin goes on in these words:

That about Eight years since, when Mr. Bushnell came first to Box, he feasted
his friends on the Lords day, and having drank liberally that day there, one
Thrift, one of the Guests was killed in the Tower there, but by what means this
Deponent knows not. And says farther, That he knows, that Mr. Bushnell
have usually till within this two years frequented Alehouses in Parish
business, and have there drank hard in Mr. Speak 's and Mr. Long 's Company;
and have saw him set there drinking after they have been gone, but cannot say
that ever he saw him drunk. And says further, That Mr. Bushnell have always
baptized Infants by the form of the Common Prayer till the last Sabbath day,
excepting the Sign of the Cross.

William Pinchin pretends he came unwillingly to swear, yet we see he comes not
unprepared. I shall therefore desire the Reader to take some notice of this
deposition which consists of three parts* answerable to the three first
Articles exhibited against me.

1. Profanation of the Lords Day.

2. Frequenting Alehouses.

3. Using the Common Prayer at the Baptizing of Children.

I shall observe something to thee touching all these accordingly as they lie
in order.

first I shall tell thee that whatsoever William Pinchin deposes touching my
Feasting on the Lords day, or drinking liberally on that day, or of the death
of John Thrift, he has only upon conjecture, or else upon hearsay: For he
then upon Oath acknowledged before the Commissioners, that he was not that day
at Box, but at Broughton, which is some four or five Miles distant from Box,
and it is like enough he was there at the Revel, that being their Revel-day.

2. He then deposed likewise that this Lords day was Midlent-Sunday.

3. He then deposed, that I preached not that Afternoon, imputing it to
Excessive Drinking; And yet we have not one word of this in the Copy of the
Depositions which we received from their Clerk. Whether it were ever taken, or
if taken, whether Index Expurgatorious has dashed it out I will not say.

Clerk was taking William Pinchins D^poposition, Mr. Byfield did often
interpose, as if it had belonged to him to teach William Pinchin how to swear,
and the Clerk how to enter it. Adding that if he wrote, so, or so, it would not
amount to a Charge, for that the latter part of it would contradict the former,
or words to such a purpose: (No Deposition pleased him but such as had poison
in it.) And here I must tell the Reader that this Mr. Byfield seemed wholly to
have forgotten both the place and the purpose for which his Name was put into
the Ordinance, for by that it is clear that neither Mr. Byfield nor any other
Minister has* any thing to do but only to assist the Commissioners in their
adjudging who shall be accounted ignorant and insufficient; whereas it is well
known that Mr. Byfield intermedled in the matter of Scandal more then all the
Commissioners beside. I appeared Nine times before them, where Mr. Byfield ever
made one; and (when the Pipe was out of his Mouth) his Tongue was seldom
silent: but either dictating to the Clerk; encouraging some Witnesses,
thwarting with, and threatening and turning back others; thrusting some out of
doors, that they might not hear how things past: charging the Clerk that he
should give no Copies of the Depositions, making Orders which were for his
purpose, reversing others which were not; reading and explaining Acts and
Ordinances; concealing some other which were not for his purpose, instructing
and Catechizing some of his Commissioners: Of all which thou shall have
particular instances in the Sequel. But now in the business which was properly
his, Examination, my man was as mute as a Fish, for I remember not that be
proposed so much as one question unto me. Indeed he has not been so favorable
in that particular to every body: For he has (as I have been told) pressed a
Neighbor of mine with a Question very earnestly and closely; and wot you what
it was? It was (doubtless with Mr. Byfield a fundamental one) What was the
yearly value of his Living? and indeed when Mr. Chambers preaching at Bath on
those words, Novem. 11. 1657.
Joh. 14.22. made this Observation, That Judas Iscarias proposed no Question,
but about Earthly things, as, What will you give me? Might not this have been
sold? etc. I could not choose but think of Mr. Byfield.

William Pinchin acknowledges himself to be absent, and yet he swears as if he
had been at Box. I am not so much a Lawyer as to know how far forth an Oath
will extend, or to what it will amount, if a man depose nothing but what he
has received by hearsay. Amongst the people of God heretofore the matter was
not established, Deuteronomy. 19.15.
but at the mouth of two or three Witnesses; they could not if absent send in
their Testimony under their hands, and then certainly much less could they
give Evidence of a thing which they never knew. In after Ages it is reported
that they deponed after this sort.

1. They must testify from their own sight.

2. What day of the Month such a thing was done. Weems. Chr. Synag. p. 167. ex
Talmud. lib. Shopherim, i. e. Judicum.


3. What Month of the Year such a thing was done.

4. What Seventh year of the Jubilee.

And sure enough it is that whatsoever is deposed in such a Case is no
Testimony but a Report, and so as to the Testimony and the Witness, it is
false, although the thing reported were true. Testis falsus est, non is modo
qui mendacium dicit, sed qui etiam quod verum est testificatur cujus certam and
indubitatam notitiam non habet, id est, testatur quod nec vidit, nec audivit,
nec expertus est. Cartwr. in P^. 21, 28
I presume they will not dislike my Author. He is a false Witness, not only he
who tells a Lie, but he also who testifies a truth whereof he has not a
certain and undoubted knowledge, that is, if he testify that which he has
neither seen nor heard, nor has had any Experience of; which I speak not in
any wise by way of granting that to be true which William Pinchin has informed
in this particular; for I shall manifest it hereafter unto thee, that this
report is both false and slanderous, but only to evidence thus much unto thee
that be it true, or be it false, yet William Pinchin could be no competent
Witness of it, because by his own confession he was at the same time at
another place about four or five miles off. It has been observed as a most
senseless and imprudent piece of malice in the Chief Priests and Elders, (and
indeed Malice is always such) that after Consultation they should order it in
Sanhedrim, Math. 28.11, 12, 13.
That large Money should be given to the Soldiers to say, that h^^ Discip^es
came by night, and stole him away while they slept. Si do^mierunt quomodo
surtum viderunt? Jansen in Concor.
Si autem non viderunt, quomodo fuerunt testes? If they slept, how saw they the
theft? and if they saw it not, how could they be Witnesses? Proportionably say
I, if William Pinchin were then at Broughton, it is impossible that he should
see it? And if he saw it not, how could he be a witness? Such conjecturall
reports or informations upon hearsay, I have known to have been rejected by
Justices of Peace in matter of Tithes; and shall such an O^th in one case be
insufficient to help a man to a shilling, and yet in another case be enough to
und^e him? And clearly these Commissioners gave me here a taste both of their
justice and discretion, as likewise hinted unto me what I was to expect from
them, in that they did not only receive such a deposition as this from such a
man as this; but also set it in the forefront, and make it the Leading
Deposition to all the rest.

Article, William P^^chin swore positively at this time at Lavington, that the
day whereon Thrift was killed, was Midlent-Sunday, and that I usually kept
Feasts on that day: May 8. 1656.
Yet at Marlburrough afterward he takes a greater latitude, and swea^s, That he
was assured that it was betwixt Candlemas and Easter (it seems he was not
assured of what be swore before) whereas upon search in the Register, it was
found to be on the 13 of September. (which as Mr. Byfield who pecused the
Register Book said) was nothing near it. As I remember it was at this time that
Mr. Blisset, to reconcile these clashing Oaths, and to strengthen his Evidence,
said that this mistake was only in a Circumstance, the Time; and such a mistake
is enough to mar the whole Action. Malum ex quolibe^ defectu. And if
Circumstances are enough to specificate moral Actions, then much more divine.
Oaths, as they are not to be urged, but in weighty and intricate causes, so
they are not to be taken without much deliberation and precaution. He who has
sworn to speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth forswears
himself if he speak any thing more, any thing less, or any thing beside, Dr.
Sanderson, de jur. prael. 3.
Qui in juramento assertorio aliter dicit quam res est et si in re l^vissima
pejerat. The least aberration in an assertory Oath, makes it no less then
Perjury. Thou shall swear the Lord lives in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness; Jer. 4 2.
in truth, not falsely; in judgment, Perk. C. C. lib. 2. Chapter 13. 2.
not rashly or unadvisedly; in righteousness, not wickedly. These three are
called Comites Juramenti, the Companions of an Oath, without which no Oath can
be lawful. Aquin. 22. and 89. A^t. 3 ex Hieron.
Judicio caret juramentum ^^cautum, veritate juramentum mendax, justitia
^uramentum iniquum, seu illicitum. And yet no less then two of these three
has William Pinchin neglected in his Oath; Judgment, for he swears rashly and
unadvisedly, mistaking the Spring for the Autumn, and March or April for
September: and that he made as little regard of swearing in truth, as he did to
swear in judgment, I am next to tell thee.

William Pinchin at this time at Lavington deposed that I preached not that
Afternoon when John Thrift was killed, imputing it to excessive drinking. May 8.
Whereas at Marlburrough he deposes, that I had received 6 s. 8. d. from the
Widow Hedges for preaching a Funeral Sermon upon a Lords day in the Afternoon,
at the burial of her Husband John Hedges. Now it appeared by the Register then
in place, and examined, that John Hedges was buried on the self same Afternoon
of the same Lords day whereon John Thrift was slain. So that William Pinchin
having formerly sworn that I preached not that Afternoon, swears afterward,
that I received Money for preaching a Funeral Sermon at the same time. Another
Circumstance for Mr. Blisset. I could not perceive it, that any of the
Ministers took it amiss* that I received such a reward; (perchance Mr. Byfield
looked upon it as a piece of Sacrilege that I took no more) but if they had,
it would have been testified to their faces, that some one among them had on a
time received three times as much for the like service.

William Pinchin did then look, being thus palpably convicted by himself, and
caught in his -- what shall I call it? Perjury: Lambert, Iren. l. 2. c. 4. page
395. mihi 5 Elizab. c. 9.14 Eliz. c. 1.
Perchance some may say, that according to the ancient notion of the word
Perjury as with reference to our Municipal Laws it was not so much: Or, shall I
call it false witness? it was more, because he was sworn, and the Rule of the
Civil Law is, Cod. lib. 4. Tit. 20. de Testibus.
that whosoever shall depose any falsehood in Testimony, shall be held guilty of
Perjury. But the Reader may call it what he please; yet of this I am sure, that
with God, and in Scripture Phrase, false swearing and Perjury are all one: With
him the Crime is the same wheresoever committed; and as the Crime, so
doubtless the Punishment will be the same: I say had you seen how Ghastly
William Pinchin then looked being thus surprised, you would have said, that
there needed no more to have stopped William Pinchins mouth from swearing, or the
Commissioners ears from crediting him.

Article of Charge against me. And he says further,

That he knows, that Mr. Bushnell have usually till within these two years
frequented Alehouses in Parish business, and have there drank hard in Mr.
Speak 's and Mr. Long 's Company, and have saw him set drinking there after
they have been gone, but cannot say that ever he have seen him drunk.



1. That we have here expressed, that he swears upon his knowledge; whereas we
have not the word in the former part of the Deposition, which may confirm thee,
that what he had deposed before, was either upon Conjecture or Hearsay.

2. Those words, That I have frequented Alehouses in Parish business, I shall
in this sense admit to be true. As often as there were Meetings at Alehouses,
touching Parish business, (which was but very seldom) I might frequent them;
that is those Meetings there, my Interest engaged me thereunto as much as any
man's: And that those Meetings were there, it was not long of me; it is w^ll
known, that there was a Room at the Church-house reserved for that purpose;
which Room William Pinchin ('it is like) thought not so fit to carry on his
Contrivances in; and therefore it might be a design in him to remove those
Meetings thither, because he was resolved (if swearing would do it) that to
that place with safety I should not come. It Is well known, that within these
few years William Pinchin has been a great Rate-maker, and seldom out of
Offices; that he has brought in large Accounts, and in those his Accounts it
will be made appear that he has made but little Conscience either of Honesty,
or of his Oath.

drank hard in Mr. Speke's and Mr. Long's Company. As touching the first of
these Gentlemen, Mr. Speak, I shall say, that (as I have heard) this was not
the first t^me wherein William Pinchin forswore himself, to wrong him And it is
not unlikely, but that this consideration, that Mr. Speak was my Patron, (and
now he is gone, and so in no capacity either to be pleased or offended with any
thing which I shall say, I assure thee, if ever any was, such he was to me,
vere Patronus, a Patron indeed; one who most freely bestowed the place upon me,
and I think he never repented that he had so bestowed it:) and I his Clerk,
that he was loving to me, and I as in duty bound, respectfull toward him; might
move William Pinchin (a professed Enemy and Pare^tibus, and Patronis, to
Parents of all sorts) to level at us both. And I believe ^t that William
Pinchin and I should have been better friends, if I had done by my Patron, as
he has done several times by his Parents, Cosen them, curse them, and beat
them out of d^res.

Speak; I could never hear it reported by any one (unless by him who will
swear any thing) that this Gentleman was ever given to intemperate Drinking, no
not in his healthy and ^^^^ger years: but now in his latter days, (and this
was the time to which this Deposition refers, and in which I had any knowledge
of him) it is well known that he was so valetudinary and crasie, that his own
Infirmities would have constrained him to have kept a temperate Diet, although
he had not been disposed to it.

Gentleman, Mr. Long, that he should be within two years, (that is within two
years of the time wherein William Pinchin thus deposed, which was April 28.
1656.) in such a place, and with such Company drinking hard, will seem very
strange to any one that shall peruse the Register Book of the Parish of
Corsham, for there it appears (and so much was certified to the Commissioners,
at their last sitting at Lavington, under the hand of the sworn Register of
Corsham,) that this Mr. Long was buried, December 9. 1651. So that if William
Pinchin swore truly, it must needs follow that this Mr. Long was drinking hard
at Box, more then two years after he was in his Grave at Corsham. Another
Circumstance for Mr. Blisset.

There is in the close of this part of the Deposition, That he cannot say that
ever he saw me drunk: Which Clause I would have the Reader to bear in his mind
until the Transactions of the next day.

refers to the third Article of Charge exhibited against me, it is this,

That Mr. Bushnell have always baptized Infants by the form of Common Prayer,
till the last Sabbath day, excepting the Sign of the Cross.

To which for present I shall say but only this, that for any thing William
Pinchin knew, it might be so, or it might be otherwise; for (excepting the
Sabbath which he speaks of in his Deposition, whereon he staid for a godly
purpose no doubt) it was none of his use in those few times he came to Church
to stay so long till Children were Baptized.

Peter Webb, in these words,

That he have often seen Mr. Bushnell at Alehouses, but only about Parish
business. And says further, That at Michaelmas was Twelve-Moneth he Baptized
this Deponents Child by part of the Book of Common Prayer, and that about four
or five years since, he saw him playing at Cards at Mr. Speak 's.

This Deposition (because it has nothing singular in it but playing at Cards,
which will fall under another Deposition) I shall at present pass over.

Obadiah Cheltenham, and swears, That he have often seen Mr. Bushnell at Clarks
Alehouse in Box, and at the George at Corsham, from five years past, till
within two years, but never saw him drink to excess.

No nor so much as drink neither, for his words were, That at Corsham he did
only look into the Room where I was, belike he means the Room where (after the
Sermon was ended) the Ordinary was kept. I wonder he had not charged me with
frequenting Inns and Alehouses at Lavington, Caln, Marlburrough, in attendance
to these Commissioners: For I can assure thee, that since I came to Box, I
never lodged so many nights in Inns and Alehouses, nor have spent a Tenth part
of Money in those Inns and Alehouses, as I have parted withal in this
business: And perchance some body, who knows the pulse of the Marlburrough
Commissioners very well, will (when I have told him all which I intend) say,
that my Discharge might have been procured at a much easier rate then mine
undoing.

Obadiah Cheltenham was far more fierce at Lavington then his Deposition
represents him: For (beside that he there thwarted with one witness, and
prompts another) he then upon Oath informs the Commissioners, That I had used a
Prayer before Sermon so often, that the very Boys of the Street, could repeat
it and laugh at it. Which passage it seems, Mr. Chambers noted, for (as I have
been told) he reported it in another place: Now since Obadiah Cheltenham had
always free admission to them, and a gracious Countenance from Mr. Chambers
and Mr. Byfield, I may conjecture, that in private at least this was looked
upon as matter of Charge against me.

Vindication in this particular, I shall offer to thy consideration these
things.

1. That I conceive it not to be any crime in a Minister to use a Set Form of
Prayer.

2. That I conceive it not any crime in a Minister, to use the same set form of
Prayer more then once. I am not the first that says, That the gift of Prayer
does not exclude means, and endeavors of our own; as premeditation, diligence,
study, both of matter, order, words: Nor did I ever take praying in, or by, or
with the Spirit, and Extempore, unthought of, unpremeditated Prayer, for one
and the same thing. My present judgment is, that as to the public there is no
such praying by the Spirit as when we have seriously considered and bethought
our selves aforehand, both of what we have to pray for, and of whom we are to
ask it. Nor am I singular in it if I should say, that the Spirit does then help
our Infirmities, Danaeus in Orat. Dom. Tract. 1. c. 12. p 39. mihi.
when as with due affections, and requisite ardency of desire, we pray as we
have premeditated, or have been taught. And if it happen, that the people are
well acquainted with it, it is so much the better, the business is their own,
and of such a nature as that it is a business which nearly concerns them, and
as I conceive it the Ministers duty to fit his public Prayers so as they may
be most for public use, so I conceive it fit likewise, that the Congregation
be well acquainted with both the matter and order of them, that both the one
and the other may engage with the greater fervency, because they all know, how
nearly they are concerned in it; and can all joyfully say Amen unto it. And to
give me thy thoughts in this particular, I say, that as the Example of those
who have attempted this unpremeditated way could never encourage me to attempt
the like, so neither have the Arguments which they urge against this
premeditate way of Prayer prevailed so far with me, as to make me change my
mind.

particular, I shall say thus much, That I have formerly made use of the same
Prayer in Congregations far more judicious and numerous then is that of Box,
yet I could never hear any thing taxed in it, as misbeseeming or ridiculous: No
nor at Box neither, unless it were by William Pinchin, and Obadiah Cheltenham,
or such like, who may have the impudence to dislike what they have not the
grace to practice. Nay, even at Box, I am confident of it, Obadiah Cheltenham
may go throughout the whole Parish, and be so far from finding Boy, or Boys
that laugh at it, as that he shall not find any one that remembers so much as
three lines of it: And therefore I look upon this as a double slander, against
the Boys and my self.

Obadiah Cheltenham prompted Thomas Powell another Witness, to inform, That I
had preached unprofitable Doctrine; what it was, we shall have when we come to
Tho. Powels Deposition. And doubtless, Obadiah Cheltenham would have had the
Commissioners believe, that there was nothing but good meaning in all this;
that the desire of his heart, and his utmost aims were, that they might be fed
with Food both wholesome and convenient for them; and therefore I must be
represented as an unprofitable Teacher, and so to be laid aside, so to usher in
an expedience to these their Godly desires: But see now how the event has
bewraid all. Mr. Stern has lately told me, that these men, William Pinchin,
and Obadiah Cheltenham, invite him to Box with much importunity, and many
promises, even beseeching him to come and preach Christ among them, of which
for a long time they said that they had a great want; and therefore (like the
man of Macedonia in Paul's Vision) they pray him to come unto them and help
them: But (said he) all this was but for some Interest of their own, their gain
(belike) being their godliness; William Pinchin of late coming but seldom to
Church, and Obadiah Cheltenham being (as it is said) a frequenter of the
Meetings of the Anabaptists.

Thomas Powel, and deposes, That sometimes, till within Four years past, he
have seen Mr Bushnell in Raynalds and Baylies Alehouses in Box, but knows not
what drew him thither: but never saw him drink to excess. And says, That till
within three or four years past, Mr. Bushnell have baptized by the Form of
Common Prayer. And that about two years since, Mr. Bushnell preaching against
Malice, said, That Malicious persons were the Devils Nymphs, and wished them
with him for their wages.

Thomas Powel had been then demanded when he had been last at Rainalds, he
would have been made confess that he had not been there in six years before,
and therefore possibly he could not see me there within four year. But now
whereas he adds, he knew not what business drew me thither, I doubt me that he
wilfully forgets himself, for he cannot but remember that the business which
once drew me to Baylies, July 12. 1651.
was his own; to compose a difference then depending betwixt himself, and a
Neighbor whom he then maliciously and spitefully prosecuted, about which we
spent the greater part of the night: and I believe that he cannot forget that
the business which drew me to Bailies at another time was to beg relief for
Marlburrough, May 15. 1653.
where on the Lords Day we found him sitting at a Table with a Jug before him:
when and where with some ado he bountifully advanced a Groat toward that
charitable work; which was not so much as we received from some who lived in
the Church-house, and received Alms of our Monthly Collection: Nor had our
Benevolence to Marlburrough, amounted so high as it did, unless some amongst
us had been far more liberal then Thomas Powel was. Now I cannot readily
remember that I ever saw Tho. Powel at Baylies but only at those times.

Marlburrough, I must tell thee, that some of that place (such whom I believe
had their share in the Dividend) have since made me but a very sorry requital,
either for my pains for them, or my Charity toward them. I little thought it,
when I went about from house to house throughout our whole Parish and Tythings,
for several days together, with much importunity too, to beg for
Marlburrough, that Marlburrough men, Mr. Blisset, Mr. Hunt, Mr. Tho. Bailey.
(within three years after, sitting in their stately houses, built at the
Countries and other men's Charges) should be with the first that should turn me
out of doors: That those who (had it not been for the Benevolence of the
Country, which was much advanced by the industry of the Ministers) might have
sat without doors, should with a breath leave us in as sad or a sadder
condition then the fire left them. And thus much will I say more as to mine own
particular, that my Purse as well as my Pains went very far for them, for they
received more from me, and my little Family then from all those 22 whom they
countenanced and encouraged to swear against me: I recorded it in our Parish
Register Book, both the sum which was collected for them, as also the names of
the persons who bestowed their pains in Collecting of it. At the White Heart at
Marlb. July 2. 1656.
Which one of the Marlburrough men, (Mr. Tho. Bailey perusing the Register Book)
noted, how he liked it I know not, perchance not so well. I have read of those
of that disposition, that being once aloft, cannot endure to be told that ever
they went, or sent a begging; but when they were on their legs again, their
main Endeavors should be to remove or crush them who lifted them up, for fear
it should be known that they had been down. Now whether I incurred the
Marlburrough men's displeasure in being so saucie as to commit their (sometime)
indigent and begging condition to Posterity, (they though most willing to
receive, yet as unwilling to be told of it) I will not judge. I have not now
our Register Book at command, but for want of that let these Papers remain as a
record to testify to the present and future times how these Marlburrough men
have requited me.

Tho. Powel's Deposition is, That he never saw me drink to excess: Which I
shall desire the Reader to keep in his memory till the Transactions of the next
day.

Next he swears, That till within this three or four years, Mr. Bushnell have
baptized by the Form of Common Prayer.

To which I shall reply only this, that as this was nothing to the Ordinance by
which these Commissioners sat and acted, so it was more then Thomas Powel
knew, for he was a man that seldom came to Church, nor do I remember that I
ever saw him stay the time during the Administration of that Sacrament: For
present I shall desire thee to observe how Thomas Powel treads in William
Pinchins track, and swears as if he had taught him his Lesson.

That about two years since, Mr. Bushnell preaching against Malice, said, That
Malicious persons were the Devils Nymphs, and wished them with him for their
wages.

And where lies the matter of Charge here? or to what Article does this
Deposition refer? Is Malice become a Virtue? and if a Vice, is it so rare in
the Land, that it is unseasonable to reprove it? And what have we next? I said
that Malicious persons were the Devils Nymphs: Risum teneatis -- Indeed I could
not forbear, which doubtless (had he seen it) would have much offended Mr.
Byfield, as he was on the like occasion at another time. The Clerk, as
wondering at the Expressions, for some time withheld his hand, belike,
conceiving that Tho. Powel might mistake, but he continuing earnest, and often
iterating those words, Nymphs, Nymphs, the Clerk enters it accordingly.
Doubtless, Tho. Powel conceived these to be some stabbing words, he was so
zealous for them; and yet to any understanding man they will not amount to any
Charge, unless it be of simplicity, falsehood, or malice in the Reporter of
them. For

1. Few that know me will believe it, that I should ever say so. And

2. In case I had said so, the most that I could have been charged with, had
been impropriety or incongruity of speech, although we read of the Devils
Children often, yet of his Nymphs never, until in Thomas Powels Deposition.

Give me leave to adventure my conjecture how this might come to pass. I told
thee a little before, that Tho. Powel in his Depositions did tread in William
Pinchins steps, I doubt me that he had William Pinchin for his tutor here, and
that he taught him to say, that I had said that malicious persons were the
Devils Imps; which Thomas Powel misapprehending, or remembering, might swear
that I said, Malicious persons were the Devils Nymphs. I have read of a Guide,
Plut. invit. Han. and Fab. Max.
that by mistaking Casilinum for Casinum was likely to have hazarded Hannibals
whole Army. What hazard Thomas Powel has brought upon his soul by this, I
leave it to him who will one day call vain and unadvised Swearers, much more
false Swearers to an account.

smiled at the ridiculousnesse of the Expressions, yet afterward considering
that Thomas Powel was upon his Oath, and so bound by that Sacred tie, where^n
our great God was called in as a witness to the truth, and consequently an
Avenger if he spoke false; and he bound to speak the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth, should then depose such words as spoken by ^e which
never were spoken, and I believe, ^ooked on by many even of the Commissiners
themselves as even impossible to be true, I say that this did much sadden my
spirit; and sorry ^ am that it was so much or no more looked upon ^y these
Commissioners: But indeed, (con^idering what kind of Testimonies they re^eived
against me, as likewise what use they made of those Testimonies) I much doubt
it that they made use of such Testimonies against ^e, which they in their
Consciences knew to be ^alse. And this they might do, (although without Equity
or Conscience, yet) not without presidents, such as they are, both from the Old
and the New Testament; but me thinks, the Example and the Ends of these men,
are enough to frighten any others to adventure the same ^ray. Job 22.15
Have thou marked the Old way which wic^ed men have trodden?

what, and when, and where any words should ^e spoken by me which Thomas Powel
could ^rest to such a sense; at length I lighted upon this conjecture, wherein,
from some words which Thomas Powel has formerly let fall in some company, I am
confirmed. Some yea^ past (I am sure more then two twice told) took for my Text
those words of our Bless^ Savior, Math. 12.32. But whosoever speake^ against
the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven hi^ neither in this world, nor in the
world to com^ Where, having told them the usual definit^ of this sin unto
death; toward the conclusion of my discourse, by way of Caveat, I advise^ my
Hearers, that as they desired not to co^^ at it, so neither to come near it, no
nor s^ much as toward it neither: In order whereunto, after several other
Caveats, I told them, the men must take heed of raising and reporting malicious
slanders; such which their own Consciences cannot but tell them are false, and
yet so^^ base by-respect will put them on both to report an^ justify them:
Adding further, that a man might come toward this sin against the Holy Ghost
by slandering, or maliciously reporting a known falshoo^ of but a Man: For I
had told them before that the sin against the Holy Ghost, was not s^ called
because it was against the person of the Holy Ghost, but because it was against
thos^ Graces whereof the Blessed Spirit by way o^ Appropriation is said to be
the author or give^ which I clearly manifested unto them from the case in the
Text; for otherwise with what congruity could our Blessed Savior have no^
taxed them with this sin, when as their Malicious slanders were against
himself? It Is without doubt that these Pharisees with whom our Blessed Savior
had now to do came near ^t. And therefore they came near it ( Peter ^alls it a
resisting of the Holy Ghost) because that wilfully and wickedly, against
Knowledge, Acts 7.51.
and against Conscience, they contemned his per^^n, reproached his Life,
Miracles, Doctrine, and ^bo^^ed the multitude to believe and report such (...)
of him which they themselves must needs (...) were both false and slanderous:
And all this ^or the carrying on of their hypocritical pomp, and vulger
esteem. After which I added, that ^uch who are busy to suggest false reports
of ^en, and are desirous to publish such things ^f them which they know are
false, on pur^ose to make them odious, that they may the ^^tter compass some
base end of their own, and make no conscience of what they report, ^ut only
labor that they may get credit to it, ^^ch men as these are in that way which
lead^th to that sin, which is the sin which shall ^t be forgiven. And indeed
such men do so ^roperly perform the Devils work (for he is (...), Calumniator,
a Malicious slanderer) ^^t it is the great pity or mercy of God, that ^^ey are
not with him for their Wages.

This was the sum of the Discourse which I ^ade upon that part: And if I shall
be con^^nced of any thing therein as contrary to and Doctrine or good Manners,
as containing any ^^ing false or unseasonable, I shall most willingly ^tract
it; and be beholding to the man that shall ^struct me better: Till then I shall
remain in the same mind as formerly I was, but sha^ not cease to wonder at
some body, (and considering that it was the wickedness of the Pharisees which
occasioned this Discourse, ^ likewise considering the end which in likely hood
has befaln them for this wickedness I say considering these things, I cannot
b^ wonder at some body, Tert. Phil. Temiror. Antoni. etc.
as Cicero did at Mar. Anthony, I wonder at thee Anthony that thou d^ not
tremble at those men's ends whose Actions the do imitate.

Tho. Powel: I have alread^ told thee what I spoke, as likewise the occasion
upon which I spoke it: But now wh^ should Thomas Powel take this amiss, and
kee^ it so long in his mind, and article against me for preaching against
Malice? It Is we^ known, that (if deducible by good consequence from the Text) I
was as plain, and a high against others as against the Malicious was Malice at
this time Tho. Powels Herodi^s* This it is for a man to have a guilty
Conscienc^ about him: He confesses himself guilty o^ the crime by his fretting
and storming at the reproof. I can clearly say, that my Pulpit Reproofs were
far from particularising of person^ yet I shall give thee another conjecture,
upon which Thomas Powel might imagine that b^ that discourse after an especial
manner I aime^ at him.

Thomas Powel and Robert Raynalds the Clark of the Parish; the Thomas Powel
maliciously and spitefully prosecuted. Of him Thomas Powel complains, and
before some Justices of the Peace takes his Oath, or procures William Cottle to
swear it, that Rainalds had sold Beer on the Lords day, as likewise by
Unlawful Measures.

Here I shall desire thee to observe,

1. That he neglects our own Neighboring Justices, and makes his complaint
before Justices of another Division.

2. This Oath was merely upon Hearsay.

3. That the complaint is only against him that sold, no mention made of him or
them that bought.

I shall have nothing to say touching the first of these: But now as to the
Second, that this Oath was only on Hearsay, I am confident that Tho. Powel
dares not say that he saw it, or knew of it, but only by report: And here
William Pinchin and Tho. Powel concur again: William Pinchin swears touching
things done at Box, when as he was then at Broughton, and William Cottle or
Thomas Powel swear of selling of Ale at Rainalds, whenas perchance they were
abroad at some other Alehouse, or asleep at home. But now as to the third
thing: If he knew that Robert Rainalds sold Ale on the Lords day, then must he
needs know who bought it likewise, and how comes it that there is no mention
made of him or them? 10 s. apiece Addit. Ordin. imprinted 1650.
There is a penalty to the one as well as to the other, and I take it, the like
penalty to the one as to the other. And had it been pure zeal, and zeal like
Phinehas, they had been pares in peccato, equal in the offense, Number. 25.8.
so Thomas Powel would have made them like Zimri and Cozbi pares in poena,
equal in the punishment. Nay further, I am sure that it will be made appear,
that to Thomas Powels knowledge others have sold Ale on that day, as well as
Rainalds, yea and by as small Measures, yea and that Thomas Powel has been at
the drinking of it, yea and has paid part of the Reckoning; and yet we have
not one word from Thomas Powel of this: And how comes he to be so zealous for
the Lords day, and lawful measures now? Certainly not out of any regard he had
either to the one or the other, but to satisfy his own leven'd spleen, in
doing Rainalds a discourtesie. This same partial indirect information was among
the Heathen accounted most unjust and unworthy: Cic^r. pro. Quintio.
Quis hoc statuit, quod equum sit in Quintium, id iniquum esse in Nevium? But
now amongst the people of God (if proceeding from a wrong ground in the
informer, as Envy, Malice, or the like, or looking toward a wrong end, as
benefit to himself, or revenge or mischief toward him against whom he gives
the information) it was accounted a lie, Psalm. 52.2, 4.
although the Informer had spoken nothing but the truth. And when it shall be
upon Oath that a man affirms so, I doubt not but that as he who speaks so,
speaks falsely, so he that swears so, Dr. Sanderson, de jur. prael. 2. 6. in
fine.
swears falsely. Omnino idem sit accedente juramento Perjurium, quod est in nuda
pollicitatione Mendacium.

Math. 12.32.
near about the time that these differences depended betwixt Tho. Powel and his
Neighbor, and Thomas Powel (for Hypocrites are very touchie) might cut his own
heart with them; his conscious breast giving him that when I reproved the
fault, I meant him, and might watch for an opportunity (for Hypocrites are very
revengefull) to do me some displeasure. This I remember, when there was a Jurie
at Chippenham employed to enquire touching Ministers, and the value of their
Livings, this Thomas Powel and William Pinchin, and another Miller, I think
they called him Stanmore, were as I heard very busy about me, but then they had
not Commissioners which were for their turns, and therefore as to my prejudice
they did nothing. But since Thomas Powel makes this an Article against me, That
I preached against Malice, and said that Malicious persons were the Devils
Nymphs, I must needs conclude him to be guilty of the crime; and I shall tell
him further, that I have read of such a one, (yea and a good one too)
heretofore. Luke 11.45.
Master, thus saying, thou reproachest us also: where you may observe that the
Lawyer freely acknowledges himself guilty of those crimes which our Blessed
Savior there reproves; (...).
and yet the impudent proud thing counts himself slandered or reproached in
that he is told of them.

Depositions which were taken at this time: But yet for a Conclusion to the
Transactions of this day, give me leave to observe a few things unto thee.

1. That the Deposition of Mary Workman, who was examined upon all the
Articles, and that Deposition carefully taken, (for said Mr. Blisset, she was a
Midwife, and so might know much) is wholly left out.

Obadiah Cheltenham then thwarted with a witness which was this Mary Workman,
Quid jurant? de veritate dicenda non modo super articulis datis, sed in iis
omnibus quae ad causam faciunt. Cod. lib. 4. number. 9. in marg. ad literam 2.
he then affirming when she had denied it, that I had within a quarter of a
year, signed two Children with the sign of the Cross, she holding them in her
arms; which he said were the Children of Mr. Speak, and Mr. Snell. This made
the poor woman amazed, considering that Obadiah Cheltenham being sworn with her
self but a little before to speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth; and she rightly conceiving that the same Oath bound him still all
the while he was before these Commissioners, and speaking to my business, I
say it made her amazed, that he should swear that I signed two Children within
a quarter of a year, when as one of those Children, Mr. Speke's was Baptized
October: 28. 1653. and almost a year older then the Ordinance by which these
Commissioners sat and acted. Another Circumstance for Mr. Blisset.

William Pinchin was giving in his Testimony touching my use of the Form of
Common Prayer, he having informed that I began with the Lords Prayer, and
afterward read some Psalms, Mr. Byfield asks him whether after the end of the
Psalms, I said, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.
He then asked likewise whether (after I had Baptized Children) I said,
Forasmuch as this Child is regenerate. I remember not what Answer William
Pinchin made to one or other. But to me Mr. Byfield seems to intimate by his
Questions, that it should have been matter of Charge against me if I had used
either. I assure thee Reader that this made me wonder: And what may there be in
that Doxology that should offend Mr. Byfield? the thing it self? and is it a
crime to give glory to the Blessed Trinity? or will he be angry with us because
we say as the Heavenly Host did, Luke 2.14.
Glory to God in the Highest? Were we not all Baptized in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost? Which I conceive to mean more
then Beza's Invocato nomine Dei Patris, etc. and to import as much as to devote
our selves unto, or to resign our selves up to the service of the Blessed
Trinity: And are we charged for this, that we now make public profession of
it? or was it disliked by him because looked upon now as altogether useless,
it being composed by the Council of Nice, in confutation of the Heresy of
Arrius? But now what if I should prove it to be more ancient then that Council,
and formerly put to another use, and that those Fathers did not so much
constitute as quote it: and quote it thereby to overthrow the Blasphemy of the
Arrian, because it was contrary to that Doxology, which was appointed in the
Apostolical and Primitive times? But yet admitting that Heresy to have been
the cause of it, is it therefore now a crime, such a crime as may deserve
ejectment to continue it? is our Field, our Church so free from those Tares? is
the Orthodox Doctrine of the Trinity so sincerely taught and believed, and so
unanimously? Tell me, you Reformers have you never since you began your
Reformation, heard of some that have plucked off no less then two of three of
the persons of the Blessed Trinity? stripping one of his Being, another of his
Deity? and indeed had I not found it by experience, I should not have believed
it, that the use of this Doxology should be imputed to a Minister as a crime,
or that a man should be reputed scandalous for this, because he made public
profession that he was no Arrian.

Byfields next Query, Whether I said forasmuch as this Child is regenerate? I
answer, that I believe that Mr. Byfield had small mind to engage himself or me
in any of the public Schools on that Question touching Baptismal
Regeneration, possibly he might have read what Dr. Burges and Mr. Bedford have
said upon the same Argument; Saints Rest, part 1. page 162. mihi.
yea even Mr. Baxter himself doubts not but that Baptism is an Instrument of
relative Regeneration and Sanctification. But to put this matter (as to Mr.
Byfield) out of doubt. In that Confession of Faith set out by the Assembly
(whereunto there was no doubt, Mr. Byfields consent and approbation as well as
his hand) we have these words:

Baptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament, Cap. 28. Number. 1.
ordained by Jesus Christ, not only for the solemn admission of the party
baptized into the Visible Church, Tit. 3.5. In Marg.
but also to be unto him a Sign and Seal of the Covenant of Grace, of his
ingrafting into Christ, of Regeneration.

Does Mr. Byfield under his hand acknowledge it to be a Sign, and Seal of
Regeneration, and yet is it in his judgment a crime in me to say so? If it be
among men, when once a man has put to his Sign and Seal, the person so
engaging, as to all purposes and Covenants expressed in that Instrument, stands
obliged to make them good: and the person to whom the Grant is made, will from
that day rest himself assured of his Bargain, because he has it under hand and
Seal. And dares any say that the Covenant of God is not Authentic, Number. 4.
when as he has put his Sign and Seal to it? and if it be Authentic, can it
be a fault in a Minister to publish so much? I shall sum up all into an
Argument thus:

Baptism is a Sign and Seal of Regeneration to Infants, of Believing Parents:
But the Child or Children by me Baptized were such: Therefore it is a Sign,
and Seal of Regeneration to them.

Mr. Byfield has under his hand acknowledged the major Proposition, and the
minor he dares not deny; and yet he was angry with me for inferring and
pronouncing the Conclusion. Certainly his Spleen conceived against the Liturgy,
had now so far prevailed upon him, that in his Passion he forgets what he had
formerly written and published for Orthodox. So that me thinks Mr. Byfield
might have then done as did one of whom I have heard heretofore, who stiffly
denying a thing wherewith he was charged, and after being convicted of the
truth of that Charge by a Writing under his own hand, fell to smite and
complain of his Head in some such upbraiding words as these, Why Head, Head,
Head, have thou forgotten what thy Hands have wrote.

Transactions of this day, desiring the Reader to observe only this, that as we
were leaving the Room about Eleven or Twelve of the Clock at night, William
Pinchin and Obadiah Cheltenham delivered in a Paper to one of the
Commissioners, which (as we guessed by the Sequel) contained either that they
had other matter of Charge, or else some other Witnesses which they desired
might be heard against me.

The Transactions at my Third time of appearing before them at the White Heart
in Marlburrough, May 8. and 9. 1656.
Lavington, there came a piece of Paper unto me in these words:

Mr. BUSHNELL,
YOu are hereby required to take notice, that the Commissioners for Ejecting
Scandalous Ministers, have appointed their next meeting at the Sign of the
White Heart in Marlburrough, to be holden on Thursday the 8 of May next, by Nine
of the Clock in the Forenoon; when and where they expect and require your
appearance before them, with your Witnesses for your defense to receive their
judgment according to ^he demerit of your Causes.

For Mr. Walter Bushnell Minister of Box, these.
29 of April, 1656. Signed in the Name and by the Order of the Commissioners,
by me Will Blisset.


Malburrough, where I find at the White Heart a very great appearance. For the
Commonwealth, summoned in by the procurement of William Pinchin, there
appeared (besides William Pinchin) Thomas Powel, William Clement, Nicholas
Spencer, John Cottle, William Rawlin's, Thomas Steven's, Anthony Balden,
William Cottle of Rudl^oe, Henry Harris, John Harding, ( Obadiah Cheltenham
being gone thence for London that morning) These being all sworn, were required
to speak to the Articles. But before any deposition was taken, Mr. Byfield made
a motion that all my Witnesses (for I had many at that time there) might be
withdrawn or turned out, whiles the Witnesses for the Commonwealth were in
examination; giving this reason, That it was not meet that they should bear
what the other Witnesses testified. Not meet indeed, for they would have noted
and remembered many of their Contradictions and Perjuries, which Mr. Byfield
would not that they should be public. This man in his proceedings desiring to
be as close and as just as the Inquisition. This motion of his was soon
condescended unto, and accordingly put in pract^ce: he had before taken order
that I should have no copy of their depositions, from the Clerk; which order
was so strictly observed, that (which was strange) even money would not procure
it; and here he takes a course that we shall not hear them from their mouths.
But now when my Witnesses came to be examined, the others were permitted to
stay still, yea and encouraged to contradict, control, except against, and
turn back whom they pleased; of which the Reader shall have more hereafter.

William Pinchin and Tho. Powell, who (for in the Clerks Copy they are both
yoked together) depose thus, That about seven years since Mr. Bushnell drank so
hard upon the Lord's day (as they the^ conceived) that when he was at Church he
could scarcely read plain and distinctly, and John Jones and Lawrence Pinchin
came from his house with him.



1. That whereas Thomas Powell swore formerly in William Pinchin's track, here
they swear in a breast together.

2. That they had both sworn before that they never saw me drunk, or drinking
to excess, and yet now upon the matter, and by consequence they depose it.

3. That this their deposition is grounded merely upon conjecture, neither of
them seeing me drink a drop. Let us next see the Reasons or grounds which moved
them thus to conceit.

1. When I was at Church I could scarcely read (...).

2. That John Jones, and Lawrence Pinchin came from my house with me.

When I was at Church I could ^^nce read plain] and could no body observe this
but Thomas Powell and William Pinchin? by that I have charged them with, and
proved upon them in the Transactions of the former ^ay, these two must needs
appear, (to such as ^re of honesty or discretion) to be very unfit men and
incompetent Witnesses against me, much ^esse to be ring leaders to the rest. I
am con^ident that there were more at Church at that ^ime as well as they, and
such as were as at^^^tive and sat as near as they; and how comes ^t about that
William Pinchin could find no ^^earing mate but Tho. Powel? This may be the
reason of it, Thomas Powell had the last ^ay approved himself to be a very
hopeful Scholar, and having then deposed, that about (...) years since, I
said, that Malicious persons were ^he Devils Nimphs; he might well depose now
that about seven years since I could scarcely read ^im; And yet should I ask
them, what Chapter or Psalm it was, or in what words I faulterred, I believe
(for all their good memories) they would say that they could not remember it:
if the faultering had been often, the Congregation must needs have noted it;
and ^ but once, how come they to forget what it was? And in such cases I
conceive it necess^ry that depositions and examinations should ^^scend to
perticulars, and as they had charg^^ me with indistinct reading, so ought they
^ have given instance wherein I faild. If the^ had charged me with Treasonable
words, ^ Lascivious debosht speeches, it would ha^^ been demanded, But what
were those words ^ What were those speeches? I told thee (...) long since what
an excellent faculty Th^^ Powell had to remember, when he came ^ perticulars;
and I believe that at this tim^ (had they been urged to it) we should ha^^ had
some such wise answer now as we ha^^ then; it was at this time that William
Pinc^^^ informs upon Oath that I had used some ^ the Common Prayer at the
Thanksgiving for (...) Wife; and being asked what I said, he answered, that I
prayed that the Moon should not burn her by day, nor the Sun by night doubtless
this man remembers himself accordingly as he teaches Tho. Powell.

Typographical Error^ some of which I might unexpectedly light o^ It might
proceed likewise from dimness (...) sight, darkness of the afternoon, or from
many causes beside. But if they will need have it that he who reads
indistinctly must undoubtedly have drank hard before, I shall from their
Antecedent infer this conclusion, That their man since at Box never came to
Church sober, for I have heard from some of ^he place that he has not read a
Chapter (...) and distinctly since he came among them.

John ^^^es, and Lawrence Pinchin came from my ^ouse with me? The one is my
Uncle, the ^ther my Brother in Law; living both in Corsham Parish, a Parish
next adjoining. Touching whose behavior if you enquire of their neigh^ours, I
believe you shall be answered, that it ^ sober and civil; unless William
Pinchin or ^ome such like seduce them into their compa^y. And as touching the
occasion which ^rew them thither, I am confident that it ^as far more
warrantable then what has ^rawn William Pinchin on Lords days to Brough^^, or
Thomas Powell (on the same day too) to ^n Alehouse at Corsham. I am apt to
think that ^ main reason (besides his malice) which moved William Pinchin to
swear that there was hard ^rinking at my house, was this, because it is his
^sual custom to do so at his own; for I can ^ake it appear unto thee* that this
William ^inchin together with no less then four of those ^ho have appeared
against me, have at his ^ouse from Saturday night till ^unday morning, ^ate up
drinking and singing, dancing and quar^^ling, insomuch that William Pinchin
conducted his Neighbor Cheltenham on his wa^ homeward, belike for fear he
should be assaulted.

John Jon^^ and Lawrence Pinchin came to Church they (...) high colors.
Whether this clause were eve^ taken, or whether Index Expurgatorius hat^ dashed
it out, I cannot say. But of this I a^sure that some discourse there was about
^ in my hearing, while the Depositions were ^ taking: and as I have heard among
the Commisioners after they had dined, when an^ where it was observed that
some of them (havin^ feasted themselves belike at the cost of Incide^^ charges)
had very high colors: and this might be the cause why this branch should be
(...) off, because that from this dangerous Topic the same conclusion might be
drawn against some of themselves. But now as touchi^^ John Jones and Lawrence
Pinchin (admittin^ it were as they swore yet) their colors could be no
argument of their hard drinking, for they that know them, seldom see them other
wise, but at all times and seasons, high colored and ruddy. If arguments may
be deduced from complexions, I should then have argued with Mr. Byfield, That
if ruddy complexions be a competent medium to prove excessive drinking, in them
that look so; then, that pale, wand, livery countenances were a competent
medium to prove an excess of envy or malice in them that look so.

William Pinchin alone in these words, And this Deponent Pinchin says farther,
That about five or six years since, Mr. Bushnel was at a Stabbal match with Mr.
Edward Long and others, when they came to Rainalds Alehouse aforesaid (this
deponent being one of the company) and there they drank very hard, and healths
were put round, and Mr. Bushnell drank them with his H^t of, and did then drink
excessively as this Depo^^^t conceives.

William Pinchin in this Deposition seems to contradict what he had sworn
before. Sect. 3. 2 day.
There he swears that he cannot say that he ever saw me drunk; and yet now that
about five or six years ag^ne in his company I drank exc^ssively, which is as
much as if he had sworn I was drunk. It Is like enough he may say (it is usual for
him so to do) that at that time he did not mind it; but since searching and
bestir^ing of his memory, he has by recollecting of himself recovered it, and
can depose accordingly; and now give me leave to tell thee (for this was not
the first time that he made use of it) of the strange faculty of this man; to
see what gradations and pauses he makes in his Depositions, how he remembers
best at a distance! how he m^^ds himself in his recollections, and can swear
more punctually of a thing done many years agone, then he could when it was but
newly acted, and this is remarkable, that his second thoughts, his roused
Oaths, are most pernicious: he never swearing so desperately as when he has
most bethought himself, which will give any intelligent man cause to think,
that what he deposes in the second or third place, he does not remember, but
invent.

Jan. 8.
in the year 1646. he swore before the Committee of Wilts, sitting then at
Marlborough that he had heard that Mr. Speak ro^^ in Arms in the Kings
Quarters; Decimators.
but in the year 1656. he swears before some Commissioners sitting at the
Devizes, that he had seen Mr. Speak ride armed in a Troop of the Kings part,
along by his Fathers house; which clause of the Deposition riding Armed in the
Troop must needs refer to some time before the year 1646. Then he could depose
only that he Heard of such a thing; but ten years after he can depose that he
Saw it, which he swears accordingly. Touching which Deposition although the
Gent. suffered some prejudice in his Estate, but more in his thoughts, yet he
seemed to be of the same mind, as an Eminent Knight once was, who being falsely
accused upon Oath, replies, that he was more sorry for the witness his
perjury, then he was for his own danger. This Gent. Mr. George Speak (although
he freely forgave him, and prayed that God would forgive him likewise, yet)
even to his dying day often protested, Dr. Sanderson, de jur. prael. 1. 4. in
fine.
and by such strong asseverations, wherein he called God to witness, (which
amounts to a voluntary Oath) that William Pinchin had sworn falsely against
him.

Country farmer (as I have heard) occasion to say, that William Pinchin in
his Depositions did usually fetch Trip, it is like that his allusion might be
to running Leapers; with whom it is not usual to do their best at first, but
they assay again and again, and in their latter ever striving to out do the
former, in order whereunto they fetch the larger or swifter Trip. Now observe
how William Pinchin observes this method in his swearing.

1. Against Mr. Speak, against whom he swears, first, That he had Heard that
he rode in Arms; but now this would not carry it, nor reach the mark at which
he aimed, and therefore the next time he fetches a swifter Trip, and swears
that he Saw it.

The like against me at Lavington, he swears, that although he has seen me
drinking yet he could not say that ever he saw me drunk, but now this Oath was
not mortal, nor did it cleave the hair; and therefore he fetches a swifter
Trip at Malburrough, and swears that he conceives that I drank to exceess in
his company. He would have made the Commissioners believe at their last sitting
at Lavington that he had sworn farther yet, and that the Clerk had not taken
it; but the Clerk offering to depose that after he had in private a perusal of
the depositions, with a power to add, alter, or amend what he pleased (for this
was a favor which was shown them) and that William Pinchin had left it as
the Clerk had enterred it, there was an end put to his leaping or fetching Trip
any more.

William Pinchin shows himself like such a witness which the chief Priests and
Elders sought for heretofore, and could not find; for after their utmost search
it is said of theirs that neither so did their witness agree together; Mark 14.59.
which disagreement, or inequality, or imparity of their testimony, I conceive
lay not so much or only in this that they thwarted one with another: -- 14.58.
(For St. Mark reports both the Witnesses as testifying the same thing) as it
lay in this that take it at most, and stretch it out to the utmost, yet that it
did not reach unto, Mat. 26.59.

Mark 14.55.

Vide Grot. in Mar. 14.56.


but fell short of the thing which the chief Priests and Elders aimed at, and
that was to put our Blessed Savior to death; for these righteous men knew that
all which hitherto been testified would not before Pilate amount to so much as
to make him worthy of death, and therefore it is said, that neither so was
their witness You Equalis, par, or conveniens: not equal, or alike, or
agreeing, because it was not answerable to the desires and designs of the
chief Priests and Elders. But notwithstanding they had testified beside,
against, beyond the truth, yet they still came short of the suborners malice.
Now in such a case William Pinchin would have fetched trip; and if he had
fallen short at one time, his memory should have served him, and he would have
reached it at the next. So that his former Oaths did upon the matter make him
find his legs, or give him aim how to cleave the pin, having been wide,
short, or over shot before. And here let me observe this unto thee, touching
such who swear out of malice, and such who swear for a reward. They both agree
in this, that neither the one, nor the other regards the truth; but the
mal^cious swears any thing that will do a mischief; the hireling any thing that
he is taught: the first looks upon the penalty of the Law, and swears not the
truth, but whatsoever shall render a man obnoxious; the other looks upon the
reward, and swears (not the truth neither, but) any thing which may procure his
wages; nor is it unusual but that he who has so much malice as to swear
falsely himself, will find so much money or somewhat aequivalent, which shall
prevail with some other so far as to swear as he would have him. It being
commonly seen that the malicious murderous spirits bail the Hook, for the
greedy and hungry to bite at and swallow. Of this the Reader shall have
examples in this William Pinchin and others hereafter, as they fall in their
proper place

William Pinchins Deposition apart.

1. He deposes that I was at a Stabbal match with Mr. Long, and others.

2. That afterward we came to Rainalds Alehouse.

3. That he was one of the Company.

4. That there they drank very hard.

5. That healths were put round, and that I drank them with my Hat off, etc.

As touching the first of these, if by being at a Stabbal match, his meaning
be, that I was a Spectator there, then it might be true: if his meaning be,
that I was there as a Gamester, then it was false. And what a crime it is to be
there as a looker on, (or indeed as making one in the recreation) I am yet to
learn. Those that there played were Gentlemen of as good rank and repute as were
most in those neighboring parts; and there they sometimes met to recreate
themselves at that Exercise, it being an usual game in that place; and it is
like enough that it might be their pleasure to send to me, being of their
ancient acquaintance, as having been born and breed among them; brought up at
the same time, at the same School with them; and afterward at the same time
with some of them at the same University; upon which accounts thither I might
come, and be then and there a looker on. And yet all this, (by their leave)
with far less just cause of scandal or disrepute to my profession, then to be
at Markets or Fairs, buying and selling, chopping and changing, matching and
measuring Colts and Horses, amongst jockeis and horse coursers.

Edward Long might be then and there in the Company, and others likewise, but
now how comes it about that some of those others are not expressed in
particular as well as Mr. Long? I must tell the Reader, that index
Expurgatorius has been here again; for upon my cross Examination, I desired
that William Pinchin might be required to instance in some particulars, in some
other persons beside, which were there with Mr. Long, my self, and et caetera,
as conceiving it to be somewhat ridiculous that it should be informed, that Mr.
Long should play at Stabbal with etc. or that etc. should come to Rainalds and
drink healths with Hats off; all know actus esse suppositorum, that it is the
person that Acts, and not the species, or the individum vagum. To which William
Pinchin answers, that besides Mr Long, my self, and etc. there were Mr. Ducket,
and my Brother. This I desired might be taken and entered accordingly, and Mr.
Chambers (being then near to the Clerk) told me that it was so entered, and yet
we see not one word of of it in the Depositions which we were to plead unto:
And it is like enough that this was the reason why it was dashed out, Mr. Ducket
and my Brother were both living, and shortly afterward before these
Commissioners ready to vindicate both themselves and me, and therefore it was
requisite that they should be left out; but now Mr. Long being dead; and etc.
no body, might be kept in as most competent pot Companions with me, for Mr.
Long being not to be recalled, and etc. no where to be found, could not with
any possibility be called upon, to speak any thing either for themselves or me.
And here let me observe this unto thee, that as Companions in my intemperance
they either quote such who are dead, and cannot speak, or if living, then are
they such which they are resolved not to hear. I could willingly add something
touching that Gentleman Mr. Long, this is the second time that (in this
business) his name has been in Question to his disrepute long after he was
dead; but they have not yet done him all the wrong that they intend, and
therefore I shall suspend what I have to say of him, till we hear of him again.

To Rainalds we might come. That was the house where these Gentlemen usually
dined, and it is not impossible but that this Deponent might be in the Company.
But now I shall add, as with reference to my self that that Clause [ of his
being in the Company] renders the following passages ( that I drank hard, that
healths were put round, that I drank with my hat off, and then drank to Excess)
even impossible to be true. I remember that that ingenuous Knight Sir Tho.
Moore observes it in Richard the Third, That Ambition and Malice had so far
transported him, that in the contrivance of his designs, and the laying of his
scene, he very far overshot himself in point of common discretion, and rational
polity; for (says he) Richard pretending his body to be wasted with sorcery,
and Witchcraft, he charges his Brothers wife the Queen as a Sorceress, and
Shores wife as a Witch of her council, for working this mischief toward him:
Whereas ( says that observative Knight) besides that the Queen was too wise to
go about any such folly, yet if she would, of all others she would not have
made Shores wife of her council, whom of all women she most hated.
Proportionably say I, If I had been at any time intemperately given, or so
idely disposed as to dring too much, yet certainly this could never be where
William Pinchin was; I should not in any wise have made him my companion; for
since I had any right understanding of his conditions (and that was in the year
1645. as I shall tell the more anon) I discoverd a mass of such ingredients in
him which were enough to denominate a man base and unworthy; and these further
confirmed to me, by continued and frequent, barbarous and base pranks and
practices which had that influence upon me, that from that time (as much as I
could) I shund his company, much more his familiarity or intimacy, finding in
him too much of what might be detested or feared; but nothing of that which
might be desired or loved. And does he now quote himself, together with Mr.
Edward Long, and etc. to be both a witness and companion of my intemperance? I
have a confidence that those who well know both William Pinchin, and my self,
will conclude, that there was no such thing, because William Pinchin says
that he was then in the company.

swear like a jolly fellow indeed, as if his hand were in, That there they
drank very hard, etc. this Deponent being one of the Company. From whence it
must needs follow, That he himself likewise was one who drank very hard, that
drank healths with his Hat off, and that drank to excess, and yet such is his
malicious impudence, that he charge me of those crimes whereof he
acknowledges himself to have been guilty of at the same time; which is much
worse then those worst of men, Joh. 8.
the Hypocritical Pharisees and Scribes (the Godly of those times Mr. Chambers)
for these although justly convicted, and thoroughly shamed and silenced, yet
that we read of, were neither guilty of, nor ever confessed the crime whereof
they accused the woman. I have read the Fable, I have read the Moral of it too;
but here we have an example of an envious man, who sticks not to pull out (...)
of his own eyes, so that his neighbor might lose both his; in case that had
been true which he informed (which was most false) yet in him it had been most
false and base, because envy and malice put him upon it. But now what name is
bad enough for it, if envy and malice did not only put him upon it to report,
but to invent it likewise? I have read and heard of those who have employed
themselves, or been employed by others, as spies, or decoyes to insinuate
themselves into men's affections; to mix with them in desperate designs, to
like, to applaud and be with the foremost of the Company, and all this, that
they might afterward betray and accuse them. But this (how ever practiced, how
ever countenanced) employment always looked upon as unworthy a Christian, yea
or of a man, although the end pretended be Safety or Security, or such which
have the face of Good, and what such may expect, the Apostle tells us. Romans 3.8.
whose condemnation is just.
But now of a man that should belie himself to mischief his neighbor, and
swear falsely against himself, that there might be the more poison and venom in
his acc^sation, of such an one I have not read beside William Pinchin. The man
that comes nearest to him (as I remember) is that Amalekite. In this there
lies a difference: 2 Samuel 1.


1. That this Amalekite only speaks falsely of himself; but William Pinchin
sweare^ falsely.

2 Samuel 4.10.
2. This Amalekite belies himself out of s^^^ hopes of reward which he expected;
but William Pinchin swears falsely against himself that he may do some greater
mischief toward me* There is a passage in that story which the Commissioners
might have then made very good use of* David there takes him at his word, and
accordingly proceeds against him in these words, 2 Samuel 1.16.
Thy blood be upon thy head, for thy mouth has testified against thee, and
accordingly punishes him as a Murderer. So might the Commissioners (for some
of them were Justices of Peace) have said to William Pinchin, Thy mouth has
testified against thy self; thy punishment be therefore on thine head, and
accordingly punished him as a Drunkard. If William Pinchins Oath were true,
then his fact was punishable; if false, then his perjury.

William Pinchin; the next that presents himself was Nicholas Spencer. And he
being sworn, says,

That he has been often with Mr. Bushnel at Alehouses in Parish business, and
not at other times, nor did he ever see him drink excessively. But says, that
there they met by accident, and then discoursed of Parish business.

Prithee Reader, give me thy thoughts, Where lies the matter of charge in this
Deposition? He says we have there met by accident, I presume he means at
Rainalds; it is my likely as just occasions ( Robert Rainalds being Clerk of
the Parish) might draw me thither, as were those that drew him.

William Clement, and he deposes:

That in the time of the wars he found Mr. Bushnell at Rainalds Alehouse: When
Rainalds told him that the King had lost a Garrison to the Parliament; at which
Mr. Bushnell struck his breast, and said he was sorry for it.

Although I see no matter of charge against me in this Deposition, unless it
were scandalous to be Loyal, yet let me add something touching the person who
thus deposed, and with what affections he did it. I shall therefore here give
thee to know, that this William Clement is Father in Law to William Pinchin,
and that William Pinchin has had a great hand over him, and has frightened*
him to do that which I believe has troubled William Clement more then the
taking of any Oath whatsoever; of which thou shall have more hereafter: for the
present I shall only acquaint thee with what affections William Clement
appeared against me, and afterward shall leave it to thee to Judge whether he
had not some malicious and spiteful intentions which set him on work. Sometime
after this William Clement meets with one Thomas Morley, of Swanswack near
Bath, whom (contrary to his former use) he bespeaks very fair, calling him
Cousen, proffering him the Beer, that he was glad to see him, that he had been
oftentimes coming to his house, or to some such purpose, but in the close, he
falls to the business, which was, That the Minister of Box was not right, that
they were resolved to out him that an especial witness which they had against
him, was one Sanders who had done Thomas Morly some wrong [That is, had broken
open and robbed his house] but in regard that this Sanders was so material
witness for their purpose, his request to him was, That Thomas Morly would not
at that time appear against him, because that might very much impair the credit
of that witness, whose Testimony was so useful. All that I shall now say
touching this William Clement is only this, that be who labored to stop
another man's mouth from speaking a truth which might have been to my behoof,
may rationally be conceived to open his own mouth to report a falsehood which
might be to my prejudice.

seven witnesses yet behind, viz. Anthony Balden, John Harding, John Cottle,
William Rawlings, Thomas Stevens, Henry Harris, and William Cottle of Bud^^e
for his mother; yet these being sworn and examined upon the several Articles,
had not one word to say to either; which made one of the Commissioners in a
kind of wonder to ask, Wherefore so many were summoned to appear having nothing
to say? I cannot but tell thee, that one of the witnesses whom I named but now,
conceived that at that time we should have had an end of it, in regard that all
that said any thing which signified any matter of charge against me were
William Pinchin and Thomas Powel, and in regard again, that it was so manifest
that what they spoke, they spoke out of malice; which (said he) the
Commissioners having more understanding then we, must needs perceive; and so
they did some of them, and one of them a Minister too, (to the Doctors credit
be it spoken) reported it elsewhere. And yet which. is strange in this man,
although he discovered their leaven, and so must know them to act from base
principles, and with reference to a ^^se end; yet he always vouchsafed to these
men whom he knew thus to act, his favorable countenance and furtherance. I know
that the comparison would be odious, and therefore I will make none, only let
me observe thus much unto Dr. Chambers, Mat. 27.18.
That Pilate sought to discharge the person accused before him, because he
perceived that they delivered him out of Envy; and it is commendable in him:
but now here we have one acknowledging that the prosecution of these witnesses
proceeded from malice, and yet he backs and incourages the very worst of them
to go on.

William Pinchin had formerly been toward Grandfather in law, and Grand
mother, Father and Mother, Father in Law, and Mother in Law, Uncle and Aunt,
Brother and Sister; and how barbarously he had used me, and what further
mischief he had threatened against me, for no other cause that I can imagine,
but only for entertaining, l^dging, relieving, clothing, furnishing with money
his Father, Mother and Brother, when he had beaten them out of doors; for I had
a confidence that there were then amongst the Commissioners some Gentlemen of
discretion, and conscience, who (having a right understanding of his qualities
and conditions, and being informed how he had been several times complained of,
and convicted before several Justices of the Peace, of such horrid and
barbarous crimes, as have scarcely been acted since Cain, and the Father of
Canaan, and Absalom lived upon the Earth, (All which I could then, and at this
present can easily prove) would never have taken him for a credible witness,
or have countenanced him as an Informer, or Solicitor, no nor so much as looked
on him, unless it had been in detestation. But now none more forward to
withstand and oppose this then Dr. Chambers, who knew much of it to be true,
but was not willing it is like, that it should come to the knowledge of these
Gent. for fear that he should thereby have lost so precious a witness, or
perhaps for fear that he should have heard something which would have nearly
reflected on himself. This Doctor then acknowledging that there had been some
small differences between them, praying that no more words might be made of it;
together with an intimation that all differences were now composed, or to some
such purpose: In order whereunto William Pinchin produces a large Paper which
he had then in readiness, written by himself, containing a large story of his
own making, acknowledging that there had been some small differences among
them; that he had 500 l. with his Wife; and that all was now composed and well;
or to that purpose. This Paper (being solemnly delivered in) was deliberately
read by Mr. Blisset: That Mr. Blisset which would not then allow of cousening,
and Cursing, and Paricide to be sufficient exceptions against him or any man in
point of Testimony. These it is like he looked on as Circumstances; and to tell
thee my mind, when I had observed the manner of their proceedings. I could not
but think of those Elders and Nobles that condemned Naboth; who
(notwithstanding that they knew the witnesses which appeared against him to be
Sons of Belial, notwithstanding they knew them to be false Witnesses of their
own making, yet) passed sentence according to that false evidence which they
themselves had put into the Witnesses mouths. But to return to the Paper, of
all other passages I cannot forget this that he says. That now all differences
were composed; belike he means betwixt his Father and himself. And such another
Certificate might Cain have framed and delivered in, and have said, that All
was now sweetly composed, and there were new no differences remaining betwixt
him and his Brother, for that he himself had murdered him some certain years
before. That good old man William Pinchins Father was dead near three years
before this time: and although I cannot but believe that God gathered him to
his Grave in peace: (so knowing what I know) I cannot think otherwise but that
this Son of his hastened his fall; and so although the Father were there by the
sooner with God, yet we may well think that the Son is the farther from him by
it: it being usual for wicked Children, Brothers, and other wicked men to
hasten Gods servants to him by those ways and means by which they ruin
themselves. And although our Laws repute none Paricides but such who lay
violent hands on their Parents, and by some blows and wounds give them some
visible cause of death; yet I doubt not, but that Divine Justice will look upon
many for Paricides whom our Laws do not reach; nor see I any cause to doubt of
it, but that he who with Frights, with Threats, with Curses* with Blows, with
Gripes in the Throat, with drawing Knives, with continual horrid and barbarous
vexations, shall even break his Fathers heart, (and so much William Pinchin the
Elder has said that his Son would do by him) is as guilty of his blood as if
he had taken a Knife and stabbed him. And I could advise Mr. Chambers to
admonish William Pinchin that he would sadly consider of it in this his day:
And I am confident of it, that they had done better service both to the Church
of God and to the Commonwealth, if (in stead of encouraging him to swear
falsely and maliciously himself, and instructing others to do the like) they
had spent some pains with him to have made him know, that the Voice of a
Fathers blood, is some more clamorous then the Voice of a Brothers.

Chambers knows, whether there have been any such Love and Unity amongst those
who are there yet behind, as was then suggested and pretended to be. If he
knows not of it already, I can tell him that since the time that I was thrust
from Box, there have been notable clashing of Doors, gnashing of Teeth, sweet
words passing from the Son to the Mother, and great thwarting and crossing
betwixt them in their business, it being William Pinchins custom to do by his
Mother as he did by me. To do himself some mischief, that he may do his
Mother a greater, pleasing himself in frighting away work and Custom from
their Mill, as I have heard; belike thinking himself well satisfied with
little or nothing, because his Mother does thereby lose her half. The Doctor,
if he ask the Neighborhood, or the Servants, or the Children, may be told
that there is little there that favors of a Cordial Union, or of a Blessed
Reformation. Possibly it may not be so public now as it has been formerly:
but in case she be forced out of her house, she dares not say that she was
kicked or beaten; and in (...) she comes to any of her Neighbors, he must
complain softly, and in a Chamber; and buy her relief, or else want it. The
recompense which she has made me, being a fair warning for any one to receive,
relieve, or else to pity her. Nay more, Mr. Stern has told me since I came to
T^^^, that her Son has used a means to (...) her not only out of her house,
but out of the County likewise.

William Punchin produced another Paper (I think he received it from Thomas
Powell) as the implaint of an honest man (I think he added Godly too) being at
that time in the County of Summerset. The writing was but short, and the
complaint as I remember;

That he had lived so long under my Ministry, and was not profited; or to that
purpose.

Which Paper upon my request they show unto me, upon the view whereof I find
it to be the hand of William Sergeant, a man indeed living in Sommerset, but in
a Parish adjoining to Box, a considerable part of his Estate lying in that
Parish; about the Tithes whereof (for he refuses payment) he has been
questioned and cast by both Persons and Vicar, He dyed in Ilchester Gaol, 1659.
and so far proceeded against, that he lay in Gaol upon the same score even to
his dying day. This man William Sergeant (by report) has gone through all
Opinions, and at that time was, and I think still continued as vehement a
Quaker, as any whatsoever. Upon the redelivery of the Paper, I told them I had
much to show from the same man, and written by the same hand. Now by this the
Commissioners might have guest what sort of men appeared against me, in that
they labored to strengthen themselves by such who are professed enemies to the
Profession and Calling of Ministers. Not was this the first time that they
received Papers against me written by this William Sergeant. He it was that
wrote the Articles against me, which were Exhibited by John Travers, his
Brother in Law. But since he was in person before the Commissioners at my next
time of my appearing, I shall trouble thee no more about him now, nor with any
thing else touching the Transactions of this day.

From Marlborough after an Expensive Reckoning we are discharged: and
notwithstanding the Warrant by which I appeared, expressed that I should then
receive judgment according to the demerit of my cause; yet as to Sentence
there was nothing then done; belike the Testimonies came not up as ^et to the
Expectations of these Commissioners, or to Mr. Byfields and Dr. Chambers
desires, or else William Pinchin might give them in another Paper, and that he
had other Witnesses yet behind, that could swear farther and Testify more; but
for that time discharged I was until another Summons.

The Transactions at my fourth time of appearing before them, June 4. and 5. at
the George in Ca^ln.
Marlborrough, May 9. within some short time after I received a piece of Paper
from John Travers in these words:

Mr. Bushnell,
YOur appearance is expected before our Commissioners at their next meeting at
the George in Caln, Wednesday the 4. of June, with your Witnesses, for your
further defense; if you intend any more.

William Blisset Clerk.
14 May 1656.

William Pinchin, Jone Pinchin his mother, Elizabeth Pinchin his Wife, Peter
Web, John Gibbons, Nicholas Spencer, Thomas Hayward, Ann the Wife of William
Rawlins, William Cottle, and Henry Parsons of Box, John Gibbons of Corsham,
John Travers of Slaughtenford, William Sergeant of Bathford, William Sanders of
Chippenham, Obediah Cheltenham, Richard Cottle, and Lawrence Cottle of
Ditcherridg, who being all sworn were required to speak to the Articles,
accordingly as they were proposed unto them.



1. That William Pinchin at this time leaves off to be a witness, and now takes
upon him and acts the part of a Solicitor, or Informer, for (as I can prove)
he instructed and catechized some of the witnesses before, and so far prevailed
with them, that they were contented to swear not what they had informed him of,
but accordingly as he had written; and afterward he marshals his Witnesses into
a form, and accordingly as he looked upon his Paper they were called upon, and
examined upon those Articles to which he referred them. Obadiah Cheltenham
being his assistant in the business; for notwithstanding it was much which they
then said and did, yet we have not one word as from them in the Depositions
which were taken that day.

2. I have told thee the last day, how no ^ess then seven of William Pinchins
witnesses wholly disappointed him, and that two more said something to no
purpose; so that he had none to stand by him then but his honest neighbor Tho.
Powel. But now you may guess having such Hints and encouragements from his
Commissioners and Doctors, he has by this time fitted himself with men proper
for their purposes and his own; for he has now procured men of all sorts, and
from several quarters, not only Parishes but Counties likewise; nor is it any
wonder if some of them (considering their own quality, the encouragements from
those Commissioners, and the virtues of their Tutor William Pinchin) should
^etch trip, and swear to the purpose. That he, (that is William Pinchin)
suborned some to swear, and tampered with others, was, or would have been
proved to the Commissioners faces: and this might be the cause why Will*
Pinchin would not swear himself, because he had an assurance that he had now a
sort of approved lads who would swear as he would have them; so that whatsoever
is afterward deposed you may look upon as William Pinchins, having got this
advantage by it, that whereas he swears formerly by himself, which could be
looked upon only as a single Testimony: now he swears by many proxies, which may
be looked upon as several Testimonies: when as in truth it is all Pinchin still,
although conveyed by other pipes and feathers.

Byfield (as soon as he had taken his pipe of Tobacco) coming from a window
where formerly he was, made a proposal that all persons whatsoever there
present should withdraw: It Is thought that he had some farther proposal to
make, which was conceived to be touching some Gentlemen then in the room, whose
presence he did not (as it was thought) so well like of; but soon after we were
all called in again, and all admitted excepting my Witnesses; but Mr. Byfield
would not by any means admit that they should be in the hearing.

William Sargeant whom I have lately mentioned. John Gibbons of Corsham, and he
were both at Caln before the Commissioners; but both soon thrust out of door
because they would not take their Oaths, and keep off their Hats. Now I have
heard that all which William Sargeant had then to say was against the calling:
and that his coming thither was to have spoken to Mr. Chambers, or Mr. Byfield;
against whom I am confident they had far greater exceptions then against me.
And that this was William Sargeants business at Caln appears by this; for it
was he who after he was turned out of doors at Caln made that great stir
beneath in the Court: 'twas he that then scattered the printed Papers, one
whereof was brought up into the Commissioners Chamber and delivered to them by
Mr. Crump, who was much troubled at it, and put into a great sweat thereby. And
now, is it not strange that the Commissioners should receive Articl^s and
Papers against me, from such hands? Nay, is it not more strange that they
should retain, and file up his Papers, and yet reject his person? that his
Papers should be carefully kept, and looked on as godly, and yet that the
Author should be turned out of door as a Quaker? I wonder not so much at
William Pinchin that he should produce such men (for you shall see in the
following discourse that he has prepared and produced much worse) as at those
Ministers who ever countenanced the person of the one, and made use of the
Papers of the other. It was an handsome argument which a ^^man used to the Duke
of Clarence, thereby to withdraw him from the Earl of Warwick with whom he
sided, to his own Brother King Edward 4. against whom he took part. Phil. ^am.
Speed H^st.
That the especial arm of that part wherein Clarence was at present engaged,
was utterly to extinguish and ruin the house of York, whereof Clarence was an
emi^ent person. And I say that the consideration of the designs of such sort of
men, might have told the Commissioners, the Ministers at least, that as to this
particular their case was as mine; and that had they opportunity to their will,
they would do as much by them as they have done by me.

Depositions; The first in order as they lie in the copy received from thee
Clark, was the Deposition of John Travers: who says,

That about four (1.) years since he havingly (2.) order taken up some
Malignants horses at Box, (3.) several addresses were made to him by Mr.
Bushnel, (4.) Major Hunt, and (5.) others who came all together from Mr.
Bushnells house, having there drank very hard, being high in Beer, as this
Depo^^^ conceived.

Deposition I shall observe to thee;

1. That the time when as John Travers came to Box, was in August, 1648. which
is much more then four years before June, 1656. Another Circumstance for Mr.
Blisset.

2. What other order he had I know not, but I am sure that he then acted by
virtue of: forged Warrant written as from Mr. Edward Stokes, his name likewise
being subscribed unto it; but disavowed by that Gentleman, as neither written
by him, or by his consent; and conceived to be contrived by Thomas Webb, John
Travers his Brother in law. That Webb who is so notorious for infamy with Mr.
Henry Whites late wife; this Webb being at that time in the company, and a very
busy man among them. By which you may guess John Travers to have been a very
unfitting man to be looked on as a credible witness, when as I could then, and
can yet prove him guilty of such Crimes which our Law punishes with Pillorie,
loss of Ears, slitting of nostrils, 5. Eliz. 14.
and scaring with an hot Iron, and it may be rationally presumed, that he who
will for an advantage make one man say what he never thought of, will likewise
for a like advantage make another man do, what he never did.

And 3. whereas he adds that there were addresses made by me to him, I must
tell thee that this is like the rest. I make addresses to John Travers? I had
known the fellow above thirty years before; yet cannot remember that he was
ever so high, or my self so low, as that I should either need or fear him. And
says he, that I made Addresses unto him? And these several addresses; whereas
I am sure that I could have made him confess, that I was then never but once
where he was; and then my business was to Colonel Air, and not to John
Travers. And next he adds that Major Hunt and others came from my house. Here
we have dead men, and etc. my companions again; for although Mr. Hunt were then
living, yet he was not at the time of my appearing, before the Commissioners,
in a capacity to vindicate either himself or me. And whereas he says that they
had there drank very hard, it must be replied that it was more then John
Travers knew whether they drank so much as a drop there, he saw it not, for he
was not in the house, and therefore what he swears is either upon conjecture or
hearsay. This is the third time that they have received such Testimonies
against me.

John Travers was one) having taken up Horses in the Parish, amongst others
light upon a Horse or two of one Mr. Colliers, a Gentleman then living in
Dorsetshire, and a Brother to Mris. Hunt, whom he then came to visit; they
being thus distressed repair to Colonel William Air for his assistance, which
he promises, in order whereunto he repairs to Box, will her likewise repair Mr.
Hunt, Mr. Collier, Mris. Hunt, and two more of her Sisters; who conceiving
Colonel Fire to be at my house, come thither, but not finding him there (after
a very short stay) they make to another place where they understood he was, and
I along with them. And I assure thee, that their have was such, and their stay
with me so short, that I cannot say that they ever sat down or drank so much
as a glass of Beer. And thus much would two Soldiers at that time quartered
with me in the house (who were more likely to know, and to speak, the truth
then John Travers) have deposed, if I could have had so much justice that they
might be heard. Indeed John Travers was so far in the right, that one of the
Gentlemen was very high, which was this Mr. Collier, but it was in anger, and
not in Beer; and so I believe John Travers would have found him, if Mr. Collier
had had him in a convenient place. I have told thee that we all came along
together from my house to Colonel Air, where John Travers likewise was, and
many more beside, where we made some stay, and had much discourse about those
Horses, and other matters. And it is strange that none should observe this
distemperature in all that time, but only John Travers who never saw us drink.
But doubtless John Travers expected some moneys for his pains, and therefore
right or wrong, true or false, he would swear somethinng to the purpose that he
might seem to have deserved his wages. I hear that afterward he wished that he
had never meddled in it, (so did Judas too) for that he had thereby gained the
disrespect of some Gentlemen; nor can I wonder if that all men should abandon
and abhor his society that sticks not at forgery and perjury. But since he is
dead, I shall say no more of him but only this, (and this interrorem aliorum,)
That notwithstanding he had been of a long time a Contribution gatherer, a
plunderer, an informer, a kind of Agent and Sequestrator, yet it is said that
he dyed very poor: and notwithstanding he had been many times absent from
Slaughtenford, and for a long time together, yet divine Providence so orders
it, that he should die a beggar in that place where his infamies were known and
practiced; touching the manner of his death I say nothing.

Jone Pinchin widow, and says that about two years and a half since, Jane Hendy
told her that Mr. Bushnel had attempted to lie with her: and withal said, that
she did think that most of your Parsons were fl^shly given. And says, That
about two year since Mr. Bushnel baptized Mr. Spekes child by the Book of
Common Prayer, and signed it with the sign of the Cross.

Transactions of the first day at Lavington, I told you that Jane Hendie was
summoned in as a Witness for the Commonwealth: but I made no mention of her
information then, conceiving that it might be better deferred till another
time. She was likewise at Marlburgh, May 8. and was sworn there likewise, her
Deposition being taken in these words;

That she never heard of any lascivious talk from Mr. Bushnell, nor did he ever
attempt to lie with her, nor does she remember that she ever spoke of any such
thing to Jone Pinchin widow, or to any other person.

This her Deposition, Born 1518.
together with her age and poor withered countenance, had in all likelihood
satisfied the Commissioners as to that particular; but now William Pinchin at
Lavington boldly interposes and tells the Commissioners that his mother this
Jone Pinchin had told him that this Jane Hendy had said so much to her: on
which Master Chambers adds that if Goodwife Pinchin had said so, he was bound
to believe her. And again at Marlburgh, May 8. when there were Papers
delivered in by William Pinchin written by himself, wherein it was affirmed
under her mark that Jane Hendy should say so, the Doctor adds again, That If
Goodwife Pinchin said so, he was in conscience bound to believe her.

Doctors leave I conceive these words of his, I am bound, and I am bound in
conscience to believe her, were not spoken by him either with discretion or
charity.

1. Not with so much advisedness or discretion; for it is well known that
William Pinchin had that power over his Mother that she dared not but to say,
and to do as her Son would have her; I believe so well known that the Doctor
himself could not be altogether ignorant of it; and what an encouragement (...)
these words of the Doctor give William Pinch^^ to teach his Mother to say or to
swear any thi^^ having this assurance given her before-han^, That what ever she
said must be believed, and (...) for current? if she had not said so, yet he
having such a hint given him and such a power with his Mother, might easily
order it that against her appearing before them she should attest it with
confidence. When I consider the story of Herod and the Baptist, Mat. 14.
I am fully persuaded that Herod's unadvised promise, gave occasion to his Wives
and Brothers daughter to ask John Baptists head. And (that notwithstanding they
hated him to death) they would not have made such a request, unless they had
been imboldened thereunto by Herod's promise; (...).
But now when such words shall fall from his mouth, Whatsoever thou shall ask
of me I will give, and this promise confirmed with an Oath; This is enough to
make them fl^e high, and to bethink themselves touching some great demand,
proportionable to his vast concession, Mar. 6.23.
and their vaster malice. One of the Evangelists reports it, that having such a
promise, she consulted with her mother what she should ask, and there is no
doubt of it, but that the consideration of such a promise moved her Mother so
to instruct her: and why might not these words from the Doctor, I am bound, and
I am bound in conscience to believe her, hearten up the S^^ to instruct his
Mother what to swear, as well as those other words heartned up the Mother to
instruct her Daughter what to ask?

Goodwise Pinchin had said so, yet what sufficient Grounds had the Doctor for
so much confidence, I am bound, I am bound in Conscience? I shall allow it that
the Doctor has been a long time acquainted with her, that she may have
entertained him and his often, and her carriage may have been such as to gain
his good opinion of her; but yet all this will not amount to be a sufficient
ground for so much confidence, that she should be so knowing as that she could
not err from the truth, or so cordial and entire that she would not report a
falsehood, for all Mr. Chambers knew she might be another woman then he took her
for. And why might not the Doctor be mistaken in her as well as he has been in
many others? ( women I mean, for there his acquaintance did especially lie, and
these many of them such who had the hand over their Husbands) who have followed
him as far, and as often as Jone Pinchin* and yet are now saln off both from his
Doctrine and acquaintance? Nay, why might not the Doctor be mistaken in her, as
well as he has been in his friend and Chaplain Blake late of Warminster: no
man can know what is in another heart. Nay, why may not the Doctor be mistaken
in her as well as many hundreds have been mistaken in the Doctor? Si proprium
non cognoseamus, quanto magis ignotum erit alterius? Cartwr. in Prove. 27.19.
Alas what just grounds of confidence have we that we cannot be mistaken in
others, when as we are so often deceived in our own selves? When as the Prophet
says that the heart is deceitful above all things, desperately wicked, who can
know it? Doubtless he speaks of the deceitfulness and small knowledge which
every man has of his own heart, Jer. 17.9, 10.
as well as of the hearts of other men.

all the Doctors great confidence) others, who have had more and better means
to be acquainted with Jone Pinchin in some particulars then I believe ever the
Doctor had, have not met with so much upright dealing from this Jone Pinchin
which deserves so great an Encomium: I have heard of such that have discovered
her to be very nimble with her To^dish, more nimble then became an honest
woman: I have heard too from others who have been set by their Parents (it
seems they had cause to doubt her) to watch her that she might not mis-remember
her self, and take toll twice; it was her own Son William (as I have heard)
that said, That she had driven away most of the custom from the Mill, and
certainly this could not be by any of her virtues. I love not to rake in
dunghils, yet this I can say of my own knowledge, that she has borrowed of me
several and considerable sums which she has neither paid me, nor will she
confess that she ever borrowed them; and that she has in money and accounts
received several sums from me, which she will not acknowledge that she ever
received. I lent her and her husband money out of my purse, when her Son had
beaten them out of door, they being utterly destitute, nor knew they where to
go to relieve themselves, which is yet unpaid, nor can I gain any thing from
them but base words and deeds in lieu of it. The Doctor may do well to advise
them to make payment to me, (it is a piece of courtesy which he has done for
his friends in some other place as I have heard) or else let him abate of his
good opinion of them. But if he will not credit me, let him ask his friend Mr.
Stern what just and upright dealing he found with them, when he sojourned with
them there? and what a reckoning they brought him in (as he has reported it)
for Bread and Cheese. It Is true indeed, 7 l. Twenty Nobles.
that is believed that Mr. Stern had better provision there, then Bread and
Cheese, and therefore was it false in him to report it so; but yet it is
believed again that he either paid for that which he never bad, or paid to a
far greater value then the provision came to, and that therefore the Doctors
good friend must be guilty of cousening and cheating. We know that in the
Decalogue that Command, Thou shall not bear false witness, is in order
immediately after that Thou shall not steal; it may be that the Prohibitions
are therefore so near, because usually the sins are so. He that has stolen will
not stick at a lie, nor is it any great wonder that such who have been light of
their hands, should be false of their tongues.

I am bound, I am bound in conscience to believe her, were not spoken by the
Doctor, with charity toward Jane Hendy, for the poor old woman had been twice
before them before this time, and upon her Oath (being never tampered with or
prepared, as was William Pinchin use, no nor so much as spoken with by me)
deposes,

That she never heard any lascivious talk from Mr. Bushnel; nor did he ever
attempt to lie with her; nor does she remember that ever she spoke of any such
thing to Jone Pinchin widow, or to any other person.

And now for Dr. Chambers ( a man of so much reverence and learning) to say
(when it had been good manners in him to hold his peace) that if Goodwife
Pinchin had said so he was in con^cience bound to believe her, was (upon the
matter) to say to this Jane Hendies face, that she had twice forsworn her
self; I said before, that the Doctor could not know so much of the widow
Pinchin, but he might be mistaken in her. I now add further, that for any thing
he knew, this Jane Hendy might deserve as good an opinion of her fidelity as he
had of this Jone Pinchin; and is it not then a most uncharitable thing for such
an one as the Doctor to pronounce the one as infallible, the other as perjured,
upon such uncertain grounds? I am bound in conscience. Beside the encouragement
which this gave to William Pinchin, of which I have spoken already, what
consternation and amazement must this needs bring upon all my witnesses? When
as a word from William Pinchin, (who will say or swear anything to do a
mischief) as from his Mother (who must swear and say as he would have her)
shall in this Doctors judgment render them under that notion as to be looked
upon as persons perjured.

sadness of spirit that these contradictory Testimonies of Jane Hendy and Jone
Pinchin (whereof one of necessity must be false) are both taken upon Oath; one
or other of them must needs be forsworn; and with me (and I believe that most
that know us are of my mind) it is soon decided where the perjury lies: for I
protest it in the presence of our great God, that there never was any such
attempt made by me, no nor so much as thought of; and therefore I cannot
possibly be so uncharitable as to think that the poor woman upon no grounds,
and for no purpose, should belie her self or slander me. And now I shall add
further, that I believe that this and many other false Oaths had never been
taken, had not the Doctor by those words, I am bound in conscience, hinted unto
them a kind of faculty, or dispensation of swearing, and that now they might be
bold. And one thing farther, This Oath being false, as I am confident it was,
and as it is very probable this Oath being caused by such an invitation, I am
bound in conscience; If an incourager or an abettor, or a perswader be an
accessory, I cannot acquit somebody (the Doctor may guess whom I mean) from
being guilty of this, and many following perjuries. I remember that Ulysses
lays a claim to all the Heroic acts of Achilles, because that it was through
his procurement that he went to the wars of Troy. Metam. 13.
Ergo opera illius mea sunt -- And why may not these men be entitled to all the
infamous actions which follow, since it was from them especially that they had
their rise and encouragement?

widow Pinchin had given in this Testimony, I desired Mr. Blisset to ask her
whether she believed it? To which she answered, that goodwife Hendy did say so.
But this not satisfying Mr. Blisset asks her again, But do you believe it to be
true? To which she answers again, that it was true that ^^odwife Hendy said so:
but this not satisfying ^et, Mr. Blisset asks her the third time, But do (...)
conceive Mr. Bushnell to be any such man? To which she answers, that she could
not judge. Now ^ must tell the Reader that not long before this, she having
some discourse with several persons, ever acquitted me, saying that she be^ieved
that I was wronged, or to that purpose: ^ut now she changes her note, and
says, ^^e cannot judge. Doubtless her own son Wil^iam, or the Doctor (for I
have heard that he ^as at her house betwixt April 28. and June 4.) ^^d
instructed her, and taught her to fall ^hort: and why might not he make the
whole, as well as alter a part of it? It was observed that while the Mother was
on her Examination, the son was in some ag^ny and ^erplexitie, which he expressed
by rubbing, and ^^resting of his face and head, fearing belike that his Mother
should miss her trip, or forget, or mis report those instructions which he had
given her.

Jane Hendie, since this business was over, to recollect her self, and to call
to mind what discourse or communication she had had with Jone Pinchin which
might be wrested to such a construction. Whereupon she told me, that during the
time that she was my servant, I entertained a Minister in my house (he calle^
himself Page) who pretended that he was beaten out of Ireland, affirming that
he had there escape^ very great dangers and sustained very great losses*
Insomuch that he was now very low, and both needed and desired the charitable
relie^ of others. In order whereunto he desire^ that he might preach in my
Church, to which I condescended, which Exercise and Collecti^^ being ended, in
regard that he made a great moan, I took him with me into my house, entertained
him and lodged him all night: and (had it not been for his great importunity to
be gone early the next morning) it is li^^ I might have entertained him longer;
but it appears since that he therefore made such haste to be gone, because he
had already (lying in a chamber by himself, where there was a Trunk and some
Boxes open) possessed himself of his errand; for he had stolen several pieces of
Clothes, Stockins, and other garments both of mine and others, which he took
away along with him. We mist not these Clothes till some days after; nor did
my servants (for I was the last that heard of it) discover unto me any
suspicion that they had of him until one had told them he had lately seen this
Page about five miles from Box, lying sleeping on the ground, near unto an
hedge, by which there ran a little Brook; and that two ( habited like women)
were in the mean time washing and hanging out to dry, several parcels of
clothes; adding farther to my servants, that had they been there they might
have chanced to have met with that which they had lost. This story Jane Hendie
tells to Jone Pinchin, and was in some passion about it: for it seems that she
had suffered in that loss; she speaks her mind likewise very freely touching
Page and his Landresses; and to some who made themselves unwilling to believe
that men of his profession should be of such a conversation, she adds to this
purpose, that your Parsons ( ^^ning me no more then she named Mr. Byfield ^r
the Doctor) might be fleshly given as well as other m^n. This is the sum of the
story, as she has reported unto me; and as she says this was all she spoke to
Jone Pinchin, neither did she (as it is in her Deposition) mention my name at
all. And see now what a story the son, and the Mother together with ^he Doctors
encouragement have made of it. I believe that the Doctor knows already that
there have been such heretofore, who were much given to mistake, and
mis-remember, and mis-report other men's words, and all for the worse, to the
prejudice of him that spoke them; and I believe that the Doctor knows what sort
of men they have been. To all which let me add only this, And think thou
this that thou shall escape that do the same? Romans 2.3.


Jone Pinchin Deposition, which I have not yet spoken to which is this;

That about two years since Mr. Bushnell ba^tized Mr. Spekes child by the Book
of Common Prayer, and signed it with the sign ^ the Cross, her son Williams
wife then o^posing that she was then also present at the Baptizing of Mr.
Spekes child, and swea^ the same.

wonder (...) thee; That with in six weeks a child should grow a year and three
quarters old; April 28. 1658.
for this is one ^ the children of which Obadiah Cheltenham spak^ at Lavington,
and then and there affirmed up on Oath, that I had signed it with the sign of
(...) Cross within a quarter of an year, it wo^^^ be proved; it is likely he
meant that Willi^^ Pinchins mother, and his wife should prove it Here we have
another circumstance for Mr. Blisset* And here we have a story (such an one as
^ is) of a thing done about two years since* ^ shall desire thee to know that
the child o^ whom they speak was Baptized, October 2^ 1653. which was more then
two year and ^ half before these depositions were taken, an^ although that word
about may make it passab^ in some tolerable sense, yet it is in my thought that
William Pinchin had some design in it that his mother and his wife should swear
so indefinitely: for in this particular the space of (...) or seven months,
nay of but a week would have very much altered the case. The Ordinance by which
these Commissioners sat bares date, Aug. 29. 1654. and although it did look
backward beyond the date of it, and questioned such things which were done
before the law ^as made, yet it does not look so far back as to October. 28.
1653. Then (nay on the last of December, 1653.) that might have been done with
safety, which if one had done on the day following, he might have been
questioned for; it might be therefore a design in William Pinchin to put it
into such indefinite terms (...) two years, it might be somewhat within, and
under, as well as above; and such an interpretation as best pleased the
Commissioners, (and that if Mr. Byfield and the Doctor could have procured it,
should have been such as would have done me the most mischief) should have been
put upon it: But of this Deposition I shall say no more, because be it true, or
be it false, as to the matter of fact, yet as to the matter of charge it
signified nothing.

William Cottle, who deposes,

That when Thrift was killed, he d^d conceive him to be overtaken in Beer, for
that he could not scarce pull the rope of the Bell without stepping into the
fold; but where he had it, this deponent knows not. And says also,

That aboout two year since Mr. Bushnell coming through Pickwick lane from
Corsham bended to and fro upon his Horse: and this deponent the morrow asking
Brewer the Inkeeper what he had done to Mr. Bushnell, said, he was well enough
when he went thence, having spent only ten pence, out said he did use to suddle
a Cup there now and then.



1. Touching John Thrift. 2. Touching m^ ^elf.
As touching John Thrifts ringing, and in what Condition he was when he rang, I
shall refer thee to the deposi^ion of another witness summoned in to appear at
the same time and place by William Pinchin; which was this William Cott^es own
brother and taken in these words.

Richard Cottle of Box deposes that Thrift afore^aid, ringing two or three
pulls at the Be^^ when he was afterward killed; this deponent did not conceive
he was in drink, and having but the last week asked of him that gave him the
rope, and took it of him again, (he being also of the said opinion) this
Deponent does the rather believe it.

Here you see we have two for one, and those this William Cottles brother, and
Will. Love his Brother in law: who gave him the rope, and took it of him again;
and therefore in likelihood might know more of John Thrifts condition at that
time then any man.

Commissioners been pleased to suffer it) I could have made it appear, that at
such time as John Thrift rang, this William Cottle was not below in the Church
or Belfree, but above in the Tower tolling of the great Bell: from whence it
was as impossible for him to see what was then done below in the Church, as it
was for William Pinchin to see what was done at Box when he was about five
miles off at Broughton.



That as I rode homeward from Corsham, I bended to and fro upon my horse.

Certainly this will signify nothing with sober men but only a distemperature
in the informer. The several postures and motions of the body, the variety of
gate and garb, the carriage of the hands or feet of men whether on horseback or
on foot, as they are little thought of by him that uses them, so I think as
little regarded by any rational man that shall behold them: We look upon these,
and such as these, as done without any mature deliberation: and therefore
barely as such, neither matter of commendation or reproof: nor are they usually
called humane actions, although he be a man that does them.

Brewer an Inholder of Corsham as his voucher, I shall acquaint thee with the
Information upon Oath, which this Thomas Brewer gave before the Commissioners,
and shall after leave it to the Reader to judge, how this William Cottle has
represented both him and me. I must tell thee that this Deposition of Thomas
Brewer was not taken at this time at Caln, but afterward at Marlburrough* July
1. yet because it relates so much to William Cattles Deposition, I shall
anticipate the day, and insert it here; It is in these words;

Thomas Brewer of Corsham Inholder, being sworn, says, That he did never tell
William Cottle or Henry Parsons before sworn, that Mr. Bushnell did use to come
to his house to suddle a cup as they have deposed; nor was he distempered at
the time mentioned in their Depositions. And says, that he have known him
these ten years, and never saw him drink to excess, nor did he ever go from his
h^use distempered with Beer as this deponent knows; yet says, that he have
often been at this deponents house in Corsham, but seldom save in business for
the children, to whom he is a Guardian, or to the Lecture, or the like, and
says that he have been there three or four hours at a time in the Deponents
said he use with his Tenants, etc. and have not drank more then a jug of Beer,
or a Pint of Wine.

deposition. That he never told William Cottle that Mr. Bushnel did use (...)
to his house to suddle a cup. Here we have another sad story, Contradictory
oath's taken again. Of which (as I have said) of necessity one must be false. I
am satisfied as to my self where the perjury lies; and it may be that the
reader will be of my judgment before I come to the end of the story. It was at
this time that we exhibited Articles of exception against this William Cottle
touching his credit and former conversation, every of which would have been
proved upon oath. As

1. That this William Cottle was a drunkard, and that on the Lords day; and
even in the time of divine service he had usually seduced others to his house
to drink. As

2. That this William Cottle was a thief, who together with John Twyford the
hangman cut, carried and stole Poles out of Hungerford wood, supposing them to
have been the Ministers. As

3. That William Cottle was a scandalous and infamous person, who having been
convicted for selling Ale without License, and other misdemeanors, and yet
taking no warning, was by the Justices of the Peace sent to the house of
Correction; from whence he made an escape, so that a Justice of Peace made him
give Bond to sell Ale no more, because he could not otherwise restrain him. As

4. That William Cottle was a cousening and cheating fellow: for, ( putting
himself into the Office of a Tything-man in the room of another m^n* he
collected moneys for the buying of Drums and C^lours, which he keeps (or the
greater part of it) ^ his hands, or else otherwise imployes it: and suffers the
Cattle of one James Butler ( for whom he (...) Deputy) to be taken away by
Soldiers until sa^ satisfaction were made. Insomuch

5. That William Cottle was looked upon a one that regarded neither his word
nor his Oath, so that the steward of the Leet discovering him, would not admit
him (although he greatly thirsted after it) to serve in that place any more:
conceiving him belike to be a person so unworthy and so unfit to be trusted, as
that he was not held meet for so mean an office as a Tything-man. As

6. That William Cottle was a slanderer of the Ministers, charging them in the
general with greediness, and that he would trust none of them all: and that for
instance he mentioned Mr. Chambers who had left Claverton, and was gone to
Pewsie

Counsel for that time waving all the rest, pitched upon the last, viz.

That William Cottle should say that your Parsons were greedy, and that he
would trust none of them all, no not Mr. Chambers, who had left Claverton and
was gone to Pewsie.

This Article was indeed of it self the most inconsiderable, although perchance
it made the loudest noise with them, because it reflected somewhat upon their
Doctor. Now William Cottle being charged with these words, confidently denies
that ever he spoke them, being still upon his Oath; affirming, That no honest
man would justify that he had said so: and drawing his finger a thwart his
throat, seemed to intimate that he would give any man leave to cut his throat
if it were justified.

Soon after which comes in William Rawlins of Box, against whom William Cottle
could take no exceptions, and being sworn, says;

That on Whitsunday last soon after the morning Sermon, as they were in the
Churchyard (he named the particular place in the Churchyard, as likewise
others who heard it as well as himself) William Cottle spoke these words;

That your Parsons were greedy, that he would trust none of them all, no not
Mr. Chambers, for he had left Claverton and was gone to Pewsie.

Which words when William Cottle had heard, without more ado he acknowledged
that he had spoken, adding further, Why what if I did say so i^. The truth is,
that the thing being considered barely in, or by it self, it mattered not if he
had said so; for it was true as he said; Mr. Chambers had left Claverton, (nor
was this the first time that he had left it) and was gone to Pewsie, and this
to his great advantage too, for the report goes that he is three hundred pounds
a year gainer by this remove. But now William Cottle having been sworn to speak
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, (and this Oath always
binding him whiles he was before these Commissioners speaking upon his cross
examination to my bvsiness) and having upon this Oath denied any such words to
be spoken by him, and yet within a few minutes after, as our Proverb goes even
in the same breath, upon the same Oath to confess that he had spoken them --!
What greater or further Testimony could these Commissioners have of this man's
falsehood? or how could they look upon him as a credible witness against me,
since he sticks not to forswear himself in their presence? Another circumstance
for Mr. Blisset.

Byfield kept much ado about this Deposition of William Rawlins; it is like
enough that he was unwilling that it should be taken; sure I am that there was
a kind of an heat stricken betwixt my Counsel and him about it; it may be
that it was not only zeal to his friend the Doctor which made him so earnest;
but also respect unto himself, he rightly considering that in this saying, he
himself was reproached likewise; for that the Doctors changes might give
occasion to men to enquire what a steadfast and settled man Mr. Byfield had been
in his time: and how many removes he had made from that time he did officiate
at Enford, till this time that he was now in the Parsonage at Callingborn. But
yet my Counsel prevailed, and (although with some ado) entered it was and
subscribed by William Rawlins who had deposed it. And yet (Reader judge of
their equal dealing with me) we have not one word of this in that copy of the
Depositions which we received from their Clerk, and according to which we were
to frame our answer. I have often told thee that they had an Index
expurgatorius, yet formerly he came only with his knife, or his pruning hook,
and took away only some boughs or Limbs of a Deposition, but here he comes with
his Axes, and takes away both root and branch.

John Travers, sitting by during this debate, and hearing and noting all the
passages, observed it (and so did others beside) and (as I have heard) has
reported it elsewhere with some complacency, that Mr. Chambers did hang down
his head the while; Now we know that hanging down of the head does usually
signify that there is shame and sorrow in the Heart.

-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.
And whereas shame does usually produce either an amendment in the person so
exposed: or else indignation, which the person so exposed conceives against him
whom he looks on as the cause of this Exposal; I have some conjecture that this
wrought after the latter and worser way with Dr. Chambers; and that he did for
this store up a good turn for me against he had an opportunity. Of which the
Readers shall have some account in due time and place.

William Sanders; but because I shall have something touching him, and of the
Doctor in reference unto him, which is very remarkable in the Transactions of
the next day, I shall therefore forbear him till then.

Lawrence Cottle, who deposes:

That about one year and a half since, he and some others that went to school
with Mr. Bushnell played at Cards in Mr. Bushnells house, when Mr. Bushnell took
up one of the Boys games, and played it out for him at Slam: after which some
difference happening between the boys about their game, he snatched up the
Cards, and threw them into the fire and burnt them, and said he would have no
more playing at Cards in his house.

matter of charge lies? is it in this, That they played at Cards in my house? I
know nothing (all circumstances duly considered, and it was my care it should
be so) that makes it either unlawful or inexpedient. The time was after Supper;
the company, mine own scholars; the stake (for any thing I knew) Apples, or
Nuts, whereat in an harmless manner for some short time they might recreate
themselves. If it happened otherwise (as the Deposition here says that it did)
the beginning of the differences put an end to the Game. As I remember Mr.
Byfield disliked it that I had not burnt the Cards before, but delaid it till
the end of the Game. To which I shall say only this, that had they been filling
or smoking with a Tobacco pipe, I should have looked upon it as a thing so
disingenuous and misbeseeming Scholars, that I should have snatched it away and
broken it without any more ado.

John Gibbons in these words;

John Gibbons of Box being sworn, says, Th^^ about three quarters of a year
past he pla^^ twice with Mr. Bushnell at Tables in his own house, for good will
only, and no moneys. But says, that he was induced so to do at the request of
this Deponent.

To which we have near in place and substance, the Deposition of Peter Webb in
these words;

Peter Webb before sworn, says, That sometimes before two years past, he have
played with with Mr. Bushnell at Tables in his own house, but for no moneys.

matter of Charge in these Depositions. For

1. Are these Games illiciti in se? unlawful in themselves? or in their own
nature? Then are they such at all times, in all places, and to all persons.
Never man did, never man can use them, but in the very use of them he offends.
But perchance they will say, that they are Illiciti quia prohibiti, and though
indifferent in themselves, yet in being forbidden they become unlawful. To this
I shall subjoin, and if they be thus forbidden, it must be either ^y some old
Law, or else by some new, ^ believe that Mr. Byfield would not say, By any ^ld
Law, and if he had said by the New; that is, ^he Ordinance by which they sat,
and accor^ing to which they were to act: I shall an^wer, that then these two
Depositions signify ^^thing against me, for the ordinance in this ^articular
makes only such Ministers to be deemed ^^ilty of Scandal who shall be found
frequent players (...) Cards or Dice; and certainly then no man ^ill say that I
played frequently with these men, ^hen as they depose that I never played with
them but once a piece. I am confident that Mr. ^^field and the Doctor would not
be termed ^^equent Preachers, if they had Preached no ^ftener then it is proved
that I played at Cards ^r Tables. There was beside a concurrence of ^ll
circumstances, which being duly observed know not the Casuist so strict which
accounts them absolutely unlawful. For

1. We made it matter of recreation.

2. We used them sparingly. And

3. Covetousness (which is usually the poison ^f all games, so far as to
distemper and enrage ^he passions) could not be possibly there, because ^as it
is in their Depositions) we played for no^^ing.

One thing more let me now add touching ^ohn Gibbens, and his Deposition, of
which he ^old me since I came to London, which was this, that the Clerk Mr.
Blissets son had written ^omewhat as his Deposition which he never spoke; as
that we played at Tables on the Lords day, to which he would have had John
Gibbens to set his hand, which he refusing, he takes the Deposition as is
aforesaid; on which let me observe only this, that if John Gibbens had not read
the Deposition over, he should have been made to testify that which was most
false, which possibly some who could not read what he had written have done.
This precious Clerk having that faculty, that the witnesses shall say no more,
nor less, nor any other thing then he will have them. So it might be to my
prejudice, what they never spoke shall be inserted; but if for my advantage,
then what they spoke plain and distinctly shall be left out. He told me
likewise, that Obadiah Cheltenham bestowed a kind of a rebuke upon him, telling
him that he swore but faintly, and that by his Deposition he had done them more
harm then good.

Thomas Hayward, who deposes;

That about Pauls-tide last was two year, Mr. Bushnel did use some of the
forms of Common Prayer at a Funeral.

To which I say only this, that for any thing appears to the contrary, he might
mean that I read 1 Cor. chapter 15.

Nicholas Spencer, who being before sworn says,

That oft-times till within three quarters of a year past, there have been
Stabbal playing upon the Sabbath in the Parish of Box, and playing at fives
upon the same day in the Churchyard; and that this Deponent have often
complained to Mr. Bushnel thereof; who have replied that it was the Officers
and none of his business; but says that the said Mr. Bushnel have often
reproved and rebuked his Parishners for the same in his Sermons.

sworn that oft-times within three quarters of an year, the widow Pinchins and
her Sons fulling Mils, had been set on work on the Lords day; and that on the
same day their servants have usually hanged out their clothes in the rack. That
on the same day Obad. Cheltenham came usually from Marlborough to his own
house. That on the same day William Cottle, and Nicholas Nowell, have kept
tippling in their houses. That Thomas Powel have set it aside for a day to make
bargains in, because he would not spare the time on the Week days. Nor have
there (that I know of) been greater profaners of that day, then were those very
persons that appeared against me. But what? D^d N^cho^as Spencer see these men
at Stabbal? Why h^d not he complained of them upon Oath? he could have informed
of his own knowledge, I only on hearsay as from him: and (whatsoever the
practice of these Commissioners were) I knew that our Justices were so worthy,
as that they would not look upon such an Oath, as a sufficient ground for a
conviction. And whereas he said that he complained to me of it; was I a
Magistrate to punish, or an Officer to prosecute them? If he had complained to
me of William Pinchins paricide, of Obadiah Cheltenhams -- -- Chastity, of
Cottles profanations, etc. I must have given him the same answer as I did then,
That it is the Officers business to prosecute them, and none of mine. By
Nicholas Spensers own confession I acted as became one in my place, I often
reproved and rebuked the Parishioners for the same in my Sermons. To which I
shall add one thing more; I did (which I conceive to be most properly the
Ministers office in this business) publish the several Acts and Ordinances for
the Observation of that day: that neither the Officers, nor any others might
pretend ignorance of their duty in that case; but that the people might know
what was forbidden them, and under what penalty it was forbidden them; and that
the Officers might know what they were to expect in case they neglected their
duty: I say that these Acts and Ordinances I published oftener then the Law
required. Yea, I think, far more often then Mr. Byfield, or Dr. Chambers. But
as touching the same Nicholas Spenser, I shall for present only desire thee to
observe how he mends and makes some progress in his Depositions, how ( William
Pinchin-like) he fetches Trip, in his second Deposition outgoing the first,
and in this third overleaping all, as shall be certified unto thee by and by.

Transactions of this day. Being called in before them the next morning which was
June 5. I perceived that the Marlborough men, together with Mr. Byfield, Dr.
Chambers, and another Minister of Marlborough, I think they called him Mr.
Hughes, were very sharp set: they had dispatched two Ministers before; and the
Doctor by his big countenance seemed not to have digested it that Cottle should
upon his Oath before such a company deny and yet acknowledge it, that he should
say that your Parsons were greedy, that he would trust none of them all, no not
Mr. Chambers, for he had left Claverton, and was gone to Pewsie; and therefore
I was not to expect any kindnesses from him, because he might look upon me as
the Author of his Exposal. And therefore I desired that I might have some
further time granted for the Examination of other Witnesses; for I told them
that the Witnesses which were produced and encouraged against me, I could prove
to be men neither of honesty, nor of credit, or truth. Which if I made appear,
then their Testimony (be it what it would) fell to the ground and became void
of it self; for their Ordinance allows of none but of credible Witnesses; and
the old rule is, Recriminatio valet ad tollendum Testimonium, that a
recrimination is of force to take awa^ a Testimony. But to these words of mine
that I should prove these Witnesses to be men of neither credit nor truth, Mr.
Blisset replies to this purpose, That it were strange if there should be found
such men that were of no credit or truth, for that the Devil spoke truth
sometime. To which words for the present I shall ask of Mr. Blisset, first,
What he thinks of those words, Joh. 8 44.
He (the Devil) abode not in the truth, because there was no truth in him? I
shall ask him, secondly, Whether or no if the Devil should depose a truth, his
Doctors or himself would look upon it as a sufficient Testimony? I shall give
the Reader my present Judgment touching these particulars in the Transactions
of the next day. Only let me observe thus much unto thee now, that it seems
to me that ordinary witnesses, be they whatsoever, come they from wheresoever,
swear they what or howsoever, yet if serving Mr. Blissets turn, they should
have been welcome to him. Yet upon this my motion, To have further time granted
me for the Examination of other Witnesses; I was bade to withdraw, and being
soon called in again, my request was granted. But now whether it were because
my suite was equal, or whether or no it were because Mr. Byfield and the
Doctor had not there a full Quorum of fitting Commissioners (for although all
their friends of Marlborough were there, yet I remember not that any of Sarum
were) I cannot judge.

The Transactions at my fifth time of appearing before them, at the White-Hart
at Marlborough, July 1. 2.
liberty granted to me to bring in my exceptions both against the persons and
the Evidence given in against me at that time at Caln, I had notice by word of
mouth from the Commissioners Clerk, Mr. Blissets son, that that I was to
appeared before them at the White-Hart in Marlborough, July 1. next following.
And thither I repair accordingly with such along with me, whose Testimonies
(had they been equally heard, or duly considered of) would (with uninterested
men, or such who had not been aforehand resolved which way it should go, right
or wrong) doubtless have so far prevailed, that it would have appeared that the
Doctors, Mr. Byfields, and Mr. Blissets witnesses had been indeed such as I had
formerly represented them to be, Men of neither truth nor credit. Nor can these
men have any just cause to distaste me that I call them their witnesses, when I
have given my reasons of it. I have told thee already, that I believe that many
a one which has appeared before them, and have been sworn against me, had
never so done, had it not been for their invitation and countenance; which as
before, so at this time appeared most visible: for (besides others which I
shall name by and by) at this time there appear for the Commonwealth William
Pinchin, Obadiah Cheltenham, and John Travers, not as witnesses, but as
Sollicitors or Promoters: and in their addresses (neglecting the Gentleman to
whom alone of right this business did belong) their applications were to Mr.
Chambers and Mr. Byfield, John Travers and William Pinchin, at the upper end of
the Table, standing at the elbow of the Doctor, and Obadiah Cheltenham toward
the lower end, waiting upon Mr. Byfield; and this I conceive to be reason
enough wherefore I call them their witnesses. There appear at this time beside
these Nicholas Spenser lately mentioned, and Nicholas Nowell, and Jone his
wife: nor could I have any liberty to produce any witnesses for mine own
vindication, till the depositions of the witnesses for the Commonwealth were
first taken.

Nicholas Spenser in these words;

Nicholas Spenser of Box being sworn, says that he being at Church when Thrift
was killed, observed that he was overtaken in Beer by his countenance and
absurd carriage.



1. That this Deposition as it is under their Clerks hand, is not entered as a
distinct Deposition by it self, but it is shuffled up together with that
Deposition which he took at Marlborough,. 18.3. da.
May, 8. of which I have spoken already.

2. Whereas the Clerk puts this in the first place, as if it were the first
that ever Nicholas Spenser took yet that this was the last, and that his
Depositions of May 8. and of June 4. of which I have spoken before, were both
before this, to which I am now to speak. Now who or what should move the Clerk
(in this and many other places beside) to this (...), to invert and confound
the order wherein these Testimonies were delivered or taken (whether it were
design thereby to confound my counsel and us; that we should have a confused as
well as an unperfect Paper to answer to; that so having but a little time to
answer unto it, by this inversion of order we might be the more perplexed; or
whether or no they therefore placed the Depositions of their most Gigantick
swearers in the front, as the Indians set their Elephants to face their
Enemies, Plut. in vit. Alex.
that the world might think that all the rest were like the first: or whether
it were from neglect or oversight) I cannot judge. Observe,

3. That this Nicholas Spenser had (as I have said) been twice before them
before, that he had been twice sworn, and examined upon all the Articles, and
could not remember any such thing. Now I have heard that it has been deemed an
undue course for a witness to be twice examined against a man. This being given
as a reason, Because that this is to draw him on by degrees to swear home, and
to mend in his second Deposition what he fell short in the first. Nor is it
unlikely but that such who have been once or twice called in upon Examination
and cannot remember any thing, may if called in the third time have so much aim
given them, that they may remember somewhat amiss, but more of this by and by.



1. He swears that he was at Church when John Thrift was killed. Now there are
many others that are confident that he was not in the Church when John Thrift
came in and rang; but might come in afterward, when as it was reported that he
was slain. But now,

2. Observe with me what a notable argument the man has got, or what reasons
he has to persuade him to believe it; He observed that he was overtaken in
Beer by his countenance and absurd carriage. I have seen this Nicholas Spenser
as fantastique and ridiculous in his carriage as I have seen any man: turning
himself half round upon his toe or his heel, casting out his legs, throwing
abroad his arms; and for his countenance I have seen him (as our Proverb goes)
as red as the roust Cock, and yet I believe at that time he has been as far
from distemperature, as he was at this time from truth or charity.

John Thrift, as likewise in what condition he was in when he was slain. I
shall here once for all give thee a brief of the story as it was. This John
Thrift living in the Parish of Box, This was on Sept. 13. 1646.
and being my near kinsman, together with his wife, and some others of our
neighboring kindred, agreed among themselves (as I have since heard) to meet
all together at Church at Box, and afterward to dine with me: there was neither
feast prepared, nor any invitation made by me, as many of them yet living did
depose before these Commissioners. Soon after dinner (I retiring to my Chamber)
this John Thrift speaks to some others to go along with him to the house of one
John Hedges who was to be buried that afternoon; with a purpose to attend the
Corpse to Church. But in the way thitherward, understanding that the company
there expected were not as yet come together, they turn into the Church, where
there were some ringing; where this John Thrift takes a rope from one that was
ringing, and soon after delivers it to him again, as you have it in Richard
Cottles Deposition, to which I refer you. Now soon after this he espying the
Tower door open, arises from the seat to which he had retired himself after his
ringing, and beckning to one to follow him, goes up the stairs, as it is
thought, to see how they tol'd the great Bell in the Tower, and being (in all
likelihood) utterly unacquainted with the place, as he who followed him
likewise was, going up a Ladder about 12 rounds, whether by a blow from the
trap door, or from the Bell, or from the wheel, or by what other sad accident
it is not known, he fell from the Ladder as it is thought upon a piece of
Timber lying in a nether loft, and was taken up dead. This as to the manner of
his death. Now as touching the condition he was then in, (beside the opinion of
William Love, and the testimony of Richard C^ttle) take the following
Depositions.



May 8. at Marlb.
John Jones being sworn, says, That at the time mentioned when Thrift was
killed, this deponent dined with him at Mr. Bushnells, when he came there by
accident, and drank no more then might do him good: and went thence to the
Church where he came by his death ^ but says that he was not distempered with
Beer. And says that the said Mr. Bushnell then went forthwith from dinner to
his study, as this Deponent conceived.



Richard Pinchin of Box, being sworn, says, That he was then also at Mr.
Bushnells at dinner, and speaks fully to the same purpose as does John Jones,
and says that there was no drinking after dinner.



Jane Hendy being sworn, says, That at the time last mentioned, the said
guests came all to Mr. Bushnells by accident without invitation, as Mr.
Bushnell told her, she being his servant.

contradictory Depositions, and see in which of them there lies the greater
likelihood of the truth: which will be done, if we look on

1. The quality of the persons who thus informed. And

2. If we consider whether of them had the more likely means to know the truth
in this particular. In brief, whether of these were more likely to know; and
which of these were more likely to speak the truth. Touching William Pinchin,
and William Cottle, and of their creditableness, you have heard something
already; and more you shall hear anon; and as touch^^ (...) Nicholas Spenser, I
have told thee but now ^^^t he had been twice sworn before, and could remember
no such thing, as likewise what may be thought of such who have been at several
times admitted to swear against the same person. I have told thee likewise what
encouragement the witnesses had to swear any thing against me, and such most
made of that would swear most desperately. So that Nicholas Spenser having been
twice before them before, and now called in the third time, might by this
understand their minds, and prepare accordingly, as I have heard of some
Juries, who having been often turned back, at last find as the Judge would have
it; besides, William Pinchins and Nicholas Spensers intimacy grew daily more
and more: it is not unlikely but that he might be then designed Sequestrat^r in
case that I were ejected, and that he might know as much. I am sure that
afterward it so fell out, and this place of Sequestrator he executes with great
port and complacency: and who but William Pinchin to be his assistant in the
business; and his house ( William Pinchin knew how to bring him in a reckoning)
appointed for the entertainment of their Minister: and so might William Pinchin
bid him call himself to mind, and persuade him that he was at Church at that
time so long, that at length Nicholas Spenser might persuade himself that he
was there indeed. As the confident Cheater in the Dialogue fancying that he saw
a fearful fiery Dragon in the sky, Eras Coll. Spectrum.
and reporting it to his companions, ( what with pointing to the place, what
with calling on them to look steadfastly, what with wondering at them that they
were so dull sighted as not to see a thing which was so obvious) at length so
prevails with them, that they are persuaded that they see it likewise. The
ground of this my conjecture is, because I have heard that William Pinchin has
practiced with several other persons in the like kind. Nay more, the influence
which William Pinchin has upon this same Nicholas Spenser is so great, that
even their own man and associate Mr. Stern has observed it: and has (as I
have been told) reported it, That William Pinchin did lead Nicholas Spenser
about the Parish by the nose. Further yet, and perchance most especially, it
must be remembered that Nicholas Spenser and William Pinchin are both Tenants to
the same Landlord, a Gentleman as yet under age, who (if at all) has been but
seldom in those parts amongst them himself, and I think but few others in his
behalf. Now there go several reports that William Pinchin and Nicholas Spenser
have both been very bold with their Landlords wood and timber, felling when and
where they had no License, and such woods and timber, of which by their good
wills they would never give account; so that Nic. Spenser knowing William
Pinchin to be so dangerous a man to swear, might think it good for himself to
strain himself somewhat to gratify so good a fellow tenant, lest otherwise
William Pinchin should fetch trip, and in another place remember something
against Nicholas Spenser which he would not be willing to hear of.

the means which the persons swearing these contradictions had to know the
truth in this particula^ It is out of doubt that William Pinchin and William
Cottle were not in sight, and it is doubted whether Nicholas Spenser were then
in the Church, and yet these charge us. But now it is out of doubt that both
William L^ve and Richard Cottle were then in the Church, and both saw and
observed all passages, and yet these acquit us. Again, William Pinchin, William
Cottle, and Nicholas Spenser, who charge him with being overtaken in Beer, did
not see him, nor any of the company beside on that day drink so much as a drop
of Beer, and yet we have others who dined with him, who kept him company
afterward, who came along with him into the Church, and saw him go to the Tower
stairs, deposing that he drank no more then might do him good, and that he was
not distempered with Beer. There is no Question that had John Thrift escaped
that fatal accident, Nicholas Spenser would never have remembered his absurd
carriage or sworn that he had been overtaken in Beer: But now his untimely and
has encouraged Nicholas Spenser to be far more uncharitable toward him then
were the Jews toward those Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their
sacrifices. John Thrift must be distempered, he must be a sinner above other
men, because such a thing befell him. I could beside these Witnesses have
produced more witnesses of as unquestionable credit, who were then at my house
likewise: but I cast with my self that if two or three were not enough, then
were twenty too few.

prosanation of the Lords day at my house by excessive drinking.

I add 2. no nor by feasting neither: for the Commissioners have the Testimony
of some, and might have had of more, that (as to me) they all came by accident,
and without any invitation, and some of them were such who had been on the
Lords day many a time with Mr. Chambers at a greater distance on the like
occasion.

Nicholas Spenser, the Deposition of Nicholas Nowel and Jone his wife was taken
in these words;

Nicholas Nowel and Jone his wife being sworn, say, That Mr. Bushnell with
Colonel Air and his man came to their house (an Alehouse at the foot of Box
hill) and there remained about an hour and an half, where they drank nine Jugs
of beer, for which Mr. Bushnell paid 18 d. and then drank Mr. Spekes and other
Gentlemen's healths, and say that Coll. Eyres man drank one of the nine Jugs,
and they two drank now and then a glass of the rest, and no person else.

Clerks copy it has gotten the pre-eminence of place before many of his
fellows. Now before I come to speak to the Deposition it self, I shall premise
a few things to thee, which moved these Deponents thus to swear, as it was at
this time there testified upon Oath before these Deponents faces, and confessed
by these persons themselves. I had at that time several witnesses with me for
my vindication whereof some were wholly rejected, the Depositions of others
never entered, and of some their Depositions entered, and yet left out of the
Clerks copy, and of others their Depositions entered by halfs, as I have already
told thee, and shall tell thee more in due time. But (although with much ado)
I then got the Deposition of Henry Sheyler to be both heard and taken; part
whereof relating to this business was in these words. And this Deponent farther
says,

That Nich. Nowell before sworn told this Deponent on Saturday morning last,
that Mr. Travers offered to take off his bonds, that he might sell Ale again,
if he would appear and swear against Mr. Bushnel; and that yesterday he said he
would not have appeared and been sworn, had not Mr. Bushnell at the time
mentioned in Nowels Deposition, told Colonel Air of his Gun, and said that
therewith be used to kill Hares, and Pigeons.

Index Expurgatorius has been here with his pruning knife again; for Henry
Sheyler then deposed;

That William Pinchin was at the same time with John Travers, and made Nowell
the same proffer and promises.

I must tell thee further, that soon after this Deposition of Henry Sheyler was
taken, Nowels wife (being before at a window and hearing what had passed) comes
toward the Doctor, (for unto him were the most especial addresses made) and
after a long and a low Courtesy adds,

Yea surely if Mr. Bushnell had not to pick a thank with Coll. Air told him of
my Husbands Gun, and said that therewith he used to kill Hares and Pigeons, we
would not have been here to day to have sworn against him. And still continuing
Courtesing to Mr. Chambers, (who then turned his head about and looked toward
her) she adds farther, That he had known her of a long time.

Now if it be true what the Country reports of her, she has in her time been:
very virtuous woman, and of very credible acquaintance. Now when I heard these
words so unexpectedly spoken, and that there was as much or more confessed then
we desired to prove, I could not choose but smile. Which Mr. Byfield noting,
was much displeased with, adding withal to this purpose, That it was not, or,
that I should not find it a laughing matter. Indeed it is true, it was no
laughing matter. Christians ought to be sorry for others offenses, and such an
offense I shall prove this to be, that it is no less then perjury. And yet
thus much let me tell Mr. Byfields friends, that if I were to blame for
laughing at it, then certainly he and his Commissioners deserved no
commendation for making use of this Testimony; it is enough to make the
evidence suspected, yea and (be it what it will) rejected too by equal Judges.
If it shall appear to them, (and it was evident enough here) That the witnesses
depose out of malice, or for hopes of reward. Nay more, such informers are
looked upon as guilty of falsehood, although they spoke nothing but what was
true. I wish that his surviving friends would take notice of the marginal
quotations and practice accordingly, 1 Samuel 21.6, 9.

1 Samuel 22.10.


where they may see that notwithstanding Doeg spoke no more then what was true,
and nothing but what he had seen and board; yet David charged him for telling
of lies, Psalm. 52.2, 3, 4.
and with having a false tongue for it; giving us to know thus much, that it is
all one to speak the untruth or the truth, if the truth be spoken in an undue
manner. Proportionably say I, in case it had been true what they informed, yet
(since the impulsive which incited them unto it was spleen and revenge, for a
conceived injury which I had done them some seven years before, and their aim
some hopes that they might sell Ale again) may they be as justly taxed of
falsehood and lying as Doeg was. Nay farther, Doegs was a bare information, and
no more, and therefore David charge him only with lying and falsehood, but
doubtless he would have had another name for it, if he had thus spoken upon
Oath. Nor can any deny it, but that if he who speaks a truth after that undue
manner speaks falsely; then those who swear a truth after that undue manner
swears falsely. And could M^. Byfield countenance, encourage and serve his turn
with such vile practices as these, and yet thunder against me for smiling at
them? Could he strain at this gnat, Ma^th. 23.23, 24.
and swallow the other Camel? I shall desire them to observe it that our
Savior speaks the words to the Scribes and Pharisees, whom he calls there
Hypocrites; the Scribes went for the knowing, the Pharisees for the just, holy,
or godly of the times, yet both these our Blessed Savior charge with
blindness and hypocrisy, to give us to know thus much, that in case we be
Scribes, never so knowing; yet if our eyes are always on others, and never on
our selves, we are no better then blind: or in case we be ^harisees, and of
never so much pretended sanctity, yet (in case we should be rigid against
others, if we be indulgent to our selves, quick to observe and aggravate, and
multiply and judge another mote, and wholly in the mean time to forget our own
beam) we are no better then Hypocrites; Ye blind guides which strain at a Gnat,
and swallow a Camel.

Henry Sheyler, has deposed

That William Pinchin and John Travers proffered to take up their Bond, that
they might sell Ale again in case they would appear and swear against me.

Now I must tell thee that (beside this hope, and their quarrel against me
about the Gun) I believe that Nowel and his wife had another thing to incite
them to appear against me, which was that they looked upon me as one who had
been a cause that their former License was taken away. For I must tell thee
that (beside many disorders which I had heard of from this Nowels house, lying
^ot at the foot of Box hill, as it is in the Deposition, but in a remote place
both of the Parish and the County) there was a complaint made to me by the wife
of one John Pitcher, living not far from this Nowels house, which (as far as I
can remember) was to this purpose: That her husband John Pitcher did usually
haunt this N^wels house, and that for whole days and nights together; that he
there m^st wastfully spent his money which he earn^d at his hard labor: she
his wife and many small children in the mean time wanting necessaries. I think
she then told me that her hu^band had pawned some of his household goods (as
platters or the like) for B^er; but this I am sure she then told me* that (what
for some money in hand, what for the satisfaction of an old score) he was
making over a small parcel of sheep which they had, to this N^wel, which if he
did, she ^ayes that she and her children must go naked. She told me farther,
Tha^ ^^r husband coming thence in his distemperature, was very outrageous and
unnatural toward his wife and children; that he had been there the last night,
that he came home but that morning, which was the Lord's Day, and that she had
left him at home asleep. I (hearing this sad story from her, and guessing both
by her countenance and habit, that her condition was very lamentable, and
knowing that she had many small children) bade my servants to take her in, to
relieve her, and withal commanded that they should give her somewhat to carry
home for her children, she having told me before, that she had at home no
sustenance for for those small children, nor money to buy; but before she went
away, I asked her what her husbands carriage was toward her and her children
when he was himself and sober? she told me that it was both loving and careful,
and that he was never so outrageous as when he was set on by this Jone Nowel;
whereupon I (considering the perishing condition which her poor small children
were then in, as likewise doubting what might happen in case her husband should
awake, and find her missing, having such a woman as this Jone Nowell at his
elbow) advised her for the present to repair to her home, to relieve her
children, and not by any means to speak to her husband until he were sober: but
then in a friendly manner to acquaint him where she had been, and what she had
done: assuring her further, that if this were the order of Nowels house, there
should be a course taken with them without her further trouble. Now so it was,
that sometime after this Nowels License was taken away, and he forced to give
bond to sell no more. The consideration o^ these things make me to have a
strong conjecture, that Nowels wife conceited that I had acquainted Col. Air
with their profanations and disorders, as well as with her husbands Gun, and
that now (having this opportunity, and the countenance of the Doctor, her
ancient acquaintance) they were resolved to be revenged on us both, (I mean the
Colonel and my self) both for the one and the other.

Colonel Air, his man William Daniel and my self, coming from Bath one Evening
alighted at this house standing near to the highway. The reason why we
alighted was, because the Colonel complained that he was a cold, the season
being frosty, and the time about the 20. of December. 1649. And having a very
good fire there made, we sat down for some time and warmed our selves: Col.
Eyres m^n, and another (I take it he was a son of this Jone N^well, which she
bore in the time of her former husband) in the mean time walking our Horses
without. I very well remember it that we drank there, I very well remember it,
(for I entered it upon my Book of disbursements as soon as I came home) that I
delivered to this Jone Nowel, 18. d Which I did at the motion of Col. Air, he
having at that time no silver about him; which we looked not upon as reckoning,
as if in Beer we had spent so much, but in regard that we had there a very good
fire, that there was one all the time without with our Horses; as also for that
we looked upon them as poor people, we made light of it, and paid it. Touching
drinking Healths, I am confident they swear at random: if any thing, it might
be remembrances, which (I know not the reason of it) is both a name and thing,
which passed among these Commissioners, with better acceptance: but if one or
other, then certainly must the latter part of their Deposition, That they two
drank now and then a glass, be false; for in such cases William Pinchin has
told us the use is to put the Healths or Remembrances round: and if so, then
there is no doubt but that they had their portion likewise; and I must tell
thee that I have since heard (for at the time mentioned in the Deposition, I
had very little acquaintance there, this being the first time that I ever was
in the house since I came to Box, and indeed the only time, excepting that I
was once there since, when I went about from door to door to beg for Mr.
Blisset, Mr. Hunt, and Mr. Bailey, and the rest of Marlborough) that this Jone
Nowell will not refuse her cup when it comes to her turn. Nay, as I have heard,
she will rather be on the fore-hand, taking two for the others one, which she
has done at Corsham so long, till she has made her self worse then a beast,
and not able to go but by the support of her Neighbors, whereof one carried
her Basket, and the other haled along the Woman, the worse luggage of the
twain. I have been told too, that she then fell into a pool with her head
forward, and it is like enough, had not her neighbors, William Westbury at whose
house she lodged that night, and Thomas Druet, Sen. with much trouble and
labor brought her to Box, she might at that time have made an end, and so the
Doctor had lost both her Testimony and Courtesy.

about an hour and an half] and our discourse such as did not in any wise
savor of excessive drinking. I remember that I told Colonel Air of the Gun,
it stood then in sight in the Chimney. I told him likewise, that therewith he
used to kill Hares and Pigeons; but they seem to have forgotten it (a willing
ignorance no doubt) that I then told the Colonel, that therewith he usually
killed Hares and Pigeons on the Lord's Day; it having been (as I have been told) a
common practice with this Nowell so to do; and being met on a time with his Gun
by one who was going to Church, and admonished by him to go along with him:
this Nicholas Nowell gave him this answer, That he got not his living by going
to Church. And I assure thee what I told the Colonel, I therefore did it that
Nicholas Nowell might by this private Complaint to a Justice of Peace take
warning, and that he without any further trouble to the Magistrate, or charge
or punishment to himself, would for the future without any more ado have
become a new man. And whereas they cite this Gent. Colonel Air, as one that
was with me at the same time at their house; I shall acquaint thee with
somewhat which Colonel Fire had formerly deposed as with reference to my self
before these Commissioners, in these words.

And this Deponent says further,

June 4. 1656. at Caln.
That he has known Mr. Bushnell this thirty years, and has frequently kept
him company, but never saw him drink to excess, and in his opinion have ever
walked as circumspectly as might become a Minister.

So far that part of his Deposition. Now if Colonel Air never saw me drink to
excess, then certainly not now at Nowels. And (if they say that this our being
at Nowels might be at the time that he so deposed have slipped his memory) I
shall acquaint thee, Jul. 54, 15. at Lavington.
That even touching this our being at Nowels he was ready shortly after to
Depose to every one of the particulars in charge against us, according as I
have presented the particulars unto thee; but Mr. Byfield and his friends had
before they parted at this time from Marlborough taken a course to prevent
that, for they made an order (conceived to be on purpose to leave Colonel Air
and my self under the infamy of Nowels Deposition) without remedy or hopes of
vindication of ou^ selves) That no witnesses which I should produce, should be
heard or admitted of, of which I shall tell thee more in the close of the
Transactions of this day.

William Sanders, which I told thee because it did much refer to the
Transactions of this day, I should deser it till then. The Deposition is in
these words:

William Sanders of Chippenham Shoemaker deposes, That about four years since
he saw Mr. Bushnell come from the Bell in Box reeling to and fro three or four
foot at a time; and says that he believes that he was then drunk* for that he
fell down, having been at the Bell four or five hours in the company of Mr.
Cannings, and Mr. Edward Long of the Moor, and says, that after he fell in the
street he rise again, and so reeled home.



1. The thing it self as it is reported.

2. The repute or quality of the person who thus deposes. As

3. Some inducements which might encourage him to appear and swear any thing.

As touching the First, That I came from the Bell reeling three or four foot at
a time; that I had been there four or five hours; that I fell down, that I rose
again and so reeled home.

To this I shall answer, That if this were true, it is almost impossible but
that others should see it as well as William Sanders. For

1. It must be in the day time, else he could not see it, and if in the day
time, others must needs see it beside, for the distance betwixt the Bell and my
house is at least a furlong, and there are many houses and cross ways between
them; and I believe that you shall hardly go between those two houses from sun
rising to sun set, but you shall see and be seen of many; and can he quote no
body, not William Pinchin, or Nowell, or Cottle, or Nicholas Spenser, or
Obadiah Cheltenham, or some such like, which saw it beside himself? June 4,
1656.
It was at Caln that William Rawlin's wife appeared according to a Summons
procured by the information of William Sanders, he affirming that she had seen
it as well as himself; but when as the woman came to depose, she could testify
no such thing, but all on the c^ntrary, and to my vindication and their infamy,
if she might have been permitted to go on: But her name is not at all in the
Depositions, it being the use to take those Depositions which imported matter
of charge against me, but nothing which might represent either them or their
Witnesses in their colors. And

2. Whereas he says, that I had been there three or four hours, he must needs
intimate to us thus much, that he himself had been at that house so long. But
now considering the conditions of the woman which then kept that house, this is
as impossible to be true as the other; for she has often told me of it since
(and I am confident that she will depose it) that she would be so far from
entertaining this William Sanders in her house for four or five hours, as that
by her good will she would not have admitted him to come within her doors.

conditions and qualities of this William Sanders; and see whether he were a
person of such credit as the Ordinance requires. I shall first represent him
unto thee as he was upon Oath represented unto these Commissioners: and after
give thee a short story of his infamies, every particular whereof (had the
Commissioners been so just as to have given us leave) should have been proved
upon Oath likewise.



June 4.
William Air Esquire being sworn says, That sometime since, diverse persons being
impeached for committing diverse Robberies about Sandy-lane, William Sanders,
before sworn, was accused to be one of them, and was at the Assizes arraigned
for the same, and found guilty by the Grand Jury, but in favor of life was
acquitted by the Petty Jury.

The next in these words;

July 1.
Reynald Arlet deposes, That 15 years since, Sanders before sworn, committed
Sacrilege by cutting and stealing the Church Leads.

The third in these words;

July 1.
William Morley deposes, That under the pretense of a Soldier, the said
Sanders in the wars broke up this Deponents Brothers house, and took goods
thence to a good value.

A fourth in these words;

July 1.
Michael Baylie deposes, That about eight years since, without provocation, the
said Sanders fell on his own Father, and beat him, and said that he would make
an end of the old rogue.

These are the very words of the Depositions as they are under the Clerks hand;
although either not taken, or not copied out so fully as the Witnesses deposed
in very many remarkable circumstances.

three last Depositions were taken at Marlborough, July 1.
the Doctor (belike having before either instructed William Pinchin what was to
be done, or else having been informed by William Pinchin what he had done)
beckens to William Pinchin with his hands and twinkling of his eyes, it seems
as doubting that William Pinchin had forgotten himself. Whereupon William
Pinchin approaches, and with a low cong^e delivers to the Doctor a piece of
Paper, which the Doctor conveyes to Mr. Blisset with some such words, There is
a Testimony of this man's (meaning Sanders) behavior; which was by Mr. Blisset
read accordingly. The business was but short, and my thoughts so much upon this
Doctor, that I little noted it; only I remember that there were the names of
some whom I knew, set to it, and the names of others which I have heard of; of
which (as likewise the false pretenses by which this Certificate was gotten)
more anon.

William Sanders being questioned for the sacrilege mentioned but now, fled;
and sheltred himself from prosecution (as the report goes) in one or both of
the A^mies; and that he stands answerable for this sacrilege even to this
hour; And was it not an handsome thing in the Doctor to countenance this man
against the Minister, that had robbed the Church? that in stead of bringing of
him to condign punishment for sacrilege which he was then proved guilty of,
he should then endeavor to bear him out in his perjury likewise? But there
were men heretofore of such Principles (I shall say more of them hereafter)
that regarded not who they were they made use of, it serviceable to their ends;
that could Saint, and Anathematize, the same person accordingly as he stood
with reference to their interest; if for them, then had they good words enough
for him; if not, then he was none of the Godly.

But to return to the present business; William Morleys Deposition tells us,
that Sanders brake open his Brothers house under the pretense of a Soldier;
belike conceiving that as that pretense had sheltred him for breaking Gods
house, so it might encourage him to break open and rob his Neighbors. I must
tell thee further, that Sanders does as yet stand guilty of this felony
likewise. And this was conceived to be the reason why his Certificate was at
this time delivered in by his Proxy William Pinchin (it being thought that
Sanders himself was then in Town:) for they thought that if Sanders himself had
appeared in person, he should have been apprehended for his former felonies,
and so sent to a place where he should have been secured from starting.

infamies; let the Reader enquire after him in any place where he has lived,
and I believe that an especial token that he will be remembered by, will be some
vile prank that he has played; and the truth is, that when this Sanders
appeared at Box Church-house where his Father lived, we of the Neighborhood
conjectured, either that he had done some pranck elsewhere, and was come
thither to shelter himself, or that he was come thither to do some good pranck;
in order whereunto it was observed that he was much accustomed to nightwalking,
as he pretended to go a Fishing, and such was their credit, if any thing were
lost (Sheep or the like) and search to be made, the house which the Officers
did usually begin with was the Church-house, where this Sanders Father lived
and harbored him.

notoriously known and infamous, I shall here acquaint thee with: sometime in
the year 1654. I think it was about the 15. or 16. of September, this Sanders
being at an Alehouse in Pickwick in the Parish of Carsham, in the company of
one Thomas Stockman of Bathford, he falls there to abuse him so far forth, as
that he forced him to pay a reckoning for Beer, etc. which Sanders had spent
before Stockman came in, and afterward following the poor man, going homeward
(it being night) in a lane about half a mile from the house where they had
drank, this Sanders overtakes him, knocks him down, robs and wounds him so
grievously, that he lay sometimes under the hands of a charitable person for
his recovery: Insomuch that complaint was made to a Justice of Peace, who
grants forth his Warrant (yet to be shown) against Sanders: but (I know not the
cause of it) this Warrant was never served upon him, Dated Sept. 19. 1654.
Subscribed Edward Stokes.
so that he stands guilty of this assault and robbery, even to this hour. Thus
much has Thomas Stockman formerly affirmed, although at this time he would
neither be deposed of it, nor prosecute Sanders for it; for since the time that
he was robbed, and this July 1. this Thomas Stockman is fallen off to the Quakers;
and therefore conceives Oaths and prosecutions to be against his Principles.
And all this would have been testified to the Commissioners, if they would have
given my witnesses leave to speak. I shall trouble thee with one pass^ge more:
I having some discourse since with a man of Corsham (one whom the Doctor knows,
and pretends to respect much) touching this business, and having told him that
Sanders was an especial witness against me; the man by way of wonder speaks to
this purpose: Why they would not take the Testimony of such a rogue as Sanders,
I think, would they? and then tells me a story that Sanders on a time coming to
his house, fits him down by the fire, where the man (having some occasion to go
into another place) left him sitting, but at his return (which it seems was
sooner then Sanders expected) he finds this Sanders with his feet standing in
the fire, and his head and his hands up in the Chimney stealing Bacon that
hanged there. Nay, even at this time; his Oath, and behavior were such, that
it bred astonishment even in those that countenanced him. Insomuch that John
Travers sitting by, and hearing his Deposition, was overheard to say to this
purpose; There is a rogue to swear, I could not keep him sober a day together,
but that he would be drunk every day.

Commissioners might soon have perceived the truth, and credit of this man, if
they would have noted, or been informed touching words by him then spoken, he
being then upon Oath: and those were touching his fidelity to the State, and
his service done to the State: and the wounds (as he reported yet to be seen)
which he had received in the State-service. Whereas it would have been proved
(if they would have heard my witnesses) That he received those wounds when he
was in arms against the State, and under the command of Captain Thinn: and it is
like enough that he had there continued still, had he not feared that they
would have hanged him for breaking open and robbing houses; and this fear it
was, and not any good will which forced him over to the other party, there to
secure himself: and as John Travers reported it, brought a good Horse with
him; to give them some assurance that he durst not go back again to that party
from whence he fled; and (as Sanders then affirmed) he became a Soldier under
Captain Travers, a fitting match; like Captain, and like Soldier.

him no more then a thief or a robber of both God and man; or a plunderer, or a
paricide, a profaner or a drunkard, or the like. But now this does not wholly
disinable his Testimony; but could I make it appear that he had formerly
foresworn himself, that then I had said something to the purpose. To this I
shall answer,

1. That by their instructions the Commissioners were to take the Testimony of
none but credible witnesses: and then certainly it will appear by that which
has been already said, that Sanders to all uninterested men is nothing like
it: we cannot prove it that those who bare false witness against Naboth, did
ever bear false witness against any before: But this it was which rendered them
suspicious (and with just Judges should have been cause enough to abhor them)
because they were sons of Belial, wicked, mischievous, lawless men; men of so
much known infamy, that they would not stick at any thing, which was put upon
them, be it either to speak or to do, but in the general were ready for any
wicked employment, and for the particular fitted themselves according to their
occasions who employed them. Such who held a common shop for all comers, and
would furnish their customers according to their likings. And here by these
Commissioners leave, I shall tell them, that there are other exceptions as well
as former perjury; which with equal Judges, (such who have the discretion to
know, and the conscience to practice* just things) may render some witnesses
unworthy of credit. In that famous trial of Faulconers perjury in the case of
the Lord Craven, we have several proofs brought in touching Faulconers former
behavior and credit; and all taken (a piece of justice, which I could not
obtain from these Commissioners) as that this Faulconer had been a blasphemous
debaucht man, a cousening and cheating fellow, and one that had been several
times committed for suspicion of felony; and all for this purpose, to make it
probable that he who formerly had (for nothing, or but a small matter of
profit) committed such horrid crimes, would not for some greater matter stick
to forswear himself.

Doctor and his Commissioners had a better opinion of Sanders, then Sanders had
of himself; for Sanders was so far conscious to himself, that his guilty
conscience did so far misgive him, as to make him doubt that his former
infamies had been so odious, as that they had been enough to disinable him to
give in any thing in point of Evidence, and to take off all his testimony in
all places whatsoever. For thy further satisfaction in this particular, I shall
now acquaint thee with the false pretenses and lies wherewithal Sanders, or
such as acted for him, got hands to that forementioned Certificate which Mr.
Chambers so tenderly delivered in. After such time as Sanders had deposed
against me, June 4. at Caln.
belike foreseeing that I should recriminate, he goes, or procures some to go
to some of the Borough of Chippenham, and tells them to some such purpose,
That he was to appear the next assize at Sarum as a witness in a trial: in
order whereuto he desires their hands to a Certificate touching his behavior
for half a year last past. Doubting (as it was informed) that otherwise his
Testimony would not be taken, in regard of his former infamies, being both
notorious and frequent. Such, as I have heard, was his relation; but I must
tell thee that this relation was false in every particular. For

1. Sanders dreads an Assize or Sessions as much or far more then he does a
Pesthouse; nor can you fright him worse then to tell him that he must appear
there.

2. This Certificate pretended for the Assize at Sarum (where Sanders did not
appear, nor had he any business there) was delivered in three weeks before at
Marlborough.

3. This Certificate desired to enable him to take an Oath, was framed and
delivered in after the Oath was taken. So that Sanders or his agents have
herein notoriously falsified, and imposed upon his neighbors at Chippenham, as
some of them (if I have not been misinformed) have acknowledged: protesting
against it, and complaining that he has grossly abused them, in procuring their
hands with a lying pretense, and afterward carrying them to such a place, and
using them to such a purpose, which was contrary both to his pretense and their
intention. So that we have here that old piece of Policy practiced, Scelere
velandum est scelus, one, a former wickedness covered with a latter;
false-swearing plaistered over with a lie; by lying he procures this
Certificate, that he might employ it to cover his former false Oaths. Now I do
not wonder that William Pinchin, Nicholas Spenser, William Sanders and Obadiah
Cheltenham should contrive and practice such unworthy courses; my wonder is,
that the Doctor should so demurely put to his helping hand for the promoting of
them; nay that he should be more forward then William Pinchin: and readier to
call for it then William Pinchin was to deliver it in. But doubtless the Caln
business did yet stick in the Doctors stomach; there were a generation of men
heretofore great pretenders to godliness, that were very touchie, and very
implacable; and perchance before I make an end of this discourse, I shall make
some observes to the Doctor of the Agagite in the Old Testament, and the
Scribes and Pharisees in the New.

Question, But can you prove Sanders to be perjured before? I shall say that
readily I cannot, perchance, nor none beside: and this is the reason of it,
because it is believed that this was the first time that ever he was admitted a
witness upon Oath against any; and it is like enough that therefore he forswore
not himself before this time, because that before this time he had no
opportunity: the want of which we know has restrained many a one from
wickedness, which otherwise they have had a mind unto. By his own
acknowledgment he looks upon his credit as much crased, otherwise he never
would have importuned for this certificate. I think it be not usual for men to
carry their certificates with them in such cases to any Assize.

Commissioners (being belike pleased with his Deposition, because he had sworn
as they would have him, and having in him found such a one as they had looked
for of a long time) were by any means willing to preserve his reputation; in
order whereunto the Doctor (as I have said) delivers in the Certificate: Mr.
Byfield, Mr. Bailey, Mr. Hunt, thwart with, interrupt and turn back my
Witnesses, that they might not inform how infamous Sanders had been. And Mr.
Blisset (he loves to have something rare by himself) to rebate the edge of the
Depositions of Colonel Air, Rainold Arlet, William Morley, and Michael Baily,
says, that those offenses were committed long ago, and that since he, that is,
Sanders, might become a new man, or to some such purpose. But now I would fain
know of M^. Blisset, when this reformation began in William Sanders? or (if
that Question may seem to signify nothing) by what testimony in his life and
conversation has this Sanders evidenced it, that there is any reformation at
all wrought in him? As I remember, Sir Water Raleigh rejects the book of Judith
from being so much as Apocryphal, because he cannot find any time, age, or
century wherein to place it. And I doubt me that Mr. Blisset would have as much
to do to find out the time when William Sanders reformation began, or any thing
that does resemble it, unless he means that his Oaths against me have merited
so far as that his name does now deserve to be put into red letters. And tell
me Mr. Blisset, when did his reformation begin? Did it begin when he was before
you at Caln? I have told you already, and had proved it (if they would have
heard my Witnesses) that he then forswore himself in your presence; affirming
then upon Oath, That he had received those wounds in the States service, which
he received in the Kings; or in a drunken fray at Chippenham; or did it
commence as his Certificate was delivered in at Marlborough? I have told you
already by how many falsehoods and lies he obtained it; no signs of amendment
these, no nor of change neither, unless the change be for the worse. Besides
the man whose house he brake up and robbed at Swainswick has since told me;

Jan. 15. 1658.
That he then took from him to the value of Twenty Marks, that he and his fare
the worse for it to this hour.

Sanders in the mean time who has robbed him, and spent, or worn out, or
otherwise disposed of his goods, slants it abroad, bears it high, and is so far
from making this man any part of satisfaction, as that he comes not near him so
much as to acknowledge that he has done him any wrong. Anne sunt hae vestes
filii tui? Do your Reformadoes, your godly men go thus clad? are robberies, and
lies, and perjujuries proper arguments of a reformation, Mr. Blisset? Do grapes
bear thorns, or figs thistles?

Blisset must give me leave to reply upon him, and say, that if William Sanders
were such a villain so long ago, and yet no amendment perceived in him, what an
overwaxen and overgrown Monster may he be by this time? To what an height of
wickedness may he be mounted up unto, that was guilty of Sacrilege when as he
was not much above twenty? Sen. Trag. Med.
I remember that Medea in the Tragedy meditating mischief and revenge, studies
to do something which was answerable to her years; conceiving something more
then ordinary to be proportionable now, because she had committed several
strange wickednesses when she was but a Girl. -- Haec virgo feci -- thus* and
thus I did, thus I murdered my Brother, after this manner I deceived my Father
many a year agone, when I was but young: But, Majora jam decent scelera;
Greater wickednesses may be expected now from me, now that I am at full growth,
and am both a woman and a Mother. Proportionably say I, This William Sanders
might (beside many fair inducements from the Commissioners and Suborners)
encourage himself to some notable villainy from this, that he had been so
infamous so long ago; and might say to himself, That it is but a little more
then what I have done already, that I am now about to do. I have already many a
time, and often broke those commands, which enjoined me not to profane the Lords
day, not to dishonor my parents, not to kill, not to steal: and it is but a
little more, if for once I break the next Command likewise, that says I must
not bear false witness, and swear falsely against a Minister. And now that I
have done with Mr. Blisset as touching Sanders; let me add something to Doctor
Chambers, as with reference to the same person. I have told thee that at such
time as (amongst other notorious infamies) we had proved Sanders to have fallen
upon his own Father, to have thrown him down, and beaten him, saying, that he
would make an end of the old Rogue; Mr. Chambers calls for a Certificate, and
promotes it in this Sanders his behalf. And this was the second time wherein he
showed himself very forward either to countenance or defend such who by the Law
of God had forfeited their lives. Exodus 21.15, 17.
1. In the behalf of William Pinchin; and here in the behalf of Sanders: making
those crimes to be but small d^fferences in the one, and no great matter in the
other; which Gods Law looks upon and punishes as h^rrid, barbarous, and
unnatural. And since the Doctor has thus appeared in the behalf of such
persons, he must give me leave to tell him a story. It Is reported that when
Caracalla had murdered his brother Geta in his mothers arms, he practiced with
Papinius at that time a famous Lawyer, to defend or extenuate the fratricide
before the Senate; of which foul murder the Lawyer refuses to undertake the
Patronage, giving this reason, That it was easier for a man to be a Paricide
then to defend it: and this with such resolution, as that it is said that he
lost his life for his refusal. Now I question it, whether Doctor Chambers would
in such a case have been so backward as this unbelieving Lawyer was? I believe
that he would not, my reason is this: He that shall (as the Doctor did) look
upon a sons cousening, cursing, frequent beating of his Parents, after a
barbarous manner throwing them down, laying hands upon them, taking of them by
the throat, drawing his knife upon them, calling them old Rogue, and threatening
to make an end of them, as only some small differences, or matters not much to
be noted, or easily to be excused; may rationally be conceived to think it no
great matter if he had actually murdered them. But the Reader must remember,
that in those days Paricides were very frequent, and in great credit; yea, and
that then the Doctor, and his Commissioners acted by a power which had murdered
our King, The common Father of us all, and many of their Brethren beside. Yea
and farther yet since that present Government by which those horrid Paricides
were committed, was that which empowered these Commissioners and Doctors to
act, and that a strict enquiry was by them made, who were disaffected to it?
and a severe punishment inflicted on those who were found disaffected to it; we
may safely say, that even these men Commissioners and Doctors did approve of
those wickednesses which the other had committed; and by approving of them,
confess themselves to be some of those Paricides. The blessed Reformation being
then so much improved, that the breach of the fifth Commandment was accounted
godliness, but the observation of it scandalous.

William Sanders informs that Mr. Edward Long of the More, and Mr. Cannings
were then and there with me at the same time. Now this is the third time that
this Mr. Longs name has been mentioned to his disrepute long after he was
dead. Twice before by William Pinchin, and the third time by William Sanders;
indeed I think I may safely say all these three times by William Pinchin, for
that Sanders and Cottle were then at Caln, both Catechized by William Pinchin
before they swore; who (as I have been told) wrote down something which one of
them never spoke, and yet he hearing it was (since William Pinchin had written
it down) content that it should go so; so that we may guess that these swore
not according to their knowledge, but according to their lesson: Obadiah
Cheltenham, and I think John Travers being at that time coadjutors with William
Pinchin in the same business. This Gentleman Mr. Long was then dead, and so
could say nothing for himself or me: yet thus much I am confident will be
testified by men yet living, who knew him well, that for four, nay five, nay
six years before this Deposition was taken, it was even impossible for Mr. Long
to be such as this Deposition represents him, a drinker to excess: as I have
said, he was buried in December. 1651. and for a long time before lay under a
lingering and wasting Consumption, which at last brought him to his grave: and
this was so visible to his friends, that in case he had been inclined to
intemperance, yet they would have withheld him even for his healths sake. It is
like enough I might meet him at that house, and like enough it is that I might
make some stay there with him; and if they ask me why, I shall tell the
Commissioners and Doctors that the occasions that drew me thither* were far
more commendable, and my actings there far more Clerk-like then theirs have
been at several Innes, at several places and times, for a longer time together
then is mentioned in Sanders Deposition. It Is too well known, that there were
at this time many unnatural differences betwixt this Mr. Long, his Mother, and
Brother, which were heightened so far as to some suits of Law: that these
differences caused a great alienation of affections betwixt them, so great that
(although but three) the same house would not hold them; for the composure of
which strifes, there were many (and some persons of quality) that traveled much
in it: and it was the pleasure of some of them to take me along with them, as
one who was well known to all the disagreeing parties, and well thought of by
them: in order to a composure I was sometime with one party, sometime with
another, and sometime in one place, and sometime in another, and that for more
hours together then are mentioned in the Deposition. And that this was the
business which drew me to Rainalds house at this time, and occasioned me to
stay so long there, and that I was not at all distempered with Beer, would have
been Deposed by Mr. Canion mentioned in the Deposition, who was then and there
all the time, and heard and saw all that had passed, but him (beside many other
very material witnesses) they would not admit of.

Clerks hand: and I make no question but the Reader (remembering how many
Depositions I have charged them with which they never took, how many
Deposition^ were taken but never entered, and how many Depositions were entered
by halfs) will take these for the greatest and worst which they had against me.
To which, (beside what I have already observed) I shall offer to thy
consideration some few things more. 1. Whereas there is mention made of my
being at Bailies and Rainalds his Alehouses, and of my drinking there, I shall
tell thee, that I had both the women who keep these houses (being both very
ancient and their husbands dead) before the Commissioners, who were there
sworn, but their Depositions in the Clerks copy very much contracted, and are
only in these words.

1. Sarah Rainalds who keeps the Alehouse aforesaid says that Mr. Bushnell
seldom came to her house but in Parish business; nor has he been there this
half year, and the last time not to drink.

2. Elizabeth Bailie who kept the Alehouse aforesaid, being sworn, says, That
Mr. Bushnell never came to her house (as she remembers) but upon Parish
business for making rates or the like: but says, that he has not been there
this two years past.

This is every word which we have as deposed by them, when as it is well known
that their Depositions were very much longer. I pass by that part of Sarah
Rainalds Deposition, where she informs, that I was once there in company when
the reckoning came to two shillings, and to Mr. Byfield who asked how many
there were of us; answers that there were about sixteen; and besides they had
Tobacco: which passage the Clerk noted, although he did not take it, and to Mr.
Byfield who somewhat scrupled the reckoning, says (looking up into Mr.
Byfields face) that there were sixteen, and that they had Tobacco too.

Whether either of them saw me distempered with Beer at any time, or drinking
to excess in their houses? Which Question was proposed to them both; and they
both answered No. If there had been any such thing, that I had drunk hard with
Mr. Long or any other, they must needs know it; and had they known it, I am
confident that they would not have forsworn themselves to conceal it. I know
not whether it were at this time against them, or at another time against
Thomas Brewer that Mr. Byfield took exceptions to this purpose;

That they were parties being Alehouse-keepers, and therefore not likely to
speak the truth, because it might prove penal to themselves for entertaining
any too long, or letting them drink too much.

Now to see the Disposition of that godly man; he would not believe that any
swear truly, but such as swear as he would have them: To do a mischief. With
him no Witnesses were credible but desperate ones.

Nay, to see the abundant charity of that man! I presume that he conceived
these women to have some understanding of an Oath, otherwise he would not have
admitted them to swear, and yet he sticks not to imply that they would perjure
themselves to save their five shillings a piece. I had it not at that time in
my head, but now let me mind them of one thing more, of which I have some
confidence, and it is this. That had these women by virtue of those Oaths which
they had then taken, been demanded, Whether they had never seen William Pinchin
drinking to excess in their houses? they must have answered that (although
much against their wills, when they knew not how to be rid of him) he has been
drinking, and smoking, and quarelling, and drivelling so long, that he has
made himself worse then a beast; yea and that (this would have been proved too)
he has there disgorged himself, I say not into his Hat, but as seemly as one
that uttered his mind, having overcharged himself with Wine and Quince pie.

William Pinching the Solicitor, and Mr. Byfield the Advocate soon silenced or
put them all by; and thus they served no less then four at this time, Mr.
Camon Will. Bushnell, Hen. Harris, Ric. Cottle.
some whereof would have told pretty stories of William Pinchin, John Travers,
Obadiah Cheltenham, William Cottle, William Sanders, yea perchance of the
Doctor too, if they might have been heard; which doubtless William Pinchin
foresaw, and therefor was so forward to stop their mouths; Mr. Byfield and the
rest ever seconding him, having this pretense for what they did, That what
those who deposed against me was for the Commonwealth and present Government,
but that those who would have deposed for me, was against the Commonwealth,
and against the present Government.

Henry Sheyler before mentioned, whom William Pinchin stoutly opposed,
alleging, That he was a drunkard, and that there had been two Bastards laid
to his charge. To which the other as stoutly replies, That that charge might be
false as well as true; but put him in mind of an attempt of a Rape made by
this William Pinchin upon a Woman near Bristol, when they two were in Arms in
the Kings Army: and had he not been taken off, pretending this was nothing to
the present business, he would have told the Commissioners such a story of
their witness and Solicitor William Pinchin, naming the time when, God dam me,
I will --
the place where, the manner how, together with other circumstances, so filthy,
and much worse then beast-like, that I remember not that I have in any Author,
either sacred or profane, met with a story to match or parallel it, unless that
Lam. 5.11. come near it; but this was quasht, and Henry Sheyler permitted to
proceed, which he did in these words;

That on Saturday on Whitson week last past, he went to enquire for William
Cottle whose wife told this Deponent, that he had been three or four days
running after William Pinchin to witness against Mr. Bushnel; upon which
William Cottle coming into the house told this Deponent, That William Pinchin
promised him, that if he would swear that Mr. Bushnel came drunk from Corsham,
he would make him Parish-Clerk and Register of Box. However if he were not
ejected, he should be Register. And then said farther, that if he should swear
it, he should offend the Gentlemen, if not the Farmers. To which this Deponent
by reply bid him speak the truth; upon which the said Cottle affirmed, That he
could not swear that he ever saw Mr. Bushnell distempered with Beer: yet the
said Cottle then affirmed that he had now an opportunity to be even with Mr.
Bushnell for permitting Col. Air to send him to Bridewell for selling Ale
without License.

Henry Sheyler.

1. That William Cottles wife told him that her husband had been three or four
days running after William Pinchin to witness against Mr. Bushnell. Now so
much she had said before to Anthony Balden, and before her husbands face too;
and thus much was testified upon Oath before the Commissioners sitting at Caln
by Anthony Balden; but it seems (according to the custom) either never entered,
or else Index Expurgatorius has dashed it out.

2. William Pinchin offered to make him Parish-Clerk and Register, etc. Now
these were places which to mine own knowledge William Cottle greedily thirsted
after, and made great suit for, but was rejected for both; we conceiving him to
be very unfit to bear any office about the Church, who had been formerly
thought unfit to serve so much as for a Tithingman. I must tell thee further
that there was some such trade driven likewise betwixt this William Cottle and
John Travers. For William Cottle being summoned to appear before these
Commissioners by this John Travers asks him, Who should pay him for his days
work? To whom John Travers replies;

That if Mr. Bushnell were ejected, he would see that he who succeeded him
should pay him; but if Mr. Bushnell were not ejected, that then he was likely
to loose it.

A pretty bait for such a fellow, and questionless enough to make him fetch
trip, or (as Obadiah Cheltenham instructed him) to swear out right, for
otherwise he was likely to lose his present labor, and expected reward; and
that this was discoursed betwixt John Travers and William Cottle was testified
on Oath before the Commissioners now sitting at Marlborough by Mary Bailey; but
either not taken, or else Index Expurgatorius has been here again. And here
let me observe this unto thee, how that William Pinchin and John Travers have
their varieties of baits and flies suitable to the appetites of their fish.
Salust b^ll. Catal. p. 9.15. mihi.
(We know that Cataline had such heretofore; yea Mr. Chambers the chief Priests
and Elders made use of the like, Matthew. 26.61. compared with Luke 23 2.) Nowel
they knew longed to have his Bond up that he might sell Ale again, and
therefore they promise him,

That if he will appear and swear, that shall be taken up.

William Cottle sore longed for these offices, and therefore William Pinchin
baits for him with these promises;

That if he would swear that Mr. Bushnell came drunk from Corsham, he would
make him Parish Clerk and Register.

four things especially which cause false accusations, Malice, Obsequiousness,
Coverture, and Covetousness; we have no less then all these discovered in this
William Cottle here.

1. Covetousness. The Registers and Clerks place, together with five pound
beside, were promised him as his reward; and he must swear that I came drunk
from Corsham, that he might obtain it.

2. Obsequiousness. He seems little to regard it whether he swore truth or
falsehood; but whether he should please or displease. If he should swear it, he
should offend the Gentlemen, if not the Farmers.

3. Malice, and indeed leavened, stale and sowred Malice; and such on which the
sun had gone down* many an hundred time. That he had now an opportunity to be
even with me, for permitting Col. Air, to send him to Bridewel for selling Ale
without License, which happened about Sept. 1653.

4. Coverture (if it be not somewhat worse) for he falsely charge me of his
crimes, and he therefore charge me with them, because I had labored to
suppress them in him, when as he was guilty of them; like the Elders in the
Apocryphal story of Susanna; because I would not consent or suffer him to
practice profanations, and other disorders, he charge me to have been a
practiser of such.

Transactions of this day; only I shall tell thee before, that at this time it
appeared that they had somewhat overshot themselves: (an usual thing for such
Politicians) and that it was in some sort long of themselves that they had not
their will of me so soon as they desired. I have told thee already that Mr.
Byfield had taken order formerly that we should not in any wise have any copy
of the Depositions, which at this time stood us in some stead, for the Doctor
and he had then a strong party, (yea and if not a Quorum, yet a major party)
for them. Their friends of Marlborough, and some one of Sarum, Mr. Phelps, were
at their elbows, who no doubt had it in their thoughts to have made a quick
dispatch with me; but my counsel opposed their sentence then, because we having
no copy of the Depositions, could not possibly give in any answer or plead to
the charge. The Evidences were long, and could not readily be summoned up
either by my Counsel, or by him which was for the Common wealth. This
obstructed them at that time, and for the present the business was suspended.

Sarum about the Assize time shortly then to follow; but soon after I had word
brought me, that it should be before that time and at Lavington: I understood
likewise that Mr. Byfield was the cause of that alteration; for (having been
for some time absent, and at his return into the room understanding what had
passed) the man began to be in some passion, and clapping his hand upon the
Table, he fiercely tells them to this purpose, That if that order stood (the
order made in his absence) or if I were not ejected, he would sit no more
amongst them. Whereupon (for as I have said he had then a major party) that
former order was reversed before the Ink were dry; and I being called in, Mr.
Blisset read a new Order to me to this purpose;

That my next appearing before them was to be at Lavington, July 14. where I
was to have my final judgment; that I was not to bring in any more witnesses
for my self; but that they for the Commonwealth might bring in as they pleased.

Whereupon for that time I had my discharge, but I looked upon my self as
condemned, and that this was only a reprieve from Execution for so many (that
is about 12) days.

The Transactions at my sixth time of appearing before them, July 14. and 15.
at the Antelope in Lavington.
condemned person, having now no liberty left me to speak for my self, nor any
beside to be heard in my behalf. But that all that were or would be against me,
had not only a liberty, but a kind of invitation likewise to speak their
pleasure of me, with approbation: and therefore might conceive that this
summons was only that they might undo me with the greater reproach; every son
of Belial being now encouraged to wound and insult over me, now that my hands
were bound, and my mouth stopped; yet to Lavington I repair: Excepting that some
far sought and prepared youths would have appeared and have sworn up to the
suborners instructions, and the Commissioners desires. When Lo, there appear
for the Common wealth only William Pinchin, Obadiah Cheltenham, Nicholas
Spenser, William Cottle, and one Brewer, I think his name be John, that lived
then either in Corsham Parish, or at Weaver-Mill. Of these William Pinchin, and
Obadiah Cheltenham, as formerly solicit, the business; and unless it were in
order to that, or his Sequestratorship, or to hear his own commendations, I
know not what it was which drew Nicholas Spenser thither. But there were only
two prepared to swear. This Brewer and William Cottle. But now as touching
Brewers Deposition, as I remember, that was never taken by the Clerk; but as
Brewer spoke, Mr. Byfield wrote down something in his Note Book, but what I
know not. A story it was he told about an Health or remembrance drank in
Colonel Air his house, and that I was then present in the room, and he
likewise as a servant to Colonel Air, but that I drank that health he could
not depose: Whereupon Obadiah Cheltenham (being belike displeased, because he
had sworn so much short of their expectation), addresses himself to the
Commissioners, and tells them, that he (that is, Brewer) had represented it
otherwise unto them. So that it seems, that they had the Catechizing of him
before he came to swear; yea and possibly this might be done, when as they*
that is, William Pinchin, Obadiah Cheltenham, John Travers, met somewhere at a
kind of a feast, where (as I have heard) Obadiah Cheltenham being a small
Clothier, William Pinchin having fulling Mills, and Brewer being a fuller; this
Brewer had some promises that he should be set on work by them Another bait
suitable to the appetite of their fish. But it seems that Brewer being at this
time under another influence, had forgotten his lesson, and spoke not as they
had taught him, but somewhat of the truth, and somewhat which was false: for he
then and there reported upon Oath, That at the time aforementioned he was then
in Colonel Eyres house, and his servant, of which falsehood he was then
convicted by Colonel Air himself, at that time and place present, who then
affirmed (which the other could not deny)

That this Brewer had never been any servant of his; that he had not found him
meat and drink, or paid him wages, which he should be unwilling to ow to any
servant.

But it seems that the occasion which drew John Brewer to Colonel Eyres house
at this time, was this: it happened that this Brewer ran a hunting after their
Hounds that day, and so afterward thrust himself into the house for a meals
meat, and it is not unlikely, but that he might be so officious as to make
himself a waiter until his turn came to dine. But now the Information which
Colonel Air gave touching Brewers Deposition, wherein he largely insisted on
the Company there present, as likewise the occasion on which that disc^urse
began, as likewise the time and place where it began, and from what it had its
rise, as likewise what he would have informed touching our being at Nowels
house, in order to his own vindication and mine, was at this time wholly
suppressed: because contrary to that order which they had formerly made. viz.
That no witnesses for me should be admitted. Yea, notwithstanding one of the
Commissioners then sitting, Mr. Michel urged that Colonel Air should be sworn,
and his Deposition taken, yet the Marlborough and Sarum men together, with Mr.
Byfield, carried it in the Negative, because contrary to their good order: and
the Colonel being put back, I had not any hopes that any beside should be so
much as looked upon.

Gentleman, Colonel Air, let me here add something; That as Justice of Peace
he had proceeded against many of those witnesses which swore most desperately
against me, as felonious and scandalous Malefactors; against William Cottle, by
sending him to Bride-well for selling Ale without License; against William
Sanders by sending him to Gaol about a robery; against William Pinchin in
binding him to the good behavior, and granting forth several Warrants against
him, for beating his Father and Mother out of doors. I cannot say that he acted
any thing against Nowel, unless it were in taking away his License: for
(although Nowel has been since prosecuted for the attempt of a rape, in an
house, and in the night time, and he upon the outcry of the party (as I have
heard) making away, was yet discovered by the shoe of his Hurl foot, which he
left behind him, yet) I cannot say, that Colonel Air bound him over for it.
All which notwithstanding, all these men by Colonel Air thus proceeded against
for several infamies, are by Mr. Byfield, the Doctor, and their friends at
Marlborough encouraged to testify against him to his reproach, and yet he not
permitted to say any thing in his defense. I shall for the present observe thus
much unto these Commissioners and Doctors, from a Topic drawn, a Testibus ad
Judices. That such Judges have proceeded but with little credit or justice,
that have countenanced infamous persons to be their witnesses: and that where
sons of Belial are encouraged to testify, there the Judges are usually such as
the Elders were in Jezreel, 1 King. 21.8, 9, 10.
or the chief Priests and Elders were, Matthew. 26. 59, 60.

William Cottle, as I have told thee, was now at Lavington likewise, but all
that he had to say, was only this, that he would be d^posed, That he had never
spoken such words to Henry Sheyler as are mentioned in his Deposition: But the
man and his proffer were both rejected, and it is like enough for this reason;
The Commissioners might look upon him already as a perjured person, and
therefore might they well think that he would not stick to forswear himself
again to excuse it, and as Sanders formerly endeavored to countenance his
perjury with a lie; so William Cottle minded to countenance his, with another
false Oath. But this, as I have said, the Commissioners did not admit; and yet
they made use of his Testimony against me; yea, and so did the Judges in the
case of Naboth, and the chief Priests and Elders, although they knew that their
Testimonies were false, and that they themselves had put those false words into
the witnesses mouths.

William Pinchin, Nicholas Spenser, and Obadiah Cheltenham, would have engaged
William Cottle to swear again, I cannot but wonder and tremble, to think how
far wicked men for base interests will lead, and how far a wicked man for the
hopes of a small reward will follow. This William Cottle (betwixt the time that
he swore at Caln, June 4. July 14.
and this time that he now appears at Lavington) was heard to wish, that his
tongue had been cut out of his mouth before he had sworn against me; yet now
(being backed by his Tutors) he is ready with the same tongue to lay a heavier
burden upon his soul. Having sworn falsely before, he now appears to swear
falsely again, that he never said so. But mark the sequel: and here I would
have the Reader to admire, to wonder, to tremble, but not to judge. Shortly
after this time William Cottle falls sick, his wife (as I have heard) has
reported it, that it began with a burning in his lips, proceeding thence to his
tongue, insomuch that he was forced to keep water in his mouth to cool it,
while he was at work; one who was with him as a Physician has told me, that
when he came to see him, he found his tongue black, and swollen even out of his
mouth. In this sad condition (sending forth such groans which were heard into
the street) he continues certain days, and not long after dies. 1656.
Now (considering that sentence was past upon me, Jul. 23. and that William
Cottle was buried Aug. 18. next following, and that he lay sick for several
days before he died, and was not buried till some days after he was dead) I
say, these things considered, there will remain but a very few days for him to
rejoice in my overthrow, or to please himself with the expectation of his
reward. It must be confessed, that William Pinchin was somewhat more kind unto
him in his sickness, Mat. 27 4.
then the chief Priests and Elders were to Judas in his distress; for (as it is
reported) both he and his Mother visit him often; but now whether or no it were
to encourage him with hopes of recovery, or to comfort him with an assurance of
his reward when he was recovered, or whether or no it were to confirm him in
what he had said and done, fearing that he should repent, and tell the truth, I
will not judge.

Reader, think not that I insult over this carcass, or in any triumph tell thee
of his sudden and sad fall, or say that he was thus smitten for this cause.
Only let me say thus much, that as we may trangress by being too uncharitable
in such cases, so we may transgress by being too stupid. And I wish that all
that shall read this story, may from this Example have a care to themselves, as
with reference to their several actings and relations. If suborners, that they
have a care how they prepare and practice with others. If mercenary, that they
have a care how they are practiced with: and if Commissioners, that they have a
care whom they countenance and give credit to. And I wish that these
Commissioners may be the last that credit or countenance such witnesses: That
Obadiah Cheltenham, William Pinchin, John Travers, Nicholas Spenser, may be the
last that prepare them: that William Cottle may may be the last that take such
Oaths; and that I may be the last that suffer by them. And I further wish that
these men, W. P. O C. J.T. N. S. yea and the Commissioners and Doctors too, may
timely and sadly consider of it; That if William Cottles soul perish for this
cause, then they cannot but look upon themselves as guilty of his damnation. If
God will will require the blood of men at their hands, who seeing others in
wicked ways shall neglect to recall them; certainly much more will he require
it at their hands who shall put them into wicked ways, and encourage them them
to go on. If he who withholds not from Hell be accessory, then much more be
that thrusts thitherward. And here let me observe unto thee the portion which
divine Providence dispenses to such practitioners, that do, or say, or swear
basely or falsely for reward or gain.

1. They are often disappointed of, and never receive that which has been
promised them, as Cottle.

2. In case they receive it, yet can they take no delight in the keeping of it;
it was so with Judas.

3. That such a thing which they never dreamed of befalls them, which will never
be wiped off, Infamy.

4. That that does usually befall their families, which by these ungodly
courses they labored to prevent. I have told thee already, that John Travers
promised William Cottle, that if I were ejected, he would see that he who
succeeded me should pay him, if not, he was like to loose it: but a third thing
has happened, which they never dreamed of: and who shall pay him now? Divine
Providence so ordering it that I should be ejected: that William Cottle should
live to see it: that he should die before he could receive the reward of his
perjury: that that has befall his family which by this means he labored to
prevent: and (if his soul miscarry for it) he is gone to such a Master for his
wages which neither he, nor the suborners, nor the Commissioners, nor their
Doctors did then so much as dream of. I say that that has befallen his family
which by this means he labored to prevent, Poverty. He left behind him many
small children, and a wife, who was with the Overseers to engage for her
house-rent (notwithstanding her late husbands father were her Landlord) before
I was thrust from the place. I have been told since, that this William Cottles
widow (belike conceiving herself to be her husbands Administratix, and that all
promises made to him to be due to her) has been with some of the ingagers for
the portion promised her husband; which it seems was five pounds, besides the
Clerks and Registers place; but that she was yet put off, and advised to go to
Mr. Stearn for it, which has made the woman to fly high, and to report it,

That had it not been for the Oaths which her husband took against me (which he
took upon the encouragement of W.P. J.T. O.C. N.S.) she believes that her
husband had been alive to this hour.

From which it is clear enough that she believes that her husband had sworn
falsely; and that he was thus taken off because he had sworn falsely; and that he
had sworn falsely upon their instigation.

witnesses against me but only Cottle and Brewer: yet I must tell thee, that at
this time Mr. Long the intruder of Both, by his Letter gave me an Alarm in the
rer^. To the best of my memory his Letter was to this purpose.

1. That I had, without his leave, preached at the funeral of Mris. Jane Rosewel
at James his Church in Bath.

2. That at her grave I used these words; For as much as it has pleased
Almighty God of his great goodness, etc.

3. That I was not well reported of by the godly.



1. Something touching the contents of the Letter: And

2. Something touching the conditions of the man, which he has expressed by his
several Actings.

As to the first branch in his Letter;

That I had preached at James Church in Bath, etc. without his leave.

I answer, That true it is, that I then and there Preached, and was thereunto
invited by Mr. Richard Masters her son; but I told him (before I promised him
to do that last office for his Mother) that I would not undertake it, unless he
would first undertake that I might preach there without any obstruction or
disturbance, of which he assured me, and told me he would make that his
business. Upon this promise I repaired to Bath (for the former discourse was at
my house at Box, whither Mr. Masters came on Monday before the Funeral) on the
Friday next after her decease, the day appointed for her interment; and coming
with the Corpse to the forementioned Church, I find Mr. Long in the Ministers
Pew; who then entertained me with this complement, saying, I was welcome. Yea
and sometime after this Solemnity, he comes to some of my friends, and enquires
of my welfare, with thanks for my pains, desiring to be recommended to me, as
also of my acquaintance. Now how suitable this is to his Letter let the Reader
judge: nor heard I of one word of his distaste until the time that I was
Articled against before these Commissioners, which was about 18 months after.
Tell me ( you Commissioners) how many times had the Sun gone down upon his
wrath in the mean time? and if they will needs have him godly for all this, I
shall tell them that they seem to deal with Mr. Long as the Poets have done by
their Goddess June, whose deity they would assert, and yet they would not deny
but that she was of a most lasting malice, and of a most revengeful disposition.

Distuleratque graves in idonea tempora poenas. As touching the second branch
of his Letter;

That I used at the Grave these words, Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty
God of his great goodness to take unto himself the soul of our Sister, etc.

I answer, That it is like enough that I might use these words, or words
equivalent. I ever took her to be a woman who ever lived and dyed in the fear
of God, and therefore in Christian Charity was bound to believe that God whom
in her life time she had served, would at her death (of his gracious mercy)
take her soul unto himself. But now were I to speak at the Grave of Mr. Long,
(he continuing to the last such as he has been) it is like enough I may say of
him only this, That God of his most wise and unsearchable providence had taken
him out of the world.

And then as touching the third Branch:

That I was not well reported of by the Godly.

I would fain know who those godly men are which he means, and where they live?
Does he mean at Bath? I hereby assure thee, that (be my conversation what it
will, yet) any there deserving that denomination, godly, could hardly speak
evil of me, because I was then unknown to them; or does he by godly mean
William Pinchin, O.C. W.C. J.T. W.S.N.S? of their virtues and other godly
qualifications you have heard somewhat already, and more you shall hear anon:
or does he by godly mean himself? This indeed is something like the rest; for I
assure thee, that (excepting that time wherein he, together with one Bony a
Barber, his Brother in law, then living in Bath, came to my house at Box, to
search for the age of their wives in the Register there) I remember not that I
ever exchanged six words of discourse with him: and therefore he (if godly
according to the true notion of the word) could not speak evil of me, because
he had so small acquaintance with me. It must not be forgotten that Mr. Byfield
presents this Letter to them with this recommendation of Mr. Long;

That it was written, and came from the Godly Minister of Bath.

Now to give thee my thoughts, I have a conjecture that Mr. Byfield and he did
act by confederacy, Mulus mulum, that they tossed good words to and fro betwixt
them, that they did mutually give and take, and gratify one another with
specious compellations: Godly me, and I will Godly thee: and that therefore
they did give such words that they might receive the like. And thus did the
Scribes, Pharisees and Lawyers heretofore (they loved to act according to, and
follow the best examples) who seemed to hold their reputation as it were in
common, and took a reproach done to one, as a reproach done to all, Luke 11.44,
45.
Master in thus saying thou reprochest us also: but I doubt that as it was with
those heretofore in point of holiness and righteousness, Vid. Gr^t. in locum.
so it was with these now in point of Godliness; That they understand and
practice it much alike.

Long, I have told thee that we were to others mere strangers, and although
living near, yet it was in several Counties: I never troubled my self about him
or his business; and he now to appear against me in his Letters? from whence
proceeded this? from piety, or prudence, or any principle that is rational or
religious? certainly from neither.

1. Not from Prudence. What? a Minister (if he be such) against a Minister, and
at such a time as this? when we had almost all beside against us, fot we to be
at it amongst our selves? It may be rationally conjectured that in Noah's Ark
the Sheep and the Wolf, the Lion and the Goat, the Hawke and the Dove had no
hatred unto, nor fear of each other; the imminent and dreadful danger which
they were all in, made them for that time to lay aside their antipathy: and
then for Mr. Long at such a time as this, and in such a manner as this, and
upon the solicitation of such men as these who brought his Letter; to appear
against me! and to engage against me in the behalf of such who would cry Aha,
so would we have it, at the ruin of us all! and Mr. Long let me tell you, that
I have this conceit with me, that these very men who importuned you thus to
appear against me, would to serve their turns, if occasion were offered, be as
ready to practice with me to write against you.

Prudence then in Mr. Longs actings. No nor

2. Any Piety neither. There were indeed heretofore a sort of people who
pretended to Godliness, and yet amongst other vile affections were false
accusers; these indeed might have the form, 2 Timothy 3.3.
or outside, or resemblance of Godliness, but in their conversations they
denied the power thereof; and therefore were they the more (...), because they
entitled Religion to it, and converted their malicious actings with so good a
name, Godly. I would have Mr. Long observe it (if he understand the Original)
that the word which we English false accusers, or as it is in the margin,
Make-bates, is (...), 1 Timothy 2.11.
the same word being Englished Slanderers, and both these, the false Accuser,
and the Slanderer, called by the Devils name, because they resemble him in
their actings. Now to bring down this to Mr. Long;

1. I believe he will not deny it, but that his Letter was intended by himself
as an accusation against me.

2. And I have already proved it that this accusation, as to him, must needs be
false, because he knew me not.

And then 3. he appearing by his Letter against me in such a conjuncture of
time, place, persons, and after such a manner; I cannot conceive otherwise but
that it was with some spiteful malicious design against me. And therefore Mr.
Long must give me leave to tell him, that I think I do him no wrong, if I
report him for (...), a Slanderer, as the word is rendered 1 Timothy 3.11. and for
(...), a false Accuser, as the word is rendered, 2 Timothy 3.3.

Long will needs be Godly for all this, yet I must tell him that his Godliness
is of a much differing kind from the primitive Godliness, and the concomitants
thereof. Then was Godliness accompanied with righteousness, 1 Timothy 6.11.
faith, love, patience, meekness: So far from offering wrong to any, that it
was desirous to do them all good; so far from hatred to any, as that it wrought
charity toward all; and so far from severity, or rigidnesse, as that it made
men most moderate toward offenders. Hence that of the Apostle, If any man be
overtaken in a fault, Gal. 6.1.
ye which are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness. It is
observed by many Interpreters that the word which is englished Restore,
properly signifies to put in joint any bone of the body which is broken, or out
of its place. If then the spiritual man (the Ministers of the Church) were to
set in joint members that were dislocated, then certainly in no wise to break
them when they were whole; and if to set and restore them in the spirit of
meekness, then certainly in no wise to break them in the spirit of backbiting
and slandering. No fruits of Godliness these, Mr. Long. Nay more, to come to
him nearer, and upon the score of writing Letters. 2 Cor. 3.1.
The Apostle, although he says he needs them not, yet seems to intimate that
it was then a custom for Christians, especially Ministers, to grant to others
according to their several occasions, their Letters of recommendation; thereby
to procure to those that travailed good acceptance, and entertainment with
those Christians to whom they were to go, being upon their own account, utterly
unacquainted with them. But now that a man should upon no grounds write against
a Minister, and so write against him as one of whom the Godly could not give
one good word! Certainly if this proceeded from Godliness, then it must be from
such a Godliness which the Primitive Christians looked on with detestation;
from such a Godliness as was that of the Chief Priests and Elders, Scribes and
Pharisees; not from such a Godliness as was that of the Apostles and Brethren;
for such a Godliness which has its rise from Hell, and not from Heaven. The
Jews, Act. 28.21.
although they hated Paul to the death, and sought for his life often, yet it
seems that they wrote no Letters against him to their Brethren at Rome.
Malicious although they were, yet their malice seems to be terminated and
limited to the parts near adjacent: but Mr. Long has been more active, and his
influence more diffusive, for --

only man whom he has singled out to sho^t at: but he seems to be of the
disposition of Ishmael, G^n. 16.12.
his hand is against every man; and although I could say much of him in this
particular, I shall yet forbear it, because it is in the case of some other
men; nor should I have so much as touched at it unless, it had been to give
thee some hint of his Dispositions: And all that I shall touch at is to tell
thee of the pains, travel, earnestness, expense, hazard and other unworthy
courses, which he has practiced against others as well as my self; but he has
not found in Sommerset men according to his expectation; No Doctors or
Marlborough men there; the Commissioners there being Gentlemen discreet and
moderate, who as I have heard, have (some of them) given him good counsel, yea
and turned him off with several rebukes; and those such as, had they lighted on
an ingenuous, modest, or godly spirit, would have been enough to confine him at
home with shame and silence. Let others whom it concerns report his carriage
and actings then; what provocations he used to induce some to swear, what pains
he took to summon in witnesses, what poor offices he undertook in his own
person, what persons he uses in the business, and what names he has for them
to advance the design; I say of these, and such other like these, let others
speak whom it concerns; only let me mind thee of one thing which has been much
talked of in Bath and laughed at, it is this: Mr. Long having produced many
witnesses (which it seems in their Depositions did not swear up to his desires)
does further desire that others then absent might be summoned in end heard,
giving these absent men this Character, that they were ( beside many other good
Epithets) godly men, and yet for his Proto-Saint, he names a man whom he does
no more take for godly, then he does me, or I him. And here let me (for the
close) observe one thing to Mr. Long, (for his Godfather Mr. Byfield who gave
him that name godly, is since dead) and that is this, That the chief Priests
and Elders, Scribes and Pharisees had such a gift, that they could change their
countenance too, and speak differently of the same persons, accordingly as they
were serviceable unto, or obstructive of their private, malicious, and
hypocritical design. These people were much applauded, encouraged,
countenanced, persuaded and moved by the chief Priests, when it was to bring
our Blessed Savior to death: but when they went a thwart the design, the best
words which they had for them then, are, Joh. 7.49.
This people who knows not be Law, are cursed.

Long, and return to the Commissioners, who (having now as many Witnesses and
Papers as they thought would serve their turns, as likewise a supply of such
other Commissioners which would do the business) employ Mr. Jonathan Hill to
sum up the Evidences against me; which he does, but very briefly: his
Rhetorique consisting especially in this;

That he labored to aggravate my Crimes from the Crimes themselves, from
Circumstances, and from the quality of some persons who appeared as witnesses
against me; and lessening their contradictions, perjuries, and subornations, by
an argument drawn from a consideration had to the Commonwealth or present
Government, whose witnesses they were, and for whom they acted.

I cannot forget one thing which he insisted on in the first head, and that was
touching the person of Nicholas Spenser, intimating that much credit ought to
be given to his testimony, because he was a grave, old Gentleman. Touching his
gentility and gravity I shall say nothing; only let me acquaint thee with this
one thing concerning him: That this Nicholas Spenser professes a skill in the
recovery of such who are distracted; and withal, that he does sometime
practice upon Pigs, being alike distempered; now I know not what courses he
takes for the recovery of men; but I have been told that for Hogs he has this
Receipt; That he cuts an Apple, or a piece of Cheese, and writes upon it Sare,
Nare, Fare, and then by inversion Fare, Nare, Sare, and so gives it the Hog;
for which (as I have been told) he has received money, or something
aequivalent. Now this must be either a Charm or a Cheat, both which are
punishable by our Municipal Laws: There is Mr. Jonathan Hill's grave old
Gentleman. I will not be peremptory neither that Mr. Hill said much upon the
second head, nor indeed was it so much as was said and done many a time before
by Mr. Byfield and his Commissioners; who countenanced and encouraged many
undue, unjust, yea very vile and wicked practices, pretending that it was for
the Commonwealth or present Government; in the mean time they discountenanced,
suppressed many just overtures and proceedings of ours, pretending that it was
against the Commonwealth, and present Government.

Commonwealth was, whose interest must be promoted by such unworthy courses?
Did they mean that present Government as it stood then established? This cannot
be, because I have charged them with, and proved them guilty of the breach of
that Ordinance set forth by that power, and according to which they were to
act; and it may seem strange that a man should say, that he acts for the
Commonwealth, and yet at the same time violate those laws which the same
Commonwealth has made. I think that I do them no wrong, if I should say, that
by Commonwealth they meant some private interest or aim of their own, which
yet must go under that Vizor, Commonwealth, that they may drive on the design
with less suspicion. But I will for once suppose, that they meant as they said,
and that their utmost aim was the promotion of the good of the Commonwealth,
taking Commonwealth in the best sense: but then I shall add some few things to
be considered of. As

1. That a good end is not to be promoted by evil means; we may not do evil,
that good may come of it, in any case. I shall add;

2. As not in any case, so much less are we to do evil for the promotion of the
Interest of the Commonwealth: of any temporal Ordination, Dominions and
Kingdoms are (as of Gods especial institution, so) under his especial care: The
powers that are, are ordained of God; and as we are therefore to be subject to
them, Apol.
because they are of his institution: (Caesar is more ours, says Tertullian,
because our God set him up) so we may assure our selves, that their interests
are to be promoted only by such ways and means which the King of Kings
approves of; which we are assured are none but such as are lawful and just. So
that to fancy, that that which is so especially from God, must be supported or
advanced by such ways and courses which God has expressed himself that he
does abhor, is upon the matter, to say, that our great God wants the Devils
help to support his own institution: or that his Government could not be
established unless the Prince of darkness did afford some contribution toward
it. Mr. Byfield had an Hebrew name, and therefore possibly he might understand
the meaning of those words, 2 Samuel 6.8.
Perez Vzzah; and thence he might learn that God takes it much amiss from them,
because they put forth their hands presumptuously and inconsiderately to uphold
the Ark, although shaken: much more would he have taken it amiss, if they had
in contempt of his express command put forth wicked hands to uphold it. I
remember, that when Captain Bishop endeadeavoured to extenuate, if not to
justify Faulconers perjury, in the case of the Lord Craven, by recounting the
services which Faulconer had done for the Commonwealth, and adding that
Faulconer was one by whom the Commonwealth sat safe, at that hour; The
learned Council replied on him thus; It is God that we sit safe by, and not by
him. Perjuries are not proper means either to advance or strengthen a
Commonwealth. I shall say no more in so clear a case, but only in the words of
Job, 13.7.
Will you speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him. And now I shall
add

3. That whosoever shall go about, either in pretense, or otherwise, to advance
the Interest of a Common wealth by unlawful or wicked courses, is the greatest
enemy unto it. The Throne is established by righteousness, Prove. 16.12.
therefore destroyed and over-thrown by injustice. And the former part of the
verse, It is Abomination, etc. seems to intimate that not only Piety, but even
Prudence, should engage such who meddled in Commonwealths, to the observance of
Equity and Justice, because wickedness is so destructive to them. Be it then
either the Supreme that commands unjust things, or inferior Commissioners that
put unjust commands into execution, yet of them all, it may be easily proved,
that there are none that are such Malignants to their Government, as are they
themselves. Excepting himself and his virtuous Jezabel, I know not of any that
did contribute more to the ruin of Ahab and his house, then did those
obsequious Elders and Nobles of Jezreel, and their sons of Belial. It Is like
enough, that the State Politic may deride both the Priest and his doctrine;
and it is like enough that Ahab (before he fell at Ramoth Gilead) would have
derided, or done worse to any man who should have said as much to him. But I
would have the State Politiques to tell me, what opinion they think that Ahab
has of it now? who were the greatest enemies to him and his house? who were
they that brought his family to a sudden ruin, and a fearful one? could we
hear him from the dead, he must needs answer, that he himself and his friends
undid him, and that nothing did so much strengthen his Enemies against him, as
his own and his Favorites injustice.

Marlborough men) some one whom you lately knew, See the Wiltshire Address of
October. 20. 1658. promoted by Mr. Byfield and his friends at Marlborough, Isaac
Burges, Tho. Bailey, Will. Blisset, William Gough, Nich. Profit, Thomas Hunt,
Will. Hughes, John Keyns, and to be communicated to Mr. Spinach, Mr. Barcroft,
and other godly Ministers, to Mr. White, and Mr. Eatwell of the Lavingtons.
your polished shaft had not been so suddenly taken away, and his Posterity,
your Plant of Renown, laid aside so soon, so as scarcely to be spoken of, but
in pity or contempt, unless such Officious Commissioners as your selves, had
executed his Ordinances with far greater injustice then ever he made them. You
might and did say, That it was for the Commonwealth, for the present
Government, and possibly you had thoughts thereby to have established, and
perpetuated that Establishment both for him, his, and your selves. And now lo,
as to them their honor is in the dust, and as for your selves, you live the
scorn of others as well as those whom you have injured: yea, and possibly in a
very short time you may be in a worse condition then those whom you have thrust
out of doors.

Lavington at this time: After that Mr. Hill for the Commonwealth, had summed
up the Evidence against me, and my Counsel on my behalf had pleaded to the
charge, we were all commanded to withdraw, that the Commissioners might debate
the business among themselves. There were at this time many of them, and indeed
a greater number then I had seen at any time before, viz Mr. Thistlethwait, Mr.
Michel, Mr. Shute, Mr. Middlecot, Mr. Ludloe of Claringdon, Mr. Hely of Sarum,
and the three Marlborough men whom Mr. Byfield had called upon that morning at
Marlborough, and brought them along with him. Now those that know that
Country, can tell that Marlborough lies not near the direct way from
Collingborn to Lavington, and yet Mr. Byfield takes it in his way thither; to
give us to know, That malicious men will not spare for any pains; nor are they
ever out of the way, so they may compass their mischievous ends. I was told
likewise, that Mr. Byfield on the way from Marlborough to Lavington was like to
have had some mischance, he falling from his Horse, or his Horse falling with
him; I believe, that if any such mishap had befaln me, he would have made it
matter of charge: That either the Horse or his Rider had drank to excess. These
Marlborough men, I say, he brought along with him; and, I doubt not but that he
had sent to some in, and near Sarum to meet him there: for such now appeared
which never sat in my business before, nor did they ever hear Deposition of
any witness which was taken by the Clerk, and yet they voted against me: of
which more hereafter. And indeed the meeting of most of the Commissioners at
this time in this place was design in Mr. Byfield, for he therefore reversed
that order which they had made for my appearance at Sarum, because he doubted
(as he was heard to say) That I should make such friends there as to come off;
which to prevent, he both straitens me in in time, changes the place, and
provides himself of such Executioners, that (right or wrong) should cut my
Throat in private.

Byfield bestir'd himself, what weight he laid upon every Deposition against
me; what Rhetorique he used to improve them; what Salvo's, and lenitives he
finds for the perjuries, subornations, contradictions, and other vile practices
of those witnesses which appeared against me; what applications and persuasions
he makes to some whom he looked not for there; I say, had you seen or heard
this, you might have been apt to think, that Mr. Byfield had taken more pains
in framing this Declamation, then in composing many a Sermon. And yet as
zealous, and eager as he was, he could not forbear (no not for that time) his
beloved Tobacco; that must be remembered, although he makes many a Parenthesis
in the taking off his Pipe. I have yet by me the copy of a speech, which goes
by the name of a Speech of Sir Walter Raleighs, spoken by him upon the Scaffold
a little before his death; Wherein (amongst other passages) be expresses
himself thus. There is one thing above all that does most afflict me, and that
is a most false and scandalous report that has much blemished my reputation
and honor; How that when that Noble and worthy Earl of Essex left this world,
that I stood in a window drinking Tobacco, laughing and making merry at his
downfall. Although I compare not my self to the Earl of Essex, not Mr. Byfield
to Sir Walter Raleigh, yet let me observe thus much upon his words: That if it
had been dishonorable and scandalous for him thus to do, being but a spectator;
then it would have been much more dishonorable and scandalous for him thus to
have done if he had been a Commissioner, or an Informer against him. It Is true
indeed, my life was not then in question, but yet my livelihood, my reputation,
the exercise of my profession (which a man ought to prefer before his life)
were; and then for Mr. Byfield (as it is said then a Minister) to be eructing
out of his mischief in smoke against a Minister in such a conjuncture of time,
was a carriage so misbeseeming, and such a scandal, as that I believe, none
that they ever turned out were proved guilty of.

Lavington; upon my coming to Town, and bringing Colonel Air, and some others
along with me of good quality as witnesses, (which as I have told thee, were
all turned back by virtue of Mr. Byfields order,) I was told that one near
related to the persons and practices of these Commissioners, should say to this
purpose, seeing us come in, That Mr. Bushnell had brought such and such along
with him, but that it was to no purpose: for he could not stay at Box, because
that place was appointed for another man. And now to see how murder will out,
we have now the reason why they countenanced so many infamous perjured
suborners against me, and that was this, because I had a considerable Living to
lose; that they had appointed it for another man; and (as I shall tell thee by
and by) made their advantages by turning me out, and bringing another in. I
remember that Plutarch tells us of one Quintus Aurelius, who in Sylla's time
was proscribed and doomed to death, only for this, that he had a fair house at
Alba. And let me add a little farther; That to thrust out the Incumbent, right
or wrong, was not the only piece of injustice these Commissioners and their
then corresponding friends at London have practiced; Hugh Peter's, Phil. Nigh,
etc.
for beside the Ejectment of the Clerk, they had an Art to defeat the Patron of
his presentation. And without doubt this has made many a man scandalous, That
these Commissioners had a resolution to dispose of, or to be gainers by the
disposal of their Livings. Let Patrons speak for themselves: as to mine one
particular I shall say only this:

1. That by their own Confession, my place was appointed for another man. Which

2. I believe was the man who has since my ejectment held it, Mr. Stern; who
lived formerly in a Living Sequestered of Mr. Walkers at Chilmark, and it may be
was there as a kind of a Curate to Mr. Sangar, Dr. Chambers brother in law. But
at this time was destitute, and therefore right or wrong, a place must be
provided for him elsewhere. But yet

3. These men, as godly as they are, love dearly to be fingering money. Mr.
Stern has said, Mr. Stern confessed the same to me and another, June 3. 1660.
at the Saracens head in Friday-street, London.
that Mr. Blisset had twenty pound of him, (I believe half the money would have
made Mr. Blisset my friend) which in all probability he had an eye to of a long
time, and therefore his utmost power must be improved for the thrusting me out;
otherwise he had lost his expected gratuity which he was to receive for
bringing the other in. Twenty pound sterling; that was a g^od Circumstance
indeed Mr. Blisset.

Transactions of this day: after a very long debate: (for Mr. Byfield and his
Commissioners met with more obstruction in the business then they dreamed of) I
was discharged from Lavington, having no more said to me then but only this;
That I was to appear before them again at Sarum, at the Assize time then
shortly to follow; and there to undergo their Examination touching my
sufficiency.

The Transactions at my seventh time of appearing before them, at the Three
Swans in Sarum, July 23.
Ministers who were there besides my self: and I made my self curious to
enquire who and what they were, and what the business might be which drew them
thither. And was answered that some of them were related to some of the
Commissioners, as brothers, kinsmen sons in Law; and that their business
thither might be either to tender their humble respects to them (Mr. Byfield
and the Doctor especially looked to be honored) or else in order to some
augmentation, or change. That others there present I was told wanted livings,
and that they repaired thither (as Vultures follow Armies) expecting shortly
some execution, that they might be in a readiness to seize, and feed upon the
prey. Both these I looked upon as Volunteers, and that it was matter of
advantage that brought them thither; but now there were others there who
appeared as Prest-men, and were forced in upon summons, amongst whom I reckoned
my self; and therefore I made my self the more inquisitive touching them,
conceiving their condition to be as mine. Touching some of which, I was told,
that there were heavy Articles in charge against them, and many proofs of those
Articles, but that the carriage of some body was so humble, and a Speech which
some body made so winning, that he was discharged until further order: but
since I have heard that some body has furnished one of the Marlborough
Commissioners with a Horse, yea and that some body has presented him with a
parcel of Hay since that, so that it may be that the Horse or the Hay, made the
Speech, and not the Master. These are but Circumstances Mr. Blisset. Against
some others I was told, that there were Articles too, but yet that they would
come off, because there was money advanced yearly, for the relief of
Marlborough. Against others I was told, that there were Articles too, but yet
there was but little danger in the business, because the persons so charged had
been with Mr. Byfield and bowed before him, or were of the Association, or of
some Classes. Now I hearing this, could not but conclude my self a man whom
they had resolved for ruin, because I had practiced none of these ways; for
notwithstanding one near related unto me was told, that to stand out in my
justification was not the way to get off as also of another way which if I
practiced, might procure my discharge, or to some such purpose; yet I was
resolved that neither Horse, Money nor Hay, should go for me. I being otherwise
taught, We must not do evil that good may come of it. If I had deserved
ejectment, they ought not to have discharged me for a reward; if I had not
deserved it, they ought to have discharged me without it.

exceptions taken against me that I came not amongst them, Mr. Chambers, Mr.
Byfield, etc. and that I did not make one at their meetings. That I did not
Associate, but rather that I not only neglected but despised them, or to some
such purpose. And doubtless (with the Doctor and Mr. Byfield) this was enough
to make a man Scandalous in the highest degree. Give me leave therefore to tell
thee the reasons why I did not thrust in my self, and make one at their
meetings: for although there were no law which either enjoined or forbad them;
and therefore such meetings of themselves (being not simply evil) might be
matter of indifferency; yet unto me there seemed not an indifferency ad
utrumli^et: but that (all things which I proposed unto my self rightly
considered) I conceived it better for me to forbear and to stay at home. For

1. I saw no great good which had come of them, or which in likelihood might
come of them. And

2. Because they had no Commission so to do, and that the times were touchie,
hazardous, suspicious, I doubted what interpretation the Civil power might have
put upon such meetings. And

3. Because the persons who were the leading men among them were as fierce and
rigid in their way, as are any (I believe) on this side or beyond Twede;
neither did I know what matters they would propose; or how far the managerie of
them might be extended. It was since our memories that one lost his head, and
others were in pitiful Case, for meeting and acting some things against the
then present Government. And whether or no the working heads of the times might
not have strained these meetings to some such construction, I know not. However
the pretenses might be specious and fair, yet the design of some might he had
enough; and although some might appear there in their simplicity, yet others
might have had some further differing, perchance contrary aim. And this we
must have been sure of, that the project of but one or two, if disrelished,
would have been accounted the crime of us all. In short, I had heard so much of
the dispositions of some of them, that they could not hold, but that they must
needs be meddling in matters which they had nothing to do withal; all
concernments both of Church and State must come through their fingers, although
direct, they were wholly for Sermons, and Directories, yet indirecte for Acts,
Ordinances, Orders, Proclamations, in which I will not say they were better
versed; but sure I am, of these some of them made more use then they did of
their Bibles. I should not have spoken of it, unless a friend of their own Mr.
March. Needham had observed it, Case Commonwealth. p. 2. page 70. mihi.
That the Presbyterian Government (if such as the Kirkmen would have it) is no
good friend or servant to the civil; Nay, he affirms further, that the settling
of the Presbytery in their Mode, would erect a Power Ecclesiastical distinct
from that of the civil: for (says he) It is a Maxim among all Presbyters, and
we find it pleaded for at large in the Confession of Faith, set forth by the
Assembly of Divines, That there ought to be a Jurisdiction in the Church, that
is in their way of Discipline, distinct from the Civil. Which Tenent of
distinction (he adds) must needs be the same in effect with that of the Church
of Romes Supremacy; seeing those who plead now for a power without the Civil,
will not be long ^re they arrive to such an height of presumption, as to act
above it, or against it^ in pursuance of their own designs: it will be
impossible to keep such a Church in Discipline within its limits in any
Commonwealth, which makes the same persons Civil Subjects and Eccl^siastical
Superiors. Of the like strain may the Reader meet with much more in the same
Author, against whom I believe they will take no exceptions, being one that
has deserved so well from them, as that he engaged in their quarrel so far as
to cast down their great accuser Mr. John Goodwin.

Doctor and Mr. Byfield intrude so much, and act so fiercely as they did in
matters of that Cognizance, which they had nothing to do withal; for as I have
said elsewhere, by their Ordinance, the Ministers had nothing to do but only to
be assistants to the Commissioners in matter of Examination touching
sufficiency; yea, and as I have heard a Lawyer told Mr. Byfield, that by an Act
of Parliament, made about the beginning of the long Parliament, Clergy men were
wholly excluded from having any hand in secular employments. All which
notwithstanding none take so much upon them in matter of scandal, as these two;
it were no groundless or irrational conjecture to say, -- Et con^ipit ^thera
monte.
that thus they might do upon confidence of the Presbyterial power, in whose
Chair they might fancy themselves to be, and that they were they that ought to
have Dominion; yea and notwithstanding they tell us that they hate Popery to
the death; yet they may be pleased with, and practice according to the
Jesuits, etc. In o dine ad spiritualia, which could they extend according to
their desires they would leave but little for the Secular Power to take
cognizance of: Mr. Byfield and the Doctor, they sitting at the stern, and
directing the course, and the Hackney Marlborough men tugging at the Oar, and
wafting them to their aims. Those for their repute, honor, sway, these for
their advantage and gain: one sort loving to be obeyed and reverenced, and the
other sort loving to be fed. These dangerous consequences I presume the present
Civil Power will have so much providence as to foresee, and will have so much
prudence is to prevent.

Sarum, being in Town, July, 22. the day before the Examination, I went to
visit Mr. Air with whom I had formerly some acquaintance, his house being near
to the house where I lodged: with whom I had not been long, but looking through
a window into a Court which leads into his house, I see William Pinchin and
Obadiah Cheltenham making thitherward, whom Mr. Air meets at the door, and
after some short stay with them he returns into the room again with a letter in
his hand, which I conjecture he received from W. P. and O C. and that it
concerned my self; and this Letter possibly Mr. Air might have shown me, had
not M^. Byfield the Doctor, and a third man whom after I understood to be Mr.
Strickland, (somewhat you see will bring Mr. Strickland under Mr. Eyres roof)
came shortly after unto his house: whether it were design in them, or
accidental to come so soon as the others were gone, I cannot say; which three;
when I saw making toward the room; I withdrew into another, from which after
some short stay I returned back again to Mr. Air, who then told me (these
three being gone) that Mr. Byfield had told him; That the major part of the
Commissioners were satisfied touching the matter of scandal proved against me:
as I remember I said no more to him but this. And what make I here then? But
these words of his brought somewhat to my mind, which I had read of Bishop
Ridly, A. B. Cranmer. B. Latim^r.
who although he were sent to Oxford to Dispute, yet his death was resolved on
by Gardener and Bonner, before he went from London, or had ever framed
Argument. And now Mr. Byfield has given me a Perspective wherewithal a man
might look into his godly Bosom; for it is now manifest, that this Examination
was intended to no other end, but that by it I should the more condemn my self;
for what ever I had said, it would not have procured my discharge, because I
was condemned before; and if I had said any thing to disrelish so learned, so
prudent, so pious, so just a Quorum, as were the Doctor, Mr. Byfield, Mr.
Hughes, and the Marlborough men, it should have been improved to have made more
against me: Non intererat occidentium quid dicerent, was the old rule of law,
and since we have been told, that there is no reply to be made after that
sentence is past. Bradshaw to the late King.
Mr. Byfields friends must give me leave to tell them, that I have heretofore
read of such as himself, and in this particular; and who should they be (Mr.
Byfield loved to make use of rare men for his presidents) but the Sanbedrim at
Jerusalem. (Reader, think not that I intend the resemblance to hold, save only
in this, That Mr. Byfield and his friends were somewhat like the chief Priests
and Elders) Who

1. Sought for and encouraged false witnesses, against that blessed person whom
they studied how to destroy; which witnesses falling short of their
expectation, they

2. Themselves proceed to Examine him, Vt ex ipsius ore aliquid elicerent quod
ipsum oneret, Grot. in Mat. 26.62.
that they might entice something out of his own mouth to charge him withal.

Examination, which was the next day following, at the three Swans, where I
appeared about two or three a clock in the afternoon, where I found Mr.
Chambers, Mr. Byfield, Mr. Hughes, and the three men of Marlborough, beside
many other Commissioners and some Ministers. There were then with me Colonel
Air, my Counsel Mr Carter, and another a Minister, who were desirous to have
heard the Examination; but could not be admitted by any means, because there
was an Order made,

That none should be in bearing but the Commissioners, and their subordinates.

I have a conjecture, that Mr. Byfield (if not the sole Author, yet) was a main
promoter of it, because he was so zealous, that it should be observed, and also
gave some reasons why it was made: for when some of the Commissioners, (I
having expressed my self, that it should have been indifferent to me if the
doors were thrown open, and that all that would might come in) urged that
others might be admitted, Mr. Byfield insists upon the Order, adding something
by way of a seeming reproof for their inconstancy, Nay if you will not stand to
your Order Gentlemen; and then gives the reasons which moved them to make and
to keep it, and that was,

That if all were admitted, then would the whole Country know what Questions
they proposed.

And what if they had heard or known them? were your Questions such that you
were ashamed that they should be known? or was it for fear the Country should
(hearing your Questions and my Answers) think better of me then you were
willing? and have been apt to discharge me whom you were resolved to ruin? But
it may be Mr. Byfields reason that all should be excluded, was not that the
Country might not know what Questions they proposed, but that the Country
might not take notice that Mr. Byfield proposed no Question at all; for I
remember not that by way of question he said so much as a word to me. That
tongue of his, which at former times ran upon speed, so that nothing could stop
it, seems now to be cripled, and to be downright lame. So that, were he living,
we have now got a receipt to cramp Mr. Byfields tongue, and is that to discourse
of matters of Religion.

ejected me for insufficiency. Let them report of it what they please, yet will
there lie this disadvantage against them, That there is not much likelihood
that they should report the truth, which took such a course that the truth
should not be known. But for the Readers satisfaction in this particular, I
hereby let them know that I shall not refuse any of them in any of the Public
Schools of either of the Universities; where I am sure there will be no orders
made to shut the Auditors out of doors; nor shall Mr Chambers cry out against
me for this as he does against Mr. Dell, Satis pro fiducia, as is the man, such
is his confidence: for I assure him, that he cannot have a meaner opinion of me
and my parts, then I have of my self; but yet mean although they are, yet
perchance not so contemptible in respect of theirs. I remember, Homer, although
he account Menelaus to be too weak to encounter the warlike Hector, yet he
makes him match enough to combat the effeminate Paris.

Colonel Air and my Counsel, Mr. Blissets son the Commissioners Clerk, with
advice to me that I should resign, adding that then I might be capable of
another place, whether he came from his Father with his word in season, I know
not. I know not neither, whether he came in any way of courtesy with this
advice; possibly he might by this, give me to know, that the same hand which
had disposed of my Living for another man, might upon the like consideration
dispose of another man's Living for me. But this his advice of my resignation,
and the reasons of it were rejected, with some contempt both on Colonel Eyres
part and mine own; it being no other then ridiculous, that a man should be
capable of, and thought fitting for another place, and yet not fit to keep his
own; and therefore, as I said, this Proposal was either that they might make
their advantages all manner of ways by putting another into my place, and
settling me elsewhere, or else that they might the more triumph in my ruin,
because in thus doing I had contributed more to mine own ruin then they
possibly could; having by a Resignation made my self utterly incapable of
returning to Box, as also of receiving any profit thence which might be allowed
to such as were Ejected.

my doom, which was pronounced against me, by virtue of that Order which Mr.
Byfield, and his Marlborough men had procured against me at Lavington about
twelve days before, and had lain dormant by them ever since, as a trusty
reserve no doubt, which (if they could not destroy me any other way) should not
miss to knock me down. I observed that while my sentence was reading, Mr.
Chambers had pulled down his hat somewhat low on his face, but for the residue
of his face which might be seen he looked very big, and possibly might say
within himself, That now he had taught me to bring a man of his merit upon the
Stage, to make him the discourse and laughter of the Country, for leaving
Claverton, and going to Pewsie. Mr. Byfield in the mean time was playing with a
Tobacco-pipe between his fingers (although he forbore to smoke it for that
short space, yet had he the P^pe in a readiness, and was filling of it out of
Mr. Martins Box before I left the room) and seemed to look merrily at it, which
minded me of that Risus abest nisi quem visi movere dolores. No laughter there
appears
Unless for others tears.


Byfield was very much disappointed in his Expectation; I have heard say, that
his word was, That if he could not bow, he will break them; if he were not
dead, I should say it was a fitting Motto for an Inquisitor; however I must
tell his surviving friends, that as to mine own particular he was so far from
hitting the mark, as that he has missed the Butt: whosoever shall light on
these sheets, and read them, will readily say, Surely he has not bowed me,
there being not a line in the whole, relating to himself, that relisheth of
begging; and for breaking me, I wish (so it might not be to their torment)
these qu^ndam Commissioners had seen how contentedly I lived without my means;
how little I grieved for the loss of it; how little I desired the re-injoyment
of it: Yea, let me tell you farther, that (although ignorant and scandalous you
account me) I have often read Psalm. 37. and there I am taught (and I humbly
thank him, God has given me a heart to learn) not to fret my self because of
evil doers; Ver. 1.
nor because of him who prospers in his way; because of the man who brings
wicked devices to pass: although I never envied your power, yet I pitied you
for your managery thereof; and (for all your spiteful, vile unjust proceedings)
I desire to have no revengeful thoughts against you; nor had I in the
Publication of this Narrative any aim to asperse you, but to vindicate my self:
Yea, and let me tell you farther yet, that (although you had it not in your
intentions) yet my Ejectment has been some ways advantageous unto me, and
that in securing me from several vexations, and a continuation of fears,
doubts, charges, compliances, visits and other inconveniences, which had I
continued at Box, I must have been exposed unto, all while you continued in
your power, and executed your power with so much injustice. And this whether I
look on the Commissioners or mine accusers.

William Pinchin, of whose perjuries, subordinations, and other his vile and
base practices I have spoken somewhat already, and more I shall say, when I
give thee a short view of his life; and yet this man must have been humor'd by
me, and humor'd in his baseness: Nay, not only humor'd, but fed too; I must not
have dared but have fu^nished him, whenever he asked; and his poor indigent
condition was such, that he would have been always craving; and if I had
denied him at first, or questioned him afterward, it is like the fellow would
have grown surly, and have stopped my mouth with the Commissioners, or threatened
me with Tho. Cox, or his Mr. Chambers, or Mr. Byfield. I remember, that
sometime before I was questioned, this William Pinchin came to my house, to
borrow some money of me, with which I did not at that time furnish him; whether
it were because I then had it not, or whether it were because his mother had
formerly borrowed a considerable sum of me, as she said for him, of which I was
not then satisfied, no nor (what through their base sharking shifts, and mine
own easiness) am I ever like to be, I now remember not; but as for me, he then
went without it; but it seems he was then so nearly driven, that he borrowed
what he could get from my servant. I have heard that he was highly displeased,
that he went without it. And possibly took this course of perjury and
subornation, to be revenged of me for it. Now under this pressure I must
always have lain, nor would there have been any way to have kept him from
forswearing himself against me, but to have lent him what he had asked for, and
never after to have demanded it of him. His mother Jone likewise would have
been sneaking after me, whose property is not only to forget courtesies, but to
repay them with base usage, in denyng what she has received, or by patching
with those to whom she has been beholding; ever beggarly, and ever base. I
must likewise have made much of John Travers, as long as he lived, and Obadiah
Cheltenham, they must have been entertained and thanked, yea, and rewarded for
frighting me; and my benevolence should have been spent at the next Alehouse,
they making themselves merry at my charges, and laughing at my fear, which had
furnished them to pay their reckoning.

Commissioners and their appurtenances. Thrmas Cox doubtless would have visited
me often; and I must have been as nearly related to Mr. Blissets son as Mr.
Stern was: and although Marlborough were too far to send Hay, yet doubtless
something would have been expected there, although less visible, yet not less
chargeable. I could have expected no more courtesy from them then they
vouchsafed to others, and that was only a dismission until further Order. So
that I could have sooked upon my self at Box, for no better then their Tenant
at will, and that their favor toward me, would have been according as I
remembered them: whereas I was since freed from all these charges, and continual
fears; and if any man in my absence enquired for me, I have had no cause to
fear that it was Thomas Cox, your Agent. Mr. Blissets son has had no relation
to me; neither might the Marlborough men, or their wives, expect any Horse,
Hay, Money, or Plate from me. Nay more, should I have chanced to have met your
Doctor on the way, I should have given him (not such reverence which he looks
for, but) such respect as I thought fitting: and upon some such weighty
account, I have been told that he was distasted at me; and so was Ham^n the
Agagite against Mordecai. Nay, (which is more then all) the very sight of Mr.
B^field did not since affright me; but on him could I look with pity or
contempt, whom my terrified brethren durst not think of but with tremb^ing.

Lud^oe of Claringdon, and Mr. Hely of Sarum These I have told thee appeared at
Lavington, having never sat in business before: nor ever heard the Dep^sition
of one witness, which was taken by their Clerk; and therefore they could know
nothing but by information from Mr. Byfield and his friends of Marlborough, and
yet these sentence against me. And it is like enough, that as they were sent
for, for this purpose, so were they resolved what to do before they came out of
door. Touching Mr. Hely, A fierce Decimator in the time of O. Protector.
the wonder will not be so much to them that know him. But now for Mr. Ludloe,
a Gentleman; that he should in a matter of so great concernment, be so easy as
to be drawn in against me, and ruin me in my livelihoood, my reputation, my
profession, my hopes, only upon the information of others, of such others; I
will say no more, but only thus; that if Mr. Ludloe had been in my condition, a
Minister under question, and I in his place, a Commissioner to give my vote; if
I should have voted against him, upon no better grounds then as yet appear to
me, he has voted against me, I should think that men had done me no wrong, if
they had made this report of me, That it was pity, that a man no better
qua^ified* should have so much power; and that in my sentence I had little
regard either to pieny, prudence, conscience, or justice.

Hely, I have been told, that a great exception which he had against me, was
this; That I was a Common Prayer man. I think he could not have said more in my
commendation; like Balaam, instead of cursing, he blesses me; he condemns me
for having done my duty; and sentenceth me to deprication for using that Book,
whereas by the Law all Ministers are liable to deprivation, 1. Eliz. cap. 2.
because they do not use it. So that he dooms me being innocent, to that
sentence which the Doctor and the other Ministers had deserved.

The Transactions at my Eighth time of appearing before them at the Three Swans
in Sarum. March 17. 1657.
justice of corrupt Judges, the malice of perjured witnesses, the restless
impudence of the sons of Belial could desire. Both Commissioners, Doctors, and
witnesses be like triumphing to think how much they had undone me.
Notwithstanding it were by Candle light that I were senten^ed yet was there an
order issued our the same night (I guess that William Pinchin and Obad.
Cheltenham were not more earnest to desire it, then the Doctors and
Marlborough men were to satisfy them) impowering Nich: Spensers, and Joh.
Harding to the sequestratorship of the ptofits of my Vicarage. Which suddenly
they enter upon, and pro^eed in it with much diligence and revo^. Nich: Spenser
especially, traversing over the Parish with a Hony-pot under his Coat,
doubting (as I have been told he should say) that he should not receive enough
for his winter Toasts. And clearly my condition was then such, that as they had
taken a course that I should not stay at Box, so there was a course taken by
others, that I should not know whether to go, or how to employ my self for a
subsistence. For I was not in a capacity to receive any fifts, because I was
unmarried; and utterly disabled to the performance of any ministerial duties,
so much as to teach a private school, because I was ejected. And possibly these
considerations might encourage the Commissioners, Doctors, witnesses, to act as
they did, because they had now an opportunity to undo me according to their
desires. They having deprived me of my present livelihood, and the Protectors
Declaration of Nov. 4. 1655. debarring me of all hopes of getting any
livelihood for the future.

Person and Declaration since I have mentioned, let me ask his Marlborough
Commissioners and Ministers, and was this the thing whereby he merited so
highly of them, as that they in their Addresses to his Son must needs call him
Polished shaft? I believe that they were beholding to their Doctors for their
expression, and I believe again that they that Doctors took it out of Isai.
49.2. where the Messiah tells us that the Lord had made him such. And certainly
this so properly agreeing unto him, as not without blasphemy to be
communicated to any other. These men were by their Patrons instructions, to
eject men who were found guilty of blasphemy; and lo, I believe that a more
shameful and gross piece of flattery, and Blasphemy, has not been lately
heard of then is this of their own. No nor in former ages neither, unless that
of Acts 12.22. come near it. But yet (I would do these men what courtesy I
can) I will suppose that by that expression Polished shaft, they mean no more
but this; that although proprie or primario none can be justly styled so but
the Messiah, yet secundum significationem limitatam, and restrictam, in a
limited and qualified sense others may be called so likewise. As Kings and
Judges are called Gods, Exodus 22.28.
because they receive their Commission from God, and so ought to employ
themselves as in his busisiness: the same word giving them power to act, and
likewise cautions touching their behavior in that power: and so proportionably
might they borrow this Epithet Polished shaft, and bestow it upon their
Patriot. But now (this being granted them) they must yet give me leave to ask
them, and with what congruitie? and how do these words belong unto him? if I
mistake not, the Messiah is there so called because he was sent of God to
subdue his, and the Churches enemies. But now what enemies of God, or of the
Gospel or of the Church did your Protector subdue? Style you him by this name
because of these ordinances? if so, then you speak by contraries; therefore a
Polished shaft, a vanquisher of the Churches enemies, because the first undid,
and after stopped the mouths of hundreds of able, and orthodox Ministers. And
whereas the Apostle says it would be woe to him if did not preach the Gospel,
(which woe is still impendent upon all Ministers who shall wilfully neglect
their duty,) this Protector takes such an order, that it should be woe unto
them if they did preach the Gospel. And yet a Polished shaft. The Church of
England has not greater or more bitter enemies then the Jew and the Papist.
The one hating us because Christian, the other because reformed; and and yet
both these had his favor. The Jew a kind of an invitation, near of the date
with this Ordinance: the other, entertainment in the royal palace, when as
hundreds of Ministers, I believe truly Godly, and I think as learned as ever
our Church enjoyed since the Reformation, were not only thrust out of their
livelyhoods, but also cast off from executing the Priests office unto the Lord.
In this more like to the son of Nebat, then the son of God. 2 Chronicles. 11.14.
And whereas those ejected Priests, and Levites had the land of Judah to go to,
and there find both a livelihood and an employment: This their Polished shaft,
had so ordered it, Narat. p. 56, 57.
(it is Mr. Pryns observation) that they should have no employment neither at
home or abroad. Nay more, (to put them and their families upon a necessity of
starving) he not only enacted that they should have nothing to subsist by, but
also made it penal after the most ignominious manner, if they went about to
beg. Which (says the same Mr. Pryn in the same place,) was such a transcendent
Barbarism, impiety, and high way to extirpate religion (as pious, learned
Archbishop Vssher told him when he mediated for their liberty, as he told Mr.
Pryn and others with tears, which b^oke his heart soon after) as the Pope and
Jesuits themselves could not have invented the like; and exceeded all foreign
persecutions against Protestant Ministers in Piemont, Bohemia, and Silesia by
Popish Princes being of a different religion, but he a pretended protestant
zeal^t. This is the Marlborough men's polished shaft.

Holy one of God, the best; I can hardly find one so wicked as to be joined in
comparison with him, unless it were Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who out of a
politic respect (like unto his) thrust out the Priests and Levites, both from
their service, and their livelihoods; and after he had taught them the made of
sacrificing, suited: himself with Priests of the lowest of the people, or the
the Sanhedrim at Jerusalem, Act. 4.18.
who commanded the Apostles not to teach at all, or speak in the name of Jesus.
The Apostate Julian, although he be looked upon as a bitter enemy of the
Church of God, although he persecuted them, although he scoffea at them; yet I
read not that he silenced them. One of the worst things which he is reported to
have done against them, is, That he forbade them the public Schools, and
studies of Arts and Tongues: Amian. Marcel.
which Decree an Historian (principled like himself) styles Inclemens,
obruendum perenni silentio, merciless, uncivil, and to be buried in everlasting
silence; and yet these Marlborough Addressors think not a name (fitting only
for the Son of God) too good for their Patron, who had made a decree against
Christian Ministers, far more barbarous then was that of Julian. It Is true
indeed, in the close of that Ordinances, he has a kind of a qualifying
Proviso, and talks of tenderness to be used, but it is under such conditions,
that if men should observe them, they must cease to be what they ought, Godly
indeed. And whereas he talks of tenderness, many a one in this Land of ours can
witness what his tendernesses have been; and have found the words of the
wiseman verified in him, The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel, Prove.
12.10.

tender and Godly strain, that shortly after my Ejection, some sitting as a
Parliament (although the far greater part chosen by the Country were by him
excluded) thought it not fit that it should be continued, and therefore by not
confirming of it, they null it; and not only so, but also they make further
provision, That all ejected Ministers whatsoever, married or unmarryed, not
having 30. l. per annum, or 500. l. in personal estate, might be capable of
receiving fifts: which fifts the Commissioners by virtue of that Act, were
required to allow them, which I believe was no good news either to the
Marlborough men or their Doctors.

Sarum, about March 17. 1657. for the Assize being there held about that time,
I had some confidence that I should find the Marlborough men and their Doctors
there; nor was I disappointed of my expectation, for there I find them at the
three Swans, sitting in Mr. Byfields lodging: and being told that my
application to them must be by way of Petitioning, I employed one, who was a
kind of a Clerk to them, to draw it up in their usual form, which he did in
these words; Shows, That your Petitioner being by your lawful authority
displaced from, etc. which word lawful, a friend of mine (being somewhat
acquainted with their proceedings) did somewhat stomach at: which dislike being
perceived, their Clerk (belike knowing that lawful was not a word which
belonged to his Masters the Commissioners and Doctors) was content to strike
out, and so it was, Being by your Authority displaced, etc. wherein according
to the Act I moved 1. for a fifts. And 2. That to be allowed from the time of
my Ejectment, which was above a year and half before. And 3. (in regard I lived
in Bath, which was in another County, and a days journey from any place where
they usually sat) I moved that this might be settled at this their present
sitting. In order whereunto I had then some with me, who proffered themselves
to be Tenants to my Vicaridge at 100 l. per annum; for the payment whereof
there would have been better security given then 3. or 4. of the Marlborough
men should have given out of that estate which is lawfully theirs. Now Mr.
Chamb. hearing Henry Sheyler (for so was his name that made this proffer)
promising 100 l. and having heedfully eyed him all the time, asks (belike
fearing that the Commissioners should have forgotten so necessary a question)
Whether he were sufficient? it is like he meant, to pay the rent, which he
profer'd. And here to see how these Doctors, Mr. Byfield, and Mr. Chambers,
concurred in questions fundamentals. What Is your Living worth a year, quoth Mr.
Byfield? Is he sufficient, to pay the rent, quoth Mr. Chambers? This business
did in no wise concern Mr. Chambers, unless he mistook the Examination of the
sufficiency of the Tenant, for an Examination of the sufficiency of the
Minister. But it may be that the old business of this leaving Claverton and
going to Pewsie, did yet stick in the Doctors stomach, and therefore having
undone me in the gross before, he now improves his spite, to undo me by retail.
Let me here observe something unto thee touching this Doctor, and such as
himself. When they are at any time questioned touching their leaving of their
first livings, (which many of them have done) these livings being of but a
small value, and then intruding themselves into other Livings, and the Livings
of others, per fas, aut nefas, right or wrong; and those such which are of a
greater value then their own Livings, which they had repudiated: or when they
labor for augmentations, or unions of two or three Parishes into one, (these
men will abhor Pluralities as odious as bigamie) and all for their own profit:
in excuse for their shifting and changing, or consolidating, they will tell you
either that the former air did not agree with them; or that by the exchange,
they might win more souls, or (with more truth and plainess) that they were
even enforced to this change for a comfortable maintenance for themselves and
theirs, which their own Livings could not supply them with. And yet these very
men (the Doctor for one) have no such weights or measures for others. And when
I say others, I mean Ministers, and such (I speak not of my self) who are every
whit as deserving as themselves: whom they can be content, not only unjustly to
thrust out of all, but also to defraud of that small pittance, a fifts, which
the Modern laws has allowed them; measuring unto us by the small Ephah, but
weighing to themselves by the great Shekel. The Doctor must give me leave to
tell him, that I have read of such who were of this judgment, that Right and
Property to a thing were founded in grace; and that all men were usurpers who
were not of the Godly. Now we know well to whom this Epithet Godly, has been
by some men appropriated in these latter years, and for what purposes: and
therefore might the Doctor be so fierce against me, as one (I being not of
their Mark) on whom even an Alms were cast away.

Blisset had his fling at us, at this time when Henry Sheyler offered 100 l.
per annum for the Vicaridge; saying to this purpose, that Mr. Stern did not
make above 90 l. per annum of it. It seems that Mr. Blisset was well acquainted
with Mr. Sterns receipts, and I doubt not but that he and his son William, have
been well acquainted with some of Mr. Sterns disbursements likewise. But at
this time at Sarum there was nothing done, for notwithstanding I had procured
one who proffered himself to be a tenant to my means under such a rent, and in
regard of the distance I then lived at, and the uncertainty of the time and
place of their sitting, I urged for a dispatch at that time, yet as to my
business nothing would be done, I being put off only with this answer, that I
should come before them at some other time and place, whereof Mr. Stern should
have notice, that they might bear what exceptions he had to make to my demands.
This was a business which did not please them, and therefore they delay me, on
purpose (belike) to tire me out: or in case I would be clamorous, they would so
order it, that my expenses in waiting on them, should amount to as much as the
fifts, which they intended to allow me.

The Transactions at my ninth time of appearing before them at the Angel in
Marlbo. April 28. 1658.
Marlborough, and that (if I would have any thing with them) I must appear
before them there, where (notwithstanding the nomination of that place gave me
an an assurance of the justice which I should find) I appear according to an
Order I received from their agent Thomas Cox: They had by this time obtained an
addition to the number of both Commissioners, and Ministers, so that now they
needed not send, or go to Sarum for it, they having a Quorum of their own
nearer hand. Upon this additional account there sat at this time Mr. John
Keyns of Marlborough, and another, who then lived in the Parish of Bradford,
being one who has varyed his name so often, that it is hard for me to say,
what is the right; but at that time he wrote his name John Randolph.

Stern according to summons appeared there likewise, bringing with him N^cholas
Spenser, and William Pinchin so often beforementioned, all whose business was
to make what exceptions they could to defraud me of a Fifths, and a very
gracious car they had from the Commissioners. Mr. Sterns first exception was,
that I had carried away many doors, which legally I could not remove. To which
I answered, That I had removed no more then I brought, and that in case I had
exceeded, he was to seek his remedy elsewhere, this being no obstruction to me
for a fifths. Upon this Mr. Byfield begins a very learned Lawyerlike discourse
of what he had heard in that Case, and that was to this purpose, That in case
the doors were banged in Jimmals so as not to be removed without drawing of a
nail, that then legally they could not be removed, but if only in hooks, that
then they might: in which judgment of his all parties did acquiesce: and
indeed this speech of his minded me of some words which were frequent in the
mouth of my predecessor Mr. Coren (a man too much given to suits of law) who
would often say, That he was better read in the Acts of Parliament then he was
in the Acts of the Apostles. Another exception which they had against me, was
non obedience to their Orders, and this was made by Nicholas Spenser, and to me
(who asked what order it was) he answers, It was an Order which he had
rereceived from the Commissioners but that he had left it at home, but added
that he showed me another Order which I would not deliver back again to him;
this order I had then about me and a very wise one it was, for I was required
at my peril to deliver up possession by such a time; and yet no person named to
whom I should deliver it up, but this, as nothing to the purpose, was waved
likewise. Another exception which they took was, that I was worth 500 l. and
this was managed by Mr. Stern, and W. Pinchin M. Stern affirming that he had
heard so and William Pinchin affirming the like: possibly if he had been called
upon another time, William Pinchin would have fetched trip, and if need were
would have sworn that he had known that I had been worth 500 l. but these
exceptions signified but little, and therefore were soon waved likewise. The
next thing we fall upon was the valuation: I have told the formerly, that I
brought one with me to Sarum who profferd a 100. l. per annum for it, which
profer they were resolved not to accept of. And therefore they all employ their
united Forces to beat down the value of Yea notwithstanding Nich: Spenser and
William Pinchin had not long before valued my Vicarage at 86. l per annum, at
the parish rate, yet are they not now ashamed to say it was too much, John
Ranoulph giving them this hint that it did usuallie pinch on the Parsons side.
These men W. P. and N. S. having the same measures for me as some men say they
have for their customers, a greater and a less. If I am to pay a Tax, then the
Vicaridge is worth 86. l per annum, but if I am to receive a fifths then it is
not worth so much. Nor did these Commissioners that I could perceive take any
notice of this; unless it were to countenance it, although in thus saying they
manifested themselves to be such as honest men should abhor to be, and just men
should abhor to countenance: but honesty and justice were virtues neither in
use nor credit either with the Commissioners, Doctors, or witnesses. One thing
more touching these men N. S. and W. P. it is this: It may be that it was not
only to injure me that they thus labored to beat down the price of my living;
they might in this have some aim unto themselves: for so it was that N. S. and
W. P. shortly after this become tenants to M. Stern for it, and therefore it is
like they did so much undervalue it, that they might rent it at the same rent.

M. Byfield sends for a large paper book written, which afterward I
understood was his Domes-day book wherein he had the value of all the livings
in the County: and turning to Box he finds it valued at 80. l per Annum, and so
he stints all further debate touching the valuaion, because (as he said) that
valuation was given in upon Oath: soon after which he falls to reading of that
Ordinance of Parliament, which allowed a fifths ^o such ejected Ministers who
were married, for a maintenance of their Wives and Children, and then asks me
whether I demanded a fifts by virtue of that? to which I replied with some
indignation, that he knew that I did not, being unmarried. But I added further,
that I demanded a fifths by virtue of an act made 1656. Upon which words of
mine he asks me whether I had that act or not? my answer was that I had it, and
seeing me about to pull it out and read it, he add's that they had it too, and
thereupon amongst an heap of Acts, Ordinances, Orders, Depositions, Charges, a
great Tobacco Box, pipes, candle and candlesticks he finds it out, and reads
it. Now to see the disposition of this precious scribe, I think we do him no
wrong to conjecture that he therefore proposed that Question to me, Have you
the Act? with a purpose to have defeated me of a fifths if I had not had it by
me. His spite toward me continues still; had it been to do me a discourtesie,
doubtless that Act had been in a readiness, but now it was purposesly suppressed,
and had never been produced but upon constraint, to let us know thus much, that
voluntarily or with a good will, he would do nothing but mischief: and that
when he did any thing which was right, he was even enforced to it.

of him (had he been living till this time, I should have said much more to
him) which I found by mine own experience, that he seemed to be a man of a
stirring spirit, and one that proposed no other end unto himself, but himself,
nor scrupling any thing which he conceived conducible to that end, his desires
(for so much as I could discern in him) being rather that he might be feared
then loved. I seldom hear of any courtesy which he did to any, unless it were
by accident, and out of a cross humor to others, who would have done some
mischief without his consent: so that it may be said that he dislik^d not the
injustice, but this, that any should do it without has approbation. I seldom
come into the company but that he is much spoken of, and yet very little which
is commendable; and since gone I think scarce missed, or lamented, or wished
for by any, unless by such as the men of Marlb: or those who have enjoyed
other men's livings, and desire to keep them: and as touching his lay
Commissioners of Marlborough, I believe that they loved him as much as he loved
them, and that was very little: and yet they kept a fair correspondency, which
doubtless was because they could not be without each other, and so their mutual
respects grew not from affection but interest. I cannot charge him with
receiving either Bribes or gratuities, as hay, horse, plate, money: possibly it
was not covetiousnesse which made him to be so mischievous, but an imbred
malice in him. If I had known that a present would have prevailed with him, or
had I been minded to have practiced with him that way, I should have courted
him with a handsome Quantity of Spanish Tobacco, to which he was the most
immoderately and scandalously addicted, thar ever I saw any man. And yet
(considering how many Livings he had got into; how many Ministers he had
displaced, and even starved, and that in his translations he ever had an eye to
the Barn, Glebe, and flock of Sheep, more then to the Church) it may be
conjectured, that he was of like Passions with his Brethren, of whom every
Countryman can now observe, that their religious cry has been only for
self-interest, that their removes are for their advantage in revenue, and that
their Gain is their Godliness. All which notwithstanding, I have been told that
he died but poor, unless it were in Books, of which (and of very choice ones)
be left a handsome Library; and perchance for this very thing he died the
poorer, it being thought that he came by his Books as lawfully as he did by his
Living. To speak in short, I look upon him as a man who was mischievously bent
against every body, yea, and that, al things duly considered, he was more
mischievous to his friends then his foes: for (and here let me yoke up some of
his fellow Commissioners and Ministers to him) I believe that many a one of
their Witnesses in my business had not contracted upon their souls those horrid
crimes of perjury and subornation, etc. had it not been for their countenance
and encouragement. I believe that were he living, he would confess, that he did
me as much mischief as he could; and yet I believe that one of the same Tribe
did me more, although he were more secret in it. If you desire to know any
thing touching his Religion, I think you must enquire of Hugh Peter's, or Philip
Nigh, whom it is like (had he lived till this time) as he had been a confederate
with them in their Traitorous and mischievous actings, he might have born
company in their punishments.

Commissioners might consider of it, I was shortly called in again, and told by
Mr. Bailey (for he was Chairman at that time) that in lieu of a Fifths, they had
allowed me 12 l. per annum to be paid half yearly; the first payment to be made
on the 29. of September then next following, which was more then two years
after I was ejected, and so to be paid by 6 l. every half year, on 25. of
March, and 29 of September. until further order. I presumed that they intended
not this as any courtesy to me, and therefore expected no thanks, being indeed
worse toward me then the more civil sort of Theives, of whom I have heard,
that having robbed men of all, they have yet upon their complaint restored them
again a considerable part of it For this Order, Mr. Blissets son William would
needs have 2 s. 6 d. which I told him, was more then I should make of it. And
since I have mentioned this Order, let me observe something unto thee, touching
the Commissioners who made it: and all shall be to acquaint thee with the
fittingness of these men to be im^loyed in matters of the meanest trust; and
how little they regard a Parliamentary power, unless it be to serve themselves
by it. For 1. they were by that Act to allow me a Fifths, and yet all, things
considered, they did not allow me a Tenths. 2. This they were to allow me, if
not from the time of my Ejectment, yet from the time that the Act commenced,
which was in September. 1656. and yet they allow me nothing till two years after.
3. They were by this Act to settle this allowance to me during my life, whereas
this was only till further order. And indeed this same until further order, was
in much use with them; and I believe that it brought them in many a round sum.
If any were discharged, it was only until further order: If any Fifths were
granted, it was until further order; they ever kept us in a dependence and aw
of them: and doubtless men's good behavior was looked upon, accordingly as they
or their wives were remembered: and indeed, as to my self, this same until
further order, cost me and my friends (considering how many journeys we made,
how great expenses we were at) even as much as the Fifths came to, for we made
one journey to Sarum and two to Marlborough, before we could receive a penny. I
remember that Mr. Blisset, when the order was read, says (having pulled down
his Hat, and looking upon the Table) That I had put Mr Stern to a great deal of
charge, and seemed to intimate, that therefore they allowed me no more for a
Fifths. And here to see how this Treasurer charge me with his crimes: for it
was he and his son who had put Mr. Stern to so much charge, and not I. For --

twenty pound which Mr. Blisset had born him, of which I have spoken already,
^^y (as Mr. Stern reported it) demanded another round ^^m of him for their
incident charges ^or thrusting me out: And upon this occasion Mr. Stern
reported in, when Michaelmas was ^ome, and that small pittance which they
allot^^d me for a fifth he became due, I employed some ^^^^nd^ to demand it in my
name, and to receive ^ to my ^^fe, by virtue of that Order; to whom Mr. Stern
makes his answer to this purpose, That he accepted not against the Order, but
that he ^xpected that I should pay a fifth part to all Taxes wherewith al he was
charged: and being demanded what th^se charges were, he answers, That the
Commissioners demanded 15. l. of him for their incident charges in thrusting me
out, of which he ex^^^ed that I should pay a fifth part. Now I believe that Mr.
Stern would never have spoken those words, unless his other friends of
Marlborough had (...) some such thing unto him; and that they would have stood
by him in it, and have made in good: for notwithstanding when my Brother had
told them of it, they seemed to make strange of it, and to be unwilling to own
it, yet all this might be, because they were then under another influence;
their Polished shaft, Oliver, was dead; and his son Richard, their Plant of
Renown, had called a Parliament, which was at that time sitting, amongst whom
there were many persons of honor; who (as I have been told) had a resolution to
question these Commissioners, both touching their power and their actings;
which was enough to make the Marlborough men to tremble, and possibly therefore
they change their Note, because the times were changed.

witnesses who were so fierce against me, (reflecting belike on their own
merits, and learning of the Commissioners) demanded and received from Mr.
Stern, as he has told me, considerable sums for their incident charges which
they had been at in appearing so often against me, to swear me out of my
living: conceiving belike, that if the Commissioners were so well paid for
their injustice, then might they expect to be paid for their perjuries: and
(considering the conditions of some of them) I believe that they did not (as
some poor, cheap Knights of the Post) swear at a low rate, or for a few six
pences or shillings. William Pinchin doubtless knew how to value his Oaths as
well as he did his bread and cheese; and much according to those Soldiers in
the Gospel, that would not be hired to bear false witness, but for large money,

Stern, that he expected that I should pay a fifths of their incident charges,
put me in mind of something which I had read of Phocion of Athens, Plut. in vit.
who being unjustly condemned to death, was afterward enforced to buy his
poison, and to be at charges for his own Execution: these men serving me in the
same manner: for (as not content to take away all that I had) they would have
made me pay them for undoing of me. And as in this, so in another particular
likewise: for (as thinking they had not enough undone, in turning me out of my
house, on the reparations whereof, and the mounds, I had laid out near an
hundred pounds) Mr. Stern prefers a Bill against me in the Exchequer, (I guess
being encouraged thereunto by these men) for dilapidations, to the value of
more then I think he is honestly worth. Now I cannot think that Mr. Stern ever
would have preferred such a Bill against me, unless it had been upon their
encouragement; nor do I believe that they would have encouraged him thereunto,
unless they had thought with the wise once in the Psalm, That they should never
be moved; their long success in their wickednesses having possessed them with
that delusion, that God did own them for his; and from this consideration, that
the Divine power made use of them as the instruments of his displeasure, to
correct others by, (which sober men take to be an argument of his displeasure,
rather then of his favor) they forthwith sooth themselves up that they were
his beloved ones. These men little dreaming that their foundation was laid upon
Oliver: and that Oliver's foundation was laid upon the most unparalled
wickedness that this Land was ever guilty of: and that a building raised upon
wickedness is never without a woe; and that the higher such a building is
carried up, the nearer it is to ruin.

Mr. Stern preferred a Bill in the Exchequer against me for dilapidations: I
must tell thee now, that upon my answer he forbears to proceed, as likewise the
reason why he let his suit fall. When the Bill was dismissed the Court, for want
of prosecution, I had a subpaena for cost for non-prosecution, which an
Attorney serving upon him, asks him, What his reason was that (since he had
begun his suit) he did not go on with it? To whom Mr. Stern makes his answer to
this purpose; That the times were various, every month bringing forth some
change, and that this was it which made him give over; for, said he, should it
come to that pass, that Carolus Dei grati^ should be written instead of
Custodes Libertatis Angliae, actum esset, all his hopes would perish: from
which words of his it is evident enough, that he himself distrusted his own
case, if proceedings should come to be legal: and that all the hopes he had
that his suit should succeed, was only from this, that wickedness should still
prevail; for that then he might expect to find such Barons in the Exchequer, as
he had found Commissioners at Marlborough.

l. charges incident (and when I have done with that I have done withal) for
let me now observe unto thee, what a beneficial trade these Marlborough men
made of it, let the wind sit which way it would. I think in this particular,
out-doing the Jews themselves, for they would so far improve their
opportunities, that fall out what could, they would turn it to their advantage:
for were it that Ministers were summoned, or not summoned before them, ejected
or not ejected, yet, be the chance what it could be, it proved always to be a
winning cast for them.

I shall say but little of the former, because it never was mine own case, yet
there are those whom I know, that can tell you how often Tho. Cox their agent
visited them, and what his business was, what dangers he sets before them, and
what advice he gives to prevent or remove those dangers; in brief the business
is, Vna eademque manus -- some quarterly feeling, he must be paid for
preventing that storm which was of his own raising. And then for those who had
been summoned to appear before them, I have told thee that all the discharge
which they had, was only until further Order; which must needs keeps them in a
continual fear, and force them to a continual charge: nothing was too good,
nothing too much for these Marlborough men and their wives. And now as touching
such who were in my condition ejected, they had that Art, that if they could
get nothing by keeping of them in, they would be sure to get by turning them
out. And here I can speak upon mine own knowledge, 20 l. Mr. Blisset had (I
know not for what else) for putting Mr. Stern in, and 15. l. they demanded for
thrusting me out; it is good being a hangman upon such terms; and questionless
this was enough to make me scandalous, because I would not d^ub, and they were
resolved to get by me one way or other. I have read of several persons, who in
this particular, have been somewhat like these Commissioners; but the fittest
example for them, is that of some Sheep-stealers that I have heard of, who have
been so mischievously thievish, that they would destroy the sheep for no other
cause, but that they might have the wool. And now one would think that they had
undone me as much as possible, and yet Mr. Stern has told me, that he is a
greater looser then my self, that I am 400 l. the worse, but that he is 500 l.
the worse; so that to me he seems to have met with some of such a disposition
whereof I have heard a Miller to be, who stole five pecks out of a Bushel. And
if it be as Mr. Stern has reported it, Mr. Blisset has not been wanting to
himself in this business; for he has not only made the Vicaridge of Box bring
him in plentiful returns to his Treasury for the present; but also he has so
providently provided it, that it shall yield him a crop after we are dead and
gone; for as Mr. Stern told me, he has gotten the next presentation to the
place: so that now it is not to be wondered, that he ruined me first, and (after
he had received his largess from him) cared not how soon Mr. Stern were gone
from the place, in order whereunto it was endeavored, that he should be made
weary of it; because his turn was next: and so upon Mr. Sterns avoidance, he
might make use and benefit of his Presentation. These, Mr. Blisset, are
Circumstances that supersede all former Circumstances whatsoever.

And now by way of Conlusion, I had thought to have addressed my self to our
renowned Patriots now sitting in the high Court of Parliament, and humbly to
have begged this piece of justice from them, That they (who call greater
Oppressors to an account, and force them to cast up their ill gotten morsels,
the incomes of their oppressions, bribery, perjury, subornations, and the price
of blood) would not think it below them to look upon such men as these: in
their places indeed much inferior, but to their power altogether as
mischievous. Nor should I have any aim or end of mine own in it; neither
reparation nor satisfaction for my losses sustained, should I have looked for.
Only this I conceive most equitable, that if I were content to sit down quietly
by my losses unjustly sustained, then should they be enforced to surrender up
those gains, which they have unjustly got: it would be too great a temptation
to future ages to make them adventure on the like, if they should hear that
such who were guilty of such horrid crimes, should yet go clearly off with the
profits of their wickedness. But since his Majesty's gracious parnod may extend
even to these; I shall not go about either to enumerate their crimes, or to
aggravate them. May they enjoy (if it be lawful to wish so) the returns of
their injustice. May Mr. Blisset and his Marlborough friends thrive better by
their Commissionership, then they are likely to do by their purchase at Purton.
Yet this may we say safely of them, although we can call them to no other
account; that they are such as those of whom the Poet speaks: Juv. Sat. 1.
Criminibus debont hortos, praetoria, mensas. They ow to their own Crimes for
their estates. And further let me tell them, that notwithhanding the Querela,
the Question or complaint against them, for those crimes be taken away; yet
that the Culpa, the guilt of them still remains upon their souls. Yea and
further yet let me add, that notwithstanding the Querela were remitted unto
them without their repentance, or perchance so much as their desire, yet that
their Culpa, their guilt will not.

FINIS.

