AN Exact Relation OF The most Execrable Attempts OF JOHN ALLIN, Committed on
the Person of His Excellency FRANCIS Lord WILLOUGHBY of Parham, Captain General
of the Continent of Guiana, and of all the Caribby-Islands, and our Lord
Proprietor.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Lowndes, at the white Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard
near the little North door. 1665.

AN EXACT RELATION Of the most Execrable Attempts OF JOHN ALLIN, Committed on
the Person of His Excellency Francis Lord Willoughby of Parham, etc.
THis abominable Villain (as the sequel of this story will demonstrate him) was
born in London, traded some years in Barbados, from whence he ran off, and on
the 10. of April, Anno 57. arrived in this Colony.

Here he settled with an active industry, but much addicted to Swearing,
Cursing, and Drunkenness; and on the 15. of February Anno 59. was accused and
tried for horrid Blasphemy, cursing the most blessed Redeemer of the world,
with expressions unfit to be named but by Devils; at the instant recital of
which in his Penance and Recantation enjoined him by the Court, the very
Foundation of the house wherein they sat (I being then an Auricular witness)
gave a fearful crack, to the terrible amazement of all the trembling Auditors.
This dreadful signal of Divine displeasure wrought no remorse in this vile
Blasphemer, who disregarding Scripture, and scoffing at Piety, entertained his
hours of leisure with Romances, and the Lives of some bold Romans and daring
Valiant ones, which bred in him an admiration (which he often uttered in his
discourse) how any man, endued with the least reason or courage, would on any
account suffer torment or public ignominious death, when his own hands with a
stab or poison could give him ease and remedy. Besides, he would often plead
that children in misery might justly curse and stab their parents who begat
them to beggary. He had good natural parts, but low education, which (had he
had Grace) he might have improved. His principles Atheistical; on some subjects
he would discourse very rationally, especially on Planting, in which time and
experience had tutoured him. By his knowledge in this he advanced his humble
fortune, which increasing, heightened strange apprehensions in him, at length
more adapting him for Errantry than Planting; he would often say, that if he
thought his labor and industry would not present him with more horses in his
Coach than the Emperor, he would never toil; and gave out, that as soon as his
Estate enabled him, he would buy a ship, sail to Constantinople, and kill the
Great Turk. That he scorned contests with private men, for he was born to blow
up Parliaments, destroy Kingdoms, etc. and these and such like swelling Vapors
would often arise from the frothy brain of this Desperado.

On the 4. of November Anno 63. he was exercising his sarcastical wit to the
prejudice of Captain John Parker, who retorting grated on Allins former
blasphemy: this begat a peek which ended in a Duel, and Captain Parker being
wounded, Allin retires, expecting the issue; hearing no danger, appears, and
was bound over to Sessions. Captain Parker afterward recovering, Allin
declared, that had he miscarried, he would have erected a large pile of wood by
his Negroes, and when thoroughly kindled, would have stabbed himself, and run
into its consuming flames to prevent an ignominious death.

On the 18. of November last His Excellency arrived in this River, to the
unexpressible joy of all the Inhabitants, His Excellency under God being the
foundation and essence of th^s Colony. Allin was advised that His Excellency
was informed in Barbados of his Blasphemy and Duelling, and that strict
inquisition was made what punishment he had undergone for such an accursed
crime, and whether since his penance and recantation he had expressed any
remorse and amendment, what life he had led, and how he came to be chosen a
Representative, and possess some Offices of eminency in the Colony, it being a
deserved scandal unto it, that such a known Blasphemer should be entrusted with
places of Dignity in it. Allin wrongfully conjectured that this intelligence
was blown into His Excellency's ears by Captain Parker, whereupon he writes a
very civil Letter to His Excellency in vindication of himself, utterly denying
that he ever uttered those accursed expressions, that the accusations were
malicious, and as he pretended, by reason he had formerly committed one for
drinking the Kings health, and that Captain Parker continuing his animosities
against him, had kindled his prejudice and disesteems.

At Christmas all the Gentlemen near his Excellencies Plantation were invited,
Allin (though not called) intrudes, and on the morrow after Christmas day His
Excellency sends for Allin privately into his chamber, tells him he had
received his Letter whereby be had perceived his parts, and on that was very
fit for the service of the Country, and should be sorry that this business,
which he had said he durst not name, should be proved against him; that he sent
for him, to let him know, he was not prejudicated, but must do justice; several
people had complained against the lewdness of this Country, and not only
Captain Parker, but several others told him of the business; that he never
could perceive Captain Parker had any prejudice to the Country (as Allin had
alleged) and for Duelling he must and would be severe according to the Laws, it
preserved men's lives, etc. But that he had no design on his Person or his
Estate; Allin replied, that malicious times produced strange effects, etc. and
as he was going away he asked His Excellency whether his stay was any thing
offensive; His Excellency replied, he would not thrust any person out of his
house, but was no ways desirous of his company, till the business was cleared.
This private conference in his Excellencies chamber was immediately penned by
Allin, and found amongst his papers. Immediately after this, Allin, informs
several of his acquaintance of what had past, retires, and was shy of exposing
himself to the public view; they all assured him that His Excellency had no
design neither on his person nor estate, for if he had he would have secured
him. Notwithstanding all their good advice Allins obstinate suspicion falsely
concluded, that His Excellency had a design upon his Vineyard (as he called it)
and therefore would put him to death that it might be forfeited. This
groundless apprehension made him desperately mad, and guided by an Atheistical
Tenet, designed a most murderous inveterated revenge on his innocent
Excellency, and his own death. And that his designed malice might have
opportunity to effect his intentions, on the second of January, after he had
made a short stiff Cutlash, exceeding sharp, he commanded five Negroes and a
Christian servant to put some provision into his Boat with some Axes and Bills,
and then called another Christian servant, and told him, that if he heard he
were dead, he should take what he could get, and that he gave him his freedom.
This done, he directs his course to the upper end of Parham Plantation, and
near the open ground, not far from a path leads to Noctia, of an old saw-pit,
he commanded his Negroes to build a Hut, and sent some of them to observe
whether any approached that place, and that they might be unsuspected, ordered
them to carry wood on their shoulders, as if they had belonged to a Plantation
near unto His Excellency's Plantation, where he sometimes walked with very
slender attendance. These recreations of His Excellencies gave Allin
encouragement for his desired convenience, but divine providence still steered
His Excellency from that part, where this murderer expected him. On Monday the
second of January His Excellency visiting a Neighbors Plantation, came home
late at the landing place, Allin lay undiscovered to murder him at his arrival,
but a light, and attendance suddenly coming down to receive him, Allin at that
time was disappointed. The day following His Excellency honored a Neighbor
with a visit, about two leagues from Parham, during his absence Allin sent a
Letter by the hands of a Negroe Boy, but 'twas not left for, nor delivered to
His Excellency that day, for it was late before his Bark returned. That night
Allin called for victuals, and said, come lets eat a little before I die; his
servant replied, I hope not so Master, I hope there is no cause or fear of
death; I cannot tell answered Allin.

The next morning being the fourth day, Allin sent a letter very early, by the
very same Negroe Boy, and charged him most strictly to deliver it with his own
hand; the l^d most confidently goes to His Excellencies chamber, presents the
Letter which was wrapped up in a leaf, and unsealed, and so departs; His
Excellency (because to Allin stood on his justification, and pleaded guiltless,
that the Blasphemy for which he was accused) had sent for the papers out of the
Records which concerned his trial, and this morning about the time of the
delivery of Allins Letter, received them, where he found three positive
Depositions, his Indictments, and the Penance enjoined him by the Court for his
blasphemy: After this His Excellency showed my self, and Major Banister (as he
was walking in his Plantation) none attending him besides our selves, Allins
Letter, with what impudency penned, the inserted Copy will evidence, and
discoursing of him, His Excellency averred, he need not have any suspicion of
him, for he intended him no injury, but he was bound for to take cognizance of
his fearful Blasphemy, and to search what judicial proceedings there had been
about it, for such a business as this, being of a most dreadful nature, ought
not to be slubbered over; and withal informed us, that for his satisfaction he
had sent for, and that morning received all papers relating thereunto. And as
for his Duelling which Allin so much feared to be punished for, he intended not
to question him upon the late strict Act, being it was never published nor
known here, etc.

His Excellency had summoned the Council here to attend him this evening at
Parham, at which time as he intended to walk to his Windmill, near the place
where Allin lurked, arrives some Gentlemen of his Council which prevented him,
had he gone, Allin had at the place attempted to murder him. The usual hour
for evening Prayers being come, all went to divine service in an upper dining
Room, where my self, Council, and several Gentlemen of the Colony, besides
Domestic Servants, attended His Excellency. And as his Chaplain was reading
the first Lesson, being the 3. of the 2. Samuel, and the 27 verse, And Joab
smote Abner under the fifth rib, etc. Allin enters the room with a ghastly and
direful countenance, at first unknown to any present, and going toward His
Excellency with his left hand somewhat extended, as if he intended some civil
address, and his right hand aloof behind his right thigh, with his sharp
Cutlace in it, and as soon as within reach smote (...) his Excellencies head
with all his fury, and seconded his blow before I, who was one of his nearest,
could enterpose; immediately other Gentlemen rushed on him: at the instant in
which I seized him, Allin stabs himself with his short Cutlace in his right
side, and down he fell: all were surprised with amazement and horror, and had
I not with a passionate earnestness most strictly commanded them to forbear,
that he might be reserved for the hand of Justice, several would have slain
him; and he hearing them cry out, Kill the Dog, replied, I came here to dye, to
kill my Lord, and then my self. After I had secured him with a Guard, I waited
on His Excellency, whom I found through Gods mercy far better than I expected,
wounded in the Forehead with a slanting blow, By Letters since from Suinam, we
understand that the Lord Will^ughby's wounds were for dangerous, that his
brains were seen to beat.
but his worst hurt was in his left hand, with holding it up after he had
received the first blow, had his forefinger and middle finger cut off, and had
lost a third had not a large Ring which he wore thereon defended it; I
returning to Allin, commanded him to be searched; in his pocket were found some
Powder and Balls, and several Papers; his wound had a large Orifice, and about
his bare belly a new cord bound hard, for what use I know not; and charge being
given to a Surgeon to dress him and take care of him, I with my Council
perused his papers, amongst which we found the Letter which he had writ to His
Excellency, which I have here inserted, that the world may see what an
imperious and bloody Villain this was; but this, as in the Postscript he
writes, was sent, but not delivered. The Letter superscribed, For His
Excellency the Lord Willoughby our Proprietour.

An Abstract of some passages out of Mr. Allins Letter sent to His Excellency.
MY LORD,
YOur Marshals gave out that they were come for me, which made me fly my house;
I now stand upon my guard, and am resolved never to be seized by Mankind, etc.
I do humbly beg, desire, and expect, that you will by my Boy the bearer send me
your general pardon both for Words, Blasphemy, and Duels fought with Captain
Parker, as likewise for this way of asking it, also a pardon for Captain
Parker, etc. If you do not send me this pardon full and large, remember that
you will be guilty of all the blood that I shall spill, and mischief I shall
act, which shall be as great as ever was acted by the instructions and hands of
a private man; upon the reception of which I will lay by my Arms, and come in
to your Lordship with the greatest submission, etc. He that slights his own
life may command any man's life in the world; and I have too much of a Roman in
me to possess my own life, when I cannot enjoy it with freedom and honor.

My Lord, but the very last night at your coming ashore I had your life in my
hand, my sword drawn, and as much courage as ever Caesar had, and my
convenience was so great, that I was overcome with the advantage, my reason
overcoming my passion, and telling me I can never lay an higher obligation upon
this Nobleman, than by now passing his Life: and therefore (my Lord) remember
however you deal by me, you met with a generous Enemy. My Lord, to conclude, if
you seize my Boy, or that you force him to confess any thing, or that he be not
with me by the setting of the Sun, or that he bring me no answer, I will
conclude that you intend to destroy me, or at the least put ignominies upon me,
which I will never endure; I will renounce all Allegiance, revenge my self on
all my Enemies, then kill my self.

MY LORD, I am your devoted Servant, JOHN ALLIN.
From the Woods, Tuesday Jan. 3. 1664. My Lord, I sent this yesterday by one of
the clock, but you were not at home.




His Letter was too large and too impertinent to be all inserted in this small
Narrative, but these are the most material parts; But most of these Rants in
their several Paragraphs were not written in his last Letter to his Excellency,
for had they been sent, a cautious care had been taken to have prevented his
design of Blood on his Excellency.

This night he lay in torment, with the anguish of his wound, which caused a
violent Fever. He repented for nothing but that he had not killed His
Excellency; and cursed the Coat which he wore (which was one of his Negroes,
that he might be the less known) that dulled his sword from entering deep enough
into his body. His Excellencies Chaplain giving him some spiritual advice, he
bid him talk to the rabble, and not to him.

He gloried in the action he had committed, but grieved it was unsuccesful; and
being by an intimate acquaintance interrogated of his Accomplices; he answered,
He scorned any man should share with him in so noble an action. Being demanded
whether he desired any thing to dispatch himself, he answered, He could do that
at any time: and about 12 at night, the Marshal being gone out of the room, he
drew forth a Pistol (which was supposed to be tied to his thigh) charged up to
the Muzzel, clapped it to his Breast, struck fire but 'twould not go off; he then
called to a Sentinel to spare him a stick of fire to light his Pipe, which
observed, he clapped the burning cole to the Pan, but all would not discharge the
Pistol, which then discovered, was taken from him.

Being deprived of his Instrument to murder himself, he in vain ^ollicited the
Marshal privately for another, still continuing obstinately unrelenting, and
grieved at nothing but that he had not murdered His Excellency and butchered
himself.

On the sixth day he was sent down to the Gaol with a strong Guard, and seemed
cheerful when he was put into the Boat, but had not gone above two Leagues,
when feeling death approaching, but undiscernably to the Marshal and Guard, he
discoursed a little, and was immediately seized with internal tortures, and in
a short time became senseless and expired. His carcass was delivered to the
common Gaol, where I commanded several Surgeons to dissect him, and narrowly
observe whether he had taken any poison in his Maw. They found a Pill of
Landocum undigested, some digested, and some that had passed into his
Intestines. This was privately given him by one Sergeant the Surgeon that
dressed him, enticed thereunto by a Diamond-ring and some small presents, who
now in durance too late bewails his folly.

The Jury of Inquest found Allin Felo de se; and because such an unheard
attempt merited an unusual punishment, his naked carkase was ordered to be
dragged from the Gaol by the common Hangman, and Negroes, to the Pillory at the
Town of Toorarica, where a Barbicue was erected; his Members cut off, and slung
in his face, they and his Bowels burnt under the Barbicue, with a seditious
paper which he had left to be published after his death, his Head to be cut
off, and his Body to be quartered, and when dry-barbicued or dry roasted, after
the Indian manner, his Head to be stuck on a pole at Parham, and his Quarters
to be put up at the most eminent places of the Colony.

The Pole to be of the most durable wood, to the future terror and cursed
example of such incorrigible Villains.

Thus died this perverse Atheist, unparalled in History, whose pride and
passion, and overweening judgment of h^s cursed Tenet, hurried him to this
ignominious end, which his folly fansied should never seize him.

A most remarkable Example to be seriously considered by all that slight the
Omnipotent God, his Word and Service, blaspheme the most holy Savior of the
world, value their own vanities, and deny their ears to good advice.

It is my duty, and it has been my care, to inform the World aright of all the
passages of this vile Assassinate and matchless Miscreant, wherein I have been
exceeding cautious that only Truth should direct my pen.

Jan. 11. 64. WILLIAM BYAM.

FINIS.
Let this Relation of John Allins Attempt upon the Person of His Excellency
Francis L. Willoughby of Parham, Captain General of the Continent of Guiana,
etc. be Imprinted.

May 22. 1665. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.


