Mr. BVTLER's Fast-Sermon, Preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, April 28. 1697.

Clarke Mayor. Martis quarto die Maii 1697, Annoque Regis Willielmi Tertii,
Angliae, etc. Nono.
THIS Court does desire Mr. BUTLER to print his Sermon preached at the
Parish Church of St. Mary-le-Bow, on Wednesday last, before the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Citizens of this City.

Goodfellow.

A SERMON Preached at St. MARY-LE-BOW, Before the LORD MAYOR, AND Court of
Aldermen, and Citizens of LONDON, On Wednesday the 28th of April, A Day
appointed by his Majesty's Proclamation for a General and Public FAST. By
LILLY BUTLER, Minister of St. Mary Aldermanbury.

LONDON; Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons in Cornhil, over
against the Royal Exchange. MDC XC VII.

JAMES 4. 9, 10. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your laughter be turned
to mourning, and your joy to heaviness. Humble your selves in the sight of the
Lord, and he shall lift you up.
THOSE Jewish Christians, to whom the Apostle directs his Discourse in this
Chapter, were engaged in Wars and Fightings; and earnestly Ver. 1.
wishing for the return of Peace and Plenty, and those other Advantages they
fought for, but could not obtain them, ver. 2. Ye lust, and have not: ye kill,
and desire to have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye have not. He
therefore informs them, what was the true Cause of all their ill Success and
Disappointments; they did not seek to God for the Blessings they desired, or
asked them only for evil Ends, not that, being delivered out of the hand of
their Enemies, they might serve him without Fear, but be enabled to make the
more plentiful provision for their Lusts, and with the greater Quietness and
Freedom pursue the fulfilling of them: Ye have not, because ye ask not. Ver. 2,
3.
Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your
Lusts. They had also contracted such a Friendship with the World, as was Enmity
with God, to whom they had espoused themselves; and therefore he calls them
Adulterers and Adulteresses, ver. 4. They doubled and dissembled with God in
their Hearts, and their Hands were polluted with many foul Practices, which
their Ver. 8.
greedy Covetousness had employed them in. He well knew there could be no good
hopes of better Times, till they were better themselves; and therefore proceeds
to tell them, what was fit and necessary to be done by them: That they must
submit themselves to God, and resist Ver. 7.
the Devil; that they must diligently perform the neglected Duty of Prayer, and
the other Exercises of Divine Worship; Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh
to you: Ver. 8.
That they must prepare themselves for such Approaches unto God, by putting
away the Iniquity of their Hands, and the Hypocrisy of their Hearts; Cleanse
your Hands ye sinners, and purify your Hearts ye double minded: And that Ver. 8.
in order to the effectual working this Repentance and Reformation, they must
afflict their Souls with a godly Sorrow, and humble themselves in the sight of
God, for the Sins they had committed; and then, and not before, they might
expect the happy Fruits of God's Favor. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep; let
your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness: Humble your
selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. The words of the
Text then, if we seriously compare our Case with theirs to whom they are
written, we cannot but acknowledge, are very proper Matter for our present
Meditation. In speaking to them at this time,

I. I shall show, What that Duty is which they require of us.

II. I shall show, The great Necessity of this Duty.

III. I shall show, The Seasonableness of it at this time.

IV. I shall show, The great Benefit of performing this Duty, intimated in
these words, and he shall lift you up.

V. I shall direct to some proper Considerations, for the exciting you to it.
And

VI. I shall show, What are the necessary Fruits of a due performance of it.

1. I shall endeavor to show, What that Duty is which the Text requires of us.
And to this end, I shall show,

First, What is to be the general Matter of our Sorrow and Mourning.

Secondly, What are the necessary Qualifications of this Sorrow. And

Thirdly, The particular Reasons of our Sorrow and Humiliation for that general
Matter.

First, I am to show, What is to be the general Matter of our Sorrow and
Humiliation; What that is we are to be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, and to
humble our selves in the sight of God for. It is for Sin. The Apostle had been
declaring and reproving the Peoples Sins, and is here calling them to repent of
them: Ye Adulterers, says he, ye Adulteresses, ye Sinners, ye double minded,
be ye afflicted, and mourn, and weep; that is, humble your selves in this
manner, for all those Iniquities whereby ye have justly deserved such
reproachful Names as these are. Every Man then should afflict his Soul with
Shame and Sorrow, for his own, for other Men's, and for the Nation's Sins; for
all the Abominations have been done in the midst of us, for the Sins of
Magistrates, and Ministers, and of all other Ranks and Conditions of Men; for
all have sinned, and helped to increase the Public Guilt, and to complete the
Character of a sinful Nation, a People laden with Iniquity. For these things
both God and the King do call us this Day to fasting, and weeping, and
mourning. And, by our assembling together at this time, we make profession of
humbling our selves in this manner. I shall therefore, for your farther
Direction, show,

Secondly, What are the necessary Qualifications of that Sorrow which is
required of us.

1. It must be a hearty Sorrow. That Mourning and Humiliation, which God
expects from us, is chiefly that of the Soul and Spirit; Rent your Hearts, and
not your Garments, says the Prophet Joel. God will not be satisfied with Joel
2.
such outward Ceremonies and Formalities of Mourning, as those were, in which
alone the Fasts of the Jews did too often consist, such as tearing their
Garments, bowing down the Head like a Bulrush, spreading Sackcloth and Ashes
under them, disfiguring their Faces, and appearing before him with a sad
Countenance; Will thou call this a Fast, and an Isa. ^8. 4, 5.
acceptable Day to the Lord? All these may be nothing but a vainglorious show
and pageantry of Mourning, to attract the regard and esteem of Men; nothing but
Mockery and Hypocrisy in the sight of God. It is the breaking of the Heart, the
melting of the Spirit, the humbling of the Soul for Sin; this is that
Humiliation which God has the greatest respect to. The other may make us
appear to Men to grieve and be afflicted, but this, this inward Sorrow is
necessary to the humbling our selves in the sight of God, who searches the
Hearts of Men.

2. It must be a great and deep Sorrow of Heart. All Evils are to be lamented
with a Sorrow proportionable to the greatness of them; and therefore Sin being
the greatest of all Evils, our Sorrow for that should be the greatest of all
our Sorrows. It is to him, that is of an humble and of a contrite Spirit, that
God has a special regard, to him whose Spirit is even ground to pieces with
Sorrow, as the word Contrite signifies. The Sacrifices of God, says David,
Psalm. 51. 17. are a broken Spirit; it is a broken and contrite Heart, which God
will not despise. It must not only be the Sorrow of the Heart, but also so
great a Sorrow of it, as may fitly be called the breaking and grinding it to
pieces, as much Sorrow as our Hearts are able to bear; especially when we
bewail, as we profess to do this Day, all our Sins at once, the Sins which we,
and all the People of this Land, have committed.

3. It must be an impartial Sorrow, a great and hearty Sorrow for Sin,
wherever we see it, or of what kind so ever it is. Our love to any Person or
Party must not lessen our dislike of their evil doings; neither must our
Displeasure against any, make us unconcerned at theirs. We must not delight in
that our selves, which we are offended with in others, or take pleasure in
seeing other Men do, what we dare not do our selves: we must not mourn for one
Sin, and rejoice in another: we must not hate and dislike only those Sins,
which, through some opposition in our Tempers, or through satiety, or some evil
Effects we feel of them, are become irksome and grievous to us; and love, and
cherish, and delight our selves in the commission of others, which are more
agreeable to our Humor, or Constitution, or Interest. Our Laughter must be
turned to mourning, and our Joy to heaviness; we must be afflicted, and mourn,
and weep, for those very Sins we were wont to take the greatest Pleasure in.

4. It must be an humbling Sorrow. We must so be afflicted, and mourn, and
weep, as to humble our selves in the sight of God for the Sins we have
committed, so as to wash away all the filth of Pride, and every high Thought of
our selves. Our Sorrow should be attended with Shame, and a deep sense of our
own Baseness. Whenever we bewail our Sins, we should abhor and loath our selves
for them, and acknowledge the Justice of God in all the Evils they have brought
upon us, and his undeserved Mercy in that we are not utterly consumed for them.
Such a Mourner was Job, when he abhorred himself, and repented Job 42. 6.
in Dust and Ashes. Such was David, when he confessed that he was foolish and
ignorant, even as Psalm. 73. 22.
a Beast before God. Such was Ezra, when he fell upon his Knees, and said, O my
God, I am ashamed, and blush Ezra 9. 5, 6.
to lift up my Face to thee, my God: for our Iniquities are increased over our
Heads, and our Trespass is grown up unto the Heavens. And such was Daniel, when
confessing, with Fasting, and Sackcloth, and Dan. 9. 3.
Ashes, the Sins of his People, he thus expressed himself; O Lord,
Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto Ver. 7, 8.
us Confusion of Face, because we have sinned against thee. Such Mourners
should we all be this Day, lying down in our Shame, and our Confusion covering
us, and loathing our selves in our own sight for all the Evils that we have
committed.

5. It must be a lasting Sorrow. It is not the Duty of one Hour, or of one Day
only. Is this the Fast that I have chosen, says God, a Day for a Man to
afflict his Soul? Isa. 58. 4. The Sorrow which God expects from us, is not such
as vanishes in our Sighs and Lamentations, or runs out with our Tears, and then
leaves the Heart to return to its wonted hardness. It is not as a morning
Cloud, which overcasts the Soul for a little while, but soon passes away, and
then all is clear again, and our Affections shine as bright as ever upon the
Sins we bewailed. It is not falling out with them, and our selves for their
sakes, for one Day, and renewing all our Love and Kindness the next: No, we
must never smile any more upon our lamented Sins, or remember them without
Shame: We must never suffer our Hearts to be lifted up again, or to grow
insensible of that load of Sin, which we have felt so heavy upon them, and has
given them so much Pain and Trouble: We must always carry with us the same
resentment of the filthy Conversation of the Wicked, and be continually
disposed to mourn and be afflicted, in seeing and hearing their Abominations. I
proceed now,

Thirdly, To consider the particular Reasons of this Sorrow and Humiliation,
for our own and others Sins. These are the filthy Nature, the base Ingratitude,
and the evil Fruits and Consequences of them. We must be afflicted, and mourn,
and weep, and humble our selves for them; because hereby our God is
dishonored; his Authority despised, his Laws trampled on, and his Love and
Goodness abused: because hereby our most Holy Religion is disgraced, and the
Christian Faith exposed to the Scorn and Derision of bold and growing
Infidelity: because the Peace and Prosperity of our Country is undermined, and
so many Public Mischiefs procured by them: because hereby our Minds and
Consciences are defiled, and the Image of God defaced in us, the Peace of our
Souls destroyed, and everlasting Wrath and Punishment incurred by us. These are
all of them very sorrowful Considerations, and we must have respect to them
all, in afflicting and humbling our Souls for our Sins. Thus much may suffice
for the explaining the Nature of the Duty of the Text.

I shall therefore proceed and show,

II. The Necessity of it, which will be manifest, if we consider,

First, That without this great and hearty Sorrow and Humiliation for our Sins,
there can be no true Repentance, without which there can be no Pardon, no
Reconciliation with God, no hopes of diverting the Judgments of God from this
untoward Generation, no escaping the Wrath to come, no hopes of Eternal Life
and Salvation. This Sorrow and Humiliation for Sin, is therefore very often
expressly called for, when Men are exhorted to repent, and particularly
mentioned in the account of their Repentance. Thus said the Lord to the House
of Israel, when he called them to repent, Joel 2. 12. Turn ye, even to me, with
all your Heart, and with weeping, and fasting, and mourning, and rent your
Hearts. Thus when David repented of his Sin, in the matter Psalm. 51.
of Uriah, he offered the Sacrifice of a broken and contrite Heart. And thus
the Prophet Ezekiel foretells the Repentance of the Captive Jews; Ezekiel. 6. 9.
They shall loath themselves for the Evils that they have committed in all their
Abominations. And thus we read of the Penitent Woman in the Gospel, Luke 7. 38.
that she came behind our Savior weeping, and began to wash his Feet with
Tears: And of St. Peter, that when he began his Repentance, he went out, and
wept bitterly: And of those Converts he made, Act. 2. That they were pricked in
their Heart, at the mention of their great Sin, in crucifying the Lord Jesus.
Repentance, as it is often described in Scripture; is a turning from Sin, and a
turning to the Lord; a turning from Sin, in the Judgment, Will, and
Resolutions, and in the Affections likewise; the love of it is turned into
Hatred, and delight in it into Shame and Sorrow for it. And this inward turning
from Sin goes before, and produces the turning from it in the outward
Conversation and Practice: Therefore St. Paul tells us, that Godly Sorrow
works Repentance not to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10. We first grieve for
Sin, and then forsake it; We feel the remembrance of it lie heavy upon our
Minds, and then and therefore set our selves to shake off the uneasy Burden.

Secondly, The Necessity of this Sorrow and Humiliation will be farther
manifest, if we consider, that without this there cannot be that Love of God
which the first and great Commandment requires of us. If we love God with all
our Heart, we cannot but look with great displeasure upon that, which is most
contrary to his Nature and Will, which his Soul hates, and his Honor suffers
so much by. Can we see him most highly provoked and injured, whom our Soul
dearly loves, and not be afflicted at it? He that can reflect upon his
Rebellion and Disobedience, that can remember how often, and how many ways he
has grieved and offended God, and not mourn and be ashamed at the thoughts of
what he has done, How dwells the love of God in him? How absurd are all his
pretenses to it?

Thirdly, The Necessity of this Sorrow and Humiliation, will be yet farther
manifest, if we consider, that without this there can be no true Love of our
Neighbor, without which we cannot be Christ's Disciples. Love will not suffer
us to be unconcerned at the Calamities of those who are the Objects of it. We
cannot but grieve to see their Bodies in pain, their Minds distracted, their
Goods rifled, and their Enemies executing their bloody Designs against them;
and are we not ashamed to pretend, in any sense, to love our Neighbors as
Christ has loved us, if we can see them under far greater Miseries than all
these, and yet be little affected with them? If we can see them diseased in
their Souls, dead in Trespasses and Sins, inslaved by the Devil, pulling down
the Wrath of God upon them, and ready to fall with their Souls and Bodies into
unquenchable Flames, and not have our Bowels moved, and our Hearts pained
within us?

Fourthly, Without this Sorrow and Humiliation, there can be no true Faith,
without which it is impossible to please God, or to be justified in his sight.
How can we believe that God is our Maker and Preserver, and the giver of every
good Gift, and yet offend him daily without Remorse? How can we believe, that
he hates all the Workers of Iniquity, that he is angry with the Wicked every
Day, and will by no means acquit the Guilty, and yet be easy under all the
great and provoking Transgressions we have committed against Him? How can we
believe that the Son of God came down from Heaven, and suffered all the Shame
and Torment of the Cross for our Salvation; and feel no wounds in our Spirits,
no shame in our Faces, for all the ungrateful Returns we have made to his
tender Love? How can we believe that he gave himself for us, to save us from
our Sins, whilst we cherish and embrace them with pleasure, and will not be
delivered from them? How can we believe that Glory, Honor, and Immortality,
are the certain Reward of those that work Righteousness, and yet remember with
little concern how carelessly we have neglected so great Salvation? How can we
believe, that Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, eternal Death and
Misery, will be the undoubted Portion of every Soul of Man that does Evil, and
not look with Horror and Bitterness of Spirit, upon our sinful Lives? What
brutish Folly and Ingratitude does the unrelenting Sinner accuse himself of,
whenever he is so absurd, as to call himself a Christian?

I proceed,

III. To show the Seasonableness of this Duty of Sorrow and Humiliation. God
does sometimes more loudly call to Weeping, and Fasting, and Mourning; and the
Sins and Circumstances of a Church and Nation increase their Obligations to
them, as with us at this Day. Had ever any Age or People more or greater Sins
to mourn for, than we have? Is not the whole Head sick, and the whole Heart
faint, and the whole Body full of Wounds, and Bruises, and putrefying Sores?
Have not all sorts of Men corrupted their Ways? Are they not altogether become
abominable? Are not Atheism and Infidelity, Rioting and Drunkenness, Chambering
and Wantonness, Strife and Envying, Pride and Covetousness, the profanation of
God's Sacred Name in horrid Oaths and Curses, and the contempt of Divine
Worship, the most notorious things we can any where observe? And can sorrow for
Sin ever be more seasonable than now, now that it is so general, so impudent,
and so exceedingly multiplied in all its Kinds? Is it not a most proper Season
to mourn for our Sins, when we have already smarted so much for them, and the
Rod is still upon us? when they have brought us into so many Difficulties,
afflicted us with so many Losses, shed so much English Blood, and made so many
Orphans, and Widows, and Childless amongst us? Is it not high time to humble
our selves under that mighty Hand of God, we have felt so heavy upon us, is
still so visibly lifted up against us, and from whence alone we can expect that
Success, and Peace, and Settlement, our Sins have hitherto withheld from us?
But that nothing may be wanting to persuade us, to concern our selves
effectually for the discharge of the Duty of the Text,

I shall show,

IV. The great Benefit of our performing this Duty, intimated to us in these
Words, and he shall lift you up.

First, We might comfortably hope, that if we were generally, or but some good
Numbers of us thus humbled, God would lift us up above all our Difficulties,
and above all our Enemies; that we should dwell on high, and our place of
Defense should be the Munition of Rocks, secure from all those Storms and
Tempests our Sins have raised against us. The great End of God's sending his
Judgments upon a People, is to humble and afflict their Souls, with the
remembrance of those Sins whereby they have provoked him. And therefore we may
reasonably hope, that he who does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
Children of Men, will take off his Rod; when the Design of his Correcting is in
some good measure accomplished. God had expressly threatened to destroy Niniveh
within forty Days: Yet when they fasted, and cried, and humbled themselves
before him, he repented of the Evil he said he would do unto Jonah 3.
them. And when the King of Egypt had gathered a mighty Army against Israel
because they had forsaken 2 Chronicles 12.
God, 2 Chronicles. 12. and the Lord saw that the great Men particularly humbled
themselves, he sent his Prophet to tell them, that he would not destroy them,
but Ver. 5.
grant them some deliverance, and his Wrath should not be poured upon them by
the hand of Shishak. And accordingly we read, verse. 12. that in Judah things
went well. Is it then in our Power to do any thing, so serviceable to our
public Peace and Prosperity, and shall we still neglect it? Are not these
Blessings worthy to be sought with Tears and Sorrow? and would they not be very
cheaply purchased by the performance of so reasonable a Duty, after so large an
Expense of Blood and Treasure in vain for the recovery of them?

Secondly, Our particular penitent Sorrow and Humiliation, may prevail with God
to lift us up above those Calamities it may be too late for us to prevent. When
Men are cast down, then thou shall say, There is lifting up; and he shall save
the humble Person, Job 22. 29. An eminent Instance of this distinguishing
Providence of God, we have Ezekiel. 9. 4. where God commands a Mark to be set on
the Forehead of those that did sigh and cry for the Abominations that were done
in the midst of Jerusalem, that the Ministers of his Wrath might not come near
any of them, ver. 6. For such Men are the particular Care of Heaven, and the
peculiar Objects of the Divine Favor. To this Man will I look, says God, Isa.
66. 2. even to him that is poor and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at my
Word.

Thirdly, God will lift up them that mourn and afflict themselves, as the
Command of the Text requires; that is, He will raise their drooping Spirits,
revive and comfort their humbled Souls. He is therefore called by St. Paul, 2
Cor. 7. 6. The God that comfort those that are cast down. The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me, says the Prophet Isaiah, he has sent me to preach glad
Tidings to the Meek, to bind up the broken hearted, and to comfort them that
mourn, Isa. 61. 1, 2. Such Men have an everflowing Spring of Comfort always
abiding in them, even the Holy Spirit of God, who dwells with such as are of
a contrite and humble Isa. 57. 15.
Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the Humble, and to revive the Spirit of the
contrite Ones; to give them such a Sense of the Divine Love, such joyful and
glorious Hopes, as will abundantly sweeten the worst Condition they can be in:
So that to be thus sorrowful, is the best way to be always rejoicing.

Fourthly, God will lift them up, who thus humble themselves in his sight here,
to his own everlasting Kingdom hereafter, where they shall shine as the Sun,
and whither no Clouds can reach, to diminish ought of their Glory and Joy.
Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 3.
As God delights to dwell with such Men here, so will he receive them to dwell
with himself hereafter, when he will dry up all their Tears, heal all their
Wounds, put an end to all their Sorrows, and fill their Souls with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory; when he will no longer speak to them, as he does
in the Text, Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep; but will call them to enter
into the Joy of their Lord, to sing the Song of the Lamb, and to exercise
themselves in perpetual Hallelujah's.

Thus then you see how necessary, how seasonable, and how profitable, the Duty
of the Text, and the Duty of the Day is: And shall we not, now at length, set
our selves in earnest to the performance of it? Shall we still rejoice to do
Evil, and delight in the frowardness of the Wicked? Shall we still maintain the
Character which the Prophet gave of Niniveh, Zeph. 2. 15. This is the rejoicing
City that dwells carelessly? God forbid! Let us search and try our Ways then,
and know every Man the Plague of his own Heart, and turn to the Lord with
weeping and mourning, for all our great and crying Sins. And for the afflicting
our Hearts with this Sorrow, I shall,

V. Direct to some proper Considerations for this purpose.

First, Let us consider the Goodness and Mercy of that God we have sinned
against, and try to afflict our Souls with Shame and Sorrow for the base
Ingratitude of our Sins. When David had put Saul in mind of the tender regard
he had had for his Life and Safety, we read that Saul lift up his Voice and
wept, at the thoughts 1. Sam. 14. 16.
of his cruel Designs against him: And will not our Souls melt with Sorrow,
when we consider the tender Love, the great and innumerable Favors of that
good God we have injured and provoked? Was ever Love so great as his, or
Ingratitude so vile and monstrous as ours has been? How kind, how
compassionate, how bountiful a Father have we offended? O the Riches of that
Forbearance and Long-suffering we have despised! O the height and depth of that
Love we have abused! The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib; but
ungrateful Wretches that we have been, we have not known, we have not
considered as we ought, our innumerable Obligations to love and serve him, in
whom we live, and move, and have our being. That we should thus requite the
Lord, the Lord that made and bought us, that preserves and provides for us, of
whom and from whom are all the good things we enjoy! What more than brutish
stupidity are our Hearts depraved into, if they are not pierced through with
Sorrow at the remembrance of such prodigious Ingratitude?

Secondly, Let us endeavor to afflict our Souls with Sorrow, for the Sins we
have committed, by considering the bitter Sufferings of the Son of God by and
for them. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn
and be in bitterness, says the Prophet, Zech. 12. 10. And methinks we should
always be thus affected when we look upon him, when we consider the Death and
Passion of our Blessed Savior, who did bear our Sins in his own Body on the
Tree. How doleful were his Cries, how tormenting his Pains, how shameful his
Death, when he carried our Sorrows, and our Iniquities were laid upon him? Are
we not pained at the very Heart to think, how insensible we have hitherto been
of all these things; how we have renewed and increased his Sorrows, Crucified
him afresh, and again and again put him to an open shame, by the hardness of
our Hearts, and the scandal of our Lives? O my Soul! methinks we should every
one of us be ready to say, How can thou any longer endure the Thoughts of
these things without shame and remorse, the Thoughts of thy Redeemer's
Sufferings, and thy own Ingratitude? Did the Son of God cry out under the
burden of thy Sins, and art thou easy and cheerful under them? Did he bleed and
die for thee, and can thou not weep for him, for the Sufferings thou have
brought upon him, and thy unkind behavior toward him? O Blessed Jesus! that I
should be thus insensible of thy intolerable Sufferings, and of thy infinite
Love! that I should take Pleasure in that which brought thee to so much Sorrow!
that I should cherish and embrace, and be so fond of that, by and for which
thou wast wounded, and bruised, and put to all the Shame and Torments of the
Cross! Oh! what Lamentations, what Tears, can be loud or bitter enough to
bewail the shameful returns I have made, for that precious Life and Blood which
were so freely given and shed for me?

Thirdly, Let us endeavor to afflict our Souls with Grief and Shame, by
considering the filthy and abominable Nature of Sin, we have been so fond, and
spent so much Time in the service of. There is not any thing in Toads or
Vipers, so ugly; so loathsome, so destructive, as there is in Sin; Every
Creature of God is Good, but Sin is the Devil's Offspring, it is the Devil's
Image and Work. And what can make us more deformed than that, which makes us
resemble him; which the God of Love cannot but hate; which the Father of
Mercies cannot but abhor, which he cannot look upon? It is the Transgression of
a Holy, Just, and good Law; it is the corruption of our Nature, the plague of
our Hearts, and the filthiness of our Flesh and Spirit; and do we not blush and
loath our selves, to think how much we have set our Hearts upon it; that it was
for this, for the sake of this, so base and filthy a thing, that we have been
all this while abusing the Love of a most Merciful Father, and defeating the
Design of our Compassionate Redeemer, who gave himself for us to redeem us from
Iniquity?

Fourthly, Let us endeavor to afflict our Souls with Shame and Sorrow, by
considering what means of Reformation, and what earnest Invitations from God we
have sinned against. God has given us mavelous Light, frequent Warnings,
great and precious Promises, severe and dreadful Threatenings, and called upon
us with the greatest Compassion and Importunity, that he might reclaim us from
our Sins. And is it not an evil and bitter thing, O Sinner, that thou have
resisted all these, rendered them all of none effect; and, in spite of all the
Methods of Heaven, still persisted in the dangerous, ungrateful, and filthy
Ways of Sin? Try then how thou can affect thy Heart with such Reflections as
these upon thy sinful Doings. Had I been born amongst Heathens and Infidels, my
Sin and Folly had been less; but all that I have done against my God, and
Savior, and my own Soul, I have done it in a bold and obstinate defiance of
the Glorious Gospel of the Son of God; against the plainest Commands, and the
strongest Motives to Obedience revealed in it. There I had Life and Death,
Heaven and Hell, plainly set before me; but neither did the one move me with
Fear, nor the other encourage me with Hope, to forsake my Sins, and return to
my God. How often have my God and Savior besought me by their Ambassadors to
be reconciled, to come unto them that I might have Life? How have they
stretched out their Hands all the Day long, and, with repeated Declarations and
Instances of Mercy and Compassion, invited me into their Embraces? But alas!
all this has been done to a stubborn and gainsaying Wretch. O my foolish and
unhappy Soul! that thou should be thus obstinately bent upon Sin and Ruin!
that thou should be thus insensible of the most gracious Offers of Pardon and
Mercy, and the most dreadful Denunciations of Wrath and Vengeance! that thou
should make so light of the most condescending Addresses of thy offended God,
of the most compassionate Invitations of a dying Savior! How grievous should
the remembrance of these things be, how intolerable the Burden of them?

Fifthly, Let us endeavor to afflict and humble our Souls, by considering how
shamefully we have contradicted our Profession, and broken our most solemn
Engagements, by the Sins we have committed. Is it possible we can think,
without regret and shame, how we have dishonored the Holy Name by which we are
called, how contrary we have walked to the Precepts and Example of our Lord and
Master, and how frequently we have broken our Vows and Resolutions of
Amendment? Say to thy Soul then, and try how it will work upon it; Oh! what a
shameful Sinner have thou been? How wide a Difference is there betwixt thy
Profession and thy Practice? How holy is thy Religion, how loose and profane
thy Life? How regardless have thou been of the Vows of thy Baptism, of the
Promises thou have made in thy Distress, and of the most solemn Engagements
thou have entered into at the Table of the Lord? O my Soul! does it not become
thee bitterly to bewail such false and absurd dealing, such bold dissembling
with thy Almighty and Gracious Lord, such presumptuouViolations of the Covenant
of thy God?

Sixthly, Let us endeavor to afflict our Souls with Shame and Sorrow, by
considering for what Trifles and Vanities we have committed and continued our
Sins. When Lysimachus had sold himself and his Army for a Cup of cold Water, he
thus lamented the foolish Bargain he had made; O ye Gods, said he, for how
short a Pleasure have I Plutarch.
made my self of a King a Slave! So let the Sinner say within himself; For what
perishing Enjoyments, for what poor and short Delights, have I forfeited the
Favor and Love of God, and endangered the Life of my immortal Soul? For what
Vanities have I wearied my self, in committing Iniquity? What Fruit have I of
all those things for which I am now ashamed, and the End whereof is Death? That
I should spend my Strength for that which is not Bread, and my Labor for that
which profits not! That I should so wilfully expose my self to everlasting
Death and Misery, for the Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a Season! That I
should prefer the empty Profits of Iniquity, before the inestimable and
incorruptible Reward of Righteousness! That I should so offend my Merciful
Creator, dishonor my Gracious Redeemer, and grieve the Holy Spirit of God, so
often and so wilfully as I have done, for things that perish in the using, for
the most vain and momentany Enjoyments!

If we did but seriously consider these things, and press them hard upon our
Minds, surely we could not be altogether stupid and insensible under them, we
could not but feel some remorse for the Folly and ingratitude of our Sins, and
humble our selves in the sight of God for them. I shall hope therefore, that we
are in some measure thus affected with these Considerations have been laid
before us, that we feel our Hearts afflicted with Shame and Remorse, for our
many and great Transgressions. This is that temper of Soul, which becomes the
Fast that God has chosen, and which we profess to appear before him with. O
that we might all manifest to our selves and to the World; by our future
Behavior, that we have not dissembled with God this Day; but at length humbled
our selves in sincerity before him, and indeed sorrowed after a Godly sort,
both for our own, and the Nation's Sins!

I shall conclude my Discourse with showing,

VI. What are the necessary Fruits of such a true godly Sorrow.

First, It must and will be followed with an actual forsaking the Sins we have
mourned for, and lamented. If we are in earnest pricked to the Heart, with the
remembrance of our former Sins, how can we consent to stick such Thorns into
them again? Can we be easily persuaded to repeat those Practices, which have so
deeply afflicted our Souls, and created us so much Shame and Sorrow? Can we
willingly load our selves with those Burdens again, we have heartily sighed and
groaned under? If we do return to the service of the same Lusts, and persist in
the same sinful Neglects we pretend to bewail, it is most certain we are not
humbled unto this Day; we proclaim our selves Dissemblers with God, or such
extravagant lovers of Sin, that, though it has cost us a great deal of Grief
and Pain, yet we cannot but still cherish and embrace it. And then what will
all our Sorrow avail? It will aggravate the Guilt of our continued
Disobedience, and we shall be but the greater Sinners, the greater Mourners we
have been.

Secondly, Our Sorrow and Humiliation must, and if it be sincere, it will be
followed, with vigorous and earnest Endeavors to restrain and reclaim Men from
those evil Practices, which give us so much Grief and Vexation. To what purpose
do we pretend to fast and mourn for the Sins of the Times, if we neglect to do
our parts to make them better? It is very much in the Power of this Assembly,
of the Magistrates and Officers of this City, to advance the Reformation of it,
at least to prevent the bold and public commission of many of those Sins, we
are met together to humble our selves for. And what provoking Hypocrisy must it
be, to pretend to mourn and be afflicted for those Maladies, we have power to
cure, and will not? Is it possible you can lay to Heart, as you profess to do
this Day, the Dishonor is done to our God and Religion, the Mischief is done
to our Country and to the Souls of Men, by the open and insolent Vices of the
Age, if any little, private, worldly Considerations can hold your Hands from a
zealous and faithful execution of those Laws, which are made for the Terror and
Punishment of such evil Doers? For God's sake then, for the sake of our most
Holy Religion, for the sake of all that is dear to us here, for the sake of
those Souls for whom Christ died, and for the discharge of our Oaths and
Consciences, let us do all that is proper for us, in our several Places and
Circumstances, at least to repress the Growth and Insolence of open Wickedness:
Let the World see by our Zeal and Diligence, and Courage, in prosecuting this
Design, that we do not sigh and mourn in appearance only for the Abominations
that are done in the midst of us; that the sight of them is really so grievous
and hateful to us, that we cannot forbear, as far as it is in our Power, to
force them out of Public View and Practice. We must all shortly appear before
the Judgment Seat of Christ, to give an Account of our executing those Trusts
God has reposed in us. And do we not tremble to think of being found
unfaithful, in the most weighty and important Matters of our Duty both to God
and Man? But I am persuaded better things of you, though I thus speak. You have
already given many Instances of your Zeal in striving against Sin, and the
Effects of it are not altogether invisible. May its Flames increase and spread
yet more and more, till it have burnt up all those Briars and Thorns, which
prick and wound the Souls of all Righteous Men, and hedge up our Way to Peace
and Settlement. Then would you have Praise of God, and Peace in your Minds; and
the Applause of all good Men, and the Generations to come would call you
Blessed. Then you would have comfort in the Hour of Death, and boldness in the
Day of Judgment, and an exceeding great Reward in Heaven, inestimable
Treasures, unfading Crowns, and Joy unspeakable for ever more.

Amen.
FINIS.
Some Books Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil.
THE Works of the Most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, containing Fifty four Sermons and Discourses on several Occasions;
together with the Rule of Faith. Being all that were published by his Grace
himself, and now collected into one Volume: To which is added, an Alphabetical
Table of the Principal Matters. Price 20 s.

Six Sermons; viz. Of Stedfastness in Religion. Of Family Religion. Of
Education of Children. Of the Advantages of an Early Piety. By his Grace, John
late Archbishop of Canterbury. In 120. Price 18 d.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper;
also by his Grace John late Archbishop of Canterbury. In 120. Bound 6 d. Or
Stitched in 80. 3 d. or something Cheaper to those that are so Charitable to
give away Numbers.

The Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament, and the New; with Annotations,
and very exact Parallel Scriptures. To which is Annexed the Harmony of the
Gospels; as also the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins, and Measures, to
our English Standards. And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel
Clark, Minister of the Gospel. Printed in Folio, on a very Fair Letter; the
like never before in one Volume. To which is newly added a very Exact and
Useful Concordance, Price 30 s.

The Works of the Learned Isaac Barrow, D. D. late Master of Trinity College in
Cambridg. Published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, late Archbishop of
Canterbury. The Third Volume. Containing Forty five Sermons, upon several
Occasions, completing his English Works.

A Brief Exposition of the Apostles Creed, by the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow,
late Master of Trinity College in Cambridg; (Never before printed, being very
different from his Volume of Sermons on it): to which is added, His Exposition
of the Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, etc. In 80. Price 4 s. 6 d.

Practical Discourses upon the Consideration of our Latter End, and the Danger
and Mischief of delaying Repentance. By Dr. Isaac Barrow. In 8 o. Price 18 d.

The Four Last Things; viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell: Practically
Considered and Applied. By W. Bates, D. D. In 120. Price 2 s.

Sermons of the Forgiveness of Sins. On Psalm. 130. ver. 4. Also by Dr. Bates.
Price 18 d.

A Brief Concordance to the Holy Bible, of the most usual and useful Places
which one may have occasion to seek for: In a new Method. By Samuel Clark, M.
A. Price 2 s.

The Advice of a Father; Or Counsel to a Child: Directing him how to demean
himself in the most important Passages of this Life. By E. C. Gent. In 120.
Price 1 s.

A Conference with an Anabaptist. By Dr. Assheton of Beckenham in Kent. Price
1. s.

A Theological Discourse of Last Wills and Testaments. Also by Dr. Assheton.
Price 1 s.

Several small Books against Debauchery, Profaneness, Blasphemy, Cursing and
Swearing, etc. By Dr. Assheton. Price 2 d. each, and something cheaper to them
that give away Numbers.

A Discourse concerning a Deathbed Repentance. By William Assheton, D. D.
Price 6 d.

A Familiar Guide to the Right and Profitable Receiving of the Lord's Supper:
Wherein also the Way and Method of our Salvation is briefly and plainly
declared. By T. Dorrington. Price 1 s.

A Sermon Preached at Bow-Church before the Lord Mayor, etc. upon a General
Fast. June 26. 1696. On Neh. ^. 9. part of the 26th and 27th Verses.

A Sermon Preached at St. Lawrence Jewry, at the Election of the Lord Mayor,
1696. On Prove. 29. 2.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Mr. James Lordell, March 27. 1694. On Rev.
14. 13.

A Sermon Preached at St. Mary-le-Bow, to the Societies for Reformation of
Manners, April 5. 1697.

All four by Lilly Butler, Minister of St. Mary Aidermanbury. Sold by B. Aylmer.


