A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mr JAMES LORDEL, WHO WAS Buried at St
MAGNUS Church, March 27. 1694.

By LILLY BUTLER, Minister of St Mary Aldermanbury.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1694.

To my Honored Friends, Mr John Lordel, Benjamin Lordel, Samuel Lordel,
Abraham Lordel, Peter Lordel, and Mrs Mary Lordel, Mr John Trymmer, and Mrs
Sarah Trymmer,
Brothers and Sisters of the deceased Mr. James Lordel.
Honored Friends,
MY Obligations to your Good Family are so very great, that I could not deny
your request for a Copy of this Sermon, preached at the Funeral of your Dear
Brother, and my very Good Friend. It must be the relation it has to him that
has moved you to design the Printing of it. And though I am very sensible how
unfit it is to be thus exposed, yet it is some satisfaction to me, that by
consenting to it, I shall show how hard it is for me, to refuse you any thing
that may be a testimony of my respect and gratitude. I do often think, with a
great deal of pleasure, on that exemplary Virtue, and most tender Love to one
another, which are so remarkable in every one of you: And that you may be
steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in these things, and long enjoy the
comfortable fruits of them, is the hearty Prayer of

Your most obliged Friend and Servant, Lilly Butler.

REV. XIV. 13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth:
Yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works
do follow them.
BLessedness is that which all men naturally desire; but the greatest part of
them either cannot or rather will not understand, when, and how, and where
alone it can be found. Most men seek no farther for it than their Senses will
direct and guide them; and think for certain it resides amongst the things that
are seen, and are but temporal. One eagerly pursues the deceitful and
uncertain riches of this World; wearieth his body, breaks his rest, defiles
his conscience, and, whilst he little thinks of it, sells his soul too; that
he may fill his baggs and barns, and increase his treasures and revenues: and
all this while flatters himself, that if he can but accomplish his designs, he
shall then be a happy man, and may say to his soul, as the rich man in the
Gospel did to his, Soul take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry; for thou have
goods laid up for many years. But, alas! in a very little while, and for the
most part before he can attain to that rich-man's wealth and increase, he
receives his dreadful rebuke and summons; Thou fool, says God to him, this
day or this night thy soul shall shall be required of thee; and then, poor
wretch, all his hopes and expectations perish; and the intolerable misery he is
condemned to sadly discovers his mistake of happiness. Another confidently
persuades himself, that there is no happiness like greatness and honor; that,
if he could but attain to such a height of dignity and preferment, then without
all peradventure he should be a happy man. But oftentimes whilst he is studying
and contriving to advance himself, before he can reach his affected honors,
Death comes and spoils all his plots: Or if he do perfect his designs, he
injoys his honor but a very little while, and then is thrown down from the
height of all his glory, his body into the grave, and his soul as low as hell.
A third derides and laughs at the folly of others, and very confidently
presumes that he has found the truest happiness, even carnal delights and
pleasures, the faring sumptuously every day, and spending his days and nights
in rioting and drunkenness, in chambring and wantonness, in contriving and
acting new scenes of lust and intemperance. But, alas! this man's fondly
conceited happiness, promotes and hastens his real misery, distempers his body,
consumes his strength, and shortens his life, which is no sooner ended, but
instead of those soft delights, those pleasures of sin he enjoyed for a season,
he is forced to lie down in unquenchable flames, to weep and wail for ever in
that place of torment prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Indeed we are all
too apt to take up our rest here, and to look for too much happiness in this
world, Job 5.7.
where we are born to trouble as the sparks fly upwards. But if we hearken to
the Divine Author of my Text, he will there discover our mistake in this
matter: he will tell us, as he was taught it immediately by a voice from
heaven; the season, and nature, and subjects of true felicity. I heard a voice
from heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord,
from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors;
and their works do follow them.

In these words we have, First, A description of those that are blessed and
happy men; Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord. Secondly, The certainty
of their blessedness from the testimony of the Spirit. Yea, says the Spirit.
Thirdly, The nature of their blessedness; It is a Rest; That they may rest from
their labors: and a Reward, Their works do follow them. I purpose to speak
something to the several parts of my Text, and conclude with some seasonable
Application of it.

First, Here is the Description of those that are blessed and happy men; The
dead which die in the Lord.

First, The Dead, and not the Living. It is a true account which Job gives us
of the Life of man, c. 14. v. 1. Man that is born of a woman, is of few days,
and full of trouble. Solomon supposes a far happier state of life than was
ever yet found in this World, and pronounces of this likewise, that it is but
vanity. Eccl. 11.28. If a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let
him remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many. All that comes is
vanity. And certainly we may rely upon the judgment of Solomon in this matter;
who, if there had been any happiness in this world, would undoubtedly have met
with it. He had experienced most, and he had searched into all the admired
enjoyments of this world; and the conclusion he made after all his diligent and
exact inquiries, he tells us himself, Eccl. 1.14. I have seen all the works
that are done under the Sun, and behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit.
There are but two sorts of men, the Wicked and the Righteous, and neither of
these can be happy here. The Wicked are like a troubled Sea that cannot rest.
Isa. 57.20
They have always something to ruffle and disturb their minds; some unruly
lusts, disordering passions, unsatisfied desires, disappointed expectations, or
the severe rebukes of a condemning conscience: Besides those pains and
diseases, those crosses and mischiefs, and other outward evils, which are the
natural or moral effects of Sin, the common fruit or punishment of it. So that
were it possible to make their hearts as visible as their vices, we should soon
see what little reason there is to call the proud happy, or to disbelieve the
testimony of the Prophet, That there is no peace to the wicked. As for Good and
Righteous men, it cannot be imagined that they should be acquainted with rest
and happiness where they are strangers and pilgrims, at so great a distance
from their Father's house, and the inheritance prepared and reserved for them.
They are not of the world, and therefore the world hates them, and is ready to
say, and do all manner of evil against them. They are not perfectly free from
Sin, which is it self a heavy burden to them, and moves their Heavenly Father
to correct them. They carry a body of flesh about them, which lusts and
warreth against the Spirit. They have an Adversary the Devil that continually
assaults them. And amidst all these disturbances, who can be happy? Most
certain then is it, that here is not our rest; that amongst the Living,
Blessedness cannot be found; but as we are taught in the Text, it is the
Portion of the Dead, Blessed are the Dead. And were this true of all that are
so, it were a comfortable doctrine indeed, and Death would deserve some mild
and gentle name, instead of that frightfull character, The King of Terrors. But
it is not every one that dies, but only those that die in the Lord, that are
made Partakers of this happiness. Which brings me to the other part of their
character, Who are Blessed and Happy men.

Secondly, They are those Which die in the Lord. Blessed are the dead which die
in the Lord. In speaking to this I shall show, First, Who they are that die in
the Lord; and, Secondly, That these only are Blessed.

First, Who they are which die in the Lord. Some, instead of in the Lord, read
for the Lord, taking the Blessedness of the Text to be pronounced of those
that, in the times of persecution, lost their Lives for the sake of their Lord
and Master Jesus Christ. But I rather think the words are to be taken in a
larger sense, as signifying those which St. Paul calls, The dead in Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. all those that die in the Fear of God and in the Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Those that are faithful unto death, and keep the works of God
unto the end, or as they are described in the Verse before the Text, They that
keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. They that do this; and,
notwithstanding all the opposition they meet with, persevere in doing thus unto
the end; These, and which is the next thing I am to show,

Secondly, These only being Dead are Blessed. The wicked is driven away in his
wickedness, says Solomon, but the righteous has hope in his death. Prove.
14.32. When a wicked man dies, his expectation shall perish, and the hope of
unjust men perishes. Whilst they live they may, and often do, flatter
themselves with hopes of Happiness hereafter; but Death makes a lamentable
discovery of the vanity and deceit of all such presumptuous expectations. The
Son of God himself has told us, that, If we will enter into life, we must keep
the commandments, Matt. 19.17. that the Blessed are those that do his
commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in
through the gates into the city, Rev. 22.14. The promises of eternal life,
glory, honor and immortality belong only to them who by patient continuance in
well doing are made meet to be partakers of them. But to those that obey not
the truth, but obey unrighteousness, God will render, says S. Paul,
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does
evil, Romans 2.7, 8, 9.

Indeed, if we do but seriously consider the refined and spiritual nature of
true Happiness, we should certainly think it a most absurd thing to imagine,
that those who die in their wickedness should be made Partakers of it. Can you
think that God will do himself that which he has forbidden us? that he will
cast pearls before swine, or that he will throw his childrens meat unto dogs?
that he will prostitute the divine and spiritual Blessings of the world to
come, to those that have drowned their souls in the brutish pleasures of flesh
and sense? But if we could suppose that God, who is of purer eyes than to
behold evil, that cannot look upon iniquity, should be willing to receive the
obstinate workers of it to dwell for ever in his presence; yet even there they
would not be happy. For there are many Sins which in their own nature include
trouble, as envy, wrath, malice, covetousness, excess, with many others. But
they are all contrary to the pure and holy nature of God, to his Image, which
is the Glory and Happiness of the Saints in Heaven, and wheresoever they are,
they are always attended with a darkness of the Understanding, a perverseness
of the Will, a disorder and depravation of the Soul. And is it possible a man
should be happy, and at the same time encumbered with these, the worst of evils,
such as corrupt and distemper the Soul, the better part of Man, and are most
opposite to the greatest good, to God the only enjoyment that can make us
happy? If then as the Tree falls, so it lies: If we must go into the other
World in the same state we leave this, and those that die unjust and filthy,
must be unjust and filthy still; it is impossible that they should be happy,
who, instead of being faithful and obedient, continue wicked unto death,
unless we can reconcile torment and bliss, sin and holiness, the image of the
Devil and the image of God. But on the other side, Lift up your heads, O ye
Righteous, and be not dismayed at the thoughts of Death: For as that
approaches, so your redemption draws nigh. In your Father's house there are
many mansions, and the Blessed Jesus is gone before to prepare a place for you,
and yet a little while, and he will come again, and receive you unto himself,
that where he is, there ye may be also. In the mean time he has not left you
comfortless, for he has given the Holy Spirit to revive the humble and
contrite soul, to give invincible testimony to the truth of all his promises,
particularly to that of Blessedness to them that die in the Lord: Which brings
me to the next thing observed in the Text, which is,

Secondly, The certainty of their Blessedness who die in the Lord from the
testimony of the Spirit; Yea, says the Spirit. Wicked men may think it in vain
to serve God, and count the life of the righteous madness; but it were happy
for them, if they might die the death of the righteous, and have their latter
end like theirs. For when a Good man dies, then all his labor and sorrow is at
an end; and he enters upon a state of happiness that has no period. And his
hopes of these things are not like the flattering fancies of ungodly men, which
have no foundation but their own folly: But they are founded upon a rock, upon
the steady and immutable Word of God, which, though heaven and earth shall pass
away, can never be moved, shall never fail. Blessed are the Dead that die in
the Lord: Yea, says the Spirit, the Spirit of God Almighty, who therefore can;
the Spirit of truth, who therefore cannot but do what he has promised. And
their Blessedness is as great as it is certain, for they shall rest from all
their labors, and their works shall follow them in a glorious reward. Which is
the next thing observed in the Text; viz.

Thirdly, The nature of their happiness who die in the Lord; it is a Rest, That
they may Rest from their labors; and a Reward, Their works do follow them.

First, It is a Rest, a Rest from all their labors; that is, from every thing
that brings with it either pain, or trouble, or sorrow.

First, They Rest from all the necessary labors of this life. The good things
of this world are gotten and preserved with care and industry, and men eat
bread in the sweat of their brows. God has therefore allotted us six days in
seven for our labors of this kind. But those that die in the Lord do
immediately enter upon a perpetual Sabbath. The labors of Seed-time and
Harvest, of Trade and Study cease for ever: and they have a constant supply of
all good, without any uneasy thought, or care, or pains taken for it.

Secondly, They Rest from all their labors under the rage and malice, the
injustice and persecution of their enemies. They that will live godly in Christ
Jesus must look to suffer, under the hands or tongues of an ungodly World. And
indeed oftentimes, such are the hard speeches and the cruel usage they meet
with from it, that if they had hope only in this life, they would of all men be
the most miserable: But when once Death has removed them hence, they are
presently advanced above the reach of all their enemies, covered with the wings
of the Almighty, and received into the everlasting protection of the Lord God
of hosts.

Thirdly, They rest from all their labors under the correcting hand of their
Father which is in heaven. Whilst they are in the body, they are too prone to
fall into sin, and to fulfill the desires of the flesh. And therefore God, in
love and mercy, does take the rod into his hand, chasten and correct them here,
that they might not be condemned with the world or delivered into the bitter
pains of eternal death. But no sooner has Death pulled down these earthly
tabernacles, but thenceforth, they neither feel nor need any more correction:
Then they are perfectly rescued from all pains and diseases, from all crosses
and afflictions whatsoever. There is no need of patience which was so necessary
in our state of trial here. For there is nothing troublesome or uneasy in that
Rest which remains for the people of God.

Fourthly, They Rest from all their labors and trouble, under the difficulty
of their duty, and the assaults of their spiritual enemies. Whilst they are
here, they are always in a Military state, continually combating with the
Devil, the World and the Flesh. The Devil seeks, with unwearied diligence, to
turn them out of the ways of God, or to render their progress therein painful
and unpleasant. The Flesh is ready upon all occasions to mutiny and rebel;
insomuch that they are forced to keep a diligent watch over it, or it would
soon betray them to the rage and malice of their enemy without. They meet with
many and violent temptations from a corrupt and naughty world, and much
opposition in running the race that is set before them, and are constrained to
use a great deal of care and study, labor and industry, to bring into
captivity their thoughts, words, and actions unto the obedience of Christ. This
is the condition of all the faithful disciples of Christ, so long as they
abide here. But no sooner are their Spirits returned to God that gave them, but
all their striving and fighting is at an end. Their warfare is accomplished,
and they are more then conquerors. Henceforth there will be no Devil to tempt
them, no law in their members warring against the law of their minds.
Mortification, contrition, selfdenial, taking up the cross, and all the uneasy
part of their duty here, will have no place. They will then be obliged to
nothing but what is highly acceptable to the whole man, nothing but what is
necessary to complete their happiness. Thus, Blessed are the dead which die in
the Lord: Thus, and abundantly more too, They not only Rest from their labors,
but their works do follow them; which is the Second part of the description of
their happiness.

Secondly, Their works do follow them; that is, they shall not be forgotten
when they are dead, but eternally crowned with a glorious reward. When all
their earthly enjoyments forsake them, then their works of righteousness will
remain with them, and plead their title through the merits of Christ, to that
kingdom prepared for them from the foundation of the world. Be ye steadfast, 1
Cor. 15.58
and unmovable, says St. Paul to the Corinthians, always abounding in the
work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the
Lord. In vain? No, it shall be abundantly recompensed with a great and
inestimable reward. A reward that becomes the Sovereign Lord of heaven and
earth to bestow, and was purchased for us with the precious blood of his
only-begotten Son: A reward that will make us like the Best of beings, and put
us in possession of the Supreme good: A reward that contains in it, Treasures
that are inestimable and incorruptible, a Crown that never fades, an eternal
weight of Glory; Joys that are unspeakable, and Pleasures at God's right hand
for ever-more: A reward of infinitely greater value, than all that wealth and
treasures, crowns and kingdoms, victories and triumphs, and a thousand more
such words can signify. In short, It is a reward above all our expressions,
above all our hopes, and above all our imaginations. O the height and depth of
the love of God! How unsearchable are his mercies, and the extent of his
goodness past finding out? Shall such contemptible worms be thus advanced by
him? Shall such provoking sinful creatures, be made partakers of the joy and
glory, the nature and happiness of their great Creator? Lord! what is man that
thou art thus mindful of him? that thou should thus reward our weak and
imperfect services? The best of us, when we have done our best, are but
unprofitable servants. Not unto us therefore, not unto us, but unto God, our
good and gracious God, be all the praise and glory of that reward, the
Blessedness of them that die in the Lord.

I proceed now to make some seasonable application of the several parts of my
Text, which I have spoken to. Since there is no happiness amongst the Living,
but only, The Dead are Blessed.

First, Let us reflect a little upon our selves, and consider whether we live
as becomes those, that do in earnest believe these things. Is there something
here below that has the strongest of your affections, and the most vigorous of
all your endeavors? Is your care greater, and your concern more lively for the
things of this life, than for the Blessedness of those that are Dead in Christ?
Are Riches, or Honor, or Pleasure the most frequent and delightful matter of
your desires and thoughts? If these things are so, you have certainly made a
weak, a miserable choice. You have taken up your rest here, and espoused that
for your best beloved, and most desired happiness, which has nothing to do,
which has no being in the state of true Felicity. If there be any here that
find themselves guilty of this extreme and dangerous folly, let me exhort you,

Secondly, To make a better and a wiser choice. Seeing there is no happiness
but amongst the Dead, see that ye live like men that are thus persuaded. Tear
the world out of your hearts, and moderate your labor for the meat that
perishes. Let your hearts be more in heaven, and your desires and endeavors
most earnest for the Blessedness of such as die in the Lord. If this be not our
Rest, let us labor for that Rest which remains. Let us live as becomes those
that profess themselves, but strangers and pilgrims upon earth, to be seeking
after, and traveling toward another, a better, an heavenly Country. Alas!
What is there in this world, that is worthy to be compared, with that glory
which shall be revealed and enjoyed in the other? Do but look before you, and
there ye may see what, a few years hence, will be the condition of us all. And
when that day is come, how little will all the pleasures, riches, and
preferments of the world profit us? In what then does the Greatest Monarch
excel the Poorest Beggar, but in a little Funeral Pomp, he is nothing sensible
of, a greater crowd of Witnesses, and a more lasting Monument of his return to
Dust? Why then should we dote upon, and place our happiness in, such mean and
perishing enjoyments? Let us live above the world whilst we are in it, and
contemn the petty and ignoble designs of the Children of it, who expect a
portion in this life only. Let us lay our designs for Heaven and Eternity, for
that perfect Rest, and that inestimable Reward which is above, that so when the
time of our dissolution is come, it may be said of us; They are Dead, and They
are Blessed.

Thirdly, Seeing those only that die in the Lord are blessed, let none of us
flatter our selves with hopes of happiness, 'till we are prepared to die thus.
There are few Persons we meet and discourse with, but will profess some hopes
of being happy hereafter; and I would to God we had all ground for the most
comfortable and confident expectations of this kind. But if there be any
amongst you, that live after the flesh, and fulfill the lusts of it, that allow
your selves in the practice of any known deliberate sin; Ye are not prepared to
die the death of the righteous or to have your latter end like theirs. I say no
more than what St. Paul tells us he had often declared, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. The
works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, lasciviousness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, Envyings, murders, drunkenness,
revellings, and suchlike: of which I tell you before, as I have also told you
in times past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of
God.

Fourthly, The consideration of the Blessedness of those that die in the Lord,
their Rest and their Reward, should moderate our grief, for the loss of those
Friends, of whom we have good reason to believe that they thus die. Such was
this our Deceased Brother. He was one that discovered an early disposition to
piety and religion, and remembered his Creator in the days of his youth. He very
much delighted in reading of the Best Books, in a modest discoursing and
recommending of them, whereby he greatly improved himself and encouraged
others. He abhorred the common Vices of the Profane Sparks of this age, and
could not be persuaded, that the chief accomplishments of Men were to be learnt
from Beasts or Devils. He was not in another extreme, morose or sow'r, but
exceeding affable and courteous, winning and obliging, cheerful and pleasant
in his conversation, as, in obedience to, and for the credit of his Religion, a
good man should be. I believe he hardly ever provoked any man, or under-went
the censure of having done an evil or disobliging thing. He was beloved and
well spoken of by all that knew him; He was a sincere and hearty Friend, a
zealous promoter of peace and unity amongst all his acquaintance, an ingenious
Advocate for any that were censured or accused, of such a meek and quiet spirit
as is of great price, in the sight both of God and of Man. In a word,
Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things
are of good report, his life was richly furnished and adorned with. It pleased
God, toward the latter end of his life, to afflict him with very grievous
pains; which gave him an opportunity of manifesting, a most exemplary patience
and submission to the will of God, and his improvement in the virtues of an
afflicted state also. I have not said these things to inform you, who were most
of you acquainted with them before, from your own experience and observation;
but rather to bring them to our remembrance, for the provoking our imitation,
abating our sorrow, and encouraging our hopes of his happy state. The manner of
his death was very becoming such a life, so quiet and composed, so easy and
comfortable, that I believe all of us, who were present at it, could not but
wish, that we might so die as he died, and that our latter end might be like
his. He is Dead, and we may confidently hope he is Blessed too: that, to use
his own words, when he saw the time of his departure was at hand, his soul has
taken wings, is fled away, and is at rest.

Lastly, Let the consideration of the Blessedness of those which die in the
Lord, encourage, and effectually persuade us all to keep the Commandments of
God, and the Faith of Jesus; to make it the great concern and business of our
lives, to behave our selves so, that at length we may be Blessed with all those
that die in the Lord. Let the time past of our lives suffice to have done the
will of the Flesh; and let us resolve for the time to come, to deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world. Can any thing better deserve your care and labor, than that everlasting
Reward and Rest which God has prepared for them that live and die in him? Do
the Commandments of God seem grievous to you? But can you think them so, whilst
you have respect unto the recompense of the reward? Will not Heaven make a
sufficient amends for all? Will not the Blessedness of the Dead abundantly
outweigh all the difficulties of a holy Life? Are you afraid the World should
deride and persecute you, if you should be true to God and your Conscience, and
lead a Virtuous and a Christian life? But why should this discourage you? There
is a day coming, and it is not far off, when, if you do but endure and
persevere 'till then, you shall be exalted above the malice of ungodly men, who
shall admire your wisdom, and envy your happiness for ever. Are you loath to
forego those sinful delights, you must needs forsake, if you would prepare
your selves to die in the Lord? But is there any comparison, betwixt these
pleasures of sin, which are but for a season, and those pure, divine and
everlasting joys that are above? Let us then contemn the frowns, and trample
upon the most enticing allurements, of the Devil and the World, and resolve to
be steadfast and unmovable, diligent and abounding, in the work of the Lord.
God does now call upon you, by the motives and arguments of the Text, and by
this instance of Mortality before you, that you would no longer delay the time,
but make have to keep his commandments. To day then, even whilst it is called
to day, let us hear and obey the voice of God; let us not dare to harden our
hearts this one day more, for who knows what a day may bring forth? If you will
not know in this your day the things that belong unto your peace, your
everlasting peace and happiness, for ought you know, they may henceforth be hid
from your eyes for ever. Oh! that we were wise, that we did consider our latter
end! and so number our days, as effectually to apply our hearts unto that holy
and heavenly Wisdom whilst we live here, which may in the end bring us to
everlasting life, to the Blessed Rest and the Glorious Reward of those that
live and die in the Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
NEwly printed, the Holy Bible: Containing the Old Testament and the New; with
Annotations, and Parallel Scriptures. To which is annexed, The Harmony of the
Gospels: As also, The Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures, to
our English Standards; And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel
Clark, Minister of the Gospel. Printed in Folio of a fair Letter; the like
never before in one Volume.

Printed for Brabazon Aylmer in Cornhill.

The Four Last Things; viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell; Practically
considered and applied in several Discourses. By William Bates, D. D.

Recommended as proper to be given at Funerals.


