THE OFFICE OF THE Good House-wife, With Necessary Directions for the Ordering
of her Family and Dairy; and the keeping of all such Cattle, as to her
particular Charge the oversight belongs. ALSO, The manner of Keeping and
Governing of SILK-WORMES, and HONEY-BEES; both very delightsome and Profitable.

By F. B.

LONDON, Printed by T. Ratcliffe, and N. Thompson for Richard Mills at the
Pestle and (...) without Temple Bar, Anno Dom. 1672.

TO THE READER.
AMongst all the Sciences which man can attain to, either by contemplation or
practice, there is none which more raises up his Spirits, ravisheth his
Senses, causes greater admiration of the works of God and Nature* brings
greater contentment or recreation to the wearyed Spirits, or which can be more
profitable for the life of man, than Husbandry; whereby we see the
incomprehensible power and greatness of God, who of a small ^orn, Pippin, Nut,
tender Twig, and small Plant, causes to grow up Trees, Herbs, and infinite
store of Fruits; therein we acknowledge the bright shining beams of the
goodness and bountifulness of the great Lord and Creator toward his Creatures,
naturally and evidently to appear and shine; because, that of the things
growing out of the Earth, he nourishes, sustaineth and maintains our humane
life; therein also we conceive marvailous exceeding pleasure to see the Trees
and Herbs at certain times to spring out of the bosom and womb of their tender
and natural Nurse. To be brief, we learn there what manner of life we ought to
live, as not to be idle, but to incraase that which is ours; to contemn
daintiness, pleasures, ambition, and such other vanities; and let us imitate
the lives of our Forefathers; as of Abraham, who delighted in the life of a
Shepherd; Saul, in keeping of Asses; David, in keeping of Sheep; and both of
them called from the Fold, to the bearing of the Royal Scepter: Elisaeus also,
and Amos, of poor Shepherds, were made Prophets, and faithful Interpreters of
the word of God* To be brief, the most worthy amongst our Forefathers, even
such as are renowned in Holy Scripture for their virtue and excellency, were
first of all Laborers; and afterward by God taken from the Plow, the Cart*
and Feeding of Cattle, to be employed in a more excellent Calling: This Country
life being not only more holy, innocent, and just, but also more pleasing and
acceptable unto God, and that which receives more blessing than any other from
him. But let us pass over the Sacred Histories, and give me leave (following
the Proverb, which says, We must learn the manners of our Predecessors, and
practice according to the present age) to lay out unto you the ways how a good
House-wife (as to those particular things belonging to her Charge) shall Order
and Govern a Farm, as that it may keep and maintain with the Profit and
Increase thereof, her Husband, and all his Family, which shall be hereafter
declared in this Tract of The Office of the good House-wife; who must not
forget, that Woman was made for a helper, and that God does call her to her
task, which does not consist of a few or base things, but of many and the
principal matters; Yea, and the Cure and Charge of the Families health. But
leaving to speak any more of her charge in particular; I could wish her to be
wise, according to Sobriety and Gravity; Sobriety, in not meddling above her
place or reach in matters of Physic; and Gravity, in not having to do in the
matter of Peaks and Paints, either for using or preparing them; for they argue,
if not plainly prove, a light, a loose, and very sinful life. And thus good
Women, having commended unto you, such advice as is both delightful and
Profitable, (I leave you,) hoping you will practice it accordingly.

F. B.
THE OFFICE Of the Good Housewife.
ADam our first Father was placed in a Champion ground (after he was Created,
and fashioned of the Earth, of the field of Damascus) to serve his Creator; and
to the end, that all his actions might redound to the glory of his Sovereign
Lord, not to toil in it with pain, and grief, which shortly after were laid
upon him, and his posterity. This is the reason why the old Writers have called
the Husband-mans Trade, the life of Liberty, and Innocence; for in truth, of
all Arts, which respect either the profit, or health of man, Husbandry is the
chief; for besides the nourishment it affords, it also has a kind of
continual Trade, with the Earth; the common Nurse of all men, strengthening and
maintaining the powers of our bodies, and causing us to live more healthfully,
and a longer time, and increasing abundantly our Posterities; as may be
instanced in the story of Noah (writ by Diodorus Siculus) who with his Family
coming out of the Ark upon the top of the Mount Cordicus, descended into the
plain at the foot of the Mountain, in which, Noah erected a Pillar; and upon
this occasion, ever after it was called, The place of Noah's coming forth of
the Ark, and was inhabited by him and his Family; repeopling the World in such
fruitful manner, as that Ninus in Noah's life time, was able, and did leavy an
Army of Seventeen hundred thousand footmen, Two hundred thousand horsemen;
besides Ten thousand and six hundred Charriots, or thereabouts. Much to the
same purpose Berosus writes, That in the space of 100 years, these Husbandmen
did increase so abundantly. That Noah One hundred years after the Flood (even
when Phaleck was born) was constrained to send Sem into Asia, Cham into Egypt,
and Africa, and Japhet (whom men call Atlas Maurus, because he dyed in
Mauritania) into Europe, all of them to perform the duty of husbanding the
Earth, their natural Nurse, and to sustain those their great multitudes of
people, which Scithia could no longer contain; Moreover, the plentifulness and
number of such as have led the husband-mans life, and exercised Husbandry, has
been always greater, and their works more excellent than any others whatsoever.
Cicero tells us, that there is no life, or manner of living more free, and more
worthy a virtuous man, than the Husband-mans life; and howsoever it be, that
every man in all things enquireth after his own commodity, and frames himself
to come as near to perfection and excellency as possibly he can; Yet the
well-instructed and modest householder contenteth himself with that, whatsoever
it be, that comes of the hand and grace of God, and accounts for great
bountifulness and liberality such portion as falls unto him. So then we are
to hold our selves content with such estate and condition, as the place shall
afford where we must dwell and settle our habitation; and if it be not such as
some curious man in his desire, or one that is hard to please, might require
and look for, then we should strain our selves to mend it by our industry, and
the means set down by many famous writers on this subject. And now having roved
thus far; I come to the owner of the Farm, who I wish and desire may be a man
of great knowledge, well acquainted, and given to matters of Husbandry; for
whosoever is ignorant of them, having had but small practice therein; as also he
which does take his chiefest delight in other things, and spends his time
otherwise, must of necessity commit himself to the mercy and discretion of a
Farmer, which will mock him to his face, and will impair his Grounds and House
also, heaping thereto a world of quarrels and suits, which he will raise; or
else he must trust to some other accomplisher of the business, either in
governing, or waiting and attending, and he asking council of other the Farmers
there-abouts; they will make him believe things not to be so good by half as
they are; and indeed we read for certain in the Roman Histories, that the Earth
was never so fruitful, as when it was allured and won by the industry of the
famous Roman Citizens, and delivered out of the tyranous handling of
gross-headed Peasants, whom we see before our eyes, (notwithstanding that they
are altogether ignorant) to grow rich at our costs and charges, and to the
great spoil of the Ground which they husband and till; there is nothing
comparable to the over-looking eye of a prudent and discreet Owner, and one
that is accustomed to Husbandry, who looks after, and contenteth himself with
such estate as may stand with his profit, let him learn well to know and
understand the natures and choice of men, cattle and grounds, and let not that
work happen, which he himself knows not how to do if he should stand in need,
or else to give directions in, and command unto others; at least let him
understand the times and seasons when, as also the manner how things were
accustomed to be done; For the owner of a Farm that understands not, shall
never know well what to command, and does nothing but trouble and vex the
workmen; and it is the manner of men to mock at such as command and will such
things to be done, as are nothing to the purpose, but must afterward be undone
again, or else abide without any profit. Let the Owner of the Farm make his
abode upon his own Inheritance; let him have a back Gate, that he may withdraw
himself from home, and secretly return again when he pleases, and this will
keep his People continually in doing of their offices and charge; let him not
go to see the town unless it be upon his earnest affairs; and let him commit
his Suits to be followed [which without great loss he cannot let pass] by some
faithful Attorney, to whom he shall entrust nothing but the only counterpain
of his evidence; and being in the Town, let him not go to see any man therein,
except it be in Winter, or at such time as his Harvest is in, and his Seed-time
dispatched; to the end that by one and the same means he may attend upon his
Causes in controversy, and go about the getting in of his Debts. I wish
further, that he carry himself pleasant and courteous to his folk, not
commanding them any thing in his choler; for boisterous and rough language
will prevail as little with men, as with stiff-necked Jades: let him speak
familiarly unto them, let him laugh and jest with them sometimes; and also
either give them occasion, or else suffer them to laugh and be merry; for their
uncessant pains are something mitigated, when they are vouchsafed some gentle
and courteous intreatance of their Master toward them; Notwitstanding I wish
him not to be too familiar with them, for the avoiding of contempt; neither
would I have him to acquaint them with his purposes, except it be sometime to
ask their council in a matter; and let him not spare sometimes to seem to do
after their advice, though he had determined the same course before; For they
will work with more cheerfulness, when they think that the matter is carried
according to their invention: Let him patiently and quietly bear the tedious
and troublesome natures of his neighbors, whom he knows to envy and repine at
him, never giving them any just occasion of displeasure, but to pleasure them
to the ut most that he can, and seem to be at one with them as if he never had
understood any thing to move him to the contrary, and thus he may purchase
peace and rest.

Let him make choice of a Farmer or Bailiff of indifferent years, such a one as
has the report of an honest man, and his Wife to be a thrifty Housewife, and
his Children well nurtured; such a one as has no Earth near unto your House,
who is well experienced in matters and businesses belonging to Husbandry; one
that will use to rise first, and go to bed last, which will make no bargain
when he is in drink; as also that he know how to govern, and amend all such
Tools as he has the handling of, or which his folk use; otherwise, if there
should but need a Handle to a Spade, or Nail to a Horse or Tumbrel, there must
presently be admitted into wages a Nail-Smith for the Cart, and a Shooe-Smith
for the Horse: Let this Farmer or Bailiff, have always his eyes upon his
People, and oversee his Cattle every night; and not only when they are in the
house, but also when they return from labor, or from Pasture; let him view and
look well upon their countenance, gate, state, and gesture; for to know if
there be any diseased or languishing: and from this care he is not to exempt
himself any one day, in respect of the Oxen, Kine, Swine, and Sheep; for
oftentimes in the Morning they go to their Pasture in good state and plight,
and return sick home at Evening; Let him not go to bed before he have appointed
every one of his people what he is to do the next day in the Morning; Above all
things let him be just and true to his trust; Let him not Swear, but show such
example to his people, as thereby he may induce them to esteem highly of him,
to reverence and to honor him; Let him pay them their own justly, and not to
pay them any thing before hand, if it be not in case of loss or fickness; Let
your Farmer or Bailiff have all necessaries as he shall request of you, whether
it be for the maintenance of your house, or the repairing of any other things
that do belong unto you* watch him not so near, as that he may have cause to
complain; for he may wrong you in some one thing or other that you would never
think of; and mark, That to be too much exacting upon the Farmer, does
oftentimes make him either a mere negligent, or a plain Thief.

Now to the end that his people may not live idle, and that they may not loose
one small Minute of time, he shall dispose of his work so, as that they may
every one have his certain time, and he shall know at his fingers ends what
thing is to be done every month and time of the year.

In the Month of January, chiefly toward the end, he shall cut down his VVood
and timber, which he appoints for building or other work, when the Moon is
decreased; for the brightness of the Moon makes the VVood more tender; and the
VVood which shall be cut at such time, will endure a long time without rotting:
He shall Dung the Fruit Trees, not letting the Dung touch the Roots: He shall
cut his Vines in fair weather: He shall cut and take away the superfluous
Boughs of Fruit Trees, the Moon decreasing, He shall furnish afresh or make new
his Carts, Tombrels, Ploughs, and other his Instruments necessary for Husbandry.

In February in the new of the Moon, he shall transplant Vines of two or three
years old, he shall make ready his Garden grounds to sow and set therein all
manner of Herbs, he shall repair the Hedges of his Gardens; he shall cleanse
the Dove-house, Hen-house, and other places where the Geese make their haunt;
because that these Fowls in the end of this Month begin to be hot, and to
tread; He shall make clean the Bee-Hives, and kill their Kings; he shall give
the Earth her second Earing* for the sowing of Beans, Pease, Barley, Oats,
Hemp, etc. he shall prune and cleanse the Trees of whatsoever is superflous.

In March in the beginning of it he shall sow Line, Woad, Oats, Barley, Pease,
Fitches, and other such like kind of pulse; He shall sow his Nurseries with
Kernels of Apples; He shall plant such Herbs as are set low and close by the
ground, as Sage, Lavander, Rosemary, Strawberries, Gooseberry-bushes, Roses,
etc. He he shall trim up his Gardens, as well for the Kitchen as for pleasure,
and shall sow therein whatsoever necessary Seeds.

In April about St. George's day, you shall set abroad your Citron and
Orange Trees, Mirtle-Trees; as also all such other Trees as you had kept within
the house all Winter, from which he shall remove Earth from foot to foot,
taking from them such Roots as are put forth toward the upermost parts of the
Earth, as also all superfluous Boughs, not suffering any one ^ranch to exceed
another, either in breadth or height; He shall cut the new Vine: for at this
time it endures best to be cut, he shall be careful to to feed his Pigeons;
because at this time and the next month they find but little in the Fields; he
shall sow Barley till the end of the Month, and till the 8th. or 10th. of May.

In May he shall water the Trees that are newly planted, he shall shear his
Sheep, fill up his Wines and Cyders, gather store of Butter, and make Cheese,
Geld his Calves, and begin to look to his Bees and Silkworms; he shall weed
his Corn, he shall uncover and free the Roots of his Vines from the Earth about
them, to the end that the heat may not hurt them; He shall take away all the
tender branches and green Boughs, which bear no fruit.

In June he shall make ready his Threshing flore, and cause it to be thoroughly
cleansed of Straw, Dirt and Dust, he shall cut down his Meadows, make and In
his Hay, and crop his Vines.

In July he shall cut down his Wheat, Rye, Barley, and all other Grains that
are ripe and ready to cut; he shall gather from Apple Trees and Pear Trees the
faulty Apples and Pears, and such as do overcharge the Trees, he shall pull his
Line and Hemp, and graft in the bud.

In August he shall gather such Fruits as he means to preserve; he shall take
away the Leaves from about such Grapes as are slow and backward, to the end
they may receive the more heat from the Sun; he shall prepare his Vessels for
Wine and Cider, and other things necessary therefore.

In September he shall give his Fallows the last Earth; he shall sow his
Wheat, Mashline; Rye, and such like like Corn; cut down late Meadow-grounds, to
have the after-crop; He shall gather Stubble for Fuel, and for the Oven all the
Year; He shall gather the leaves of Wood, grind them and make them into Balls,
and so dry them in the Sun.

In October he shall make his Wines and Cyders, and tun them into Vessels, make
Honey and Wax, and drive the old Bees; he shall bestow his Orange, Citron,
Mirtle-Trees and others in some covered place, to avoid the danger of the
vehement Cold.

In November he shall Couch his Wines and Cyders in his Cellar; He shall gather
Acrons to feed Swine; He shall gather such Garden-Fruit as will keep; he shall
lay bare the Roots of Artichocks, and cover them again very well, that the
Frost may not perish them.

In December he shall oftentimes visit his Field, and let out the water, which
may stand in them after great Rain; He shall cause water to run through the old
Meadows, and dung them if need be; He shall make provision of Dung, to mannure
he Fallows that are broke up and Til'd; he shall cover with Dung the Roots of
Trees and Herbs, which he intends to keep until the Spring, he shall Lop
Willows, Poplars, Saplin and other Trees, to the end that their Boughs may more
speedily put forth and grow so soon as Winter shall be past; he shall cut down
his VVood, as well for Building as for fire; he shall also busy himself in
making many Instruments and necessary things of wood requisite for household
store, and for repairing his Teams, Yokes, Ploughs, and all other Instruments
for the fitting and garnishing of Cattle, going to Cart or Plough, to the end
that all may be in good order, when they are to go to labor; he shall also
make provision of Spades, Shovels, Pick-axes, Hatchets, Saws, and other
Furniture, fit for a Countrey-House-store.

The condition and state of the House-Wife or Dairy-woman, is of no less care
and diligence then the Office of her Husband; understood always that the Woman
is acquitted of Field-matters, in as much as she is tied to matters within the
house, as the Husband is tied to what concerns him, even all the business of
the Field; and according to our Custom of England, Country women look unto the
things necessary and requisite about Kine, Calves, Hogs, Pigs, Pigeons, Geese,
Ducks, Peacocks, Hens, Feasants, and other sorts of Beasts and Fowls, as well
for the feeding of them, as for the milking and making of Butter and Cheese,
and keeping of all things neat and clean about the house, getting and providing
the laboring men their Victuals in due season; and furthermore they have the
charge of the Oven and Cellar, and the handling and ordering of Hemp and Flax,
etc. as also the care of looking to the clipping of Sheep, of keeping their
Fleeces, of Spining and Combing of Wool to make Cloth for the Family; of
ordering the Kitchen Garden, and keeping of Fruits, Herbs, Roots, and Seeds;
and moreover of watching and attending the Bees; she must be obedient unto God,
and to her Husband, given to store, and lay up and keep things sure under Lock
and Key, painful, peaceable, not loving to stir from home, not contentious,
full of words and tatling, nor drowzy headed; let her dispose of all things
under her charge in such sort, as that every thing may have his certain place,
to the end that when they be to be used, they may easily be found and
delivered; let her always have her eye upon her Maids, and be first at work,
and last from it.

Of Kine.
ANd for the better keeping of Kine, let the House-Wife cause her Maids to
overlook oftentimes, and see that all things be well in the Cow-house; for
there is nothing that does them so much good, and keep them so well in health
and good liking, (their Meat and Fodder excepted) as the clean and neat keeping
of their Houses; let them be rubbed along the back, about the neck and head, and
no more, with a wisp of straw hard writhen together, at their coming from
Pasture, and in the Morning after they have been dressed, let the holes that
are in their house-flore be carefully filled up, wherein their Piss might stand
and stink, and cast Sand or Gravel upon the flore, that they may have the
faster or surer setting for their feet; let them not be put to the Bull before
they be upon their third year, nor any longer then until their twelfth year;
for if they be put too soon then they be grown up to their full strength and
growth, they will bring forth Calves half cast, small and little, weak and
feeble, and if you continue their breeding after twelve years their Calves will
not be so strong, nor of so comely a shape; she shall make much account of the
Cow, which is of a mean stature, a long body, a large flank, four or five years
old, of a black or brown Color, or spotted with White, and either of these, a
great belly, broad betwixt the brows, a black eye, and long horns, not turning
in one twards another, but of a wide and well spread shape, her Ears very
hairy, a narrow Jaw, a thick and gross Muzle, wide Nostrils and snivley, little
and black Lips, her Hair glistering and thick set, her Legs short, her Thighs
gross and thick, and her Neck long and gross, her Back large and broad, her
Tail long even to the heel, her Hoofs short and even, a broad Breast, a great
and gross Brisket, and her Dugs great and long.

The Good House-wife must be careful, as well for the feeding of her people, as
for the gaining of the Penny, diligently to set on work her Daughters and
Maidservants, about the ordering of the Milk, and making of Butter and Cheese.
After the Milk is Milk'd it shall be set in a place where it may be cool, to
the end it may keep the longer, and become the thicker in short time; in as
much as Cold does thicken the Milk, as Heat does sour it, ^^ make it to turn,
she shall not let her Milk be kept long, as above a day in Summer, especially
in Autumn and the Spring; but as soon as she can she shall gather her Cream,
Green-Cheese, Pressed-Cheese, Whey, and other Commodities, which a good
House-Wife is wont to raise according to the time; yet in Winter the Kine
yielding but small store of Milk, as then being with Calf, she may gather three
or four Meals together, which will not so soon be spoiled, by reason of the
coldness of the Weather, which makes the Milk to thicken presently; and seeing
Cheese made in Winter, is not of so great price, nor so good and dainty, as in
Spring, Summer and Autumn, by reason of the Grass; therefore it shall be no
great matter to gather the Butter the clearer from the Cheese in Winter then at
any other time. To speak any thing here of the making, keeping and ordering of
Butter and Cheese, would be impertinent; for I presume there is no
Countrey-House-Wife but is well acquainted therewith, and for those that live
in Cities and great Towns, it matters not whether they are skilled therein or
not.

Let the Good House-wife take care that the Kine be provided with a Bull, and
that chiefly in the months of May, June, and July; For about this time they
are set to go a Bulling, seeking for the Bull themselves, without being lead
unto him; and you shall know their inclination to the taking of the Bull by the
puffing and swelling of their Hoofs, as also by their continual Lowing, and by
their leaping upon the Bulls back. The profit which rises by their taking the
Bull at this time is; for that they will Calve about 10 Months after, (which is
the just time of their Going with Calf) and that being at such time as new
Grass does draw on, it will be an occasion of increasing their Milk, and their
Calves shall be a great deal the better fed.

The Cow that is indifferent lean, will hold her Bulling better then the fat
Cow; but on the contrary, a good Bull for breed must be fat, well set together,
and well meated for Two Months space before.

And for the choice of a good Bull, let him be rather long then high, of a
black or brown hair, large betwixt the Shoulders, strong Legged, round and well
trust Body, broad Breasted, short Headed, broad Brows, a fierce Countenance,
and terrible to fight, black Eyes, short Horns, and a long Tail full of hair.

During the time of the Cows going with Calfe, keep them from leaping of
Ditches, Hedges or Bushes, and a little before the time that they do Calve, to
feed them in the house, or Yard adjoining to the house, and that with good Hay
or Turnips, or such other Provender as the Country shall afford, not milking
them at all for a good space before their Calving; for the Milk that they have
then cannot but be naught, and become as hard as a Stone.

As for Calves newly fallen, you must leave them with good Litter of fresh
Straw until such time as the Cows have licked and cleansed them, and for two or
three days after let the Cow be with the Calf, which does heat and settle the
Calf; after that you shall put it into some shed, providing it good Litter, and
renewing the same once a day, and thence you shall bring them forth when you
would have them suck; and if you see that they will not suck, or that being
willing to suck, they can do nothing but offer to take the Paps, without
sucking any thing, you shall look under the Tongue if they have not the Barbs,
which is a whitish fleshiness growing under the Tongue, almost after the manner
of the Pip, which (if it be so) you shall take away gently, (without flaying
the Tongue) with a little pair of sharp Pincers, washing the place afterward,
either with red Wine of it self, or with the Infusion of Garlic and Salt
stamped therewith: For this disease will cause them to languish, unto death, by
keeping them from sucking; Let them be carefully kept from Lice and Scabs, both
which do hinder them from thriving, the Lice may be picked away, and for Scabs
if they have any, which you may know, if straking your hand along their Skins,
you feel it, hackt and rough like a File, and the Hair stairing and standing
upright; for the healing whereof you shall rub them with Butter all over where
the Scab is. But as it is a great deal better to prevent diseases then to cure
them: The House-wife shall cause her Calves once or twice a day to be rubbed
over with wisps of Straw unbound, and suffer not their Piss to stand in Puddles
under them; but let them be kept with fresh and dry Litter, causing their Dung
to be carefully cast out every day from among their Litter.

Of Swine, and the Office of the Hog-herd.
OF all the Cattle that serve for Food, the most ravenous, the most filthy, and
the most harmful, is the Swine; and yet are they had in great estimation, and
mnch commended amongst us, for the sweetness of the Flesh. The ravenousness and
greedy feeding of this Beast, is witnessed by the Sow, which the French King
killed in Hunting, within whose Belly were found six Pails full of Grapes;
their filthiness and stench, their wallowing of themselves, their eating of
stinking and filthy things, as also the harm that they do, may be proved by
their rooting up and undermining of Walls, the trampling about Trees, Meadows,
and unsown places; for this cause in a Farm of great Revenues there will need a
man only for that purpose, to govern and guide them in the Fields, even such an
one as knows how to dress and order his Herd in good time and manner, and in
cleanly sort to put the Pigs that are weaned in one place with the Bores and
Hogs; and the Sows with their young ones into a second place by themselves; and
further that the sick and diseased may have a fresh place by themselves, fresh
Straw oftentimes given them and renewed, does fat them as much as their meat,
and he must take care that their Troughs be always clean; and against variable
weather the Hog-herd must have in store much Acrons, Beans, Crabs, wild-pears
or some other rotten Fruit, or some manner of Pulse, or Cole-worts, or boiled
Turnips to give them; and every day when they come from the Field, let the good
House-wife have in readiness for them hot meat, as Whey, or the droppings of
the Cheese-press, mingled with Bran and Water: For besides that this good
attendance will cause them to make have home, and not forsake their company to
run straggling abroad when the Hog-herd has let them out of the Field; these
hot Drinks and Meats do also heat the cold Meats, which they have fed upon in
the Field all the day before. And Thirdly, they will rest better in the night.
And Lastly, not become so subject to diseases; And let there be special care
taken, that their meat be not cold nor too thin, least it cause them to have
the Flux of the Belly.

Let the Swine-coats be paved with Stone or Brick, with good passage for their
Piss to run away; for this Beast, though he be Sluttish and Dirty, does
notwithstanding prosper best in a clean house, and that the corruption of the
Air, which this Beast makes in close places (especially when they are many in
number, may not cause them to have any ill sent, or other Diseases; it is
convenient, that there be made open Lights or Windows with Bars, and that there
be shutters to stop them when it snows, or in cold Weather; the benefit of
which Windows will be to let out their evil Air, and let in the good; Keep not
above ten Bores for one hundred Sows, and so proportionably, the rest as well
males as females, let them be Gelt; Keep those especially for Bores which have
a short and broad Head, the Snout set high and long, the Chine of the Neck
large, his Feet short, his Thighs great, and all the rest gross, square and
well set together, of Color White, and full of Brisles upon his Back; And for
Sows those which are long, side-bellied, small-headed, large-buttockt, and
sides giving out, and likewise of a White Color, of the rest make provision
for your house.

This Beast is a great Eater, and cannot endure Hunger, especially the Sows,
which in this necessity have been seen to eat their own Pigs, and those of
others, as also Children in their Cradles; and therefore you must have care,
that their Troughs are never empty; They are subject to many diseases, and they
are known to be sick when they hang their Ears much and become slow and heavy,
or when they lose their Appetite. For the better certainty, when there do not
appear any of these signs, pull from him against the Hair, a handful of Brisles
off his Back; if if they be clean and white at the Root, he is sound and
healthful; but if they be bloody or otherwise spotted, he is sick; likewise it
is commonly said, That when a Hog is sick, he will neither eat nor drink, till
he knows whether he shall live or die, and therefore when he falls to his meat,
you may be assured that he begins to mend.

The Hog by reason of his filthiness, has (for the most part) one fault or
other betwixt his skin and his flesh, how sound soever he be; and therefore it
is good after he is killed to singe of his Hair with straw, rather then to
scald them off with water; for the Fire does draw our a great deal more easily
then hot water, whatsoever is betwixt the skin and flesh; kill your Hogs in the
increase of the Moon, and let them not drink nor eat the day before you kill
them; that so their flesh may be the more dry; for if they drink till you kill
them, the salting time will have the greater quantity of superfluous moisture
to drink up; Cut out as many of the bones as you can; for that will cause the
salting to be of better effect, preserving the flesh the longer from corruption.

Cover your Bacon all over with bay salt, renewing it once in three days, and
do this for a Fortnight or more, and then hang them up to smoke over a
Wood-fire, but in any case, not too near the heat of the Fire, and when they
are well smoked, which will be in Ten days time, if they have a constant Fire,
then hang them about your Kitchen, or other convenient place where they may
keep dry. The Bacon thus salted, will be more fast, and of a better Taste then
any other way; Some cut the flesh in pieces, and put it into a salting-tub,
making as many beds of Salt grossly brayed, as of flesh, the one above the
other, and when the Tub is almost full, they fill it up with Salt, and press
all down together with weights; but this way is nothing so good, though more
used by some people, and some Countries, then the other.

Of Poultry, and first of Hens.
AS concerning the ordering of Poultry and Fowls, which is the next chiefest
thing that a good House-wife is to regard; There must care be had, that the
Hen-house be every day made clean, even so soon as the Pullen be out, and the
Dung put aside fot the fatting of the Meadows, the Baskets for them to lay in,
often shaken up and refresht with new Straw and Nests, and their Pearches and
Ladders scraped every Week; Their Water-pots must be kept clean, and filled
with clean Water every day, and that twice in Winter, and thrice in Summer, and
their Water must be clear always; for the filthiness of their water causes the
Pip, as well as want of water; Let there be no holes broken about the Hen-house
for fear of Cats, Foxes, VVeesles, Pole-cats, Fulmers, and other beasts given
to ravin abroad in the night; as also the Kite, Hen-harrow and Owl, which
sometimes will swap into the very Brood-house, to catch the Kitchen.

To every dozen of Hens, one Cock is sufficient, and he must not be of Color
White or Gray, but Red, Tawny, or Black, his Body well compact, his Crest or
Comb very upright, Red, thick, and not notched, toothed or gasht with Cuts, and
well raised Neck and high, his Bill short, thick and crooked, the Pinions and
flight of his Wings great, his Ears great and very white, his Eye black in a
Circle that is Red, Yellow or Azure, his Wattles of a Rose color, standing of
a White and Red mixture, the Feathers of his Neck long, golden and changeable,
his Legs very scaly, thick and short, his Claws short and fast, his Spurs stiff
and sharp, his Tail upright, gross, thick and crooking backward. The Tawny or
Reddish Hen likewise is the best, and that which has the Feathers of her Wing
Black, the stature of the Hen should be indifferent, her Head great, her Comb
upright, and very Red, her Body great and square, her Neck thick, and Breast
large; The Dwarf or little Hens do lay more Eggs then the other, but they are
not so good to sit on Eggs, to bring forth Chickins; and if you be not disposed
to keep a Hen to brood and bring up Chickens, you must within a day after she
has brought forth her Chickens* let her forth again to have the company of
Cocks, to the end she may forget them, and begin again to lay; then take a
great fat Capon, and one that is young, pull all the Feathers off his Belly,
and ^ub his Belly with stinking Nettles, and after deliver him the Chickens to
brood and lead, and by that means they will be better defended both from cold,
and ravenous Birds, as also better fed, he must be put under a large Basket
made with Osiers, with his brood of Chickens, and so leave him there some time,
to the end he may fall in love with them, so soon as he shall be at liberty, he
will bear them up, keep them, lead them, and become a more foolish doting or
true lover of them, then the Hen her self would have been, when they are two
days old, you must crumble them some soft Bread and Cheese, or else some
Barley-meal, and Garden-cresses, or leaves of Leeks chopped very small, and a
little sodden, and this will be good for them against Rheumes, and the Pip, and
after this time for the space of fifteen days the Capon or leader must be kept
under a Coup, and let the Chickens run in and out about the Coup, and then at
the end of those days to let them run about, both leader and followers, giving
them still the same nourishment to feed upon; It will not be good to let them
go too soon into the Courtyard, or abroad, and beware that the Snake do not
breath on them, or hiss at them: For the smell of such breath is so pestilent
unto them, as that it generally kills them all; to prevent which, you must
burn often near unto their Coup, Hartshorn, Galbanum, or womens-hair; for the
fume or smoke of these does drive them away.

As concerning the cutting of Cock-Chickens, it must be done shortly after the
Dam has forsaken them, and that they begin to Crow and be in love with
Pullets; for if they escape the first year and half, there is no meddling with
them: So after you have made choice of such as shall serve for the benefit and
leading of your Hens, as those which are best made, and most bold, you must cut
the other; for to feed and fat either in the Coup or Chaff-house.

Of Geese.
AS the profit of them is great, so the loss also profit; because the charge of
keeping and feeding them is not so costly, as their watch and ward is gainful,
being indeed better then that of the Dog, as has been showed long ago by the
Geese of the Capitol in Rome, who awakening the Soldiers and standing Watch,
were the cause that the Enemy was repulsed and driven back; Again she declares
when winter and hard weather draws nigh by her continual squeaking and
crying; She lays Eggs, hatcheth Goslings, affords Feathers twice a year,
for beds, writing, and for shafts, which are gathered at Spring and Fall: The
loss and discommodity is, because they crave a keeper; for otherwise they will
bruise and knap off the young Sionces of Trees, the Herbs off the Garden, and
Shoots of Vines, as also injure and hurt the Corn, when it is shooting and
putting forth its Stalk, as well by breaking it, as by dunging upon it, in such
sort, that in Countries where Wild-Geese haunt, there is found sometimes a
great piece of Corn wasted and destroyed in less then half a day, and the
Tame-Geese do not less harm, if they be let alone and suffered to do it; for
they pull up the Corn by the Roots; and besides, where they Dung there will
nothing grow for a long time after.

The best Goose and Gander is of Color White or Gray, and the next with White
and Gray, is also indifferent good; notwithstanding the White does abound more
in laying of Eggs then the others, and has also a better flesh, and it is good
to make choice of such a one as has the knee-joynts, and space betwixt the
Legs great and large; The Goose lays three times, she be kept from sitting
and hatching; but it is a great deal better that she sit upon Eggs, because the
young ones thereby brought forth, do nourish better then the Eggs, and also do
increase the Flock, and at every laying time, some will lay twelve Eggs, and
more sometimes, others but five at the first, four at the second, and three at
the last; and these three several times come between the first of March and the
last of June, and they do never forget the place you first bring to lay in; if
you take not up their Eggs, they will begin to sit as soon as they have their
full number; but it has been credibly reported, That if you take away their
Eggs as they be laid, they will not cease laying till they come to a hundred;
yea so long, and so many (as some say) until their Fundament stand gaping and
open that they are not able to shut it, because of the effect wrought by their
much laying. The Goose is commonly set upon 13 or 15 which is an odd number,
and when she is set, you shall place near unto her some steeped Barley, in such
quantity as that she may take it out of much water; for she loves not to leave
her Eggs or young ones, and by this means she shall not need to raise her self,
except a very little for to feed, for otherwise her Eggs might take cold.

The young Goslings must be kept shut up with the Dam for Eight or Ten days,
and be fed within with Barley-meal tempered with Honey, Bran, and Wather, and
now and then with Lettices and tender Sow-thistles, after that with Wheat
steeped and softened, and after that time to accustom them to the Meadows with
their Dam; but let them be fed before they go thither; for they are so
ravenously given, as that through sharpness in their hunger, they pull the
Grass and young sprouts of Trees with such force and violence, that sometimes
therewith they break their own Necks: They must be put up every night into the
house, for fear of Foxes, Cats and Weesles.

Gosling, intended to be fatted, must be chosen either very young, when they
are but a month old, or else when they are four months old, they must be put in
some dark and warm place, the younger will be fat in twenty days, and the elder
fat in forty; You must give them Barley and Wheat-meal tempered with water and
Honey; for the Barley makes the flesh white, and the Wheat makes them fat,
and makes a great Liver.

As for the stock of Geese that go abroad, you shall feed them Morning and
Evening with some sort of Pulse; and now and then give them some Lettices,
Succory, and Garden-cresses, to get them an Appetite; and for the rest of the
day send them to the Meadows and Water-pools, under the custody of some little
small Jack, who may keep them for going into any forbidden places, as also out
of the Nettles and Briars, and from feeding on Hen-bane, which some call the
Goose-bane, and from Hemlocks, which set them in such a deep sleep, as that
they die therewith.

Of Ducks.
AS for any great diligence to be used about this Fowl; there is no such need
except it be for keeping them from Weesles, Cats, Kites, Vultures and Serpents,
in the place of of their haunt, they must have some Corn cast, and the dross of
the Riddle about the edges of the Pond, and in the same, to cause them to be
puddling in the mire; in other points they need not much attendance, nor
greater care then this, to know their haunts, that so you may take their Eggs
and put them under some Hen to sit on them.

This kind of Foul is made fat in such manner as the young Geese; that is to
say, with the same food; They are profitable to keep, in as much as their flesh
is very pleasant to eat, the Feathers smaller, better, and more wholesome to
sleep upon, then those of the Geese, they lay Eggs in great quantity, but not
so good or delicate as those of Hens.

Of Peacocks.
THe Peacock is a Bird of more beautiful Feathers then any other that is, he is
quickly angry; but he is as far off from taking good hold with his feet, he is
goodly to behold, very good to eat, and serves as a watch about the house; for
spying strangers to come into the Courts or Yards, he fails not to cry out
and advertise those of the house; It is true that he is not kept with a little
cost and meat, being a great eater, and quickly digesting his meat, the Cock
being over rank by Nature, does break the Hens Eggs, thereby to keep her from
sitting, that so he may the more freely enjoy and use her; the Cock lives a
long time, as twenty or five and twenty years, but the Hen somewhat less, both
the one and the other somewhat troublesome to bring up when they are young; but
there is no need of any great care to be taken of them after they have once
left the Dam, except it be in keeping them from hurting the Corn; The Hen has
three several times or seasons of laying in the year, but she that is set has
but one, and passes over the other times in hatching and leading of her young
ones; She begins her first laying time at mid February, and lays five Eggs
one after another, at the second she lays four, three; and at the third three
or two; If the Cock and Hen tread not, you must bring them to it by such food
and meat as will set them in heat, and for that parched Beans are very good;
and to know when the Cock is in his pride and heat, you need no other sign then
his viewing of himself, and covering his whole body with the Feathers of his
Tail, and then we say, he wheeleth. When the Hen fitteth she withdraws and
hides her self from the Cock, in the most secret place she possibly can; for
he cease not to seek her by reason of his excessive rankness and lustiness of
Nature, and if he find her, to cause her to rise from off her Eggs, and then
breaks them. When she has hatched her young ones, she must be diligently fed
with her young ones, and kept under a Coup in some place where the Cock cannot
come; for he hates and hurts his young ones, until they be grown to have a
Coppel upon their heads; and at such time as this is growing out of them, they
must be kept very warm; for then they are sick, and many die.

You must feed the young ones at first with Barley-meal, tempered with Wine, in
manner of thick Pottage; and to thicken it, some put thereto soft Cheese well
purged from the Whey; for Whey will hurt them greatly: Sometimes they must have
Grasshoppers given them (their feet plucked away) Spiders and Flies given them
for Physic; for they drive away Vermin naturally, so that there is scarce any
found where they haunt. The Flesh of Peacocks is melancholy and hard of
digestion; but to make it tender, you must kill your Peacock in Summer a day
before you eat him, and in Winter four days, and hang some heavy thing to his
Legs; The Peacock well roasted may be kept a whole month, and loses nothing
either of his smell or good relish. The Dung of them is very Sovereign against
the diseases of the Eyes, if it may be found; but the Peacock so much envieth
the good of man, that he eats his own Dung, for fear that any man should find
it.

Of Indian Hens and Turkeys
THey may rightly be termed Coffers to cast Oats into, a devouring Gulf of
meat, wherein there is no other pleasure to be taken, but only in their cry and
furiousness when they are come to be great ones, or continual cheaping when
they be little. It is very true that his flesh is fine and delicate, but
without taste, and hard of digestion, and this is the cause why men use to
powder them, Lard them much, and season them with Spices, and most commonly
bake them in Pies.

The meat for this kind of Fowl is the same that is good for Hens, and so made,
and his property is to be abroad, to feed upon Grass, Herbs and Worms; and the
Farmer may well say, that looks how many Turkeys he has in his yard, even so
many Mule Colts has he in respect of their feeding. In Winter they must be set
in a warm place and dry; their Perch not above eight or ten Foot from the
ground, because they do not fly high. As concerning their laying and sitting,
it is altogether like that of the Peacocks.

The House-wife shall not make any great account of Turkey Eggs, at least he
that loves his health shall not esteem of them for his use; For Physicians
hold, That Turkey Eggs engender Gravel, and minister cause to breed the Leprosy.

Of the Dove-house.
THe profit of the Dove-house is very great in respect of the young ones, which
every year increase innumerably, insomuch that out of some Dove-houses, you may
draw ten or twelve dozen a week all Summer long; the care to be had about them,
is not so great as that about other Fowls, nor the cost so great; for they get
their own livings most part of the year.

Let the Dove-house be seated where the good House-wife may conveniently, and
with ease go unto it, and withal it would be well to be out of the noise of
Folks, the dashing of Trees one against another, and the roaring of Waters, and
it should be a flight shoot from any water, to the end that the old Pigeon may
in her flight warm the water which she brings for to give her young ones, yet
in Winter time when they do not breed, and that they lie at the Barn doors to
pick up the Corn which is scattered from, or struck abroad by the Flail, let
there be a water-pot set upon a Pillar of stone or wood for them to drink at,
made in fashion of a Basin, divided into many partitions, that it may be easy
for many of them to come to it together, either to drink, or bath themselves in.

The holes in the Dove-house should be made of Mortar, tempered with straw; for
they are more kind for Pigeons then those which are made of Boards, square Tyle
or Plaster, however they are subject to Chinks and Vermin; and therefore if you
will have them good, you must draw them over with a strong crust of Lime within
and without; and howsoever you make them for matter, yet they must be made so
large, as that the Pigeon may turn her self in them, without ruffling her
Feathers, and so high, as that the Pigeon may stand upright in it, and not
touch the top with her back; if either of these two points be missing, then she
leaves her hole desolate and forsaken; and oftentimes the house too. To drive
away Vermin, it is good to stick some branches of Rue in the windows or doors
of the Dove-house.

Upon the Pinnacle of the Roof make the picture of a Pigeon, either of Wood,
Potters-clay or Plaster, to draw such as fly by thither. If your Dove-house is
but meanly stored, draw none of your May flight, but let them fly; for they
thrive better then the latter broods, and are sooner able to get their livings;
Above all things let them not be pinched of meat in the Months of April and
May, because old ones are very many of them sitting, or else have hatched:
Neither in the Month of June; for that is a time when they can get but very
little meat abroad, and is called the benting Month, according to the old
Verses.

The Pigeon never knows woe,
Until she does a benting go.
If you would increase the store of your Dove-house by drawing others thither,
you shall lay upon the Altar within the house, or upon the Windows, a Loaf made
of Red Earth, Cummin-seed well bruised, Honey and Brine all well boiled
together, and dried in the Oven; for having picked upon this lump, they will
never fail to return thither again; for they are much given to the pleasing of
their taste; and further, by the very sent and smell of this remaining about
their Bills, they will be the means to allure others along with them to their
Coat, which for the aforesaid commodiies sake, they will never leave or forgo.

When you shall perceive that they begin to lay, cast them Morning and Evening
a little clean Corn, and cause their water-pot, wherein they bath themselves,
to be oftentimes made clean, and fresh water put therein; Let the Dove-house be
kept very clean, and for that cause let him that has the charge thereof, go
into it once every week at least, and that in the Morning, or at the times of
relief, when the Pigeons are seeking their meat abroad in the Country
thereabouts; for they keep their noon-tyde in the house, and at that hour he
must not enter therein, he shall pare the floor, cast out such as he finds
dead, make clean their holes; and if any are fallen out of their holes, let
them not meddle to put them up again; if he perceive the train of any Snake or
Adder, let him provide a long earthen pot, and set it upon its bottom, and put
within it a Pigeon, and place it right in the train and walk of the Snake or
Adder, and set by it some board or other, or other thing whereby she may creep
up unto the top of the pot, and cast her self in afterward and thus you may
cleanse and rid the Dove-house of such Vermin.

It is true, that Pigeous do require some cost in Winter, when through Frost or
Snow, or when the Corn is shot, they cannot find any thing in the Field; but
this is not above two Months continuance or thereabouts, that you need to feed
them with Corn; at the end of which time they commonly afford you a flight, and
they are the most fat, tender and dainty of all the year.

You shall preserve the Dung which you take from the Pigeons, not mixing it
with that which the Kine or Calves, etc. make; for it is very hot, and serves
to fatten and amend the Fenny and wet places of Corn-ground, or of your
Meadows, or young Plants and tender Herbs, and to refresh and relieve all Trees
subject to coldness and moisture.

Of Gardens.
IT is requisite that we should now describe the manner of ordering the Garden,
wherein the good House-wife must have a good share in the oversight, we will
begin therefore with the Kitchin-garden, which should be separated from the
Garden of pleasure by the intercourse of an Alley of the breadth of three
Fathoms, or else by a Wall or Hedge; both which Gardens must be in some plain
plot of ground, as it were a little hanging for the convenience of the
Rainwater that shall fall therein; and likewise for the benefit of their
labor, it must be cast into squares, very equal and uniform, by the side of
the Kitchin-garden; It were necessary to have a Garden for Hemp, Flax, saffron,
Turnips, Parsnips, and other things of profit and good Husbandry; and on the
other side of the Garden of pleasure, another Garden for Pease, Beans, Rice,
Millet, and such other things; for they serve greatly for the keeping of a
Family.

The enclosures of the Garden must be such, as the commodity and necessity of
the place does require; that is to say of Walls, if the Revenues of the Farm
will bear it, or of a strong and thick Quickset Hedge, if there want either
Stone, Brick, or Revenues to build the Wall withal. Some there be that enclose
their Gardens with Banks, but nothing to their profit; for the moisture of
their Gardens which should serve them, is thereby conveyed away and taken from
them; for this way does no where hold good, but in Fenny and Marsh grounds.

The ground of the Gardens must be good, of his own nature free from stones,
well broken and dunged a year before it be dug to plant in, and after it
has been dug and dunged or marled again, you must let it rest and drink in
its Dung or Marl. As concerning the nature and goodness of it, the stiff Clay
or sandy ground are worst of all, but it must be fat in handling, Black in
Color, and which crumbleth easily in the breaking or stirring of it with your
fingers, and becomes small with laboring, and generally all grounds that are
good for Wheat are good for Gardens; it is requisite also (to the end it may
bring forth green Herbs in abundance) that it be reasonable moist; for neither
that which is very dry, nor that which is subject to much wet, is good.

Notwithstanding if the grounds belonging to the Farm, happen not to be such,
you must remedy it as well as you may; the stiff Clay and sandy places must be
amended by Dung and Marl, and would be cast three foot deep, the watery places
will be made better, if you mix with it some sandy or gravelly ground, and
therewithal cast it round about with Ditches, thereby to draw and drein out
the water annoying the Garden. Thus the good Husband shall do his endeavor to
amend, and make his ground more fruitful; Let the Dung which he lays upon it
be either of Sheep, Swine, Horses or Pigeons, according as the nature of the
ground shall require, and the elder it is, the better also; in as much as in
time it loses his filthy stink, and whatsoever other evil quality, and
gets a new kind of rottenness which is more soft and more easy to be
converted into the substance of the Earth, whereby good earth is made better,
and the naughty amended. This is the cause why such as have writ of Husbandry
in Latin, do call Dung Laetamen, and French men call it Letiere; because it
makes the ground merry, that is, when it is once mingled and incorporated
therewith.

If it be possible let not your Gardens be on that side the house the Barn or
Thrashing-flore is, to the end that the Herbs and Flowers may not be hurt by
the Dust, Dirt, small Straw or Chaff, which might be blown from the
Thrashing-flore unto the Garden by the wind; for such Chaff having taken hold
upon the leaves, does pierce and fret them through; and being thus pierced,
they burn and parch away presently.

As there are two times in the year to sow Herbs, so there are two seasons to
bring into order and dress Gardens, that is to say, Autumn and the Spring; Let
your ground be dug and manured in November, which you intend to sow in the
Spring; and dig in the Month of May such other grounds as you intend to sow in
Autumn; to the end, that by the Cold of Winter, or by the Heat of summer, the
Clods may be apt to turn to dust, and become short and brittle, and all
unprofitable Weeds may be killed.

The time of Sowing.
ALl Seeds which are for the store of the Kitchin-garden must be sown and
removed in the increase of the Moon, as namely from the first day unto the
sixth; and for those that are sown in the decrease, they either come up slowly,
or else be nothing worth; besides that, although you sow in the increase of
the Moon, it sometimes falls out, that notwithstanding your Seed be fat,
full, make a white Flower, and be nothing corrupted or hurt, yet some evil
constellation (which the Gardeners do call the course of the Heavens) do hinder
them, that they profit not, nor thrive any thing at all.

If you are disposed to sow Seeds in Summer, it must be in the increase of the
Moon of July and August, and in Autumn in the increase of the Moon of September
and October; as also for the Spring in February and March: In places naturally
Cold, or which receive no great Heat from Sunbeams, the sowing in the Spring
time must be toward the latter end thereof, and that in Autumn hastened and
early performed; and on the contrary, the sowing of Seeds in the Spring time,
in a hot place, must be early, and the sowing in Autmn late. Seeds grow best
when they are sown upon warm days, or days that are neither hot nor cold.

Colworts, Spinach of all sorts, with Succory, Garlic, Leeks and Onions are
sown in Autumn, and live all Winter.

Colworts, Rocket, Cresses, Coriander, Navets or Turnips, Radishes, Parsnips,
Carots, Parsley, Fennel, and other Herbs, whose Roots are good in Pottage, are
sown in Autumn; and in the Spring, notwithstanding they grow better being sown
in July in hot Countries, and in August in Countries indifferent hot, and in
September in cold Countries.

Lettice, Sorrel, Purslane, Cucumbers, Gourds, Savory, Hartshorn, Thrick-madam,
Beets, and other tender Herbs, as also Artichokes are sown in the Spring, and
for the most part also those of March and April grow more early then those of
February, according to the diversity of the time.

So soon as the ground is full of Seeds in all places, you must be careful to
water it if the place be dry of its own nature, that so the Seed may not be
hindered of his sprouting by too much dryness, or that the Herb already sprung,
may not die. The best water to water Pot Herbs withal, is Rainwater, if it
fall in the night, or in such a time as it may not heat the Herbs; for it
washes and cleanses them from the Dust, and Vermin that eats them,
especially if the Rain come driving with a Northern wind; for want of this the
River or Brook-water is best next, being a little warm, and instead of this
Well water (drawn in the Morning, and put into a Barrel, or some other thing of
Receipt, that so it may take the heat of the Sunbeams) may serve; for cold, and
Salt Water is an enemy to all sorts of Herbs; The time to water them, is the
Evening and Morning, not the midday, for fear that the water being heated by
the Sun, and the surface of the Earth (being hot) might burn them at the Root.

Cutting of Herbs is profitable for them, at such time as they be somewhat what
grown, to make them keep their greenness the longer, and to make them more
beautiful and tufted, to keep them from seeing, and also to gike them somewhat
a more pleasant smell, then they had in their first stalk; but all Herbs must
not be cut at all times; for such as have a hollow stalk, as Onions and others,
if they be cut when it raineth, the blade or stalk of the Onion is filled full
of water, and rotteth, and this is the cause, why Herbs of such nature are not
to be cut, but in a fair and dry time.

Of setting and removing Potherbs.
TO give the greater scope and liberty to Herbs, and to make them greater, you
must remove them when they have four or five leaves out of the ground, and this
may be done at any time; but especially see that the season be inclining to
moistures and Rain, and they must be set in ground that is well furnished with
fat, without any amending of it with Dung, if the time fall out dry, you must
water them after they be new set in due time, not staying long, and set them
thin, that so they may have their Earth lightened when need requires, for
thereby they will grow better and fairer.

Slips for the Garden of sweet and fragrant Herbs may be gathered at all times,
and they would be of young sprigs of a year old, taking part of the old wood,
and writhing that to put it into the Earth, or else cleave it below, and put in
the cleft an Oat, and round about it two or three more Oats, rather then Dung;
for Herbs that are removed do not require Dung at their Roots; but rather they
have need that the lowest parts of their Roots should be a little steeped in
water.

Of gathering and keeping Seeds, Roots, and Flowers.
ROots for the most part are gathered when the Leaves are fallen off Flowers,
as Borage, Bugloss, all good, and Marygolds when they are thoroughly open;
Flowers must be gathered to be kept while they are shut, Leaves and whole Herbs
when they are grown to the full, Fruits when they turn Yellow, and are grown to
their perfection, Seeds when the Herbs are all laid and dry; and it must
generally be observed in all manner of gathering, as well of Herbs, Flowers and
Roots, as of Fruits and Seeds, that it be done in a fair and clear weather, and
in the decrease of the Moon.

Such Herbs as are to be kept must first be made very clean; and dried in the
shadow, which is the best means to keep them stronger in their virtues and
qualities and after put them up in bags of Leather, and not of woven stuff of
wooden Boxes, that so they may not loose their virtue, as we see it put in
practice by fine Herbs, which are kept to be used in Winter; wherefore me
thinks, that the Apothecaries fail much in their way, which hang their
Physick-herbs in the Roof of their house, whereby they spend their force, and
become laden with Dust, Cobwebs, the Dung of Flies, and a thousand other filthy
things.

The best way to dry flowers will be in a temperate place, and to turn them
often, to the end they may not corrupt; having a continual care, that they may
not loose their color or smell, and when they are dried, put them into an
earthen Vessel. Seeds must be kept in Bags, or Boxes well stopped and kept in dry
places; and where there is no water shed; for Seeds are mightily spoiled with
moisture. The Seeds of Chibolds, Onions, and Leeks, as also of Poppey, are kept
in their rinds and heads: For to keep Roots you must observe two ways; for
either they are to be kept new as they are yet green, or else they are to be
kept dry; for to keep them new you must lay them in Sand or Gravel very thin,
in some place under the Earth, and a little covered, or else to bury them under
the Earth in the Garden, as I have seen it done to keep them the greatest part
of the Winter. To keep them dry, after they are gathered, you must wash them
with clear water, and after take from them all the small Fibers and Hair-threds
that hang about them, and then dry them either in the shadow of the Sunrising,
if they be but small and thin, as are the roots of Fennel, Succory, Parsley,
Sperage and such like; or in the South Sun if they be gross and thick, as those
of Daffodils, Gentian; Sow-bread, Water-lilly, Briony, and such like, after
they are dried, and thus prepared, hang them in some high and upper room, open
toward the Sun when it is in the South, and where neither smoke nor dust, nor
the Sunbeams may any way hurt them.

The Garden of Pleasure.
THe most pleasant and delectable thing for recreation belonging to a Farm, is
the Flower-gardens; it is a commendable and seemly thing to behold out of a
window many Acres of ground well husbanded, whether it be Meadow, Pasture or
Arrable; but yet it is much more to behold fair and comely proportions,
handsome and pleasant Arbors, as it were Closets, delightful Borders of
Lavander, Rosemary, Violets, and other such like, to hear the ravishing Music
of an infinite number of pretty small Birds which continually day and night do
chatter and chant their proper and natural branch Songs, upon the Hedges and
Trees of the Garden, and to smell so sweet a Nose gay so near at hand, seeing
that this so fragant a smell cannot but refresh exceedingly, when going out of
your Bedchamber in the morning after the Sunrise, and whiles the clear and
Pearle-like Dew does Perch upon the Grass; you may hear the mellodious Music
of the Bees, which busying themselves in gathering the Thime, do fill the Air
with most acceptable sweet and pleasant Harmony, besides the Borders and Rows
of Thime, Balm, Rosemary, Marjerome Cypres, Sothern-wood, and other fragrant
Herbs, the sight and view whereof cannot but give great contentment unto the
beholders,

The Garden of pleasure must be cast and contrived close to the one side of the
Kitchin-garden, as before has been said, but so as that they be sundred by the
intercourse of a large Alley, and also a hedge of Quickset, whose ground must
be of a like goodness, and have the like labor, Tilling and Husbanding that
the Kitchin-garden has bestowed upon it.

The Garden of Pleasure shall be set about and compassed with Arbors made of
Jessamin, Rosemary, Juniper, Cypress-trees, Ceders, Rose-trees, and others,
first planted and pruned; as the nature of every one does require, and after
brought into form and order with Willow or other poles, as may serve for the
making of Arbors, the ways of Alleys must be covered with Sand well beat, or
paved with Stone or other like thing.

The Garden shall be divided by a large Alley or Walk into two equal parts, the
one shall contain the Herbs and flowers used to make Nose-gays, as March
Violets, Provence-gilliflowers, Purple-gilliflowers, Indian-gilliflowers, small
Panuces, Yellow and White Gilliflowers, Marigolds, Daffadils, Canterbury-bells,
Purple-Velvet-Flower, Cornflag, Lillies, and other such like, and it may be
called the Nosegay-garden.

The other part shall have all other sweet smelling Herbs, whether they be such
as bear no Flowers, or if they bear any, yet they are not put in Nosegays
alone, but the whole Herb with them, as Sothernwood, Wormwood, Jessamin,
Marjerome, Balm, Mints, Peniroyal, Rosemary, Hysop, Lavander, Basil, Sage,
Savory, Rue, Tansey, Thime, Camomil, Nept, Sweet-balm, all good, and others of
like nature, and this may be called the Garden of Herbs, of a good smell, the
greatest part of which sweet Herbs, as also Nosegay-flowers, though they grow
naturally, and of their own accord, without any labor or travel of the
Gardener, yet such of them as stand in need of dressing and ordering, shall be
sown, planted, removed, gathered and kept no otherwise then the Pot Herbs, but
yet notwithstanding regard must be had of the nature of every particular one,
but (because this tract is only directed to the good House-wife) I shall leave
the particular ordering, sowing setting, and planting of all to the judgment
and good discretion of the Gardener.

And now having delivered the manner and form of the Garden of pleasure, I
should withal speak of the manner of bestowing the Herbs and Flowers therein,
in proportions of diverse fashions, or in Laberinths or Mazes; but in this
course I cannot set down any universal prescript or order, seeing they depend
partly upon the Spirit and invention of the Gardener, and partly upon the
pleasure of the Master and Lord, unto whom the ground and Garden appertains
the one whereof is lead by the hops and skips, turnings and windings of his
Brain, the other by the pleasing of his Eye, according to his best fancy, and
therefore I shall here omit them, and proceed to instrust the good House-wife
in what month, and time of the month diverse sorts of Seeds may be sown.

A Table to know the best time to sow diverse sorts of Seeds.
He that will sow seeds must know that
Some may be sown at all times of the Month and Moon, as Asparagus Coleworts of
all sorts Spinage-Lettice Parsnips Radishes.
Others in a certain Month and time of the Moon, as in February the Moon being
New Thime Garlic Burrage Bugloss Marjerome Purslane Radish Rosemary Sorrel
Double Marigolds
Full Anise musked Violets Blites Skirworts White Succory Fennel Parsley.
Old Cole Cabal White Cole Green Cole Cucumbers Hartshorn Spinach
Cabage-lettice Mellons Onions Parsnips Burnet Leeks.

Sow in Mar. the being New Garlic Burrage Bugloss Marjerome White Poppy
Purslane Radish Sorrel Thime Violets
Full Musked Anise Blites Skirworts Succory Fennel
Old Cole Cabage White Cole Green Cole Cucumbers Hartshorn Spinach Hysop
Gilliflowers Cabage-letice Melons Onions Burnet Leeks

Sow in April the Moon being New Marjerome Thime Violets
Full Apples of love Marvelous Apples
Old Artichocks Cabbage Cole Gilliflowers Parsnips

Sow in May the Moon being Old Blessed-Thistle

In June the Moon being New Gourds Radishes
Old Cucumbers Mellons Parsnips

In July the Moon being Full Old White Succory Cabbage-lettice

In August the Moon being Full White Succory

Some seeds grow best being new, as Leeks Cucumbers Onions
Other Seeds there are which grow best being old, as Coriander Parsley Savory
Beets Cresses Spinach Poppy
These m^st be preserved from Cold. Lettices. Artichocks Cabbage-cole
Dyers-grain Mellons Cucumbers

It is good to plant and gather Grafts in the last of the Moon, and to graft
two days after the change, Note that seeds must be gathered in fair weather in
the wain of the Moon, -- kept
Some in Boxes of Wood Bags of Leather Vessels of Earth
Others as Onions in their Husks. Leeks in their Husks. Chibolls in their Husks.



THE Silkworm, And the Government of them.
THE good House-wife must not make less account of the Silkworm then of the
Honey-bee; for besides the pleasure which she may conceive of the sight of the
marvelous industry of this little Creature in making and spinning of Silk, she
may also reap an incredible profit of so excellent a work, which honors and
makes men glorious, attired with the pomp of this workmanship and piece of
cunning skill; in so much as we see Kings, Princes, Knights, Gentlemen, and
other personages clothed and apparelled with the travel of these pretty
Creatures; and which is more, the Silk serves not only for the appareling of
men, but also for a singular remedy to comfort the Heart that is sick, to
rejoice and recreate all the heavy and troubled spirits, as we may well
perceive by that famous confection, called of the Physicians Alkermes; which
being for the most part compounded of the decoction and infusion of Silk in the
Juice of Kermes, being taken inwardly, is a Sovereign remedy in faintings and
swouning; wherefore the good House-wife shall make great account of these
Creatures, to the end that she may reap profit of the sale of the Silk, which
she shall gather from them yearly; which profitable practice is well known
amongst the good Wives of foreign Countries, from whence we have such great
quantities of Silk brought into England

And for the making of her best commodity hereof she must choose out a
convenient place for the keeping of them, and it must be rather high then low,
in a good Air, without moistness, and so provided of Windows, as that the Sun
may come in at them Morning and Evening, if it seem good to those that have the
charge of them. The Windows must be such as will shut close, either glased or
paper-windows, to the end that when it raineth or blows, in cold weather or
in moist, they may be kept very close and fast shut; for who so fails to
govern, and provide for them in this manner, without doubt these pretty
Creatures (being tender at all times) cannot escape but die, when cold weather
comes. There must likewise be Nets hanged before the Windows, to the end that
when the Paper-windows are opened, the Sparrows, Swallows, and such like
hurtful Birds, may not get in to feed upon these Worms: Neither Cock nor Hen
must come in here; for they would so ravenously feed upon them, as that they
would be ready to burst. The walls and floor must be very clean, and free from
holes or crevises, by which Rats, Mice, or other like Vermin may enter and get
in to kill and spoil these little things, either night or day. In it there must
be Tables or Shelves for them to abide upon, and they must be kept upon Sheets
of Paper, the edges turned up, that they may not creep away.

The careful House-wife as soon as Spring draws near, and that she shall see
that the Mulberry-tree begins to bud, shall bring forth her Eggs that she
has kept all VVinter, and set them where the warmth of the Sun may come to
them; and if she see that the Mulberry-tree is slow to bud, there shall be
fresh Dung laid to the Roots thereof, during the new Moon of March, thereby to
bring it forward; for otherwise for lack of the leaves of the Mulberry-tree; if
it should happen the Worms should be bred or hatched, you must for their food
have recourse to the Heart of the Thorn, Elme-leaves, the tender tops of
Nettles, and others, all which will but keep them alive; and as concerning
making choice of such Worms as are to be breeders, you must take the seed,
which being bathed in Wine, falls to the bottom; and does not float above;
the time of breeding then is about the fifteenth or twentieth of April, from
the fourth unto the tenth day of the Moon, but never in the decrease; for then
they will bring forth their Silk at such time as they are strong, in such sort
as that their ends and husks will be greater, harder, and more finely haired
then any other that are bred at another time: For these that are bred in the
decrease of the Moon are always feeble, and yield no profit; the way to make
them hatch is, after that you have watered and bathed them in the VVhite-wine,
rather then warm water, to lay them near the fire till they are a little warm;
then lay them betwixt two Pillows, made likewise something warm, and so as they
hatch and come out of their Eggs, to take them gently away, and put them upon
Mulberry-leaves, and to lay them upon Boards or Papers that have been rubbed
over with Wormwood or with Sothernwood, or some such like Herb, and give them
fresh Mulberry-leaves Evening and Morning, increasing them every day as the
Worms shall grow greater and greater, unto the fourth change; for then they
will stand in need to be fed at noon also, because then they eat more then they
were wont; but be cateful, that when they mew or change, you must give them
sparingly; for then they are weak and feeble, and in any case let not the
leaves be moist, wet or rotten, and if it should fall out, that they are wet
when they are gathered, you must wipe them thoroughly with clean linen, and dry
them a little at the fire if need be. They must be gathered of old Trees rather
then young ones, and not to gather them in the Morning when they are wet with
the Dew or other thing, until the Sun has gone over them, and be sure to pick
the bad from the good before you give them to the Worms. These little
Creatures must not be touched with your hands, but as little as may be; for the
more they are handled, the more they are hindered; because they are very
exceeding tender and dainty, especially at such time as they cast their sloughs
or claing; yet notwithstanding they must be kept clean and neat, and all their
little Dung taken from them once in two or three days, the place where they are
kept, must be perfumed sometimes with Frankincense, Garlic or Onions; that you
may minister matter of pleasure to these little Creatures, and if they are weak
and sick, these smells refresh and recover them again. You shall take notice
that they are wont to sleep, especially at such times as they cast and change:
After they have cast and changed the fourth time, they eat better then ever
they did, until such time as their bodies begin to shine, and that they make
show of the Silk that is in their bellies; which if it be to come white from
them, their heads will look as if they were Silver; if Yellow, their heads bear
the Color of Gold, if Green or Orange Color, their heads foretell the same.
Thus they feeling themselves well filled and fed, do seek out some resting
place for the purpose to fasten themselves unto, and there orderly to avoid
their Silk, every one shutting up himself in his scale or husk, which they make
or build up in three days at most.

When you perceive them begin to spin, and fasten themselves to the Paper or
other thing that they are kept on, You must make them little Coffins of Poper,
putting but one in each Paper, and so pin them up about the Room to the
hangings or other things convenient; when they begin their work, they are so
eager, as that they go mad till they be packed up in their little Clews and
Bottoms, where they are so enclosed that a man would think they would be
stifled they have finished their work in two or three days more or less, as the
weather is cold or hot at that time. When any begin to spin, mark the
Paper-coffins, when you pin them up, with the day of the Month; for in six days
you may wind off their Silk, though they lie thus in their husks, for the most
part twenty days more or less, according to the softness or hardness of their
Bottoms of Silk, and then (if you do not wind off their Silk before) they will
eat their way out.

As concerning the choice of their Husks or Cods, the Orange-coloured are the
best, and not the Yellow, and least of all the White or Green. When you go
about to wind your Silk, you must have in readiness a Reel, and then after you
have pulled off all the loose Silk, till you come to the hard bottom, find out
an end, which you may do by drawing two or three ends together till they run
single, and so do by the rest, and you may wind 10 or 15 Husks together, and
your best way to wind is out of water a little warm, and wherein some
Gum-Arabick has been soaked. After this manner you may wind so much Silk off
the Husks, that the Worms will drop out into the water, and the Gum'd water
gives the Silk an excellent gloss; Take the Worms out of the water, and lay
them on sheets of Paper to dry, keeping them safe from Rats, Mice, and other
Vermin, and then make choice of the best for breeding, which are the grosest
and blackest; for those are the strongest, and afford better Eggs then any of
the other; you must take more female-then males, and for the knowing of the one
from the other, the Eyes of those Creatures do sufficiently testify thereof;
for the females have thinner Eyes, and not so black as the males; but this is
known best when the become Butter-flies, which will not be till the middle of
July, or after; and then as soon as they come forth out of their Husks, they
will couple, and lay their Eggs, one will lay about 200 Eggs, which will stick
to the Paper as they are laid, and there should be kept without stirring all
Winter, till brooding time come again, and you must be sure to keep them from
the Winter-frosts.

As concerning the diseases whereunto these little Creatures be subject; when
they have not been so carefully looked unto as they should, to be kept clean,
when the cold Northern-wind, or the hot Southern-Sun has molested them; as
also when they have eated too much, then they become sick, wherefore keep them
very cleanly, stop the Windows and holes by which the cold winds do enter and
get in, and carry Coals of fire that smoke not, into their Rooms, setting
thereupon Frankincense, (for they so love this smell, as that it presently
cures them) and also besprinkle them with a little Malmsey, or Aqua-vitae. And
if they have been troubled with too great heat of the South Sun, then sprinkle
on them some Rose Water; if they have over-eaten themselves the contrary diet
will cure them, as the keeping them two or three days without eating any thing;
if there be any of them that ure spotted with duskish, bluish, or yellowish
Color, and there appear withal upon their Bellies a certain humor that does
wet them, they must be speedily taken from out of the company of the rest, and
carried out, and in the Morning before the Sun rise, set the whole and sound in
the air for some small time, and after put them in their places again, and
sprinkle them with good and strong Vinegar, and rub their Rooms with Wormwood
or Southernwood, and also to give them air, and let them feal the force of the
Sun, provided that the Beams thereof do not touch them, and so fit the Windows,
that the Morning air may season and send his breath throughout the whole house,
And as for those that are sick, keep them upon Papers by themselves, and now
and then sprinkle on them some Rose Water, or Aqua-vitae, and rub their Papers
with Wormwood, as before.

The pleasure in the keeping, tending and observing this little Creature, is
not to be conceived, but by those that have had the government of them. As
concerning their shapes, first their Eggs are laid all round together upon the
Paper, and in such order that none are laid upon another, and they are about
the bigness of a Turnip-seed, or small white Beads, which within a week after
they are laid do turn Yellow, and in a week more they are Brown, and the week
after they are a Dun Color, which Color they hold all Winter till the latter
end of April, at which time or beginning of May they will hatch and bring
fourth young, as has been showed before. When they are hatched they are black
and no bigger then the end of a small Pin; when they they are about a fortnight
old, their heads begin to be white, and a fortnight or three weeks after that,
they cast a slough or skin, and the bodies begin to be white, and so at every
time they cast, their Color does change, until such time as they begin to
spin, and then you may perceive them to be clear, and shine of such Color as
the Silk will be that they spin.

From the time that they are hatched to the time of their spinning, will be
about seven weeks, and after that they never eat any more; for after the Silk
is wonnd off, and the Worms come out of the bag, in a short time they come to
be Butter-flies, as you have heard before, and then after they have coupled and
laid their Eggs, there is no more care to be taken of them, for then they pine
away and die.

OF THE Hony-Bee, And the Government thereof.
IF the greatest part of the profit of a Farm depend upon the keeping of
Cattle: I dare be bold to affirm, that the fruitfulest thing that can be kept
about a Countrey-house, is Bees; indeed there is some pains and care to be
taken in choosing, feeding, watching, and keeping of them clean in their Hives;
but withal, what so rare and singular commodity have we as the Wax, and the
Honey which we enjoy by their admirable workmanship, both profitable and
pleasant for the use of man; Let not it then seem strange, if I advise the
Householder to be careful to keep Bees about his Farm, and withal teach him in
a few words what should be the ordering and governing of them and their Hives,
and what time and hour it is good to gather Honey and Wax.

The Householder therefore shall first make choice of some fit and secret place
in his Garden of pleasure, for the keeping of his Bees, in the bottom of some
Valley if possible, to the end they may rise on high to fly abroad to get their
Food, and also when they be laden, they may descend the more easily downward
with their load; but especially let the place be open to the South Sun, yet
where they may be shaded sometimes, and that by some wall, ramport, or
house-side, that they may be defended from winds and tempests, and so also that
they may sly sundry and several ways, for to get diversity of Pastures, and so
return again to their little Cottages laden with their Composition of Honey.

And it is convenient to have them where there is good store of Thime, Organy,
VVinter-savory, VVild-thime, Rosemary, Sage, Gilliflowers, Violets,
VVhite-lillies, Roses, Saffron, Beans, Mellilot, and other sweet Herbs and
Flowers, wherein there is no bitterness, and also Fruit Trees, Peach-trees,
Pear Trees, Apple Trees, Cherry-trees, and other such like.

The place must be closed in with a strong Hedge or good wall, for fear both of
Beasts and Thieves; for Kine and Sheep do eat up their Flowers, and beat the
Due off from the Flowers, which should load them; but of all tame Beasts there
is none that does so damnifie these little pretty wretches as Swine and Goats;
for the Goats wast their Food, and jump against their houses, yea, and
oftentimes beat them down; the Swine, besides the wasting of their Food,
rubbing against their Hives, do overturn them, and the seats whereon they be
set; Sheep in like manner loosing some of their locks of Wool upon the
Hedges, are the cause that the silly poor Bees now and then become entangled
therein, when they labor to get their Food, and so leave their Carcasses for a
pledge; Hens likewise have a glutronous appetite toward them, Snakes and other
like venomous Beasts sometimes take up their Inns in their Hives; but to take
away this casualty at once and for ever, you must plant Rue round about them in
good quantity; for such Beasts cannot abide this Herb. Their place also must be
far from the Dunghils, and all dirty or miry places which might hurt them with
ill smells; for they are deadly enemies to all filthiuess and uncleanness; but
let their places be as near as you can to some little Brook of water, naturally
and of it self continually running, and this Rundle must have by the edges
thereof Stones or Boughs of Trees for the Bees to light upon.

But whatsoever the place be, whether in the Garden of pleasure or else where,
it must not be hemmed in with very high walls on every side, unless you leave
slits or holes in the walls aabout four foot from the ground, that the Bees may
pass the easier in and out.

The place and standing for the Bees being thus appointed, the next thing is to
provide for Hives; the best are those which are made of Boards, wide enough,
but not very long; and they must be made so, that one or two of the Boards may
be lifted up when the Honey is to be taken, or the Hives to be made clean;
There are some Hives made of Sallow or Willow twigs; and some of Straw, but not
so convenient as the former; they must be wide beneath, and narrow above, drawn
over and dressed on the outside with Lime and Oxe-dung mingled together, that so
they may continue the longer; they must be set upon Boards fitted for the
purpose, and that near unto some wall or house-side, but not close to it, that
so there may be a space left, for one to go about them and make them clean, or
else upon some Vault of Stone or Brick to the height of three foot, and as much
in breadth laid over with mortar on every side, and planed so, that that
neither Rats, Mice, or other Vermin may clime thither to hurt them. The Hives
shall be so set, as there may be a certain distance betwixt one and the other,
that when need shall require to look unto any one, for the making of it clean,
or any other thing. You may not shake or disturb the adjoining Bees, who do
greatly fear when they are touched, least their workmanship of Wax (which is
very weak and easy to be spoiled) should be stirred or broken. The Hives must
have some covering or shelter of Boards or other thing besides the shade of
Leaves and Boughs, which may serve to preserve them against cold, Snow, Rain
and heat, although heat do not so much hurt unto Bees as cold. Therefore behind
the Bees as they stand, there must be some building, or at least a wall, which
may be to them instead of a Sunny-bank against the North Wind, and keep the
Hives in a moderate warmth, and mark it well that you put the forepart of the
Hive, where the Bees come forth, something more toward the East then the
South; to the end that in the Morning the Bees for their earlier coming forth
may have the Sun warm upon them for their better awakening. The holes by which
they pass and repass, must be very little, that they may may not give place for
the entrance of much cold, and they will be big enough, if so be there may but
one Be pass at a time; but according to the quantity of Bees in the Hive, you
must have more or less holes, three holes will be sufficient for the fullest
Hives. It would be convenient that they be sheltered with Boards in Winter,
made with Windows to open and shut, that you may close them up in Snowy or very
cold weather.

I will say nothing here of the ingendring of Bees, whether it be by the
coupling of Males and Females together, as we see in other kind of Creatures,
or by the corruption and rotting of the Belly and Entrails of a young Bullock;
(whereof Virgil speaks) but I will describe them as they are already
engendered, as what be the properties of such as are fit and like to make good
Honey.

There are many sorts of Bees; for some are of a golden Color, clear, shining
and bright, others blackish, rough and hairy, some great, some small, some
thick and round, and others spare and long, some wild and some tame; but if you
would buy or gather swarms to keep for their Honey, look and take good heed
that they have the Marks following, as that they be little ones, somewhat long,
not hairy, golden colored, shining and sparkling like Gold, spotted above,
gentle and loving. For the greater and longer that Bees are, the worse they
are. And if they be cruel they are nothing worth; notwithstanding that their
Choler and malice is easily helped if they be well marked and fruitful, by
seeing them often; for in your often going to them they become tame; but because
one cannot perceive whether they have all these marks aforesaid, if he see them
not: If you buy them, before you bargain you must open the Hives, and see if
they be well replenished or not, and if you cannot look up high enough, you may
guess what they are by considering if there be good store at the mouth, and
whether you hear a great noise and huzzing within; and if they be all retired
to rest, if you blow into the Hive, you will presently perceive whether they be
many or few, by the noise which they will make when they feel the breath. It is
good to buy them as near unto your abode as you can, and not in other Countries
far off; for the change of their Pasture Air and Country does astonish and
amaze them; besides also, the farther they are carried, the more they are
pained in their Hives; but if they cannot be had but by seeking far for them,
it will be best to carry them away in the Evening or before day, and rather in
Spring then in Winter, and then to be born between two men, and when they are
brought to the place of their abode, you must not open them till next day at
night, to the end that after they have rested all night, they may be the fitter
to come forth peaceably in the Morning; There is no such careful heed to be
taken in the choosing of those which are given, nor of those which are taken
out of the Fields or Woods; although I could advise the contrary, seeing the
charges and pains are as great about the bad as the good; notwithstanding when
one takes them out of the Fields or VVoods, it is not possible to make such
choice as he would, and therefore must be content with such as come next to
hand. The manner used in some Countries to gather them is thus. When you have
found out any place where store of Bees do use and keep, (which is commonly in
in Woods and Forests where Herbs do abound, and Trees of sweet smell and near
some small River or Fountain) you shall use diligence to find out the place of
their abode, which you may easily learn by watching their return from water,
whether it be near or far off, then afterward in the beginning of the Spring,
with Thime and Balm bruised, with other such like Herbs as Bees love, anoint
and rub a Hive well, so that the smell and Juice thereof may remain behind;
after that make the Hive clean, and sprinkle it with a little Honey, and having
thus handled it, set it down in the Woods or Forests, near unto the Springs
where the Bees do most use, and after they have once found it out, the Hive
will quickly be full of Bees.

The good Householder having provided Hives and fit places, and also having
bought or gathered good store of Swarms of Bees to replenish his Hives, shall
be careful to afford them a more diligent and attentive kind of Government, and
ordering then unto any kind of Cattle; Because the Be is more discreet and
industrious then any other kind of living Creature: For she has a kind of
wisdom coming near unto the understanding of man; and therefore look then for a
more careful manner of usage and carriage toward her from them that are her
Governors and cannot abide them to be sluttish and negligent, nor to be
nigardly or filthily entreated. It must therefore be his condition that shall
have the charge of them, to consider their manners, and manner of living, and
accordingly to frame himself thereunto in the best sort that may be. They have
a King whom they obey as their Sovereign in all things, accomplishing and
fulfilling, whatsoever he shall give them in charge, whether it be to go forth,
or to return home, or to stay within, and they attend him always in companies
wheresoever he be, they comfort him, if at any time he be sick; and do keep
about him if he cannot fly, not one of them is negligent and slothful, but
every one ready and quick to any kind of work; some gather and bring home what
they get and suck from Flowers and sweet smelling Herbs and Leaves, unto those
which stay within the Hive making Honey; others are busy in making Combs, and
building of little Cabbins. Some make Honey, and others attend other matters
and vocations; some lay their hands to the softning of Wax, and temper it so
well, as that making thin Leaves thereof, they therewith build up and frame
them Cells and Cloisters; others with great labor do sunder the gross and
drossy substance, and make ready a place for every sort of Honey; some of them
with their pains and diligence do keep clean the Hives; which notwithstanding
are never defiled by any of their own Dung; for always in flying abroad they
void their excriments; some there are which ordinarily do nothing but keep
watch and ward, to the end that to the uttermost of their power they may
withstand whatsoever thing may annoy or hurt them. They carry out such as die
within their Hives; but then their King dies, they stir him nor from his place;
but crouding one upon another back about him, they seem to lament and mourn,
as they make show by their noise and humming, and that so vehemently, as that
if their Keeper do not look unto it, and take him from under them, they will
suffer themselves rather to die for hunger, then forsake him. To be brief,
every one of them is so diligent at his work, as they cannot bear it, that any
should be in their company that should not be occupied in doing of something;
and this is the cause why they drive away the drone which will never work,
neither is good to any thing else, but to wast and devour the Honey. They hate
above all things evil scents: They never fly against the light, nor unto any
flesh, or blood, or fat; but content themselves with Leaves and Flowers only,
which have a sweet smelling Juice; They take delight in pleasant Songs and
Voices, whereon it comes to pass, that if they be scattered abroad, they will
be called together at the delightful ringing of some Basin or small Bells. To
be brief, their fashion and manner of living is as it were wonderful in nature:
But to give over all further describing of them, I will content my self in
delivering the conditions and duties required about their ordering and
governing.

He therefore that has the charge and over sight of the Bees, must be careful
first of their Pastures (whereof we have made mention before) then he shall
diligently look unto their Hives twice or thrice a Month, beginning at the
Spring, and continuing till November; for there is not that time in the year,
wherein they stand not in need of something, and if they be well ordered, they
will continue ten years: They must be opened about the Month of March, and the
Honey-combs made clean with a very strong and solid Feather, when as they
cannot be come by with the hand, that so whatsoever filth is gathered there in
the time of Winter, may be cast out, and the Spiders Webs; which spoil all the
Combs, may be taken away, Afterward he shall smoke them all with Oxe-dung
burnt; for this Dung by a certain affinity is grateful and well liked of Bees;
but in the mean time before he handle the Hives, be sure that he has not been
drunk the day before, and that for the present he come not near them without
being washed, made clean, and well apparalled; in like manner he must abstain
from all meats that are of strong smell, as are all Salt-meats and
Soused-meats, and all things being strong of scent, as Garlic or Onions, or
such like things; and let him carry in his mouth some thing that has a good
smell; for by this means they will love him so well, as that he may handle
their Hives at his pleasure, and the little pretty Birds will never hurt or
annoy him. In the Spring when they begin to multiply, and increase, and to cast
their Swarms, which so soon as they can fly, desire nothing more then to fly
away, and not to abide with the old ones, and much less to become Subjects unto
them, then it will be necessary to keep watch very diligently, and that from
seven or eight a Clock in the Morning till two or three in the Afternoon, that
so they may not fly unto some other place; wherefore if you can discern and
spy out their Kings, it will be good to take their Wings from them, if they
make show of themselves oftentimes, and seem as though they would fly together
with their company, as also to cast dust them or water; for by these means they
will be kept from going away, so that then they will not go out of their own
Yard, nor out of the limits of their own Kingdom; neither will they suffer
their Troop to go far from them, or else it will be good after they are come
forth, to astonish and occupy their minds with the sounding of Basins,
Brass-pans or Kettles, ringing forth softly; for by how much you sound the
stronglier, by so much they mount the higher into the Air, and stray the
farther off; but if it be a gentle and low sound, they in like manner do stay
and keep themselves near at hand, and below; If you see them begin to knit and
hasten themselves to the Bough of a Tree, or to any bush near the ground, sound
your Pan or Basin more gently, and then having got a Hive well prepared (as
before is showed in taking of Bees in the Forest or Wood) shake them all
therein, and cover them so close with a sheet or other linen cloth, that they
may not get out again, and at night when they are all got up into the top of
the Hive, (as by that time they will) remove your Hive, and set it upon the
board or seat of Stone or Brick, where it shall continue, If they rest
themselves in such a place as where you cannot come at them with your hand,
then take a Pole and tie to the end of it a Hive, ordered as before, and
sprinkled with good Wine, and hold it near unto the Bees, and thus they will
not fail to go into it. Another way, and which is the best in my opinion, is
thus. When you see that the young Kings shall be come forth with their young
Train, which within a day or two will all become together at the mouth of the
old stock, and show by sufficient signs and tokens that they are desirous of
some place of their own, and peculiar to themselves, then set a Hive ready
dressed before them, and they will go into it, and rest contented therewith, and
abide therein.

It is to be known when this young Host will come abroad, by the noise and
humming which they will make in the Hive three days before that they purpose to
come abroad, as if a Camp of Warlike men would rise up and remove; And to know
when they make this noise, he must lay his Ear at Evening to every Hive, that
so he may hear the noise and humming when they make any. And yet indeed this
noise and humming is sometimes a sign and token of some fight or strife raised
betwixt them, as where there are more Kings then one, which must be well
prevented; otherwise by such civil Wars and deadly fights, all the whole Troop
and Company will quickly be overthrown and brought to nothing; but this
intended Combat is quickly taken up with a Bowl of boiled Wine set unto them,
or else some Honied Wine or other such liquor; which by its sweetness is
familiar to Bees for these will appease their fury; but yet if you perceive,
that these fights and skirmishes are not thus ended, you must make have to kill
the Kings of the Bees, which are the cause of such seditions and tumults, These
poor Creatures are so enraged with love toward their King, that for to defend
him, they willingly cast and expose their own lives into open hazard against
all his Enemies, which come to assail him, besides other incredible obeisance,
which they continually yield unto him.

At this time of the Spring it likewise sometimes comes to pass, that by
reason of the hardness of the winter past, or of some disease or sickness,
there is great want and scarcity of Bees in old stocks, and this must be
remedied by putting a new Swarm into that hive, killing the young King, that so
his Subjects may content themselves to live peaceably under the old; but if you
have not a Swarm, then the next way is to put the Troops of two or three such
diminished stocks into one, bedewing or sprinkling the same before with some
sweet Liquor, and after to shut them up in the same Hive, and set something
within it for them to eat, until they be well wonted unto it, and so to keep
them three days closed up, giving them a little fresh Air at some small and
little holes.

If Rainy weather continue long, that the Bees cannot go out of their Hives to
seek pastures, and to bring home food unto their young brood, you must not fail
to help them with some provision of honey, until such time as they shall be
able to fly abroad to get their own living, and to work their Honey combs off,
for otherwise you shall quickly make an end of them, as it oftentimes comes to
pass. All the Summer they must gather Honey (whereof we will speak hereafter)
and at the same time every ten days their Hives must be opened and smoked with
Oxe-dung, and afterward be cooled by watering the empty parts of the Hive, and
likewise be made clean, and all Grubs taken out of them if any be therein. In
some fair day about the end of Autumn, you must make clean their Hives; but see
that it be hot and calm weather; and all the Winter you must not open nor touch
them; but keep them close within till the Sunbeams break forth again for their
comfort, stopping without whatsoever clefts and holes you find, with Mortar and
Neats-dung mixed together, so that you leave none open, but only a way for them
to pass in and out; and also though their Hives stand under Covert, yet cover
them again with Hackles made of straw, or some such like thing, that as much as
is possible they may be kept from cold and winds, which they fear and abhor
more then any other thing, and you shall likewise provide, in case of a hard
Winter, to make provision of Juice of sweet Balm, Honied-water, Sugered-water,
Milk, or other Liquor, which may be convenient for them, in which Liquor you
must steep pure and clean Wool, whereupon the Be sitting, may suck out the
Juice or Liquor that is therein.

In the Combs are found Drones like unto Bees, but greater, which (although
they be unprofitable, because they gather no food or sustenance, but eat up
that which others bring in) yet do serve for something, for they hatch the
young brood, whereupon come the small Bees, and therefore you must not kill
them at all, but keep a certain number; to the end that the Bees may not grow
slothful and idle.

And to the end that they may not endure hunger in Winter, and that they may
not eat up the Honey they have made, and which is best untaken from them, it
will be good to give them some dry Figs stamped or tempered in water, or boiled
Wine, and likewise some Raisons stamped and sprinkled with water, or else some
Curranes stamped with good Wine; or else to cast then in at the door of the Hive
some sweet Liquors with Siringes, as Milk, and especially Goats-milk, as the
best of all the rest, to bear out the scarcity and poorness of the time until
Spring.

The diseases of Bees and their remedies.
THe Be is subject unto the Plague, in which case there is no more Sovereign a
Medicine for them, then presently to carry them far off; they are troubled with
the Flux of the Belly in the beginning of the Spring, when the Spourges are in
the flower, and the Elme-trees bring forth their Seed, where they are given to
feed greedily, and with great Stomachs, having fasted all Winter, and they be
so desirous to eat of these new and young Flowers, as some folk are to eat of
new Apples, and thereupon they die quickly, if it be not speedily foreseen.
For this cause you must quickly help this Flux of the Belly, with the Rinds or
Seeds of Pomgrannets dried, pounded and serced, and afterward mixed with
Honey, and sprinkled with sweet Wine, or with Honied-water, wherein has been
boiled Rosemary, or with Marselles Figs, which have been boiled long in water.

Bees ore often sick when there is great store of Flowers; for the Bees
thereupon labor rather to make great store of Honey then any young Bees, and
so it comes to pass that many die of excessive toil and travel; wherefore when
in the Spring time the Meadows and Fields are full of Flowers, it will be good
every third day to stop up the places whereat they go in and out of their
Hives, leaving only a few little holes, but such as the Bees cannot go out at,
that so they may be turned from making of Honey, and also when they perceive
that they cannot fill up all their waxen Chambers with Honey, they may apply
themselves to fill them with young Bees.

They fall into a Consumption and dry all away when they have endured a very
great heat or cold, and it is evidently derceived; for it is often seen, that
one bears out of the Hive the body of another that is dead, and and some of
those that are within a Hive become pensive and sad after the manner of a
general mourning, which when it happens to them, they must have meat made of
Honey, boiled and beaten with Galls or dry Roses.

Sometimes there is such store of Combs made, as that for want of Bees they
stand empty, whereupon it comes, that they rot and destroy the Honey by their
rottenness, and the spoil of the Honey causes the Bees to die; for to remedy
this you must put two Swarms into one Hive, or else cut away the putrified
Combs with a very sharp Knife or other well whetted Tool.

The gathering of Honey, for which there is so much labor taken all tbe year,
is chiefly effected at three several time, as shortly after the Spring, all the
Summer, and in the beginning of Autumn; but there cannot any prefixed day or
certain time be appointed for the same; seeing it depends upon the finishing
of the Combs, for if you draw them out before they be thoroughly wrought, the
Bees will grow malecontented, and cease to work any more, by reason of the
thirst which they endure. The time of gathering Honey is known by the Bees
ceasing to make any great noise, but turning the same into a soft and low
buzzing; as also if the holes which are above are stopped with Wax, and if the
Bees drive out the Drones, which are like unto Bees, but a greater beast, and
altogether unprofitable, and without taking any pains; for they gather no Food,
but eat up that which others bring in. The Hour of taking the Combs is most
commonly in the Morning or Evening; For it is not good to disquiet or trouble
them in the heat of the day: The Hives must not be wholly emptied, and so all
the Fruit taken out, but there must be left about a fifth part as well in
Spring as in Summer; but in Autumn two parts must be left, and a third taken;
for by this means you shall not much discontent them, but shall leave behind
abundantly behind for them to feed upon, The gathering of Honey most commonly
used and reasonable, is but to take the ripest Combs, and those which are best
perfected, and with all of them unto two thirds; If the Hive be but half full
of Honey, then but the half of that to be taken; and if it be under half
full, then proportionably; you must make them come forth with the smoke of
Neats-dung, or of Galbanum, or wild Mallowr, and with the Juice of this Herb
anoint his face and hands which shall gather the Honey, to keep him that he be
not stung; or which is better, let him have a thin hood to compass and go over
his face, head and neck, and Gloves on his hands; and by this means he shall
see at his pleasure what he goes about to do, and yet be free from the danger
of the Bees stinging; but notwithstanding that you take from their work of
Honey and Wax; yet you should not kill them, nor drive them far away if it be
possible, but keep them to draw more profit out of them afterward, and when
there is no hope of good of them by by reason of their oldness; even then you
must not use any ungrateful cruelty toward them, as murtherously to massacre
them instead of recompense.

In the Country of Tuscany in remembrance of the beautifulness of this poor
Creature, it is forbidden upon a great penalty to kill Bees, so long as
possibly by any means they may be kept alive; when you are to take out any of
their Combs; therefore, you must smoke them in such sort, that they may
withdraw themselves into the top or covering of the Hive, and not to come
forth, or else you shall make them come forth; the covering of the Hive being
taken away and a Sack tied to the mouth of the Hive, so smoking the Bees, they
will betake themselves into the Sack, which must be tied and laid upon the
ground until such time as the Honey be taken away at leisure; After this, the
Hive must be set to the mouth of the Sack, and the covering put upon it again,
that so the Bees may return and enter (...) their house again to begin the work
anew, or else to set near unto the Hive you intend to geld, another empty Hive,
which shall be perfumed and hanged about with sweet smelling Herbs, to entice
them thereunto

The Combs being taken away, shall be carried to the place where you intend to
make the Honey, and stoping the Windows of this place, prevent the coming of
Bees thereinto; for they will busily seek the Treasure that they have lost, and
therefore to cut off all means of entrance for them into this place, you must
there raise a smoke, which may drive away (...) which shall assay to come in.

You must drein your Honey the same day that you have taken out your Combs,
although they be warm and somewhat hot; and for the doing thereof the Combs
must be set one against another in a Willow or Osier basket, wrought very
clear, and fashioned like unto an Hypocras bag; After that you have cleansed
away from the Combs the Seed of the young brood, and all manner of other filth,
let the Honey run through the basket into a basin, then put it into an Earthen
Vessel, which must for some small time be left open, till it has done boiling
and casting forth of its froth; this done, the pieces and lumps of Combs shall
be taken out of the basket and pressed, and there will Honey come out of them,
but not so good as the former, which must be put by it self, that the pure, and
that which is indeed very excellent, may not be corrupted thereby; (...) that
the Combs are thoroughly pressed and washed in sweet water, they shall be cast
into a Copper or Brass Kettle with some water, and so set upon a soft fire to
melt; this Wax thus melted shall be strained, letting it run out into water,
and then being melted again with water, you shall make it up into what form you
will

The good Farmer makes gain of every thing, and I dare boldly say, that there
are few things found about a Countrey-house which are of greater increase and
advantage then Honey. Again we see what Traffic the Spaniards make with it,
who through the barrenness of their Country, having no other means to enrich
themselves, do keep a great number of Bees. In like manner do the Inhabitants
about Narbone, who send amongst us great quantities of Honey, which we make
serve for our use; but I would advise such as make a Traffic hereof, that they
would not gather any Honey but that which is good; For the labor and cost is
no less to nourish and keep bad Bees, then those which are good.

The marks therefore of good Honey are, that it be of a Yellow Color, pleasant
smell, pure, neat, and shining in every part, sweet and very pleasant to the
Taste, and yet notwithstanding this having a certain kind of acrimony of
shardness, of an indifferent consistence betwixt thick and thin, hanging
together in it self it such sort, as that being lifted up with the fingers end,
it keeps together in manner of a direct line, without any breaking assunder;
it must not be long in boiling, and yield but small store of Scum when it does
boil, and that which is gathered in Spring and Summer is much better then that
which is gathered in Winter.

Honey the newer it is, the better it is, clean contrary to Wine, which is more
commended when it is old then when it is new; this also is to be marked in
Honey, that as Wine is best at the Mid-Cask, and Oil at the top, so Honey is
best toward the bottom; for by how much Honey is more firm and heavy, so much
it is the better as being the sweeter.

The use of honey serves for many things, it prolongeth life in old Folks, and
in them which ate of a cold Complexion; that it is so, we see that the Be
which is but a little Creature, feeble and weak, lives Nine or Ten years by
her feeding upon Honey: To be short, it preserves and keeps from
putrefaction and corruption, which is the cause that we have so many
Compositions made therewith, as Honey of Violets, Roses, Rosemary-flowers,
Mirtles, Bugloss, and such like. We have have here in England a Drink made of
Honey, which is far more pleasant, and more wholesome then many mighty Wines, and
it it is called Mead, or rather Metheglin, this kind of Drink is very good
against Quartain Agues, ill dispositions of the body, Diseases of the Brain, as
the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy and Palsy, in which cases Wine is forbidden.

The Contrymen of Provence, and the Italians, do make March-panes of Honey,
and Almonds, etc. which are singular good for them to eat which are in a
Consumption; as also to cause spetting, many other Virtues there are in Honey,
which I shall here omit, and conclude with the discourse of an ancient
Gentleman, who lived a retired life in a small Cottage in Kent, to some
strangers who visited him, wherein I shall a little further acquaint you with
the Commonwealth of Bees, which is neither impertinent to the matter in hand
nor tedious to make you weary. It follows thus.

Gentlemen I have for the space of twenty years past dwelt in this place,
taking no delight in any thing, but only in keeping my Bees, and observing
them, and this I find, which had I not seen, I should hardly have believed,
that they use as great wit by indution and art by workmanship, as ever man
has, or can, using between themselves no less justice then wisdom, and yet not
so much wisdom as Majesty, insomuch as thou would think that they were a kind
of people, a Commonwealth for Plato, where they all labor, all gather Honey,
fly altogether in a Swarm, eat in a Swarm, and sleep in a Swarm, so neat and
finely, that they abhor nothing so much as uncleanness, drinking pure and clean
water, delighting in sweet and sound Music, which if they hear but once out of
Tune, they fly out of sight,, and therefore are they called the Muses birds;
because they follow not the sound so much as the consent; they live under a
Law, using great reverence to their Elder; as to the wiser.

They choose a King, whose Palace they frame, both braver in show, and
stronger in substance, whom if they find to fall, they establish again in his
Throne, guarding him continually with no less duty then devotion, as it were
for fear he should miscarry, whom they tender with such faith and favor, that
whithersoever he flies they follow him, and if he cannot fly they carry him;
whose life they so love, that they will not (for his safety) stick to die; such
care have they for his health, on whom they build all their hope, if their
Prince die, they know not how to live, they languish, weep, sigh, neither in
tending their work, nor keeping their old society; and that which is most
marvelous, and almost incredible; if there be any that has disobeyed his
Commandments, either on purpose or unwittingly, he kills himself with his own
Sting, as Evecutioner of his own stubbornness.

The King himself has his Sting, which he uses rather for honor then
punishment, and yet albeit they live under a Prince, they have their
Privilege, and as great Liberties as straight Laws.

They call a Parliament, wherein they consult for Laws, Statutes, Penalties,
choosing Officers, and creating their King, not by affection, but reason not by
the greater part, but the better, and if such a one by chance be chosen as is
bad, then is there such civil War and dissension, that until he be plucked down,
there can be no friendship

Every one has his Office, some trimming the Honey, some working the Wax, some
framing the Combs, and that so artificially, that Dedalus could not with
greater art or excellency better dispose the orders, measures, proportions,
distinctions, Joints and Circle; diverse hew, others polish, all are careful to
do their work so strongly, as they may resist the Craft of such Drones as seek
to live by their labors, which makes them to keep watch and ward, as living
in a Camp to others, and as in a Court to themselves, such a care of chastity,
that they never engender, such a* desire of cleanness, that there is not so
much as meat in all their Hives; when they go forth to work they mark the wind,
the Clouds, and whatsoever does threaten either their ruin or Reign, and
having gathered out of every Flower Honey; they return laden in their Mouths,
Thighs, Wings,, and all the body, whom they that tarried at home receive
readily, as easing their backs of so great burdens.

The King himself not idle, goes up and down entreating, threatening,
commanding, using the Council of a Sequel, but not loosing the dignity of a
Prince, preferring those that labor to greater authority, and punishing those
that loiter with due severity; all which things being much admirable, yet this
is most, that they are so profitable, bring unto man both Honey and Wax, each
so wholesome, that we all desire it; both so necessary that we cannot be without
them. Here is a Commonwealth which oftentimes calling to my mind, I cannot
choose but commend above any that either I have heard or read of, where the King
is not to talk of, where there is such homage, such love, such lobour, that I
have wished oftentimes rather be a Be, then not be as I should be.

In this little Garden with these Hives, in this house, have I spent the better
part of my life, yea and the best, and thus contented with a mean Estate, and
never curious of the high Estate, I found such quiet, that me thinks he which
knows least, lives longest; insomuch that I choose rather to be an Hermit in
a Cave, then a Councellor in the Court.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Mills, at the Pestle and Mortar, without Temple Bar,
Pandion and Amphigenia, or the History of the Coy Lady, adorned with
Skulptures, qy John Crown in large Octavo Price 3. s. bound,

Divine Contentment; or a Medicine for a discontented man, and a Confession of
Faith and other Poems upon several subjects, by Edw. Manlove of Ashbourn in the
County of Darhy Esquire ^. s. bound,

Chausers Ghost, or a piece of Antiquity, containing Twelve pleasant ^ables of
Ovid, with the History of Prince Corniger, and his Companion Sir Crucifrag, by
a lover of Antiquity, 1. s. bound.


