SERMON Preached at St. Mary-le-Bow Before the LORD MAYOR, Court of Aldermen,
AND Citizens of LONDON, On Friday the 26th of June: A Day appointed by
Proclamation for a General and Public Fast.

By LILLY BUTLER Minister of St. Mary Aldermanbry.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1696.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN HOUBLON, Lord Mayor of the City of London, And
the Court of Aldermen.
MY LORD,
IN Obedience to your Commands, I have published this Sermon preached before
you on our late General and Public Fast day. I endeavored to speak those
things which were most suitable to the occasion of that our Solemn Assembly,
and proper to excite only those Affections which became a People, humbling
themselves before God, and supplicating for Pardon and Mercy and Assistance.
And if the Printing of this plain Discourse, may in any measure help to forward
that Reformation of our Lives, it was designed to convince the hearers of the
necessity and advantages of, I shall bless God for this opportunity, of doing
something, how little soever it be, toward the promoting the Public Good;
Which that we may all, in our several places, zealously endeavor to advance,
is the hearty Prayer of

My Lord, Your most obliged and humble Servant Lilly Butler.

Mr. BUTLER'S Fast-Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,

June 26. 1696.

Houblon Mayor.
Martis 30 die Junii 1690. Annoque Regni Regis Willielmi Tertii Angliae, etc.
octavo.
THis Court does desire Mr. Butler to Print his Sermon preached at the Parish
Church of St. Mary-le-Bow, on Friday last being a general Fast Day, before the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of this City.

Goodfellow.

Nehem. 9. part of the 26, and 27 Verses. They wrought great Provocations:
Therefore thou deliveredst them into the Hand of their Enemies.
THE Children of Israel being assembled together with Verse. 1.
fasting, upon a day of public and solemn Humiliation, as this is; The
Levites, in the Name of all the People, make an humble Acknowledgment to God,
of their ungrateful and rebellious Behavior toward him; how they had all
along defeated the gracious Methods of his Providence, to oblige and turn them
to him; and how justly at length they were punished by him.

He spared them long, and delivered them often, and did many great things for
them. But they dealt proudly, Verse. 16. 17.
and hardened their Necks, and refused to obey. And though God was slow to
Anger, and for a great while suffered their Verse. 19.
Manners, and in his manifold Mercies forsook them not; yet at length, when he
saw they obstinately persisted to abuse his Patience and Mercy, and had
aggravated their Sins to a most intolerable Degree, he became weary of
forbearing. He gave his People to the Sword, and was wroth with his
Inheritance. They wrought great Provocations: Therefore he delivered them into
the Hand of their Enemies. In which Words we may observe, First, The Character
of the Israelites Practice, They wrought great Provocations. Secondly, The
Punishment inflicted by God for it, He therefore delivered them into the Hand
of their Enemies.

In this manner he did often punish their great Provocations. He had told them
by Moses, Lev. 26. that if they walked in his Statutes, and kept his
Commandments, he would give Peace in their Land, and none should make them
afraid. Verse 6. They should chase their Enemies, and make them fall before
them by the Sword. Verse 7. But if they should despise his Statutes, and abhor
his Judgments, and break his Covenant, Verse 15. then he would set his Face
against them, they should be slain before their Enemies, and they that hated
them should reign over them verse, 17. And the Prophet Isaiah, long after,
speaks to them to the same purpose, Isa. 1. 19, 20. If ye be willing and
obedient ye shall eat the good of the Land; but if ye refuse and rebel, ye
shall be devoured by the Sword, for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

This was to be the standing Method of God's proceeding with them, and
accordingly we find it observed in abundance of Instances. I shall therefore
make it my Business at this Time, to apply this Account is given of God's
Method in dealing with his People Israel, (as may be most suitable to the
Occasion of our present meeting) to our own particular Case and Circumstances,
by showing, First, How justly we may be charged, as the Jews are in the Text,
with having wrought great Provocations. Secondly, That we have great reason to
fear, that our great Provocations may be punished by God as theirs were, that
he may therefore give us up into the Hand of our Enemies. Thirdly, What a
dreadful Judgment this would be, which our Sins threaten us with. Fourthly,
What is the most effectual means to prevent this Punishment of our great
Provocations. Fifthly, What Particulars are required of us, in order to the
Discharge of that general Duty, which is so effectual a means to prevent this
Punishment. These are all of them very proper Matter for our present Meditation.

First, I am to show how justly we may be charged, as the Jews were in the
Text, with having wrought great Provocations. This will manifestly appear, if
we consider these following things.

First, To what a prodigious Height all Kinds of Iniquity are raised amongst
us. Atheism and Infidelity have strangely improved their Interest in this Age,
in respect both of the Number and Impudence of their Proselytes. And what David
charge with Folly, but to say in our Hearts, Men are bold to profess with
their Mouths as an Argument of a more discerning Wit and Reason. How insolently
do many set their Mouths against Heaven, disputing the Being, and exposing the
Oracles of God, and deriding all the sacred Mysteries of Religion? Are not
profane Attempts daily made, to propagate the most unchristian Notions, with
that Zeal and Earnestness, with which we are required to contend for the Faith,
which was once delivered unto the Saints? With what Loudness and Affectation do
Men profane the awful Name of God? As if Blasphemy were a sort of Eloqence, and
Oaths and Curses Wit and Rhetoric; as if there were no greater Bravery, than,
for Men to defy God and contemn his Judgments, and to curse themselves into
Damnation. How is the Land overspread with Luxury and Intemperance? And what
Numbers are there, that regard nothing else, even now that God so loudly calls
for fasting and mourning, but to sit down to eat and drink, and to rise up to
play? Chambering and Wantonness are become a Trade and Calling, and all the
Arts of Solomon's Harlot, Prove. 7. have been daily practiced in our Streets,
with the greatest Cunning and Impudence. How many Examples, does almost every
Day produce, of such prodigious Frauds as former Ages were Strangers to? How
little of that Sense of Honor is left, in managing Trade, which was wont to
give such great Advantage to it? Men are now in so much haste to be rich, that
the old, and honest Ways of Traffic, are too slow for the Violence of their
covetous Desires, and they greedily run after the new Inventions of a corrupt
and fraudulent Age. Notwithstanding the public Dangers have threatened us,
which are wont to unite a People amongst themselves; we have retained our old,
and engaged in new Quarrels, and are still assaulting one another with
unchristian Censures and Revilings; and seem to be more heartily concerned for
Victory, in our little Differences at home, than in our Wars abroad, for our
common Safety, Liberties, and Religion. And are not all these very great
Provocations?

Secondly, These will appear still greater Provocations, if we consider what
Engagements we are under, to abstain from all Transgressions of the Laws of
God. This was a great Aggravation of the Sins of Israel, that they were a
People in Covenant with God. The Sins of the uncircumcised Nations were nothing
so great Provocations as theirs, who professed themselves the People, and were
solemnly dedicated to the Service of God. And therefore this is often charged
upon them, as a heavy Aggravation of their Disobedience and Rebellion against
God, that thereby they had dealt falsely in, and broken his Covenant. The same
Aggravation, only much heavier, are our Transgressions loaded with: We are as
solemnly dedicated to God as they were, and engaged to him by the Rites of a
better Covenant, established upon better Promises, and requiring a more easy
and reasonable Service. We have generally made Promises, and Profession, of
renouncing the Devil, and all those his Works, which notwithstanding are so
commonly and so impudently practiced by us, and are therefore false and
perjured Wretches in every wilful Sin we commit. How great then are our
Provocations?

Thirdly, Our Sins are very great Provocations, as they have been committed
against the most prevailing Attempts of the Spirit of God, to restrain and
reclaim us from them. This is particularly mentioned, as one Aggravation of the
Sins of Israel, Verse 20. that God had given them his Spirit to instruct them;
and Verse 30. that he testified against them by his Spirit in the Prophets. But
we that are Christians, have clearer Revelations made, both of our Duty, and
the Motives to it, than the Jews had, by the same Spirit. And these things have
been taught and urged upon us, with great Plainness and Affection, by those
whom the Holy Ghost has set apart for the Work of the Ministry, who have not
spared to tell us of our Sins, to warn us of our Danger, and to call us to
Repentance. The Author to the Hebrews mentions this as a peculiar Aggravation
of despising the Law of Christ, in comparing it with despising the Law of
Moses, to do Despite to the Spirit of Grace. The Sins of Christians Heb. ^0. 29.
are committed against more prevailing Methods of God's Holy Spirit, and these
Methods have been no where used, with greater Strength and Advantage than
amongst us; we have had more of his Light, more of his Calls and Invitations,
more of his Warnings and Reproofs, more frequent and earnest Applications than
most, if not than any other of the Christian Nations. Our Sins therefore,
which, notwithstanding all this, we have multiplied against God, must needs be
very great Provocations,

Fourthly, Our Sins are great provocations, as they have been committed against
many and great Mercies. The Mercies of God are particularly insisted on, by the
Levites in this Chapter, in confessing and aggravating the Sins of Israel. His
choosing them for his People, his delivering them out of Egypt, his feeding
them in the Wilderness, his long forbearances and his many gracious
deliverances of them: And how like to these are the Mercies we have sinned
against? How early did God choose us to plant his Gospel amongst us, and take
us into Covenant with him? How graciously did he deliver us from the Tyranny of
Rome, from a far worse Bondage than that of Egypt? What a rich and plentiful
Land has he planted us in? What an excellent Form of Government has he
Established for us? How constantly has he been watching over us, interposing
for us, and making bare his Arm in our defense? How many signal Mercies and
Deliverances have been crowded into a few years past? When our hearts were
ready to fail for fear, and for looking for those things that were coming upon
us, how seasonably did God send us a Deliverer, and surprise us with the safety
of all that was dear to us? And when our danger was greater, because our fear
was less, by what wonderful methods of Providence were the dark and bloody
designs of our Enemies discovered and disappointed, and their expected Triumphs
turned into everlasting Infamy and Reproach? If we look abroad, what Nation is
there that has had God so nigh unto them for all that we call upon him for;
yea, for what we have neither asked nor thought of? And though we complain
still, as we have always done, yet we should hardly be willing to change
Conditions with any of the Nations round about us. How great then are our
provocations, the abominable Transgressions which we have committed, against
our good and gracious God, who has striven by all the methods of Love, by the
most valuable expressions of Mercy and Goodness, to engage us to return to him?

Fifthly, Our Sins are great provocations, as they have been committed against
the Discipline of God's Rod, and those many Judgments he has sent to teach us
Righteousness. This also is one of the aggravations of the sins of the Jews,
mentioned in this Chapter, and they are often in other places upbraided with
it, for being smitten in vain and receiving no correction, but still revolting
more and more. And how just is this Charge against us also? How impregnable
have our Lusts been against all the Batteries of the Divine Displeasure? How
many fiery Trials have we past through without leaving any thing of our Dross
behind us? God has sent the Pestilence among us after the manner of Egypt; He
overthrew some of us as he overthrew Sodom and Gomorrha; our young men he has
slain with the Sword: He has visited us with intestine and foreign Wars; the
Person of our Sovereign, our greatest Security upon Earth, and many Thousands
of our Countrymen are still exposed, to all the sharp and fiery Instruments of
Death; yet have we not returned unto the Lord, but in this our distress we
rather sin yet more against him. Our Lusts have increased and multiplied under
the Curses of God, the severest Judgments he has punished them with. Thus also
have we wrought great provocations.

Sixthly, Our Sins are yet greater provocations, as they have been committed,
even whilst we have been making public Professions of Repentance. For this is
the pretense of appointing and observing our monthly and yearly Fasts, that we
may confess and bewail our sins, and humble our selves, with purposes of
Reformation and Amendment. The Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 58. 3. does thus aggravate
the Sin of the Jews. In the Day of your Fast ye find Pleasure or Desire, i. e.
Your sinful Lusts and Pleasures are still indulged by you, notwithstanding all
your fasting. And how justly may this too be charged upon us? Have we abated
any thing of our Wickedness since we began our Fasts? Are we not the same
sinful People that we were before? What Lusts have we mortified, what wicked
Customs have we abolished, what sinful Practices have we reformed,
notwithstanding all our Confessions of Sin, and pretended Humiliations for it,
notwithstanding so many solemn Professions of Sorrow and Repentance? How highly
provoking is such Mockery and Hypocrisy? What a mean Opinion does it argue we
have of God? As if we thought him capable, of being imposed upon, by false
Pretenses, and hypocritical Shows, and mere outward Ceremonies of Respect, or
of being bribed by these to dispense with the most abominable Impurities and
Lusts. Thus we have turned our Fasting and Prayer into Sin, and made our
Iniquities the more provoking, by these our solemn meetings. If we consider all
these things together, certainly we cannot but confess that we of this Nation
have wrought very great Provocations, that our Iniquities are increased over
our Heads, and our Trespasses grown up unto the Heavens. And will not God visit
for these things, will not his Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Will
not so loud a Cry of Sin awaken the divine Justice to a speedy Execution of the
Judgment we have deserved, to withdraw his Protection, and to leave us to the
Will of our merciless Enemies? That we may be possessed with due Apprehensions of
our Danger, I shall show, Secondly, That we have great Reason to fear that our
great Provocations may be punished by God as those of the Jews were, that he
may therefore give us up into the Hand of our Enemies. For,

First, We have no such particular Promises of Preservation from, and Conquest
over our Enemies, as the Jewish Nation had. God had expressly told them, that he
would drive out the Nations before them, and give them a quiet and peaceable
Possession of the Land of Canaan. But notwithstanding, for their great
Provocations, he did often deliver them into their Enemies Hands. How then can
we hope still to escape this Punishment, who have no such particular Promises,
when our Provocations are as great as theirs? God did often deliver the Jews
for the sake of his Promise to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, 2 King. 13. 23. And
the Lord was gracious unto them, and had Compassion on them, and had respect
unto them; he delivered them from the Oppression of the King of Syria, because
of his Covenant with Abraham Isaac, and Jacob, and would not destroy them,
neither cast he them from his Presence as yet. But we have no such Promise made
to any of our Fathers, and therefore have much less Reason to hope for that
Defense and Protection from God, which the provoking Israelites did sometimes
find against their Enemies. The Example of the Text then is a strong Argument
against us, if God punished their great Provocations with the Sword of their
Enemies, we have great Reason to fear that he will, much rather, punish ours in
like manner.

Secondly, The Honor of God was more concerned, in defending and preserving
the Jewish Nation, than it is in defending and preserving ours. For they were
the only Worshippers of the Lord Jehovah, and whilst they were so, it was in a
manner necessary for the asserting of his Divinity, and the Preservation of the
Knowledge and Worship of him, sometimes to appear on their Behalf, and not to
suffer their Enemies utterly to prevail against them. And therefore, when the
Provocations of Israel were great, he is often said to have wrought for his
Name's Sake, that it should not be polluted amongst the Heathen, that they
might not triumph and insult over the God of Israel, as Rabshakeh did over the
Gods of those Nations his Master had conquered, Isa. 36. 18, 19. Where are the
Gods of Hamath and Arphad? Where are the Gods of Sepharvaim? Who are they among
all the Gods of these Nations that have delivered their Land out of my Hand?
And God did not give them up to be destroyed utterly by their Enemies, till he
had planted a Church among the Gentiles, and had made them his People who were
not his People But there can be no such Reason given, for God's defending and
preserving us, notwithstanding our great Provocations. The Honor of his Name
cannot be so much interested in our Safety, who are only a Part of his Church.
The Christian Faith, and the true Worship of God, would still be maintained and
preserved, though we should be so given up into the Hands of our Enemies, that
we should be no more a People, and the Name of our English Church no more in
Remembrance. How justly then may we fear this Punishment, if we still continue
our great Provocations?

Thirdly, We have still greater Reason to fear this particular Judgment for our
great Provocations, because it seems to be nearest at Hand. It is a Rod which
God has been, for some Years, shaking over us, and threatening to punish us
with. The Sword is already drawn, we are actually engaged in War, with a subtle
and potent Enemy; and if God but withdraw himself, and resolve to go out no
more with our Hosts, there needs nothing more to bring this heavy Judgment upon
us. And can we hope that God will always be active on behalf of so provoking a
People, that he will not at length be weary of interposing and fighting for us?
This is a Judgment then so ready, and so easy to be inflicted on us, that we
have great Reason to fear that God may thus punish our great Provocations.

Fourthly, This is a Judgment that many amongst us seem to be fond of; some are
wishing and praying for it, and others have engaged in the most horrid
Villainies, that they might let it in upon themselves and us. And will it not be
very just with God, and very agreeable to his Method of punishing, to cause
them to inherit their own Choice, and to be filled with their own Devices, and
to obtain the Miseries they so eagerly pursue, especially when we have all so
highly deserved to partake with them by our great Provocations? When so many of
us are weary of God's Mercies, and impatient under the Deliverances he has
wrought for us, and complain of the Oppression of his Blessings, may we not
reasonably fear, that he will take up a Resolution of delivering us no more,
and saving us no longer against our Wills; that he will make us sensible of the
Value of those Blessings we despise, and murmur at, by forbearing to prolong
our Enjoyment of them? If this be our Case then, if we have so much Cause to
fear, that for our great Provocations God may deliver us up into the Hand of
our Enemies, that we may be awakened to use our utmost Endeavors to prevent
this Punishment, it will be very seasonable for us to consider,

Thirdly, What a dreadful Judgment this would be, which our Sins threaten us
with. What a wretched Condition should we be in, if God should give us up into
the Hand of the Enemy we are contending with? Who can express the Violence and
Cruelty, the Rapes and Outrages, the Wasting and Barbarities, the Burnings and
Bloodshed, that have attended all his Successes? How much do these things
transcend the most tragical Descriptions? with what barbarous Cruelty has he
persecuted his own most faithful Subjects, only for professing the same
Religion with us? What Slavery and Tyranny are those very Persons subjected to,
that support his Greatness and sight for him? What a dreadful Protector then,
of Life and Liberty, of Property and Religion, must he be, especially for us
who have so highly provoked him, and been the chief Bar to the Progress of his
Success and Victories? Methinks the Thoughs of this terrible Judgment, our Sins
so loudly threaten us with, should make our Hearts tremble, and our Knees smite
one against another. But is there no Hope in Israel concerning this thing? Is
there no Remedy or escaping? God forbid, that our Case should be thus
desperate. We cannot tell but God may yet be prevailed upon, to turn and repent
and to leave a Blessing behind him. I shall therefore show,

Fourthly, What is the most effectual means to prevent that dreadful
Punishment, our great Provocations threaten us with. It is in one Word,
Repentance; a deep Humiliation and Sorrow for all our great Provocations, and a
sincere Amendment of our Lives, for the time to come. This we have great reason
to hope, might yet turn away the Wrath of God, and prevail for us against our
Enemies. For,

First, This is a Means, God has always prescribed, for the rescuing his
People out of their Enemies Hand: When at any time he threatened his People, for
their great Provocations, to give them over to the Sword, he still invited them
to repent as a certain Means to escape it. The Prophet Joel describes the
Enemies of Judah in a very lofty and terrible manner, Chap. 2. A great People
and a strong, there has not been ever the like, neither shall there be any
more after it. A Fire devours before them, and behind them a Fire burns.
Nevertheless he tells them if they would but turn and repent, God would remove
this great Army from them, Verse 20. and drive them into a Land barren and
desolate: And for our farther Encouragement, let us consider,

Secondly, The Repentance and Reformation of his People, were generally
followed, with most remarkable Victories over their Enemies. The Reformation in
the Days of Asa, was followed with a Victory over a thousand thousand
Ethiopians; and that in the Days of Jehosaphat with so signal a Victory over
the Children of Moab and Ammon, that we read 2 Chronicles. 20. 29. That the Fear of
God was on all those Countries when they had heard that the Lord fought against
the Enemies of Israel, and that in the Days of Hezekiah, with a wonderful
Defeat of the victorious and insulting Army of Sennacherib. These things
happened unto them for Examples, and are written for our Encouragement. And if
we could but be persuaded to make the Experiment, I doubt not but we might yet
reap the like happy Fruits of a great Reformation. For,

Thirdly, When those that are God's People by Profession and Covenant, repent
and turn to him, then those Ends and Reasons cease, for which God is wont to
give them up into the Hand of their Enemies. Then God may defend and fight for
them, without any Prejudice to the Honor of his Holiness and Justice and
Providence. Nay, then the Glory of them is more fully manifested when he
shows himself strong on the Behalf of them that are upright toward him. When
the Righteous wash their Feet in the Blood of their Enemies, then says David,
Psalm. 58. 10, 11. Men will say, Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous:
Verily he is a God that judges in the Earth. When the Inhabitants of a Land
have learned Righteousness, the great Design of God's Judgments is
accomplished. Then there is no need of giving them up into the Hand of their
Enemies, that they may return and seek God; or be a Warning and Example to
others that afterward should live ungodly. And,

Fourthly, As it does very well consist with, and answer the Ends of his
Wisdom, so it cannot but be very agreeable to his Inclinations, to defend and
protect a holy Nation, a peculiar People, purifyed to himself, and zealous of
good Works. He delights in the Prosperity of good Men, and rejoices over them
to do them good. There is nothing more pleasing, or agreeable to his Nature,
than to exercise loving Kindness and Mercy. How forward then must he be to
exercise these upon a Church and Nation, reformed in Faith and Practice? If but
a single righteous Man cry, the Lord is ready to hear and deliver him; how
ready then would he be to hear, succor, and defend, a righteous Society of
Men? Such an Opportunity of subduing the Enemies of a reformed People, he seems
to lament the Loss of, Psalm. 81. 13, 14. O that my People had hearkened unto
me, and Israel had walked in my Ways! I should soon have subdued their Enemies,
and turned my Hand against their Adversaries.

Fifthly, We have great Reason to hope, that God is thus graciously inclined to
our Nation in particular, to give us yet most happy Success against our
Enemies, if we would but yet repent, from his favorable Dealing with us,
notwithstanding the Continuance of our great Provocations. He has often
stretched out his Hand against us, but presently taken it in again, as if he
did not know how to give the fatal Blow. He has suffered us to be encompassed
with almost unavoidable Dangers, but still at length his Arm has wrought
Salvation for us. He has saved us out of the Hand of our Enemies, when they
have been ready to triumph, in their almost accomplished Designs against us; as
if he were thus affectionately contesting with himself concerning us, as we
read he once was concerning Ephraim, Hos. 11. 8. How shall I give thee up
England? How shall I deliver thee into the Hand of thine Enemies? My Heart is
turned within me, my Repentings within me are kindled. What can be the Reason
of all this Goodness and Forbearance and Longsuffering toward us, but his
great Desire, that we should not perish, but rather come to Repentance? If now
we seriously consider, on the one Hand, the imminent Danger, we have brought
our selves into, by our great Provocations; and on the other Hand, the
comfortable Hopes we may yet entertain, of Safety and Deliverance, of Success
and Victory, if we did but repent and amend our Doings; methinks we should be
all ready to do the utmost we can for the accomplishing of that which, is so
necessary and prevailing a Means, to preserve us from the greatest Calamities,
and to make us a flourishing and a happy People. Which leads me to show,

Fifthly, What Particulars are required of us, in order to the Discharge of
that general Duty of Repentance, to prevent our being delivered into the Hand
of our Enemies. To this End,

First, Let us humble our selves before God, with Shame and Sorrow for all our
great Provocations. Let us search and try our Ways, and set our Iniquities in
order before us. Let us know every Man the Plague of his own Heart, and reflect
upon all those prevailing Sins and Impieties, which overspread the Nation; let
us be afflicted, mourn and weep for all our Abominations, and in the Anguish of
our Spirits bewail the Folly and Ingratitude of them. This is the proper Work
of this Day. Let us try then what we can do, what Impression we can make upon
our Hearts, by reflecting upon God's Mercy and our Ingratitude. Let us employ
our Minds in such Thoughts and Reasonings as these. Oh! How kind, how
compassionate, how bountiful a Father have we offended and provoked? What could
God have done for us that he has not done? And yet what could we have done
against him that we have forborne? O the Riches of that Forbearance and
Long-suffering we have despised! O the Height and Depth of that Love we have
abused! We have been obstinately sighting against God, whilst he has been
caring, and watching, and fighting for us. We have been taking part with his
Enemies, the Devil and Sin, whilst he has been defeating the malicious and
cruel Attempts of ours. Thus have we requited the Lord, the Lord that made and
bought us, our most liberal Benefactour, our most gracious Protector, the God
of our Salvation. And can we forbear to add, The Remembrance of these things is
grievous unto us, the Burden of them is intolerable? We abhor our selves for
them, and bitterly bewail the Iniquity of these our Abominations. If we are not
thus affected with Shame and Sorrow, for our personal and national Sins, we
have been mocking God this Day, by an hypocritical Fast; and have made our
Provocations and our Danger still greater. But neither is this all that God
requires, in the Fast that he has chosen, or for the procuring his Help
against our Enemies, a Day for a Man to afflict his Soul; but to our Sorrow for
what is past,

Secondly, We must add sincere and hearty Resolutions to forsake and turn from
all our Transgressions, and to walk before God in Holiness and Righteousness
all our Days. Let us resolve then every Man of us, by the Grace of God, to
reform our Lives in every particular, wherein we have offended; to sacrifice
our dearest Lusts to the common Safety of our Church and Nation; that there
shall no longer cleave to us any of those accursed things, which may trouble
our Hosts, or strengthen the Hands of our Enemies against us. With what Face
can we complain of any Miscarriages, whilst we obstinately persist in those
Transgressions, which so justly provoke God, to infatuate our Counsels, and to
prevent the Success of the wisest, and the most sincere Endeavors for the
public Good? Every impenitent Sinner amongst us is a Traitor to his Country,
and has a Hand in all our Mismanagements and Misfortunes, and opposes the
establishing and perfecting of that Deliverance God has wrought for us; and
warreth against that Safety at home, which our Fleets and Armies are sent
abroad to fight for. If then we have any Affection for the Country wherein we
were born, and have enjoyed so great a Plenty of the richest Blessings; if we
have any Value for those Laws by which our Liberties and Properties are
maintained; if we have any Love for that Church wherein we were baptized, and
enjoy such excellent Helps for the promoting our eternal Happiness; if we have
any Regard to that Purity of Doctrine and Worship, which by so many Wonders of
Providence, God has continued to us; if we have any Concern for our Persons,
Estates, and Families; if we dread the Thoughts of having all given up, to the
Ravage and Fury of the most barbarous Insolence and Cruelty, that many Ages
have produced; let us no longer delay the Time to keep the Commandments of God,
let us not lose the present Opportunity of securing all the dearest Interests
we have: Let it not be as a Price in the Hand of Fools, that have not a Heart
to use it: Let us not refuse those Offers of Aid and Assistance, which the Lord
of Hosts does this Day call upon us, to dispose our selves for, by a true
Repentance.

Thirdly, Let us endeavor to make this Reformation as general as we can: For,
if it were but in any good Measure so, we might then be confident of the divine
Protection, that God would stir up his Strength and come and help us; that he
would make our dwelling on high, and our Place of Defense the Munition of
Rocks, inaccessible to all the Attempts of our strongest Enemies. If then by
our Example or Authority, our Exhortations or Reproofs, our Friendship or
Advice, or by any other proper Means, we can diminish that Heap of
Transgressions, which is already grown up unto the Heavens, and loudly calls
for the Vengeance of God upon us, let us not be wanting to do our utmost. This
is the most noble and blessed Design, we can possibly engage in, to recover Men
from those Snares of the Devil they are taken captive by, to check the
Insolence of triumphant Wickedness, and to restore the Practice of true
Christian Piety to its primitive Glory. For this purpose the Son of God came
down from Heaven, and humbled himself unto Death, even the Death of the Cross,
to purify to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works. And can we be
more honorably employed, than in joining with the Savior and Redeemer of Men,
in working together with him, for the reclaiming a crooked and perverse Nation?
We can do nothing more highly conducing to the Honor of our God and Savior,
to the Interest of our Church and Nation, to the subduing the Enemies we are at
Strise with, to the Benefit of our Protestant Brethren abroad, to the procuring
a safe and honorable, a lasting and happy Peace, to our own present Comfort
here, and our everlasting Happiness hereafter. O let us not then be backward
and unwilling to that, which we have all the Motives and Arguments in the World
to persuade us to prosecute with all our Might. We have been forward enough in
making Parties, for those private Causes we have espoused; let us try now, with
the same Zeal and Industry, to make a Party, at least, for God and the public
Good. Let us unite our hearty and vigorous Endeavors, to shame and
discountenace Sin, to retrieve the Honor of despised Religion, and to increase
the Number of the Friends and Votaries of abandoned. Virtue. Such an
Association as this would indeed be the Honor and Interest of us all. This
would give us Ground to hope, that God himself would engage with us, stand by
us, and avenge us of all our Enemies. Let us every one then consider, as in the
Presence of God, what is in our Power to do, toward the Reformation of the
Lives of Men; and what particular Methods of promoting this our several
Callings and Places oblige us to; and what Account we shall be able to give of
our Stewardship, when we shall stand before the Tribunal of God, if we do not
improve our Talents to those Ends, for which he has put them into our Hands.
This is a Work of too great Importance, with respect to God, our Country, and
our selves, for any little Considerations to excuse our Neglect of. And though
after all we can do, we should have Cause to complain with the Prophet, Isa.
49. 4, 5. that we have labored in vain, and spent our Strength for naught;
that the People will not be gathered; yet shall we be glorious in the Eyes of
the Lord, and our God shall be our Strength. He will support us under all our
Disappointments; he will preserve us in public Calamities, as shall be most
expedient for us; he will make all things work together for our good, and at
length bring us to that City of God, that Heavenly Jerusalem, where there are
no Fears or Jealousies, no Murmurings or Complaints, no Factions or Divisions,
no Wars or Contentions; but where all the blessed Inhabitants shall be
unspeakably and eternally happy, in the Enjoyment of the God of Love, and the
Prince of Peace, and in the most hearty and constant Love of one another. For
which Blessed Place God Almighty fit us all for Jesus Christ his Sake, Amen.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil.
THE Works of the Most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, containing Fifty Four Sermons and Discourses on Several Occasions:
Together with the Rule of Faith. Being all that were Published by his Grace
himself, and now Collected into one Volume: To which is added, an Alphabetical
Table of the Principal Matters. Price 20 s.

The Works of the Learned Isaac Barrow, D. D. late Master of Trinity-College in
Cambridge. The Third Volume. Containing Forty Five Sermons upon Several
Occasions. In Folio.

Practical Discourses upon the Consideration of our Latter End, and the Danger
and Mischief of Delaying Repentance. By Dr. Isaac Barrow, in Octavo. Price 18 d.

The Four Last Things, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell: Practically
Considered and Applied. By W. Bates, D. D. in 12o. Price 2 s.

The great Duty of Resignation to the Divine Will in Afflictions. Also by Dr.
Bates. In 8o. Price 18 d.

Sermons of the Forgiveness of Sins. On Psalm. 130. v. 4. Also by Dr. Bates.
Price 18 d.

The Bishop of Gloucesters Thanksgiving Sermon preached before the House of
Lords, April 16.

Mr. Stephens of Sutton in Surrey, his Thanksgiving Sermon preached before the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen at Bow Church the same day.

Mr. John Showers his Thanksgiving Sermon the same day.

Mr. Strype of Low-Layton in Essex, his Thanksgiving Sermon the same day.

Mr. Gardener of London his Thanksgiving Sermon the same day.

The Christian Merchant, described in a Sermon; Humbly Dedicated to all the
Merchants of the City. By W. Gostwyke, Rector of Purley in Berks.

A Sermon concerning Vocal and Instrumental Music in the Church. As it was
delivered in the Parish Church of St. Andrews Undershaft, upon the 31th of May
1696, being Whitsunday, and the Day wherein the Organ there Erected was first
made use of. And the Hymn which was then Sung. By Gabriel Towerson, D. D.

The Advice of a Father: Or Counsel to a Child; Directing him how to demean
himself in the most important passages of this Life. By E. C. Gent. In 12o.
Price 12 d.

A Conference with an Anabaptist. By Dr. Asheton of Beckenham in Kent. Price 12
d.

A Sermon preached at the Meeting of Protestant Dissenters, called Quakers, in
Turners-Hall, London; on the 16th of the Second Month 1696. Being the Public
Thanksgiving for the Deliverance of the King and Kingdom. By George Keith.

An Exact Narrative of the Proceedings at Turners-Hall, the 11th of the Month
called June, 1696. Together with the Disputes and Speeches there, between G.
Keith and other Quakers, differing from him in some Religious Principles. The
Whole Published and Revised by George Keith; With an Appendix containing some
new Passages to prove his Opponents guilty of Gross Errors, and
Self-Contradictions.


