A LETTER TO A MEMBER OF THE House of Commons ON A PROPOSAL for Regulating and
Advancing the WOOLLEN-MANUFACTORY, etc.

Given to the Members at the Commons Door, the 25th. of January, 1697/8.

LONDON, Printed for Geo. Huddleston; at the Blacka-moore's- Head, near
Exeter-Change in the Strand. School.

A LETTER TO A MEMBER OF THE HOUSE of COMMONS, ON A Proposal for Regulating and
Advancing the Woollen-Manufactory, etc.
SIR,
I have read, and here give you my Thoughts of the Proposal you sent me,
relating to the Woollen-Manufactory: First It convinces me, that without the
Experience and Information of practical Heads, Men of the best Understanding,
cannot form Laws and Methods, for improving our Trade and Navigation: If what
this honest Clothier, for so I take him to be, has offered, was improved by a
Law, I think it would establish and advance the Woollen-Manufactory of England,
more than all the Laws made these hundred Years. Thus far I am of the
Proposer's Opinion, as it relates to the working Part; but I doubt he is short
in his Method for preventing the Exports of Wool.

His Expedients for balancing, as he calls the Exports of Wollen-Manufactory
from England and Ireland, seem such as I should think our Friends in Ireland
will think reasonable.

There is only two Things that want Explanation: First, Whether Six Pence a
Pound should be charged on Irish-Frize, that would be equal to a Prohibition,
the Commodity not being of Value to bear it?

The other Thing to be explained, is, Whether this Duty should be charged by
our Parliament here, or by the Parliament of Ireland?

I believe all Nations in the World that have heard of our Constitution, think
us the happienst People under Heaven; the way to keep us so, is to secure our
Brethren in Ireland, the Right they have to the same Constitution.

Now I think the Soul of our Constitution is, that no English Man is bound by
any Law made, where he has not a Representative.

Both Kingdoms hold Parliaments; let us be careful of Parliaments: By our
supporting theirs, we secure our own; but if either Kingdom makes Laws for the
other, we invade the Rights of English Men, by denying them their
Representatives where Laws are made to oblige them.

I have often admired the Wisdom of the Romans, in making the Privilege of a
Roman Universal, through their whole Conquest. The poorest Mechanic, though in
a Kingdom governed by their own Laws, not those of Rome, yet a Roman, had the
Privilege of being tried according to the Roman Constitution; why should not we
that have a better Foundation than Heathen Rome, be as good Men, that is, as
Careful of the Rights and Liberties of our Nation?

Let us not then Consent to have any thing imposed on English Men, wherever
they are, that we would not endure our selves. I am sure we should not submit
to a Law made in Ireland; and we have nothing to justify our making Laws for
them but Force, which though it may be a good Attendent to support Righteous
Laws; yet I cannot think it a good Authority to make them so, that are not.

The British of Ireland hold by the same Tenure we do; by supporting the
Annuity of our younger Brother, we secure the Inheritance to our selves.

I am afraid advancing the Power of our Parliament to the breaking the Rights
of another, may turn upon our selves. I confess my self a Votary to
Parliaments, and would therefore have nothing done that might weaken their
Constitution.

I own we have Reason to the last Degree, to look to our Woollen Manufactory;
and I should rather part with all the other Trade and Commerce of the Nation
than that; yet that should go, and my Life too, rather than my Hand should join
in that Act, which breaks in upon the Rights and Liberties of English Men.
Whilst we preserve that, it is our own Fault if we secure not our Trade and
Navigation; and why should not we, by justifiable Methods, oblige Ireland to
serve us in both?

I am humbly of opinion, there are Ways and Room enough to make that Island
equally profitable to us with all our Foreign Plantations; but then it must not
be by driving out the English, in my weak Judgment. It has been always the
Mistake of England, in not giving Encouragement for more of our Nation to plant
there; perhaps a thousand Families might have grown to a Strength that would
have prevented the frequent Rebellions, that have cost the Lives of hundred
thousands of English Men. We must, for our own sakes, keep Ireland out of Irish
and Foreign Hands; and that we cannot do, but by our own People. It would be
unnatural to them, and dangerous to our selves, to establish them in Slavery;
and it is so, where Men are governed by Laws they have no hand in making. The
Infallible Author teaches us better Doctrine, where he bids us, So speak, and
so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty, that is our Right
may no hand invade it. I am,

SIR, Your Obliged Servant, F. B.

FINIS.

