Surinam Justice. IN THE CASE Of several persons proscribed by certain Usurpers
of Power in that COLONY.

BEING A Publication of that perfect Relation of the Beginning, Continuance,
and End of the late Disturbances in the Colony of SURINAM, set forth under that
Title, by William Byam Esquire (sometime Rightful) Governor of that Colony.

AND The Vindication of those Gentlemen, sufferers by his injustice, from the
Calumnies wherewith he asperseth them in that Relation.

Couched in the Answer thereunto By ROBERT SANFORD.

Neither least in Innocence nor in Sufferings. Nec mori vereor, nec vivere,
virtute salva*
Laesa, and mori and vivere.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the Brazen Serpent in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1662.

Imprimatur.

George Stradling, S.T.P. Rev. in Christo Pat. Guil. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.
Ex Aed. sub^ud. 14. October. 1662.
To the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners appointed by his Sacred
Majesty to consult the Affairs of his Foreign Plantations.
My LORDS,
REason could not direct me to a better way to let your Lordships understand
the whole of my case, then by presenting you with the full charge my
adversaries have published against me, with such answer to it as truth and my
own innocence prompted me to make. Here your Honors will find all the
criminations which their inventions could superadd to the proofs brought
against us, and my refutation of them, which are both subjected to your
Lordships judgment.

That this Narrative which I have exposed to public view is Byam's own; I can
only bring these Arguments for: when I came to Barbados (which was long after
the departure of my fellow-Proscripts from Surinam) Byam, not doubting their
arrival, gave only short accounts to his friends there of those rancounters
amongst us, referring them to this Narrative sent formerly: But they,
miscarried by their leaky vessel, came not to that Island till I was departed
thence, and then this Declaration became first public there. Among diverse
copies, one of them was sent to my Uncle (well interessed in Surinam) with a
letter from Byam aggravating my particular fact: He sent both to me, and I, as
faithfully as I could transcribe them, have sent both into the world. I can, I
believe, find some here who having seen and read them before they came to my
hands, dare so far rely on their memories as to aver these to be the very same.

Here now, my Lords, you have both the parties pleading before your Honors: in
the contest, the disadvantage of the weapons is observable; They, having
afflicted us with the greatest injuries, have nothing to do but to be dirt us
with any imputation which may render us criminal enough for the punishments we
have suffered: We are forced to bring Proofs of our Innocence against their
no-proofs of our guilt, or else muct fall under (...) and aspersions: as though
it were argument enough of our cri(...) ^at we have so highly suffered.

Certainly it is a hard task to prove negatives, but surely a much harder case
that suffering Innocence must be put to it, while he that has violated her is
credited on his bare assertion: yet this is our task and our case, and how I
have performed it, and acquitted my self and friends of their defamations your
Lordships alone can judge.

This I shall chiefly urge, our enemies do here confess that they have
despoiled us of reputation and liberty by an infamous imprisonment, of goods,
by heavy fines, of houses, lands, and of country by banishment, and all this
by an usurpt power, and an arbitrary tyrannical way of proceedings, by the
force of an army, destroying the Birthright of the subject. If they must have
credit given to all their criminations against us, I hope they will not he
permitted to traverse what they have confessed of themselves: If then, to
subvert the sacred fundamental Sanctions of our Nation, to tread under foot the
laws established for the preservation of persons and proprieties, to usurp
Dominion, that branch of Regality, to congregate an armed force without
warrant, and therewith to invade the Rights of their fellow subjects, be crimes
of a mid-night-hew, I hope they may be as well understood when they charge
themselves with all this, as when they accuse us of what is less evident.
Since also the Honor, Liberty, and Estates of the subjests are in the
protection of the King and his laws, why should not these persons be
accountable to them, how rightly they have deprived us of all these?

But they think to justify their proceedings against us by the names of a
General Assembly and the united Authority of the Country, when it is known
that the General Assembly, though duly Authorized, neither there nor in
Barbados, was ever a Court of Judicature, especially in criminal cases, such
being always tried by the Governor, assisted by all the Justices, at the
General Sessions of the Peace, where the fact is presented by a Grand Inquest,
and after found done or not done by a Jury of the neighborhood. And this is
according to Magna Charta, and to this way of proceedings the Authority of
Surinam were bound by their own Act, besides the General fundamental
Constitution.

Yet should we grant that it were customary in those Colonies to try offenses
by the General Assembly, contrary to the great Charter, it would not excuse a
company of men who seiz to themselves the Power and Name of a General Assembly,
and vote all those that deny their Authority, guilty of what crimes they
please, sparing or punishing them according to the Rule of their wills. What
they call sedition in us, they confess to be only a disputing their power,
and an Act of Parliament cannot authorize any to be Judges in their own cause.

My Lords, as we cannot loose our Allegiance by changing or soil or heaven, so
neither can we loose the Royal Protection. And that subject that hazards life,
and fortunes to enlarge his Majesty's Dominions, the revenues of his crown, and
traffic of the Nation, deserves not to be disenfranchised.

I should not importune your Lordships with a repeated clamor of my case, did
I groan under a supportable sufferance: but wholly to loose an estate purchased
by a large expense of money, time and travel: to be reduced from a plentiful
way of being to the nearest confines of Beggary; from the dignity of store, to
the contempts of want; to be deprived of that fruition, which when it was in
hope only did sweeten the toil of its acquist; and what is the sum of all, to
see a wife and children, dear and deserving, panting under this whole burden;
is so superlative a punishment, that I cannot believe all they would make me
guilty of can deserve it: Death, though murder, had been a mercy to this.

And this, my Lords, without Hyperbole or aggravation, is truly my condition:
whatever I brought into that Colony, and whatever improvement of that my
industry had made (which was sufficiently considerable) is so wholly gone, that
not the least Remains thereof are left; lands I have there, but such as lie
waste, and, without money to restock them, must for ever lie so; and though my
enemies malice go not so far as to forfeit them, their heavy impositions will
devour them.

They have so weakened me (such was their cruel policy) that I can scarce call
for Justice: by the Grandeur of their oppression they have made the most
probable purchase of their own impunity; and their example will instruct those
that shall hear after meditate wrong, to do it fully; unless deterred by the
impartial scrutiny, your Lordships shall make into these actions; and your
laying or leaving the punishment where you find the guilt: which unfeignedly
is the hearty prayer of

My Lords, Your Honors most humble Servant, R. SANFORD.

TO THE READER.
^F in this Narrative my phrase or style be beneath the elegancy and purer
Dialect of our Eastern English, and that in any particular I express my self in
an Idiom different from what use has made common in these Parts, I desire the
Reader to be favorable in his censure: For (besides that in this I rather
studied truth then words) it is more than an excuse to say, I was transplanted
in my very childhood into the West Indies; where I spent my whole puerility
and adolescence, all the time proper for Erudition, and the polishings of my
now-entered virility. Near twenty years have I been absent from my native
Europe, the greater and better part of which I lost in places unrefined from
their aboriginal Barbarism.

R. SANFORD.

Surinam Justice.
Byams Declaration.
Sect. 1 THe Governor of Surinam has been for these three years past,
annually Elected by Delegates chosen by the Freeholders thereof: A Power which
Necessity enforced them to assume during the Distractions of our Nation, but
always with submission to the Supreme Authority of England.

Upon his Majesty's happy Restoration, advice being brought of his Royal
Proclamation for the Continuance of all Governors, Magistrates and other
Officers till further Order, it was in Obedience to the same unanimously
Concluded and Ordered at a General Assembly as follows.

By the Governor and General Assembly.
Since by his Majesty's late Proclamation all Governors etc. Of Colonys are
Required to Continue and Execute their several Offices in His Majesty's Name
till further Order; and since it is daily expected that Particular Orders will
suddenly arrive from his Majesty to this Colony for the Government thereof, so
that the Meeting of the Inhabitants for the Electing of Representatives will be
but a needless and unnecessary Charge and Trouble to the Inhabitants. It is
therefore Ordered that all Persons rest quiet and contented in Obedience to the
Authority aforesaid, and Perform all necessary Duties and Injunctions from
them Proceeding, till they are Concluded by such alterations as his Sacred
Majesty shall think convenient to appoint amongst us.

Dated the eight day of May 1661.

Answer.
Sect. 1. Those Delegates were Chosen by the People to Erect the whole frame of
Government, and they accordingly did (as formerly, so) in the Beginning of this
last year appoint the whole General Assembly; and limited the time of their
Rule precisely to an Anniversary day, on which the Election of the whole
Authority was to be by the People repeated: and this Power was not only to
submit to the Supreme Authority, but to Govern Conformly to the Laws of
England. Nor was that Necessity which during the Distractions of our Nation
Enforced them to this course, viz. [No Commands from the Sovereign for a
Government] at all taken away by His Majesty's happy Restoration; the
Proclamation they speak of being a mere Chimaera of Byam's own Brain, invented
to serve his Ambition of a Perpetual Dominion, so often and by so many Arts
formerly Endeavored.

Take away then so much of the Preamble of This Order as concern's that
Proclamation, and we find only those stale Inducements (often heretofore used,
and as often hist't out) viz. [ a sudden change, and therefore unnecessary
trouble to continue the former Rule for Elections.] But this Consideration
neither concerns, nor is of weight to Authorize, a Substituted Power to alter
those Constitutions which by their Superior Power were Established: for a less
Potency then that which creates cannot annihilate. Nor can it Logically be said
that the Delegates by investing this General Assembly with a Legislative and
Magistratical Power for a year did by those words pass such Power to them for
ever; so that though we should grant that within their year they could make
such an Order, it would not follow that after their year expired they could put
it in Execution by exacting Obedience to it.

Declaration.
Sect. 2. The Date of this Order was above a Month before my Commission
expired; Here Democracy fell, by the Loyal Concessions of our Government to the
Royal Power of Monarchy: which was communicated by the Gentlemen of the General
Assembly to the Inhabitants of their Respective Divisions as occasion
presented; and all for about four Months Resigned their Submission unto it.

Answer.
Sect. 2 By Democracy here, we must understand the Constitutions of the Peoples
Delegates; and by the Governments concessions to Monarchy, the altering that
constitution upon the suspicion of a Royal Proclamation to that purpose issued
forth: for if they mean the General Submission of the Colony to the King as our
supreme Lord, why should not this Democracy have fallen as well in Olivers and
Richards time (as it was attempted with the like Pretexts) whose power Byam
recognized with equal zeal as he did His Majesty's? No argument can evince but
that, That form of Government appointed by the Delegates might very well still
have Consisted with our subjection to the Sovereign Power of England.

Declaration.
Sect. 3. About the latter end of October following I committed Daniel Jones a
Carpenter to the Marshal, for contemning, sleighting, abusing the Authority of
the Colony; as also for his obstinate refusing to pay a fine imposed on him by
the General Assembly for his former insufferable Insolence: with command that
he should be kept in Irons till further Order, there being then no Prison of
security in the Colony. Mr. Michael Mashart interposed for his Release on
Bail, which I refusing, caused Mr. Mashart that night being ( the 27th. of
October) in the height of his Cups, not only to deny, but to stand in defiance
of the Authority of the Colony. Jones Escaping from the negligent Marshall
flies to Mashart; they both quit their houses and betake themselves to the
woods and to their arms: whereupon I sent Sergeant Major George Usher to
Mashart to require his appearance before me; Mashart told him he would own no
Governor nor any Authority in the Colony.

Answer.
Sect. 3. Though generals prove nothing, and as little credit be to be given
to his criminations who is himself guilty of unjust prosecutions, yet I shall
not decline to Evince that Joues could not (at the time mentioned) slight,
contemn, or abuse Authority. For admit we had not a greater truth for the
Assertion, yet according to that Rule of my Lord Cooks [De non apparentibus
and non existentibus eademest ratio] we may rationally affirm, from its never
being seen or published amongst us, that there never was any such Proclamation
from the King as they ground their Authority upon: and that foundation being
removed they have none for their Government. For the power which they derived
from the Delegates was determined by their express limitation on the second
wednesday in June; so that the Dominion which they were possessed of in October
following was taken by themselves, and is consequently an Usurpation; and
whether that can be sufficiently slighted, contemned or abused, let them
resolve who yet feel the calamities of our late times in England.

I never thought flying from Persecution had been ranged with resistance to
Power; atd wonder as much how Usher could find Masharts Recesses, and return
unoffended from his Arms: a little proof would have done well; some
Illustration at least to bring the tale together. It should seem if they did
betake themselves to arms it was se defendendo, so natural as that the Law
dares not punish it.

Nor was it Jones's insufferable Insolence, but Byams and Martens implacable
hatred, that imposed that former fine: as Illegally and Arbitralily as his
latter fine and Banishment was decreed: they might have remembered the
Precedents I cited against that Judgment, which they could then no otherwise
answer than by straffords case attainted by Parliament.

Declaration.
Sect. 4. But before I proceed it will be requisite to advise that on the 13th.
of February 1660. there was an Act made by the General Assembly for a Levy upon
land of half a pound of Sugar per Acre, to be paid at two several payments:
this Assessment was to discharge public debts, build a State-house and a
Prison (which was Gall to the Debauehers of the Colony) and also for a Stock in
the Treasury: Mashart and Jones, meeting with the Inhabitants of the Division
where they lived, were the first that clashed and stormed against it; In so
much that at that time nothing was done as required: whereupon about a week
after I summoned all the Inhabitants again, but Mashart and Jones appeared not:
I then Declared unto them upon what Basis the Government stood, and the
necessity of this Levy; which very much satisfied the people: and that Mashart
may be inexcuseable, Capt. Thomas Griffith, one of the Representatives of that
Division, did, about the middle of July last, inform the said Mashart at his
house of the Order of the General Assembly, in Obedience to His Majesty's
Proclamation concerning our present Government: the same I advised Mashart the
September following, with which he then told me he was satisfied,

Answer.
Sect. 4. This Section should precede the former as the cause does the effect;
for the demanding of this Levy when the Assessors power was legally expired,
was it indeed which raised the Dispute against the pretended Authority. The
people before only muttered at the loss of their Privileges, but when they
began to see an approaching loss of what with so much difficulty they labored
for, they grew louder in their clamours: and thinking themselves well fortified
with arguments, denied the power which demanded this of them: hoping to lighten
their burden by a new Election, which hopes was Byams and his Partisans
despair. Nor must we think every Silence a Satisfiednesse.

Declaration.
Sect. 5. On the 28th. of October at the meeting of the Inhabitants of the
Division of Toorarica, Mr. William Sanford (one of the Confederacy) did also
very Insolently spit in the face of Authority, stirring up the people to
sedition; and was uncontrolled by his brother, Lieutenant Coll. Robert Sanford,
then present; a Magistrate and one of my Council; who afterward appeared to
head the Faction.

Answer.
Sect. 5. That Mr. William Sanford at the meeting of the Inhabitants of
Toorarica about this Levy did deny payment thereof till he was satisfied by
what power it was demanded, openly denying the Governors Power, I shall
readily acknowledge; but that he did thereby insolently spit in the face of
Authority I must deny, for the reasons afore-alledged. That he was uncontrolled
by me I understand not; for the same that Byam says himself did upon the like
occasion in Masharts Division, I did here, and thereby silenced my brother.
Perhaps he counts him uncontrolled, because uncommanded into Irons as Jones
was: (which exasperated Mashart, my brother, and diverse others.) But though I
was one of Byams Council, I was not of his Closet; and my Magistrates oath
(which he never took) deterred me from such lawless severities.

Declaration.
Sect. 6. These two pretended Grievances which they seemed to boggle at, the
Levy and the Government ( in the latter of which they objected the peoples
liberties were infringed) were but Cloaks for a farther design. For about six
or eight (I mention the most) malcontents; of bad fortunes, worse lives, and
no endeavors, envying the prosperity of the industrious and observing their
own declining condition, occasionod through continued sloth and drunkenness,
were resolved, if possible, to unhinge the frame of Authority, bring all things
into a confused disorder, and out of the troubles (which their sottish
distemper had fancied) patch up their decaying fortunes. The truth of this and
what else I assert, will most evidently appear out of the annexed Depositions.

Answer.
Sect. 6. When the world reads there were but six or eight so very bad as are
here described, and after hears that eight only were banished, they cannot but
in charity conclude those eight to be the very worst; and so amongst our other
sufferings we must wander the world with all this filth upon us. But till a
contrary proof appear, this assertion may be full as current, that above three
fourths of these Proscripts brought better fortunes into that Colony by many
degrees, than Byam or the more numerous of his assessors: (their fines are some
evidence of this.) Nor were they less industrious in improving those fortunes:
many of them also were seldom exempted from the most eminent employments. And
if drunkenness be a crime meritorious, in our enemies thoughts, of so sharp
and severe a punishment as we have undergone, I wonder they were not themselves
deterred (or ashamed at the least) so publicly to become examples of excess in
that kind, that very night in which they had determined concerning us. But I
will excuse them as transported with Joy, and confess that Recriminations
purge not the guilty. And heartily I do wish that this fault could be less
objected to any of us, or to our Nation: this I shall only aver, very few of
us Exiles, did ever any injury, either to public or private Interests, by
Ebriety: a Negation to a bare Affirmative is enough; and the likelihood of the
other plots objected in this Paragraph we will examine in our answer to the
next, and to the Depositions annexed to which they refer us.

Declaration.
Sect. 7. During part of these rebellions dissentions Lieutenant Coll. Sanford
was commanded abroad with a party to satisfy the timorous Indians, who
suspected we had a design to cut them off: with him were many of our bosom
enemies, who all the voyage endeavored to discompose the minds of the
Soldiers, pretending they would get what number and settle S. Vincents: I
waited his return to summon the General Assembly, whereof he and Captain
Strange (at that time with him) were Members: and though I was advised by
several that he was the grand Promoter of these disturbances yet I was still
incredulous.

Answer.
Sect. 7. The Disputes made to their present Authority being so reasonable and
just, Byam to make it a Crime is forced to accuse it of Pregnancy, a guilt big
with Monster, the Prodromus to the Colonyes destruction; as though the new
Electing their Representatives, now more than ever, must be the only narrow
way for its ruin to enter at. Yet herein he is so unlucky as to assert what
every child almost in that Colony can contradict: for he lays the Inducements
to this plot to be discontent, bad fortunes, worse lives, and no-endeavours,
and (the cause of all these) sloth and drunkenness; and at the same instant
makes Mr. Michael Mashart, Mr. Daniel Jones and my Brother, the first trumpets,
and me the grand Promoter of these disturbances, and head of the Faction; all
whom particularly (I should not speak it, were it not a most evident truth)
were the just contrary to all these aspersions; persons industrious and in the
way of thriving by it; living comfortably as any there; and whose greatest
hopes and assurance of perfecting their good condition, consisted in that
Colonyes advance, and their own continuation in it. But this is too positive;
to descend therefore to Particularities and manifest Illations. I shall first
then desire Byam to remember that I was not sent forth to satisfy the timorous
Indians, but our timorous selves; 'twas we had information that the Indians, in
(revenge of some pieces of justice executed on them for deteining our runaway
Negros,) had designed to cut us off; and that great numbers of them were to
that purpose congregated in an adjacent river: to prevent and suppress this
design, I was by order of the General Assembly sent forth with general
Instructions to do according to necessity and discretion. Before my going, this
business of Jones, Mashart and my Brother happened, and the discontents in the
Colony grew loud. That very night that I was to set forth I received a letter
from Byam (which I have yet to show) then a long way distant at a Feast;
wherein he tells me that he had received the Report (by which the whole Colony
was at that time alarmed) that thirty of our men were already slain by these
Indians; and not knowing what particular orders to give, because the certainty
of this as yet appeared not, he leaves the managing of the whole business to
me, encouraging to an actual engagement if I found the rumor true, in which he
promised well to second me. Now let the impartial Reader judge, if there were a
party that designed the Colonies destruction, if many of its bosom enemies
were now with me, who am said to be the head and grand Promoter of that design,
whether a better opportunity could be presented to us to bring all things into
confusion, and out of the general ruins to repair our own? The falling on any
one town of Indians with hostility had in great part effected this; or if (as
hereafter he lays to our charge) we had a purpose by force of arms to remove
the power de facto, and to seiz his person, when could it better have been
effected then now? Byam was absent, the Colony full of discontents and fears, I
in arms with a boundless Commission, and (as himself says) abetted by many of
the faction. What hindered to make my train as numerous as my self pleased, to
march up to the place where Byam was, environed only with feasts and jollity
(to which also I had his and the present occasions invitation) and to make my
self master of his person, and in that of the Colony? But when it shall appear
that nothing of this was done or attempted by me (for if it had, either Byam
would have complained of it, or else I should now have had no cause to
complain) that I managed this business of the Indians with all integrity,
satisfied their discontents, and removed our fears, and, having done my errand,
that (notwithstanding the threats of gallows, prisons, and irons wherewith many
of the Gentlemen with me were accosted at my return, and my self thought
unsafe, because suspected) I, yet, disarmed my self and Partisans, who all
retired to their respective habitations; it cannot rationally be concluded but
that either there was no such plot as is charged on us, or, if there were, I
was not of it, much less the head. And this truth also will readily emerge,
that the raisers of it thought themselves to have force enough of words and
arguments for the present dispute, and therefore needed not the force of swords
and guns. Again, it is strange, if I were the head of these designs, that such
eminent criminals as Mashart, Jones, and my Brother, all then skulking for fear
of Byam, did not rather repair to me, then in arms, and of better force to
protect them than their single weapons.

As to the story of Saint Vincents, the discourse we had of it was as innocent
as any I have ever heard or meddled in: and afterward when Byam would needs
squeez a plot out of it (a torture which at this time all our occasional
discourses suffered) it proved in it self so ridiculous, improbable, nay
impossible to be the real design of any but very fools or madmen; and then also
was so far from menacing any harm to the Colony, or an acting contrariant to
the present government, that after Byam had busied himself much to find out
the depth of it, and had gotten one who stuck not to swear according to his own
dictamens, Captain Crook (happily by at this examination) by a clear owning and
rehearsing whatever was truth in that business quashed the accusation; the
main reason that the Reader finds it not amongst the other annexed
depositions: A fate which I am sure all the calumnies against us would have
suffered, had we been allowed the equity to be present at the swearing of the
witnesses. But lest we ( whom they had destinied to ruin) should appear too
innocent for their malice, they would not, after this, suffer any, designed to
exile, to make a defense, but posted on to a sentence; and if the prisoner but
spoke against it as strange to be sentenced and not heard, Marten and Noel
would make it their admiration that they should offer at a pleading not guilty.
And as these were first ironed, and af^erward judged to have deserved it (for
their better impunity who had so used them) so one, whom they durst not have
let loose after such usage, was before he appeared, assured of pardon, if he
would but with silence accept it; and when he came before them themselves
pleaded his innocence (though the leader to all the declaimed guilt) and
assured their ready mercy; which discourse when he received with a bow only,
they render him as carrying himself with remorse, submission, and civility, and
therefore meriting their moderation; while the others, for claimingan equal
share in his innocence, are argued of impudence, and epitheted incorrigible.

Declaration.
Sect. 8. In the mean Mashart, Jones, Will. Sanford, and their adherents range
to and again by stealth, corrupting and provoking the people against the
authority, alleging there was no such Proclamation from his Majesty, and that
there could be no power over them.

Answer.
Sect. 8. Admit all this be true (for as yet we find no proof thereof) I
cannot but now call it discretion to inform the people (who were by the
intended convention to become parties) of the true state of the question. Yet
so little was I hitherto engaged in this dispute, that none of these in the
least consulted me: for though I was satisfied that the General Assemblies
power was an usurpation, yet I had no thoughts of opposing or forcibly removing
them; and therefore within my self condemned these strivings, not as criminal
but indiscreet.

Declaration.
Sect. 9. I was daily acquainted with all their motions, actions, and
projections, and could at any time have taken them by force, but remitted it
until the General Convention of the Freeholders, which upon serious advice I
had summoned as well as the General Assembly: who were to meet on the 28. of
November.

Answer.
Sect. 9. This I readily believe, knowing it the grand complaint in that Colony
that Olivers policies were daily practiced, and no society or scarce family
found empty of an Informer or Trapanner: one incitement to many hot spirits to
speak worse then they thought. The worst of slaveries! subjecting the honor,
fortune, and life of the ingenious to the mercy of knaves and fools; such as by
these very practices evidence themselves dead to all sense of honor and
honesty. Byam, when he takes occasion, a little while after, to mention my
letter, might have remembered that I condemned, and dehorted from these kind of
subtilties, whereby the innocent and the generous are more often ensnared then
the more wary criminals. But I wonder what Law he has found for acting by
force? he must take it from some new precedents of the late usurpers, for I am
sure our old law disapproves and punishes it. The serious advice on which he
summoned all the Freeholders to meet at one place I guess to be this, he
feared if he admitted the regular way [of each division choosing their proper
representatives] that among the few of his own division he should hardly find
votes enough for himself to be continued one, and consequently must despair of
being governor for that year; he would therefore rather venture his greatness
on the more numerous chances of the multitude drawn into one body: for else, it
was without precedent, and a solecism in reason too, (especially at such time
as [to avoid their unnecessary trouble] was the main excuse for taking away the
peoples privileges) to call all the inhabitants, dispersed many scores of
miles, to one place, in a tumultuous manner to confirm or renew their
government.

Declaration.
Sect. 10. At Lieutenant Col. Sanfords return of his party they enquire whether
Mashart and Jones are imprisoned, and gave out publicly had they found them
committed they would have torn the Prison in pieces; another swore he would
break the neck of the Colony, or his own neck, in six months; another would
kill the Marshal, with other most impudent rants and menaces of these
Rumbullion Hectors.

Answer.
Sect. 10. When I returned it was told us the Governor had garrisoned his
house, kept parties in boats upon the river, made a Sedulous quest for Mashart,
Jones and my Brother, for whom agallows was preparing, and Irons for diverse
other Gentlemen then in arms with me. They told us that I was voic't the
original of these tumults with design of making my self Governor (one of the
many arrows which Byam and his Partisans had frequently shot to wound my
reputation with the people, and render me less eligible into public affairs,
where my honesty was most commonly irksome, because most constantly counter to
their different practices:) these reports kindled a flame in the Gentlemen with
me; who, prizing their liberty and honor, were deeply affected with the menace
of a Confinement proper to rogues: and being well satisfied in that point [
that the Governor etc. had no legal Power] they stuck not publicly to assert
it, and that they could not, but as Trespassers, act a violence against their
persons etc. And hence it is not unlikely but some might threaten to tear down
the Prison, or kill the Marshal, viz. If they should either be shut up in the
one, or seized by the other. And probable it is that in these heats Crook might
say he would break the Colony, inferring that others should share in the ruin
with which they meditated to depresse him; for, verba semper accipienda sunt in
mitiori sensu. But admit these words were absolute, without any condition or
other excitement then the speakers malice, they are at worst but evidence of an
endeavor without effect. And it is an Impudent begging the question to call
them seditious and rebellious; for those terms presuppose a legal Authority
against whom this was uttered; and that was it in dispute, and should not be
taken for granted, till conceded by the controverters, convinced by force of
arguments not arms. But the sworded man takes and leaves at his pleasure.

Declaration.
Sect. 11. After this Lieutenant Col. Sanford sends me an account of his
voyage, admiring at the strange dissentions and rumors which he found at his
return, professing his innocence and integrity which I really credited. But the
report that I had summoned the whole Country in, and these malcontents
despairing of compassing their aims (observing the generality of the Country
bent against them) they plotted afresh: for in this Juncture of time arrived
three ships from Guinea, two with Negroes under the command of Captain Nicholas
Sulke (who would dispose none till he saw the Authority settled) the third
belonging to Captain John Bonner, an empty vessel who had been taken by the
Dutch in Guinea. These Desperadoes inconsiderately measuring his condition by
their own, thought him a proper Instrument for their purpose, and therefore
sent and treated with him to freight him for Jamaica, proffering him fifty
thousand pounds of Sugar to carry them, their Negroes, and such things as they
should bring aboard, off the Country. Captain Bonner was attentive to their
Proposals, till they told him of standing upon their guard, and defending what
should be received into his ship; to which in short he told them he was not a
person for their turn, they were mistaken in him, that he never did nor ever
would sell any Port, that without the Governors order he would carry none off,
if that were brought he would readily serve them etc. but by the by, fifty
thousand pounds of Sugar was more by fifty times then the treaters with him
were worth.

Answer.
Sect. 11. Though I found my self not exempted the list of Delinquents, and
well knew from former experience that Byam wanted only occasion, not malice to
prosecute me with an exemplar severity; yet would I not presently unfix those
resolutions of indifferency and moderation, which in this present dispute I had
put on. Having therefore milded those passions which these rumors had raised
in the Gentlemen of my party, I persuaded them 1. To discredit those improbable
reports. 2. with a still patience to attend the designed convention of the
people (where I doubted not the calming all things by a moderate debate and
mutual condescension) and 3. To disband and retire to their several homes.
Successful in this, I labored the like with Byam; and after I had given him
an account of my voyage, I recounted the various reports which alarmed us at
our return. The innocence I professed was this, 1. That I had no aims at the
government; for the truth of which I attested heaven; and desired him, when all
the Freeholders met, to examine them singly upon oath whether ever I had made
any kind of attempts on any one of them for their votes: and for his further
security I offered to become obliged by all Bonds, religious or civil, never to
accept it though thereunto courted by the united Colony. 2. I assured him that
I never promoted the present disputes made against the authority, and was
heartily sorry that they were begun. But withal he may remember that 3. I told
him I was ever persuaded that if any durst question the powers legality he
would be by reason unanswerable: and therefore I entreated him, since matters
were in the present state, to proceed by moderate justifiable ways, and not so
as he had begun with Jones, in which I could not abet him salva virtute and
justitia. 4. I blamed the violent counsels of Marten, who offered himself the
Hangman of any at the Governors single command; of Usher, who advised and
threatened to nip them in the bud; and of Ferris, to hold their noses to the
grind-stone: menaces fitter to frighten the Colony into a dissolution, then to
work a consolidation. Much of this letter may appear from Byams answer which I
can produce. If now by what he says of my professions of innocence, he would
have the world believe that I did profess my self clearly and absolutely of
his party, approving all his actions, my own Letter, if he dare show it, will
contradict him: and let both our future actions be compared with our Letters,
It will appear, I was constant in my persuasions, and esteem of Justice, while
he varied his resolutions and brake his word.

But it is strange that those whom he calls Desperadoes should enter upon a
treatment with Bonner, needy and empty, to do God knows what; when at the same
time Sulke, famed rich in gold, full of Negroes, weak for opposition,
distrustless of such attempts, gave all the invitations to needy men to cast
conscience and danger at their backs in his surprise: whatever the design was
which they would have drawn Bonner to, it seems it had peril in it, and must
by force have been defended; and so might such an attempt on Sulke have been:
nor can any thing be objected to this action, which would not have equally
sorted to that. But how comes it that this is here mentioned as a plot of us
Exiles, and nothing thereof charged to us at our reckoning? In all the
Depositions I find not one syllable of this, (nor indeed ever heard of it
before I saw this his Declaration in England) and therefore am ready to think,
if any such thing were in agitation, it was some engine of Byams; which (though
it failed of drawing inconsiderate persons into the action, yet) might at least
give some suspicion of a Plot: (and to be suspected, with them was to be
guilty.) An art not unused even there. And possibly had he brought the
accusation into public while we were present, the mystery of iniquity had been
discovered. However, Bonner is now here, and does not accuse us that were sent
off with this matter; If such treaters were, it is most likely they are kept
behind, as fitter for Byams use then our company.

But what may we think this new plot to be? at first sight it looks like the
attempts of those that are weary of their creditours company, and then some of
his eminent assessors may be suspected rather then we: (and indeed his
concluding mark best suits with some of them.) At plainest, it is a running
away from the country, not a staying in it, working its confusion by a
disjointing of the Authority, with which he taxes us a little before: but the
Gentleman is gotten into a wood of plots, and being lost in the mazes of his
own invention, he untreads his former steps, and wants a thread of truth to
guide him out.

Yet grant him all this likewise; I would fain have him satisfy us what law it
is that punishes [this peculiar endeavour] with trial by an arbitrary military
court, and a censure of irons, fine, and banishment? the thoughts of the heart
not reduced into practice, though never so evident, are not endictable, except
in that only case of imagining the Kings death, which the the Statute has
made Treason. And suppose bare endeavors were penal, I have not yet found any
repeal of that sacred sanction in Magna Charta [no freeman shall be taken,
imprisoned, disseised, outlawed, exiled, or otherwise destroyed or condemned
without trial by his Peers or the Law.] Whence also had they their Commission
for erecting a Martial Court? (if we should grant them the Proclamation.) Both
King and Parliament have expressly said that no such Commissions shall hereafter
issue forth. I dare promise that the Authors both for their ruling, and thus
ruling, will upon enquiry be found only themselves

Declaration.
Sect. 12. This project failing, they attempt a second, viz. the surprizal of a
small Shallop of ten Tuns, belonging in part to Cryn Jacobson a Dutchman, who
came from fishing with some Fish and Manates. This Cryn lived here before the
English settled, and has submitted unto, and lived under, the English
Government; by the Act of the Country was made free, has been a very great
help to our settlement, is partner both in Shallop and Plantation with an
English- man, and employed his Vessel only in fishing for the good of the
Colony. But the seizing this Vessel as a Prize for his Majesty they designed as
a mask, and arm and congregate themselves against his Majesty's Power, which
their own confession does manifest. On the 23. of November. Captain Thomas Crook
(an old Soldier, fitter to execute than contrive) with Captain George Strange,
Mr. Michael Mashart, Mr. Rowland Bulkley, Mr. Thomas Archer and others, entered
this Shallop, having two Men and a Boy aboard her. Crook in the first place
burns one of the Seamen in the breast with a light Match, to extort a
confession where the Ammunition lay, which he discovered: in the next place he
plundered their Chests, and divided what he found amongst his Officers which he
had made. Captain Strange was sent abroad to procure what men, arms, and
ammunition he could possible; about seven pounds of powder, some ball, and
firelocks he immediately sent aboard with his Negroes, and in the night
followed with Mr. William Needham, Mr. William Sanford, Mr. Peter Fabian armed:
And when they had fixed and charged their arms, Crook vaunted [now we are ready
to talk with the Governor.]

Answer.
Sect. 12. Dolosus versatur in Generalibus, and though Byam cannot define what
the evil of taking this Shallop is, yet it must be a nefarious project, the
prosecuting of a wicked design, so horrid, that his mouth is filled with the
very name of it, and cannot pronounce the thing. But because he seems to be at
a loss to determine what ends six or seven unarmed men could have, in
publicly seizing a small Shallop of inconsiderable value, up in the heart of
the River, and there remaining with the possession of her; I will undeceive the
world with the whole story of that action, which Byam portions out (as he does
our words also) by such pieces as best size with his purpose. Those Gentlemen
then here named, were in company with Mr. Wroth; (whom I wonder should be left
out, being the ringleader in this action to the rest) their discourse was of
what was then the common talk, the presentidisputes against the Government, and
what best course might be taken to make Byam show authority for his continuing
Governor. Wroth hereupon advises to seize this Vessel (whose owners and
Sailers were Dutch, and who unluckily lay in their Eye) as a prize to his
Majesty. A Court, says he, must be called to try the King's Title, we will
plead to the Jurisdiction of that Court, and thereby draw Byam either to show
the Proclamation he boasts of, or else to confesss himself to have no such
thing. The Council was approved, and in the posture they were, (which was
without all kind of furniture for any other design) they go aboard this Boat,
take her as his Majesty's prize, put two of the Seamen ashore, and one they
let remain aboard to see that nothing be Embezeled. Captain Strange is desired
to acquaint my Brother (dwelling hard by) with this action, that he might go
and consult with Mr. Wroth about managing the intended Plea, because he had
seen the late Act of Parliament concerning Trade, on which they purposed to
prosecute this Vessel, and justify their seizure: this was the occasion of my
Brother's coming to them, armed only with his Sword, whosate a while on the
side of the Shallop, entertaining discourses with Mr. Wroth, and then returned
home. Strange in this mean while goes to Crooks and his own house, and fetches
thence two or three Carbines and a Pistol, and some small ammunition; rather to
secure the prize from a being re-taken by the owners, and themselves from a
being ridiculously cudgelled out of her by the Seamen, then with any hopes
with so small a force to oppose Byam and the generality of the Colony, which
(as himself says a little before) themselves had observed to be bent against
them. After this Strange returns, accompanied with Needham and Fabian, who
co-habited in the same house with him. M. Wroth had this day appointed Banister
to come and receive some Coppers which he had sold him, and fearing least
Banister should pass by unseen and miss of him, it was concluded to hale all
Boats that came up with the Flood, which they did till they found Banister,
with whom Mr. Wroth went home. Mr. Mashart returned also ashore again, it being
resolved upon, to leave no more aboard the Shallop than might serve to keep the
possession of her. As to the other Bugbear actions and speeches, I shall take
occasion to speak to them when I examine the Depositions.

All this I learned from Mr Wroth and my Brother, at such time as their visits
were permitted; for as yet I had not intermingled with any thing they call
Sedition. And here now the Reader has a clear view of this action, and the
very inside of it; let him compare this Relation with the annexed Testimonies,
and trace it with the severest scrutiny of reason, if he can find a worse, or
other intention in it than what is here declared. But say they had worse
intentions, they were ineffectuall; and had they had a full and mischievous
effect, I do not yet find that Byam and his accomplices could legally judge
either actions or intentions. If it be said, that then none could, and
consequently the Colony was in a miserable condition; I grant that too, but
fault none but Byam and his Partisans for drawing on that misery.

But what would Byam infer from the enumeration of all these arguments in
behalf of Cryn? that his Shallop was no Prize? alas! that is not the Dispute,
but whether she might without a horrid crime be seized as a Prize or not; and
whether, being seized, his Majesty ought not to have had a legal trial for her?
Had Byam called a legal, or only a formal Court, to take judicial cognizance of
this case, he would not have been much put to it for arguments to defend Cryns
title; for the seizers purposed not to urge that point so severely to his
prejudice, after they had been once convinced of the Courts Authority and
Jurisdiction: and this may appear from what is witnessed that Crook should say:
[I value not my part of this prize at a pipe of Tobacco, it is another business
we are come about concerning the Country, and the choosing a new Governor.]

Declaration.
Sect. 13. These rebellious acts of Felony and hostility were no sooner
committed, but I had immediately advice thereof, (though at that time five
leagues from them) as also of their intentions to r'ally what force possible
they could, to guard the River, and keep Boats from passing to the meeting
(which was to be about four days after) to seize my Person, to bring all
things into confusion, the better to compass their ends. Whereupon, seriously
considering the danger of delays, I forthwith commanded Sergeant Major Geo.
Usher with a Periago manned, with strict orders, if possible, to regain the
Shallop-peaceably, if not, by force: and at the same time I raised all the
upper parts of the Country and followed to his assistance. But in my way I
encountered my Major returning, who gave me this account; that he found twelve
men in arms aboard, that they required him to keep off from the Vessel, being
all in a warlike posture; that he commanded them in his Majesty's name from me
to deliver up the Vessel, which they refused; that he surrounded her several
times, and told them he would permit none to come ashore from her, or go aboard
to her; that they, fearing my sudden approach to reinforce him, after some
debate surrendered her up; that they were gone to Cassiapoory with their arms
and ammunition.

Answer.
Sect. 13. By the Epithets he gives to this lawful and justifiable action, may
be seen how far every of Byams accusations is to be credited without
examination: But to the point. I will believe his Mercury's nimble enough, and
affirm some of them rode on the wings of the air, the air I mean, of his own
fancy: and those were they that brought him the immediate intelligence of these
Gentlemen's intentions, and were I suppose the same that brought the former
advice of his Majesty's Proclamation. And because the Gentleman vouchsafes to
come forth of his cloud of Generals, and expose himself to view, we will a
while survey him. And first, what ends should these men have in endeavoring to
guard the River, and keep Boats from passing to the meeting, since themselves
waited for that meeting? Is it likely that any men in their wits should seize a
heavy Shallop, unable to move, (had she been unmor'd, which she never was) but
as acted by the stream or a chanceable wind, with her to r'ally what possible
force to guard the River? From what quarter too should they fetch these forces?
the whole Colony are said to be against them. If they had hopes for such
intents, they were themselves Masters of Periagoes susceptible of ten times the
force, with which they could have moved into all quarters with an activity and
terror requisite to such a design, and have seized Byams person (or attempted
at least) at home in his own house, and not ridiculously have sent him an alarm
four and twenty hours before, and waited his coming at their station five
leagues distance, with hopes then to take him when he centupled their strength,
and had coopt them up within their wooden walls. I wonder he had not contrived
their plot for them thus, that they determi-to have Byam come aboard to them,
and deliver himself up: or thus, that they were resolved that he should call
none to his guard but who were of their faction, and should betray him unto
them: for the manner which they used in carrying on this design which he
charge them with, points at some such strange hope, or else (which is the
more likely truth) they had indeed no such purpose at all. But how comes he
here to say, they would keep Boats from the meeting, both when the sixth part
of the Country were not to pass that way, and when in the Depositions (to
which he gives such uncontrovertible credit) Crook is accused himself to
purpose a repair to the meeting, to try whether they would make the Shallop a
Prize or not? How is it too, that even now they were presented as running away,
and, having gotten wings, they fix themselves into a standing guard.

Though where Usher is known there be no great credit given to his words or
oaths; and though he here commit a great mistake in telling twelve for seven,
(fear frequently multiplies the object) yet we will not dispute the verity of
his relation to his Patroon; but only affirm, that they that had taken the
Prize were before determined to deliver her up to Byams order upon the first
summons; (the reason that several were already gone from her) Crook only, with
a soldiers bravery, was desirous to try whither Byam, or any by his command,
durst act hostility against them that declared themselves to stand there in
defense of his Majesty's Shallop: and upon that score it was that he said when
he charged the guns (not [now we are ready to talk with the Governour] but, as
in the Depositions) now I wish the Governor would come and speak with us. In
pursuance of this council also was the shallop first refused to Usher; they
only waiting the effects of his braving rounds: nor did they at last deliver
her for fear of Byams re-inforcement (of which there was great need, indeed,
against seven men and a longboat) for some of them were resolved to try him
too as well as his Aga; but others (fearing they should not make so clear and
evident a justification of the harmlesseness of this action, by their voluntary
surrender of the shallop, if they deferred it till Byams approach, when they
might seem rather enforced to it) pursued the former council; and, as soon as
Usher was gone shore, followed him and delivered up the vessel to him; taking
his had and faith that she should remain in notion of a prize till a legal
court word determined the question.

Declaration.
Sect. 14. The Country being up and very unwilling to retire home till these
disturbers of their peace were secured, earnestly desired (to which I as
readily condescended) that these enemies to our King and Country might be
speedily apprehended; which in honor and duty I was bound to see performed,
had it not been so seriously requested. And therefore that night I sent Captain
Augustine Story with a party of firelocks, who found most of this seditious
gang together; whom he disarmed and brought away, as also their arms and
ammunition: these ( with some other of the confederacy whom I had surprised a
little before) I committed under a guard till the meeting of the General
Assembly, which was to be about four days after. The next day I writ a very
civil letter to Lieutenant Colonel Sanford (who was of my council) advising
him of all occurrences and transastions, and desired his company and advice in
these distempers: but he, being nettled that his accomplices were under
restraint, instead of observing my orders repairs immediately to them, and
first commanded Captain Story (who had then command of the guard) to lay down
his arms; to whom he made answer that he could not do it without my order;
Sanford said he was his Superior Officer, and therefore he ought to obey him;
Story retorted that he was placed there by him that was Superior to them both:
whereupon Sanford flies to the house where the prisoners were, commanded them
all forth and told them if they had courage they should follow him and he would
stand by them with his life and fortunes. But Captain Story (a gentleman not to
be bafled) caused them to retire, and presently advised me of the impudent
passages of this insolent and imperious person. Hastening to the guard I found
all quiet, and told Sanford I admired at what he had done, who answered that it
was against law in time of peace to keep any under restraint by force of arms;
to whom I replied, that if in time of peace men assumed arms against the
Authority, it was lawful and requisite to apprehend such by force of arms,
and guard them with arms till they came to a trial, and withal I charged him
as a traitor and an enemy to our sovereign Lord the King, and committed him to
the rest of the conspiracy: where he vomited such pickled language from the
brine of his passion as exceeded the Rhetoric of Belinsgate; which caused me
to remove him, from a convenient quarter, to aboard the Shallop: where the
continuance of the scurrility of his tongue enforced me (through the Complaint
of several) to deny him the society of any (for a time) except his wife.

Answer.
Sect. 14. I believe his excitements from the Country (who he says desired
this) will, upon search, be found as slender as the concernments of honor and
duty which impulsed him to the following dishonorable, unjust, and malicious
prosecutions. But because he tells the manner of his seizing us with too much
advantage to himself, I shall give the Reader a more punctual account of it. On
Sunday the 24. of November toward night Byam moves downward, and in the way
meets Mr. Mashart going home, whom he causes his soldiers to lay hold on and
keep prisoner. The night was come on before he came so low as my Brothers, and
a party is commanded to beset his chamber and take him, which they did, finding
him alone and abed: thence he sends Usher to Colonel Elyes (who knowing
nothing of the Shallop, had no crime but hospitality, and denying to declare
the quantity of his land) he finds him asleep also, and without company (save
those of his family) yet leads him away prisoner. Story marches to Mr. Wroths
(whether the Gentlemen that had surrendered the prize were retired, till Sunday,
on which our law interdicted traveling, were over) finds the rest, that Byam
bent against, there, but asleep; he wakens and acquaints them with the
Governors orders, to which they readily yielded themselves. The soldiers
hunted for arms and ammunition every where, but found none but what necessity
and the law warranted and allowed; which yet they carried away, more
feloniously then the others seized the Shallop. Byam that night sends away
Usher to raise the lower divisions also into arms, thinking himself not yet
secure enough against half a score disarmed captives. On Tuesday before day I
was rouzed by a messenger from the prisoners, who gave me a particular relation
of all our proceedings, and that (from some words of Ushers) they were assured
that it was decreed to try them by a Court of War, in which Mashart and my
Brother, at fewest, would be condemned to death. This was the first knowledge I
had of these passages; and let it not seem strange that I was transported with
the apprehension of the danger a Brother and friend were in, whom I knew
guiltless even as to bonds. This news is seconded with Byams letter,
aggravating their fact with swelling words, and menacing a punishment conform
to his prejudice. I had presently a thousand diversities of thoughts, all
tending to secure these innocents from Byams homest blows. I had frequently
experimented in Jones's case and others, that no plea, no showing of law, would
prevail with Byam and Marten to alter their determination of arbitrarily
proceeding against such as they had designed the examples of their revenge; and
all the rest of the General Assembly were either biased by interest, or else
ignorant of law and reason too, and had therefore such dread and esteem of
those two, that they durst not presume to think contrariant to their sentence.
In my advocation, therefore I had no hopes to stead them, though the second in
authority both civil and martial. Yet the danger that threatened them was of
that kind, that I durst not hazard them to the sufferance of it. What did
therefore offer it self most presently to my fancy I resolved to put in
execution (having but little discoursing time left me) and that was, before
Byams whole strength was come together, to make trial of my power as a
magistrate, thereby, and with that interest I had in the command of the
soldiers, to remove the prisoners from under their present restraint to a
place remote from the reach of Byams fury, at which distance we might contend
with the less bestial weapons, arguments and reason, and capitulate for our
return and safety. The present straight affairs were in might urge to a less
ponderated attempt, rashness being often more excusable in such contingencies,
than dull coldness, and more frequently crowned in the event. When I came
therefore to the Guards, and found Story deaf to my desires of entrusting his
charge to me, and regardlesse of my promises to have them forthcoming to a
legal trial, I assaulted him with commands as his superior officer, and
finding shows of resistance, I bade the prisoners, if they had yet any courage
left, to follow me, and I would lead them through the guards.

But some of themselves (overruled I suppose by their fears) desired me first
to send and speak with Byam; which I unluckily (not without Pregnosticks of my
felt-sufferings) assented to. Thus fear of my friends danger made me fearless
of my own, and for only laboring to preserve innocence from an unjust
violence, and the laws (to which I was svvorn) from a forcible subversion, I
must fall under the infamy of treason, more rightly due to them that acted the
persecution from which I was flaying. For when Byam landed, he and Noel charged
me as a Traitor to his Majesty, boasting that [this was it he had a long, time
aimed at.] I made my appeal presently for England, where (I told him) Treason
was only to be tried; but he said [I should find he would try me there]: to
which I answered, murder me he might, trial it could not be called; and
turning to the people, I tole them that that man in the white doublet (pointing
to Byam) had no power, and therefore could not justify them for abetting those
illegalities against us. And whatever the law should determine his crime to be,
when he had finished his purpose on us, whether treason or murder, they were
all guilty of the same for standing by and comforting him therein: And this was
the Belinsgate-language wherewith he charge me; and for such kind of
d^scourse I was afterward confined a board that fatal Shallop, where when I
showed to several strangers, visiters, the last Commission Byam had from he
Delegates, and how long since his power was determined, Usher was sent aboard,
commanded my company and papers away, and me to be kept in the stinking close
hold of the Shallop, where none was to see or speak with me: nor would they
suffer me to keep the statutes of England, but took them away also and carried
them to Byam.

But grant that I railed in the Idiom of an oyster-wench, it can be at worst
but an incivility; and such a kind of indiscretion in me, as it is in that
person, who, over-cholerick at his loss, etc. rails at the robbers while he is
yet in their power; the world by a common irony may say [he deserved the ill
usage he suffered for having less moderation at such a time] but I think none
will conclude the inflictions of the robbers, justice; nor will it be excuse
for them when they come to the Bar to say, we bound and gagged him because he
should not proclaim our theft and call in defense.

Declaration.
Sect. 15. On the 28. of November, the General Assembly being sat, I sent for
Colonel Christopher Legard, Captain Charles Legard, and Captain Nicholas Sulke,
who were in England at the happy revolution; and did there declare and aver
that they had seen and heard his Majesty's Proclamation for the continuance of
all Governors, Magistrates, etc. I then caused all the inhabitants then
present to be drawn up, to whom I declared the cause of their convention, the
authors of our disturbances, the drift of their designs, their rebellious,
fellonious, and most impudent actings, and Gods mercy in our preservation. The
people being all well satisfied, I sent for the prisoners one by one before the
united authority of the Colony; where their charges and impeachments were read,
evidence viva voce of the words and actions; which the annexed depositions will
at large declare. And according to their crimes and qualities were censured,
some to depart the Colony, and not to return in five years, others to depart
and were fined, others were fined and not sent off: but one as deep as the rest
carrying himself with remorse submission and civility, obtained a more moderate
censure.

Answer.
Sect, 15. There is a sort of men in the world that will say more in their
friends behalf then they will swear, and such Byam has got to prove the
publishing of a Royal Proclamation, which I cannot hear any man in England say
he ever heard or saw. But it is somewhat strange that Byam and Marten should,
not above a year before, themselves form and contrive an Act for the General
Assembly to pass, wherein it was ordained, That the constitution of the
Delegates should not be altered though a Commission came from the sovereign
power for the government or propriety, until we had first sent home to
acquaint the power with the inconveniences of admitting a change of rule, and
obtained an answer; And that now upon a hearsay (nay some months before that
hearsay arrived) they should be the leading men to change this established
form. But every man is nearest to himself; and Marten, besides, is so famous in
nothing as his variety of councels: and it seems the whole bulk of Government
must dance to the changes of his brain.

Yet, how slender soever this proof was of a thing of that nature, it was
suffic^ent (and less would have been so in a matter that Byam would that it
should be) to cause this General Assembly (as they call themselves) even before
any of us were called before them, to sentence the disputes to the authority as
a traiterous and rebellious opposing his Majesty's power, and the taking the
Shallop (without ever examining any reasons) as a felonious act: so that when
we were brought to the Tribunal, it was to judgment, not to trial, and
accordingly we no sooner appeared than received their condemnation.

Now, though (be it true that these men heard such a Proclamation) I will not
determine how far such Royal Edicts exact their obedience within whose
precincts they never came to be published; yet, this I dare aver, that there
was never any command from his Majesty that any freeman should be taken,
disseized, and axiled without trial by his Peers and the Law. Nor did the King
authorize any to be Judges in their own cause; or ever grant Commission to Byam
to proceed against his Majesty's subjects by a martial court and way, contrary
to the laws and franchises of the land: And yet see here Byams confession for
thus proceeding against us. Nor can they deny this by stiling themselves the
united authority; for grant their authority lawful, it cannot deprive us of
our Magna Charta Privileges. Let Bradshaw declaim with a voice of thunder, and
face of brass that his Court is founded on the highest authority, yet nothing
but an army can draw an honest man's silent assent.

I cannot less wonder at the diversities of judgments on one and the same
fact; had the law appointed the penalty it could not have been so strangely
different, nor the Judge (if sworn to observe that law) have dared to dispense
it in a various manner. Hence it is evident, their judgment, if by law, was by
a diverse and uncertain law, and, ubi lex aut vaga aut incerta miserrima est
servitus.

Declaration.
Sect. 16. The last that came before authority was Lieutenant Colonel Sanford,
who, though he brought up the Rear was the head of the faction. The first word
that proceeded out of his mouth was the lie, which he seconded with most
impudent railing against the General Assembly: whereupon I remanded him to
prison to be secured in irons, and afterward fined in five thousand pounds of
sugar, and to be sent off in the first ship bound for England, which was his
desire.

Answer.
Sect. 16. It is accounted a dangerous birth where the feet come foremost, and
certainly, if I were the head of this sedition (as they call it) the chief
reason of its miscarriage was my appearing last in the action.

The first word that proceeded out of my mouth was a truth, and that I seconded
by others as great truths: but when my arguments grew of force I was silenced.
And though this General Answer might serve well enough to his general
criminations (such kind of Returns having been often adjudged iusufficient, it
being a Rule that Generale nil certi implicat; and therefore the law requires
and injoyns certainty) yet I will be more particular (a curiosity which Byam
has no good success in, and therefore cunningly declines it) and tell the
world the whole manner of my trial.

Being guarded up to the judgment seat in the night through lanes of
soldiers, Byam reads to me some depositions containing the manner of my
attempting a rescous on the prisoners: the witnesses had not front enough to
appear; and therefore I must credit Byam (though no sworn Magistrate, and my
enemy) that they had made such oath. When he came to those words, that I should
say to the prisoners [I will assist you with my life and fortunes] I said, that
was a lie whoever swore it. And so it was, for I never said so; nor need I
disown it if I had spoke it, it being no crime for me to declare a readiness
of exposing life and fortunes for the protection of innocence from a violent
oppression. But to proceed; A silence expecting it, I spoke these very and
only words. I see here so few formalities of a legal Court, that I shall use
as few in confessing or denying what I stand accused of: nor can I expect a
very equal proceeding, finding those sit as my Judges who are my accusers; whom
it concerns as much that I be guilty, as it concerns me to be not guilty. You
Sir (to Byam) and Major Noel there, arrested me for High Treason, you ought to
prosecute, not to judge me.

Byam replies; We did not arrest you for High Treason, but as a Traitor to his
Majesty; and it was for opposing the authority of the Country.

I rejoyned; I opposed no lawful authority, I endeavored indeed to persuade
away an illegal force and the oppressions of violence. At which Byam in a fury
commanded the Marshal to take me away, and lay me aboard in irons.

The turning from them I said; This I expected; I see the formalities of
Olivers High Court of injustice, but not of any legal Court: my accusation is
Treason, not tryable by the laws, but in England.

Byam repeated it; We did not accuse you of Treason, but as a Traitor.

I then answered; How I can be a Traitor without a guilt of Treason is a
riddle which I hope you will resolve one day. And so was guarded away, Marten
giving his vote to hang me up at the window. And these, Reader, are the
impudent railings for which this strange sentence passed on me; which I
received not till about ten days after by the hands of the Secretary.

And that it may yet more clearly appear it was private animosities, not any
designs of ours against the Country, that drew on this punishment; Marten
about this time was heard to say [ Had Sparrow and Harmund been now alive, they
must have gone the same way: but, God be thanked, the Country is now pretty
well purged from them all one way or other.] These two were dead before there
was any occasion for the present disputes; and than whom none could be more
industrious or successful in their endeavors. They had indeed frequent
contests with Byam and Marten, being too much English men to be enslaved or
abused. Nor was this punishment of banishing any other then Marten's invention,
which his Ecch^ Knightly long before in a drunken liberality discovered.

But I wonder to hear Byam say it was my desire to be sent for England, which I
accounted one of the clearest evidences that themselves were conscious of their
injustice, and therefore removed me from all assistance for repair: the Reader,
I think, can find no such desire in my words, not must my judges persuade me
that they studied my pleasure in my pain. Marten was more ingenuous when he
said, [send him for England, and let him be put ashore on the first land, and
then let him prate, every petty fogger there will silence him.] They knew very
well that I had not been out of the Indies from my childhood, in near twenty
years: if they would indeed have conformed to law and my desire, they should
have sent me to England to be tried for the treason they charged me with: and
then I should have had hopes in time to have found them here to prosecute me.
Nor can I yet understand how they will answer the accusing us of felony,
treason, rebellion and enmity to the King, and prove nothing of this against
us. Slander is one kind of trespass, and the law gives action for it: and
these criminations which they have devised against us, if false, are slanders
of the blackest mouth, and may possibly be found meritorious of the Penalties
of Conspiracy.

Declaration.
Sect. 17 If I should add some circumstances of these passages, and the
carriages of these incorrigible men before Authority, it would hugely aggravate
their crimes: but they are sufficiently sullyed by what has been said already
without casting more dirt in their faces.

Answer.
Sect. 17 Should I aggravate every expression and usage of these unjust and
malicious proscuters: and expatiate into that large discourse how, not content
with what they had already made us suffer, they pursued us with avarice as well
as malice, endeavoring to seize to themselves the poor remains of our
shattered fortunes; which, how contemptible soever, it seems they thought them
worth the having; should I do this, I say, it would cast so much black upon
them as would blot out quite the complexion of Christians. But their own
Declaration, discovering so little of crime, and such huge inflictions and
penalties, and yet (as though innocence were not enough stained by their
actions) aspersing us with such hideous calumnies as reach to the depriving us
of our humane eternity, in blasting the fame of our posterity, this very
Declaration presents them fallen from humanity; and shows, how confident they
are that the blow they have given us was home, and we never likely to recover
our feet; and therefore they may the more freely trample us in in the dirt and
take the pleasure of the tongue as they have of the hand already. But a time
may come when this very Libel of theirs, will be enough to charge them to their
ruin, thought not to our restitution.

Declaration.
Sect. 18. Necessity and convenience enforced to this mannerr of proceeding
against these Delinquents; in which our moderation may, I am sure our severity
cannot be taxed. I have exposed this Paper to the view, and I hope to the
satisfaction of the inquisitive: and do seriously attest the verity thereof by
my subscription.

Will. Byam Governor.

Answer.
Sect. 18. The law indeed favors some actions, when for the doing of them
there is necessity or convenience; but if a thief plead either in excuse of his
felony, it will be well examined how great, and how alowable it is. And should
these actions come to such a test, I durst be again the Butt for Byams malice,
if any the least lawful necessity or convenience would appear for these
proceedings. However, I am glad I have his hand to attest this acknowledgement,
and only wish I had occasion to try whether he would be Gent. enough not to
retract this serious averment nor deny this subscription: I will promise him
not to charge more to him then he here confesses himself guilty of, if he will
but admit this as an evidence. But though, probably, he thinks that he now
plays securely, having put us out of all rational possibility of bringing him
to an after game, yet will I not sin so highly against the dignity of Justice
as to despair her taking cognizance of my case; and then I fear not, but that
this Declaration of Byams may dispose her to a retribution: my poverty I hope
will speed, not retard her repair, and what has shortened my hands will
lenghten hers.

And since the Gentleman is so confident that he has not dealt over-severely
with us, I only wish he may find an equal mercy and moderation when ever he
has occasion; and then, possibly, he may begin to weigh what it is to be
banished from estate and relations, to be put out of a settled and comfortable
way of being, and exposed to the contempt of beggary and deration of a wife and
children partners in the sufferance: and all this for actions rather honest
then criminal. The divine retaliation deal to Byam and his assessors as they
have dealt to me, and no better to me then I have deserved from that Colony,
and them; I think the world will judge, I need not beg a curse.

Come we now to the Testimonies which were brought against us, and the
particular facts of which we are charged, as they are by Byam himself exposed
to the worlds view: But before I come to their examination I shall premise a
few things to the readers consideration.

There is not, in my opinion, a more rational evidence of the slenderness of
our guilt then our charge, if we consider the inquisition upon our actions;
which was managed in our absence by the subtilest of our enemies, and principal
parties concerned in the quarrel; who having already designed us for
destruction, and acted againstus with conformable injuries, had a Necessity
urging them to make us as criminal as was possible. Byam therefore, when he had
seized and imprisoned our persons, sends for all that can pretend to know or to
have heard any thing that might render us culpable, and takes their
Depositions: the reader may find by the dates of most of them that they were
taken before our time of trial, while we were cooped up, ignorant of our crime
and accuser: their contents will show that much of our offense is words; and
let candor determine, whether the most innocent persons may not be destroyed
(where words are capital) if his enemy, who is concerned in his ruin, have the
sole examination of such men as himself will call for, and makes severe
scrutiny into all his discourses; picking there-hence such words as may serve
his malicious purpose, and cunningly omitting those, which, being spoken at the
same time, might extenuate, if not amove, the evil of the other: inserting
neither the occasion, incitements, time, place, nor condition of the speaker;
circumstances which illustrate a discourse, and make it often appear very
diverse from the sense of some of its words. Nor will his Declaration let us
expect more integrity in Byam, since when the reader has thoroughly read and
weighed him, he will all along find him stretching his criminations beyond any
thing of proof which he could purchase against us. And that strange passage of
Harmunds and Lacons (some years before) whose names (written in their own
character) were found as witnesses to a bill of debt due to Byam, and yet
themselves did upon their oaths declare they never saw that deed before, nor
were in place when it was made, makes me ready to conclude him not very
scrupulous of another perjury where it may be to his advantage.

And though Byam assert that evidence was given viva voce of our words and
actions, yet I shall desire the reader to understand him rightly what he
means by vivavoce; it was not that the vvitness came in, in presence of the
prisoner, and there, upon a mutual confrontment, did take his oath, and then,
upon that oath, charge the prisoner with such and such facts, the prisoner
having liberty of putting questions to him, and the court of his side to enjoin
an answer to such questions: but, as I said before, all or most of the
vvitnesses were swore beforehand in the prisoners absence, Byam being the
man that took the Depositions, as much ( I must suppose) to our disadvantage as
he could: and then when the Delinquents were brought before them, this
Deposition was read in presence of the witness, who by his silence asserts
it; and if the prisoner began to question him, Marten and Noel would call it
impudence to argue against an oath, and Byam command his Marshal to take him
away and lay him in irons.

Nor had every one privilege of seeing his accuser, but was condemned on
Depositions taken God knovvs when, where or of whom.

Yet all this notvvithstanding, they found (as I hope the reader also will)
our faults so much beneath the punishment they had destinied us to, that they
durst not bring us before an indifferent Judicature, to a trial by our Peers,
where we might have liberty of defending our actions by law, and should have
had our judges of council with us, and sworn to give judgment according to
law; but brought us before themselves (who were none of them sworn
Magistrates except those two that were my assistants in the court of
Common Pleas) where we were not permitted to enter on any defense ( that being
presently adjudged as an aggravation of our guilt) but, according to their own
wills and prejudices, sentenced to inflictions not to be precedented, I think,
in the whole body of our law, Statute or Common.

And herein they acted not only Counter to the laws of England (to which they
had always owned a subjection) but to their own constitutions also (one
instance of that subjection:) for, not many months before, these very men
Enacted [That a General Sessions of the Peace and Goal delivery be held twice a
year, viz. On the first thursday in September, and the first thursday in March.
That this General Sessions do by a Jury of Grand Inquest enquire into all
breaches of the Peace, and breaches of Statute, and all criminal matters
whatsoever, and make presentment thereof by Indictment: and proceed to the
punishment of all malefactors, especially where it concerns life or limb,
according to the known laws of England.]

But this was made while their authority was derived from the Delegates; they
decreed then like Substitutes conforming to their Commission and instructions;
but since that they have given themselves a greater latitude of Power, a Power
not differing from absoluteness; which that they might retain with the less
control, they must remove them who have been so long the obstacles to it: and
because such a general sessions as this Act prescribes cannot complete their
desires, therefore are they necessitated to this other manner of proceedings.
But God grant us more indifferent judges of this necessity then persons so
deeply interessed; who having themselves created it by usurping a power over
us, could no other way secure themselves (in the dispute* made to their power)
from a being cast in their own action, but by an illegal prosecution of us.

And now I will no longer detein the Reader from a view of the Depositions.

Deposition.
The Deposition of Capt. Tho. Griffith aged forty years or thereabouts taken
before me this 28th. of November. 1661.
1. Says. That sometime in July last or thereabouts, being at the house of Mr.
Michael Mashart, and having some discourse of what had passed the last
Assembly, the Deponent told him that it was ordered that the Governor should
continue and no new Election to be, and this by virtue of a Proclamation from
the King.

Sworn before me William Byam.

Answer.
1. Themselves have confessed that the Kings Proclamation never came to be
published amongst us (and indeed how should it since such Proclamation never
was?) and also that this very order for their Authorities continuation was
never proclaimed, but only mentioned by some few Gentlemen of the Assembly in
their occasional discourses; as is confessed here and in Sect. 4. Yet see how
severely they punish the breach of a law which never had promulgation. But
grant this order duly published, the question still is, whether the power
constituted can alter the Decree of the Power constituting in that very point
wherein themselves were restrained; since it is an Aphorism in law and reason
that unumquodque dissolvitur eodem modo quo colligatum est? We will confess
that by the employed sanction of those Delegates the Sovereign of our nation
could rescind their dictates; but our enemies also confess (in accusing us of
it) that we constantly denied the issuing forth of any such sovereign command;
nor can they charge us with any proof of their contrary affirmation: for I will
not be so uncharitable to this Gentleman Deponent as to think he swears [This
order was by virtue of the Kings Proclamation] but that he only swears [he
told Mr. Mashart it was so] and whether Mr. Mashart was bound to believe him,
and did suffer justly for his incredulity, I leave to their determination who
know there was never any such Proclamation from His Majesty.

Deposition.
The Deposition of Mr. Francis Sanford aged thirty one years or thereabouts,
taken before me this 28th. of November. 1661.
2. Says. That being at Patham hill in company with Mr. Michael Mashart the
Deponent heard him say, that he did not own the Governor as Governor, nor any
thing the General Assembly did, for he owned no Power in the Colony as yet. And
further says not.

Sworn before me Will. Byam.

Answer.
2. The Reader has heard that Byam, and that same General Assembly now ruling
with him, were appointed by Delegates empowered by the People to erect a frame
of Government; that they were limited to rule but one year; that they continued
themselves by no greater real power then their own. Whether Mashart therefore
were criminal in saying as he did, or whether this Governor and General
Assembly (who trembled at the thought of being turned out) were likely to be
equal judges of this dispute, or the person that made them, I leave to the less
partial reader.

Deposition.
The Deposition of Sergeant Major George Usher aged fifty two years or
thereabouts taken before me this 29th. of November. 1661.
Says. That being sent from the Governor to M. Mashart to require him in his
Majesty's name to appear before him; to whom the said Mashart replied, that he
knew no Governor, nor would obey any till a new Election, neither Council nor
Assembly. And further says not.

Sworn before me W. B.

Answer.
3. This is so like the former that the same answer may serve to it; only, the
Deponent might have added, that Mr. Mashart said [he owned His Majesty, but
knew no Governour] etc.

Deposition.
The Deposition of Edward Dod aged thirty nine years or thereabouts taken
before me this 29th. of November. 1661.
4. Says. That meeting Mr Daniel Jones upon the river by Mr. Knightlys house,
giving him the time of the day, and asking him how he did; he replied, the
worse for such rogues as thou art; and then, threatening him said, I will draw
up with such rogues as thou art one after another: and further says not.

Sworn by me W. B.

Answer.
4. When it was that this Deponent met with Jones, and received this churlish
return to his civil salute is not inserted. But this Dod was a former adversary
to Jones, in the business for which that unjust and malicious fine of five
thousand pounds of sugar (before hinted at Sect. 3.) was imposed: now probably
Jones met this Antagonist soon after, while yet his choler boiled with the
agitations of his soul on that sharp injury, and was the more irritated in
receiving a fawning treatment from a malicious prosecutour. And since amongst
us in that Colony this phrase of drawing up had its most common use, and that
we there understood it in a great variety of senses, good and bad; I suppose
Jones ought to have been permitted himself to define in what manner he would
draw up with Dod, perhaps he designed by benefits to draw on his repentance.

Deposition.
The deposition of Obadiah Gardener, aged twenty two years, or thereabouts,
taken before me this 28. of November. 1661.
5. Says, That on the 25. of this month, being at Mr. Masharts house he met
with Daniel Jones with his naked rapier in his hand, and he asked the Deponent
whether he knew that Mr. Michael Mashart had any hand in taking the Shallop? to
whom this Deponent replied, I cannot tell, for I saw him at Colonel Ely's; to
which Jones made answer, if that he did know that Mr. Mashart were aboard the
Shallop, he would go to him and maintain him in it. And further says not.

Sworn before me. W. B.

Answer.
5. To them that know not our Surinam dress, it may seem odd for a man to
travel with his naked rapier; but let the Reader understand, that the going
without a sword was not more common; for those that had been there many years,
constant use had worn out their scabbards, and there were neither shops nor
Artists to renew them: wherefore it was very usual to stick somewhat upon the
point of their rapier, to prevent a casual injury to themselves, or their
associates, and so to wear them either in their hands, or by their sides.

By the questions Jones made with this Deponent it should seem he was ignorant
whether Mr. Mashart had any thing to do with seizing the Shallop, and
consequently, it could not be a design of long contrivance, nor intend ought
against the Colony; for them methinks Jones (who was discovered one of the
first in plotting that countries ruin) should not now, in the execution of it,
have been omitted. But how shall we understand these unadvised speeches of
Jones, a single man armed only with a rapier? they are laid to be uttered the
25. of November: when Usher had already recovered the Shallop, and Byam, with
his guard of Janisaries, taken her seizers, (as Sect. 12, 13.) The worst that
can be thought of it is, that, as in the former deposition we find Jones
revengefull of an injury, so here he is the like of a benefit: Mashart had
endangered himself in his behalf, and now he would sacrifice himself to
evidence his gratitude: for other he could not hope in thrusting himself into
the crowds of his armed enemies.

I have a little inverted the order which Byam rangeth these depositions in;
because these two being lodged in one censure together, I would join their
charge, that the Reader might the better take the parallel between their fact
and punishment. Here then is their whole impeachment, both matter and form:
(only that we shall by and by find Mr. Mashart in the number of them that
took the Shallop) and for this they received (as Byam styles it) this moderate
sentence.

By the Governor and General Assembly.

It is ordered by the Authority aforesaid, that Mr. Michael Mashart, and Mr.
Daniel Jones pay unto the public five thousand pounds of sugar, and be secured
in irons under a strong guard, and be sent off in the first ship that shall
sail hence for England, or Barbados; and not return for five years after the
date hereof, without his Majesty's special order: it being made sufficiently
evident that the said Mashart and Jones, have been and are, most seditious,
rebellious, obstinate and dangerous persons to the Authority of this Colony.
Dated 30. November. 61.

William Byam.

And whatever sense may at first sight seem in those words relating to the
fine, yet the Judges interpreted it to be five thousand pounds of sugar apiece,
and accordingly exacted from their estates.

Deposition.
The deposition of Henry Batson, aged twenty four years, or thereabouts, taken
before me this 28. of November. 1661.
6. Says, That he heard Captain Thomas Crook say that within six months he
would break this Colony, or else he would break his own neck: and further said,
That here were two men that would conduct them, one in the front, and the other
in the rear to keep them forward. And further says not.

Sworn before me, W. B.

The deposition of Mr. Thomas Lewis senior, aged fifty years, or thereabouts,
taken before me this 28. of November. 1661.
7. Says, that he heard Captain Crook say at Paramorabo on the 13. of November
1661. that he would break the neck of the Colony in six months, or else break
his own neck: and that if he were clapped up in prison, he would have his way out
the first ship that should come in: and further says not.

Sworn before me, W. B.

Answer.
6.7. The most material words in these depositions are those which menace the
Colony: they are laid to be spoken the 13. of November, which was the time of
my return from the Indian expedition; by the subsequent words in Lewis's oath
[about finding his way out of prison] is proved that these discourses were
occasioned from those threats we receivea at our return: on which, Crook might
possibly say, if these doings break not the Colony, I will break my neck, or to
that effect, which the swearers or takers have wrested to a worse sense. But
admit he said only as they swear, and meant what he said; Sir Orlando
Bridgeman, in his excellent charge at the Old Baily; declares, that in case of
that prodigious treason of killing the King the Statute punishes the bare
imagination, but in all other cases, says he, our rule is, non officit con^us
nisi sequetur effectus. And Wingate discoursing upon this maxim, cites my Lord
Coke ( lib. 11. fol. 93. Bags case) for this Law; Offices of trust shall not
be forfeited, nor privileges in a Commonwealth lost, by bare endeavors and
intentions of doing acts contrary to that trust, and in prejudice to that
Commonwealth; no, though those intents be published by evil threatening words,
unless they be put in execution by some over-act. As to his endeavor of
finding the way out of prison, if he were put in, I think it is too natural to
be condemned: And I remember to have read, that if a Sheriff by warrant of law
only (not of record) arrest one for felony who is not guilty, he may rescue
himself. The words in Batsons oath, of [two men to conduct, etc.] are too
general to prove any certain guilt: why might they not be spoken upon occasion
of the present expedition we were just then returned from? Batson, wondering
that when the rumors were so loud of the Indians malice and power, we would,
yet, venture so far into their quarters and bring away so eminent an Indian
prisoner through all their towns, being a party of but twenty men; Crook, in a
slighting the Indians force and exalting ours, might say [ there were two men
etc.] And indeed these words seem but part of a discourse, which must have
somewhat precedent or subsequent to illustrate it; and I may well suspect that,
though they would insert nothing that might render the speaker innocent, yet,
they would not omit any thing that might make him guilty.

Deposition.
The Deposition of M. Tho. Stantor aged thirty two years or thereabouts taken
before me this 28th. of November. 1661
8. Says. That being at the Town when Lieutenant Col. Sanford returned out of
Camawyny, he heard Mr. Peter Fabian say, that they heard the Governor had
caused Irons to be made for many of them against they came home, and some
others which were in the Country; whom if they had found in prison when they
came home, they would fire the prison and let them out: and saying something
about breaking the country, Captain Crook made answer [that is done already and
I know who must enjoy it.] And further says not.

Sworn etc. W. B.

Answer.
8. This testimony clears that truth, that at our return many were menaced
with irons. etc. and thereby exasperated and urged to such passionated
discourses as are here charged to them. Nor can I think (if any other
consideration then the Governors want of Authority, and his usurping on the
peoples privileges, had provoked them to these ranting expressions,) that the
speakers would have had so little moderation as thus publicly to discover
their immature design before those whom they knew the Governors spies; and at
the same time put themselves out of their arms, and better posture of offense
or defense; so far am I from understanding these words as a least
circumstance of any dark conspiracy against the Colony. And as to the last
point of the impeachment [his saying something about breaking the countrey]
since the Deponent tells not what that something was; and since we may
reasonably enough conclude that had it been any thing ill it would have been
Recorded, we may from Crookes answer affirm, that Fabian declaimed against
these doings as tending to the Colonies breach; for it is known the Colony was
not [already broke] but in these Gentlemen's contemplations on the issue of
these commotions: and hence also may the sense and manner, in which Crook
denounced this breach, be illustrated.

Deposition.
The Deposition of David Bucket aged forty seven years, etc.
9 The Deponent makes oath that at the house of James Atkins and Thomas
Stantor one night some weeks past, he heard Ensign William Sanford say that
his warrant was as good as the Governors; upon which the Deponent made answer,
how must we live? If a Commission come from England from the King you must be
all hanged: to which Ensign Sanford said, we will put that to a venture; and
being further indiscourse he said, the Governors two brass guns should not
save him: Mr. Stephen Neal told Ensign Sanford that he might question his
Brother by what power he sat on the Bench; to which he made answer, you are a
fool if you do not. The Deponent demanded of Ensign Sanford, how we should be
governed or by what Law? to which the said Sanford said, that the Governor
would call us and try us by a Council of War for our lives and estates, and he
would be hanged if there were any other: and further the Deponent remembers
not.

Sworn before me the 26th. of November. 1661. W. B.

Answer.
9. This was the evening of that day in which my Brother had disowned the
Governors power at Toorarica convention; ( Sect. 5.) retiring thence into a
Tavern, this Deponent and some others urged him upon that point; and he being
young and hot spirited retorted according to their urgings, as shaming to
recede from his own public assertion. But he had the pardon of his judges and
therefore needs the less of my labor.

Deposition.
The Deposition of James Atkins, aged thirty five years, or thereabouts.
10. The Deponent makes oath, that about the latter end of October at night
assembled together at his house Captain George Strange, Ensign William
Sanford, Ma. Thomas Archer, and several others, at which time Ensign Sanford
said that the Governor had no power, and that his (meaning his own power) was
as good as the Governors, and better too for ought he knew: and if Major Byam
should grant a warrant to his Marshal, or any other officer under him, for him,
he would carry a stillet to in his pocket to rip out his guts; and that he
would never go without one: then discoursing about Jones, they said, that if
he should be kept prisoner, they would pull down the house about his ears: then
David Bucket made answer, that then there was no law in the Country; William
Sanford replied, a Turd for your Law: David Bucket said, then we must go to
club-law. Captain Strange, Ensign Sanford, and Thomas Archer said, it is that
we would have. David Bucket made answer, that then they were best beat up their
drums, and see how many they would have of their side, and how many of the
other. Captain Strange (as the Deponent best remembers) made answer, so they
would if there were either drum or trumpet to be got. David Bucket replied, if
a Commission come out of England, you would be all hanged every man of you;
they made answer, we will put that to a venture. And farther the Deponent
says, that amongst the discourse Ensign Sanford said, he was as good a man as
the King, the King was but a man, and so was he: and the Deponent further says
not

Sworn before me the 26. of November. 1661. W. B.

The Deposition of Thomas Quintyn, aged thirty seven years, or thereabouts.
11. The Deponent makes oath to the within-mentioned deposition, excepting the
business of Jones, and the last part concerning the words about the King: and
further says not.

Sworn before me the 27. of November. 1661. W. B.

Answer.
10, 11. The words of illest sound in these, and the former, Depositions being
charged to my Brother, I shall a little the more largely declare how he came to
be cleared: Byam and Marten being wrought upon by the tears of a Jew, who had
great prevalencies on them, and as great affections for my Brother, they were
resolved not to urge any thing against him but those words concerning the King:
in which also they purposed to allow him all liberty to clear himself, if
possible: being therefore called before them, the first evidence he brought for
himself was the constant loyalty, which, to the knowledge of his Judges, he had
expressed toward his Sacred Majesty, even in such times as it was dangerous to
own affection or esteem: 2. Quintyn upon his oath had declared, that he knew
nothing of these words though in the same society: nay more, he had owned to
the Governor that himself spoke what was said of the King (though far from a
debasing of Majesty) and that he received a check from my Brother for naming
the King at such a time and place. 3. Mr. Neal was ready to aver the same: a
rational person, and who at that time had mixed in much serious discourse with
my Brother. These negatives satisfied the Judges, and my Brother was discharged
on no other conditions than not to come near me, nor any of the prisoners. And
that it may appear how little these delinquents did design a forceable
maintaining their disputes, I shall trouble the Reader with a letter which my
Brother sent to me upon occasion of these words, when he yet expected not so
sudden an imprisonment: Byam has seen it, and may remember the contents.

Letter.
Brother, I am informed that diverse strange relations are vented abroad
concerning me, whereby I am charged by some of Treason, by others of Rebellion,
and by those that are most favorable, of backing a horrid faction and damnable
design; amongst whom I understand that David Bucket has taken a deposition
against me, and (by malice suborned) declares that I did at the last public
meeting in a slighting manner say, the King is but a man, and so am I.

None, besides him, then present are sensible of any such thing spoken; I
remember that night as we were drinking, Bucket in some discourse, but far from
that subject, gave me the lie; whereupon I offered to strike him, but was
hindered by Mr. Neal; yet so much threatened him, that he departed the company,
and has since broacht his forgery.

I shall request you on This was the day for the Countries meeting. Sect. 9.
Thursday next to bring with you what Books, or the like, that may be made use
of in the question of Treason; for I then expect the whole power of the
Governor to be directed against those who have thwarted his desires: and I
know his hatred to be as endless as his ambition is boundless.

I am etc.


This came to my hands the 22, of November, the day before the Shallop was
taken; when I was arrested it was in my pocket: which, by Byams commands, being
searched, this was taken out and carried to him; who perused it and returned it
to me again.

But how well soever my Brother escaped, this deposition must retain its force
against Captain Strange, and Mr. Archer, to whom those words, they would have
club-law, and, if there were either drums or trumpets to be got they would
sound them, were reckoned with all possible aggravations; which, that they
might not loose their weight, the prisoners are hurried into irons as soon as
they appear, before they can open in a defense: who else had this to plead for
themselves: Lubricum linguae non facile in poenam est trahendum; this was
Tavern-discourse into which they were quareled, and urged by reflections on
their lost privileges: at worst, they were but evidences of their evil
intents, of which it was a great argument that they had repented, in that, when
so suddenly after they had arms put into their hands, and a good occasion for
successfully beating up their drums (Sect. 7.) they employed both in the
Countries service, honor, and security. Besides, to them that know that the
Colony had neither drum nor trumpet in it, that expression may rather seem a
scoff than a threat.

And since Byam here takes such strict accounts of words, we may remember him
how he has heard the Savior of the world worse than blasphemed, his enemies
the Jews crying shame at the fact and connivance; and how himself has labored
the Judge (even while himself was Governor) to pronounce a remission: giving
such public countenance to the blasphemer as his very adorer Usher condemned:
And how frequently he has been delighted with Martens witty prophanations of
the sacred Christian Religion, atheistically, with scoffs, controverting all
its most reverend, most universally embraced, and most comfortable Credenda;
seldom sparing his God in his jest. Since he is now become so severe a
punisher of words (and of words, whose horridity (to use his own phrase) is
infinitely inferior to those which moved him less) let him be so ingenuous as
to let his own mouth as well condemn him of partiality, as my very charity
persuades me his conscience does.

Deposition.
The Deposition of Thomas Duke, aged twenty six years, or thereabouts, taken
before me the 25. of November. 1661.
12. Says, That on Saturday last being the 22. of this instant, about eleven
of the clock, there came aboard Cryn Jacobsons Shallop ( then at anchor above
Morganam) Captain George Strange, Captain Thomas Crook, Mr. Michael Mashart,
Mr. Anthony Wroth, Mr. Peter Wroth, Mr. Rowland Bulkly, and Mr. Thomas Archer,
and told the seamen (whereof the Deponent was one) that they seized the Shallop
for his Majesty's service, and forced the seamen to go ashore, haling and
abusing them.

Sworn etc. W. B.

13 Jacob Reyner aged twenty five years, and Alexander O-Bryan, aged twenty
years or thereabouts, deposes the same before me.

W. B.

Deposition.
The Deposition of Thomas Duke, aged twenty six years, or thereabouts, taken
before me this 25. of November. 1661.
14. Says, That two of his mates, Jacob Reyner, and Alexander O-Bryan were
turned ashore, and that he the Deponent was detained aboard to wait on Captain
Crook and his officers, and that first Mr. Anthony Wroth went into Cryns cabin,
and took his small box wherein his accounts and papers were, and perused them;
then Captain Crook went into the hold, and opened Cryns chest, and Jacob
Reyners, and took out all their clothes, hats, shoes, and divided them amongst
his company, and put a pair of the shoes on his feet, swearing grievously that
they should not take the shoes from his feet, but they should take his life
also: and that in the night there came Captain Straunges Negroes, and Mr.
Fabians with four fixed guns, and about seven pounds of powder: then came Mr.
Needham with a lance and a pistol; Captain Strange, Mr. Fabian, Mr. William
Sanford armed: but before that Captain Crook went about any thing, he took the
Deponent, and clapped his hands behind him (swearing horridly) that he would tie
him, and burn his fingers with matches if he would not confess where the powder
lay, and then with a light match burned him twice on the breast, threatening
him. When the arms came aboard they charged three, besides what was charged
before, and being ready, Crook said, now I wish the Governor would come to
speak with us. Further Crook said, as for my part of this prize I value it not
a pipe of Tobacco, it is another business we are come about concerning the
Country, about choosing a new Governor. Further the said Crook told them he
would stop all boats, and speak with them, and know their business; and on
Monday following he would go to Toorarica, and stay till Thursday to see
whether the General Assembly would make her a prize; if not, he was resolved to
carry her to Barbados, thence to Jamaica, till he found the Kings Commission
to make her a prize: further Crook said, that neither Dutch nor Jew should live
here. Further the Deponent says, that Captain Crook made these officers,
himself chief Captain, Mr. Thomas Archer his Lieutenant, Captain Strange
Master, Mr. Mashart Boatswain, Mr. William Needham his mate, Mr. Rowland
Bulkely Gunner, Mr. Peter Wroth his mate, Mr. Peter Fabian Steward; and further
says not.

Sworn before me. W. B.

Answer.
12, 13, 14. Not content with that evidence which testified the whole substance
of the fact of these men, the same Deponent is brought the second time, to
enlarge his oath with circumstances; It seems he did not swear the whole truth
before, and, to mend that fault, now, I fear, has sworn more than the truth.
And when the Reader considers this double swearing, when he is told that the
Deponent is a Dutchman, part-owner of the Shallop, who is to testify against
English men whom he has already concluded to intend his ruin (not being made
privy to their other ends) let him perpend how far revenge of an injury in one
of a diverse nation, and hopes of repair for that injury, meeting with a Judge
who called for the worst that could be spoken, may operate against an absent
and already condemned delinquent. But having been already very particular in
the relation of seizing this Shallop, and the purpose of it ( which is
illustrated from many parts of these depositions) I shall only trouble the
Reader with a few things which I reserved to this place. And first, that of
opening the chest, and sharing the clothes: had he had as much truth as malice,
he would also so have sworn that the clothes were all put up again, and nothing
diminished but an old clout given to an Indian, for which a treble return was
offered. I am sure both Cryn and Reyner did acknowledge as much to me while I
was a prisoner aboard them. 2. For the shoes; Captain Strange, being to go to
fetch some arms (a sign they brought none with them) and wanting shoes (the
then epidemic distress of the Colony) borrowed Captain Crooks; and Captain
Crook put on a pair which he found lying on the deck: of which he afterward
(upon surrender of the vessel) acquainted Major Usher, and had his leave to
wear them up to Mr. Wroths, 3. To the tying and burning with match; Captain
Crook had a cotton match in his hand to light his Tobacco (a sort of match
which takes fire and burns after the manner of tinder, and is therefore of
necessary use for travelers in those parts) one of the company asked this
Deponent where the powder lay? he standing silent, Crook flaps him in the face
with this cotton match, and asks him why he does not speak? And after when
Crook at his trial asked Duke (who stood to justify his former oath) whether
he opened his doublet to burn him on the breast, for, says he, you had a
doublet on? Duke stood silent and non-plust: And that mark of burning which he
showed, was such a spot as remains after a new-skin'd gall, and had no rawness
nor loose skin upon it or near it. But grant all this done in the very manner
here mentioned; it was but a trespass, for which the parties grieved might
have had their action, or at worst an indictment, which they would hardly in
equity, have been permitted to prove by their own oaths. The rest of the things
either make for us, and so are already instanced in, or else they are
ridiculous. and so not worth the answering.

And now the Reader has the whole charge against these Delinquents, and the
very form in which it was preferred: therefore I shall desire him to view it
thoroughly, whether there be that malignity in it which Byam declaims against?
or whether he can in all these Depositions find any thing to ground that
assertion upon (Sect. 6.) that we were resolved to unhinge the frame of
authority; upon no other score than to bring all things into disorder, and out
of the troubles patch up our decaying fortunes? or whether he can find that
confession of theirs (Sect. 12.) that in taking this Shallop, they designed to
arm and congregate themselves against his Majesty's power? or any of those
plots (Sect. 13.) to r'ally all possible force to guard the river, to keep
boats from the meeting, to seiz Byams person, etc. I shall readily confess
that after a particular perusal I can find nothing like all or any of this,
nor any other guilt than some innocent arts to recover their liberty, and some
vehement expressions of their discontent to be deprived of their privileges,
and subjected under an arbitrary usurped dominion; (for Right these rulers had
none from the constitution of the Colony, and his Majesty's Authority, or any
other, did not appear in it at all.) But, lest interest cloud my eye, I will
leave it to the Readers clearer judgment. However upon these Depositions these
following sentences were framed.

By the Governor and General Assembly.
It is ordered that Captain George Strange, Capt. Thomas Crook Mr. Tho.
Archer, Mr. Peter Fabian be sent off in the first ship bound either for England
or the Barbados; and not to return for five years without his Majesty's
license: and in the mean time to be secured under a strong guard in irons, it
having been proved by sufficient evidence viva voce that they were most
seditious, rebellious, and dangerous persons.

Dated the 30th. of Nov. 1661. W.B.


By the Governor and General Assembly.
It is ordered by the Authority aforesaid that Mr. William Needham pay to the
public, one thousand pounds of Sugar; and to be secured in irons under a
strong guard till he does depart this Colony, which shall be in the first ship
that shall set sail hence: it having been made evident that the said Needham
has abetted and assisted men in rebellion against the authority of the place
and is a person most dangerous to this Colony.

Dated the 30th. of November 1661. Will. Byam.


And least the Reader should have forgotten Mr. Needhams fact, it was, coming
aboard the Prize with a lance and a pistol; but when he so sufficiently
excused that, that Byam thought fit to discharge him; Marten told him it must
not be, for he was a dangerous desperate person, and had threatened him, and
therefore he thought himself insecure while the other remained in the Colony:
These weighty reasons drew on this sentence. Indeed Marten had been
unhandsomely liberal of his tongue both against this Gentleman and his Wife, (a
faculty which his disesteem of every one, that admires not him, prompts him to
exercise) And Needham was too choleric to intend him a Bastonado with silence,
but must threaten it beforehand, and now is thus prevented.

Accordingly were these unfortunate Gentlemen shackel'd like felons and exposed
to the derision of the ill-discerning rabble; kept about a fortnight under a
numerous guard commanded by Usher, and abused to the infaming of the gentility,
if not humanity, of those who countenanced, or rather enjoined their
sufferings: and then at last with an armed force were thrust aboard a rotten,
leaky, broken-back't vessel, with wives and children, their enemies being deaf
to their protests, nay, bespattering those protests with the defames of a
revived mutiny. They had not been three days at sea when, the vessel being
ready to sink under them, they were glad to run her on the nearest shore, which
proved an adjacent Colony of the Dutch, in whose Port she lodged unfit for a
further voyage. Hence Mr. Needham, as least criminal, adventured up to Surinam
in an Indian boat to crave leave of return for the rest, at least on Bail, till
they could ship themselves for some Port of their nation; or, if that would not
be granted, permission to remain in some nearer river where they might have
greater hopes for transport, but could prevail in neither. Nay Byam and His
labored with the Dutch for their proscription thence also; who, abominating the
virulence of his malice, increased their civility: thus they labor to reduce
these innocents to an impossibility of publishing their sufferings, and would
have been beholding to any chance that would dip it self in their blood, and
yet take the hazard and the punishment from them; less solicitous to justify
their actions before God then man.

I cannot but here, by the way, admire the constancy of some men's fate; among
these gentlemen were diverse who, for standing in defense of the Royal
Prerogative, of the peoples just privileges, and in resistance to an usurped
dominion ushered in by a subversion of legal rights, had, after many hazards
and sufferings, by banishment from their native England as traitors and rebels
been exposed to all the infortunes of needy wanderers; and these are now, for
the same virtues, re-banished with the same brands upon them; and put to
repeat, or rather to perpetuate their never-past calamities.

Deposition.
The Deposition of John Venman aged twenty eight years or thereabouts, etc.
15. The Deponent makes oath that on the 26th. of this instant month of
November, being commanded by Major Usher and Captain Augustine Story to secure
Captain Crook, Capt. George Strange and several others committed prisoners at
the house of Senior Henrico de Casseres where Mr. Stephen Neal lives. Lieut.
Col. Robert Sanford came ashore and went into the prisoners, and after some
discourse passed, he came forth again and said, Gentlemen I command you to lay
down your arms; and withal, bade the prisoners come forth, and said, follow
me I will assist you with my life and fortunes: the Deponent made answer, that
they (meaning the guards) were commanded there by a greater power then he was,
and we will not lay down our arms till further order from our Governor: to
which Lieut. Col. Sanford made answer that he was commanded by the Governor as
well as Captain Story, and that he was his superior Officer, and that it was
not lawful to bear arms in time of peace. And further says not.

Sworn before me the 29th. of November. 1661. W.B.

Mr. James Maxwel aged thirty years or thereabouts.
16. makes oath, that at the same time aforesaid he heard Lieutenant Col.
Sanford command the prisoners to follow him, and commanded Capt. Story to lay
down his arms; and further says not.

Sworn before me Die praedicto W. B.

The Deposition of Lieutenant William Burden aged twenty eight years or
thereabouts.
17. The Deponent makes oath, that on tuesday morning last (being the 26th of
November.) Lieut. Col. Sanford came out of the door where the prisoners were and
said, you that have any courage follow me and I will assist you with my life
and fortunes; whereupon they all followed him: Capt. Story cried out, Gentlemen
to your arms, and said; Lieut. Col. Sanford be patient, and go over to the
Governor, or otherwise I will send for him; he being on the other side of the
river: this was at the house of Senior Henrico de Casseres, where Mr. Stephen
Neal now lives.

Sworn before me the 29th. of November. 1661 W. B.

Answer.
15, 16, 17. That particular in these Depositions, viz. of assisting them with
life and fortunes (which I only controvert) I suppose was grounded on an ill
understanding or hearing of my discourse with Captain Story, to whom I said,
that if he would grant the custody of the Prisoners to me I would engage my
reputation, faith, life and fortunes for their forthcoming to a legal trial:
but be it as it may; the great crime inferred from hence is, that I being
Lieutenant Colonel should countermand the Order of my Colonel etc. which some
there, acquainted with little else but military punctilios, accounted so high a
presumption (if not worse) that they concluded it could not merit less then a
capital censure pronounced from a Martial Judicature. But (besides that I think
it safe for all in Authority well to study the Exceptions from that general
rule in the Petition of Right, before they too hastily Erect military
tribunals; lest, e're they be aware, they subvert a fundamental law) I shall
desire those rash sentencers to consider that a regulated Militia may be in a
place where the inhabitants are not in a posture of war nor under the
Dominion of any, but the civil sword: and that in such a place, it is no
intrenchment on the laws of war, nor tryable in martial courts, if the
inferior Officer contest, though to actual violences, with his superior: and
such is the state of the present question; only what makes it more strong on
my part, his Commission for Colonel was actually determined by the express
limitation of the Authority from whence he first and only derived it; whereas
it is controvertible, whether I being, indefinitely, without such limitation,
appointed Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment and Judge of the Court of
Commonpleas, by the Election and Act of the General Assembly (who could only
appoint all inferior Ministers) did not continue such, till the Act by which I
was empowred were repealed. Nor would I from this assert, that I was more
rightly in power then Byam (for God is my witness that very willingly I would
have shaken the burden of public administrations off my shoulders; and the
sensible part of that Colony know how industriously I have declined all those
Employments: so far was I from that ridiculous ambition of making my self
Governor; to be disproved by many instances, proved by none.) Let this truth
only take place, that neither of us had a just power, and then that objection
against me has lost its sting.

Yet, had their Authority been as legal as they could have desired it to be, my
fact is but only an attempt of rescous which was not effected; nor was any
greater violence then of words, formed into persuasions and commands, employed
on that attempt; no evil consequences followed it; the prisoners still
remained in the custody of the guards, and those guards inviolated: certainly,
if a simple rescous, though succeeded in, be not a crime for which a man must
loose fame, liberty, estate and country, I am hardly dealt with, that have
lost all these, and my ruin entailed on my children, for poorly attempting a
Rescous with arguments only.

But to make my fault yet less, they had no lawful power; and acted by an
illegal force to the destruction of the birthright of their fellow subjects;
which by this action of mine I endeavored to prevent, and, had it succeeded,
had certainly prevented it, and made up all these breaches; which was the only
end in my eye. And they that will from this only fact, conclude that I excited
to the causalities of these men's imprisonment, and bring no other instance for
their so concluding, may as rationally affirm, that because a man endeavors to
work the escape of his friend, therefore he acted with him in what drew on his
restraint.

I have already particularized in my trial, where the only sentence pronounced
to my ear was to be laid in the hold in irons, which was presently executed;
but about ten days after the Secretary brought me their whole condemnation (
dated, and I believe decreed, before my day of hearing) in these words.

By the Governor and General Assembly.
It is ordered by the Authority aforesaid, that Lieut. Col. Robert Sanford pay
unto the Public five thousand pounds of Sugar, and to be committed close
prisoner in irons till a ship sail hence for England, it being made appear
before this Authority by several evidences that the said Lieut. Col. Robert
Sanford in a most rebellious and mutinous manner, came to the house where
several persons who had taken up arms against the Authority of this Colony and
had acted feloniously, were committed, and would contrary to all law and order,
not only have discharged them, but commanded them out of the said house, and
heading them proffered to assist them with his life and fortunes: and being
called before this Authority, then sitting on the Examination and Judging of
these seditious and rebellious persons, denied and abused the said Authority.

Dated the 28th. of November. 1661. W. B.


At the instant of my receiving this I paid down my fine and took the
Treasurers discharge, hoping that I might have prevailed to have been sent off
to Barbados with the other Gentlemen, and so have been the sooner freed from my
hateful restraint, and their power also among whom I thought my life not
over-secure.

And were I as earnest to make my enemies odious as they are to befilth us with
any sort of dirt, I could bring fair evidences of a Practice against me whose
barbarism exceeds any yet instanced in. But though it concerns them, in the
part they have to act, to make us at least seem criminal; (to do which they
therefore gladly recurre to every, though improbable, calumny) to me it is
sufficient that I appear innocent: wherefore I shall not lengthen my discourse
with any digression not absolutely pertinent to my justification, though it
conduce largely to their blackning; That, if I appear faultless, being fully
enough effected by such usage of me as themselves do own. I heartily forgive the
intention who ever was guilty of it, and desire God may do so too: it is enough
for me that I am safe.

Often did I labor by letters to Byam to purchase the favor of as speedy a
banishment as my Compeers were like to enjoy, and as often had my suit
rejected; The Council was courted, but with like success; the General Assembly,
forsooth, had determined my punishment and they only could retract the Order.
To them I therefore applied my self for permission to go to Barbados: my
importunity at length prevailed, and on the 25th. day of January, in the close
of the day, I was put aboard a ship bound for that Island: the first minute of
liberty I enjoyed since the 26th. day of November. in the morning; two or three
days of which I was shut up in the stinking hold of the shallop, and all the
rest of the time laden with villeinous shackles: but by this detention I
escaped those calamities which my brethren in exile were, by reason of the
craziness of their vessel, exposed unto; and arrived safely at Barbados and
from thence hither to England before any news could inform me that they were
yet among the living. And thus after an expense of nine years precious time, in
all which with an unaltered constancy I labored in that Colonies promotion,
and, to the frequent hazard of my person and detriment to my estate, acted more
in the public concerns then any one Gentleman besides, and with less
consideration for my self; now, when I just began to taste the fruits of my so
long toil, I am thrust from thence and them with a violent Impulsion, for no
other cause but over-tendering the lives of my dearest friend and nearest
relation; which, rationally enough, I imagined on the precipice of danger. I
considered a taken life like split water was never to be gathered up again; and
knowing that there was both justice and virtue in making their rescous, the
pleasure of preserving lives so dear, winged me for the attempt, and tangled me
in the toils of my deadly-hating enemies. I, who glory in nothing so much as
an untainted loyalty, whose most certain religion is obedience to the lawful
Power, who only out of veneration to the name of his sacred Majesty had
subjected my self to less then the shadow of his Proclamation, to something
less then the air of his commands, a Nothing which had usurped his name; to
whom I was hitherto complyant in all things, and had still so been had not such
lives, so illegally, been threatened; must fall now with those abominated
imputations of faction, sedition, treason, and rebellion; so abhorrent from my
soul, cast on me to hurry me into the deepest abyss of infamy: and all this for
endeavoring to fly the persecution of an usurping Tyrant. But my great
consolation is, the same imputation, by the same sort of men, cast on thousands
that acted the same things, have, for many lustres of years, been the only
crown for the most prodigious loyalty: and it is possible the same planet still
retains some vigor of its Malignancy, especially at so great a distance from
the Royal beams.

And, indeed (if it be not criminal to confess so much) I was not less moved
with the consideration of the danger our most sacred laws were in (to which I
was sworn a Magistrate acting by virtue of a Power derived from the Delegates
subordinate to our sovereign lord the King) then I was with natural
inclinations to my perishing intimates. Having always been loyal (or a
traitor if I may so speak in the Dialect of those times) when those Infamous
rebels of our last age, without and against the King, made the ruin of our
fundamental sanctions, the groundwork of their usurped dominion; I durst not
become disloyal, or really a traitor, now, when those same laws were trampled
on to the same end, by abetting these usurpers; so much the more infamous for
pretending (to His greater indignity) to act by the Kings Authority. And
therefore I rather chose by a single opposition to fall in defense of our
Sovereigns honor and laws, then to troop with them from whom I always had a
natural aversation. And I count it something of glory, that since in the times
of need I lay under the imperfections of nonage and absence, and could not
therefore, act my affections to the Royal cause, I am yet, in the last hour of
the day, thought worthy of those titles, which (though in themselves the
highest scandals) are yet by glorious accidents become the most honorable
additions to his Majesty's most constant servants.

I have only to speak to the Conclusion of Byams Declaration, and so shall
take leave of my Reader.

Conclusion.
The Objections made by the Delinquents.
Sect. 1. That the Governor was Elective by the Country, and therein but one
year, according to the established constitution of the Colony; and therefore
his continuance therein for any longer time without the choice and annual
Election of the Delegates of the several Divisions of the Colony is an
usurpation upon the liberties of the people.

Answer.
Sect. 1 He neither inserts our objections truly nor fully; for we objected
that the Constitution of the Delegates was, that yearly the people should by
their Election renew the whole Authority, both Governor, Council, and
Assembly: and that the Delegates did so decree we prove from Byams last
Commission, dated the 15th: of June 1660. by the only virtue of which both he
and this whole General Assembly got possession of the Government; in which
Commission their decree is expressed in these plain english words. That the
freeholders of each Division do, annually, upon the first wednesday in June,
meet; and, by their free voices, elect three able, honest, discreet men,
freeholders and inhabitants in their respective Divisions, to be their
Representatives for the following year, that these The Divisions were in numb.
seven.
twenty one Representatives be the General Assembly, in whom is the supreme
Power and Government of this Country both Legislative and Magistratical (with
subordination and subjection to the sovereignty and laws of England, as in the
Preamble) and that They meet the second wednesday in June at the public place
at Toorarica, and there appoint from amongst themselves a Governor for that
year etc. So that by this Act, the former custom, which he hinteth at, viz.
[of the peoples first choosing the Delegates, then the Delegates choosing the
Governor, the Governor his Council, and, after that, the people to meet again
to elect their Assembly men] was discontinued; and this other form ordained to
all futurity till determined by the commands of our sovereign. And though Byam
pretended to those commands, yet he may remember (for he accuses us of it,
Sect. 8.) that the foundation on which we firmed our objection was, that his
Majesty had not yet determined this constitution by his Royal commands. That
very Governor, indeed, and General Assembly, to whom the Government was
committed by these same Delegates (at the instant when they made this
Establishment) for that year and no longer, so abused the trust reposed in them
that in their very first year they passed an Order for their own perpetuation;
to which when we objected, that they, being an inferior power to that of the
Delegates from whom they had their being, could not annull their sanctions;
they confuted us by arms, irons, fines, and banishment.

Conclusion.
Answer to the Delinquents objections.
Sect. 2. It is granted that the Governor was elected by the Country, and by
the established constitution of the Colony he was to be elected annually at a
day certain by the Delegates of the several divisions of the Colony, and by
virtue thereof was to continue therein but one year.

But as to this establishment it is to be considered wherefore and when it was
made, it was in the juncture of time when the whole frame of our Nation was in
confusion and out of order; the legal authority rejected by a violent power,
who had assumed to themselves the supreme power of our Nation; and that at the
first establishment was elective, in semblance to which this was made.

Answer.
Sect. 2. He should grant, as I said before, that the representatives, in whom
was the Government, were to be yearly elected, and that they from amongst
themselves were to name a Governor at a day certain (who was no other but
their president or speaker; and so, at the meetings, styled) And this
establishment was made in June 1660. when the King was happily restored to the
dominion of his people. And though indeed we then had no certainty of his
return, yet we knew how far the ever-famous D. of Albemarle had acted in order
to it; and that the Free-Parliament was actually sitting: nor was this
establishment made in semblance to any form of government set up here at home
in the times of the late usurpation; not any in that Colony (except the author
of this conclusion, if I guess right by the style) having the least esteem of
those destructive innovations; but rather in imitation of that constitution in
Barbados, which is ruled by a Governor commissioned from the Sovereign, a
Council of his own choosing, and an Assembly (two out of every parish) yearly
elected by the people, which whole body is called the Governor and General
Assembly. Now we wanting a Commission from the King, were forced to content our
selves for the present with an Assembly only, chosen by the people, who for
order sake (as those in Barbados do) made one of themselves the Speaker, and,
the better to attract the peoples reverence, gave him the title of Governor.
And because upon every emergency to convent this whole body, was thought a
trouble and inconveniency, therefore they permitted the Governor to name six
of these representatives (one out of each division his own excepted) to be his
Council and advise with him in the regulating the Colony according to the Laws
of England, and the Bylaws of this General Assembly. Now upon the whole matter
the questions are, whether the inhabitants of the Colony of Surinam being left
without conduct, might not agree amongst themselves on some form of rule to
which they would submit till concluded by their Sovereign: and, whether those
that were put into authority by such compact were not bound thereby? If it be
answered negatively, then Byam and the rest had never any rightful authority;
if affirmatively, then their authority expired in June 62. and in either case
whatever was said or done against them at this time, could neither be sedition
nor opposition; nay, forasmuch as it appears that they made the first assault,
by imprisoning Jones, and endeavoring the like to others, whatever those
persons, so assaulted and prosecuted, did act, attempt, or intend was only to
defend themselves from their unruly neighbors. And so much does our natural
ligeance to our Sovereign (of which neither time nor place can discharge us)
entitle us to the Royal Protection, and the being English men, to the
privileges of our Charter; that I cannot think a company of us can in any part
of the world be so left to our selves, as that the greater number may impunely
invade the rights of the less, and destroy them in person, honor, liberty, and
estate: Especially when we had agreed amongst our selves (and sealed that
agreement by proclaiming his Majesty, and swearing allegiance to him) to retain
our King, our allegiance, and our laws. Nor can it be rationally affirmed that
our proclaiming the King altered our constitution, unless we had unitely agreed
that it should do so; for we had in general terms before subjected our selves
and constitution to the Sovereign power of our Nation, and that after
proclaiming of his Sacred Majesty was only an acknowledging that such a
particular person was our Sovereign; which could not void our contract, since
one article of it was that nothing should void it but the Kings commands. And
that we did not think the Kings coming in, or our proclaiming him, and
annulling of our government, is evident from the Commissions which Byam (by
order of the General Assembly) granted sometime after this; whereof I have two,
whose style is, By virtue of a power unto us from the delegates subordinate to
our Sovereign Lord, Charles, etc. Nor do I find (though it should invalidate
the Delegates decree) how his Majesty's restoration does invest Byam, or any
other particular person, with the Government.

Conclusion.
Sect. 3. As to the reasons why it was made, they were th^se; in that we were
many of his Majesty's liege people who had embarked our selves and fortunes
in order to the planting and settling of this Colony; as Governor over whom by
the then supreme power of England Colonel Richard Holdip was commissioned and
sent: his declining of which, and thereby leaving the place destitute of any
such authorized government; and the supreme power of England, (by reason of
their many distractions and revolutions of Government) taking no further
cognizance of us; we, the inhabitants of this place, being necessitated
thereunto, in order to the civil and peaceable Government and preservation of
every one in his life, and liberty, and estate in this Colony (as the records
hereof do manifest) made this establishment for our Government, it to continue
with submission to the Supreme Authority of England. Now thus, and according to
this establishment did the Governor that now is become Governor in
possession; of which (his Majesty being mercifully restored to the regal and
happy Government of our Nation) his Declaration for the continuation of all
Governors, Magistrates, and Officers to continue in their several powers, and
authorities, till his Royal pleasure were further known and signified, found
him, and has and does empower, authorize, and continue him therein till his
further order. So that now he stands no longer Governor by virtue of the
establishment of the Colony, but is authorized, empowred, and confirmed therein
by his Majesty's Declaration, which is the supreme authority of our Nation: In
submission to which this establishment (as it ought, so it) was made.

The Governor thus authorized, empowred, and confirmed Governor by the Kings
Declaration, does, as a relative and necessary incident and consequent
thereunto, stand accountable to the King for the Government of this place, and
cannot without the forfeiture of his faith and allegiance to his sacred Majesty
either render up, or passively suffer his power as Governor to be taken from
him; especially we having owned his Majesty as our supreme Magistrate by our
solemn proclaiming of him, and recognized upon our public records, our
Governor as his Governor, virtually by his Majesty's Declaration.

The Governor thus authorized, empowred, and confirmed by the Kings
Declaration; and his power and authority therein as Governor by virtue thereof
recognized by us upon our own Records, the disowning of him so to be, and the
declaring and endeavoring by an Overt act to set up and exect any other
Governor, in opposition to, and contempt of, the King his Crown and Dignity,
signified by his Royal Will and Pleasure, requiring our subjection and
obedience to his commands and Declaration, is treason in such opposers and
contrivers.

Answ^.
Sect. 3. At length out comes the true reason for this establishment, but it is
not remembered. 1. That Byam played the seditions person (when out of all public
emploiment) and raised many disputes against the power left in possession of
the Government by Holdip (and therein continued by the peoples representatives)
as not sufficiently authorized, instigating the people to an actual
disobedience. Nor, 2. That, though at that time I had the sword of that
authority in my hand, and the authority to back me, yet I did not drive him
into exile, but made way for him to the Chair, by persuading those that sat in
it to descend, and give the people leave to place in it whom they liked best.
Nor, 3. That after all this (notwithstanding the a^mes he had particularly
against me in all his m^vings to sedition, in emulation of my eminency, and
disdain of his own nullity) I laid on many on that heap of votes which mounted
him to his height; therein consulting the Colonies, not my own, advance; this
person being of so restless an Ambition, that if he ruled not all there was no
ruling him. But of this no more.

He thus coming to the possession of the Government, labors every year to be
perpetuated without an annual standing candidate; and at last fearing to hazard
himself longer on the unconstant multitude ( elated also with the conscience of
his sufferings and service in the Royal cause) says, I will continue, and I
will say the King has so commanded; and I will with force drive away all those
that have hitherto, and still shall, impede me herein, be their constant
loyalty never so exemplar. For what is all this talk of the Kings proclamation
but Byams ipse dixit? Nay, what is it else but a mere fiction, raised from a
presumption that (probably enough) the King in this so great a change might so
proclaim? And these elaborate Arguments (or more truly Major Noel the scribler
of this Conclusion; a worshipper of O. Cromwell, and triumpher (in his motto)
over the martyred Charles with devict^ host liberate donati.
Noellian Inganneations) drawn from this supposal, are but like those about the
Golden tooth, which proved at last a forgery. But though to expend wit on an
erroneous principle may consist with innocence, yet to join with those whom
only forgetfulness has left out of the list of traitors and rebels in
bespotting a precise, never-varied loyalty, with the abominated aspersions of
Treason and Rebellion, pulling Ruin on whole families, and all by a mistake
(should I exclude malice) cannot but by justice be condemned as a criminal
temerity.

I need not controvert the Law our Surinam Judge so Magisterially concludes
with; but shall only add these few assertions out of Judge Ienkins, fol. 195.
etc. To alter the established Laws in any part by force is High Treason: To
usurp the Royal Power is High Treason: To subvert the Fundamental laws is High
Treason. A necessity of a man's own making does not excuse him. Presentment, or
trial by Jury is the Birth right of the subject. Magna charta, the Petition of
Right, and other good laws of this land ordain, that all men's trials should be
by the established laws and not otherwise, they are the very words of the
Petition of Right. An Act of Parliament that a man should be judge in his own
cause is a void Act. ib. fol. 139. The common law of this land is, that every
Freeman is subject to a trial by Bill of Attainder in Parliament, wherein the
King and both Houses must necessarily concur, for that trial is an Act of
Parliament to which all men are subject: But otherwise no man shall be
destroyed, etc. but by the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Common law
of the land. ib. fol. 93.

The Governor and General Assembly (as they call themselves) of Surinam do
here confess that in our trial and punishment they have usurped a Power equal,
if not superior to that of the King and both houses of Parliament, subverted
the fundamental Laws, end by force of an Army altered the established Laws of
England in the whole.

From my own reading I shall subjoine this, to discharge men guilty of Treason
and Felony, is Treason and Felony: Byam etc. have accused us of both, punished
us for neither: if we be guilty, they are answerable for not bringing us to a
trial; if we be innocent, they are puilty of conspiracy: nor can they avoid
this Dilemma by objecting our Irons, Fines, and Banishment, for all lawyers
know these are not the punishments for treason nor felony; nor had we the trial
due to either: they did this way indeed revenge themselves on some for
endeavoring to unfix them in their usurped dominion, and on me for laboring
to disappoint them of their revenge, which may, possibly, be termed an
inconsiderate, cannot rationally be censured a criminal attempt.

FINIS
The Copy of a Letter which Byam sent to Barbados to my Uncle, together with
this his Declaration. Superscribed.
For Captain Nathaniel Kingsland my respected friend.
SIR,
YOur affection to, and interest in, this Colony are sufficient obligations to
render you an account of the late distempers in our Government: and I am sorry
to tell you that your Nephew. Lieutenant Col. Robert Sanford, has not only
abetted, but hea^ed the unruly authors of our sad disturbance; I have enclosed
presented you with an impartial relation of all passages most remarkable,
wherein I have not the least been swayed by prejudice or animosity. What fa^e
thus hurried him to that excess of insolence I cannot well judge, unless
soaring too high with an ^ver weening gale of his natural and acquired parts,
which too early advanced him to public offices of Eminency in the Colony; he
unadvisedly over-set for want of the ballast of experience and discretion: had
be learn's to obey, before he commanded, he would not have commanded before he
obeyed, which you find was his error: what Apology he may present you for it
I know not, I am sure I have not painted it so foul as it really was. Sir, when
you have perused the enclosed papers be pleased to recommend them to the view
of Mr. John Kirton and Sergeant Major Authony Rous, to whom I desire my
respects and service may be presented. -- (then after a general account of the
Colonies present condition he concludes) your Nephew had of late a desire to
give you a visit, which I could not admit at present, being the positive order
for his departure was for London which was his desire; nor would I reverse what
the united authority had concluded on. If I may serve you in these parts you
may he assured of my readiness and fidelity. I wish you happiness and rest.

Surinam the 13th. of December. 1661. Your very affectionate friend and servant
William Byam.


This was writ and sent away by those other Proscripes, while I remained behind
in fetters; but their vessel failing them I came to and from the Barbados
before this arrived there, and so never saw it till I received it, sent from my
Uncle, here in London.


