(...) A NAME, an After-one; OR, (...), A NAME, a New One, In the
Later-Day-Glory: OR, AN Historical Declaration OF THE Life of Shem Acher,
Especially as to some more eminent Passages of his Day, relating to his more
through lawful Call to the Office and Work of the Ministry, for about Twenty
Years last past.

Wherein PAUL is propounded for an Example, and the Case, so far as it does run
Parallel, is set down before it; tho the Pre-eminence is given unto Paul, and
the Glory of all ascribed in every part, and in the whole of it, unto Jehovah
Aelohim, whose rich Grace, and free Love has been, in all this, unsearchably
rich and exceedingly abundant.

Wherein are also several other weighty Cases, and great Questions stated and
resolved, About the Right Administrator in perfecting a Believer's Baptism;
About Receiving of a Member in some Cases out of one Church in the same City
into another Church of the same City, in the Main of the same Gospel-Faith and
Order: And about the sound Evidences of a State of Grace.

All submitted to Scripture-Counsel, Number, Measure and Weight; to
Word-Rule-Trial-Judgment-and Determination. 1 Timothy 1. 11, 15, 16, 17.

LONDON, Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1681.

AN Historical Declaration OF THE LIFE OF Shem Acher.
PAVL.
PAVL had Act. 13. 9. Gal. 1. 1. Acts 9. 1, 4, 8, 11, 17, 19, 22, 24, 26. and
in many other places.
another Name, which was Saul: This other Name was an Hebrew Name, signifying,
Asked, Desired, or Petitioned.

SHEM ACHER.
Shem Acher is an Hebrew Name, signifying an After-Name, or a Name an After
one; to which he was directed by the LORD, in a suitable Isa. 65. 15.
Scripture, upon that new State, which he through Grace passed into.

PAVL.
Phil. 3. 4, 5, 6. Act. 21. 39. and 22. 3. Romans 11. 1. 2 Cor. 2. 22. Act. 24.
14. and 26. 6, 7. and 28. 17, 19, 20. Romans 9. 3. and 11. 14. Act. 22. 3. Gal.
1. 14. Acts 23. 6. and 26. 5. and 7. 58. and 8. 1. and 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 13,
14, 21, 26. and 22. 4, 5, 19, 20. and 26. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 1 Cor.
15. 9. Gal. 1. 13, 23. 1 Timothy 1. 13. Mat. 23. 13, -- 33.
If outward Privileges had had any thing in them to have bin boasted of, he
had enough to say concerning that; For, he was by birth an Israelite, or Jew,
an Hebrew of the Hebrews, both his Parents being such: which race of People had
many Favors and Dignities conferred upon them by the LORD, beyond other
Nations; He was of the Tribe of Benjamin, which was a Tribe signally honored
in many respects: He was educated in Jerusalem at the feet of Gamaliel, a
Disciple and a Pupil under the teaching and tutorage of that Doctor of the Law,
thus bred up in their School and College: He was instituted and instructed in
Pharisaism, of which Sect and Way his Father and other Ancestors were; and thus
was he trained up from his Youth, being very zealous for their
Common Prayer Book and Church-Canons, and other human Traditions. And thus he
continued till about the three or four or five and twentieth year of his Age,
when in a false and blind Zeal he cruelly persecuted Christ, and the Church and
Disciples of Christ, breathing out Threatenings and Slaughter against them;
thinking verily with himself, that he ought to do many things contrary to the
Name of Jesus of Nazareth: which thing he also did in Jerusalem, and many of
the Saints did he shut up in Prison, having received Authority from the chief
Priests; and when they were put to death, he gave his voice against them. And
he punished them often in the Synagogues, and compelled them to blaspheme; and
being exceedingly mad against them, he persecuted them even unto strange Cities.

SHEM ACHER.
He was descended from the Fathers and Mothers side of two Families of the
greatest Name and Note, some of them, in all Devonshire; of one of them P. 147.
Clara and perantiqua familia. Guillim's Display of Heraldry, page 107.
Cambden in his Britannia does record, that it is an Honorable and very
Ancient Family; and of the other, Guillam in his Display of Herauldry,
mentions concerning one of that Name especially, that his Merits do require,
that, his Coat Armor should be expressed in that selected manner of Blazoning,
which is fitting to Noble Personages, in respect of his noble Courage and high
Attempts achieved, whereby he merited to be reckoned, The Honor of our
English Nation, and of Naval Profession.

He was born of Religious Parents, according to the measures of Light* in that
Age, who gave him up to the LORD for the Ministerial Office and Work; and
accordingly he had his Education in the Families of Professors of Religion; His
Heart was inclined to love Books, and to delight in Learning from a Child; and
he does not remember that ever he gave way so much as to any on^ approving
thought of stepping into any other Calling: Answerably unto this, he was
instructed by some of the ablest Masters of Grammar-Knowledg, and for some time
was the highest of the Scholars in one of the most eminent Schools of all that
County.

About the beginning of the seventeenth year of his Age he was sent to the
University of Oxford, to be skilled in the Arts and Sciences, in that corrupt
unscriptural way and manner as then it was, and still is; there he took two
Degrees, tho little advancement he made in such Scripture-Learning, as since
through Mercy he has experienced to be found and useful: There he remained till
the three or four and twentieth year of his Age.

In this Time University-Wits had somewhat tainted and sowred him with a bad
Ferment, that he was somewhat swollen and prejudiced against the strict
Profession of Religion amongst the Puritan Party, (the Land being then mostly
divided into but Two Parties, Puritan and Profane) though still his
Convictions, and the power of a Religious foregoing Education, secretly, held
him in his retired serious considerate thoughts in some better liking with the
way of a strict holy Conversation even whilst, rather than part with a witty
Jest amongst his Ingenioso's, who were too much his Companions, he would have a
fling at times at the Nonconformists; of whom he was no open Persecutor, but
gave vent unto some Corruptions of another kind; of which more toward the
close about the Evidences of Grace. During this time he held on in the
Common Prayer Book track, even to the exposing of his Life to open danger, when
Soldiers came in upon him with Swords and Guns, whilst he was at his
superstitious Worship.

PAVL.
Acts 9. 3, 4, 5, 6. and 22. 6, 7, 8. and 26. 13, etc. Gal. 1. 15, 16, 22, 23.
Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9. 1 Cor 2. 2, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 11, -- -- 15.
He had a Miraculous Conversion; for, when he was in the heat of his
Persecuting the Saints, being injurious to the Christian Churches, and a
Blasphemer of God, of Christ God-Man, and of his Truths, Worship, Cause, Ways,
and Disciples, suddenly there shined round about him a Light from Heaven; and
he fell to the Earth, and heard a Voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? And he said, Who art thou, LORD? And the LORD said, I am
JESUS whom thou persecutest. It is hard for thee to kick against the Goads. And
he trembling and astonished, said, LORD, What will thou have me to do? And the
LORD said unto him, Arise, and go into the City, and it shall be told thee what
thou must do.

The History of this wonderful Work he is now ready to own, and to declare
before Princes, Priests, or People, where he had a Call and Opportunity;
preaching up that Christian Doctrine and Discipleship, which but a little
before he endeavored to persecute down; counting all his former
self-righteousness, formalworshippings, creature-advantages, outward
Church Priviledges, vain affectation of human wisdom, by Philosophic Studies,
to be as dung, and as Dogs-meat, for the excellency of the Knowledge of Christ
Jesus his Lord, for whom he suffered the loss of all things, that he might win
Christ, and be found in him* not having his own righteousness, which is of the
Law, but, that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is
of God by Faith. And now he lays aside his old human Set-Forms, and prayed in
the help of the interceding Spirit, Framing of such arguing Requests within him
as his present Case called for. Thus, he, who had been one of the prime of
Sinners, is now become one of the greatest Exal^ers of the Father's rich Grace
and free Love, of Christ's Alsufficient Satisfaction, and prevailing
Intercession, and of the holy Spirit's powerful gracious working.

SHEM ACHER.
The way and manner of the holy Spirit's working upon him has been various at
several times, yet in a marvelous gracious manner; even from his Childhood, and
in his Youth, oftentimes by Terror, now and then by Bands of Love. He lay for
many years under a spirit of bondage to Fear, being very often frighted in
terrible Dreams, wherein he fell into deep Waters, the Earth sliding away from
under him, whilst he endeavored to climb up to the top of an Hill or Rock for
safety, which he was not able to do: falling over Bridges into the Sea, and
down from thence into the Gulf and horrible Pit (though at that time he little
understood that thus was the positure of the Creation as to the lowest World.)
The Devil many times seemed to be at hand, running to lay hold on him, though
always he escaped, yet so terrified as awakened him, and left cold sweats upon
him: yet this kept him several years in aw, and held him back from many Sins.
Once when he was tampering about one Sin, which was preparing for another Sin,
though he did not then actually commit either the one or the other, a Voice
with power smote his heart as with a Thunderbolt from Heaven, What if God
should strike thee dead and damned upon the place? which quickly sent him to
his private Chamber, and set him about Praying, Reading, Confessing, Humbling
work; and at other times he was put upon Fasting, thinking with himself to
conquer Corruptions and Temptations, too much going forth in his own strength,
and depending upon Duties; which yet Experience told him were all too weak in
this Combat without help from Christ and his Spirit. At other seasons there
were sweet Allurings, especially upon reading the History of Christ's Life,
Sufferings and Death, which did very much melt him into Tears, and kindly
affect, and winningly overcome the Heart.

Though he dare not say, as one Minister told him concerning himself, he was
(...), A Self-Father, or, his own Spiritual Father; his meaning being, that he
was his own Converter, begotten and born by that Word which he preached to
others. If any would have Shem to name his Father, He, of and by whom he was
born from Above, was Abi-jah, Jah my Father; Abi Ael, the mighty God, my
Father: Abi-hu, He, and the Alone my Father He.

As Shem has been in the lowest World in his Spirit, in the Gulf, and somewhat
in Hell; so also there have been two more remarkable passages at special
seasons when his Heart was taken into nearer union to, and closer fellowship
with Christ in the uppermost World.

The one was, when solemnly and seriously setting himself to enquire into the
safety of his Spiritual Estate, he was held strictly to these Terms, That he
must burn his Papers with his own Hand, and his former Collections out of
humane Authors of Philosophical Learning, wherein much of that which was
corrupt was heaped together, amongst a little somewhat that was true and good:
and that he must begin (as it it were) Religion, and all anew, and take all
from Christ, and from his Word purely and only, with a Promise, That, then he
should be better taught, and not lose any thing that was useful of what he knew
before, and should have a better and richer stock given in. About which time it
was clearly revealed to him, and in him, by a passage in an Author, who so
opened that word, in 2 Timothy 3. 16. The whole Scripture which the English
Translation does render All Scripture, that for the whole and every part of his
Religion, in all Doctrine and Duties, he must take the whole Scripture along
with him, both Old and New Testament to be for him, wherever the holy Spirit
does take occasion to ^reat of any such particular subject matter; which
Word-Rule in the harmoniousness and uniformness, or oneness of it throughout,
has been of singular unexpressible usefulness to him ever since in this Age of
growing Light. This put him to a kind of offering up his Isaac: But Jehovah,
his Aelohim framed his Heart to it, and he readily answered the Call, and
sacrificed with his own hand in the Flames several years Labors, of great
value in the esteem of some, (for he had still an industrious mind, trying many
ways of heaping up Learning, but was not set right till now.) And from that day
to this he has found the LORD True, and Good as his Word, so that he can say,
to the praise of this God of all Grace and Mercy, That scarce one week for many
years has passed over him without some special Teachings, the holy Spirit
opening some Scripture or other before him, and then opening the Eyes of his
Understanding to take in the light and meaning thereof, of which he has
gathered much, and it is laid up by him as his rich Treasure in and under
Christ: yea, it is a very black night and dark day with him, if there be any
one such whole natural day in any one week, wherein there is not somewhat of
this: All the Glory be to Jehovah Aelohim.

But, how now? what shall be done to carry on Preaching and Praying Work? (for,
he was a Teacher of others, who much needed to have been instructed himself,
though he had a great Name amongst Ministers and People:) The Forms of Prayer
were gone, the Fire had turned them into Ashes. He had composed many of those
Forms of his own, upon several Cases, with great variety; most Hearers could
scarce discern it to be a Form of humane composure: but the LORD took him at
his Word, and he must now trust to the assistance and inworking of the Spirit
of Grace and of Supplication, who has not been thus far wanting when aright
depended on.

About seventeen years since, when the Act for Uniformity came forth, and the
Profession of Assent and Consent, and Subscriptions were required, the LORD
soon stated the Case, and resolved the Question upon Shem's Mind and Heart, not
so much as to touch that unclean Constitution of humanely invented Worship, and
so he has continued ever since, a total through Nonconformist, though
Afflictions and Persecutions have abidden him from that time.

After this the LORD honored him with somewhat of a Vision in the Spirit,
wherein two of the choicest Revelations were made manifest to him and in him:
For, in a very dark evening, whilst a Prisoner, a little before his going to
his Lodging, he bowing his knees in Prayer, was on a sudden taken up in his
Spirit as if he had been actually in Heaven, (This was about fourteen years
ago, answering somewhat to that of Paul 2 Cor. 12. 1, -- 4.
) where he had a clear view of Christ in his Glorified Humanity by an Eye of
Faith, He sitting in the sides of the Job 23. 3, 4, 8, 9. and 26. 6, 7. Psalm.
48. 1, 2, 3. and 75. 6, 7. Isa. 14. 9, -- 15.
North; which was as real to him as if he had conversed with Christ personally
in the flesh; and it is still so, when he is in a right worshipping Frame: being
led to him as to the one Mediator and Advocate to carry on all his Affairs in
the Court above. The other was 2 Cor. 13. 14. 1 John 1 3, 7. Mat. 28. 19. John
chap. 14, 15, 16, and 17. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Ps. 11 7. Their Faces, or, His Faces.
(His, or their Aspects. See Ainsworth in loc.) Numb. 12. 8. Heb. 6. 19. 20. and
10. 19, -- 22.
A Self-evidencing view of those Glorious Appearances of Father, Son, and holy
Spirit, and distinctness of Communion with each of these in their several
subsistences, shining forth in the Face of Jesus. This sight covered his Spirit
with such a shining Light and bright Glory, that, their faces viewing him, was
such an heavenly Manifestation of unveiled Aspects, as dwells with him to this
hour, and is more or less in every solemn Duty of Instituted Worship, a guiding
of his Spirit into that within the Veil, whither Jesus the Forerunner is for
him entered. And this has been revealed to him to be his being baptized with the
holy Spirit, Mat. 3. 11. Act. 1. 5. and 11. 16.

This Object raised him into an higher way of Later-Day-Glory-hymnifying, than
his former way of singing by Men's Forms, read out of a Book, could reach unto.
And thus it is through continuance of special Favor with him to this day, and
will ever live with him; for, it espoused and somewhat married his whole Man,
Body, Soul and Spirit, to each of these Three in One Jehovah, Isa. 54. 5. Psa.
149. 2. Job 4. 17. and 35. 10. Eccles. 12. 1.
as to his Husbands, Creators, and Makers; To the Father, as the Father; to the
Son, as the Son; to the holy Spirit, as the holy Spirit; Makers, Husbands,
Creators.

PAVL.
Act. 26. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Gal. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1. 1. and 3. 7, 8. Act. 9. 15.
To. 11. 13. 1 Timothy 2. 7. Gal. 1. 16, 17, 18.
He had such a Call to the Office and Work of the Ministry as was not common;
for he was an Apostle by the Will of God, and not of Men, neither by Men, but
by Jesus Christ; neither was the Gospel, which was preached, of this Servant of
Christ, according to Man; for he neither received it of Man, neither was he
taught but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, who at that very time, when he so
remarkably converted Paul, called him hereunto, saying to him, Arise, and stand
upon thy feet; for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, To make (or
ordain) thee a Minister, and a Witness, both of those things which thou have
seen, and of those things in which I will appear unto thee, delivering thee
from the People, and from the Gentiles, unto whom I now send thee: To open
their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan unto God: That they may receive Forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance
amongst them who are sanctified by Faith, that is in me. Whereupon he was not
disobedient unto the heavenly Vision, but showed first unto them of Damascus,
and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the Coasts of Judea, and then to the
Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn to God, and do Works meet for
Repentance. This preaching Office he presently set about: Immediately he
conferred not with Flesh and Blood, neither went he up to Jerusalem, to them
that were Apostles before him, being 2 Cor. 11. 5. and 12 11. Ephesians. 3 8. 1 Cor.
15. 8, 9, 10. and 3. 5, 6, 7, 22.
nothing inferior to the chief of the Apostles, yet calls himself the least
of the Apostles, and an Abortive, and pronounces himself unworthy to be said
to be an Apostle, because he persecuted the Church of Christ. He was but a
Minister, by whom many of the People believed; yet appointed of God for those
great Ends, of bringing in of Sinners to Christ, and of building them up in
Christ, that the LORD might have all the Glory, for Paul was not any thing in
and of himself.

The LORD wonderfully owning him, and blessing of his Labors, in such
large-spreading and deep-rooted Conversions, in planting of
New-Testament-Churches, and many other ways; false Apostles, and others,
envying and opposing of him, do now call into 1 Cor. 9. 1. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 13. 3,
4, 5.
question his Call to the Ministerial Office and Work, whether it were lawful
and right or not, because it was not some way as theirs was, which they would
have imposed upon him, to which he could not submit.

This puts him upon making of an 1 Cor, 9. 3.
Apology, to defend and magnify his Office, wherein if he were a Fool in
glorying, if any so thought or judged him, it was chargeable on those who so
compelled him thereunto, that the Minds of young Converts might not be
troubled, nor the Work of the Gospel other ways hindered.

Those Arguments which, among others, he does urge for the Proof of the
Lawfulness of his Call, were drawn from his being Gal. 1. 15, 16. So was
Jeremiah; chapter 1. 5. So was John the Baptist, Luke 1. 15, 16. So Christ, and so
Isaiah, chap. 49. v. 1, 5.
separated thereunto from his Mother's Womb.

He was eminently gifted by the Holy Spirit for this Office.

He was much Graced by the same Holy Spirit for this Function.

See before, page 6.
He had a special Call thereunto by Christ himself.

1 Cor. 9. 1.
He had such a Sight of Christ, and such a Voice from Christ, relating to this,
as was extraordinary.

2 Cor. 13. 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 9. 12.
He had sealing Testimonies from Heaven, in the Hearts of Multitudes, of his
Ministerial Call.

Acts 14. 1, 2 3.
He had a Miracle-working Power communicated to him, for a further Confirmation
of the Lawfulness of his Call, and Truth of his Doctrine.

SHEM ACHER.
His Call to this Office and Work of the Ministry, having somewhat in it which
is outward, common, and ordinary, referring unto Men; and somewhat which is
inward, special, and more than ordinary, relating unto God: it may therefore
have some good Use, and profitable Tendency, to speak distinctly unto each.

That of it which refers unto Men is this: Let any almost plead and urge what
they will or can, as to this, he has somewhat or other to say for the stopping
of their Mouths; and all of it put together, is at least more than he knows of
any one Man, who justifies his Call from Men, can say for himself. Tho Shem
Acher does mainly and ultimately resolve the Warrantableness and Rightfulness
of his Call into somewhat else, as you will hear quickly, when his Case shall
be compared with Paul's, in several Particulars, as to the Ministerial Office,
wherein yet he does give the Pre-eminence unto Paul; and this not only as to
the degrees and measures, which were higher and larger, but also as to one or
more of the kinds; particularly, as to Paul's God-inspiredness, and
Infallibility, in being the Holy Spirit's Penman of much of the Holy
Scriptures, and somewhat else, which was then peculiar to his Apostolical
Office, and Miracle-working Power.

If those who do place the Authority and Power in the Magistrate, to give a
Call to the Ministerial Office, should question Shem Acher's Call, he has by
him to show it under the Attests, the Hands and Seals of two Kings, and of one
Protector; tho as to this last, and one of the other, they were other Men, who
volu^tarily of themselves procured this for him, without his seeking.

If those who lodge this in Episcopal Jurisdiction, call upon him to give them
some account of his Ministerial Function, urging for a Succession of lawfully
called Ministers, ordained Ones, (besides the extraordinary Prophets) Such were
the Firstborn of Families, from Adam's time to Moses, Exodus 19. 22, 24. and
24. 5. Numb. 8. 5, -- 22. In Moses's Days it passed from the First born unto
Aaron and his Sons, and unto the Tribe of Levi, Exodus chap. 28, 29. Mal. 2. 4,
-- 10. Thus it continued all the Old Testament through. After the Jews return
from the Babylonish Captivity, the Reformers sought for the Sons of the Priests
in the Register, such as were reckoned by Genealogy; those who were not found
such, as polluted, were put from the Priesthood, Ezra 2. 61, 62, 63: In the New
Testament, there was John the Son of a Priest, honored by the Prophecies of
Isaiah and Malachy; Christ ordained twelve Apostles, and seventy Disciples, and
called Paul to the Office and Work of the Ministry; and they from Christ
ordained others. As to this, Shem Acher has to say, that he has it to show
under the Hands and Seals of Bishop Hall, for Deaconship, and for laying on of
Hands, (who putting him to the question, Whether he was persuaded in his Heart,
that the Holy Spirit called him to that Office? he answered, That he was so
persuaded) and of Bishop Skinner, for the Ministry.

If such as are for Ordination by a Classical Presbytery, (I meddle not here
with that Controversy, Whether a Bishop and a Presbyter be both but one and the
same Officer?) object against his Commission, and if they should take in
Independent, or Congregational Ministers to join with them in the same Charge,
he can return this, That he has the Approbation of a Dean, and of Canons, of
Associated Ministers, both Presbyterian and Independent; also of Tryers in the
Protector's Time, who were appointed for the examining, and the sending forth
of able fit Men to preach the Gospel, and to take upon them the Care and Charge
of Souls, tho he never was before them, neither did he apply himself unto them
for such an end, either by himself, or by others.

If such as do seat this in the Peoples Choice and Call, do reason the Case
with him about it, that it must be received from them, as if the Power were
originally there, he has much to offer unto such to be considered by them. The
People of that Parish where he lived before, refusing to submit to
Church Discipline, when, his Heart being set upon Reforming, according to what
knowledge he then had, he propounded it to them; (for at that time he kept up a
Meeting most Evenings, for sometime, to speak to some practical Case of
Conscience, and had written diverse little Books of Diaries of his own
Experiences.) They thus rejecting to be governed by the Laws of Christ's House,
hereupon Providence gave him as large, full, and clear a Call to one of the
most populous Towns in all Dorsetshire, by some Thousands of that Town, and by
Multitudes of other neighboring Places thereabouts, as any Minister in
England, that he knows of, had in that Day. And after about two Years waiting
by them, and referring the Case of Removal to them, into the Arbitration and
Judgment of some Presbyterian Ministers of other Counties, besides the
Encouragement of other Ministers of the same County, both Presbyterian and
Independent, who exhorted to, and approved of such a Removal; he had as solemn
an 1 Thessalonians. 2. 1. 19, 20. This Scripture was ^he Subject Matter of his first
Sermon at his Entrance there.
Entrance into the taking charge of the People of that Town, as any Pastor that
he has heard of in that Age: For, besides what has been already mentioned,
there was one solemn Day of Fasting kept publicly there, carried on by
Presbyterians and others, in a great Assembly, to prepare that People, and to
direct them in their Choice, where he was present, yet did not at that time,
either as a Mouth from God in Preaching, or as a Mouth to God in Praying,
openly appear. And afterward, at another solemn Fast there, on the Day of his
Reception, when the Public Work and Worship of that Day was performed by one
Presbyterian Minister, and another Independent Minister, which was closed up by
Shem Acher himself, and all to such satisfaction and with such rejoicing, of
about two thousand or more present, as that the Memory thereof, he supposes,
is still kept alive in the Hearts of some hundreds of them.

After this, about five years and half after, he being honored with an
Imprisonment for Christ's sake, for the Gospel sake, for Righteousness sake,
for the Elect's sake, he gathered a Church there in that place of Confinement,
toward the end of which Imprisonment, upon a solemn Fasting day, so far as
their light in those matters did attain, the Brethren and Sisters then present
thankfully owned their profiting under his ministerial Labors, and gave a
large Testimony to his ministerial Office and Work; only this must be
remembered, that, at several times upon several occasions, he in the hearing of
several of them, did always reserve to himself the liberty of answering of
Christ's Call to any other Place or People; for, he was the LORD's, having
given up himself unto Him, to be wholly and only at his dispose, and not to be
during Life staked down to any particular Place or People.

Once more, since his coming to London, he has been gathering of another
People; and that Church with whom he now walks, did all such of them as were
then actually in Fellowship, upon a Solemn-Fast-assembling, communicate their
Experiences to one another, how much the LORD had blessed his Labors upon
their Hearts, and toward the close of the work of that day, (not by Imposition
of Hands, or Ordination to the ministerial Office, or any thing of that Nature,
which was openly so declared both by him and them.) One of them in the Name of
the rest, in Prayer to the LORD, did by stretching out of his Hands, as others
also of them did, commend him unto the LORD in a special Message to the Sabbath
Churches in Wiltshire, Hampshire, Dorcetshire, Glocestershire, and Berkshire,
which was undertaken by him, and prospered with desired Success, the report
whereof at his return, caused Joy to all the Brethren and Sisters in Fellowship.

This is somewhat of that, which he here brings in as an Argument unto Men, who
are urgent for such outward, common, ordinary, Calls to this Office from Men.

This was a choice piece of the Beauty of this Providence in this his age of
growing-Light: For, let any one convinced of the Seventh-day Sabbath, have been
of what Judgment soever, yet still there had been a Receiver of him into
Church Fellowship, whatsoever his Principle had been.

If after all this, it be more deeply researched into, and he be close and home
put to it, what he himself does mainly and ultimately resolve his inward,
special, more than ordinary Call into as to the ministerial Office and Work; he
desires, that, so far as the Case will run Parallel with Paul's, (though he
here, as before, gives the pre-eminence to Paul) it may be in a Brotherly
manner and Christian way admitted and received.

He was set apart to this Office, from his Mother's Womb: For, his Father and
Mother related to him, when he grew up to some capacity for the taking of this
in, that, (if not whilst he was in the Womb, in case he should prove a Male
perfect Child, yet at least) upon his being born a Male Child with perfection
of Limbs and of Parts, by Vow or some religious Promise made to God, they would
give him up unto the LORD, to whom they dedicated him for the Office and Work
of the Ministry, which has since been suggested to him by the Holy Spirit, and
confirmed by many Experiences according to the Word, which he does embrace with
a thankful joyful Heart, as a more than common Favor from that good Spirit.
His Parents, as they had thus designed him to this special Course and
honorable Calling; so accordingly, they were at the care and cost to train and
breed him up in such Knowledge and Learning, as the Principles and Seize
of that Age and Day directed them to. As he grew up, his strong Propensions,
and continued Inclinations were for this Calling, as the only proper course of
his Life intended for him; tho by invitation thereunto by his Father, and from
others he has since discerned; that, he entered upon somewhat of it too soon
and too unfurnished; for the longer he does live, and the more spiritual
discerning he has, still the more he sees and feels of his 2 Cor. 2. 16, 17.
Insufficiency for so high, honorable, and great undertaking, and would gladly
sit at the Feet of others, every way more accomplished, and more 2 Chronicles. 24.
20. Margin.
clothed with the Holy Spirit for it; and he is grieved at Heart, and afflicted
in Spirit, to behold the over forwardness of so many in the present Age, who
undertake to be public Teachers of others, when diverse of them do need to be
catechizinglytaught themselves.

Since his more through passing into this Office, the Holy Spirit, who does
divide his Gifts to every Man severally as he will, has in some measure Ps 68.
11. 18. Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Gifted him for it: (which he would speak thankfully, as acknowledging it to be
mere Grace and special Favor; for, he ascribes nothing of the Spirituallity of
it to his own former Philosophic Studies or self Acquirements or human
Instructing, but, it was divine Teaching, and Gifted infusing from Heaven: so
withal, humbly with selfabasing, that, all this while he has made no further
progress in a Fittedness and Ability for this Calling in the proper peculiar
Endowments for it: though this he can say through Grace; that, for these last
seventeen years, more especially for the last fourteen years, he has had in the
Strength and Supplies of the Holy Spirit, an industrious mind to trade with his
Talent received; and there is seldom a day, wherein somewhat more is not,
according to the Mat. 25. 29. 1 Pet. 4. 10. Romans 12. 3, 6. 1 Cor. 12. 3,-11.
Luke 19 12, -- 26. 1 Cor. 7. 17.
Promise given unto him: and he remembers well, that, for about seventeen Years
ago, though he h^^ some knowledge of the Hebrew and Greek Tongues before, yet
this Meditation taking sensible hold of his Heart, that, when he went through
the Bible, and examined the Gifts of Ministers there, he could not find any one
Minister of Christ lawfully called by him to that Office, who did not
understand the Words of Jehovah Aelohim in their Original Language; that which
did so quicken him up to pray for, and to endeavor after a more growing
Skilfulness, especially in the inner knowledge of the Hebrew Significations by
the Holy Spirits Teachings, that, the serious Thoughts of, and unexpressible
Advantages by, this Scripture Learning, do abide with him to this Day: and he
does judge it very requisite for those who conc^rn themselves in this Calling,
to lay this more to Heart; had not the Holy Spirit somewhat Gifted him for this
employ, he should still fear and doubt, he had never called him to it.

The same Holy Spirit has in a measure Graced and Sanctified him for this Holy
Function. This also as before concerning Gifts, he does write with the same
thankful humble Acknowledgments. It is not every one, who does pretend and
pride himself as Gifted, yea suppose him to have great common edifying Gifts,
who is thereby presently commissioned by Christ for the Ministerial Office;
seeing some such are notoriously scandalous Livers, bitter Persecuters of the
Saints, open declared Enemies against the Power and Purity of right Worship,
and of other true good Religion, against which they sharpen and set the edg of
those Weapons of Knowledge which they have: who, whilst such are so far from
being to be admitted Administrators of Church-Ordinances, that, they ought not
to be admitted to, or continued in, a state of Church Membership, but should by
the due regular exercise of Church Discipline, be shut or thrust out from such
Communion. And here, when he duly considers, and seriously ponders, 2 Timothy 3.
17. 1 Timothy 6. 11. 1 Samuel 9. 6, 7. Lev. 21. throughout. Ezekiel. 44. throughout. 1 Timothy 3. throughout. Tit. 1. 5, -- 9. Rev. 1, 2, 3. cha. 1 Pet. 5. 1, -- 4. Tit.
2. 1. Acts 6. 2, -- 4.
what Men of God, what chief Men among the People, how holy, how unblemished,
how unblameable, how sober and vigilent, how temperate, how moderate, how sound
minded, how wisely circumspect, how modest, how well behavoured, how fitly
attired and well adorned, how hospitalish and harbourous in a courteous
receiving and entertaining of Strangers, how apt, able, fit, apposite to teach,
well-habited and disposed for orderly-clear-convincing-teaching; endued with a
good Faculty of instructing and and of discipling of others, how not given to
Wine-bibbing, or to Excess in any other Strong Drink which makes Drunk, not an
Ale-stake, or common Tipler, not one that loves tossing of Cups; not a striker,
smiter, or beater of others, not one of ungoverned heat, or of military
Fierceness, not filthily-gaining, not covetously intent upon dishonest base
gain; how equal, full of Equity in all things: how, courteous, gentle, patient,
how unbrawling either as to Speeches or Actions, declining the offered
occasions of sinful contendings: no lover of Silver nor Idolizer of Money: how
well governing his own Family, Household; having his Children (if the LORD give
him any) in Subjection, under Discipline, in good order; faithful Children, not
refractory, not obnoxious to the Sin of Luxury: not one who is but newly
ingraffed or implanted in Christian Profession in God's House, such as ought to
have a good Testimony from those that are without, such a one as cannot justly
be called into question, or into Court for any manifest Crime: what a Dispenser
of God, as his Steward; not pertinaciously pleasing of himself: not prone to
anger, not hasty, not spirited for rage: what a lover of goodness, of good,
both Men, Truths, and Things: how Just, how Holy, how Pious, how Continent: how
firmly adhering to that faithful Word which is according to wholesome Doctrine,
that so he may be able also to exhort in Doctrine, such as is healthful and
sound, and to convince such who are contradicting and gainsaying ones; not
attending to Jewish Fables, or to Precepts of Men averse from the Truth, or
turning Truth away, or turning from the Truth, one speaking those things, which
do become sound Doctrine; a Feeder of the Flock of God where he is: a
carefullywatchfully-overseeing one, not forcedly, but willingly, freely, with a
prompt or ready Mind; not imperiously domineering or lording it over those
allotted to his Care and Charge: being Exemplary to the Flock; one, who
believes and prepares for the Appearing of the chief Pastor, to receive and
carry away an unfading Crown of Glory: one, who gives himself to Prayer, and to
the Word; whose Wife must be one who is honest, who proves constant, no
Calamniatrix, not a devilish Slanderer, or false Accuser, no malicious
Detracter, one sober, faithful in All: what a Star, what an Angel! When these
Qualifications, and many more that might be added, are brought and put
together, to measure, as by a straight Rule, many of those by, who lay claim to
this Office, that does put Shem Acher upon deep Sighing, and makes him ask this
Question in his Thoughts, Where do the able faithful Ministers dwell?

He has had some signal Calls to this Office by Christ, especially at three
times, one about fourteen years ago, another about seventeen years since, of
both which an account has been given before for some other purpose, and once
before both these, when with the former of these last two he did set himself,
by Fasting and Prayer, to know the Mind of Christ, whether he had indeed set
him apart to this Office: in all which times he had satisfying Answers, and
Signs fulfilled quickly after in some remarkable returns by eminent Conversions.

He has had such a sight of Christ in the North, as was clear and evident to
his Eye of Faith, chiefly more at one Season, mentioned before, which was made
so real to him, and has more or less so continued for so many years Night and
Day, as does leave it out of doubt with him, in a degree, as if he conversed
with the Person of Christ himself, so far as Shem Acher in this state of
Imperfection, has a Capacity of walking with an exalted Christ in his state of
Glory.

As for the Sealings on Earth, of his Commission received from Heaven, in the
Hearts of converted Sinners, of edifyed Saints, of comforted Souls, he had
rather, others would speak and declare than himself; however seeing somewhat
may be expected from him, as to this Parrallel, he does 2 Cor. 2. 14. -- 17.
give thanks unto God, who especially for twenty years or more, has caused him
to triumph in Christ, and has made manifest the favor of his Knowledge by him,
more or less in every place, as he has traveled up and down with the blessing
of the Gospel of Christ. For, (besides some ownings of him and of his labors
before whilst he lived in a little Parish) when he was called to that Neighbor
Town spoken of before, there was as hopeful a budding and blowing of young ones
there and in the Neighborhood, and he hopes much good brought forth to the
praise of Grace in and by many; there being yet alive several scores who can,
as he supposes, somewhat sensibly call to mind the Truth of this: besides what
the LORD has done by him in two Counties during his Imprisonments for above
nine years, at which time some were begotten again in the bonds of the Gospel;
and also what good and gracious effects his preaching of the Gospel has brought
forth, by the Spirit and Blessing of God upon his Works since his Liberty, in
any other place, particularly near and in London; For, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19, 20.
what is his Hope or Joy or Crown of rejoicing? are not even a converted,
edifyed, comforted, confirmed People in the Presence of our LORD Jesus Christ
at his coming? For, these are his Glory and Joy.

As for a Miracle-working Power, such as Paul had, he does not pretend to this,
either for all the Kinds, or for those high Degrees, and great Measures, as
Paul was honored withal: yet this he can say in Truth to the Glory of Jehovah,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, that his Aelohim has done wonderful
things for and upon him, and mavelous Works by him for and upon others, as to
healing Cures both upon Spirit, Soul, and Body, and also as to the executing of
very sore threatened Judgments against and upon diverse of his implacable
Adversaries: whereof there be Witnesses, as to what was open and public: the
particulars whereof would make this Narrative too long: only one Experience he
shall impart, which was a great secret of the LORD Christ's using him as his
Administrator upon himself. Having, by much labor in his work in the
forementioned Town about twenty years since, broken his Strength, which caused
a Rupture, he used such means for a Cure, as the most skilful Physician, and
some others most experienced in such cases could help him to, all which proved
ineffectual; whereupon his Thoughts were inwardly at work, upon this Enquiry,
whether there were not some other way for his Cure to be sought after? This was
brought upon his Heart, that, Jam. 5.
the Ordinance of Anointing the Sick had not been used: he was convinced of the
need and use of this Ordinance, of the standing preceptive and promising part
of it; but, knew not whither to his satisfaction to go, or send for a right
Administrator, the Ministers generally in those parts at that time, eirher not
having Light or Faith therein, and some of them openly opposing of it: hereupon
a secret Voice whispers, that, as a Messenger from Christ, he should administer
it upon himself, the case being so circumstanced; which accordingly he did, and
felt the healing strengthening Effect of it quickly: which has continued for
many years, so that, he knows not, but, that Joh. 3. 25, 26, 27.
Sanative Virtue having been drawn down from Christ, by a touching of him, by
the Hand of Faith, in a way of believing on him and on his Word, he is well
healed, though still under and for Christ he use apt means for the continuance
of this great Mercy in order to Service: all the praise be to him for his
Mercy, and for his Truth.

So that what John the Baptist said in the same case, both as to his Baptism
and Ministry, A Man can receive nothing, except it be given him from Heaven,
Shem Acher does apply to his own Case, who has not in this Matter, so far as
the Resemblance here does answer, taken what is lawful and good, but what has
been given unto him thus from above. In the Hypothesis or Supposition, that one
special Argument or Matter upon which John was then disputing, those Words are
referred to what went immediately before, relating to the Ministerial Office of
Christ, or of John, or of both, as to Teaching and Baptizing: Both John the
Minister, and Christ the Master, having received Gifts, Graces, and a Call from
Heaven to exercise this honorable Function, or delegated Employment; they both
having been owned and dignified with a Divine Testification from above, which
gave and confirmed them in their lawful Authority so to act, ( Mat. 21. 25.
John 1. 23. and 3. 11, 25, 26, 27, 32, 33.) These right Words, although more
generally laid down, have great force of strong Reason, and of convincing
Argument in them, to prove, That a Man can receive nothing, take nothing to
himself, as to such a Call and Office, and the Execution thereof, in a regular
way, and right manner, by due Commission, and warranting Authority, except it
were first given him from Heaven: For tho legitimately to give, and
legitimately to receive, are related to each other, and so are together at
once; yet in order, to give is first: And therefore tho the Verb be in the
Present Tense, (...) 3 Sing. Praes. Subj. yet the Participle is in the past
Time, (...), Partic. N^ut. Praet. Pass. Not any, no Man of right good
Conscience, Heb. 5. 4. is to take this Honor to himself, but he who is called
of God, ordained and appointed thereunto by his Word-Warrant, ( Numb. 16. 10. 1
King. 13. 33. Luke 3. 2. Acts 23. 5.) Not any takes: As to the matter of Right
none can justly take, none ought to take; tho many as to matter of Fact have
taken, and do take, without Gift from Jehovah Aelohim, the great Lord over all.
It being a Function of Divine Institution, and of special Favor, of great
Honor, and of weighty Charge, both ordinary and extraordinary Ministers must
be able to prove their Call, Heb. 5. 4. and 3. 2. Jer 17. 16. Amos 7. 15. Romans
1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Ephesians. 4. 11. Exodus 28. 1. 2 Chronicles. 13. 9, 10.
1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. 1 Samuel 23. Where any have upon their own Heads set
themselves a running, or have been pushed forwards by others, whom the Lord
never sent, it concerns them to consider how they will answer it.

And this is one Ground and Reason for this present 1 Cor. 9. 3.
Apology, which is an Answer with a Defense as to Men's false chargings, 1 Cor.
4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
wherein he can justify himself and plead his Office in their Day and Court,
though in some particular Circumstances of his Case, the Searcher of Hearts,
and the Tryer of Reins, can find matter enough against him for which to condemn
him: O how much Wisdom and Love has the righteous Judge manifested toward Shem
Acher, in that he has found out a way, wherein to justify him from that wherein
he can and does comdemn himself?

He has patiently born the secret Artifices, and open Attempts of some to
defame him and to decry his Ministry for about these six years last past, as
being made willing to deny himself, to take up his Cross daily, and so to
follow Christ: but having long observed, that such do still trouble the minds
of diverse, who have been hopefully coming on, and do lay stumbling blocks in
the way for the hinderance of others, whereby Gospel-work has been at a stand,
the Sabbath Cause wronged, many Souls prejudiced, and the Honor of our LORD at
least darkened, to say no more, he does now judge it high time (having had
several louder Calls thereunto of late) to do public and open right to this
Cause (and to some other after Causes and Cases) where others have done it such
public and open wrong, which is but an act of warrantable regular love toward
himself and toward others: and also an act of due Equity, and of distributive
Justice, for the wiping off of unkind Calumnies and injurious Aspersions
imputed and cast upon an honorable Office; about which he has been many and
many a time Prove. 18. 13
prejudged and condemned (as also in other cases) before his Matters of Fact
and of Right have been known, or he himself heard; thus has his silence in this
cause been misinterpreted a confession of Guilt. If any ask, why this had not
been brought forth sooner, he has much to say in answer, if he would enlarge:
but in short, some hints he has already given which carry forcibleness of right
Words in them, to the impartially intelligent and spiritually discerning; and
he hoped, that, the Experiences of many in this City, upon whose Hearts the
LORD had sealed to the Office of his Ministry, might have put some timely stop
to the further spreading of such defameings. Besides, it is evident to him,
being led far into the mystery and meaning of this Providence; that, this is
the fittest season for the making of the present Apology: and, if, either some
will charge him with Vanity and Pride, with Folly and Vain-boasting, in writing
so much upon his own Defense, or, if it have another effect than many are well
aware off, for the putting of separate Churches upon a further search into the
Scriptures of Truth, about the right constituting of Churches, the lawful Call
to the Ministerial Office and Work, and some other weighty Ordinances, spoken
unto in this Paper, it will much concern those, who make the exception duly to
ponder, who is chargeable, Whether the Apologist, who in a Cause and Case so
circumstanced does make his honest Defense and just Plea? or, those unfriendly
ones, who have compelled him hereunto? which advocating for Innocence, so far
as it is Innocence, has Scripture-Warrant Joh. 29. and 31. Chap. and elsewhere
in that Book. Acts 22. and 26. chap. 1 Cor. 4. 1.* 5. and 2 Cor. 11.
throughout, and 12. 11*
both in the Old and New Testament; so that, if he have been a Fool in
glorying, they are others who have necessitated him thereunto.

PAVL.
Acts 19. 18. and 22. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 13. -- 17.
He was baptized upon this eminent Conversion, and clear Call to the Office and
Work of the Ministry.

He being sent more to Preach the Gospel, than to Baptize, though this were in
his Commission too. They were not very many whom he did Baptize, lest any
should misjudge that he had baptized in his own Name, which he does expressly
deny and disown. He is called upon not to tarry, but to arise, and baptising to
be baptized, and wash away his Sins, calling on the Name of the Lord; whereupon
he does submit to this Baptismal Ordinance.

SHEM ACHER.
He having had such Calls, and such clearings up of this Call, to this
Ministerial Office, of which so large an Account has been given, especially at
those solemn Seasons of Fasting and Prayer, when he set himself more in serious
earnest to be satisfied concerning this his Call from Heaven, by the Holy
Spirits leaving some sealing Testimony thereof upon his Heart, according to the
Word, at such a needful time, when he was under some perplexing Doubts and
distressing Fears, about this Call. Being thus prepared for it, as is already
rehearsed, the Light of (amongst some others) two Truths and Duties of this Age
were evidently made known unto him, the one of the Seventh-day weekly Sabbath,
the other of perfecting Believers Baptism (he does leave others here, whose
Case at present is, or hereafter may be more concerned in this Matter, if it be
not already perfected upon and in them, to consider, whether then, if there be
otherways a fittedness for, and a Call to, the Ministerial Function, it may not
be proper and useful to enter upon this Office with such Heb. 6. 1, 2. Mat. 3.
13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and 4. 1. -- 17. Act. 9. 18, 20. and 26 16. -- 20. Exodus
29. 4. Le^. 8. 6.
perfecting of Baptism now they are grown Believers? so were the Priests under
the Old Testament, (which is mentioned not at all to reinforce any Old
Testament* Shadow, Figure, Type, or Ceremony, now under the present New
Testament Administration of Grace) so was Christ; so were his Apostles: so was
Paul, let the Spirit of God from his Word speak with Men's Hearts about this. I
forbear in this place, to add any further Arguments for, or Advantages by,
this.)

The occasion of his passing into the Scripture-Path, of the weekly
Seventh-day Sabbath was this: A near and dear Brother, and Friend of his from
the Country, wrote this Case of Conscience to him; whether, the first day of
the Week, as commonly observed by almost all Christians, or the seventh, which
is the last day of every Week, in the weekly returns of it, were indeed the
weekly Sabbath, according to God's Command? or in words to the some effect, for
it is now about sixteen years since; and he earnestly desired the Opinion and
Judgment of Shem Acher upon this Case. Upon the Receipt of this Letter, he was
somewhat startled at this new Proposal, though he was not so fully satisfied
for some years before about any word-Institution, for observing the first day
(as a Sister in Sabbath-Fellowship, converted under his Ministry, a shining
Ornament to her holy Profession, whilst here below, but now above with the
LORD, informed and reminded him, that, when she propounded the very same Case
to him about six or seven years before, he gave her a very faint unsatisfactory
answer, as if he scarce were then a cordial Favourer of that first day; for,
tho he preached up Sabbath-Duties and Privileges in that Town, yet his
Assistant was, as one part of his Work, to engage in the Controversy, which was
the limited day.) At the first receipt of that Case, he was full of other work
and employ, about his own and other Cases, and laid it aside for near a Month;
the Brother whose Spirit was tender in this Case, as in many other new Cases,
sent a second Letter, with renewed importunity, requiring and expecting a
speedy Answer; Upon this, Shem Acher speaks to Jehovah Aelohim, to Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, to Christ God-Man, in Prayer about it, and then makes
Scripture-Testimonies to be Psalm. 119. 24.
the Men of his Counsel: and being under an Obligation to take the whole
Scripture along with him, for the resolving and determining of this Case, and
to lay aside all his former Apprehensions, and no longer to parle with Humane
Traditions, Philosophical arguings, Carnal reasonings, or any other
unscriptural Authorities, he took his Bible, which he has now had about forty
years, and to which he was well used, and so could with the more readiness turn
unto apt places, beginning with the first Week of the created World, and there
he found that, Genesis 2. ^, 2, 3.
the weekly Seventh-day Sabbath had Foundation, both in Jehovah's Word, and in
Created Nature, as being the only day of the whole Week, on which the Creator
and Redeemer rested, which day he Blessed, and which day he Sanctified, for
Sabbath-Purposes and Privileges, and not any other Day of the Week, neither
first, second, third, fourth, fifth, nor sixth, but only the seventh. On he
goes with his enquiry through the whole Book of Moses, and finds the seventh
day Sabbath Exodus 16. 22. -- 30.
reinforced, and the neglect and profaneing thereof reproved, before the solemn
proclaiming of it at Mount Sinai; where the very next step in his Travails he
hears Exodus 19, and 20 chap. particularly chap. 20. verse. 8, 9, 10, 11.
the trumpeting promulgation of this Kingly Law of the Seventh day Sabbath,
sounding loud in his Ear and Heart: and still, the further he passed on in the
after Writings of Moses, and of the Prophets, the more he is led along in the
Seventh-day-Sabbath-way, till he came full home to the close of the Old
Testament, with this Seal put upon this Scripture-Canon or Rule by Jehovah
himself, Mal 4. 4.
Remember ye the Law of Moses, my Servant, all and every, both of the Commands
for keeping holy of the weekly Sabbath day, and of the Promises of Blessings
and Sanctifyings of weekly Sabbath day to right Observers of it, and also of
the Threatenings denounced against Profaners of the weekly-Sabbath-day, relating
only to the seventh, the last day of every week, and to no other day of the
week. He was now in a short space of time, the very same day of entering upon
this enquiry, got so far forwards in this way, of the seventh-day Sabbath from
that Light and Truth which Jehovah Aelohim sent forth from his word by his Holy
Spirit, that, he forthwith concluded, there was no either going back, or
stepping aside, for him out of this Scripture-Path: For, if all the Old
Testament were for it, the New was not against it, seeing if any had preached
up the first, or any other day, except the seventh, of the whole week, at the
beginning of the New Testament-dispensation of Grace, those who were more Acts
17. 1^^
noble-raced Believers on, and Disciples of Christ, before the Writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles, who searched the Scriptures they then had, whether
the first-day-pretended-Sabbath-Doctrine were true or not, they could not find
that written Word, which they then enjoyed, had any such Institution at all in
it, but, the weekly Sabbath's Exodus 25. 11, 16, 21, 22. 1 Kings 8. 9. Jam 2. 8,
9, 10, 11, 12.
crowning honor was all through visible and legible upon the head of the
seventh day only. However he narrowly examined, and diligently compared the
whole New Testament Writings by the Evangelists and Apostles: and there he soon
discovered, that, the LORD Jesus Christ, whose 1 Pet. 2. 21. 1 Cor. 11. 1. 1 John 2. 4, 6. and 4. 17.
Example he was to follow in all the Acts of Decalogical Obedience, or
Obedience to the Laws of the ten Words, and whose exact perfect Holiness and
Righteousness both of Nature, Heart, and Life was fully every way answering to
all the demands of this Law, which was to be both imputed to Believers for
their Justification, and conformed to by Believers in their Sanctification;
this Christ all his Life long, in the weekly returns of the Sabbath, kept the
Luke 4. 16, -- 31. and 23 56. and elsewhere.
seventh day Sabbath, and no other day of the week as such, to which the
Gospels give abundant Testimony. Now he begins to be more confirmed, and
wondereth how he could so much overlook, so self-evidencing a Truth and Duty so
long: he converseth further with the Records of the Apostles, whether their
Doctrine and Practice did Harmonize, and tune in the same Concord with this new
Ps. 92. Title. Jer. 6. 16. and 17. 21, etc.
Song, Psalm, and Hymn of the true good old weekly seventh day Sabbath. His
only remaining work now left, was to consult the Apostles Writings, and therein
he reads in plain legible Characters, that, as Christ's Custom, Manner, or
constant practiced Usage was; so also was Luke 4. 16. Acts 17. 2, 3. and 18. 4.
Paul's (the Expression is one and the same in the Greek) to observe the
seventh-day as the only weekly Sabbath day, and that, no other day in the whole
week has both the Name and Nature of a weekly Sabbath Day given to it by the
Holy Spirit, but only the seventh day: and that Obedience to these Laws of
Christ is so often called for both Mat. 5, 6, 7. chap. Joh. 14. 15. Luke 10.
25, 26, 27, 28. Romans 4. 15. and 5. 13. and 13. 8, 9, 10. Jam. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11,
13. Heb. 5. 9. Rev. 12. 17. and 14. 12. and 22. 14, 15, 18, 19.
by Christ and his Apostles, as an evidence of Love to Christ, and of other
Interest in him, as a Savior; and that the new Testament Scripture was also
closed up with Christ's Seal of Blessing to those who doing these his
Commandments, and of pronouncing a Sentence of Excommunication against any Man,
who should either add to, or take from this written Word, Will, and Law of
Christ. The whole Scripture being thus profitable for this Doctrine and Duty of
the weekly seventh day Sabbath, Christ sat as one expecting an answer,
readily, heartily, whereupon Shem Acher was not disobedient to this heavenly
Teaching by the Holy Spirit; but resolves in the strength and supplies of the
same good Spirit, to set about the Practice of it; and this State of the
Question he sends to his enquiring Brother, who also forthwith embraced the
same Truth, and reduced it to Practice.

And now lo, a very formidable Sight stares him in the Face; for he saw such an
Army of Opposers, not only profane, but professing, not only Foes, but Friends,
all almost as one Man up in Arms against him, as soon as it should take Air
abroad, (for he was then the LORD's Prisoner) and be known, that it was his
Principle Ps. 119. 165*
and Practice. He also foresaw, that tho this was no * Stumbling Block at all
to him, neither any disturbance to his own great Peace; yet many others would
throw it as a Stone of Offense in their own and others ways, to the troubling
the Minds of young Ones. In such Multitudes, who promised so fairly, and came
on so towardly, how many were likely to be much prejudiced against him, and his
former and after-Ministry? And what was most terrible of all, Acts 28. 22.
how evil (tho injustly) many were likely to speak against the Word and Ways of
the LORD, and to blaspheme Jehovah's fearful, glorious and holy Name. Christ
still held him to former Terms, of bringing All to an whole Christ, and his
whole Word; and suitably the good Spirit framed his Heart to this holy Resolve,
Duty is mine, the Issues and Successes of things are the LORD's, and do belong
to him.

He privately obsevred the Seventh-day Sabbath for some time, but with great
Difficulties, and sore Trials, and distressing Hardships in the Prison: He
imparts the LORD's Teachings of him to one, and then to another privately, who
gave place in them to this Word-Truth and Law; and so unto some others, as they
were capable of receiving it. And when four or five were hopefully gained over,
he could hold no longer, and could not but speak the Truths and Things of
Christ in a more open Declaration, and public Profession; which being
understood by some Ministers and others, two Ministers came to him in the
Prison, a little before the end of the sixth day, with vehement earnest
importunate desirings, beseechings, and entreatings, and other arguings and
charmings, that, he would forbear, tho but one day, the next day, which was the
seventh day, to consult and consider of so weighty a matter, in so great a
change for one week, Oh for one week longer! His Answer was quick; short, full,
and resolved, in the Strength of the LORD, No, he would not put it off one day
more, it was clear as the Light to him through the whole Scripture, and if he
should put away from him this Statute of Jehovah, tho but for one day, he knew
not, but that the Holy Spirits quicknings, teachings and comfortings of him,
might withdraw, and Convictions be darkened and deadned: From this time, tho
Sufferings for Christ came on, yet Consolations by Christ did abound, and the
Scriptures did look with a clearer Face; such is also the Experience of many
others, who are upright-hearted walkers with Christ, and through followers of
Christ in this way of his Command. The very next day, therefore, the seventh
day, he celebrated as the weekly Sabbath day, openly witnessing to it, and
publicly declaring for it, from the Word: remembering, Joh. 18. 37.
that of his LORD Christ, To this end was I born, and for this cause came I
into the World, that, I should bear witness unto the Truth; every one that is
of the Truth, hears my Voice. This was the saying of Christ himself a few
hours before his Death. Since that, Shem never met with any Objection, that
could shake or stagger him, but all wrought for his fuller Confirmation and
Establishment.

In the next place, his perfecting of Believers Baptism comes to be considered.
Convictions about this also, did quickly spread in the Prison, and from thence
in other places. Having no convenient Accommodations for Dipping, under close
Confinement, he and two more took up Resolutions to pass under that Ordinance,
when the LORD should give his Prisoner Liberty: when he was set free, he and
the other being at a time in London, two Brethren and one Sister, being
thoroughly satisfied in each other, took Boat and rowed down to Battersey near
London, and having discovered a convenient place of passing into the Thames
River, intended there to submit to this Appointment of their LORD the next
Morning, if not prevented or hindered. There they kept Sabbath: before the
ending of which day, somewhat providentially fell out by a difference in
Judgment, which did put a stop to that whole Action for that time. Thus the
LORD wisely ordered, and graciously overruled this Affair for Good.

For he, having before been wrought off from all other whatsoever, to bring all
entirely to an whole Christ, and to his whole Word, to Him and to it only, had
the fairer and fuller opportunity to consider before hand, how it might be done
in the purest way, and to compare what he could meet with afterward, if it
might tend to his clearer Inlightning, or further Establishment; that no one
Mark of the Beast might be found upon him at Christ's coming to Glory.

Before, he therefore writes downright to the Case for matter of Fact, he will
set down, what both before and since, he has met with for an answer to this
Question, Who should be the Administrator, and who is fittest for it?

There were diverse of the Persuasion and Practice for Believers Baptism, some
who had been his Fellow Prisoners, others of the same mind who gave him
Christian Visits: but, his Spirit was not satisfied with any one of them. For,
as for the Objection that has been made, that, a dead Man cannot bury himself,
as if therefore, a Man could not baptize himself: Such arguing from some
Similitudes are often mistaken and misapplyed, and recoil upon the Objecter. As
in this Case, a grown Believer, if in any circumstanced Case he have a
sufficient Call to baptize himself, yet is supposed to be not altogether dead,
but, alive both in Nature and in Grace too: and a living Person may do such an
Action, as may set out a dying, burial, and rising again. Let a Swallow speak
in this Case; See Swan's Spaeculum Mundi, p. 408.
History writes of this Bird, that, in the beginning of Autumn, it gets among
the Canes or Reeds, where it sinks it self into the Waters, thus dying and
burying it self, and at the beginning of the Spring it rises up alive again.
Being in London, and making enquiry there, his disatisfaction grew on: For,
upon search made concerning, either a First-or-After-Administrator of this
Ordinance, he was informed, either by printed Records, or by credible
Witnesses, that the Administrator, was,

Either, a Self Baptizer; such he knew not one lawfully authorized thereunto:
(which yet) he will not totally condemn, especially, if a Call can be cleared
up thereunto from the LORD. The Grounds and Reasons whereof are not fit to be
brought in here, particularly, tho the discerning Reader may catch at Hints
enough in what does follow. There are Hebrew words, which do set out some such
Washings, that are in two Conjugations, one of which Conjugations, Hithpahel,
is always so, and the other Passive in Niphal is often, significantly Such as
Ruchatz, and Hithrachatz, Nibtal. Nishtaph. Shuttaph. Heb. 9. 10. Lev. 15. 6,
etc. Genesis 17. 10, etc. Romans 4. 11. Col. 2. 1, 2. In the Greek a Passive Verb,
has often an Active signification. See for this Pasor's Greek Sacred Grammar of
the New Testament, p. 147, 148, 149. in many Scripture-Instances. Thus also in
the Latin there are diverse Verbs, which are called (...), such as Passively do
work Actively upon a Man's self. See Danesius his Paralipomenae. p. 78, 79, 80,
81, 82, 83.

In the Greek, Words of the Middle Voice have often an Active signification,
sometimes a Passive, now and then both.

1 Cor. 10. 2. (...) 3 Plur. aor. 1 Med. They baptising (themselves) were
baptized in the Cloud and in the Sea: Thus it was i^ ^he Types, which Moses
sanctifying by the Word and Prayer, the Israelites went in and under of
themselves. Thus, Act. 22. 16 (...), aor. 1. Imper. Mood baptizing (thy self)
be thou baptized. Shem Acher will not say, there was nothing at all of this
self-baptising by Christ's appointment upon himself, tho he resolves it into
the Act of another, of Christ himself, upon him, he being the princiipal
Baptizer of him.

Act. 22. 16. The deeper research that Shem Acher does make into this
Scripture, the more Note-worthyness does he see in it. There are two Verbs in
it, (...), and (...), both of them relating to one and the same thing; that is,
to Baptismal Washing, and they are both of them of the same middle Voice, of
the same Imperative Mood, derived from the same first Aorist, of the same
Number, of the same Gender, and of the same Person, and therefore both
according to consenting Scripture, and in right Reason, should have the same
signification, either Active, or Passive, or both Active and Passive; let it
then and therefore be here minded and considered, that, whatever of Passive
Significancy the latter of them may have in part, as the same Verb of the same
middle Voice has in another Mood, 1 Cor. 6. 11. which must be made up by the
supply of some Preposition hereof (...), says Piscator, which is wanting, and
must be put before the Accusative Case, (...), wash thou off according to, or
concerning of because for, or by reason of those Sins of thine; yet still at
least mainly according to Grammar-Syntax and Propriety, it must be Active here;
and such a Syntax is found in other Authors, particularly in Homer, Iliad. s.

-- -- -- -- (...)
(...).
Vt quam celerrime Patroclum abluerent a sanie sanguinolenta. So that, the
foregoing Verb also, (...), is to be allowed the like Active meaning, in this
place, Baptize thou, (thy self, and others, Christ putting baptising into
Paul's Commission, as one part, tho not the principal part of his Ministerial
Office.) It is granted, that, the same Verb, referring to the same Baptism, in
the Passive Voice, has a Passive Signification, Act. 9. 18. which Passive Voice
it often Reflexive, that is Actively-Passive: However, in Act. 22. 16. all the
words of the Verse do carry an Active Sense with them. God can make a Man,
especially a Minister, an Active Administrator of an Ordinance, and upon
himself, so it is in that other Ordinance of the Supper.

Thus, in the Syriack, the one Verb here in this place Active, the other
Reciprocal and Reflexive. Pegnil, Ithpegnal, and Ithpagnal, are much after the
Use and Form of the Hebrew Conjugation Hithpahel, which does signify the Action
of one upon himself, such an Action as is Reflected on its own Subject; for
which cause the Hebrew Grammarians do generally affirm, that, this Conjugation
does want a Passive Form. Conjugatio haec parens est and proles; and so, it is
sometimes rendered, 2 Samuel 20. 10. Cavet sibi. Genesis 49. 1. Congregate vos. Isa.
52. 2. Excute te. Luke 13. 24. Cavete vobis. Isa. 29. 9. Cogitabundi estote.
Act. 9. 26. Ad adjungendum se. The Hebrew (...) in Daniel and in Ezra, Hith, is
in some of those Scriptures used for, (...) Aith, in the Chaldee and Syriack.
If any after all this will alledg, that Ananias did baptize Paul; when they
have first, if they can, make it clear, convincing, and evident, that he did
so, let them bring forth such an Ananias, who has an express immediate Call by
a Voice from Christ out of Heaven, confirmed also by a Miracle wrought, that,
he has such a Call and Commission thereunto, and Shem does purpose to consider
of it.


Reflective both Active and Passive upon a Man's own self: And there being some
Typical Baptisms by the Institution of Jehovah Aelohim in the Old Testament; as
also another Ordinance of the same Institution, which has much the same
Significancy with Baptism* even Circumcision, which does denote the
mortification and putting off of the sinful body of the Flesh through the
Circumcision of Christ, being buried together with him in Baptism, the Sign and
Seal whereof Abraham at the first passing into it, did both actively and
passively administer from the LORD upon himself, by the cutting quite away the
Flesh of the Foreskin; and Circumcised the rest of the Males in his Family: of
which no more at present, till Controvertists leave their heats of Passion in
contending and grow cool, and become Men of Understanding, of a more excellent
Spirit.) But, he knew no such Administrator to his satisfaction: For, if the
Historian have not wronged some of the first so baptized in Holland, which is
too usual, one John Smith, a Member of Henry Ainsworth's Church there, being
excommunicated for some scandalous Offense, is reported to be one of the first,
who baptized himself first, afterward baptized others: and this Story brought
no good report of such an Administrator to Shem Acher.

Or two Men according to their Principle in their Judgment altogether
unbaptized before, did baptize one another at the first, and afterward did
baptize others: and so were many of the Baptizings in London, reported
originally to be in one if not in two Instances, where also no extraordinary
Call from God thereunto, that ever he yet heard of, is pretended or pleaded.

Or else a private baptized Brother, no lawfully called Minister of Christ, nor
rightly ordained Officer in a true Church, did baptize others: and so he
understands were some of the choicest and best accounted Baptizings in the
esteem of many, of several of the baptized ones in London, carried on by one
who always refused to be any Minister, or ordained Officer in the Church. He
has been credibly informed by two yet alive in this City of London, who were
Members of the first Church of Baptized Believers here, that their first
Administrator was one who baptized himself, or else he and another baptized one
another, and so gathered a Church; which was so opposed in Public and in
Private, that they were disputed out of their Church State and Constitution,
out of their Call to Office; that not being able to justify their Principle and
Practice by the Word, they were broken and scattered. This, together with that
which goes immediately before, he was and is dissatisfied about: because, when
he does look into both the Typical Administrators in the Old Testament, and
Antitypical ones in the New, still they were in Both, 1 Pet. 3. 20, 21. Gen 6,
7, 8 chapters. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. Isa 40. 3, 4, 5. Mal 3. 1. Mat. 3. Mark 1. Luke
3. Joh. 1 and 3 chapters. Mat. 21. 23-27. Joh. 3. 22 -26. and 4 1, 2. Mat. 28.
18, 19, 20. Acts 8. 12, 26, 39.
Commissioned, Ordained Ministers and Officers appointed thereunto, either
extraordinarily and immediately by the LORD thereunto; a Call from whom they
could evidence by somewhat extraordinary to themselves and others, that it was
a special call from Jehovah Aelohim: such an Administrator was Noah in the Ark;
such was Moses under the Cloud and in the Red Sea; such was John the Baptist,
whose Baptism was from Heaven: (Let the Question here be asked, and a sound
Answer well returned, Who baptized John? and whence was his Baptism?) Such were
the Apostles of Christ, and other Ministers and Officers ordained by them, or
extraordinarily and immediately sent forth, specially gifted, graced, and
called by Christ thereunto.

Or else such one or more, whom such a company of Believers who had no lawfully
called, rightly ordained Minister or Church Officer amongst them before, nor
any such Minister or Ministers, Officer or Officers, to ordain or commission
such, and yet do choose, and undertake to ordain by laying on of hands, they
being all private Brethren, some private Brother or Brethren into the
Ministerial Office, and to send him or them forth to preach and to baptize:
neither could this quiet his thoughts, or satisfy his spirit.

Or else some such one, who however pretending to be called and sent forth by
Men, yet is not gifted, graced, and qualified according to the Requirements of
Christ in his Word, for such an honorable Office, and weighty Work: here also
he was to seek, and could not so acquiesce.

Or otherwise, some such who say they were at their first passing under this
Ordinance, under an unavoidable necessity of doing somewhat this way beyond and
besides the ordinary-stated-Scripture-Rule and Way, which they hope the LORD
did accept of, they giving to him the best they had according to their
then-understanding: whereunto Shem Acher has only this to desire of such at
present, that, they see well unto it, their pleaded necessity be such an
indispensible real urgent unavoidable necessity, as the holy Scriptures do
warrant; and that, they impose not that on him as a standing Rule to submit to,
and to walk by, who is under other manner of Circumstances, and does derive all
his Satisfaction from an higher and purer Spring. And if that Necessity which
they plead, have led them into a private Path, which is besides the ordinary
beaten Highway of King Jesus in his Word, they have need to bring forth
somewhat extraordinary, which may carry along with it true-and self-evidence.

What other way was there then yet left in this case, but only this one, to his
satisfaction; He having been before so quite taken off from all Men, and all
Creature-Authorities in these matters of Religion, and having given up himself
wholly and entirely to Christ as his one and only LORD and Lawgiver, and to the
Word of Christ as the one and only Rule of Faith, Worship and Life, and
complete Summary of all useful Arts and profitable Sciences; and having had so
many sealing Experiences of Christ's more immediate and extraordinary
Teachings, Callings, Healings of Him by his holy Spirit from his Father in his
Word, and having passed before under a being baptized with the holy Spirit, he
with one more traveled from London to Salisbury, where, about the middle of
the Day, in the broad River of that City, which runs with living water, he
received his being baptized as by the Hand of Christ himself, in the Face of
the Heavens, and so passed under Wa^er, and baptized another: and further also
received Imposition, Act. 10. 41. (...). They were before-chosen and ordained
of God to this Office of being Witnesses of Christ's Resurrection, by his
lifting up, stretching out, laying on of Hands: It was God's Hand who thus set
them apart: (The compound Word is afterward used for Ordination of Ministers
to their Office, Acts 14 23.)
or stretching out by laying on of Hands* as from this God Man, from Christ,
tho sitting in the higher Heaven in his glorified Humanity, Christ being the
Author of this both Water and Spirit-Baptism, and stretching out and layingon
of Hands.

The Reader or Hearer of this Narrative, is desired to make a little stand in
his thoughts, and here to ponder a while upon this weighty Considerable. In two
grand parts of this Historical Declaration, the LORD has graciously given unto
Shem Acher somewhat of 1 Cor. 2. 9, -- 16. and 12. 10, 11.
a Spirit of Discerning, whereby to discern Spirits for the present, and to
foresee some of those Prophesied Methods which he will use, to set in order the
Affairs of his House toward and in the latter-day-Glory, whereby Shem is
enabled to trust Christ for Afterward, or Afternesses, or what shall hereafter
come to pass; The holy Spirit working and distributing what Gift he will to
whom he will. These two Parts are his more than ordinary, both Call to the
Ministerial Office and Work, and way and manner of his Perfecting of Baptism.
Both which being more immediately derived from Ephesians. 1. 20, -- 23 and 2. 19. --
22. and 4. 7, -- 16.
Christ, that Head Officer of the Church he has the advantage and opportunity
of holding forth before others, this, as one of the great Truths of the 2 Pet.
1. 12.
present Age, the way and means of Jehovah's bringing his People Ezekiel. 43. 10,
11, 12. and chap* 44. throughout. Psalm. 74. 9.
to measure all Administrations according to the Prophetical Pa^tern and
promised Platform will be, by raising up, by gifting, graceing, calling, and
sending forth some extraordinary Messenger, as from Heaven, to open, interpret,
apply, and promote this revealed Mystery, relating to the a^proaching Glory of
the latter days. Do not now over-hastily conclude, that, this is a rare
Artifice, and a witty Invention, for Shem hereby to point out himself to be
this special Prophet, by a new Name, which he assumes to himself; as if the
foregoing Prophets did direct as with a Finger to him, as that Elijah the
Prophet, or one in the Spirit of that Elijah, who was to come, and to restore
all things, and so to take this glorious honor unto himself. For, he does not
cry up himself to be this very Messenger: tho Jehovah Aelohim may use and
employ whom he pleases in this honorable Work, and Shem is somewhat prepared
in Heart, by the Holy God Spirit, greatly to rejoice, and to give all the Glory
to the LORD, might he live to see in his day and time, such a Gentile-Minister
or Ministers, as an Angel or Angels from * Ps 12. 6. Isa. 34. 16. Rev. 11. 19.
Heaven to come forth with the pure Word of God, altogether freed from all
corrupt humane Mixtures whatsoever, either the very Original it self or an
exact Copy word for word, and being clothed with the Spirit may preach it
abroad with Power and Success, tho Shem as to this more eminent Honor, were
laid aside, and might be privileged with sitting at the Feet of such a one, to
receive words as from Christ by such an extraordinary Messenger. But, this is
that which he has further to say in this matter; that, he takes it for a
special Favor freely bestowed upon him, that, the LORD has revealed this inner
Secret to him, and has so far made use of him as to assert and revive the
Doctrine, and somewhat to prepare the way for the coming of Jehovah Christ in
the conspicuous Appearance of his Personal Presence: before which time he will
by Voice direct, and call and send some peculiar Officer or Officers of his, as
Isa. 4^ 6, 7, 8, 9. and 42 4, 16, 21. 1 Pet. 1. 23, 24, 25.
a public Crier, with this Royal Proclamation: That, this Christ as King of
Kings, and LORD of Lords, is about to come to crown his Kingly Law, his written
Word and revealed Will therein, as the one, and the only living abiding Rule,
for all Churches and States to walk and to measure All by: let the Scriptures
in the Margin be noted well. These Cryers and Proclaimers are public Officers
to give open notice of some State or Church-Affair, whereof the supreme King,
Priest, and Prophet, the LORD Jesus Christ, thinks good to advertize his
Subjects, as by sound of trumpeting Voice; that, all and every one who are
concerned may have the certain knowledge and timely warning thereof; It must be
with such a vehement sound as is heard at a far distance, that, no one may
pretend or plead Ignorance, when within hearing; with the Voice of one crying,
calling by Name those he meets, and by express Word, gathering a Convocation
and Assembly, reading some part of the Book and Law and Will of God, preaching
some Evangelical Word unto them, who give the hearing: For, this Voice, in the
6, 7, and 8, ver. of the 40th chap. of Isaiah, is distinct from the foregoing
Voice, in the 3, and 4, ver. which was more fulfilled in and by the Ministry of
Mal. 3. 1. Mat. 3. 3. Mar. 1. 2, 3. Luke 3. 2, -- 5. Isa. 52. 7, 8. and 60. 5,
10, 16 and 61. 4, 5, 6, 9. and 62 6. and 66. 12, 19, 20, 21.
John the Baptist. John delivered his Message faithfully both as to his
Ministerial and Baptismal Office, at the entrance of the
New-Testament-Administration of Grace, when Christ was coming shortly after in
his state of Humiliation. But, some other or others, will be called and sent
forth about this latter, and toward the latter-day-Glory, a little before
Christ's coming in the Clouds in his state of Exaltation, as the 9, 10, and 11,
ver. of the formentioned Chapter will evidence, to a discerning considerate
Reader, when the Sioners shall be Evangalized and gathered into Church-Flocks,
unto a purer way than ever yet. When the Jews shall be in a preparedness for
this great turn, and thereby made ready for the LORD, at that time, Song. 8. 8,
9, 10.
as at the beginning of the New-Testament-Dispensation of Grace, some Ministers
from among the Jews were employed in converting and baptizing of the Gentiles;
so now in these later days, some of the Gentile-Ministers, may have the honor
to be Instruments under Christ, of converting and baptizing of the Jews: And
where can that People find a meet Administrator, if the LORD do not more
immediately send them some Prophet, who can prove his Mission and Commission to
be from on High? They still requiring a Sign, 1 Cor. 1. 22. For, as for those
few of their Brethren in this day, who by outward Profession and Confession do
own Christ to be the true Messiah already come in the Flesh, Shem Acher never
yet met with any of them, (he has conferred with about five or six of such) who
come forth with any thing extraordinary, visible mark and gift upon them, as to
a being clothed with the Spirit. And that Baptism which they have received, at
least some of them, if not all, has been from corrupt hands in a corrupt way:
And Shem does bear good will toward that People, praying for Jerusalem's
Peace, and for Sion's Purity, seeking the good of her Sons and Daughters, and
having experienced the Truth and Goodness of that Promise more ways than one,
that, such shall prosper who love her. Besides, there may be diverse of the
Gentiles, who a little before God's thus favoring of Sion, may be brought more
thoroughly into a perfecting of their Baptism, from among the Seekers,
non-Church-Men, and several others, upon some of whose Spirits this does lie
with pressing weight; whither shall we go to meet with a
lawfully-called-Ministry, and a lawfully-constituted Church? where is there a
wellwarranted, heavenly attested-Administrator? Shem in this does speak out
some of the Thoughts of such dissatisfied ones, and he is so far ready with an
answer, which he can give to those, who ask him a word concerning his Ministry
and Baptism; Whence is thy Ministry and Bap^ism, and from whom thy Ministry and
Baptism? as to the perfecting of both, it is from Heaven not from Earth, from
Christ more immediately and not so from Men. Here, in the way, let it be
remembered, that, the reviving of the Seventh-day Sabbath, does make way for the
later-day-Glory-Conversions, and Ingatherings of the Outcasts of Israel, Isa.
56. 1, -- 8. And that, the Prophecies and Promises of building the old waste
places, and of raising up the Foundations of many Generations, and of being
called the Repairer of the Breach, the Restorer and Paths to Sabbatize is made
over to such Revivers of the Seventh-day Sabbath. This great useful Truth is
therefore not only received in the Principle, but also closed with in the
Practice, by Shem Acher: wherein he does sweetly acquiesce to his own
satisfaction, whilst others do dispute, preach and print, to defend and justify
their various Calls to both, by Arguments mostly drawn from Men, tho running
down to them in a very corrupt Channel; and if his LORD should say to his
Servant Shem, as once to Chap. 12. v. 13 Isa. 58. 12, 13, 14. and 66. 21, 22,
23.
Daniel, And thou, Shem Acher, Go to the end, and thou shall rest, and shall
stand in thy lot to the end of those days; let it suffice thee, that Jehovah
thy Aelohim has revealed this in thee, and done this for thee: but the larger
pourings out of the Spirit, and more signal ownings are reserved for some
others: yet even this is a special honor, and the Glory be to him.

It is well worthy of an observable Remark in Scripture, that, besides the
stated Ministry, the LORD has sent forth special Prophets and Apostles, upon
urgent occasions: Some of these were of another Education and Profession, such
as Amos 1. 1. and 7. 14, 15. Acts 7 42. and 15. 15.
Amos, who had been no Prophet, nor Prophets Son, but an Herdsman, and a
Gatherer of Fruit. Thus also Mat. 4. 18, 19, 20.
the Apostles in Christ's time were some of them, poor plain Fishermen. Jehovah
communicated Himself and his Will unto such in extraordinary Revelations, and
confirmed their Office by miraculous attests from Heaven. In other Instances,
he has dignified some with such special singular Employs, in a Ministry not
common, Acts 7. 22. Dan. 1. 4, 17. Acts 22. 3 2 Cor. 12. 11. 1 Cor. 14. 18.
who were skilled in great variety of Arts and Sciences, especially in
Scripture-Knowledges, in which latter he blessed their Studies and Labors, and
encouraged their Diligence and Industry. So it was with Moses, Daniel, Paul,
and others. Jer. 28 8. Luke 1. 70. and 11. 50. Act. 3. 21.
Prophets there have been in all the Ages of the Church, besides the standing
Ministry. Before Moses there were, Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph. Afterward, there were, Moses, Joshuah, Samuel, David, Solomon, Nathan,
Gad, Elijah, Elisha, Michajah, Esaias, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel,
Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah,
Malachi, Zecharias the Father of John the Baptist. In the New Testament,
Simeon, Agabus; the good Apostles, by Name particularly, Peter, John, Paul, and
others. 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. Act. 13. 1. 1 Cor. 14. chap.
Apostles, and Prophets, are expressly mentioned as established Officers, set
and appointed by Christ in his Church. This was not confined only to Judea;
for, in other parts of the inhabited Earth, there was Job, Eliphaz, and others
in the East, who were eminent Leaders of Congregated Societies, and there was a
Balaam of Syria, Mesopotamia, who had a Prophetic Gift.

To distinguish of Prophets, and of the several kinds of them, and of the
distinct parts of their Office, is not my present work: let it suffice at this
time to show, that, the LORD has not been wanting to his Church and People,
when he has been sought unto aright; as to his gifting, gracing, calling and
sending extraordinary Officers (with a larger Commission than only to a small
gathered handful of Disciples of Christ) when the ordinary ones have been
corrupted or negligent, ignorant or unfaithful, or upon some other special
Occasions.

Shem in his own case, tho altogether unworthy of the least and lowest place of
Service ministerial in Christ's House, yet for about these twenty years last
past, having been Christ's Servant, to gather, feed, and rule a particular
Church, or particular Churches, and to this day is so, he has declared against
his being staked or teddered down to any one Place or People, he being Christ's
Servant, at his Masters dispose, to do what public work his LORD shall call
him unto, wheresoever, to whomsoever it be, having never as yet, either singly
by himself, or jointly with others, laid on his Hands upon any one, as to an
ordaining of him to the Ministerial Office.

This part of Shem's Narrative should put some dissenting Brethren upon more
serious considering, whether, they have not been very short of their Duty, who
have cried down, and run down all gathered Churches and Church-Ministers,
(because of some Antichristian and Unscriptural Principles and Practices
corruptly crept in) some for five, others for ten, some others for twenty,
othersome for thirty years together, not seeing, or not believing, or not
acknowledging, or not promoting, any extraordinary Ministry over gathered
Curch, or Churches, set up by Christ in the room thereof? And, O! who will
give, that, this seasonable Word might fall and abide with kindly in working
Efficacy, in the demonstration of the Spirit, and with power upon prepared
Hearts, and unprejudiced Minds; both as to non-Church ones, and also as to the
present Claimers of Ministry, by Office, whether National, Classical,
Congregational, pleading for a right in their Tenure, whether by Succession,
Authority from the People, or what else? That, one and another may yet be think
themselves of a more Scriptural way, for the informing, settling, satisfying,
healing and uniting of Christians. As Scripture-History does clear it up, that
so it has been, so Scripture-Prophecy and Scripture-Promise will fulfill and
accomplish it, that, so it shall be in this latter-day-Glory, even a
Prophetic, Apostolic, Evangelick, and otherways extraordinary Ministry, as
well as a Pastoral, Teaching, ordinary Ministry, revived and advanced,
continued and blessed, such special Administrators in Christ's House, by whom
resort shall be to the Mouth of Jehovah, to ask Counsel at an Oracle of
Aelohim; who has in all Ages of his Church, both before and since the Apostle's
days, sent some special Messenger or Messengers to witness for Himself, and for
the Truths of Christian Religion, against the Corruptions of the Times and Age
wherein they lived, tho the number of such under many Providence has been but
small, and the true Ministry and Churches have not so shined forth with visible
Pomp, and outward Glory.

There may, if Jehovah our Aelohim and Adonai, do bring it forth by and in the
Hand of his Providence, shortly come abroad a Scripture-Directory, concerning
an House for the Sons of the Prophets, for the training up of such, whose
Hearts the LORD shall make willing to study useful Arts and Sciences in the
Book of Books, the Holy Scriptures of Truth, Inspired Gifts, and Acquired
Gifts, where 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15, 16, 17. 1 Samuel 10. 5, -- 13. 2 Kings 2. 3, 5, 7,
16. and 4. 38.
both are sanctified, how useful are they when employed for the Edification of
the Church and People of Christ? And, who of us can tell, but that the open
declaring for both these by some Gentile-Christians, and Believers, and
Ministers, who express their Faith in Prophetic Scriptures, that Isa. 32. 15.
and 44. 3, 4. Ezekiel. 39, 29. Joel 2. 28, -- 32. Ezekiel. 47. 1, -- 12. 1 Cor. 12,
13, 14. chapter 2 Cor. 3. 17. 18.
there are near at hand some further more immediate Inspirings from the Holy
Spirit with extraordinary Charisms, or edifying Gifts, and those of working of
Miracles, and Gifts of Healings, and of Tongues particularly; (For, 1 Cor. 1.
22, 24.
the Jews do to this day require a Sign) and who withal do in the use of
ordinary means wait upon the Holy Spirit for his inner Teachings, and for his
Blessings of their unwearied Endeavors, and diligent Industry, of their
serious cryings after Scripture-Knowledg in the Original Language, and giving
their Voice for Understanding, seeking her as Silver, and searching for her as
hid Treasures: For, (the Greeks do still seek after Wisdom, I say, who knows,
but that) both Jew and Gentile may fall in love with this Art of Arts, and
Science of Sciences, if Jehovah will in either, or in both these ways give
Wisdom; out of whose Mouth Knowledge and Understanding: when Wisdom shall thus
enter into Hearts, Oh! how pleasant will Knowledge be to the Soul? Mar. 16. 15.
Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. Gal. 2. 7, 8. Isa. 40. 9. and 52. 7, 8.
As the LORD here tofore honored some of the Christianized Jews to be under
him his Apostles, for the converting of the Gentiles; so, in these later Days,
he may honor, some of the Christianized Gentiles to be under him his Apostles,
for the converting of the Jews and Israelites: Zech. 2. 5. Isa. 46. 13.
then shall the LORD and his new created Ones, be the mutual Glory of each
other. Oh! how glorious a Day will that Day of such Glory be!

PAVL.
Acts 9. 15, -- 20. and 26. 16, -- 20. 1 Cor. 15. 10.
Paul being thus put by Christ into the Ministerial Office, sets about the work
wherein he labored more abundantly than all the Apostles: his Travels up and
down with the Gospel, as one Historian has computed them, were ten thousand two
hundred and seventy Miles, from his first beginning, until his being Prisoner
in Rome; and although he might have required maintenance, 2 Cor. 11. 9, 10, 11,
12. and 12. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 9. through.
yet for the Gospel's sake he did forbear the demanding of it.

2 Cor. 11. 21. and so to the end. and 4. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Gal. 6. 17. Romans 3, 8.
His Sufferings were many and great; his being reproached was his sore Trial:
particularly that, 1 Cor. 9. 5.
for his leading about of a Sister a Wife.

2 Cor. 11. 28.
He had care of all the Churches.

Act. 9. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 38. and 11. 26. and 14. 22, 28. and 18. 23,
27. and 19. 1, 9. and 20. 1. 7. and 21. 4, 16. 1 Cor. 16. 10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 8.
16, 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 18. 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22.
Where he made or found through Disciples of Christ in any City, Town, or
elsewhere, he had and held actual Communion with them.

SHEM ACHER.
Since Christ's more through Calling of Shem Acher to this Office and Work of
the Ministry, the LORD has given him a willing and ready mind and heart, gladly
to spend and be spent in his Service, and for Souls; and although his Travels
have not been comparable for Miles and for Countries with Paul's, yet he has
had a Desire that way, if Christ had called, and enabled him thereunto; and he
had this Honor put upon him, to be one of the first who set up open Separate
Meetings in two or three Counties. And for his Diligence in Preaching, it is
well known to many, of which he gave good Testimony through Grace (to the God
of which Grace he ascribes all the Honor) especially for five years in a great
Town in Dorcetshire, and afterward, whilst above nine years the LORD's
Prisoner, toward the latter end of which part of his Confinement in Dorchester
he did preach sixteen times a week for some weeks, besides other occasional
work; and since his coming near, or into the City of London, he has not been
idle.

As for filthy Lucre, he has not greedily sought it. Whilst he received
Tithe-Maintenance in a private Parish, which was near one Hundred pounds by the
year, it was spent amongst them in Hospitality, in providing for the Poor, in
buying of Bibles and such like, in setting the Poor on work; for he suffered no
Beggar knowingly of all the Parishioners: and toward parting with them, he
laid out about three hundred pounds in building a new House, which he left to
such as should after succeed him to labor in the Word and Doctrine. This
Estate he freely left, to answer a Call unto a Neighbor Town, where was much
Work, and little Wages; For, the small Tithes belonging to the Vicarage were so
inconsiderable, that when one whole years Profits were given to the King upon
the Benevolence-Act, the Man who was to gather the Profits for the King, had at
the years end laid out about five shillings more for decimation and in
collecting than he had received: which he does not mention to reflect it upon
the Inhabitants of that Town, some whereof were not backward in contributing;
but all that, and fourscore pounds Annuity of his own, settled upon him by his
Father, was spent upon the place (except what was laid out in Books, and such
like.) He also freely restored Thirty pounds, out of which himself took not one
shilling, which was procured by some of the Town, and paid to an Assistant, as
an Augmentation, which ran in Shem Acher's other-Name. If any take himself to
have been wronged or defrauded by him, let such prove the Charge, and he will
make Restitution; Numb. 16. 15. 1 Samuel 12. 3, 4, 5. Luke 19. 8. 2 Cor. 7. 2.
For seventeen years or thereabouts, although he has refused many pounds, yet he
does remember but one piece of Tithe that he received of any, which was brought
to him by a Fellow-Prisoner, conscientiously, as she declared, which was a very
little Pot of Honey, the Tenth-part of some Hive-Honey which she had in a
little Garden of hers in the Country; which, to satisfy her, he did receive
from her hands, but he presently gave it back to her again, and a shilling
besides. This he does mention, to wipe off that Slander of Self-seeking; who
during his Ten-days Tribulation, lived upon his Annuity, whilst a Prisoner: and
since his coming to London, he has done the same. Tho his Judgment be, that
Decimation is the Peoples Duty, about which he has drawn up several Arguments
in another Paper, reserved for such a season, when such Doctrine is like to
have a readier reception.

What his Sufferings have been, are well known to some Rev. 2. 10.
, in nine full years close and hard Imprisonment, and the beginning of a tenth;
besides those continued Reproaches, Slanders, and other Opposings which have
assaulted him for about these last seventeen years more especially, both from
declared Enemies, and pretended Friends: But, blessed be Jehovah, who has
enabled him in any good measure 2 Cor. 6. 3. -- 10.
to endeavor to give no just offense, or occasion of falling in any thing,
that the Ministry might not be blamed; but in all things has endeavored to
approve himself as a Minister of God, in much Patience, in Afflictions, in
Distresses, in Imprisonments, in Labors, in some Watchings, and Fastings; by
Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Spirit, by
Love unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the Power of God, by the Armor of
Righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by Honor and Dishonor, by
evil report and good report: As a Deceiver, and yet true; as unknown to many,
and yet well acknowledged by some; as dying, and yet behold he lives; as
chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing. He forbears to
enlarge much more upon this, as not knowing how that will be received which is
already mentioned: However, he does Col. 1. 24.
rejoice in his Sufferings for the LORD's People, and by way of Correspondence
and Conformity to Christ, is filling up that which is behind of the Afflictions
of Christ in his Flesh, for his Bodies sake, which is the Church. Act. 9. and
in many other p^aces of the Acts of the Apostles. Mat 3. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
and 4. 1, -- 17.
As it was with Paul, and as it was with Christ, so also with Shem Acher, a
flood of Temptations and Persecutions brake in upon him when he thus passed
under perfecting the Ordinance of Baptism, and into a more through discharge of
his Ministerial Function.

As Paul was, so also has Shem Acher been much slanderously misreported
concerning his Authority and Power of leading about of a Sister, a Wife, in his
travels. Historians do differ in their Judgment about Paul, whether he were
actually married or not: Eusebius Pamphilus names Clemens and Ignatius, and
some others there are w^o hold that he was married. That which does persuade
Shem Acher that Paul was married, besides somewhat else which he could produce
that way, is 1 Cor. 7. 7.
that expression of Paul, I would that all Men were even as I my self, which
being interpreted of abstaining from Marriage altogether, were a very sinful
wish in him: For, if simply and absolutely taken, if such a Will and Desire had
obtained, all the Race of Mankind, and the whole Church of Christ, in two
Generations had been utterly extinct. However the Case was with Paul, Shem
Acher has been very unkindly and injuriously dealt withal about his Marriage
with Gnezri-jah. When he (with some other Ministers) had the Honor to be so
many years the LORD's Prisoner at Dorchester, it came upon and into the Heart
of Gnezri-jah, from the time of his (and their) first Confinement, to be as a
common Stewardess and Nurse, to make and bring in Provision of Food, and of
other outward Necessaries for them, her Spirit and Soul being much drawn forth
in Compassion toward the LORD's suffering Servants, in fellow-feeling of their
Hardships, and with great longings after the daily enjoyment of Communion with
Father, Son, and holy Spirit, by the LORD's Blessing upon his and others
Ministerial Labors: at which time, ^ho she then had an aged Mother to
maintain, she did pinch and straiten her self, in diet and other-ways, to serve
and be helpful unto those Ministers; which was afterward understood by Shem
Acher, and considered by him. After some time the other Ministers having
obtained their Liberty, Shem Acher's Imprisonment was continued for several
years; all which time this Gnezri-jah was a succourer of him, and did continue
friendly and faithful to him in all his Temptations, and was very useful, not
only to him, but also to many other of the Prisoners in diverse cases. When he
was set free, his Heart was engaged to preach the Gospel abroad; and having
need of help, Gnezri-jah sometimes traveled with him; This being envied and
maligned by some, to prevent* or remove any occasion of Scandal or offense, he
declared unto some of the Church, that he was willing to take Gnezri-jah to him
for a Wife, according to the Word, she being every way the fittest for him, she
being a Sister in the same way of Church Fellowship, and a Virgin modest and
chaste, many ways looked upon as excelling almost all of her Sex in the whole
Town of Dorchester, for Humility, Patience, Mortifiedness, Diligence,
Faithfulness, Zeal, and such Commendablenesses as these, in the Judgment of all
spiritual Discerners, who had any intimate acquaintance with her; and she
having undergone so many Hardships and Difficulties for him, and after so many
years experience of her fittedness for such a Yoke-fellowship, Shem Acher
married her. When this was made known, the Tempter bestirred himself, and set
some upon opening of their mouths both against him and her, that he had married
one who had been a kind of Servant to him, one much beneath him for Birth, a
poor Maid without a Portion: which was so odiously and unjustly aggravated and
spread abroad by some, who should have been more friendly, (both he and she
before then, and since, having been friendly unto them) that his Ministry was
in a great measure rendered much useless and successless in those Parts; which
purpose of Marriage a little after completed, together with the Advice of
several of the Friends in Fellowship with him, to publish a Treatise in the
Defense of the Cause of the Seventh-day Sabbath, was somewhat of the occasion
both of his coming to, and continuing near and in the City of London. Thus must
any thing a little colorable, serve for a Charge against Shem Acher, who has
met with a passage in Clarks Lives, where he makes mention of a Commendable Act
of one Minister of Christ, who having bin helped by a mean Handmaid, a Virgin,
during his sore Imprisonment for the Gospel's sake, when he was set at Liberty,
thought he could no other way so requite her, as by marrying of her. This is
recorded to the praise of that Minister; but, if Shem Acher do the same, it
must be looked upon by many as a Scandal and Crime in him. As for a Portion, he
prizeth Grace at a very low rate, who does not really in a case of competition,
esteem and prefer it above and beyond many Bags of Earthly Treasure: And although
Shem Acher might possibly have had several Thousands with another Woman, where
there was not such a suitableness in other respects; yet it was a sweet
sensible Evidence upon his Heart in his Conscience about that time, that being
closely held to that Psalm. 119. 72, 127.
Scripture-term, he readily complied with it, and conformed to it, in the
strength and supplies of the holy Spirit. The Law of thy mouth, O Jehovah, is
better unto me than Thousands of Gold and of Silver. Therefore I love thy
Commandments above Gold, yea, above fine Gold. Shem Acher having an Annuity of
Fourscore pounds by the year, settled upon him during his Life, This provided
Food convenient, and other outward Necessaries for him, and out of the rest he
was ready to distribute out of the Decimation, and otherwise, to the
Necessities of others proportionably as far as it would go; so that now, after
twenty years or more enjoyment of that Annuity, he has not laid up one shilling
out of that Means, if he die before Gnezri-jah, what he has to leave her is
mostly his Study of Books, and some Household Stuff. They have not wanted
Conveniences since they came together, neither shall either of them want when
they are parted asunder by Death; for they have Bonds by gracious Covenant
under the Hand and Seal of the faithful God, to be cared and provided for: But,
Shem Acher not having an Estate to settle any Jointure upon a Wife, if she
survived, he never had any considerable Proffer made him, neither did ever meet
with any pure Virgin so every way a meet help for him. The common corrupt
practice amongst many of the Gentry, being to settle almost all their Estate
upon their Eldest Son (which has brought a Curse upon, and has bin the Ruin of
many Ancient and Honorable, wealthy Families, the LORD in the way his
Providence frowning upon such an unscriptural distribution, He allowing a Deuteronomy.
21. 17.
double portion of their Father's Goods to the Firstborn) whereas
younger-Brothers are often put off with some small Allowance to keep them
alive. This Shem Acher does mention, not at all out of discontent at his
Allotment; for, he does write as he has long experienced, that his Annuity is
the wisest and best Portion and Provision for him, it bringing in unto him a
Competency, and discharging him from Worldly Cares, and Earthly Encumbrances;
all his labor about this being once a Quarter to receive Twenty pounds, and to
give an Acquittance: Only he brings in here this Testimony against the
forementioned common corrupt Practice. As for Gnezri-jah's Family and
Relations, An ancient Justice of Peace did declare, that her Grandfather was
one of the First who appeared for a Reformation against the Superstitions and
other Corruptions of the Times, to the endangering of his Liberty and Life; and
that he, and a Kinsman of his, did lend one hundred pounds to Mr. White of
Dorchester for his encouragement, who was one of the first and foremost and
forwardest of all the Puritane-Ministers in the West, publicly by Preaching,
and otherwise, to promote a Reformation. He dipped all his Children. This Mr.
Slado her Grandfather had a considerable Estate in England, which he sold, and
purchased somewhat in Ireland; he had a numerous Progeny, and they most of them
have prospered well in this World, and diverse of them fear the LORD: several of
them are still living. Whilst he lived in the City of Limerick in Ireland, the
Lecturers were entertained at his House; Two of his Daughters were there
married to Ministers. One Mr. Town, who married Gnezri-jah's Mother, Shem Acher
has heard was a Doctor of Divinity, having Preferments in Ireland worth Two
hundred pounds by the year, he kept seven or eight Servants and well bred up a
fruitful Family. Her Father according to the Light of that day was zealous
against Popery, often exposing his Life to danger in defense of the Protestant
Religion; once the bloody Papists attempted to bury him alive: but, the LORD
delivered him. In the Irish Rebellion about forty years ago, this Doctor with
all his Family were persecuted; he left his Estate for the Cause of Christ; and
after many wonderful deliverances in Ireland and at Sea, during that Rebellion,
several of his Family came for England, where the LORD took care of them; but
now they are scattered into several Countries. Yet notwithstanding this just
Defense made as to Men, some do still go on with their defamings both of Shem
Acher and of Gnezri-jah about this Matter, who leave their Cause with the
righteous Judge, who knows, how they both for several years have much
endeavored to sweeten the Lives of others, and to promote Peace and Purity in
the Churches: tho ill requited by many, whose unkindness have contributed much
toward the breaking down of her Constitution, and the sore distressing of her
Spirit; so that, it is a wonderful Power and Preservation, that, both her
Husband and she are yet alive.

What careful Thoughts Shem Acher has had for the Churches of the Holy
Separation according to his Capacity, Opportunity and Ability, is known to the
searcher of Hearts, and there are some Friends who have been acquainted
therewith; tho hitherto he has been but little encouraged, and cannot effect
much: but, some Testimony thereof he has brought in this way, by a Treatise of
his published in seventy seven, called, All in One, etc. by the Visits which he
has given to Sabbath-Churches, and that Epistle of Love which he this Year sent
to them for a Me^ting in London, by Messengers, for the promoting of such good
Work and great Ends, as were well worthy for the greatest Princes, and ablest
Ministers, to countenance and prosecute: had it been entertained and improved
according to its just due value; Which Epistle of Love was as follows.

Shem Acher a Servant and Minister of Jesus Christ, and the Friends in
Church Fellowship with him, in London, To all the Churches of
Seventh-day-Sabbath-Observers, who keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith
and the Testimony of Jesus; Sends a Christian Salutation of Brotherly Love:
Mercy, Grace, Love, Peace, and Blessing be multiplied to you from God our
Father, and the LORD Jesus Christ.
WE give thanks to God and the Father of our LORD Jesus Christ, who has made
known to you and to us his Holy Sabbath, and has so far favored and honored
us, as to use and own our open Confessing, and obedient Witnessing of this, and
of any other Truth and Duty of the present Age, whereunto he has called us
forth in his Wisdom and Strength, who are but Foolish and Weak in our selves;
and we earnestly desire you to help together, by Prayer with us, that, both you
and we may walk worthy of God, who has thus called us unto his Kingdom and
Glory; and who has made King Jesus to be Preciousness and Honor to us, and his
Kingly Law to be Honorable and Glorious in our Esteem: Both the Old and New
Testament toward the close of each, putting us upon a more particular and
especial remembrance of Him and of his Law; and pronouncing those to be the
Blessed Ones, who doing his Commandments, that, they may have right to the Tree
of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City.

There being diverse exceeding great and precious Prophecies and Promises,
relating more peculiarly unto the Revivers and Observers of the weekly
Seventh-day Sabbath, which shall go a little before the Coming and Appearing of
our LORD Jesus Christ in Glory, when he will gather in the outcasts of Israel,
and do his other latter day-Glory-works; For, there shall be those of such
Christian believing Sabbath-keepers, who shall build all the old waste places,
who shall raise up the Foundations from Generation to Generation, and who shall
be called Menders of Breaches, Restorers of Paths to Sabbatize in, and, the
time drawing on, Christ's Salvation being at hand to come, and his
Righteousness to be revealed, so that, we should look up, and lift up our
Heads, because such our Redemption draws near.

We therefore propound this unto your serious Consideration, dear Brethren,
beloved in our LORD, that, by two or more Messengers from every such Church in
England, or by Letters and Messages from any of such Churches, or of any
particular Brethren in Holland, New England, or elsewhere, we may meet, if our
LORD will, once, or oftener upon weighty and urgent occasions and necessities,
every Year at London, or elsewhere, at such times as shall be agreed on, to
keep days of Fasting and of Thanksgiving together, by the Prayers of Faith,
through the Mediation and Intercession of the great Apostle, and High Priest of
our Profession, Jesus Christ, to prevail with the Father for larger pourings
out of his Spirit upon our selves, and upon others, for his special presence of
Grace with us, assisting and blessing of us in all Church-Administrations, and
at such a general Meeting by Messengers; so, as that thereby there may be
begotten a better Understanding, and a more unanimous Accord among our selves,
a more successful carrying on of Truth, Love, Peace, and Holiness in our
Churches, a more exact bringing of all the Ordinances of Christ's New Spiritual
House to the Laws and Orders of the Prophetical Pattern according to
Scripture-Institution, and that, from cool considerate Conferences there may be
given forth right statings of any other Questions that may come before us,
about which to give our advice mutually to one another, by the Rules of the
Word of God, judging righteous Judgment according unto that, without any
lording it one over another, but in all lowliness of Mind, in Humility and
Meekness, being readily and thankfully made willing to receive further
Scripture Light from any, whom our LORD shall use and honor to hold it forth
before us; and that, then and there we may consult which way by a common stock
to promote any good work, for the maintenance of any Church Officers, for the
training up of hopeful young, or more aged Men (sound and steadfast in the
Faith) in the Knowledge of the Original Tongue, and of other Scripture-Learning,
and for the procuring of a more exact literal Translation of the Old-and
New Testament into our Mother Tongue, and for the more religious educating of
Children, in Families and in Schools, and for the relieving of the Poor, and
for such other good Works; and to enquire, what may be further a Duty upon us,
toward the two, and the ten Tribes of Judah, and of Israel, to help forward
their Conversion, as also what the Spirit has to say more particularly and
especially to our Churches, and to other Churches, in this great
Providential-day, and such like publick-spirited Inquiries: and all this for
the promoting of the Honor of our LORD, and of his Word, Works, and Cause, the
Purity and Peace of Churches and Salvation of Souls.

Thus, through Grace, and Mercy, obtained from our LORD, we discover and
declare our readiness to join in with you, in what is the work of our Day and
Generation, and so commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is
able to build you and us up, and to give us an Inheritance among all them who
are Sanctified.

Shem Acher.


Now that Shem Acher's Ends toward the latter-day-Glory might be promoted, and
that Shem might prosecute so good a design in the use of all those lawful
means, which his Line could reach into, in his place, for the finishing of this
part of his Testimony for Christ, for the Word of Christ, for the Law of his
ten Words and the annexed Judicials, and for the Seventh-day Sabbath more
especially; whilst others were following of the King with Petition upon
Petition, subscribed with multitudes of Hands, from Cities, Towns, and
Counties: By Shem's direction, this following Address was put into the Hands of
the King.

Honored SIR,
THe Land does tremble, it is broken, it shakes: the right Way, and proper
Method to heal its Breaches is plain and evident.

You have seen the Hand of the LORD stretched out against the Popish Plotters,
in a continued Discovery for many Months of their bloody Design.

If the LORD Jesus Christ, who is the King of Kings, would graciously give you
a Heart for it, and then put it into your Heart, openly at the next Session of
Parliament, to declare, that, It is your full Purpose, and firm Resolution, in
the Strength and Supplies of the Almighty God, to set up the Laws of Christ in
the Scriptures of Truth, as the one, and the only Rule of your Government, for
which you have their own Authority in express Words, The Law of God is the Law
of the Land.

Then will your Name be transmitted to Posterity in the English Chronicle, with
a Crown Royal upon it, Those who honor Christ, he will honor.

This from a mean Handmaid, Elizabeth Hooker.


The Sabbath of my (Mighty) God make thou it Precious, O my God of Deliverance!

A like Address was made by the same Advice and Hand, to the King to the same
Effect, in answer to that loud awakening Call, by that signal Blazing Star, for
the promoting of the same grand Design of exalting of Christ, and of the Word
of Christ.

And a third, sometime after to the present Mayor of London, for the like End.

As Paul's manner was, accordingly Shem Acher in his place, finding some
Disciples of Christ, at his first coming to live near London to do work for his
LORD and for Souls, they agreeing to desire him thereunto, and expressing this
desire to him, that, seeing they were a few scattered Sheep without a Shepherd,
not being fully then satisfied to join in Church Fellowship with any particular
Church as so constituted, and so walking in London, they declaring their being
satisfied in one another and in him, that, he would administer the LORD's
Supper unto them; which, after Conference with them, and diverse of them having
profited under his ministerial Labors, and having been baptized by him,
accordingly he did at Bethgnal-Green in the year seventy four, withal declaring
both he and they, that, this was a providential Communion in all the Ordinances
of Christ's new Spiritual House toward the latter-day-Glory, so far, as for
the present according to our Scripture Light they can regularly come at them,
and so long as the LORD should continue them somewhat near together in their
Dwellings: this was assented unto and agreed upon by those baptized Believers,
and Seventh-day-Sabbath-Observers. A little after this, some difference in
Judgment arising amongst them, which Shem Acher foresaw, and told it unto some,
a remnant of them, who were more of one Mind, agreed at a meeting in seventy
five, to own the LORD Jesus Christ to be the one and only LORD and Lawgiver to
their Souls and Consciences, and the Holy Scriptures of Truth, as the one and
only Rule of Faith, Worship, and Life, according to which they were to judge of
all their Cases. Then did they pass into a Church: For, at that meeting upon
this Agreement, without any particular Church Covenant about controverted
Matter, they did firmly lay all their Churchbottoming and building upon this
Rock and Foundation, even upon Christ and upon his Word.

A little before their thus passing into this Church* State and Relation, the
two Sabbath Churches in the City desired his Labors at sometimes with them in
the use and exercise of his Gifts, which he consented to upon their
importunity, the LORD assisting him and prospering of his Labors upon the
Hearts of several, whose longings still increased, to enjoy more of his
Ministerial Labors, after that he had gathered some Disciples of Christ and
was in a Church Way with them, and had a distinct Meeting Place in the same
City, where he met with the Church, and others who gave their Attendance at
that Assembly, where his service was accepted of the Saints; so that, they were
mutually refreshed, whereby they had in much experience a savoury taste of the
Spirits of one another, diverse of the Brethren and Sisters of one of those two
other Churches of Sabbath-keepers imparting some of their inmost Cases unto
Shem Acher, who has here upon this occasion a weighty Case to propound.

As to the Matter of Fact, which is attested to be true by the whole Church,
who knew what does follow, with whom he does walk; Shem Acher does suppose, a
Sister* of another Sabbath-Church in the same City, imparted this Case of her
Soul unto him, reporting to him, that, for some years she had been much
oppressed in Heart, distressed in Spirit, broken and distempered in her bodily
Constitution, for want of that Spiritual Life and Liberty, Purity and Peace,
Sweet and Satisfaction, which she enjoyed not where she sat before; but since
she came under the Ministry of Shem, her communicated Experience is, that she
has met with that Presence of the Holy good Spirit, and of Grace sealed upon
her Heart here, to her Edification, Comfort, and Healing; whereupon she desired
to be in full Communion with Shem Acher, and with the Friends in
Church Fellowship with him; he laying this Gase in the several Circumstances of
it to Heart (the particulars whereof he is not willing to insist upon, as being
loath to exasperate the Spirits of any concerned) imparted it to the Friends in
Gospel-Fellowship, who upon due consideration and serious deliberation,
unanimously received her into Church Communion, the healing comforting Effects
whereof, were quickly felt in her Spirit, Soul, and Body too through Grace.

Upon this Case, as to the Matter of Right, arises this Question, Whether,
under these Circumstances, either this Sister in so coming off from that former
Church, or the Church with Shem Acher in so receiving of her, have sinned and
transgressed the Laws and Rules of Christ?

That, neither she nor they are under Guilt in this Matter, Shem Acher and the
Friends with him do give these following Scripture-Arguments and Reasons,
bottomed upon Scripture-Grounds and Testimonies.

One Argument is drawn from the Principal Efficient Cause of a Church, who is
Jehovah Aelohim. He it is Psalm. 100. 3* and 102. 18. and 149 ^2. Isa. 43. 1, 7,
15, 21. and 44. 2, 21, 24. and 51. 13. and 54. 5. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Psalm. 47. 2.
Acts 20. 28. Zech. 2. 8. Rev. 2. 1. Isa. 27. 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 32. 28. Isa. 43. 1.
and 63. 16. Act. 20. 21. Gal. 1. 3. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27, 29, 30. Col. 1. 14.
Heb. 13. 20. Rev. 1 5, 6, 17, 18, 19, 20. and 5. 9. and 14. 4. Prove. 9. 1. Mat.
16 18, 19. Heb. 3. 3, 4, 6.
who creates, and makes a Church. He calls it, purchases i^. He feeds it,
he loves it as the Apple of his Eye; He walks in the midst of it; He
protecteth it; He does all things for it; He dwells there; He forms and
frames it; He is the Father of it: As the Father, and his Son, and Holy
Spirit, is thus to his Church; so also is Christ the Mediator, the Redeemer of
his Church, its Savior, Deliverer, Purchaser, Buyer, Builder.

To this Jehovah Aelohim she has 2 Cor. 8. 5.
given up her self, which is the Primary, Chief, and Special Relation, on which
all higher Church Communion and Fellowship is firmly and principally founded:
it is to supersede and overruled all secondary, meaner, commoner, and
subservient Relations, on which all lower Brotherly and Sisterly Communion and
Fellowship is more remotely, subordinately, and less principally founded. No
after-inconsiderate-Obligation to any People can take away a former higher
Obligation, whereby a right does accrue to another, especially this other being
the Supreamest over all.

The Argument runs thus.

If Jehovah Aelohim in Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; if the LORD Jesus Christ,
God-Man, who is the principal Efficient Cause of his Church, who creates it,
and makes it, etc. If he have this way evidently disposed of her, where she
may most and best honor and enjoy him in all Church-Ordinances, and
Church-Administrations, according to Word-Rule, she having thus given up her
self to him, in a primary, chief and special Relation; then neither she nor we
are under Guilt so far in this Matter.

But Jehovah Aelohim, in Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, the LORD Jesus Christ,
God-Man, who is the Principal Efficient Cause of his Church, who creates it,
and makes it, etc. has this way evidently disposed of her, where she may most
and best honor and enjoy him in all Church-Ordinances and
Church-Administrations according to the Word-Rule, she having thus given up her
self to him in a primary, chief and special Relation.

And Therefore, neither she nor they are under Guilt so far in this Matter.

Another drawn from the Instrumental Efficient Cause of the Church of God,
which is 1 Pet. 1. 23, 24, 26. Col. 1. 2, -- 7. Acts 2. 41, -- 47 and 4. 4. and
5. 14. and 6. 1, 7. and 8. 4, 12. and 9. 31. and ^1. 21, 24. and 13 49. and 14.
1. and 16. 5. and 17. 4, 12, 34. and 18. 4, 8. and 19. 19, 20. and 20. 28. Mat.
24. 45. Joh. 21. 1^, 16, 17. Act. 20 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2. 1 Timothy 3. 1. Heb. 13. 7,
17. 1 Pet. 51, -- 5.
both, sound Doctrine, grounded firmly upon the Word, and faithfully Preached,
by which the Church is born and propagated: and also, the Minister or Ministers
of Christ, who preach this sound Doctrine, and do administer in the Church, who
do feed the Church, who oversee it, who watch over it, who rule and discipline
it, who pray for it, and such like.

They argue thus.

If this Sister have put her self in the same City under such sound Doctrine,
grounded firmly upon the Word faithfully preached, and under such a Ministry,
which is the instrumental Cause of a Church of Christ, where she has wholesome
Food more proper and suited to her Cases, by which she is better nourished* is
every way more advantaged, more profited better cared and provided for, in all
Spirituals, as to a Church-State-and-Relation, for Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Conversation, having all instituted Ordinances more fitted to
her Spiritual State, Frame, Acting, and Appetite, her Soul-cases more directly
spoken unto, there being more of a sweet Spiritual Accord in Principles, and
other ways between her Spirit and the present Church with whom she walks,
which she could not for several years so enjoy in the other Society; then
neither she nor they are under Guilt so far in this Matter?

But, this Sister, etc.

Therefore.

Another is drawn from the Material Cause.

Ephesians 1. 22. and 4. 15, 16. and 5. 23. Col. 1. 18. and 2. 19. Heb. 2. 15, 16,
17, 18 and 4. 4. 15, 16. Romans 8, 9, 11, 14. Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. Song of Songs
throughout. Isa. 33. 22. Ephesians. 5. 23. Joh. 10. 14* Heb. 3 6. and 10* 21 ^2 or.
11. 2. Ephesians* 4 4, 15, 16. and ver. 11, 12, 13. Mat. 11. 20. and 28. 18, 19, 20.
The LORD Jesus Christ is the supreme Head of his Church, the material Cause of
the Church, of the same Nature, partaker of the same Flesh and Blood with all
the living Members of his Church, made like him in all, except Sin: the same
holy Spirit, who is in Christ, refideth in the Church, and in all and every of
the regenerated Members thereof, who by this Spirit are united to Christ,
animated ensouled by this Spirit: from this Christ does flow all Spiritual Life
and Motion to his Church: he is by far more excellent than the Church; he has
the Empire and Government over the Church; he gives Laws to the Church; he is
the Savior of it; he does acknowledge it, and is acknowledged by it, he is
indissolubly united to it by the strongest, closest Bond; no other besides him
is Head of the Church; he is the Husband of it, he fitly joins the Members of
it together into one Body; he does gift the Church, and its Officers; he is
always present with it, having all Authority and Power in Heaven and on Earth
given to him for these holy good Purposes.

It is here thus argued.

If Christ in all this have so framed, inclined and led this Sister, and
accordingly she have in all this thus submi^ted unto Christ in the fittest and
best way, where she according to her raised expectation has received more of
the Holy Spirit, and of influences from Christ, as a living Member under this
Church, as the only Head, and as the Supreme Material Cause of the Church; then
neither she nor they are under Guilt so far in this Matter.

But, Christ in all this, etc.

Therefore.

This was drawn from the Material Cause of the Church Supreme.

A further Argument shall be drawn 1 Cor. 6. 15, and 12. 27. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
and 4* 4, 12. and 5. 23. 30. Col. 1. 18, 24. and 2. 19. Joh. 10. 16. 1 Cor. 1.
2. and the Titles of Paul' s other Epistles to the Churches. Heb. 12. 23. Ephesians.
4. 16.
from the inferior Material Cause of a Church of Christ, which are the Elect,
Believers, and Saints, who are the Members and the Body of Christ, and have
mutual care of and for one another, Communion with one another, and are jointly
helpful to each other, and do faithfully and friend^^y discharge the Gospel
Duties of Church Fellowship mutually toward one another, such as mutual
considering of one another, etc.

It is here, thus argued.

If this Sister have joined her self there in Church Fellowship with them
amongst those, whom she charitably hopes may be such living Fellow-Member^ in
Christ with her, more and better suited to her Spirit in such a Church Way of
Spiritual Incorporation, where she has more freedom and better agreement in her
(...)an, more Spiritual Communion, more really expressed and acted helpfulness.
as to Spirituals, more enjoyment of the Gospel-Duties of Church Fellowship
mutually toward one another, than in that Society where she was before, and
all this as the Inferior Material Cause of the Church; then neither she non
they* etc.

But this Sister, etc.

Therefore.

Another is drawn from the Formal Cause of a Church of Christ.

The Formal Cause, or Form, or Ephesians. 4. 3, 4. Acts 2. 41, 47. and 4. 32. and 9.
31. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13, 27. and 10 17. and 1. 10, 11. Phil. 2. 1, -- 5. Ephesians. 1.
21, 22, 23. and 3. 17. and 2. 19. Romans 8. 9. 1 John 4. 13. Col. 1. 18. and 2.
19. Ephesians. 5. 32.
that which does give a spirited Life, Being and Motion, is the uniting Spirit
of the LORD enlivening the Church-Body, and that Union of Believers in the
Spirit with Christ as the Head, and with and another as Fellow Members of the
same Mystical Body.

The Argument thus presents it self to be considered.

If the Spirit of this Sister in Experience according to the Word, both were
before Admission, and has been and still is since her Admission amongst such
more knit and united by the Holy Spirit, in Holy Spiritual Union to Christ and
to these Fellow Members, where she has more of spirited Life, Being, and
Motion, than when amongst those with whom she walked in Society withal before,
which was broken off and taken away from her as to the quickness and comfort o^
it, as to the former Church, in whose fellowship she could not any longer to
any good satisfaction continue, and where she had little or no expectation
after much proof and long waiting, to have it otherwise as the Case was
circumstanced, she being now made more sensible, that her Spirit does more
close with, and is more one in Union and Communion with the Spirit of that
Church in this Church Way of Ordinances, with whom she is joined, and all this
as the Formal Cause, or Form, or that which does give a Spirited Life, Being
and Motion to a Church; then neither she, nor they, etc.

But, the Spirit of this Sister, etc.

And therefore.

From the Final Cause a strong Argument may be drawn, and its right words are
forcible.

Isa. 43. 7, 21. Jer. 13 11. and 14. 21, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. and 4. 11, 12, 13, 15,
16. 1 Cor. 12. 13. and 10. 16, 17. Luke 12. 32. 1 Cor. 14. 3, 26, 40. and 10.
16, 17. 2 Cor. 13. 10*
The Final Cause, or the great End or Ends, for which Jehovah Aelohim has
formed his Church, and for which Christ gave and delivered up himself, in
respect of him is his Glory, the Honor of his Name in the World, that it may
be as a Throne of his Glory; the purging and cleansing of his Church and
People; their enjoyment of Spiritual Privileges and Benefits purchased by the
Blood of Christ, their nourishing, growing more up into, and further perfecting
in Christ; their receiving more of all Spiritual Supplies from Christ, their
mutual Edification, being built up more and more in their most holy Faith,
their possessing of signed, sealed, witnessed, delivered free gracious Grants
from the Father through his Son, by his Spirit in the word of his Truth of
Grace, and at the last their everlasting Happiness, in a clear sight and full
enjoyment of the Heavenly Glory in his Eternal Kingdom, in the better Country:
In the mean time, the giving and receiving of Spiritual Alms, Bread and Wine,
to hungry thirsting Souls, as necessary Provision in their Voyage, whilst here
in the way.

The Argument is thus formed.

If this Sister, after long Experience, and much waiting, and earnest Praying,
could not attain the forementioned Ends of Church Fellowship in that way
wherein she walked before; whereas since she passed into Church Communion with
others, the LORD has graciously given her to enjoy in growing Measures much of
these desired Ends, and some good Beginnings, as she hopes, of the filling up
of these in the Heavenly Country, where she longs and waits, prays and
prepares to be with her LORD in the most pure and Glorious Church; then
neither she nor they, etc.

But, this Sister, after long Experience, etc.

Therefore.

Two other Arguments may be drawn from the just Right and due Property of this
Sister.

1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. Deuteronomy. 18. 6, 7, 8.
The Gifts and Graces and Experiences of all the Faithful Ministers of Christ
in the same City especially, being one with Christ and his Word, in the Faith
and Order of the Gospel, are a part of every Believers Portion there, which
they may use as their own, especially when actually, really more to their
Edi^^cation, as Providence does give opportunity.

From hence it is thus argued.

If this Sister in this have acted, but as her just Right and due Property is,
to enjoy this part of her Spiritual Portion, and if they have but done her
Right in granting her what is her own, as due unto her, then neither she nor
they, etc.

But this Sister in this has acted, etc.

Therefore.

Also from her lawful Liberty.

This Sister reserved a Liberty, if she found in Experience, that her
continuing there were not to her Satisfaction and Edification, that, then it
should be free to join her self to some other Church of the same Faith and
Order, in the main, of (...) Believers, and Seventh-day-Sabbath-Observers,
where she might be more to her Soul-profiting ^ and Romans 13. 7, 8. Prove. 3. 27,
28. Psalm. 11. 7. Isa. 51. 22, 23. 1 Pet. 5. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 23. 2 Cor. 1. 24.
Ezekiel. 13. 22.
they are to render unto all their Dues, to owe no Man any thing: they may not
withhold good from them to whom it is due, (from the owners thereof) when it is
in the power of their hand to do it, they may not say to their Neighbor, Go,
and come again, and to Morrow they will give, when they ha^^ it by them* none
may lord it over her, or exercise Dominion over her Faith, but should be
helpers of her Joy: the righteous and just Jehovah loves Righteousness, or
Justice; he would not have any to make the Hearts of such righteous Ones sad,
whom he has not made sad.

The Argument is thus framed.

If this Sister in thus coming off from the former Church, joining of her self
to others, have but claimed and taken what was her lawful just Liberty, and
upon being admitted by others, have found in Experience, that, she has not gone
backward, but pressed forward toward the approaching Glory of the latter-day;
then, neither she nor they, etc.

But this Sister in thus, etc.

And therefore.

Further Arguments may be drawn from common and special Bonds both of Humanity
and Christianity.

In general, and in common they being with her Fellow-Christian Disciples, and
not only so, but also in particular and in special, as they are Fellow-Baptized
Believers and Sabbath Keepers, 1 Cor. 12. 13, 27. Joh. 10 9, 19, 11, 16, 28.
and 21. 15, 16, 17. Ezekiel. 34. throughout. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
they, standing related to this Sister in the Duties and Privileges of
Church Fellowship and Communion, and having by the Evangelical Ministry amongst
them done in this but such a compassionate charitable Office, as to take a
sickly Sheep into such a Pasture, where Christ has given her both Food and
Rest, who, as her Case was circumstanced, was Consumptive before, and in danger
to be made a Prey of.

Hence they thus argue.

If they stood related in the Duties and Privileges of Church Fellowship and
Communion to this Sister, not only by general common Bonds, as being with her
Fellow Christian Disciples, but also in particular and special, as they are
Fellow-Baptized Believers and Sabbath Keepers, and have by the Evangelical
Ministry amongst them done in this but such a compassionate charitable Office,
as to take a weak sickly Sheep into such Pasture, where Christ has given her
both Food and Rest; who as her Case was circumstanced, was Consumptive before,
and in danger to be made a Prey of, knowing no other Remedy, as a means, for
her Spiritual Relief under her distressing Case; Then neither she nor they, etc.

But, we stood related, etc.

Therefore.

Further, under this Head of Argument.

It is warrantable by the Laws of concreated both Nature and Grace, to take in
by Coadunation that, which does run to them by Phil 2. 19, 20, 21. Acts 9. 26,
27, 28. Judge. 20. 11. 1 Samuel 18. 1. 1 Chronicles. 12. 17. Col. 2. 2, 19. Romans 12.
16. 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 14, 15, 16. Act. 19. 8, 9. Song of Songs throughout. Ephesians.
4 4, 5, 6.
Spiritual Connaturality. Every thing hasteneth to join with its Connatural:
and what is Connatural does readily receive it, and this by the Laws and Rules
both of the first and new Creation by sympathetical Coadunation; like will to
like. Thus in Minerals, if diverse Metals be melted together, they join each to
that of its own kind; and Beasts and Birds will flock together amongst those of
their own kind; if you put Chemical Spirits and Oil into one and the same
Glass, tho by violence they may be jumbled and shaken into a commixture, yet
let the Glass be set down steady awhile, and the Spirits will run to the
Spirits, and the Oil to the Oil, and they will be distinct, and quickly tell
the observing Eye, with whom each of them will be in Society. It is one
Property of the Church of Christ, that it is Coadunated into an Oneness and
Sameness in Gospel-Duties and Church-^riviledges.

From whence it is thus argued:

If this Sister, and They in This, have acted by the Laws and Rules of
Concreated both Nature and Grace, She coming in, and They taking in by
Coadunation, there being a mutual Motion of Consent for Church-Union and
Communion between Her and Them by Spiritual Connaturality in the great and main
things of Experimented Christianity; Then neither She nor They, etc.

But, this Sister, etc.

Therefore, etc.

Take one Argument more drawn from Scripture-Precepts and Precedents: Romans 14.
1. and 15. 5, 6, 7. Joh. 22, 34, 35. and 10. 16. Mat. 5, 6, 7, 13, 23, 25.
chapters.
Christ and his Apostles, and other ordained Ministers, did, according to
Scripture-Rules, so receive Disciples, Believers, and Saints into
Church Fellowship. Where Paul made or found thorow-Disciples of Christ, walking
in all the Commandments of the LORD blameless, in any City, or Town, or
elsewhere, there he held actual Providential Communion with them, as is proved
in the Margent, page 21, concerning Paul. In one and the same City, where were
many preaching Ministers, and several Congregations, the believing baptized
Disciples being supernumerary, too many for only one place of assembling for
instituted Worship, all of them at one and the same time; Acts 2. 41, -- 47 and
4. 4, 32. and 5. 11, 14. and 6. 1, -- 7. and 7. 38. and 8. 1, 3. and 11. 22,
26. and 12. 1, 5. and 14. 26, 27. and 15. 2, 3. 4, 22, 23, 25, 27. Compare also
Acts 2. 42, 43, 44. and 4. 23. and 5. 42. and 6. 1, 2, 5, 7, 9. and 8. 1, 4, 5,
6, 12, 14. and 9. 2, 20, 22, 31. and 11. 19, -- 27. and 12. 25. Acts 5. 42. and
20. 20. 1 Samuel 1. 9. and 3. 3. 2. Sam. 22. 7. Psalm. 18 6 and 68. 29. and 5. 7.
and 28. 2. Acts 13. ^, 2, 5. and 14. 26, 27, 28. and 15. 21, 34, 35, 41. 1 Cor.
1. 2. and Romans 16. 1. compared.
yet so many of them as were such, were as one Church, even where were several
Congregated Churches, and were not so bound up only to hear in one of these
Congregations, not only those Ministers who preached more commonly in some one
of these Congregations; but, it was their liberty and privilege to hear in
other Congregations of the same City, and other Ministers of Christ, teaching
in the same City, where it was evidently more for their Edification. All the
believing baptized Disciples of Christ in Jerusalem, are called Peter's and
John's, and the rest of the Apostles own Company, their proper ones, tho there
were other of the seventy Disciples, Teachers there also. Besides the Temple
there were several Synagogues in Jerusalem, which were necessary for
Meeting-places, the number of Christian Disciples being so multiplied. The
Apostles taught in other Houses as well as in the Temple, in the Synagogues in
Jerusalem, there being a necessity of many Meeting-places, when there were so
many myriads, so many ten thousands of Believers, as the Greek does expressly
affirm, at Jerusalem, tho the English Translation does not so render it, Act.
21. 17, 20. And the more General Appellation of the Temple does sometimes in
some places include the Synagogues; so was the Tabernacle called. There were
Synagogues in Damascus. There were Churches in Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria.
There were several Preachers, Prophets, Teachers in Antioch a City of Syria,
too many to be confined only to one Congregation, whom those of the Church in
that City might hear as they most could profit; especially was it thus in
Jerusalem. There were Synagogues at Salamis, a City in Cyprus. In every City of
Judea they had their Synagogues, where was Reading and Preaching every Sabbath
Day. There were Churches in Syria and in Cilicia. At Corinth there was a
Church, and another at Cencrea, which belonged to Corinth. And this Church at
Corinth, the Believers and Saints in Church Fellowship there are highly
commended by Paul, for first giving up of themselves to the LORD (Christ) to be
wholly his, in all things to be ruled by his Will and Law, and then, under Him,
unto his faithful Ministers, so far as these did guide them by the
Scripture-Rule according to Christ's Will therein: not only those Ministers of
Christ who were more particularly related to some Church there, not only to
Apollos, or some one or two more, but also to Paul, Cephas, Barnabas, Timothy,
Titus, Sylvanus, or any other such providentially teaching there, they all
doing the same work, and being Workers together therein: 1 Cor. 1. 12. and 3.
4, -- 9, 22. and 16. 10, 11, 12. and 2 Cor. 6. 1. and 5. 18, 19, 20. and 8. 16,
-- 24. and 12. 12, 18. 2 Cor. 8. 5. There were more Ministers than one at
Corinth, is clear from 1 Cor. 14. 23-32.

This with more of the like Collections from Scripture, might be improved to
great and good uses, when the Churches shall be in a spirit and frame for it.

At present they thus argue from hence: If Shem Acher and those with him, have
received into Church Fellowship this Sister according to the forementioned
Precepts and Precedents by Scripture-Warrants and Rules: Then neither She nor
They, etc.

But, Shem Acher, and those with him, etc.

Therefore.

Thus have they made it appear by many solid Arguments, that they have not
done, without great Causes and weighty Reasons, what they have done in the Case
of this Sister. If any will be returning an Answer, it is desired and expected,
that he would, according to what he sees here before him, first, set down the
Scriptures, and then argue from those Scriptures.

They have brought in their Testimony for their LORD in this matter, He having
given Authority to his Officers, for the Edification of his Churches and
People, and not for their Destruction. They can do nothing against the Truth,
but for the Truth. They love the Truth and Peace; they pursue Holiness, and
would have their All to be done in Love, in that Love which is of God, and is
brotherly and unfeigned. 2 Cor. 10. 8, 10. and 13. 8, 11. Romans 15. 4, -- 7.
Zech. 8. 19. Heb. 12. 14. 1 Cor. 16. 14.

PAVL.
1 Timothy 1. 13, 15. Act. 26. 9, 10, 11. 1 Timothy 14, 15, 16, 17. Act. 9. and chap.
22. and chap. 26. Ephesians. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 15. 8, 9, 10.
Consider well the History of the Acts of the Apostles, and the several Epistles
of Paul. Ephesians. 3. 8. 2 Cor. 11. and 12. chap. throughout. 2 Cor. 4. 1, 2. and 1.
12. Heb. 13. 18. 1. Cor. 15. 10. and 2. Cor. 12. 11, 12. Phile. v. 9. Phil. 3.
7, -- 21. 2 Timothy 4 6, 7, 8.
He had sound good Evidences and Assurances of his happy State in saving
sanctifying Grace. Although in the days of his Unregeneracy he had been one of the
Prime of Sinners, yet he lived to be one of the most eminent Exalters of free
Grace, and most serviceable Instruments in Christ's hand, of any mere Man that
ever lived; yet he in great Humility acknowledged himself less than the least
of all Saints. O what a Name of Honor has he in Scripture-Records for his
Doings and Sufferings for Christ? How much did he commend himself to every
Man's Conscience in the sight of God? having this to be his rejoicing, the
Testimony of his own Conscience, that, in Simplicity and Sincerity according to
God, not in fleshly Wisdom, but in the Grace of God, he had had his
Conversation in the World; being confident that he had a good Conscience,
behaving himself well in all things. Well nigh about one third part of the New
Testament is an Historical Narration concerning him, who tho he were so
singularly eminent, and so growingly excelling in edifying Gifts, and in
sanctifying Graces, and in extraordinary usefulness, even to old Age, to the
very last, yet still forgetting those things that were behind, he reached forth
unto those things that were before, pressing toward the Mark, for the Price of
the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus, having his Citizenship in Heaven;
calling upon others to be Followers together of him, and to mark them who walk
so, as they had him for an ensample, so far as he followed Christ, who when he
had fought a good Fight, finished his Course, and kept the Faith, passed
triumphingly into Glory, being well assured, that, there was laid up for him a
Crown of Righteousness, which the LORD the righteous Judge would give him at
that day.

SHEM ACHER.
If toward the close of this Narrative any serious Enquirer, do desire to be
satisfied concerning his Spiritual State; that no trouble may remain upon their
Heart and Mind to hinder their profiting under his Ministry, the God of all
Mercy, of all Grace, and of all Consolation has treasured up much in the Heart
of Shem Acher, as matter of self-emptying and of Soul-humbling, yet withal of
exalting of Jehovah Aelohim in Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, of advancing of
Christ that Allwonderful one, God-Man: How unsearchably rich has this Grace,
how admirably free has this Love been!

A Spiritual Discerner may gather much together by way of Evidence, out of the
foregoing History of Shem Acher's Life; one more eminent Passage whereof he
would here revive in the Memory, because it has been one of the most eminent
excelling Experiences of his whole Life, when his more through Conversion, by
way of Spiritual Espousals, had such clear full satisfactory self-Evidence in
it, as shines in his inner Man to this very hour, although he had somewhat of it
before. It is that shining Manifestation of those glorious Appearances of
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, in the Heavenly Glory to Shem Acher's Spirit, and
of the LORD Jesus Christ as to his glorified Humanity, and the seed of it in
the North above this blew visible Expanse, the opening of which Mystery may
hold forth a Scripture Light for the guiding of others, in their turning to the
LORD, covenanting with him, and being espousingly united to him; for, it is,
where seriously, thoroughly, and discerningly performed, one of the most solemn
Actions in this World. As to a Covenanting with the LORD.

On the part of Jehovah. Deuteronomy. 29. 10, -- 14. and 30 1, 2, 3. and 26. 16, --
19. Ps. 110. 3.


He sets his Faces before the convinced Sinner, who is now about to turn unto
him.

He shows his readiness to pass into a Covenant-State and Relation with the
returning Sinner.

Jehovah makes gracious Offers and precious Promises to such a returning Soul
upon certain equal Terms, if it voluntarily (by his enabling and making willing
thereunto) choose, and approvingly agree to, and readily close with those Terms.

He declares to such a Soul, that, it will be accursed, if it either refuse
this Offer, or be falshearted in its profession of Assent and Consent to these
Terms.

He raises up and establishes the Soul in some great expectation of receiving
some special Good from Jehovah.

He shows himself forward to take such a Soul to himself, and to acknowledge
such a one for one of his own peculiar People.

Jehovah engages to be a God to such a Soul, if the returning Sinner give (in
the supplies of the Holy Spirit) unfeigned Assent and Consent to all this so
equal a Proposal, so every way for the covenanting Convert's Good.

He refers this re^urning Sinner, as to what Jehovah has spoken, to his own
Conscience for all this

He confirms all these Offers and Promises to such a Soul by Oath.

Jehovah sits upon the Throne of his Grace, expecting an answer from this
returning Sinner unto all this.

On the returning Sinners part.

This Soul sets it self before the Faces of Jehovah.

Upon serious deliberation, this returning Sinner is, by a day of Christ's
Power upon it, made willingness, voluntarily to choose, and readily to like all
the Terms of this Covenant of Grace.

This Soul passes over actually into Covenant with Jehovah, and acknowledges
him for its God.

This covenanting Soul submits to the justness of the threatening Curse, if the
Soul be false-hearted, unfaithful in this Covenant.

The Soul is made sensible of Jehovah's great Kindness, in making so free and
gracious an Offer to it.

The covenanting Convert, does present, give, and resign up his whole Self,
Body, Soul, and Spirit, to this Jehovah to be wholly one of his, altogether and
only at his Command, Will and Disposal.

The Soul believingly particularly applies this Jehovah to it self, as its own
God in Covenant.

This Soul takes this Jehovah at his own Saying, being well persuaded, that,
his Word so confirmed by his Promise and Oath, which are two immutable things,
is true concerning all this, and upon this Word bottometh its Faith, and
adventureth it Self, its Salvation, its All.

This covenanting Convert expects, that, Jehovah will make good all this, and
ful^^l and acomplish it in a Scripture-way, as his Word is.

The Soul is duly humbled under all this, going out of it self, off from all
mere Creatures, and away from all dependence on any Duty it does perform, to
receive all its Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption from the
Father freely, through Christ purchasingly, by the Holy Spirit in workingly,
giving all the Glory to Jehovah Aelohim, resolving in his Strength, to know,
keep and do, all the Words of this Covenant.

Somewhat of the manner of Spiritual Espousing at that remarkable time of
inward Vision and Revelation, was thus.

Sh^m Acher, having a distinct view, by an Eye of Faith, in a more than
ordinary way and manner, of the Father as the Father, of the Son as the Son, of
the Holy Spirit as the Holy Spirit; did orderly pass, being helped from on High
thereunto, and assisted therein, into a distinct mutualness of such solemn
Contract between him and every one of these, which took up some time in his
particular application severally to each from that Scripture, Isa. 54. 5. Thy
Husbands thy Maker: Jehovah Aelohim so commending Himself, his Beauty, his
Goodness, his every-way Amiableness and Loveliness, to Shem Acher's choice, so
utterly altogehter unworthy of such an unexpressible Favor in such a way of
condescending Grace, drawing Shem's Heart with such Bands of a Man, and such
Cords of Love, in working and outcalling such answerable Affections from him,
toward each of them, and so knitting and uniting his very Heart and Soul to
every one, as his Tongue cannot utter the whole of; he had rather leave the
rest to the admiring Meditations of experienced Believers, who have in any good
growing measures felt and enjoyed the same, than to expose any more of this at
present to public view. Only so it was, that Jehovah himself approved of what
then passed between him and Shem, the sealing witness whereof was never wholly
withdrawn since that time to this day, but still abides and lives there; tho he
have been exercised with many humbling Providence, buffeting Temptations,
boistrous Corruptions, blasphemous Suggestions, and distressing Cases since
that signal Honor: The LORD has since that Contract all along provided for
Shem as for one wedded to him, and the espousing knot between them is declared
indissoluble.

He does not by this say, that the LORD was never graciously at work upon his
Heart before; for he has brought in some other Testimonies for that, in some
choice Experiences before this more eminent Favor and Honor, tho for several
years in his younger time, the work were more from a Spirit of Bondage to Fear,
as has also been expressed; one time more especially, when upon Fasting and
Prayer, as he remembers, being under the Terrors of the LORD, he was summoned
to appear before the Bar of God's Justice, to answer unto such Charges as were
to be brought in against him, which were so many, so heinous, and criminal,
that seeing himself, before the actual passing of the Sentence, condemned in
the Court of the transgressed Law, in the Court of Divine Justice, and in the
Court of his own guilty Conscience, he was close and home put unto it; Whether,
he would submit to the Sentence of the Judge were it for everlasting
Condemnation by an Act of Justice, or for Eternal Salvation by an Act of Grace
and Mercy, and whether he would acknowledge God to be just and righteous
therein, if he should condemn him by an irreversible Sentence to be deservedly
miserable.

Those, whoever were thus exercised, cannot but apprehend, what Horrors and
Fears did now surprise and overwhelm Shem Acher: yet was it not long before the
Holy Spirit framed him to such a submission and acknowledgment, which with
Tears and broken Language he expressed and declared, and so threw himself all
along with his Mouth in the Dust, as at the Feet of his Judge, not knowing at
first, whether he should be struck dead, and damned upon the place or not: But,
the LORD quickly after pronouncing how justly Shem had deserved to be cursed
for ever, yet that Christ was made a Curse for him, and presently an Act of
Grace in the free and full forgiveness of his many and great Sins was drawn up,
signed, sealed, and delivered, received, applied, and witnessed to his Soul:
the Crown of all be on the Head of the free Forgiver! since which signal
Pardon, Shem has not, that he remembers, had almost any considerable fears of
Hell at all, to speak of, at any time upon him.

Thus there is Mat, 18. 1, 2, 3, 4. Luke 22. 31, 32.
Conversion after Conversion. In all which Relation concerning his Conversion,
Covenanting, Espousing to, and with Jehovah Aelohim, he does not impose his
Experiences as a Rule for others to measure the Truth and Soundness of their
turning to the LORD by, in all and every of the parts, degrees, and
Circumstances of them; provided that their Conversion be indeed true and
serious, sound and sincere according to Word-warrant and approbation: it highly
concerns them to see well to this, and duly to examine themselves by
Scripture-Rules about it, that they do not deceive themselves.

If further Evidence be called for, he can add these comprehensive Particulars.

That, Eccles. 9 3. Gen* 6. 5. Romans 1 30. Mat. 15. 18, 19, 20. Mark 7. 21, 22,
23.
there is no one Sin in the Seed of it, in corrupt Nature, or in the Thought of
it, at least in the Imagination, which ever any of the Sons or Daughters of
Adam, on Earth, or in Hell, for the kind of it, either thought, spoke, or did,
recorded in the Word or communicated to him by the voluntary Confession of
others, which he has not had both some sight of, some sense of, and some hatred
of: yea, some ways worse than ever he yet read or heard of, by inventing of
such evil things in the Fancy, as he does not know any other Man or Woman in
the World did ever contrive. This Universal, both Original and Natural
Corruption, which has so defiled his whole Man in all and every of the parts of
it, being so direct a Contrariety and Enmity to and against that Holiness and
Righteousness which is in God, and in his Law, having been Shem's Burden both
Night and Day for many a long Year. Romans 7. 17, -- 25. and 8. 2, 3. and 13. 14.
and 4. throughout. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21. Dan. 9. 24. Romans 3. 19, 20, -- 26, Isa.
45. 24. Rev. 19. 8. Luke 7. 47. 1 John 1. 9. Col. 2. 13. Isa. 38. 17. Mic. 7.
18, 19. Psalm. 103. 12. Isa. 43. 25. Psalm. 32. 1,-5. Romans 1. 17. Isa. 45. 25.
Jer. 23. 6.
Tho he does thank God through Christ Jesus his LORD, that the Perfect and All
sufficient Sanctification of Christ's Humane Nature, and the through and
perfect Obedience performed by Christ in the whole Course of his Life whilst
conversant amongst-Men here on Earth, is imputed unto him for Justification in
the presence of God, and has been so imputed, he by Faith putting on the LORD
Jesus Christ, and being clothed with his Righteousness; whereby his Sins have
been forgiven, cast behind Jehovah's Back into the bottom of the Sea; passed
by, forgotten and blotted out, and not imputed; Jehovah Christ being his
Righteousness, in which he does stand righteous before the Judgment Seat of God.

That, he knows not any one Saint, either on Earth or in Heaven, so far as we
have Scripture-Records of these in the Word, who experienced, either edifying
Gift, or sanctifying Grace, or privileged Enjoyment, or useful
Serviceableness, and such like, which he does not heartily approve of, and
which more or less he has not both holily with submission 2 Cor. 5. 9. (...)
cum Ambitione contendimus, we ambitiously endeavor.
aspired after, and some ways so far as he is concerned in his Place and
Calling had some workings about it, and by improving of Mystical Membership
applied as his own.

That, he knows nothing, either in a whole Christ, or in the whole Word of
Christ, of Holiness or of Righteousness, which he would not have an universal
growing Knowledge of, and Conformity and Obedience to, in all things in his
whole Man.

That, all these have been carried on for several years by a very sharp
Contest, and continued Conflict within, more especially against the universal
Corruption of his Nature, which has very slily and sometimes fiercely assaulted
him; yet so, as that tho there have been many a Foil and Fall in some
particular Combats, yet, that the Issue of the Fights have been Victories,
Spoils, and Triumphings.

This humble ingenuous Confession Shem Acher does freely make of those secret
Sins, which no Man alive can so charge upon him: which is one part of his
Evidence, whereby he does conform to Christ's Mind Ezekiel. 43. 10, 11. Lev 5. 5,
6. and 22. 1, 2, 3, 7. Prove. 28. 13. 1 John 1. 9, 10. Psalm. 32. 1^ -- 5. 1 ^im.
1. 13. 1 John 3. 21. and 4. 17. Heb. 4. 16.
in his Word where it is required, where Promises are made to it, where
Examples are recorded of it, and which will give him the more boldness in the
Day of Judgment before the LORD the righteous Judge, and before Angels and Men.
For these Considerations have brought his Spirit to this self-shaming
acknowledgment, so that he can die with the more Peace of God in his
Conscience, when the Hour shall come.

That, the LORD has graciously in some ascending degree manifested to him, and
revealed in him, that inward Mystery of a 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Joh. 3. 3. 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. Ezekiel. ^6. 26, 27. 1 Cor. 2. 10, -- 16. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 5. 16, 17,-25.
Romans 8. 1,-27. Ephesians. 2. 10 and 4. 4, 5, 6, 15, 16, 22, 23, 24. 2 Pet. 1 3, 4.
New-Creature-Spirit in his regenerate State in Christ, as distinct by a New
Creation from his own natural constitutive Essential parts as a Man, and from
the Holy Spirit, who was, is the begetter of it, by the immortal Seed of the
Word, and as contrary to, that Evil Spirit Satan, and to the Spirit of the
World, it being of that same Spirit, which Christ as Mediatoral Head received
without measure; and is one of the highest Advances of a Believer in a growing
and withal an humble frame to partake of the Divine Nature.

That, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Gal. 2. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 1. 1 John 1. 3. 2 Cor. 13. 14.
the Steps and Degrees of this Spiritual Growth have been more and more out of
corrupt self, off from idolized Creatures, away from Duty-dependances, into
more and more of a State of Grace, through and by that into a Life of and in
Christ, and through and by him into a Distinctness and Orderliness of Communion
with the Father as the Father, with the Son as the Son, and with the Holy
Spirit as the Holy Spirit, and thence into a more raised Communion with Jehovah
himself.

That, all through Gal. 1. 18. (...) Paul went to Jerusalem to visit Peter, so
to visit him as that, he might know from him, or declare to him the History o^
Persons and of* things, especially of Church Affairs. Thus ^a^ Shem Acher given
the History of his Life, of his Call to the Ministry, of his perfecting of
Baptism, of his Conversion, of his Evidences of Grace, of his Church Affairs*
and somewhat of an History of some others who have opposed him.
this Historical Narrative, he blesses Jehovah Aelohim, that still more or
less he has been pressing onward, and going forward, as the growing-Light of
his Age has been, not declining nor going backward in Principle, excepting
somewhat in that void space of his time at the University, but getting upward
to come at the top of all, having many a contrivement and endeavor to promote
the greatest and the best Ends, particularly those that do relate to the
latter-day-Glory; which in all the kinds and degrees thereof, he knows not to
have been so in the Heart and Mind of the most eminent Believer and excelling
Saint alive on this Earth.

^ having been for many years, through Grace and Mercy obtained from his LORD,
Shem Acher's State, Frame, and Acting, to come up in some answering growing
proportionedness to all the requirements of Christ's Mind and Will in the whole
Scriptures, that he might be a Man after Christ's own Heart, who enabled
thereunto by the Holy Spirit, might fulfill all Christ's Wills, Acts 13. 22. and
might so serve his own Generation by the Will of God, before he fall on sleep,
ver. 36. standing perfect and complete, or, filled up, in all the Will of God,
Col. 4. 12. Heb. 6. 1, 2. and so may be able in some good measure to answer
these Questions of his LORD and Judge, What do thou more? Mat. 5. 47, 48. what
excelling, what exceeding thing, wherein go thou beyond others? What Grace,
what Grace, what Grace (which the English Version does translate three times,
what Thank) have thou? Luke 6. 32, 33, 34. that, according to that Promise,
(For so it should be rendered in the Future Tense, ye shall therefore be
Perfect, (...), 2 pl. future 1 Indic. ab (...), sum) Mat. 5. 48. he may be
still at perfecting work, as his Father who is in Heaven is perfect; tho still
he carry upon is Spirit and Heart a living Sense of somewhat wanting as to
higher degrees, yet he would in every thing be and do somewhat that does excel,
Psalm. 16. 3.

If any after all this will say, That they have now one Charge more against
Shem Acher than they had before, in that he has so compared himself with Paul,
thereby ministering to the Pride and Selfishness of his own Heart: Such should
know and consider;

That, as he must after a while give an account of his writing of this
Narrative, and of his Aims and Ends in so writing, so also must they of their
Judgings and Condemnings of Christ's Servant: who has for many years been
exercised with very humbling Providence and Cases to keep him lowly after the
LORD's signal honourings of him.

As for his running Parallel with Paul, the Title Page in propounding of Paul
for an example, does expressly give the Pre-eminence unto Paul, and no farther
use the comparing, than as it does run Parallel: There is no difference between
the highest and the lowest Saint, but what the Grace of God has made: and an 1
Cor. 11. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 21. 1 John 2. 6. and 4. 17.
higher and incomparabler Example than that of Paul should every Believer,
especially every Minister, be conformed unto, even that of the LORD Jesus
Christ himself.

Had there not been so many years Attempts and Endeavors by some to blast the
Call of Shem Acher, and thereby to hinder the Success of his Ministry, to the
troubling the Minds and discouraging the Hearts, of several, who were hopefully
coming on toward Christ in his ways, he had intended to have lodged this
Historical Declaration within him, and when he had died away into Glory, to
have made report of it to Heavenly Fellow-Citizens, which then and there would
have been more cleared up in diverse Circumstances of it, and in many more
Particulars, than are here mentioned: Duty and Sin do stand sometimes within an
Hairs Breadth one by another; That may look like a Sin, which is a Duty, and
like a Duty which is a Sin: If others will count and censure this as Vainglory
in him, it is known to many, that he has been necessitated unto it. The
Searcher of Hearts does know, that Shem Acher has been made willing, that the
Glory of these Holy Experiences, and signal Honors should be ascribed in every
part, and in the whole of it, unto Jehovah Aelohim, whose rich Grace and free
Love has been in all this, unsearchably Rich, and exceedingly Abundant.

This is that Lev. 23. 37. 1 King. 8. 59. 2 Chronicles. 8. 14. Ezra. 3. 4. Eccles.
3. 11.
Word of the Day in the Day thereof, which was brought upon his Spirit to
declare unto others; it being self-evident unto him, that the LORD has put a
Beauty upon this, in thus timing of it in its own proper season; the whole
whereof is now delivered over unto the Holy Spirit, to work this History and
the choice experiences therein, upon their Hearts, into whose Hands, before
whose Eyes, or unto whose Ears, it may come, as is good in his Sight; and all
is submitted to Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. Isa. 8. 20. Joh. 7. 24.
Scripture-Counsel-Number-Measure-and-Weight, to
Word-Rule-Tryal-Judgment-and-Determination; By a Lover and Admirer of Christ,
and of his Word and Works.

Col. 4. 18. 1 Cor 16. 21. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 17.
Shem Acher.

POSTSCRIPT.
SHem Acher, having been by a private Letter to a near and dear Friend
advertised, that, he is at least by the strong jealousy of one or more
suspected, if not downright charged, (and this before the Historical
Declaration is Printed and Published) to be guilty of two Evils, the one of
striving for Supremacy, the other of not walking according to Gospel Order, and
both these in reference to that part of the Narrative, about receiving of a
Member in some Cases out of one Church in the same City into another Church of
the same City, in the main of the same Gospel-Faith and Order: Shem therefore
to prevent, or else remedy and remove, any misapprehensions that may fill the
Hearts and Minds of any Reader, as also any Stumbling Blocks at which some
unwary walkers may be offended, does openly and freely declare; that as to the
first of these, which is striving for Supremacy, (tho the Seed of this, as of
every other Evil, is in his Heart, as in the Heart of every Son and Daughter of
Adam, as our Nature is corrupted: which he does apprehend was one of the first
Sins, both of the Apostate Angels, and of Fallen Adam, 1 Timothy 3. 6. Genesis 3. 5,
22. For, both the one and the other affected a Superiority, and Self-Exaltation
above and beyond that, which was their Primitive con^reated Excellency) he does
now upon this occasion publish to all those into whose Hands this Paper shall
come, and by whom it shall be read or heard, that it has been quite contrary to
his both Principle and Practice for many years, he has preached openly against
this often in Assemblies for instituted Worship, as Multitudes of Hearers can
witness; he has Printed against it: his constant free public Testimony brought
in against it, in whomsoever he discovered it, whether Pope or Prelate,
Conformist or Nonconformist, under all the changes of Governments and
Constitutions, does plead for him in this Matter, and for this Testimony it is,
as one great occasion which has been taken and used by Men of the old Hatred
and deep Enmity against the Purity of the Christian Religion, and the Power of
Practical Christianity, who set up their own Human Authorities, Inventions,
Institutions, Edicts, and Impositions above and contrary to the Authority of
Christ, and of his Wills and Laws of his written Word; for this I say it is,
that Shem Acher has suffered so many years Imprisonment, and has been diverse
other ways persecuted: and it is much upon the same account of opposing of that
Church-dividing design and attempt in some of the Holy Separation, that he has
so appeared in the forementioned Case, which he has referred unto Jehovah to
talk with them about, Third Epist. of John ver. 8, 9, 10. Let this be well
noted and duly considered, and rightly applied. If any will be so far
contentious, as to print the Case for Matter of Fact under other Circumstances,
than the Truth is, whereby to give an odious misrepresentation of the Case unto
others, I am not minded to keep up any quarrel about that: but if there be any
need of further reply unto that, my purpose is to leave it unto some Friend or
Friends in Fellowship, who have kept punctual and faithful Records of what has
passed. That Cause which Shem in this Paper is an Advocate for, is the Matter
of Right upon such a Supposition as this printed Paper does express.

Concerning the second of these, which is, Not-walking according to
Gospel Order, Shem Acher has this to say for his Defense, in the Main, both as
to his Judging and Acting, That his studying of the Scriptures has been at
times a long while about this Church Order according to Gospel-Rule, and that
many a Prayer he has put up to Jehovah Aelohim for Light and Direction
concerning it, that his Zeal for Christ's Fathers House was that, which did
much put him forward upon acting in this Case as he has; and that considering
the smallness and fewness of the Number of those who both in the Country, and
since in the City, in both, for now toward twenty years last past, he does not
know any one particular Church, that does bring all Church-Cases more to
Scripture-Rule, as our growing measures of Knowledge herein are, and which has
more exercised Church Discipline than that Society of Baptized Sabbatarians do
with whom he has walked, and does walk. If after this Apology, Shem shall be
yet further charged with Self-Partiality in his own Cause, he resorts for this
Parallel to Paul's Example, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. With me it is a very small
thing the least, that I should be judged of you, or of an Human Judgment, or a
Man's day, yea, neither do I judge my self; For I am conscious of nothing to my
self, yet am I not thereby justified: but he who judges me is the LORD.
Therefore judge not before the time, until the LORD shall be come, who shall
also bring to Light the hidden things of Darkness, and will make manifest the
Counsels of Hearts: and then shall every one have praise of God. Learn in us
not to savor above that which has been written (in the Word of Christ.) Tho
Shem have much to plead his Cause in the Court of Men, yet the righteous
Jehovah can find out much for which to condemn him in the Court of Heaven:
Blessed be Jehovah Aelohim, who has found out a way, and has led Shem into it,
whereby to justify Shem from that in all his Cases, wherein he does condemn
himself.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. for Guillam, read Guillim. P. 3. f. (...), r. (...). P. 10. l. 13. f.
James 5, r. Jam. 5. 14, 15, 16. P. 10. l. 21. f. John 3. 25, 26, 27. in the
Margin, r. Mark 5. 25, -- 34. P. 10. l. 27, ^. John 3. 25, 26, 27. let this be
put into the Margin, with an Asterick *, before A Man, etc. P. 10. l. last but
two, strike out, 1 Samuel 23. and put in J^r. 23. 21, 22, 32. P. 11. l. 46. f.
Acts 19. 18. in the Margin, r. Acts 9. 18.


