THE PLAGIARY EXPOSED: OR AN Old Answer TO A Newly revived Calumny Against the
MEMORY of King CHARLES I.

Being a REPLY To a BOOK entitled King Charles's CASE, Formerly written by John
Cook of Grays Inn, Barrister; and since Copied out under the Title of Colonel
Ludlow's LETTER.

Written by Mr. Butler, the Author of Hudibras.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in S. Paul's Churchyard. M DC
XCI.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Publisher of this following Discourse has thought fit to oblige the World
with a piece of Curiosity: it was penned above forty years since by the
ingenious and celebrated Author of Hudibras. The Libel, which he answers, was
the Labor of one John Cook, Barrister of Grays Inn, formerly a great
pains-taker in the Mysteries of Rebellion. To give you the original of it,
'twas a studied Invective against the Person of King Charles I. before the High
Court of Justice (so called) of infamous memory; but upon the non-pleading of
the Royal Martyr, 'twas afterward metamorphos'd into a Pamphlet, with the
specious Title of King Charles' s Case; or an Appeal to all rational Men
concerning his Trial. How rational this Appeal was, may be easily discovered
from those numerous Fallacies and notori^us Falsehoods which our Author has
detected in him, not only as to what concerns plain matter of fact, but also in
the Pamphleteer's pretended way of reasoning, false Logic, and worse Law. I
shall not enter into the merits of the Cause; for I suppose the more rational
part of Mankind is abundantly satisfied in the Innocence of that Great Man as
to any thing that was laid to his charge; and upon that account indeed these
would have been little occasion at this time of day to produce so great an
Advocate for his Memory, but that there is risen amongst us a new Race of the
old Republican Stamp, who have revived the Quarrel, and copied out the obsolete
and almost forgotten Scandal of our Libeller, and made it their own. The Author
of Ludlow's Letter may be reckoned amongst the first of these, one that always
sat up for a Patron of Faction, and a Promoter of the Good Old Cause, but
showed himself most in that famous year when he was one of the Tribunes of the
People. I should not have made such a Digression upon this worthy Patriot. but
that I find him to intrude amongst his Friends Mr. Milton and our Libeller, and
seems to be the very copy of their Malice at least, tho not their Wit; and for
that reason I must confess he seems to be least pointed at by our Answerer. I
shall say no more of him at present, but pass him by with the same Contempt as
the Government has wisely done; it is but unseasonable quarrelling with a Man
that is armed with so much dirt, you will be sure of that if you have nothing
else.

I need not trouble the Reader with any Harangue upon our Author or his Book; I
suppose he is no stranger to the honester and more learned part of the Kingdom;
and as for the rest, 'twas their best security they were not knwon by him. I
shall only add, that it was Mr. Butler's design to Print the Discourse himself,
had not Death prevented him; and since it has fell into the Editor's hands,
it is but a piece of Justice to his Memory to let the World make their Advantage
of it.

Mr. COOK,
HAVING lately seen a Book of yours, which you are pleased to call King CHARLES
his Case, or an Appeal to all Rational Men concerning his Trial; I was much
invited to read it, by the Ingenuity promised in your Title. For having heard
you Style your self Solicitor General for the Kings Dread Sovereign, and your
own Honorable Client, the People; I was much taken with your impartiality,
that not only exempts all Rational Men from being your Clients in this Case, in
making them by your Appeal your Judges: for no Man you know can be Judge in his
own Case, but acknowledge your High Court from which your Appeal to all
Rational Men to consist of no such: But indeed I had not read many lines before
I found mine own Error, as well as yours, and your Proceedings nothing
agreeable to the plain dealing I expected from you; for you presently fall to
insult upon the unhappiness of your undeserved Adversary, and that with so
little moderation, as if you strove to make it a question whether his
incomparable Patience, or your own ungoverned Passion should be the greater
wonder of Men, preposterously concluding him Guilty, before with one Syllable
you had proved him so: A strange way of doing Justice, which you endeavor to
make good by a strange insolent Railing, and more insolent proceeding to the
secret Counsel of Almighty God, from whence you presume to give Sentence on
him: a boldness, no less impious than unjust in you were it true, since you can
never know it to be so.

But indeed it is hard to say whether you have shown more Malice or Vanity in
this notable Declaration of yours; for he that considers the Affectation and
fantastique Lightness of your Language, (such as Ireland, a Land of Ire;
Bite-Sheep for Bishops, and other such ingenious Elegancies of quibble;) must
needs confess it an Oratory more becoming a Fool in a Play, or Peter's before
the Rabble, than the Patron of his Sovereigns Sovereign, or the gravity of that
Court, which you say right wisely, shall be admired at the Day of Judgment. And
therefore you do ill to accuse him of reading Iohnsons and Shakespears Plays,
which should seem you have been more in your self to much worse purpose, else
you had never hit so right upon the very Dialect of their railing Advocates, in
which (believe me) you have really out acted all that they could fancy of
passionate and ridiculous Outrage.

For certainly Sir I am so charitable to believe it was your Passion that
imposed upon your Understanding; else as a Gentleman you could have never
descended to such peasantry of Language, especially against such a Person, to
whom (had he never been your Prince) no Law enjoins (whatsoever his Offenses
were) the punishment of Ribaldry. And for the Laws of God they absolutely
condemn it; of which I wonder you that pretend so much to be of his Counsel,
should be either so ignorant or forgetful.

Calamity is the Visitation of God, and (as Preachers tell us) a favor he does
to those he loves; wherever it falls it is the work of his Hand, and should
become our Pity, not our Insolence. This the Ancient Heathen knew, who
believing Thunder came from the Arm of God, reverence the very Trees it lighted
on.

But your Passion has not only misled you against Civility, and Christian
Charity, but Common Sense also; else you would never have driven your Chariot
of Reason (as you call it) so far out of the Road, that you forget whither you
are going, and run over every thing that stands in your way; I mean, your
unusual way of Argument, not only against Reason, but your Self, as you do it
at the first sally; for after your fit of saving as over, you bestow much pains
to prove it one of the Fundamentals of Law. That the King is not above the Law,
but the Law above the King; and this you deraign, as you call it, so far that
at length you say, the King has not by Law so much Power as a Justice of Peace
to commit any Man to prison; which you would never have done, if you had
considered from whom the Justice derives his Power, or in whose Name his
Warrants run, else you may as well say, a Man may give that which he has not,
or prove the Moon has more Light than the Sun, because he cannot shine by
night as the Moon does. But you needed not have strained so hard, for this will
serve you to no purpose, but to prove that which was never denied by the King
himself; for if you had not a much worse Memory than Men of your Condition
should have, you could not so soon have forgotten, that immediately after the
reading of that Charge, the King demanded of your High Court, by what Law they
could sit to judge Him; (as offering to submit if they could produce any,) but
then silence or interruption were thought the best ways of confessing there was
no such thing: And when he undertook to show them both Law and Reason too, why
they could not do it: The Righteous President told him plainly he must have
neither Law nor Reason, which was certainly (as you have it very finely) the
most comprehensive, impartial, and glorious Piece of Justice that ever was
played on the Theater of England; for what could any Court do more than rather
condemn it self than injure Truth.

But you had better have left this whole Business of the Law out of your Appeal
to all Rational Men who can make no use of it, but against your self: for if
the Law be above the King, much more is it above the Subject. And if it be so
heinous a Crime in a King to endeavor to set himself above Law, it is much more
heinous for Subjects to set themselves above King and Law both. Thus like right
Mountebanks, you are fain to wound and poison your selves to cheat others, who
cannot but wonder at the confidence of your imposture, that are not ashamed to
magnify the Power of the Law while you violate it, and confess you set your
selves really above the Law to condemn the King for but intending it.

And indeed Intentions and Designs are the most considerable part both of your
Accusations and Proofs, some of which you are fain to fetch a great way off, as
far as his Coronation Oath, which you next say He or the Archbishops by his
order emasculated, and left out very material Words (which the People shall
choose) which is most false; for these Words were not left out, but rendered
with more sense (which the Commonalty have) and if you consider what they
relate to (Customs) you will find you cannot without open injury interpret (
elegerit in the Latin Oath) shall choose not has chosen; for if you will have
consuetudines quas vulgas elegrit, to mean Customs which are to be not only
use, which must be often repeated before it become a Custom, but choice which
necessarily preceeds use.

But suppose it were as you would have it, I cannot see with what reason you
can presume it to be a design to subvert the Laws, since you know he had sworn
to defend them before in the first Article of the Oath, from which I wonder how
you can suppose that so wise a Prince (as you acknowledge him to be) could be
so irrational to believe himself absolute by this omission. But you are not
without further contradiction yet, for if he were so prefidious a Violater of
Oaths as you would have the World believe, what reason had he to be so
conscientious of taking them, certainly he has little cause to be nice what
Oaths he takes, that has no regard what Oaths he breaks.

Nor can I possibly understand your other construction of his refusal to take
the Oath, as his Predecessors had done, which you will have a design to refuse
his assent to such good Laws rather than bad Ones, as the Parliament should
tender; for besides the absurd conceits that he must still like the bad better
than the good, if you consider what you say afterward the charitable sense
will appear by your own Words to be truest, for you confess he gave his assent
to any bad one, else you had not been fain for want of such to accuse him of a
few good ones as you do there; which of these is most profitable let every
rational Christian judge.

Your next Argument to prove the King's design to destroy the Law is thus
ordered. Those Knights that were by an old Statute to attend at the King's
Coronation, being promised by his Proclamation (in regard of the Infection then
spread through the Kingdom, a Dispensation for their absence, were after found
at the Council Table; no doubt by the procurement of some of your own Tribe,
where they pleading the Proclamation for their Indemnity were answered: That
the Law of the Land was above any Proclamation: Your Conclusion is therefore,
The King had a design to subvert the Laws: sure there is no Man in his Wits but
would conclude the contrary; such Arguments as these are much like the Ropes
that Oaenus twisted only for Asses to devour.

But if this should fail you know you were provided for another not less
substantial, and that is his alteration of the Judges Commissions, who
heretofore had their Places granted to them during their Good Behavior, but he
made them but during Pleasure, of this you make a sad Business of a very evil
imaginary Consequence; but if you had considered before, what you say presently
after, that the King and not the Judges is to be accountable for the injustice
and oppression of the Government, etc. you would have found it very just that
he should use his Pleasure in their dismission as well as choice: For Men of
your Profession that have lived long enough to be Judges, are not such Puisnes
in cunning to play their feats of Iniquity above-board: and if they may sit
still they can be proved to have misbehaved themselves; the Prince that is to
give account for all, may sooner know he is abused, than know how to help
himself.

All the inconveniency which you can fancy possible to ensue it, is only to
such bad Judges as buy their Places; of whose Condition and Loss you are very
sensible, as if they had too hard a Bargain of Injustice, and believe they may
have reason enough to give unjust Judgment, rather than lose their Places and
their Money too, if they shall receive such intimation from the King. But you
forgot you self when you put this in your Appeal to all Rational Men; for they
will tell you this was a bold affront done to your High Court of Justice; for
if it were potential Tyranny (as you will have it) in the King to have but a
design to endure the Judges to give Sentence against the Law, which you say
brings the People the very next step to Slavery: what is it in those who
presume to give Sentence themselves not only contrary to Law, but the declared
Opinion of all the Judges, and those of their choosing too. And (I beseech you)
whither by your own Doctrine does this bring the People that submit to it?
Certainly if you that can accuse the King of this had been a Jew heretofore,
you would not only have stoned your Fellows, but your Savior too.

But if all your Arguments should miscarry, you have a reserve left that does
(as you say) irrefragably prove the design, what is that! is he restless to
destroy Parliament or make them useless. Believe me, this is right Ignotum per
ignotius, excellent consequence to prove his Design by his Desires; you should
have proved his Desires first (if you would prove his Thoughts by his Thoughts)
for certainly if ever he designed it, he desired it first. You had better have
concluded plainly he did it because he designed it, for that is all one in
Sense: But if I might be but half so bold with your Designs, I should with more
reason guess you have one to make us believe your familiar Acquaintance with
the secret Counsels of God (which you so often pretended to) else certainly he
has given the desires of Man so private a Lodging, that without his own
discovery (which you can give us no account of) you have no other way to know
them. You do well, and if I may advise you, you shall give over this unlucky
thing called Reason, and betake your self wholly to Revelations.

How these Arguments might prevail with your High Court of Justice I cannot
tell; but in my opinion, they had little reason to thank you for this last, for
while you make the King a Traitor, and prove his mere desire to destroy the
Parliament, or make it useless, a purpose to subvert the Laws; you do but tell
them what they are that have already done it, and the People what a deal of Law
they are to expect hereafter. All you can justly in your own sense accuse the
King of, is but Discontinuance, or untimely dissolution of Parliaments, which I
wonder with what sense you can interpret a Design to destroy the Parliaments,
since all the World knows when he parted with his Power to dissolve the
Parliament too. But see how doubly unjust you are, you accuse him for not
calling Parliaments so often as he was bound to do by the Law once a Year (as
you say) or oftener, but never consider how that is impossible to be done
without dissolving them as often, for doing which notwithstanding with so much
Clamor you condemn him. Thus you charge him with inconsistencies, and may with
much more reason accuse him for calling Parliaments, because if he had not
called them, he could never have dissolved them, which is very like your way of
Argument.

But much better than you commonly use for your next (to remove an Objection
out of your way) is thus managed; The King and not the Judges and evil
Counselors ought to be accountable for the Male*Administrations, Injustices
and oppressions of the Parliament, your Reasons are, because he made such
wicked and corrupt Judges: were they not his own Creatures; and ought not every
Man to be acountable for the Work of his own Hands; believe me this were
something if you could prove he made them wicked, as well as Judges. But if
this Plea hold, you have argued well for your honorable Clients, the People;
for if they made the King, as you say they did, you have cleared him of all
such horrid Crimes, Murders and Massacres, which you take so much pains to no
purpose to accuse him of; and like a right Man of Law have undone your Clients,
upon whose score you set them: Your next Business will be to prove God Guilty
of the Sins of Wicked Men, for they are his Creatures, and the Work of his
Hands, I take it. But this is your perpetual method of doing him right, to make
him sole Author and Owner of all his ill ordered or unhappy Actions, and not
allow him a share in any good Deed or act of Grace.

And these are the Fundamentals of the Charge, only suppositions of Intentions
and Designs, which how far you have proved just or profitable, any Man but your
self judge: The Course you take afterward is much worse in my Opinion; for you
make your own Grounds, and either not prove them at all, or (which is worse)
prove them upon their own bottom, as when you take upon you to state the Ground
of your Wars, and prove the King to be the cause of it, you do it thus:

The King (you say) set up his Standard of War for the advancement and
upholding of his Personal Interest, Power, and pretended Prerogative, against
the Public Interest of Common Right, Peace and Safety, How do you prove this?
Because he fought for the Militia, for a Power to call and dissolve
Parliaments, a negative Voice, to make Judges, confer Honors, grant Pardons,
make Corporations inhance or debase Money, and avoid his own Grants. These you
call his Personal Interest, Power and Prerogative, which you say he fought for;
now put the Position and Proof together, and see what sense it will make: truly
none but this; That he made War for his Prerogative, because he fought for his
Prerogative: is not this fine Logic; but suppose it were sense, how do you
prove he fought for his Prerogative? to this you have not one Word to say: and
why then should we rather take your Word than the Kings, who protested he took
Arms in defense of the Protestant Religion, the Liberty of the Subject,
Privileges of Parliament, and Laws of England? Certainly there is no Man in his
Wits but would rather believe his Words, than your Arguments, if he does but
consider that the most improbable part of all, [he protested to fight for the
defense of the Privileges of Parliaments,] is found by experience to be no
Paradox: how true the rest is, time will instruct you. But yet I cannot see why
we should not rather believe them, than the pretenses of the Parliament, which
were more to fight in defense of his Person, and their own Privileges, which
how they have performed your self can tell; but all this while you have
mistaken your own Question, which was not the right of Cause; but the Cause, or
(as you have it) the occasion of the War, and if you had a purpose to know
that, Actions had been the only guide of your Inquiry; for Intentions and Words
are uncertain, and if they make no Assaults in private Quarrels, I know not why
they should in public; and therefore since we can never agree about the Truth
of more remote Causes, it is most just for us to place the cause of the War
where we find the first Breach of the Peace. Now that the King was cleared of
this, all indifferent Men, who had the unhappiness to be acquainted with the
method of their own undoing, can very well testify. And if the Parliament
should deny it, their own Votes would contradict them, as well as their
Actions; for when they first raised Horse and Arms, they pretended to do so,
because it appeared the King seduced by wicked Counsel intended to make Wa^
against the Parliament; whereby they confess he had not then done it, and they
had so little ground to make it appear he ever would, that they were fain to
usurp the right of his Cause to justify their own; And they say took Arms for
the Defense of the King, which if we grant, it must follow they first made War
against him; for no body else ever did, against whom they could possibly defend
Him; nor did their Actions in offering the first violence less declare who
began the War, when having an Army ready to invade him, before he set up his
Standard, they both followed and set upon him, as they did at Edge Hill. Go as
far as you can, you will still find the Scots (whose Quarrel the Parliament
took up at the second Hand as well as they followed their Examples) were the
first beginners of all.

This being granted, how the King could afterward do less than he did, I
cannot understand: First he was bound by the Law of Nature (which you say is
Legislative, and has a Suspensive Power over all Humane Laws) to defend
himself. Secondly, by his Coronation Oath, which he took to keep the Peace; and
how could he do that, but by his raising Power to suppress those who had
already broken it? Thirdly, by the Laws of the Land, which you say trusted him
with the Power of the Sword, and how could he preserve that Trust, if he had
sat still and suffered others not only to take it from him, but to use it
against him.

But it is most probable that he never intended it, else he was very unwise to
let them be beforehand with him, in seizing upon his Castles, Magazines and
Ships; for which there can be no reason imagined, but that he was loath to give
them any occasion (in securing them) to suspect he did but intend a War. And by
all this I doubt not but it appears plain enough to all Rational Men, that he
was so far from being the cause of the War, that he rather fell into it by
avoiding it; and that he avoided it so long, till he was fain to take Arms at
so great a disadvantage, as he had almost as good have sat still, and
suffered. And in this you have used the King with the same Justice the
Christians received from Nero; who having set Rome on fire himself, a Sacrifice
to his own wicked Genius, laid the Odium of it on the Christians, and put them
to death for it.

But this way you found too fair and open for your purpose, and therefore
declined it, for having proved his Intentions by his Desires, and his Actions
by his Intentions, you attempt a more preposterous way yet, to prove both; by
what might have been his Intentions: And to this purpose you have the
Confidence (in spite of Sense) to make Contingencies the final cause of
Things; And impollitick Accidental, possible Inconveniences (which all the Wit
of Man can never avoid) the intended Reasons of State. As when you will have
the King fight for the Militia, only to command the Purse of the People, for a
Power to make Judges, only to wrest the Laws, to grant Pardons, that public
spirited Men (as you call them) may be made away, and the Murderers pardoned,
etc. All which being Creatures of your own Fancy, and Malice, and no part of
his Quarrel,) you are so far from proving he fought for that when you have
strained your Abillity, all you can say is, but this in your own sense, That he
fought for a Power to do that which he never would do when it was in his Power:
But if you take this Liberty, I cannot but think how you would bestir you self
if you could but get your God, as you have done your King, before such an
impartial High Court of Justice as this; how would you charge him with his
mis-government in Nature, for which by the very same Logic you may prove he
made us all Slaves, in causing the Weaker to hold his Life at the pleasure of
the Stronger; that he set up a Sun to dazzle our Eyes, that we might not see,
and to kindle Fevers in our Veins; made Fire to burn us, Water to drown us,
and Air to poison us, and then demand Justice against him, all which you may
easily do, now you have the trick on it, for the very same Reason will serve
again, and with much more probability, for it is easier to prove that Men have
been Burnt and Drowned, and died of the Plague, than to make it appear the King
ever used your finer device to remove public spirited Men, or can you without
extreme Injustice suppose he ever would? for it is so much as very well known he
highly favored and advanced his greatest Opposers, (for such you mean I know)
whom he found owners of any eminent desert, as he did the Earl of Strafford,
and the Attorney General Noy, (and for other honest Men as you will have them)
whom Frenzy or Sedition set against him, by your own confession he did not
suffer those black Stars (very Strange ones) to slit their Noses, and crop
their Ears.

But now I think of these honest public spirited Men, certainly some of them
have not so good an opinion of the honesty of your public Proceedings, but
they would willingly venture not only their Ears again (if they had them) but
their Heads too in defiance of your most comprehensive piece of Justice, whose
Cause while you take upon you to plead against their consent as you have done
your Honorable Clients the People, you deserve in reason to be thrown over the
Bar by your own Party for you; but confess your own injustice while you
acknowledge the public honesty of those that most oppose it.

How solid or pertinent those Arguments of yours have been, let any Man that is
sober judge: but you are resolved right or wrong they shall pass, to let us
know how easily he that has the unhappiness to be judged by his Enemies, is
found guilty of any thing they please to lay to his Charge; and therefore
satisfied with your own Evidence, you proceed to sentence, and condemn the King
with much formality, by the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, by the general
Law of all Nations, and the unanimous consent of all Rational Men in the World,
for employing the Power of the Sword to the destruction of the People, with
which they entrusted him for their own protection. How you got the consent of
Rational Men to this Sentence, I cannot imagine: for it is most certain (by your
own confession) that he never employed the Sword, but against those who first
fought to deprive him of it, and by that very Act declared they did not trust
him, and consequently absolved him both from the obligation that he had to
protect them, and the possibility too; for no Man can defend another longer
than he defends himself, so that if you will have your Sentence to be just, you
must confess it to be nonsense; for you must not only prove that those who
fought against him were the People that trusted him, not those who fought for
him, but the lesser, or less considerable part of the People, the People (as
you have the confidence to call your honorable Clients) being not the
twentieth Part of the very Rabble, which if you can do, you are much wiser than
Solomon: for it is easier to divide a Child into two parts, than to make one of
those two parts a whole Child; and if you have the trick on it, you shall be
next allowed to prove, that, take four out of six there remains six: Nor is
there more Justice or reason in the Sentence, than in the course you take to
up-hold it; for while you deny the old Maxim of Law, That the King can do no
wrong, you maintain a new one much worse, that he may suffer any; and having
limited his Power to act only according to Law, expose him to suffer, not only
without, but against Law: Truly it is hard measure; but rather than fail of
your purpose, you will make as bold with Scriptures as you have done with
Reason, if it stand in your way: as you do when you interpret that place of the
Apostles, where no Law is, there is no Transgression, to mean where there is
neither Law of God nor Nature, nor positive Law: I wonder where that is,
certainly you had better undertake to find out a Plantation for Archimedes his
Engines to move the Earth, than but fancy where that can be, which you must do
before you can make this Scripture to be understood to your purpose, and I
cannot but smile to think how hard a task that will be for such a strong fancy
as yours that cannot conceive what your self affirm; for when you deny it
possible to suppose two Supreme Powers in one Nation, you forget that you had
acknowledged much more before, for you confess the King to be Supreme, when you
say very elegantly he made Head against the Parliament, who acknowledged him to
be the Head thereof, and yet you say the Parliament is the Supreme Authority of
the Nation: Thus you affirm that really to be, which you think is impossible to
imagine.

But such lucky contradictons of your self as well as sense, are as familiar
with you as railing, for besides the many before mentioned, and your common
incongruities of Speech, as far from construction, as the purpose; there are
others, which for your encouragement ought not to be omitted; and when you
would prove the King the most abominable Tyrant that ever People suffered
under, yet you say he was beloved of some, and feared abroad: His Judges you
compared to the Saints sitting in Judgment at the last day, and yet by your own
Doctrine, they are more like Bears and Wolves, in sitting by a Commission of
force, their High Court is a Royal Palace of the Principles of Freedom, and yet
till the People voluntarily submit to a Government (which they never did to the
authority of that) they were but Slaves. The Parliament (you say) petitioned
the King as good Subjects, and yet immediately after you make them his Lords,
and himself Servant, so they give him the Honor of his own Royal Assent, and
yet they often petitioned him for it. His Trial you call most impartial, and
yet cannot deny all his Judges to be Parties, and his professed Enemies. But you
hit pretty right well when you say he caused more Protestant Blood to be shed,
than ever was spilt either by Rome, Heathen or Antichristian, for grant that
partly to be true, and confess as much Protestant Blood as ever was spilt by
the Heathen Romans, unless they could kill Protestants eight hundred Years
before there were any in the World; which eloquent piece of Nonsense we must
impute to your ignorance in Chronology, or confusion of Notions, which you
please. Nor are those Riddles of Contradiction only in your Words, but in the
whole course of your Proceedings, for you never do the King any right, but
where you do him the greatest wrong: and are there only rational, where you are
most inhuman, as in your additional Accusations, since his Death, for there you
undertake to prove some thing, and give your Reasons (such as they are) to make
it appear, which were fair Play, if you do not take an advantage too
unreasonable, to argue with the Dead. But your other Impeachments consist only
of Generals, prove nothing, or Intentions which can neither be proved, or your
own forced Constructions of Actions, or what might have been Actions, but never
were; all which you only aggravate with Impertinency, and foul Language, but
never undertake to prove; and if we should grant all you would say, and suppose
you said it in sense or order, it would serve you to no purpose, unless you
have by Proof or Argument applied it to him, which you never went about to do.

But if this were the worst, you might be born with, as a thing more becoming
the Contempt, than the anger of Men; but who can preserve any Patience, that
does but think upon that prodigy of your Injustice, as well as Inhumanity, to
accuse the King after his Death, for what you were ashamed to charge him with
alive your self, for what you say concerning the Death of King James, you will
become the Storm of your own Party, for they never used it further than they
found it of advantage to some Design they had in hand; as when they would move
the King to grant their Propositions, they made it serve for an Argument to
him, if he would sign he should be still their gracious King, if not he killed
his Father: But when they found he would not be convinced with such Logic,
they laid it utterly aside, for (without doubt) they had not lost an advantage
so useful as they might have made it in the Charge, had they not known it would
have cost them more Impudence to maintain, than they should need to use in
proceeding without it, but let us consider your Students Might with which you
first say you are satisfied, and yet after have it as a Riddle. First he was
observed to hate the Duke, but instantly upon the Death of King James, took him
into his special Grace and Favor, of which you conceive this Art must be the
cause. Believe me, your Conjecture is contrary to all Experience, and the
common manner of Princes, who use to love the Treason, but hate the Traitor;
and if he had been so politic a Tyrant, as you would describe him, he would
never believe his Life safe, nor his Kingdom his own, while any Man lived,
(much less his Enemy, whom such a King would never trust) of whose gift and
secrecy he held them both; nor is it likely that he who would not spare the
Life of his Father to gain a Kingdom, should spare the Life of his Enemy to
secure it. As for his dissolving the Parliament, I believe not only all Wise
Men, but all that ever heard of this will acquit him, whether he did it to
avoid the Dukes Impeachment you cannot prove, but if you could, you must
consider that in such cases Princes may as well protect their Favorites from
Injury as Justice, since no innocence can serve them if they lie as open to the
question, as they do to the envy of Men.

But for the better satisfaction of those you appeal to, I shall add this: It
is most certain that this Humor of Innovation began to stir in the first
Parliament of this King, and grew to an Itch in the Commons at the alteration
of Government, to which end they first resolved to pull down the chief
Instrument thereof, the Duke of Buckingham: But having then no Scotch Army, nor
Act of Continuance to assure their sitting, all the Wit of Malice could never
invent a more politic Course than to impeach him, and put this Article (true
or false) into his Charge, for thus they were not only sure of the affections
of the People, who out of the common Fate of Favorites, generally hated the
Duke, and are always pleased with the ruin of their Superiors, but secured from
the King's interposition, whom they believed by this means bound up from
protecting the Duke (though he knew his innocence) lest the envy and fancy of
all should fall upon himself; but the King who understood their meaning, and
knew this was but in order to their further attempts (which always begin with
such Sacrifices) suddenly dissolved the Parliament, and by his Wisdom and
Policy kept that Calamity sixteen Years after from the People, which the very
same Courses and Fate of these unhappy Times, have since brought upon them. But
you have taken more pains to prove him guilty since his Death of the Rebellion
in Ireland, although with as little Reason or Ingenuity; only you deal fairly
in the beginning, and tell us what Judgment and Conscience we are to expect
from you, when you say as a ground for all your Proofs; If you meet a Man
running down Stairs with a bloody Sword in his Hand, and find a Man stabbed in
the Chamber, though you did not see this Man run into the Body by that Man
which you met; yet if you were of the Jury you durst not but find him Guilty of
the Murder, I hope not before you know whether the Man killed were sent by the
King to fetch the Man you met, for then you may say it must be in his own
Defense: Truly you are a subtle Enquirer, but let us hear some of the clear
Proofs; First* he durst never deny it absolutely: besides the notorious
falsehood of that, it is most senceless to imagine that he who had wickedness
enough to commit so horrid an Act, should have the innocent modesty not to deny
it, when he durst not own it. He sent Thanks to Muskerry and Plunket by Ormond,
which you are confident his height of Spirit would never have done, if he had
not been as guilty as themselves; and may not Ormond that carried the Thanks be
by the same reason as well proved guilty as the King? What Is next, If he had
not been guilty he would have made a thousand Declarations, and have sent to
all Princes in the World for assistance against such Hell Hounds, and
Bloodhounds, etc. That was impossible to be done without sending to the Pope,
and then you would have proved it clearly indeed. But the Copy of his
Commission to the Irish Rebels is in the Hands of the Parliament. It Is most
certain they never believed it themselves, else it had not been omitted in the
Charge. But now for an Argument to the Purpose, After the Irish were proclaimed
Traitors and Rebels by the King, their General Council made an Oath to bear
true and faithful Allegiance to King Charles; and by all means to maintain his
Royal Prerogative against the Puritans in the Parliament of England, which they
would never have done unless he had commanded or consented to the Rebellion:
But observe then what will follow; After the two Houses at Westminster were
proclaimed Rebels and Traitors by the King: They made a solemn Covenant to
defend his Royal Person, Rights and Dignities against all Opposers whatsoever,
and therefore by the same reason he did command or consent to the War raised by
the Parliament against himself. But did they not say they had his Commission,
and call themselves the King and Queens Armies? But then, you forgot who they
were that said so, Hell Hounds and Bloodhounds Feinds and Firebrands, and
Bloody Devils, not to be named without Fire and Brimstone, do you think such
are not to be believed, (especially when they speak for their own advantage),
rather than the People of God, the faithful of the Land at Westminster, who
likewise when they raised Forces, said they did it for the King and Parliament.
Can any Man in his Wits deny but the King is to be believed before either of
these? And yet you cannot be persuaded, but his offer to go in Person to
suppress the Rebellion, was a design to return at the Head of twenty or thirty
thousand Rebels to have destroyed this Nation; that is very strange; but first
how shall we believe what you say before, (to show your breeding?) never was
Boar so unwillingly brought to the stake, as he was to declare against the
Rebels, if he offered to adventure his person to suppress them; when you have
made this agree in sense, let us know how you can suppose the same person, the
wisest King in Christendom, and yet so foolish to study his own destruction;
for who could suffer so much in the ruin of this Nation as himself? For his
hindering the Earl of Leicester's going into Ireland, he had much more reason to
do so, than the Parliament had to hinder him, and therefore you may as well
conclude them guilty, as him, of the Rebellion.

That he sold or exchanged for Arms and Ammunition the Cloth and Provisions
sent by the Parliament to the Protestants in Ireland, you must either accuse
the Parliament which seized upon his Arms first and used them against him, as
prove them above the Law of Nature, (which I believe you had rather do) that
commands every Man to defend himself. But the Rebels in Ireland gave Letters of
mark for taking the Parliaments Ships, but freed the Kings as their very good
friends. I see you are not such a Wizard at Designs as you pretend to be; for
if this be the deepest reach of your subtilty, had you been a Senator in Rome
when Hannibal invaded Italy and burned all the Country of the Roman Dictator,
you would have spared no longer to have proved him Confederate with the Enemy.
But I fear I may seem as vain as your self in repeating your impertinencies:
There is one Argument that would have served instead of all, to convince you of
Wickedness and Folly in this business, and that is the silence of the Charge,
which by your own rule ought to be taken pro confesso) there was never any such
thing.

I will not trouble my self nor any body with your French Legend, as being too
inconsiderable to deserve any serious notice, built only upon Relations and
Hearsays, and proved with your own Conjectures, which how far we are to credit
from a man of so much bias, and Mistakes, any of those you appeal to shall
determine, to whom I shall say but this, that you do but acknowledge the
injustice of the Sentence, while you strove to make it good, with such
additions; for if you had not believed it very bad, you would never have taken
so much pains to mend it. And I hope your High Court will punish you for it,
whose Reputation your officious Indiscretion has much impaired to no purpose:
for though we should grant all your Additions to be true, as you would have it,
it does not at all justify the King's death, since he did not dye in relation
to any thing there objected, and all you can possibly aim at by this pitiful
Argument, is but to prove him guilty because he was punished, for you can never
prove him punished because he was guilty.

For your Epilogue, I have so much charity to believe it, being of a different
thread of Language, none of your own; but either penned for you by your Mussoe
Peeters, or else you writ Shorthand very well to copy after the Speech of his
Tongue. However you came by it, sure I am it could come from no body else: and
having said so, I hope I shall need to say no more; for I shall be loath to
commit the sin of repeating any of it: but since it is but a frippery of common
places of Pulpit Railing, ill put together, that pretend only to Passion, I am
content you should use them your self, and be allowed to say any thing with as
little regard as if you wore your Privilege: yet lest you should grow so
conceited as to believe your self, I will take Solomon's Advice, and answer you
not in your own way of railing or falsehood, but in doing some right to Truth
and the memory of the dead, which you have equally injured.

That he was a Prince of incomparable Virtues, his very Enemies cannot deny,
(only they were not for their purpose) and those so unblemished with any
personal Vice, that they were fain to abuse the security of his Innocence both
to accuse and ruin him. His Moderation (which he preserved equal in the
extremity of both fortunes) they made a common disguise for their contrary
Impalations, as they had occasion to miscall it, either an Easiness to be
inflicted by others, or Obstinacy to rule by his own Will: this temper of his
was so admirable, that neither the highest of Temptations, Adoration and
Flattery, nor the lowest of Misery, Injuries, the Insolency of Fools, could
move him. His constancy to his own Virtues was no mean cause of his undoing;
for if he had not stated the Principles of Government upon unalterable Right,
but could have shifted his Sails to catch the popular Air when it grew high (as
his Enemies did) they had never undone him with empty pretendings to what he
really meant. His Wisdom and Knowledge were of so noble a capacity, that
nothing lay so much out of his reach as the profound Wickedness of his Enemies,
which his own Goodness would neither give him leave to suspect, nor his
Experience power to discover; for they managed the whole course of his ruin,
as they did the last act of it, in disguise, else so great a Wit as his had
never been circumvented by the Treachery and Cheat rather than Policy of
ignorant persons. All he wanted of a King was, he knew not how to dissemble,
unless concealing his own Perfections were so; in which he only deceived his
People, who never understood his great Abilities, till their Sins were punished
with the loss of him. In his death he not only out-did the high Resolutions of
the ancient Romans, but the humble Patience of the Primitive Martyrs; so far
from the manners of Tyrants who use to wish all the World their Funeral Pile,
that he employed the care of his last Thoughts about the safety of his very
Enemies, and died not only consulting, but praying for the preservation of
those whom he knew resolved to have none, but what was built upon their own
Destruction.

All this, and much more, the justice of Posterity (when Faction and
Concernment are removed) will acknowledge to be more true of him than any of
those Slanders you (or the mad wickedness of this Age) have thrown upon his
Memory, which shall then, like dung cast at the roots of trees, but make his
Name more flourishing and glorious; when all those monuments of Infamy you have
raised shall become the Trophies of his Virtue, and your own shame. In the mean
ti^^, as your own Conscience, or the expectation of divine Vengeance shall call
upon you, you will see what you have done, and find there is no Murder so
horrid as that which is committed with the Sword of Justice, nor any Injustice
so notorious as that which takes advantage both of the first silence of the
living and that of the dead In this last you have been very sinful, and in
accusing the dead have not behaved your self so like a Saint at the day of
J^dgment, as the Devil, whose Office is to be S^llicitor General in such cases.
I will not judge you lest I should do worse, imitate you. But certainly you
will find it the worst kind of Witchcraft to raise the Devil by sacrificing to
your own Malice, especially to so bad a purpose as you have done, that you
might invade the Judgment seat of Christ, and usurp his Jurisdiction before his
coming; which you have presumed to do with more rudeness than Hackett used, and
less formality in not sending your Forerunner to proclaim (in a Turnip Cart)
your coming to Judgment. But the worst of all is, you seem to glory in your
sins and assert the Martyrdom of your Wickedness, for having supposed a
possibility you may fall by the hands of Violence; you arm your self with a
forced Resolution which you may be confident you will never have need of, for
you have no reason to think any man can believe you have deserved a violent
death; no, you have deserved rather to live long: so long, till you see your
self become the Controversy of wild Beasts, and be fain to prove our
Scarecrow. Unless you shall think it just, as you have been condemned out of
your own mouth, so you should fall by your own hand: indeed there was no
Hangman bad enough for Judas but himself; and when you shall think fit to do
your self so much right, you shall be your own Soothsayer, and fall by the hand
of a Raviliack, to whom with more likeness compare your self than to Henry the
Fourth, for you are no King. What Raviliack was, is very well known; what you
are, I leave to your own Conscience.

FINIS.

