Mr. BVTLER's Fast-SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, AND COURT of
ALDERMEN, Sept. 16. 1691.

Pilkington Mayor
Jovis xviimo die Septembris 1691. Annoque Regni Regis and Reginae Willielmi
and Mariae Angliae, etc. Tertio.
THese are to desire Mr. Lilly Butler to Print his Sermon, preached yesterday
in the Parish Church of St. Mary Le Bow, before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Liveries of the several Companies of this City.

Goodfellow.

A SERMON Preached at St. Mary-le-Bow, Before the Lord Mayor, COURT of
ALDERMEN, AND CITIZENS of LONDON, On Wednesday, the 16th of September, a day
appointed by their Majesty's for a solemn Monthly Fast. By Lilly Butler, Rector
of Bubbingworth in Essex.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. M DC XCI.

To the Right Honorable SR Tho. Pilkington, Lord Mayor of the City of London,
AND THE COURT of ALDERMEN.
My Lord,
I Know not any thing could move you to require the Printing this plain Sermon,
but a great affection to the design of it: Which I pray God increase in you
all, and make you signally instrumental in promoting that Reformation, wherein
the safety and happiness of our Country is so highly concerned. And if the
publishing of this discourse may confer but any little matter toward it,
whatever other defects may be found in it (especially after so kind and
favorable an acceptance from you) will not much concern

My Lord, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant, L. Butler.

Isaiah LVII 21. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.
THe Prophet toward the beginning of this Chapter, upbraideth the Jews with
their abominable wickedness and Idolatry; for which they were shortly to be
made Captives in a strange land. From whence, he tells them, they should in
vain expect to be delivered, by the Nations whose Gods they worshipped, and
with whose wickedness they had complied. V. 13. When thou criest let thy
companions deliver thee: but the wind shall carry them all away; vanity shall
take them. Nevertheless, if they should at length bethink themselves, in the
land whither they were carried captive, heartily bewail their sins, and turn
unto the Lord, they should again see Jerusalem in prosperity, and peace upon
Israel. But he that puts his trust in me, says God, shall possess the land,
and shall inherit my holy mountain. All things shall be made ready for a happy
return. V. 14. Cast ye up, cast ye up, take up the stumbling block out of the
way of my people. The high and lofty one will revive the humble and contrite
Spirits. v. 15. For I will not contend for ever, says the Lord, v. 16. neither
will I be always wroth. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and
smote him; I hid me and was wroth; I have seen his ways, v. 18. I have seen
them at length corrected and reformed, therefore I will heal him; I will lead
him also, and restore comforts to him, and to his mourners. Their mouths shall
be filled with Praise and Thanksgiving, for the restoration of their peace. I
create the Fruit of the Lips; Peace, Peace to him that is far off, and to him
that is near, says the Lord, and I will heal him. But if upon their return out
of Captivity, they should forget their Redeemer, and return to their former
wickedness; their Peace and Prosperity would soon be disturbed again. For says
the Prophet, the wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, which
he explaineth in the words of the Text, and confirms with the Testimony of
his God that sent him; there is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.

By the wicked in this place, we are chiefly to understand, a wicked Nation or
People, as appears plainly by the account I have given of the context. And by
peace, Prosperity and Happiness in general; according to the common use of use
of the word peace in the old Testament. The meaning of the words then may be
expressed in in this plain Proposition. That prevailing wickedness is most
certainly destructive of the prosperity and happiness of a People. In
discoursing upon which, I shall endeavor to do these Four things.

First, To clear and manifest the truth of this proposition.

Secondly, To show that we of this Nation, are very much concerned in the Truth
of it, and that it prophesies evil concerning us.

Thirdly, To show what is to be done by us, in order to the preventing this
evil. And

Fourthly, By some proper motives and argu- to persuade every one to do his own
part in it.

First, I shall endeavor to clear and manifest the Truth of this proposition:
That prevailing wickedness is most certainly destructive of the prosperity and
happiness of a people. This will be sufficiently manifest by the consideration
of these following things.

First, The abounding of iniquity is it self the the great unhappiness of a
People. So long as a Nation is distempered with vice, the head sick, and the
heart faint, full of wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores, as the Prophet
describes a People laden with iniquity, no outward Privileges or Advantages
can make it happy. If God should give us bread and flesh from Heaven, and be
always working miracles for us, a murmuring and discontented Spirit would still
make us miserable. The bondage of Egypt, and a deliverance from it, would be
equally grievous and uneasy to it. Tyranny and Oppression, Sedition and
Rebellion, Schism and Faction, are the names of great Judgments, as well as of
great Sins. Sensuality transformeth Men into the likeness of Beasts, and hatred
and malice of Devils: and what a wretched Society must such people make? Can a
People be happy, where they are continually envying and vexing, cheating and
defrauding, censuring and reviling, striving and quarrelling with one another,
where judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands afar off, where
truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter? Is not this the
character of a very unhappy, as well as of a very wicked People? We can hardly
mention any sin, but the common and constant practice of it, is not only likely
to procure, but is it self a great Judgment upon a Nation. It is therefore
mentioned as a heavy curse upon Israel, Ps. 81. 12. that God gave them up to
their own hearts lusts; and they walked in their own counsels. Oh that I had in
the wilderness, says the Prophet Jeremiah, a lodging place of wayfaring men,
that I might leave my people and go from them: for they be all adulterers, an
assembly of treacherous men. Jer. 9. 2. David also makes the same wish, Ps.
55. when he saw violence and strife in the City, deceit and guile in her
streets. The desolation and barrenness of a wilderness were a desirable refuge,
from the greater calamities of these sins.

Secondly, Sin does farther tend to make a Nation unhappy, by the natural
fruits and consequences of it. Is it not vice and passion that break the bands
of love and concord, the most necessary preservatives of public happiness?
From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, of your
lusts that war in your members? Jam. 4. 1. It is our Saviors own observation;
That a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. And from whence is it,
that a Church or Kingdom is divided into Sects and Factions, that some are of
Paul, and some of Apollos; is it not because they are carnal? Are not
combustions of States and Kingdoms, and all unhappy broils, the natural fruits
of pride and ambition? He that is of a proud heart stirs up strife, and Only
by pride, says Solomon, comes contention Prove. 28. 25. 13. 10: Is it not
natural for proud and ambitious spirits to do all they can to unsettle that
Government, which does not advance them according to their opinion of their own
merits; and to try by repeated changes and revolutions, to raise themselves to
their affected greatness? The love of money is the root of all evil, from
whence those evil practices do naturally spring, which are continually
disturbing the world, wasting and spoiling, confounding and ruining, the
Nations of it: Idleness and Luxury impoverish a Nation, and make it unable to
bear the charge of its own defense: Sensuality impaireth the understanding, and
enfeebleth the spirits of men, and makes them unfit for counsel or action; it
takes them off from all concern for the common good, and from all other care,
but for their own ease and pleasure; and makes them unwilling to part with
any, for the Public safety, for fear they should want it to consume upon their
lusts: Irreligion and Profaneness dissolve the strongest obligation, which is
that of Conscience, faithfully to observe those Laws, upon which all Societies
are founded and subsist. And if the Community suffer, through the rashness or
negligence, the unfaithfulness or treachery, of riotous, and lewd, and
Atheistical men, entrusted to manage the affairs of it; no one can think any
strange thing has happened. It would be very easy to show, of all particular
sins and vices, that they have a very ill influence upon Societies, and do
faturally tend to the great damage and dissolution on them. Certainly then the
condition of a wicked people must needs be most desperate, when they have
nothing else to secure them from Misery and Destruction, but an extraordinary
interposal of the Divine power and providence. For can we imagine that God will
always work miracles on the behalf of his enemies? and alter the natural
tendency of things, merely that the wicked may go unpunished? Will he still
refuse to avenge himself, when nothing more shall be required toward it, but
to stand still and suffer wickedness to overthrow the sinner? On the contrary

Thirdly, We have abundant reason to conclude, that the providence of God will
farther promote the unhappiness of a wicked people, and manifest it self in
severe and signal judgments upon them. For

First, The Honor of God is very much concerned in it. When a People have
generally corrupted their ways; when they that can hardly agree in any thing
else, can yet unanimously conspire, to break the Laws, and dare the Power and
Justice of God; if he should still keep silence, if such public affronts, such
combinations of Sinners do not move him to the execution of judgment upon them:
Men will be ready to conclude with those Zeph. 1. 12. That God does neither
good nor evil. He is therefore concerned for the honor of his providence, to
convince the world, that he is a God that judges in the Earth, and governs
the Nations of it, to arise and visit for these things, and to avenge himself
on such a Nation as this. Upon occasion of such high and notorious
provocations, such a general defection from God, even good men are ready to
expostulate with him, in the Language of Jehosaphat and David; O our God will thou not judge them? How long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked
triumph? And then, if ever, it seems necessary, for the God to whom vengeance
belongs to show himself, and to make his power and justice known, by the
judgments that he executes. These National judgments, are such public
manifestations of the Providence and Justice of God, as all the Neighboring
Countries cannot but observe; they are warnings and examples to all the World,
teaching all men to fear, proclaiming the name of God to all the ends of the
earth, and causing it to be said among the Nations, the Lord reigns. And
therefore there is abundant reason to expect them from a God that is so highly
concerned for the honor of his great name.

Secondly, God has expressly declared, that his Providence shall interpose in
promoting the happiness or misery of a People, according to their doings: That
this is the course, he is resolved to take with the Nations of the earth, to
pull down, or to build up, according as they persist in, or turn from their
evil ways. Jer 18. 7, 8, 9, 10. At what instant I shall speak concerning a
Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy
it: If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil: I will
repent of the evil I thought to do unto them. And at what instant, I shall
speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to build and to plant it:
If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then will I repent of the
good, wherewith I said I would benefit them. The Lord has a controversy with
the Nations: He will plead with all flesh, he will give them that are wicked to
the sword, says the Lord. Jer. 25. 31. And accordingly we find

Thirdly, That the Providence of God has always interposed in this manner,
that in all ages his judgments have followed the prevailing wickedness of a
Church or Nation. When God saw that the wickedness of man was great, and that
all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth, he sent an overwhelming deluge,
to cleanse it of its corrupt inhabitants. And by fire and brimstone from
heaven, consumed the proud and lustful Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha. What a
succession of dreadful plagues, did God send on the oppressing Egyptians? And
what terrible destruction was made of the Amorites, and all the Kingdoms of
Canaan, when at length their iniquities were become full? And all along the Old
Testament, we find the judgments of God, Famine or Pestilence, Captivity or the
Sword, continually following the growing wickedness of his People Israel. And
when at length they had killed the Prophets, and stoned them that were sent
unto them; when they would not hearken to the gracious invitations of the
Blessed Jesus, and the Son of God himself could not persuade them to repent,
the Lord brought their greatest fears upon them; The Romans came and took away
their place and and Nation. And when the conquering Romans themselves, had laid
aside that temperance and justice, by which they had been raised; and to their
other abominable sins had superadded their Blasphemies against God, and most
barbarous violence and cruelty to his people, erecting pillars to their
Emperors, as Trophies of their abolishing Christianity: Then did the Providence
of God manifest it self in many severe and signal judgments upon them. In the
reign of one Emperor; there was in Rome a most raging Famine; a Plague, of
which, we are told, there dyed in that City 2000 a day: Great multitudes were
slain in a Sedition; and a great part of the wealth of the City was consumed by
Fire from Heaven. And besides these under Commodus, there were many of the like
Judgments under their following Emperors until Constanstine. And when the
Christian Emperor at length fell into all manner of Vice and Wickedness, the
Goths and Vandals, and other rude and barbarous Nations, were let loose upon
it, and suddenly made most terrible havoc and destruction of it. But we need
not search into Ancient, or Foreign Chronicles, for instances of the wrath of
God punishing the sins of a provoking people. For if a long and bloody War
amongst our selves, and all the woeful effects of it; a wasting and devouring
Plague, and most dreadful and consuming Fires, may be reckoned as public
Judgments; the sins of this Age and Nation have not altogether gone unpunished.
This then has manifestly been the constant course of Gods providence, to
shower down his Judgments on a sinful people. And that we may rationally
conclude from hence, that it will be so still, will appear, if we consider
these two things.

First, That God is the same Wise, and Just, and Holy God, and Governor of the
world that ever he was. He is the Lord that changes not; and his Dominion
endures throughout all Generations. Are not his ways still equal? Will not the
Judge of all the world still do right? Is not his hatred of sin as great as
ever? and his inclination to punish it? Does he repent of his past severity, or
find cause to correct the wonted method of his providence? Does not the Lord
still see, or has he forsaken the earth? If God be still the Governor among
the Nations; If his providence be still directed by the same wisdom, and
holiness, and justice, we may safely conclude, that his dealing with sinful
nations, as to the substance of it, will be the same too? that because he has
not, therefore he will not, finally acquit a wicked and impenitent people; but
sooner or later, as he has always done, will visit their iniquities with Rods,
and their sins with Scourges.

Secondly, The Spirit of God in Scripture does use this very way of arguing
from former examples of Gods judgments. Jer. 25. 29. God does thus reason with
the Nations. He tells them, they shall drink the cup of his Fury: For, says
he, Lo, I begin to bring evil on the City which is called by my name, and
should ye be utterly unpunished? Do I punish them for their iniquities, and
shall I not punish you for yours? ye shall not be unpunished; for I will call
for a Sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, says the Lord of hosts.
After the same manner does St. Peter argue, 2 Pet. 2. 5. and the following
verses. If God spared not the old world, bringing in the flood upon the world
of the ungodly; And turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes, he
infers, That the Lord still knows how, that is, is still able and ready,
to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished; (...), that is,
To reserve the unjust being punished here, in some such remarkable manner, as
the Old World, Sodom and Gomorrha were, unto the day of Judgment, when they
shall receive their eternal doom and recompense. St. Paul in the 11th to the
Romans, shows the danger the Gentile Christians were in, from Gods severity
on the unbelieving Jews. Because of unbelief they were broken off; be not
high-minded but fear. For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed
lest he also spare not thee. Romans 11. 20, 21. He tells us also plainly, 1
Cor. 10. 11. That the judgments which God sent upon the Jews in the Wilderness,
happened unto them for examples, and are written for our admonition, upon whom
the ends of the world are come. To teach all Nations, to the end of the world,
to expect the like Judgments if they are sinners like them. If the case then of
a sinful people be thus desperate, if prevailing wickedness will thus certainly
make them unhappy; not only by it self, and the fruits that naturally spring
from it; but also by provoking the wrath and pulling down the judgments of God
upon them; Does it not greatly behove us in time to look about us, and to see
whether the clouds be not gathering, and the wrath of God ready to fall in most
horrible tempests upon us? I come therefore

Secondly, To show, That we of this Nation are very much concerned, in the
truth of the Proposition I have been now proving, and that it prophesies evil
concerning us. This will be sufficiently manifest, if we do but search and try
our ways, and impartially consider what great sinners we are. A meditation very
proper and seasonable at this time, now that we are met together to call our
sins to remembrance, and to humble our selves for them. Give me leave
therefore, to set some of them in order before you, and briefly to represent
the sinful state and condition of this our Nation.

And here I am entering upon a subject, will afford us equal matter, both of
wonder and of grief; of wonder, that there should be such and so much
wickedness practiced, where so pure and holy a Religion is professed; and of
grief too, that we should be these Offenders, and Englands sins the matter of
our astonishment. If a man should barely contemplate the purity of our
Religion, and the great stir we make about it, with what heat and zeal we
contend about some little matters relating to it, he might with reason enough
conclude, that we were the most religious and holy people upon earth: But if he
come once abroad, and look but with half an eye upon the lives and common
practices of men amongst us, he would soon find he was mistaken in his
conclusion, and that the most zealous pretenders to the most pure and holy
Religion, may be as corrupt and wicked, as those that have no true knowledge of
God in their Land. Are not Atheism and Infidelity openly avowed by our Heroic
Sinners, and some pretended Refiners of Wit and Reason amongst us? Who, if they
will allow him to be a Fool that says in his heart there is no God, it is
because he says it only in his heart, and declares it not with them in more
public and daring expressions. And amongst those that profess to know God, how
many in works deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and to every good
work reprobate? Blasphemies, Oaths, and Curses seem to be affected, as the
greatest Ornaments of Speech; in which men are as loud, as Baals Priests were
in their Prayers, and repeat them as often too, as if like them they were
afraid lest God should not hear; lest judgment should sleep, or their damnation
slumber. How many such walkers have we of whom St. Paul could not speak without
weeping; whose God is their belly, whose glory is in their shame, who
inordinately mind earthly things? Rioting and Drunkenness, Chambering and
Wantonness, are such general and public vices, that they can hardly now be
called the works of darkness; not that they better become the light now than
formerly, but those that commit them are less afraid of it: Fraud and cozening,
lying and injustice, are the common methods of pursuing the profits of this
world; and hardly ever any age was better skilled, or more practiced, in the
several arts of cheating and overreaching one another. Where is that
undissembled and hearty love, which our Lord has made the principal badge and
cognizance of his Disciples? How are we estranged and divided from one another?
And how jealous of all attempts for the uniting and reconciling of us? How
uncharitable are we in our censures, how bitter in our revilings, how merciless
and revengeful in our behavior one toward another? How is every thing that is
Sacred profaned by us? How great and scandalous are our neglects, how
irreverent and hypocritical our performances of the duties of Gods worship? How
full of iniquity our most holy things? I have not time to be more particular;
we are thus, and much more sinful, after all the various methods of heaven to
reform us. What could God have done more to his Vineyard, that he has not done
in it? We have had line upon line, and precept upon precept? the brightest
discoveries of our duty, and most frequent and earnest invitations to perform
it: But all this while God has stretched forth his hands to a disobedient and
gainsaying people. God has placed us in a fruitful and pleasant Land, and
given us all things richly to enjoy. We have had peace within our Walls, no
leading into Captivity, no just complaining in our streets; but have lived in
ease and quiet, whilst almost every corner of the World beside, has been
filled with violence, and rapine, and blood. How many, and how wonderful have
our deliverances been, from the secret conspiracies and the open violence of
our Romish Adversaries? Yea what Nation is there that has had God so nigh unto
them, for all we could call upon him for? But so prodigious has been our
Ingratitude, that we have frustrated the design of all this goodness which
should have led us to repentance, and the strongest Cords of the divine Love
have been too weak to draw us to our God; as if we had resolved to outdo the
miracles of his mercy, by a more miraculous Ingratitude. Thus have we requited
the Lord, O foolish people and unwise! God has sometimes used severer methods
with us and sent his judgments into our land, that from thence the inhabitants
might learn righteousness. But we have multiplied our transgressions whilst his
Rod has been upon our backs, and in the time of our distress have sinned yet
more against him. God has stricken us, but we have revolted more and more, and
have come out of the fire but more hardened and more unmalleable. If all this
then be a true, though not a full account of our wicked state, as I would to
God it were possible to prove the contrary, certainly put all together, and it
will make up the character of a most Prodigiously wicked, ungrateful and
incorrigible People. What abundant reason then have we to conclude,
notwithstanding all the great things God has lately done for us, and the most
hopeful appearances we now have, that for all this his anger is not turned away
from us, but his hand is stretched out still; and that er'e long, if we take
not due and timely care to prevent it, we may to our utter confusion,
experience what a fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God.
Methinks now the consideration of that sad and terrible abode our sins do make,
that fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation to devour us, they
so justly call for, should prick us all to the heart, and make us ready to cry
out with St. Peter's hearers, Acts. 2. Men and Brethren what shall we do? What
shall we do to be saved from these Calamities, to fly from this Wrath to come?
If this now be the Frame and Language of our Souls, then are we rightly
disposed, as they were, to hear our duty; and I would to God it might be with
as good success. And thus I come to the next thing I am to do, which is

Thirdly, To show what is to be done by us, for the preventing that evil our
sins threatens us with.

First, We should humble our selves before God, and sigh and cry for the
abominations are done in the midst of us. But Oh! what sighs, what sorrow, can
be great or loud enough for us? For us, who are not only to bewail the sins of
some few particular persons, but of a whole land that lies in wickedness; not
only some of the lowest rank, but the highest and most provoking abominations?
Certainly never any had greater reason than we have at this day, to break out
into that passionate wish of the Prophet Jeremiah, Oh that our heads were
waters, and our eyes fountains of tears, that we might weep day and night:
Because of the wickedness we have committed to provoke the Lord to anger. Did
our Blessed Lord weep over Jerusalem, that ungrateful City, when he considered
the greatness of her sins, and the nearness of her destruction; though he was
himself without sin, and no ways accessory to the provoking that wrath was
coming upon them? And can we look with dry eyes and unaffected hearts, on those
numerous transgressions we have all a share in, on those future judgments we
have so much reason to fear, and the best of us all have helped to deserve? God
forbid we should be thus insensible! O let us in time, we pretend to do it at
this time, humble our selves and God will exalt us; Let us mourn and God will
comfort us; He will give us beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and
the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; Let us offer unto God the
Sacrifices of broken and contrite hearts, and the High and lofty One will dwell
with us, revive and comfort us; Let us turn to him with weeping and fasting and
mourning, and even rent our hearts before him; for then, says the Prophet
Joel, Chap. 2. The Lord will be jealous for his people, and pity his land.

Secondly, To our sorrow and humiliation let us join our prayers, implore his
pardon, and deprecate the wrath of God. Let us take with us words, and turn to
the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all our iniquities and receive us
graciously; Let us beseech him with all that affection and importunity, which
becomes the importance of the suit, not to remember our offenses, not to take
vengeance of our sins, but to spare his people whom he has redeemed. Hearty
and fervent Prayer has a mighty prevailing power with God: The greatest
blessings are promised to it, and the hardest things have been effected by it:
It has opened and shut the windows of heaven, and restored departed souls to
their forsaken bodies: It defeated the malice of Haman, the wisdom and counsel
of Achitophel, and put to flight an army of a thousand thousand Ethiopians: It
has prevailed with God to revoke the judgments he has denounced, and to
deliver his people after he had declared he would deliver them no more. How
then should this encourage us to lift up our hearts with our hands to God in
the heavens; to embrace all opportunities of pouring out our supplications
before him, both in our closets, and our houses of prayer? To pray without
ceasing, with the utmost vigor of our affections; To cry mightily unto God, to
wrestle and not give over, till with Jacob we have prevailed, prevailed with
God and obtained his blessing?

Thirdly, We must add the reformation and amendment of our lives. Otherwise our
Humiliation will be mockery, and our Prayer sin. Our sins are the Achans, the
troublers of Israel; and were but these accursed things put away from amongst
us, we might then be confident, that God would be appeased and the Nation
flourish. It is to the wicked only that God says there is no peace. But the
work of righteousness, is peace, and the effect of Righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever. O then that we would all know, that in this our day we
would know the things that belong unto our peace: That every one of us would
bid an eternal farewell to his sins, in that passionate style of returning
Ephraim; What have we to do any more with you? Hence ye disturbers of our
peace, ye provokers of our God, and most treacherous underminers of the safety
and happiness, both of Church and State. Let us then resolve, and if we do it
not we have but dissembled with God in our approaches this day, Let us resolve
henceforward to engage with all our might, in bridling our passions, in curbing
our appetites, in mortifying our lusts, in pulling down the strong holds of
Satan in us, and in bringing nto captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. And thus fighting the good fight of Faith, we may as effectually
promote, the safety and honor of our Country, as if we had served in its
Fleets or Armies. This is the way to strengthen the hands of them that fight
for us, to send them most effectual relief and succor, to bring down the Lord
of hosts to go before them, the God of Israel to be their Rereward, to be a
wall of fire round about them; and the glory in the midst both of them and us.
O that my people had hearkened unto me, says God, and Israel had walked in my
ways: I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against
their adversaries. Ps. 81. 13, 14.

But is it not, may some object, an universal Reformation that must produce
these happy effects? To what purpose then will our personal and particular
Reformation serve? For the answering of this I shall proceed to the last thing
I am to do, which is

Fourthly, To endeavor by some proper motives to persuade every one to do his
own part in that; the general practice whereof is the only certain means, to
procure the favor and divert the judgments of God. To this end therefore let
us consider these following things.

First, That a General Reformation is nothing else, but the Reformation of all
Particulars, and if ever it be wrought amongst us, it must be the work of
particular persons, and the result of every one's doing his own part. Let us
not then stay for examples, but rather contend for the honor of being examples
to others. Let us strive who shall be first, and most active, in so noble a
design, in setting forward that work, wherein the Honor and Happiness of our
Country is so highly concerned. How great an influence might your examples have
upon this whole City? And how soon do the manners and fashions of that
overspread the Nation? You are therefore more concerned than others to begin
this great and blessed work; to cause your light so to shine before, and above
other men, that seeing your good works, they may be won by the charms of a
bright and illustrious virtue, to follow your steps, and to glorify your Father
which is in heaven. And this would advance your reputation, and perpetuate your
memories more than all the dignities of this world.

Secondly, Though by doing our own parts, we should not be able to do much
toward a General Reformation, yet we might make up such a number, for whose
sake God might spare and bless the whole Land. How ready was God to have spared
even Sodom it self, had there been but ten righteous persons found in it. He
did spare the City Zoar for the sake of Lot and the small company with him. A
single act of one single man staid the fury of a devouring Plague, and restored
health to the Congregation of Israel. Ps. 106. 30. Then stood up Phinehas, and
executed judgment; and so the plague was stayed. To which I may add that
gracious Proclamation we find published Jer. 5. 1. Run ye to and fro through
the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in the broad places
thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executes judgment and
seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. One faithful Magistrate executing
Judgment had saved that great City. How then should this encourage you to a
zealous and upright execution of the Resolution ye have made, Not to bear the
Sword in vain, but to make it a terror to evildoers: Thus avowedly to set
your selves to destroy the works of the Devil: To be hearty and courageous in
the cause of God and righteousness, in the midst of so crooked and perverse a
Nation; To contemn all the censures and reproaches the execution of justice and
judgment may expose you to? Who knows how far this might prevail with God? If
a few righteous men can yet save us, none so likely to do it, as such
Magistrates, by such heroic piety and virtue. There may be a time indeed when
the sins of a Nation are so ripe, that though Noah, Daniel and Job were in it,
they could not avert the judgments of God, yet consider Thirdly, That however
They may deliver themselves by their righteousness. Our personal reformation
may procure a refuge for us in the day of Gods wrath. Thus Noah escaped the
Deluge of waters, and Lot the flames of Sodom; and those that sighed and cried
for the abominations of Jerusalem, the fury of that destroying Angel, who went
through the midst of it. In what manner God does often deal with good men, when
his judgments are abroad in the earth, we have at large described in Ps. 91.
Thou shall not be afraid of the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flies
by day; nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness nor for the destruction
that wastes at noon day. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand
at thy right hand: but it shall not come nigh thee. If notwithstanding it
should seem good to the Divine Wisdom to involve us in the common calamity, yet
let us consider

Fourthly, That the conscience of our own personal reformation would be then a
most comfortable support to us. What a reviving consideration would it be, when
the judgments of God are upon us, that we are not the guilty causes of them;
that we have done our parts to prevent them, and and are clear from the blood
of all men? That even these things will work together for our good, because we
love God and keep his Commandments; That all these clouds cannot intercept the
light of Gods countenance, or hide his face or favor from us: that no
tribulation or distress; neiter (...) nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor
(...) able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord?

Lastly, Consider how unsuccessful soever our personal reformation may be in
promoting the public, or our own particular good here; it will not fail of a
great and glorious reward hereafter. For so an entrance shall be administered
unto us into that City, which has Foundations, whose builder and maker is God,
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Where we
shall be free from sin, and all the dreadful consequences of it: and when not
only the Cities and Nations of this world, but this world and time it self
shall be no more, we shall be still secure in the enjoyment of the most perfect
peace and happiness. To conclude then, I exhort and beseech you all, as you
regard the Honor and Preservation of your Country, your own present Good and
Safety, and the everlasting happiness of the Life to come; by all that is
valuable and dear to you, both in this and the other world; that you would no
longer delay that Reformation, in which all these things are so highly
concerned. O that there were such an heart in every one of us, to repent and
turn from all our transgressions, to fear God, and to keep his commandments
always, that it might be well with us and with our children for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

