Explanatory NOTES UPON A Mendacious LIBEL, CALLED Concubinage and Poligamy
DISPROVED;

Written by a nameless Author, in answer to a Book writ by J. B. as being a
Scurrilous LIBEL, as not fit to be styled an Answer. AS May appear, by a
Catalogue of Notorious and Villainous Lies, and Billingsgate Raileries, and
Dunghill Language, to be showed therein.

By J. B. B. D.

Mat. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto Dogs* neither cast ye your Pearls
before Swine; lest they trample them under their Feet, and turn again and rent
you.

Chap. 5.13. If the Salt has lost it savor, it is henceforth good for nothing,
but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of Men.

Rev. 21.8. But the fearful and Abominable, Whoremongers and Liars, shall have
their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone.

LONDON. Printed for the Author. And are to be sold by most Booksellers in
London and Westminster. School.

THE PREFACE.
COncubinage Disproved: And a Marriage of one Man with one Woman maintained;
together and at once, is a pretty sort of a Paradox, which R. Baldwin's
Champion undertakes to manage in his Pamphlet so entitled.

For without Concubinage, Marriage cannot be Essentially Consummated, and
Marriage without Concubinage, cannot generate: So as it is a Riddle not easy to
be resolved, how this nameless thing the Epicene Salisal Author came into the
World without Concubinage, and so by Consequence, without Marriage Consummated,
and by consequence by Whoredom, and that not in bed, but in the field, or on
the bare Floor, without lying together, by a Vagrant Seed sucked into the Womb
thorough an Hopsack.

Now Concubinage, claiming from Concubinatus, and from Concubo, means no more
naturally, and in plain English, but merely a lying together of two Bedfellows,
whether Children, Men, Women, or Man and Wife. But whether this Author of R.
Baldwin's was more Knave or Fool, I must leave it to be determined by them that
know him and his Wife; for one he must needs be, who asserts without any
distinction, That no Concubinage can be lawful, and by consequence, that no one
Man and his one only Wife, can lawfully Concubinate or lie together in bed,
which cannot possibly be true.

But supposing the Grand Jury of London, (who were unhappily drawn in by this
Anonimous Daemonides or Stolidides (choose you whether) who Published them, in
his Title Page, and in the Gazette of Monday, Feb. the 7th, how that they
presented John Burler for Printing and Publishing a wicked Pamphlet in
justification of Concubinage, which may become hurtful to diverse Families,
etc.) did understand the Concubinage thus justified, to be nothing else but the
same thing which is now a days known by the name of keeping a Mils (as this
nameless Varlet falsely suggests it is, in his Book written after the guise of
the old Serpent, with a purpose to deceive.) Be it known therefore, to the
Gentlemen of that Jury, and unto all the World, that the Author of that Book is
a Pestilent Deceiver, and an errand Slanderous Liar.

For the said J. B. in his Title Page, justifies none but such a Concubinage as
is first plainly lawful; so as is first all Concubinage in a natural sense in
its self, without unlawful mixtures, and all Concubinage in order unto
generation, so far as it is ased according to the prescript Forms mentioned in
God's word. And 2ly such also as is of Necessity, where Marriage according to
Law cannot conveniently or posibly be had: Under which Conditions, Miss
keeping, Whoredom and Adultery are utterly disclaimed and shut out. And as for
Poligamy there is not one word mentioned thereof, in the whole Tract: And as
for any matter of double Concubinage; as it was in use in times of holy-Writ,
this pretended Author, has spoken of it only so far, as to justify a single
Concubinage, in a Case of Necessity; and left it at the disposal of Authority
at their pleasure, to continue or restrain it. If these things be not thus, let
my little Book of the State of the Case be examined, and if one tittle be found
otherwise, let me bear the blame of the Jury, and this Railer. But be it true
as I have here asserted, then let the Jurymen condemn him that misled them. And
let this Daemonides be branded for a Scarrilous and Scandalous Liar; and let R.
Baldwin be noted for a Publisher of such Stuff.

Now be these things so; and are the Premises such, and at this rate, then
follows in Conclusion, That this malicious Scribler has shot at Rovers, and
written only against, Adultery, Fornication and Miss keeping, and yet has
condemned lawful Concubinage, and by Consequence sacred Marriage also, which
without Concubinage, can is no such thing. Whence follows that his whole
treatise called Concubinage disproved is nothing to the purpose. And besides it
is a Poetical sporting upon God's Word, and the holy Doctrines thereof, stuffed
with abundance of Railing Ribauldry, and Lies as may appear by what follows.
And what soever can be found of any weight by way of objection unto what I have
written of the lawfulness of Concubinage, shall be fully answered in a little
Tract by it self.

THE INTRODUCTION.
FAithful are the Wounds of a Friend. (says the Wiseman) And in truth they are
good, for they are like the Chastenings of the Lord, which are by no means to
be despised, (Pro. 3.11.) But the kiss's of an Enemy are dangerous, they are
earnest, but too eager to be trusted, (Chapter 27.6.) Had I trip'd in the least
Syllable, of what I had Published, how kindly would I have received the
correction of my friendly Reprover. But to be treated as a justifyer of
Poligamy, of which, I had not mentioned one word in favor thereof. And to be
proclaimed a friend of Whordom and Adultery, against which I have declared my
perfect abhorrency. I can liken to nothing nearer, then to the malicious Jewish
Pharisees, who slandered our Savior, (the most temperate man in the world) as a
glutton and a Winebibber ( Mat. 11.19.) For to be spightfully lash't in the
dark, by a man invisible, Daemonides, a child of the Devil the Father of Lies,
with suppository slanders, suborned as real truths: Feels like nothing so neat
as those envenomed wounds of him, who like a roaring Lion, walks a bout,
vagrantly wandering, and seeking to devour all that comes in his way, and
saying, he has no pike against him he never saw him, and yet however, whether
Friend or Foe, whether right or wrong, down with him. The truth is, so soon as
I saw the title Page of a secret Author, with R. Baldwin at bottom thereof, I
soon imagined what I had to do with; for this was the Publisher of that
Scandalous and malicious Book, intit^^ed The secret History of the Reigns of
King Charles the Second, and King James the Second, Printed in the year 90, and
nameless both of Author, Printer and Publisher; however, there I bought one, at
R. Baldwin's house, in the Old Bailey of his Wife, and saw Piles of them bound
up to be sold, and several of them sold off before my Face, which Book being
stuffed with invictives against two Kings, and filled with malicious Lies: Take a
taste of one or two of them, as follows. [ That the Lady Castlemain, seduced
from her Loyolty to her Husband, and enticed into the Arms of the happily
restored Prince: Which was not only Adultery, but Incest in the Lord's
Anointed; it being the opinion of several Persons, who had reason to know more
than others did, that she was his Sister by the Mothers side, as being begotten
by the E. of St. A. upon the Queens body, after the Death of C. the First.]
These are the very words in the Hist. p. 22, and are as false as Scandalous, or
that a Child begotten of the Queen, ( his resent Majesty's Grandmother, or
Mothers Mother, after the Death of C the first, on the 29th of May 1660, could
not be above eleven years of age current; and therefore not be ripe for Child
bearing. Another Story is annexed p. 23. of the same Coin, saying, of K.C. the
second, [ And having no less Adulterously begotten a Daughter upon the Lady
Wood, he joined her in holy Wedlock, to one of his Sons, whom he had begotten
after the same Legitimate manner, upon the body of the Duchess of Cleaveland.]
And this is another suggestion of Satan, as impossible to be proved true, as
the first was certainly false. And now from a nameless lying Author, published
by this through packed Publisher of Lies, is come forth another such a pack of
Lies, under pretense of an Answer to a small piece of Mine, with my name
thereto. Which how heartily I have performed according to the truth of the
Case, and the genuine sense of God's holy word, I humbly refer to the scarcher
of all Hearts, and the judgment of good Men, to be determined: But meeting with
this pretended Answer, utterly void of all solid matter, and stich'd up with
mere Lies and Railery: I can conceive no way so expeditious, to clear my
Garment of this vile wreches dirt cast upon them, then by taking off the Skum,
and the Dregs from off his stinking puddle, that it may appear when is made,
what an heap of filth and dung he has piled together, and what a small
spoonful of clear matter shall appear left behind.

A Centilogy of downright LIES.
A Lie consists of three Conditions 1st. It must be something that is false. 2d
The Author must know it to be so, and 3d he must utter it with a purpose to
deceive. There may be therefore falsehoods that are not lies, as are all things
spoken ignorantly, and for want of better knowledge, a Man thinking he speaks
true, when it is not so; yet when a Man does so rashly and spightfully, and
with a purpose to deceive. In many cases such a falsehood may be tantamount
unto the worst of lies. And because I cannot have any true measure of this
nameless Authors knowledge, I shall muster up all lies and falsehoods in the
same scrol.

Lie 1. That I have been at a great deal of pains to write an Apology for the
modish practice of keeping a Miss. (Epist. Ded. p. 1.) It may appear upon
search, that in my whole tract, I have not wrote one syllable of keeping a
Miss, or of any thing tantamount thereto, that I have Apoligised for.

2. That in my ( p. 34.) I have generously done it, as it were commending it
from the pulpit as sacred and holy. (p. 2. Epist. D.) It is apparent to be
seen, that in that page or else where, no such thing is to be found.

3. That Miss and Concubine are Synonimous Words. (Epist. ded. p. 3.) This is
false, for that Concubinage is properly no more but a lying together of two in
a bed, and lawful Concubinage is either the same with Marriage, or if out of,
or besides the Marriage bed, is no farther justified by me, then God's word
does justify. But the Miss being a new word, is counted significant of a woman
kept merely for pleasure and wantonness, and not as a lawful Concubine, for the
sake of issue.

4. That I have vindicated the liberty of Poligamy. (p. 3. Epi. de.) There is
not one word of Poligamy vindicated in all my Book; but contrarily an exception
that I own it not.

5. That I make every Man a judge in his own Case, by adjudging Martha Perkins
to be an unjust Desertrice (p. 3. Ep. d.) I adjudged her not at all, but she by
her desertion adjudged both me and her self.

6. That I took Mary Tompkins into her bed. (p. 3. Ep. D.) It was not her bed,
after she had wilfully, and obstinately forsaken it by desertion.

7. That The Concubinages of the Patriarchs was a disputed practice, not
founded upon any positive command. (p. 3. E. D.) This is false, holy-writ
saying the contrary ( Exodus 21.10, 11, and Hos. 3.1, 2, 3.)

8. That God's making use of Children of Concubinage to be instruments of his
Glory, is no satisfaction to Reason or Conscience without a Revelation. (p. 4.
E. D.) This false, for that God's acceptance is good proof without Revelation.

9. That An holy Seed in Malachy insinuates strongly, that Concubinage is
unholy. p. 4. E. D. This false, because the son of Hagar, and sons of Keturah
by Abraham, and the sons of Bilhah and Zibpah by Jacob, were all of them of the
Seed of Concubinage, and yet were holy.

10. That there is not the least vestige of Concubinage allowed in the new
Testiment. (p. 5. E. D.) This false, as appears in our Saviors Case.

11. That I have blasphemously reflected upon the conception and birth of our
Savior (p. 5. E. D.) This false, for that he cannot name one word that I have
spoken thereof, contrary to the holy Text.

12. That I am guilty of profane Allusions about the same. (p. 5. E. D.) No
such to be proved.

13. That My Notions appear very foul and horrid (p. 5. E. D.) And yet no such
foul or horridness can be made appear.

14. That no better advice can be given me, than that of the Apostle to Simon
Magus ( Act. 8.22.) Repent of this they wickedness, etc (p. 5. E. D.) And yet
he can name nothing of me like the case of Simon Magus.

15. That Had I taken the Apostles advice to Timothy, I would never have been
guilty of such a practice, or advanced such principles. (p. 5. E. D.) And yet
no practice nor principles can be charged against me contrary to that advice of
the Apostle.

16. That Concubinage had its rise from Cain's Family. (p. 6. E. D.) This
false, Poligamy had so, but not lawful Concubinage.

17. That My Wife says she deserted me because I had got my Maid with Child
aforehand. (p. 6. E. D.) This is a Lie, for that the Woman had deserted above
one year before any such charge; And she named not the time of her desertion.

18. That I make no scruple of breaking my marriage Vows to God and my Wife (p.
8, 9. e. d.) This false, He might have seen and read my vindication, that I was
not betrothed to her, and nothing is proved to the contrary, except the
Allegation in her Libel; which of its self is no proof. And had I made such a
vow, yet the marriage Vows are limited according to God's ordinances. And by
her Desertion and breach of God's ordinance, that vow is dissolved, according
to God's word, (1 Cor. 7.15.)

19. That I am aleud Clergyman, that there is no way left me to heal my
Reputation, but to confess and foresake. (p. 7. E. D.) This a vilainous
slander, and a lie, charging me with a supposition, without any color or
ground of proof.

20. That He had no pick against me. (p. 7. E. D. this false, for that he has
so much reproached me without a cause. And if he has not personal acquaintance
with me, so much the more shame for him, to belie a Man he knows not. But it
may be justly supposed in his Case, that he is hired to defame me. And an
hireling takes up a Pick against a Man for Money.

21. That I have taken upon me to be judge in mine own case (p. 8. E. D.) An
old lie new vaumpt. See lie 5.

22. That I am a very partial Casuist, and give the Reader cause to suspect my
sincerity, because of allowing my wives Desertion to be a Cause of Divorce, and
that it shall not be so in the cause of the Government. (p. 8. E. D.) This
doubly false, first, For that not I but my pretended wife divorced her self,
and holy writ makes the allowance. And secondly, As to the Government, I have
not meddled at all in their case.

23. That I propose an allowance of Poligamy. There Is not one word of it in all
my writing but the contrary.

24. That My wife accuses me of committing Adultery with my Maid, before she
left me. (p. 11. E. D.) An old lie new vaump'd up: See lie the 17.

25. That I have given offense to the Church of God. (p. 11. E. D.) No such
thing proved, every common Liar is no Church of God.

26. The 4th lie repeated over again.

27. That if liberty be granted to have more than one wife, a man may take as
many as he pleases (p. 12. E. D.) This false, for that God who allows to take
another wife, ( Exo. 2.10.) yet forbids multiplicity, (Deuteronomy. 17.17.)

28. That my want of Application to the Magistrate, either in Church or State;
was a suspicious token of inordinate Love (p. 11. E. D.) And yet no such
Application required by the word of God.

29. That if my project had took place, our Nobility and Gentry should have
Cennels of Concubines, as they have now of Hounds p. 12. E. D. A false
Consequence, and a belying my project.

30. That I have written unadvisedly upon this Head. (p. 13. E. D.) And yet can
he find nothing in my writing savouring thereof.

31. That after Forty years I had lived with my wife, I went into my Maids bed
p. 13. E. D. This is perfectly invented, or wilfully mistook.

32. That my loose Book has done a world of mischief in the Nation (p. 14. E.
D.) This a double lie. First, for he can charge no guilt of looseness against
my Book rightly understood. And secondly, he cannot testify one dram of
mischief it has done, except by accident.

33. That I can expect no Pardon of God or his Church, except I make my
Recantation as public as my Crime (p. 14. E. D.) I shall suppose this fellow
wants employment; and my Recantation would do him a kindness, to make way for
him, for such another job, in order to be hired again to ruffle with somebody
else, for another such a bribe.

34. His title is a very lie, for as much as he has rashly Condemned
Concubinage, as an unlawful, wicked and destructive thing to diverse Families,
and that without distinction; as if all Concubinages were so without exception:
Insomuch, as by his own determination, this pettiful wrech cannot lie with his
own wife, or with another bedfellow, but he will be guilty of that wickedness,
which is as bad as Adulery or Incest, which is called Concubinage. And in this
humor he begins his lurry, saying.

35. That Had a Pamphlet of this nature been written by an avowed Debauchee, or
a Playhouse Beau, it had been no matter of surprise. But to have any thing
printed in defense of Concubinage by a Bachelor of Divinity, and a Minister of
the Church of England, may justly astonish us. Is not this smart and pretty
(good Reader) is it not neatly reflected upon a B. D. or a Church of England
Man? Yes, truly a Cow keeper, or a smutty sweep Chimny, would get such a lesson
without Book, and would talk of it. to his Wife and Boys, as a very pretty
conceit. But when the story shall come among the School boys, one says, and
another answers saying, Concubinage, what is that? answers Concubinatus? Our
Master has taught us to construe it [a lying together of any two in bed] why
then Dick Baldwin and Dun. Harris, we cannot go to bed together, but all the
Boys in School will be astonished at us! For all manner of Concubinage is an
horrible thing, as bad as Adultery, which I never heard before; and I wonder
how I came honestly into the World without being a Bastard. But this Author
allows of one Man and one Woman only in Marriage, but does not say how they
must Concubinate, Concubinage being such an heinous thing, that a B. D. may not
at all justify it, without being shamed out of the world. And yet one Man and
his own woman can not lie together, but they will be guilty of Concubinage: Why
sure Dick this is a strange doctrine, and I fear me your Dadee has published a
flam.

36. That a Minister of the Reformed Church should do so gross a thing, as to
justify Concubinage (and that without any distinction) is altogether
unsufferable (p. 1.) And yet is the thing unsufferable as he calls it, a most
harmless matter, whether we take it as is naturally meant or as I justify it,
which is nothing else but such a Concubinage as may be called lawful; I would
fain therefore know of R. Baldwin whether this Daemonides his Scribler be more
fool or Knave, for he must be one.

37. That Concubinage is one of the defects of depraved nature. (p. 2.) That is
lawful Concubinage is so, for I justify no other.

38. That I am an Advocate of Whoring (p. 2.) And yet no such thing can be
proved against me, or is there any ground for any such thing in my writings,
but the contrary; and I offered my compurgative Oath, that I never used it in
my life.

39. That He joins cordially with the Grand Jury in their presentment, that to
publish a justification of Concubinage, is a wicked thing, and destructive to
diverse Families (p. 3.) And yet this doubty Champion for the Jury (p. 33.)
turns Cat in the Pond, and cries, who doubts that some marriages or rather
Concubinages may be good in the sight of God, which are not so according to the
laws of some Kings and Countries. Thus he confutes and gives himself the lie
(in p. 33. against what he said in p. 3.)

30. That In the latter end of my Pamphlet, I set up for a general Concubinage
(p. 3.) That Is false, for I mentioned only a lawful Concubinage, disowning the
unlawful. He belies my writings.

41. That I confessed I went in unto my Maid out of a principle of burning
Lust. (p. 5.) I alleged indeed, that I had not the gift of Continence; and
that my Wife having wilfuly left me, I must either marry or burn. Which burning
this Doemonides wantonly styles a burning lust but I have showed the true sense
of the word in its place.

42, An old lie new vaump'd (p. 5.) see lie 17.

43. That it does not appear by any thing I have said, that my marriage with
Mary Tomkins was any other then Congressus Furtivus (p. 5.) This false, for
that I said, I married her according to the rule in Holy-writ.

44. That my allegation, That Abraham went in unto Keturah in Sarahs time is
false (p. 5.) And yet the text calls her his Concubine.

45. That to plead a necessity for more wives than one, is to arraign the
wisdom of God (p. 8.) And yet God allows of more Concubines called wives in a
sense ( Exodus 21.10)

46. That I misquoted Scripture, as glad of Figleaves to cover my nakedness (p.
6.) This was spoken of the case of Keturah, which either as the Fool he did
not, or as the Knave he would not understand.

47. That I am a loose Casuist, for saying that Incontinency in its self is no
Sin, unless expressed in unlawful uses (p. 11.) Yet this is true that I said,
from St. Paul's words (1 Cor. 7, 9.) and whereas he allegeth, that the
Incontinent are Sinners (2 Timothy 3.3.) that is, only in the unlawful use thereof.

48. That I choose rather to make provision for the Flesh, because I went in
unto my Maid according to Scripture wedlock (p. 12.) He might as well say,
every one who marries a wife does so, for what I did, was God's rule in my case
prescribed; and marriage is the same.

49. That I could not be satisfied to break the Commandment my self, but taught
others so to do, (p. 12.) And yet he cannot prove that I have done either the
one or the other.

50. That Incontinence implies the height of passion, because the word (...)
signifies they who can keep no bounds. (p. 12, 13) This false, for the true
original word is (...) and signifies Impotentia, or want of power, or one who
has not St. Paul's ability, to keep under his body. Here therefore this fellow
is either Fool or Knave again. Let him examine his new Testament, and his
Lexicon a little better.

51. That Incontinency and burning are Synonimus terms (in 1 Cor. 7.9,) for
there burning is opposed to continuency (p. 13.) This is false, for
incontinency in that text is one that cannot contain, impotens one not able;
and fearing to burn, or to be pained with desire, as with a burning fire, is
advised to marry, in order to avoid that danger. If this be not true, let me go
for the dunce: And if this fellow wants understanding, let him enquire of wiser
men.

52. That a man may divorce his Wife for his own Crime, when he pleases (Mat.
5.32.) and alleges I should have said, excess of the marriage bed instead of
Fornication (p. 14.) This is false, and a sporting with Scripture, whereas the
Excess he mentions is Fornication; but not such as to divorce a wife for a
mutual fault between man and wife.

53. That I own my self guilty of incontinence to a scandalous excess, 1st, for
not restraining Concupisence for one year at least, 2d, for not using Fasting
and Prayer. 3. for not bringing my body under. 4. for not foreseeing the
scandal would follow of going in unto my Maid.
All which things he cannot prove otherwise, but that I have done so: And yet
concludes without the premises proved: whence this is a great lie. (p. 16, 17,
18.) and.

54. is yet greater; That My case has all imaginable circumstances to make the
world believe, I was acted by downright Lust in this matter (p. 18.) For that
without proof he concludes falsely and maliciously.

55. That being engaged I would defend my practice answerable to the infamous
John of Leyden (p. 18.) This Daemonides having entered into a road of lying,
knows not where to stop.

56. That because I own my wife and Sons did accuse me of former suspicions,
which he calls Incontinencies, and that their accusation might be true (p. 18.)
This is villainous, I having protested the contrary, and they not charging so
much in the Libel.

57. That I arraigned the justice of Authority without making trial by an
Application. This false, for that I arraigned not their Justice: I said it was
doubtful, and made no Application because no Law absolutely required such a
thing to be done.

58. The old lie new vaumpt again (p. 23.) See lie 17.

59. The matter so scandalous, it ought to have been examined by Judges
competent: And yet no Law to requires it.

60. That Mr Butler 's wife was no unbeliever (p. 24) She was so according to
(1 Timothy 5.8.) An Infidel or worse.

61. That my wife accuses me of defiling her Bed (p. 25) the old lie, see lie
17.

62 The same lie over again (p, 28.) See lie 17.

63 That my Quotations from Divines are all either wrested, or nothing to my
purpose, or against me (p. 27) And yet upon this examination he can find
neither one nor the other, nor the third. All of them declaring a dissolution
of marriage by desertion, which is all that I quoted them for.

64 The old lie over again (p. 29) See lie 17.

65 That the passage of Ambrose favors me not a whit (p. 29) and yet it speaks
full to the purpose.

66 That Bucanus is against me (p. 31) Let any Reader judge thereof.

67 That to live in Concubinage with a wife, is an Irish sort of English (p. 32)

68 That in the Quotation of Polanus, mine own evidence is turned against me
(p. 29.) This very false.

69 That Musculus assigning Desertion as a cause of Divorce, is nothing to my
purpose (p. 29) And yet I quoted it for no other purpose, but what he confesses
he says.

70 That Mr Butler wickedly and falsely translated the place in Titus, in
Bucanus (p, 30) And yet I translated it not, but as in the text and applied it
not, but as Bucanus has done.

71 That the profound politics of our Concubinary Casuist, are directly
contrary to the procedure of the Almighty himself (p. 31) A senseless lie.

72 That there can be no such thing as a lawful Concubinage (p, 31,) And yet
man and wife cannot lie together without it.

73 That there is no text mentioned, that proves the lawfulness of taking
additional wives, (p, 36) This disproved over and over a very lie.

74 That the Prophet Malachy is of opinion contrary to Mr Butler (p, 38) He
belies the Prophet as well as my self.

75 That though God imposes a Law upon us, he imposes none upon himself (p, 40)
This is a sort of Blasphemy reflecting upon God, who is in all things a law
unto himself, requiring us to be holy as he is holy (1 Pet, 1, 15,)

76 That the holy Scriptures call such Bastards ( Deuteronomy, 23 2) Quivis extra
legitimum Conjugiumnatus (p, 42) This lie is very blasphemous comprehending
also our Savior, who was born out of marriage.

77 That though the Scripture does not call them so, yet really they were so (p
42) This reflects as bad, and is as false.

78 That the lawfulness of Concubinage is not demonstrable by Scripture (p,
47,) And yet it is proved both out of the old and new Testament.

79 That our author runs into contradictions, and writes impertinently (p, 51)
And yet neither one nor the other is in that page, and what he calls so is
nothing like so, let it be read and wisemen judge.

80 That it was not lawful for David to marry his Father in law's wife (p, 56)
And yet it is not prohibited.

81 That the word wives (2 Samuel, 12, 8) may be meant of Saul 's daughters which
David had to wife (p, 57) And Yet David never had but one of his daughters,
Wherefore, had not this Daemonides been a thorough packed impudent liar, he
would never have started and suggested for truth, such a manifest untruth.

82 That he has made it plain that the Apostle speaks of the marriage bed only
(in Heb, 13, 4) p, 52) and yet his Comment is such, as cannot bare a
Grammatical Construction, nor stand in with the Jewish customs then in use.

83 That the answer of our Savior about divorce, that Moses suffered the Jews
to put away their wives, because of their hardness of their Hearts, is
sufficient to put an end to all those cavils from the old Testaments instances
about Concubinage (p, 54) And yet there is a plain difference in the cases,
that being allowed merely for hardness of heart by Moses, and this by God
himself, without any such because, and is an apparent non sequitur,

84 That my instance of the conception of our Savior, is vilainous and
blasphemous (p, 58) And yet cannot show wherein: this is the very practice of
the Jews, who charged Christ with blasphemy; yet could not show wherein he was
guilty ( Joh: 10: 33, etc,)

85 That God formed our Savior in the womb, without a mediate generation (p:
58) This is against the Nikene and Athanasian Creed:

86 That my impetuous Lust makes me fly in the Face of God, himself (p: 58) And
yet can he prove no such Lust, nor flying in the Face, but railes like the
Devil, when the Angel Michael said to him [The Lord rebuke thee:]

87 That our Saviors saying to the woman of Samaria [He whom thou now have is
not thy Husband] was a severe check to her, And yet this is nothing like a
check in the Case (p: 59)

88 That she had five Husbands from whom she divorced her self (p: 59) This is
a mere invention:

89 That the Apostle in (Heb: 13, 4) condemns by Whoremongers, all use of women
out of married state (p: 61) This is a lie of blasphemous Consequence:

90 That the stories of Constantius Chlorus Constantine, etc, are Foreign to my
purpose (p: 61) And yet are instances of children born out of lawful marriage,
and that notwithstanding were in primitive times all owned as legitimate, and
not base births.

91 That Valentinian the Emperor was passionate unto madness (p: 63) A very lie
of his own invention.

92 That my passion for Concubinage, does so effectually blind me, that I
cannot see an inch from my nose (p: 66) And yet I have seen so far as to find
out all these lies, out of his scurrilous pamphlet.

93 That my proposal for Concubinage as a remedy against whoredom, is wholly
ridiculous (p: 73) And yet I had it from God's word.

94 That no thinking Man, but will be easily convinced that the natural result
of Concubinage must needs be Whoredom (p: 77) then must follow unavoidably,
that the holy Abraham was an Whoremaster; and that this Author was a Bastard,
because not born without Concubinage of his Father with his Mother.

95 That he supposed Mr Butler sensible of his impoverishment by his Poligamy,
the usual reward of whoredom (p: 83) And yet can he find no footsteps of any
such thing as Poligamy or Whoredom by Mr Butler:

96 That I act more like a preacher of Sodom, then of Righteousness (p: 83) Let
wisemen judge, and not common Liars, whose tongues are no slanders:

97 That Ovid was my brother Letcher (p 84) Ovid was a Poet; and Poets may lie
by Authority: I am a brother to no such.

98 That he has to do with an affronted Author (p: 85) Liars may well be such;
but not so of the belied.

99 That I threw dirt upon our Saviors Conception and birth (p 86) If any but
a Liar had said it, I should have blushed.

100 That my Questions in (p: 32) are unpardonable (p: 86) he means p: 30 of
mine, for my tract is mispaged,

101 That my thought is so extravagant, and impious, as if one given up of God
to the lusts of mine own heart (p: 87) He sees it seems a mote in mine eye, and
yet has a beam in his own:

102 A Man who is one flesh with his wife, cannot be so in a lawful sense with
another (p: 93) it must be not in a natural sense, that a man can be so with
his wife, but in a mystical; and if so, then why not with two, or ten, as well
as with one; is the Man a blockhead? or is he Knavish?

103 That I have falsely alleged the customs of the primitive Church to defend
my practice (p: 95) but he cannot say wherein, I have so falsified.

104 That I am guilty of Blasphemy (p: 87 So the Jews falsely said of our
Savior; when there was not one syllable to be produced that was like it.

Such are his Centiloquy of Lies, and Falsehoods; which together with his bald
Billingsgate ribauldry, and the abundance of his nothing to purpose, and false
Consequences, like Chaff winnowed from the Wheat; What will all his scribbling
amount unto? And yet be there any the least force of sense, in any of his
babble, that looks like matter of proof, I have comprehended it by way
objection, in another tract which I am printing, by way of Explanation of that
Concubinage which I justify, occasioned partly by this bauling babbler, and
especially for satisfaction of grand jury men, and all rational Gentlemen that
shall enquire thereof; not reckoning his frothy stuff worthy of the name of an
answer to my little tract, or deserving the honor of a Reply: But rather to be
dealt with as the Scythians did by their presumptuous Servants, whom their
wives had received into bed in their absence: The proud Servants in warlike
manner appeared in the field against their masters returned home from Foreign
Conquests: But the brave Masters not once drawing a Sword, showed only their
hand whips, which the dastardly Servants no sooner saw, but their hearts were
in their Mouths, and they all took to their heels: Whence I reckon, that no
dispute can be fitter answer for a common liar, then to post up his lies, for
which School boys were wont to be well whipped; whence remains no more to meddle
with his dunghill froth, savonly to take notice in a word or two of his
villainous and causeless Raileries.

In his Epist. Dedi. (p. 5) Sir, says he, this Notion appears to me so very
foul and horrid, that I think there can be no better advice given you, than
that of the Apostle to Simon Magus (Act 23.22) Repent therefore of this thy
wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven
thee, etc, And again in (p. 7) of the same, he further rails, saying [ Then as
to the opinion that the world entertains of you, it cannot be supposed to be
favorable: The worst of men abominate a lewd Clergy man and you confess your
self to be accounted such, there is no way left but to confess and forsake.
Much after this rate the villainous Bradshaw the belwether of the high court of
Justice, after he had railed on the most innocent King Charles the first, as a
Tyrant, a Traitor, a Murderer, very gravely gave him much such Council as this
puny wrech gives me (see the trial) And after this rate at Billingsgate, the
veriest whores usually cry whore first, and will strain their throats, saying
thou Thief, thou Whore, thouSlut, and the most modest commonly carry away the
greatest load of this sort of dirt. What I am of a blasphemer, foul, horrid, a
Sorcerer, or a lewd Clergy man, they who know me will hardly believe such a
blackmouth'd wretch; and they who know me not will as uneasily believe the
words of a man of darkness, who is ashamed of his name. Our Savior in such a
case, though the High Priest charged him with blasphemy, and rent his clothes in
contempt of him, and the People scorned him, and spit on him; yet like a dumb
sheep before the shearers answered not a word (Mat. 26.65, 66, 67. Chapter 27 14)
And it matters not that I say any more, for that the searcher of all hearts
knows the truth, of all cases of railery and will revenge it: Shall a man turn
again and talk to a Dog that barks, or kick again, when an Ass begins and kicks
first? He compares me to an avowed Debauchee, a play house Beau (p 1) And
upbraids me with titillution, and making provision for the flesh, and want of
prayer, etc. unto which of the Saints will thou turn says he (p: 11, 12) Even
so Eliphaz the Temanite upbraided Job Chapter (5, 1 and 154) But he belied him; he
charge me with down right Lust, and compares me with John of Leyden (p 18)
And thus the hired Orator Tertullus said of St Paul, we have found this man
(said he) a pestilent Fellow, and a seditious man and a great ringleader of
Schism (Act 24 5) and yet all he said was mere stuff, and downright lies: And
now what shall I say to these things? Should I answer him in his own language,
wisemen would say, of me, that I am like him, and yet something must be said
says the wissman lest he become wise in his own conceit (pro: 26 4, 5) thus
have I said enough, as to his railery; next of the abundance of his scribble
about nothing to the purpose:

The promised design in the Title pa: was 1st to disprove Concubinage and
Poligamy:

2ly To assert a Divine Instistution of Marriage between one Man and one Woman
only:

3ly To answer a Book writ by John Butler B.D. for which he was presented, And
4ly to prove that his Book was worth one Shilling. But little or mere nothing
of any of these 4 things has he performed. Now upon these four subjects he
has scribled over in his Book and Ep: 110 pages, or near 7 Sheets of paper,
whereof most of it consists in idle wast of Paper, to little or no purpose; as
fit for no man's use but Soap boilers, Tobaccosellers, Grocers and such like
people as have more use for the paper, than the writing therein: For first, I
have collected thereout, a Centiloquy of lies, which together with the
circumstances thereto appertaining, may take up three parts in four of his
Book: Now out of all these besure, can be collected no proof for any of his
four Subjects: Had they been printed together, as a little book I have seen
when I was a School Boy, called an hundred merry tales, perhaps it might have
fetched a penny a Book, but what is one penny toward twelve? And yet these are
filthy lies, and not worth the name of merry tales: Or had they come forth as
Aesop's Fables, as so many imposible stories, but yet containing moral truths,
it might have saved his leaves from lighting Tobacco at least; or had it
savored of Ovid's Metamorphosis, as a monstrous and bouncing Romance, yet
graced with poetical story; it might have pleased some people who have nothing
else to do but to read now and then a line, and so sit down and laugh. But
these are the worst sort of lies, like the Devils stories, told for truth, on
purpose to deceive: Now the fourth part of the Book besides the lies, is much
of it taken up in Raileries And no People of fashion care to hear scoulding
excepting the trade drivers at Billingsgate, but then the mischief is, the book
is not calculated for that Meridian, and yet we have sometimes 3 or 4 pages
together of nothing but Railery. the lies also are all for the most part stufft
with railery, so as Railery is the greatest lecture in the whole book: Now
besides all this, we have much of Tautology, and non sequitur's taking up a
deal of room, and besides all these we meet with many pages together of
rambling discourse, of no use at all but to stop bottles, as particularly from
68 to the end is of very small use, excepting that the Bear took a pleasure to
lick her own Whelps: I here say the Authors name is Salt: But if so, it has
lost its savor; and they say too, it is of the Epicene Gender, both He and
She, in good time*

FINIS.

