A SERIOUS ADVICE TO THE CITIZENS OF LONDON, By some MINISTERS of the GOSPEL in
the said CITY: Upon occasion of the HORRID MURDER And DREADFUL DEATH OF
NATHANIEL BUTLER, An high Malefactor
Beloved in Christ,
AS we thought it a great duty lying upon us, before the execution of the
sentence of death upon Nathaniel Butler to lay out our selves to the utmost for
the promoting of his spiritual and eternal good; in frequent praying with him,
or for him; in endeavoring to convince him of the superlative greatness of his
sins, and in spreading the freeness of the grace of God in Christ before him,
according to the penitential workings, we observed in him. So (having done our
duty to him; (who is dead under the stroke of justice) and as is hoped with
some success too through the grace of God, for which we bless him) we humbly
judge there is a further duty incumbent upon us, unto you the inhabitants of
this famous City, who have been spectators of this Tragedy, in a serious
recommending of this providence to you and the duty which it calls for.

Psalm. 9 16. The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes. And surely
this latter Age (though an Age full of sin) has not set before you a more
dreadful instance of man's sinfulness, and Gods justice (though in the end
sweetened much with mercy) then that which in and upon this notorious Malefa^tor
has been laid before your observation. And therefore we cannot here be silent,
but must take this advantage with all humility and affection to your souls
good, plainly to open our hearts to you.

By some (we know before hand) we shall be slighted and censured as men too
busy, and may be, as men too credulous; but in the presence of God we can say,
our aim is public good and the discharge of our consciences, and therefore we
are not discouraged.

And we are not wholly without hope, but that some benefit may be reaped from
these few lines, which here with all sincerity we do present upon that late
providence which has been before you. That providence we say, which like the
Cloud is on one side very dark, on the other side bright; very dark as to the
man's sin, but bright as to Gods mercy nnto him, as is believed.

It Is the daily and inward grief of our spirits, God knows it, that our Ministry
is so successeless, that we see so little fruit of the word preached by us,
that in a City where there is such plain and powerful preaching, such horrid
sins should be committed:

This is a lamentation and shall be for a lamentation. But possibly some secure
sinners may be a little startled and awakened by this terrible judicial hand of
God; and so a word setting in with this providence may be more effectual then
many in an ordinance. We cannot but comply with the will of God in the use of
all means for the furtherance of your salvation. And oh! that God would so
bless this dispensation that you all may hear and fear and sin no more.

Touching the sad occasion, we will not enlarge upon that: the heinous murder,
the abominable uncleanness, the wicked theft, of which Not: Butler was guilty
(of the former but once, which we speak not by way of extenuation; for that is
too much, of the two latter very often) as also the shamefulness and
dreadfulness of his death: these we pass over, as being very well known to all
of you, Neither shall we interest our selves in any narrative of the workings
of God upon his heart, during his imprisonment, and at his execution; (though
herein we could speak much as being (for the most of us) very often with him in
this time, and narrow observers of him.) Nor shall we expatiate upon some of
those great truths of the Gospel, which this famous instance does lead us to;
Namely that sometimes it pleases God in the sovereignty and prerogative of his
grace to ceaze upon the greatest sinners; and out of the coursest rubbish to
erect the monuments of his unlimited mercy. 1 Timothy 1. 16. The Lord does
sometimes take the vilest wretches, and hangs them out as patterns of his
infinite love that the freeness of his grace may be admired, and the greatest
of sinners may be encouraged; but still in the way of Faith and Repentance, we
do not, we dare not limit the Grace of God, as to exclude this Notorious and
Bloody sinner from it; nay we have good hope, that through the infinite Mercy
of the Father, and the All-sufficient Merits of the Son, he is accepted to
eternal Life. Indeed, when we consider the horribleness of his sin, the
greatness of his joy, after a short humiliation (yet deep and through we hope)
we easily conjecture, that some will question both the prudence of any
publication, and the truth of his Conversion. But we will meddle with neither
of these, leaving men to jude of the former, and God alone (who searches and
knows the heart) to judge of the latter.

Waving therefore all these things, our only design and business in this
application, is to press upon you (the inhabitants of this City) to some of
whom we are more nearly related in our respective Charges) the several duties,
which do naturally result from this Providence.

We would exhort you in the first place, To be thankful to God for his
Restraining Grace; which though it be short of his Renewing Grace, yet it is with
all thankfulness to be valued: Oh! bless the Lord, who keeps you from those
sins which this poor Wretch was guilty of, that you are not Adulterers,
Thieves, nay, Murderers and Malefactors, to be punished by the Judge; this is
the Lords mercy. 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes you to differ from others? Have not you
the same Natures? Have not you the Seed and Spawn of all wickedness in you? And
should God leave you to the baseness of your own hellish hearts, would not you
also run to all Excess of sin, and that with Greediness too? When you read over
this sad Story, we beseech you lay your hands upon your hearts, and say, What a
mercy is it, I was neither the Murderer nor the Murdered!

We desire you to mourn over the crying sins that are to be found amongst us.
Oh! the Scarlet sins that swarm in London, even in London! Swearing,
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Profanation of the Lords Day, Contempt of the Gospel,
and of the Ministry thereof; nay, even Blood-guiltiness is to be found amongst
us! Should not your Souls, like the Soul of Righteous Lot, be vexed within you
for these things, 2 Pet. 2. 7? Should you not all come up to be Ezekiel's
mourners, in the remembrance of them, Ezekiel. 9. 4? Especially, considering that
these things are done in times of Reformation, and in a place of Vision, even
in London, where the Light of the Gospel shines so gloriously; where the Word
is Preached so plentifully and powerfully, even there these abominations are to
be found. Will you not lay them to heart?

And what reason have you to admire the patience of God to this City? It Is a
wonder London is not made as Sodom, that desolation does not seize upon your
houses, that you are not all swept away with the Bee^ome of sudden
destruction, that you are not hung upon the Gibbet as Spectacles of Gods
vengeance to all the Nations round about! What? so much provocation, and yet
the City to stand! Oh the Patience and Long-suffering of God! Doubtless, if God
had not a Romnant amongst you, who seek him daily, and fear his Name, you had
been laid desolate long before now. Isa. 9.

We need not from hence to stir you up to submit to Government, and to bless
God that you live in a place where Laws are Executed. What a Chaos? what a
Wilderness of wild Beasts should we be, if Malefactors were not punished? What
Confusion, Cruelty, Barbarousness, would overspread all, if by wholesome Laws,
and the care of good Magistrates in the Execution of them, we had not some
Boundaries set to the Lusts of men? whether would the heart of man run, if
there were not some reins upon it? It Is sad the Law of God will not keep men
from sin, but seeing it will not, it is mercy we have the Laws of Man. Many are
afraid of the Gallows, which have no sense of Hell.

This great Sinner is represented to you as an eminent instance of the Grace of
God, and so we hope he was. It Is very necessary therefore, we should here insert
a Caveat against the abusing of this Grace of God. How apt are we with the
Spider to such Poison, where with the Be we should suck Honey? How many will
be apt from hence to encourage themselves in sin, and to say, Let us sin, that
Grace may abound, Romans 6 1. Or, let us sin, for Grace will abound. Man is not
more prone to any thing then to catch at eminent Acts of Grace, and to make
that Fuel to his Lust, which God intended only to be Food to his Faith. And
never was there any age wherein there was more of this Spirit of Presumption,
then this wherein we live; insomuch, that upon this very account, some of us
were very inclinable to think, That 'twas better to have the story of this man
suppressed then published. But since providence has so ordered it that it does
see the Light, we cannot but annex to it an Antidote against presuming.
Sinners, do not pervert this Grace of God; God lets you have it, to keep you
off from the rock of despair, not that you should run upon the rock of
presumption. Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. If you sin you may have mercy, but if you
presume to sin, can you then expect mercy? Grace rejected may yet save you
(though that will cost you dear) but oh tremble to abuse the grace of God to
encourage you in sins!

God sometimes gives some rare instances of his grace to notorious sinners that
none may de pair, but he is very choice in these that none may presume. It Is
true, upon repentance the greatest sinner shall find mercy, but how do you
know, that God will give you repentance? How many are in the same condemnation
that this offender was, that die without any such work upon them? we
affectionately beseech you and warn you, not to turn this grace of God into
wantonness.

These things we hint in general; More particularly we shall address our selves
to you in the several capacities wherein you stand.

You the Right honorable Magistrates of the City, with all submission, and yet
with all holdness we exhort you to do your duty. It Is nor enough for you to
punish sin when it is before you, but you are to endeavor the preventing of it,
you see what is the sad fruit of Alehouses, Whore-houses, and such places, we
hope your zeal will yet continue, nay be heightened in the suppressing of them.
Down with them, Down with them, spare them not; they are the Devils Shops, and
let him have no Free-Trade amongst us: If you will, none shall have so many
Customers as he. How many Laborers drink that away at these houses, which
should maintain their wives and children with bread? How are the youth of this
City debauched at them? where they have their Gaming, Cheating, Whoring; and
what not? Oh let your Reformation be severe and throughout in this particular!
But herein blessed be God, we have great cause as well to commend as quicken the
zeal of many. We heartily wish that those who have power in the Suburbs of the
City, would be as active in the restraining of sin as you are; that those
places and persons which you will not endure in the City (the naming of which
would foul our pen) might not be held up and harbored there; otherwise it will
be small advantage to smother Whores out of one Hive, when they have another
ready to receive them.

We hear and fear it is too true that Priests and Jesuits (those Romish Locusts)
do swarm amongst us in the City and Suburbs: We beseech you for the sake of
Jesus Christ, and for love to the Gospel, to put forth your power to the utmost
for the discovering and suppressing of them: And the rather, because they and
their party are so bold, as to intrude themselves upon prisoners condemned to
die, to pervert them from the true Religion, (for this attempt they were bold
to make upon N. B. before he was executed.)

We should also speak to our selves, and to our reverend Brethren in the
Ministry. Does not this providence speak something to us? Should we not from
hence be stirred up in our several congregations, more vigorusly to reprove
sin, and to deter men from sin? Whither will sinners go, if we let them alone?
Let our preaching be lively, quick, powerful, by Gods blessing, it may be a
means to prevent these abominable practices; However let us do this and then let
our hearers do what they will, their blood shall be required at their own
hands. Ezech. 3. 18, 19. We shall be free from it. Let us beat down
drunkenness. Adultery, etc. and such scandalous sins; and while we labor to
preach down unbelief, let us take heed that presumption and gross sins do not
break in upon us with a mighty breach.

Should we enlarge upon these things, we should be tedious. Our principal
intendment was to speak a word to you, the people and Citizens of the place
which we shall dispatch with all plainness and brevity. And here we will only
take the liberty of advising you in the Notion of Governors and Governed.

You that are Governors, (we mean Governors of families) give us leave to set
in with this providence, and to stir you up, to make more conscience of the
Family Duties and engagements, that lie upon you, in reference to your children
and Servants. Probably (if things be not misrepresented) had there been a
conscientious discharge of these duties in the Family, where this young man
lived, he had never come to this sad end. But we had rather awaken then
censure; Was not that a brave resolution of Joshua? I and my house will serve
the Lord. Josh. 24. 15. Gen 18. 9. Can you have a better Evidence of sincerity
toward God, then a faithful coming up to relative and Family Duties? Do not
parents that send up their children to you, put a great trust into your hands?
Are not their children dearer to them then all their outward comforts, and
shall they miscarry under you for want of care? Will not their blood be
required at your hands, if they perish through your neglect? will it not be sad
to have children and servanns to rise up in judgment against you and to bring
in evidence at the great tribunal of Christ? Lord my Father never minded me!
Lord my master never regarded me, I might sin, he never reproved me, I might go
to hell, it was all one to him, will not this be sad? will not this be sweet to
you, when you come to die to be able to say, Lord I have walked in my house
with a perfect heart? Psalm. 101. 2. Have you no love to religion, to propagate
it, and to provide for it is flourishing when you are dead and gone? Does not
your neglect of family duties make all the endeavors of our godly magistrates,
and of godly ministers to be ineffectual and frustraineous? God has put it
into their hearts to do good, but it is but little, they can do in public,
because you are so remiss in private. And it is the desire of our souls to beat
down sin but we groan under the sense of sad disappointment, and this is one
reason of it, what we do at the Church is undone by you again in your Families;
No setting on the word, no praying over the word etc. Oh that these things
might be as so many spurs in your sides, to quicken you to family duties.

Set up prayer in your Families; There Is a curse pronouned upon the Families,
that do not call upon God. The Lord be mercisul to the thousands of Families in
the City, where there is scarce a prayer by the master of the family, from year
to year. How can such hope for the blessing of God to be upon them, who, though
he gives mercy freely, yet he will be sought unto for it? Ezekiel. 36. 37. How can
such look for Gods bounty, who deny him his worship? Does not prayer procure
all your Family-comforts, and sanctify all your family-comforts? Morning and
Evening call upon God; and call in your servants, let them not want the benefit
of prayer; 'twil be poor to feed their bodies, and to starve their souls. If
you eat together, by all means pray together.

Catechize your children and servants; instruct them in the fundamentals of
religion; would you keep them from error in the Head, from looseness in the
life, make conscience of this duty. How excellent, how necessary, how
profitable is this ordinance, and yet how sadly is it neglected, we may in a
great measure blame you for the many Heretics, and erroneous persons, with
whom we swarm in these days.

Read and open the Scrptures to them, but do this with all humility and
sobriety, or else there will be danger. These are the Magazine, the Treasury of
all knowledge, able to make you and yours wise to Salvation; Let the word of
Christ dwell richly in you; and in all that belong to you

See that they frequent the public Ordinances let them follow you to the house
of God, not out of state, but in love to their souls; and when they are there,
see they keep there, that they do not run out again to Alehouses and Taverns
(as too many do, to our grief and your shame be it spoken) when a public
Ordinance is ended, call them to an account see what they remember, wherein
they profit, how they relish the word; this is to do good indeed to their
souls.

Keep them to strict observance of the Lord's Day; you will not let them trifle
away your days, then you will hold them to their work; Oh! let them not trifle
away the Lords day. Why do your children and servants stand gazeing at your
doors upon the Sabbath? Call them in, put them upon, reading wholesome books, and
other exercises which are proper to the day; be not partakers of their sin.

What ever liberty you grant them at other times, hold them to a close
sanctification of the Sabbath. And spend this day with them, in prayer,
repetition, singing of Psalms; This is to make your Families as so many little
Churches of Jesus Christ. How little conscience do the generality of you make
of Sabbath-duty; we might sadly bemoan this before the Lord. For your selves
you can make that day which is a day for Physic for the soul, to be the Day
for Physic for the Body; you cannot spare time all the week long, you will take
it upon the Lords day. And for your children and servants, let them walk in the
Field, play in the streets, sleep in their beds, or drink in Taverns. it is all
one to you! Will God bear this from you? Certainly, this will be bitterness in
the end.

Do not indulge your servants in idleness. that is the bane of youth, the
Devils inlet to all temptations.

An idle person is like tinder that will take every spark that falls upon it,
let them be out of employment, it is a thousand to one, but presently they are
in some sin. And yet those that know how to use their Liberty, let them have it
sometimes for lawful recreations, but this we leave to your prudence.

In the pursuit of your own pleasures and conveniences have a care of your
Families; Many of you go to your Country houses (we condemn you not for it)
but what becomes of your servants? As Eliab said to David, with whom have you
left those few sheep in the wildrnesse? Reverend Mr. Stork an eminent Preacher
in thi^ City was wont to make this matter of much complaint.
Whilst you are in your pleasant gardens gratifying your selves in your
creature-enjoyments, who takes care of them that are left behind to pray with
them, to instruct them, to see they sanctify the Sabbath; the health of some
Masters bodies is the ruin of their servants souls.

Set them in all things a good example, if they see you can strain in
defrauding others, they will easily come to strain in the defrauding of you; let
them see you fear to sin and that will be an awe upon their spirits against sin.

Take your Apprentices out of religious Families in the Country; Many of you
are punished with vexatious servants, you may thank your selves for it; you
take your Apprentices by the pound, not by good education, who will give most,
not who will deserve most, and you smart for it afterward.

But how do these Heads swell upon our hands, though we do but name them! These
are some of the things which we should present to the serious consideration of
you, who are Governors of Families; and the Lord make them useful to you.

In particular, it is of great use to prevent much wickedness to look to the
keys and doors of your houses and to have them in your own custody not in your
servants that so an occasion of sinning may be cut off from those that seek
such occasions as most fit for their pernicious designs, keep up Discipline, or
rather restore it again; How is it fallen in these times, how is it almost lost
amongst us in the City; The reins which your predecessors held with a very
strict hand, are very loose in yours; many of your servants will do what they
list, and you let them alone; we do very much lament the low ebb of Discipline
and Government and judge that to be one Cause of the many disorders which are
among us; we heartily wish it may be restored in Church, in State, in Families,
if this be wanting, all things run up to strange confusion.

A Word to the Youth and Apprentices of this City, and we have done. Oh that
you would hear us now, least you mourn at the last, and say, How have we hated
instruction, and our hearts despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of
our Teachers, nor inclined our ear to them that instructed us. This Great
Offender was one of your Rank, had he taken the advice of Gods Word, his sin
had not been so great, nor his punishment so terrible. Of all, we fear, our
counsel to you will be the most successless; Youth is rash, inconsiderate,
vain, proud, but sometime or other you will remember what we say.

Take heed of lesser sins. Little sins will make way for greater sins; if you
sip of sin, you will be drunk of it at last. How modest is sin at first, but when
it is gratified, it grows impudent. This poor man lately executed, first he
began to game, then to steal, then to Whore, and then to Murder.

Be careful of your company: associate with them that fear God; say unto them
that are vain and wicked, Depart from us, for we will keep the Commandments of
God, Psalm. 119. 115. Bad company is the way to corrupt and spoil you: Can a man
touch pitch, and not be defiled?

Read the Scriptures much; by them you must stand or fall to all eternity; when
we walk by you in your Shops, we see many have their Shop-Book in their hands,
but few have the Bible in their hands; the Shop-Book is open, but the Bible is
shut.

Entertain high thoughts of Holiness and holy men: The froth of your wits runs
out too often in jeering godliness; but take heed, tha^^ not a thing to be
dealt withal. Many of you count sin to be gallantry, and Religion but a low and
disgraceful thing. God convince you of your folly.

Frequent Public Ordinances, especially upon the Lords day, because you have
not opportunity so to do upon the week days. You Will find more comfort in the
Word and Prayer* then in all your youthful delights.

Keep the Sabbath; You have six days, let God have one; can he have less? God
out of special respects to servants, has instituted and sanctified this day.
How can you hope to keep an everlasting Sabbath in heaven, if this Sabbath on
earth be profaned by you. Many go to Tiburn lamenting the profanation of the
Lords day, as that which ushered in all their wickedness.

Every day spend some time in private prayer; it is but rising a little the
earlyer, and going to bed a little the later; you shall never be the worse for
that time you spend in the Service of God.

Be subject and obedient to your Masters; study how to please them; bear with
their passionate infirmities: Do not purloyn but show all good fidelity, that
the doctrine of God our Savior may be adorned, Tit. 2. 9, 10. Be diligent in
your Callings; if you be idle, Satan will get an advantage. The sitting bird is
easily shot, and the standing water gathers filth.

Love those that curb you, and restrain you in ways of sin; they are your best
friends: it is better to be held in, then to have a wicked liberty; it is better
to have lust restrained then satisfied. Be not angry with those who cannot see
you damn your souls, and let you alone.

Enter upon the ways of God betimes, the sooner the better: Shall the devil
have the best draught, and shall God be put off with the Lees and Dregs Eccl.
12. 1.

Live always as in Gods sight, and know, if you sin, God will certainly find
you out one time or other. Alas how many ways has God to bring the most
hidden works of darkness to light; sometimes by startling men's own consciences
to an accusation of themselves, sometimes by awakening some of their accomplices
to the discovery of the rest. If you sin together, you shall smart together.
Let this sad example never be forgotten by you for this: Those that were
Confederates in sin, are made instruments and occasions of misery each to
other. Look not upon sin in the pleasure of it, but in the danger of it: The
Wine sparkles in the cup, but 'twill be poison in the belly. Fear the strokes
of God more then the strokes of man What Is a fetter, a dungeon, a gallows to
hell fire? Mortify a spirit of pride Never such pride amongst the youth of the
City as now; What vanity in apparel, what superciliousness in carriage, what
contempt of Authority? Oh, be clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5. 5. Give not way
to imaginary, speculative heart sins; Murder in the heart, will soon be Murder
in the hand; uncleanness allowed in the thoughts, will come to bodily
uncleanness at the last. Keep Satan at a distance, if he get in, he will be too
hard for you.

To sum up all: A dreadful spectacle of Gods Justice, and of the fruit of sin,
has been lately set before you, we beseech you in the Bowels of Jesus Christ,
break off from all your sinful ways by repentance; One is smitten that many
may fear; He Is a warning to you, take heed lest you be made a warning unto
others. If you would avoid his end, walk not in his sins; as secure as you are,
if you will allow your selves in that which is evil, you do not know whither
the devil will carry you in a way of sin, or to what God will bring you in a way
of punishment Stand in aw therefore and sin not. Flee youthful lusts, Ps. 4. 4.
2 Timothy 2. 22. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor
10. 12. Every day pray that God will keep you from and strengthen you against
temptation: Say not, it is not possible I should ever be so vile as this
Malefactor was; Alas, if God leave you you will be as bad as he. Blessed is the
man that fears always. Prove. 28. 14. In all things so carry your selves
according to the rule of the Word, that you may neither fall into the hands of
men, nor into the hands of God, which is far the most dreadful. It Is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10. 31.

That Governors and Governed may th^^ discharge their duties shall be the great
design of our Minstrie by Gods assistance, and our constant prayer at the
Throne of Grace.

September. 11. 1657. Edmund Calamy. Arthur Iackson. James Nalton. Tho. Iacomb.
Robert Hutchison. Thomas White. Thomas Parson. Thomas Doelittle. Simeon Ash.
Thomas Case. Will. Tayto Roger Drake. Geo. Griffith. Matthew Poole. Dan.
Batcheler.


FINIS.

