A SERMON Preached at St. Mary-le-Bow, TO THE SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of
Manners, April 5. 1697.

By LILLY BVTLER Minister of St. Mary Aldermanbury.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1697. Price 4 d.

TO THE SOCIETIES FOR Reformation of MANNERS In the Cities of London and
Westminster.
I Have yielded to your Request for the Publishing of this Sermon, though I
cannot but expect to undergo some unfavourable Censures for it. The Profane
and Professed Enemies of that Cause it pleads, will undoubtedly, if it come in
their way, be very liberal of their silly Scoffs, and foul Reproaches: But such
Dirt is not worthy of any other regard, but to be despised and trampled on. I
am only concerned for the Censures of some better Men, who perhaps, through
some false Representations of you and your Proceedings, may condemn that
encouragement I have given to your Zeal and Undertakings. I shall therefore
take this opportunity to acquaint them, that, after very curious inquiries into
these matters, and a deliberate consulting with my own Conscience, I thought it
highly became me to speak, what I have here Published. They that were Invested
with the Legislative Power, did judge it very necessary to make diverse Laws, for
the exposing some Common and Scandalous Sinners, to shame and punishment. And
our late Gracious Queen, of Blessed Memory, was pleased to give her particular
Injunction, to those whose proper Business it was, to put these Laws in
execution. Blessed be God, we have some Magistrates, who are very ready to
discharge their Duty in this matter. But they cannot exercise that Power, is
given them by God and the King, of making the Sword in their Hands an effectual
Terror to evil doers, without evidence and conviction. And for the procuring of
these, it lies upon Private Persons to assist them. If therefore any Good be to
be done, by the execution of Laws, they are in a great Measure answerable for
it, if it be not effected.

There is need of a great deal of Zeal for God and Religion, to give Men the
courage to engage heartily in a work, which must Expose them to such great
Expenses, such severe Censures, such bitter Revilings, and such mighty
Opposition, as they, who have been employed in prosecuting this affair, have
had abundant Experience of. Wherefore, having undertaken to preach upon this
Occasion, I endeavored to speak something in Vindication, and for the further
encouragement of your Zeal in so good a Thing. But knowing very well, that
Zeal, in the best Matters, may easily transport men beyond what is fit, and
really serviceable to the End it would promote, I thought it my Duty to give
you some Cautions and Directions for the Management of it. And I hope this part
of my discourse was not the least acceptable to you. Thus far also, I believe,
I may promise for you, that, if any Good Men will be so kind, as to add their
Advice for the due and effectual ordering of your endeavors, for the reforming
or restraining the abominable Vices of the Age, you will thankfully accept and
readily follow it. And, I conceive, it will not become any Men, rashly to
condemn your Proceedings in so good a design, till they are well assured, that
your Methods are faulty, and their better Counsels are rejected.

It is certainly a good thing you profess to be Zealously affected in, and
therefore so far your Zeal must be good too. But your great care should be that
it may be as good in all other Circumstances, as it is in respect of its End
and Object: That it be not Biassed by any partial respects, or led out of its
way by any rash or indiscreet Counsels; that it be always attended with a holy
and irreproveable Conversation, and adorned with the greatest Modesty and
Humility. This would be the most Effectual course, to put to Silence the
Ignorance of Foolish, and the Malice of Wicked Men; and to engage the Affection
and Assistance of all Good Men. And I hope, these are not so Inconsiderable a
party, as to be easily overcome in their united endeavors for God and Religon,
whilst they have the Laws of the Land, both to defend themselves, and to oppose
their Enemies with. A Frown, or a hard Word, are generally the worst things we
have to Fear. Where then is our love to God or our Country, if we have not
Courage enough, in a Cause wherein they are so much concerned, to bear up
against such weak, contemptible Assaults? Oh! that we might but see all sorts
of good Men, Magistrates, Ministers and others, all conspiring together to make
one Bold and vigorous Effort, for the suppressing those public and scandalous
Vices, which cry so loud to Heaven against us. We could have little cause to
Despair of the Good Success of such a truly Religious Association. I am glad to
understand there is such a hopeful prospect of it, from that great addition of
new Bodies of Constables and Housekeepers and others, who, within a few Months
past, have united together for the discharge of their Oaths and Consciences in
this particular; and from the great Encouragement they have from the Government
of this City. And I hope it will please God, to dispose the hearts of our
Magistrates, in other parts of this Kingdom, so to consider the Oaths they have
taken, and the account they must give to God, of the exercise of that Power and
Authority they are invested with; that they may not dare to suffer any private
Considerations, to hold their hands from that execution of Laws, wherein the
glory of God and the public Good are so much concerned. We know the Terror of
the Lord, and therefore cannot but speak, and with the greatest Zeal and
Compassion, endeavor to persuade Men, to a faithful performance of those
Duties, which are of such mighty Importance to us all, both with respect to our
present and everlasting Happiness.

You have the Honor to lead in this Noble Design, and if you resolutely and
wisely Proceed in your endeavors for the accomplishing of it, you may
Reasonably hope to provoke others by your Zeal and Success, to join their
Heads, and Hearts, and Hands with you. However you may be sure, that God will
not forget your Works of Faith, and labors of Love, and patience of Hope; but
render unto you according to the Zeal, and Integrity, and Constancy of your
endeavors for him. Cast not away therefore your confidence, which has so
great a recompense of reward. Deal courageously, and the Lord will be with the
Good; If not to render your Attempts successful, yet certainly to support and
comfort you in them, and to Bless and Reward you for them. That you may happily
experience the presence of God with you, for all these good ends and purposes,
is the hearty Prayer of,

Your affectionate Friend and Servant LILLY BUTLER.

Gal. iv. 18. It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing.
THE design of our assembling together at this time, and in this manner, is to
vindicate and encourage the most zealous endeavors to reform the Vices of the
Age, and particularly, by helping forward the execution of our good Laws upon
evil Men, upon notorious and scandalous Transgressors. I shall therefore
consider, how much such Practices as these are Warranted and Recommended to us,
by that general account St. Paul gives of the proper Objects of our Zeal, and
the Excellency of it when it has respect to such Objects, in the words of the
Text, It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing.

That I may make this Discourse then as Serviceable as I can to the End for
which it is intended, I shall do these following things.

First. I shall show, That endeavoring, in our several places, to reform the
corrupt Manners of the Age we live in, is a good work, and therefore proper
matter to be zealous in.

Secondly. I shall show, That to help forward the execution of Penal Laws, upon
notorious and scandalous Sinners, is a good work, and therefore also proper
matter to be zealous in.

Thirdly. I shall show, What it is to be zealously affected in these or any
good things.

Fourthly. I shall show, What are to be the qualifications of our Zeal in these
things, or what cautions are to be given to them that are thus zealously
affected.

Fifthly. I shall answer some Objections against our being thus zealously
affected in these matters. And

Lastly. I shall direct to some proper Considerations, for the affecting our
hearts with Zeal in these good things.

First. I am to show, That endeavoring in our several places, to reform the
corrupt Manners of the Age we live in, is a good work, and therefore proper
matter to be zealous in. It is endeavoring to do those things, which best
become, and most behove us to do; by which the most excellent purposes are
served, and the highest obligations answered; and therefore it must be one of
the best works we can be engaged in.

First. It is endeavoring to advance the honor of God, which indeed ought to
be the end of all our endeavors. It is the end for which we have our being;
for which all our Time, and all our Powers, and Faculties were given us. And
what can be done more for the Honor of God, than reforming the lives of Men?
When Men are reformed, then they proclaim, not only with their Lips but in
their Lives, their acknowledgment of his Sovereign Majesty and Authority, of
his most excellent Perfections, of the Goodness and Equity of his Laws, of the
Wisdom and Justice of his Dispensations: Then they reverence his Name, and fear
his Power, and love his Goodness, and trust in his Promises, and give him that
veneration and worship is due to him: Then they show forth his Virtues, and
manifest the Power of his Grace; and, by the continual exercise of Love and
Charity, do cause abundant Thanksgivings unto God. This is Honoring of God
indeed, of God our Maker and Preserver, our greatest Friend and Benefactor, of
our infinitely great and good God. What better employment then can we have,
more our Duty or more our Interest, than endeavoring to increase the Number of
those by whom he is thus Glorified? How can we Love God, in any sense, with all
our Heart, and with all our Mind, and with all our Strength, if we do not
prosecute such Designs, with the utmost warmth and vigor of all our Faculties?

Secondly. This is endeavoring to advance the Honor and Interest of
Christianity. And surely this is always good, but was never more necessary than
Now. What can adorn the Doctrine of our God and Savior, like the Holy Lives of
its Professors? How would the Truth and Excellence, the Power and Efficacy of
our Religion be Demonstrated, when it subdued the unruly Passions, mortified
the strongest Lusts, conquered the most urgent Temptations, extirpated the most
inveterate Habits of Sin, and adorned us with all the Beauties of a Christian
conversation? Who could forbear to love, and admire, and acknowledge the
Divinity of that Revelation, which brought forth such excellent Fruit; so
worthy of God, so good and Profitable unto Men? Not all the Arguments of
Atheists and Infidels, have done that Mischief to Christianity, as the lewd and
dissolute Lives of its Professors. And we can never hope to see it recover the
Reputation it has lost, and overcome the powerful Opposition is now made
against it, till we have better Lives to plead for it. What then can more
deserve our Zeal, than the promoting that Reformation, which is so necessary
and so prevailing a Means, to vindicate the Truth and Honor of that Religion,
our Blessed Lord and Savior came down from Heaven to Reveal, and died upon the
Cross to bear Witness to?

Thirdly. This is endeavoring, in the best, and most effectual manner we can,
to promote the Public good of our Country. It is from our scandalous Vices,
that most of our public Calamities Spring, in a Natural way, and by these that
the Wrath of God is provoked. And how can we do better Service to our Country,
than by concurring to stop that raging Pestilence of Sin, which is ready to
overspread the Land; and to carry Infection, and Death, and Misery into every
corner of it; to set our selves in the gap, to keep out that inundation of
Wrath which is breaking in upon us; to help to restore that Righteousness which
Exalts a Nation, which is the Honor and Safety of a People; which endears them
to God, unites them amongst themselves, banishes those Vices to which public
mischiefs and grievances are owing, and makes every Man a Hearty Friend to his
Neighbor and the common good? What employment then can better deserve our
Zeal, than endeavoring that Reformation of the lives of Men, which would more
conduce to make us a flourishing and happy People, than all other our wisest
Counsels, our strongest Armies, and our most liberal expense of Treasure and
Blood?

Fourthly. It is endeavoring to promote the particular good of our Brethren,
in every valuable respect. It is endeavoring to propagate that Godliness,
which is profitable unto all things, having the Promise of the Life that now
is, and of that which is to come. It is endeavoring to reclaim Men from those
sinful Lusts and practices, which impair their Health, and wast their Estates,
and blemish their Reputation, and wound their Consciences, and War against
their Souls, and sink them down into everlasting Perdition. It is endeavoring
to restore Men to the favor and likeness of God; to bring them into the
Peaceable and Pleasant Paths of Righteousness; to rescue them from the Bondage
of Corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; to secure to them a
comfortable Life, a hopeful Death, and a blessed Immortality. Certainly such
Generous, such Charitable, such Beneficial endeavors, cannot but be exceeding
good and worthy of our utmost Zeal and Vigor. Thus much may suffice to show,
the Goodness of our Endeavors in general, for reforming the evil Lives of Men.
I proceed now,

Secondly. To show, That to help forward the execution of Penal Laws, upon
notorious and scandalous Sinners, is a good Work, and therefore also proper
matter to be zealous in. This will be manifest if we consider,

First. How much the execution of Penal Laws, would conduce to that Reformation
of Manners, which, I have already showed, so eminently promotes the Honor of
God, the Interest of Christianity, the Welfare of our Country, and the present
and eternal Good and Happiness of Men. It must needs be a great Discouragement
to Vice, to see it continually exposing Men to Shame and Punishment; to see Men
of Honor and Authority employed against it. Piety and Virtue must needs gather
Strength and Boldness, when the Sword of Justice defends them, and chastises
the Enemies of them: When Wickedness is forced to hide its Head, and to creep
into Corners, for Fear of it. The Habits of Sin will lose their strength, when
they are restrained from exercise; and it cannot spread its Infection so wide,
when the Examples of it are not suffered to be Common, Public, or Secure; when
it is forced out of current use and Fashion: When Men cannot combine, in such
Numbers, for the practice and Countenance of it, to aid and hearten one another
in it. The sins of the Nation then would certainly be less in Number, less
Scandalous, and less Provoking. If the execution of Laws could effect no more
than this, yet God would be nothing so much dishonored, nor our Religion
disgraced, nor the Nation in Danger of public Judgments, and therefore it
cannot but be a Good thing, and great enough to deserve our most warm and
vigorous Endeavors.

Secondly. Such an execution of Judgment and Justice, though it should avail
but little toward the Reforming of Men, yet it might, for its own sake,
procure many Blessings from God to a People. The Actions of public Persons, in
their public Stations, have the greatest Influence upon the public good.
These are the Actions of the Society, and therefore will the soonest procure
common Judgments or Blessings. For Government, and Magistracy, and the
execution of Justice, belong to a Society as such; and therefore, according as
these are administered, it is reasonable to expect God should dispense his
public Favors. It was for want of Eli's executing Judgment upon his lewd
Sons, that the Israelites were delivered into the Hands of the Philistines, and
the Ark of God taken from them. 'Till Judgment was executed upon Achan for the
Accursed thing, the Israelites still fled before their Enemies. It was by
executing Judgment upon two scandalous Offenders, that Phinehas stayed the fury
of a devouring Plague, and restored health to the Congregation of Israel. Such
another might afterward have saved them from Captivity; if they could have
found a Man in Jerusalem that executed Judgment, God would have Pardoned it,
Jer. 5. 1. But Magistrates cannot ordinarily do this alone, if there be none to
testify against the Transgressors. It is good therefore for us all, in our
several places, to endeavor the promoting so good a Work. As Magistrates
should be forward to execute Judgment, so should others be ready to discover
and accuse notorious Offenders, without which there would be no opportunity for
it. These are good things then, I have been hitherto pleading for, and
therefore such as we ought to be zealously affected in. I proceed now,

Thirdly. To show, What it is to be zealously affected in a good matter, and
consequently what is our Duty, with respect to those exceeding good matters,
which are under our present consideration. Zeal is the warmth and fervency of
the Soul and Spirit, that which actuates all our Powers and Faculties, and
inspires them with a new life and vigor, in the pursuit of that we are zealous
for. More particularly.

First. He that is zealously affected in any matter, will be very earnest in
his desires of succeeding in it. He will wish and long for more Power, and
greater Opportunities, and stronger Aids, for the accomplishing of it. His
Thoughts will be mighty intent upon it; and continually busied, in seeking out
proper and effectual ways of prospering in his Endeavors for it. He will
follow it with as vehement Desires, as covetous and ambitious Men do Riches and
Honor. Where then is our Zeal for Reformation, that most excellent good Thing,
if we seldom think how we may be serviceable to the promoting of it; If we are
not grieved that we can do no more toward it; If we carelessly neglect any
proper means or opportunities of being aiding and assisting to it; If we
willingly shift it off to others, and are glad to be excused from having any
hand in it our selves? It is very sad to think of it, but this, I fear, is
almost the common Case of Christians, of those I mean that call themselves so:
For what can they have of Christianity, besides the Profession of it, who are
thus coldly affected to that, wherein the Honor of Christ and his Gospel, and
the Happiness of those, for whom he was born and died, are so very much
concerned?

Secondly. He that is zealously affected to any good End, will be exceeding
active and industrious in the prosecution of it. His Endeavors will be
proportionable to his Desires, great and strong as they. Such was the Zeal of
our Blessed Savior, who went about doing good; and that of St. Paul, which
engaged him in Watchings often, and in Labors more abundant. And if we are
zealously affected toward the reforming the lives of Men, we shall not be
slothful in this Business, but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord with all our
Might in it. We shall never think we can take too much pains, or grudge any
toil or labor for the accomplishing of it. When an Opportunity appears to us,
we shall greedily embrace it, and improve it with our utmost Vigor. Where then
is our Zeal in this matter? What little Difficulties discourage us? How little
Time or Pains do we employ in it? How much short do the most industrious of us
come, of the restless travail, and unwearied diligence, with which we see Men
every day laboring, for the uncertain Riches, the fading Honor, and the vain
and forbidden Pleasures of this world?

Thirdly. He that is zealously affected in any good thing, will be very
courageous in the pursuit of it. If we were indeed zealously affected to this
good work of reforming the Lives of Men, we should not easily be frighted from
doing our part in it, by the Enemies and Opposition we are like to encounter
with. We should not care, what a foolish World may call us, or how a malicious
World may use us. We should not be afraid of their Terrors, or discouraged by
their Censures, or put out of countenance by their Reproaches, but boldly and
resolutely proceed in that Good Cause we are engaged in. These would be but as
dry Hay and Stubble, unable to stop the progress of a flaming Zeal for God and
Religion; we should scorn to desert so pious, and noble, and profitable a Work,
for fear of those silly, and lewd, and ungodly Wretches that oppose it. We
should go out in the name of the Lord against them, and in that have strong
confidence. Though we knew that we must wrestle, both with Flesh and Blood, and
with spiritual wickednesses in high Places, yet for all this we should not
decline the Combat, but be strong in the Lord and in the power of his Might.
We should be ready to answer with St. Paul, if we were told as he was, that
bonds and afflictions did abide us, that none of these things move us, neither
count we our lives dear unto us, so that Christ may be magnified in our Bodies,
Acts 20. 23, 24. Phil. 1. 20. The opposition we meet with would rather heighten
our Courage, and strengthen our Resolutions, and animate our Endeavors, and
increase our Labors, in so pious and charitable a Work.

Fourthly. He that is zealously affected in a good thing, will be liberal in
his Expenses for the promoting of it. Thus we find the Zeal of the Primitive
Christians prevailed with them, even to sell their possessions, and to lay the
price at the Apostles feet, when the great Necessities of the Church required
it of them, Acts 4. 34, 35. Thus also the Zeal of the Churches of Macedonia,
made the riches of their liberality to abound, in their deep poverty; They were
ready, as St. Paul tells us, to their power, yea and beyond their power, they
were willing of themselves, praying us with much entreaty, that we would
receive the Gift, 2 Cor. 8. 3, 4. They offered more unasked, than they could
well spare, and earnestly besought them to accept their Contributions. Thus
liberal should we be in advancing those good works we are pleading for, if we
were as zealously affected as they were. We should be glad to distribute, and
willing to communicate of our earthly Goods, in so heavenly a Cause, so
acceptable to God, so serviceable to his Honor and to the Interest of his
Church and Kingdom. But because as the Apostle intimates, in the Verse before
the Text, we may be zealously affected, but not well. I proceed,

Fourthly. To show, what are to be the Qualifications of our Zeal in these
things; or what Cautions are to be given to them, whoare thus zealously
affected.

First. Our Zeal must be impartial with respect to Persons and Parties. It is a
general Reformation of all sorts of Men we pretend to be zealous for; and
therefore it must not have only a particular Regard to some particular Men. The
Laws are made for the restraint, and correction of all Men's enormous Vices, and
therefore our Endeavors, in promoting the execution of them, should also have
equal Respect to all. God and Religion are dishonored, and the Public good is
prejudiced and endangered, by all sorts of wicked Men, and all Men's Souls are
equally hazarded by their scandalous Offenses. And therefore it cannot be a
truly religious Zeal, which is guided by any private or partial Respects. It
may be a Zeal of Spite and Malice, of some carnal or worldly Affection; but it
cannot be a Zeal of Love to God and our Neighbor. If it were a Zeal of Love to
God, it would use the same Endeavors, where the Honor of God is equally
concerned; if it were a Zeal of Love to our Neighbor, it would not be least
active, where we love most. If we use those we call the Means of Reformation,
and promote the execution of Laws, chiefly upon those, to whose Persons, or
Interests, or religious Communion we are disaffected; our pretended Zeal, for a
general Reformation of Men's Lives, is certainly counterfeit and hypocritical.
It cannot be thought, we should be most concerned for their good, for whom we
have the least Affection. And therefore the Zeal of such Endeavors, will show
a great concern to see Men punished rather than reformed. It will not be
punishing Men's Persons, that we may reform their Vices; but punishing their
Vices, that we may hurt their Persons.

Secondly. Our Zeal must be wise and prudent, and all its Endeavors guided
with Deliberation and Discretion. Zeal is a sharp Instrument, and therefore not
to be managed with a careless or unskilful Hand. If we use it rashly, and
without good Advice, we may stab our own Designs, and ruin that Cause we would
defend by it. We should not therefore lean too much to our own Understandings,
in the methods of prosecuting those good Designs we are zealous in: but be
continually asking Counsel of God, and of grave, and wise, and experienced Men.
We should consider Seasons and Circumstances, and, with great Deliberation and
Judgment, make choice of those that are most proper, to set forward the good
Work we have in hand. In prosecuting the noble design of Reformation, wherein
you are like to meet with so many Difficulties, and such mighty Opposition, it
will behove you, as wise Men are wont to do in like cases, to strengthen your
Hands all you can, to unite your Forces, and to combine together into
Societies; that you may mutually advise, and countenance, and support, and
encourage, and vindicate, and defend one another, in your Attempts for the
Accomplishing of it.

Thirdly. Your Zeal must be orderly. It must not transport you beyond the
Bounds of your Places and Callings. Private persons must not usurp the Office
of the Priest or Magistrate; but move exactly in their own Sphere, toward that
good End they have before them. God has set us in the Church as Members in the
Body, and all Members have not the same Office; If the Feet will invade the
Office of the Head, what can follow but overturning and confusion? The Law is
good if we use it lawfully: But if we desert our Station, or take any illegal
courses to procure the execution of it, we make our selves Transgressors,
whilst we pretend to be Reformers. We cannot expect the Countenance of sober
Men, or the Protection and Blessing of God. You know how severely God dealt
with Vzzah, for his irregular Zeal, in attempting to preserve the Ark of God
from falling.

Fourthly. Your Zeal in these good matters, must be, attended with a
proportionable regard to all other parts of your Duty, and of the same Piece
with the rest of your Lives; otherwise it will very ill become you, and serve
the End it is in persuit of. You must be holy, and harmless, and without rebuke
your selves, whilst you are zealously endeavoring to reform the Vices of a
crooked and perverse Nation. You may reasonably expect that reply, Physician
heal thy self, when you are applying Remedies to other Men's Diseases, and are
infected with those that are as mortal your selves. You must carefully avoid
giving any just occasion to any man to speak evil of you, for many will seek
Occasions, and improve them all they can, to disgrace both you and the good
Design you are zealously affected in. But if whilst you make Men feel the
Warmth of your Zeal, they also see the Light of it shine before them, in all
the exercises of a sober, righteous, and godly life; this will be such a
manifest Proof of the Sincerity of its intentions, to serve God and to do good,
as none of its adversaries will be able to gainsay or resist. Then Men will be
ashamed to reproach it, or to impute the Endeavors of it, to any corrupt
Affections, or to any worldly sinister Ends. Then no good man will be ashamed
to appear for you, to plead your Cause, or to encourage your Endeavors. Then
you may reasonably hope, that God will not throw you aside, as unworthy
Instruments for such noble Purposes; but be ready to assist, and bless, and
prosper your Undertakings for him.

Fifthly. Your Zeal should be attended with great Humility, with low thoughts
of your selves and your best performances, and a modest and humble Behavior
toward all Men; for Pride and Self-conceit will stain the Beauty, and hinder
the Efficacy, of the most zealous Endeavors for God and Religion. These are
Vices, that are abominable both in the sight of God and Man, and corrupt every
thing that has relation to them. And these are the Sins you will be most in
danger of. For this is the common Stratagem, whereby the Devil overcomes such,
as have held out against all his other Temptations. He endeavors to flatter
them into a great Opinion of their own Virtue, and to make them proud of their
Conquests over him; and so secures them to himself, by magnifying the Service
they have done against him. Let this then be your particular care, to arm your
selves against this Temptation, and to keep your Zeal always clothed with
Humility, which will be the greatest Ornament you can give it. Be as thankful
as you can for it, but never make it your Boast, that you are not as other Men
are. Consider then, who it is that makes you to differ, and of whose only gift
it comes that you are able to do unto God any good and laudable Service; that
every good Work you do, increases your obligation to do more for him, but can
be no just reason for your thinking more highly of your selves; that when you
have done the most and best you can for him, you are far from rendering unto him
according to all he has done for you; and have still reason to hold down your
Heads, and to smite upon your Breasts and say, every one of you, God be
Merciful unto me a Sinner. You have an excellent Example of this Zeal and
Humility together in St. Paul, who labored more abundantly than they all, yet
he calls himself the least of the Apostles, and gives all the Glory to God, It
was not I, says he, but the Grace of God that was with me. I come now

Fifthly. To answer some Objections, against our zealous Endeavors to reform
the Vices of the Age.

First. Some are ready to object, that this is not a proper Season for such
Attempts. Wickedness is so impudent and daring, and so much countenanced by
those, who are most able and obliged to suppress it, that now to contest
zealously against it, is but laboring in vain, and spending our Strength for
naught, and likely to make it insult and triumph the more, upon baffling our
Endeavors against it. There is indeed but too much Truth in this Character of
the Age we live in; but however, it ought not to quench our Zeal in laboring
to make it better. For.

First. We find the holy Servants of God were not discouraged, in former times,
by the same Difficulties. When all flesh had corrupted themselves Noah
continued a zealous Preacher of Righteousness. When the Cry of Sodom's sins was
gone up to Heaven, and they were most impudently bold in their commission of
them, righteous Lot did not cease to rebuke and oppose their Wickedness. When
the Altars of God were throwing down, and the People were slaying his Prophets,
even then was Elijah exceeding Jealous for the Lord God of Hosts. The Holy
Prophets did zealously set themselves to reform the Manners, of a sinful
Nation, a People laden with iniquity, and enraged against all that opposed
their growing Wickedness. John the Baptist did not forbear his warnings and
reproofs, when he was beset with a Generation of Vipers. And the Blessed
Apostles, with undaunted Courage, persisted to defend the Cause of
Christianity, when it was every where spoken against. Were not these Men of
like Passions with our selves? Is not reforming the Lives of Men as good a Work
as ever? Have we not the same God to assist us, the same Laws to oblige us, and
the same Reward to encourage us, that they had? What Excuse can we find in the
difficulty of this Work now, which they might not have pleaded for laying aside
that Zeal, with which they endeavored the accomplishing of it? But

Secondly. The worse the Age is, the more zealous should the Friends of Piety
and Virtue be to make it better. When we see Religion almost ready to expire,
where is our Love to God or that, if we do not hasten to its relief, and apply
our most earnest Endeavors for the support and recovery of it? When that is
lost, then all our Hopes are lost; then there will nothing remain for us, but a
fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation to devour us. And can any
Difficulties excuse our Sloth, when the Danger is so great and so apparent?
When Virtue is almost irrecoverably oppressed, and cries with dying Groans for
succor, shall we refuse to fly to its Defense, for fear we should endanger it
by our Assistance? What a brave and noble thing rather would it be, to
encounter Wickedness in the height of all its Triumphs, to go out in the Name
of the Lord against it, when it prides its self in its Gyant-like stature, and
has all its Weapons of War about it, and most insolently defies the Armies of
the living God? How would such Zeal and Courage become the Chidren of the Lord
of Hosts, their noble birth, and high calling, and glorious hopes and
expectations?

Thirdly. As bad as the Age is, we have no reason utterly to despair of all
Success, in these our zealous Attempts to amend it. It is the Cause of God, a
Cause wherein his Honor is mightily concerned, a Cause he loves to see us
engaged in, a Cause in which he has oftentimes wonderfully assisted, a Cause
he seems not to have cast off all regard to at this time amongst us. We have
great reason to think it is of God, that, amidst so many Discouragements, it
has come into the Hearts of some to unite their zealous Endeavors, to repress
the Insolence of insulting Wickedness, and to rescue Piety and Religion from
that Contempt and Oppression it labors under. Who knows, but that little
Cloud, which appears but as a Man's Hand, may, by the Blessing of God, so
improve and spread its self, as to be able at length by its refreshing Showers,
to renew the life, and strength, and beauty, of withering Virtue. The Powers of
Darkness, and the corrupt Nature of Man are against us; but, if God be for us,
we are certainly the stronger side. And why should we not hope, that God will
at length arise and plead his own Cause, and make his Work prosper in the Hands
of those, that faithfully and zealously apply themselves to the help of the
Lord against the mighty? For the Eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the
whole Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose Heart is
perfect toward Him, 2. Chron. 16. 9.

Fourthly. How unsuccesful soever our zealous Endeavors may be for the
reforming the Nation, yet they may be succesful for the Preservation and
Benefit of it. God may show Favor to the whole Body, for the sake of those few
Members of it, that are engaged so heartily in promoting his Honor and
Interest. He may do that for us for their sakes, which he did for Zoar for
Lot's sake, and would have done for Sodom its self, had there been but Nine
more such as he was, to be found in it.

Fifthly. Our zealous Endeavors for reforming others, though they may not be
effectual for the Preventing public Calamities, yet they may be a means to
preserve us from them, or to procure for us great advantages under them. Thus
were Noah, and Lot, and Jeremiah preserved, at least from the extremity of
those public Judgments, which by their zealous Attempts to reform the Lives of
Men, they endeavored, though unsuccesfully, to divert. But what share soever
God may think fit to give us in outward Calamities, we may be sure of the
support and comfort of a good Conscience under them; a Conscience testifying to
us, that they are not the effect of any Sloth or Neglect of ours; that we did
our best to prevent them; and that though we fall under them, yet we do not fall
under that Wrath of God which accompanies them; that all these things will work
together for our good, who have loved and served God with so much Zeal.

Secondly. Some perhaps may object against these zealous Attempts to reform the
Wickedness of the Age, that they will expose them to Scorn and Derision, to
harsh Censures, and foul Reproaches. But had ever any great and good thing been
done, if Men had always thought this, a sufficient Excuse for declining the
attempting of it? Have not the best Men, and the best things, been always
subject to the Scoffs and Revilings of profane and dissolute Men? Was there
every any brave, heroical Attempt made, on the behalf of Religion, that could
escape the spiteful Censures of a naughty World? But can any unjust Reproaches
alter the nature of a good action; or make it less our Duty, or less becoming
of us? Is not the approbation of our own minds, and the esteem and love of all
wise and good Men, and of the infinitely wise and good God, a sufficient
Encouragement against all the scurrilous Language of unreasonable and wicked
Men? Will not a strong and mighty love to God make us to glory in the Cross of
Christ, and to rejoice that we are counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name?
A malicious Informer is indeed a Character to be abhorred; but when Informing
signifies nothing, but Witnessing against the great and scandalous Sinners of
the Age we live in, for their and the public good, and the Glory of God, then
it is a generous and honorable thing, then it is doing what all the Prophets,
and all the Apostles, and our Blessed Lord himself, did before us. And if ye
are reproached for so doing, happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of God
rests on you; and these light Afflictions, which are but for a moment, will
work for you a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Why then should
we not seek, with all our Might, to affect our Hearts with Zeal in these
matters, that with vehement Desires, unwearied Industry, and Invincible
Courage, we may pursue the great and good design, of restraining and reclaiming
Sinners? I proceed therefore,

Fifthly. To direct to some proper Considerations, for the inflaming our Souls
with Zeal in these good things.

First. Consider, What mighty Obligations God has laid upon you to do the
utmost you can for him. It is in him you live, and move, and have your being.
It is by his Providence that you are preserved; and by his Bounty that you are
supplied, with all the good things you enjoy; and by the Blood of his only
begotten Son, whom he freely gave for such weak, and foolish, and provoking
Sinners, that you are redeemed from Death and Hell. And can you be cold and
negligent, in seeking to advance the Kingdom, and Honor, and Interest, of so
hearty a Friend, so liberal a Benefactor, so tender a Father, so good and
gracious a God? Can you think of all the Wonders of the Divine Love, with cold
and unaffected Hearts? Do you not blush to tkink, how little you have done for
him, who has done so much for you?

Secondly. You should often set before you the Zeal of our Blessed Savior in
this matter. For this purpose he came down from Heaven, to seek and to save
that which was lost. He took upon him the form of a Servant, and being found in
fashion as a Man, he humbled himself unto death, even the death of the Cross,
that he might redeem us from iniquity, and purify to himself a people, zealous
of good works, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, and rescue the
souls of Men out of his hands. This was the business of his Life, and the
design of his Death. And can any thing better deserve our Zeal, than that which
he thought not unworthy of his Blood? Can we be indifferently affected to that,
which our dear Redeemer valued at so dear a rate? Can we be better, or more
honorably employed, than in uniting our Endeavors with the Son of God, and
working together with him for the recovery of a perishing World? Are we not
concerned, that in any respect he should live and die in vain, who lived and
died for our Salvation? Can we stand still, and make no Attempts to stop the
growth of that, which renders his Passion of none effect to Men, and destroys
the Souls for whom he swet, and bled, and died?

Thirdly. Consider the Zeal and Diligence of the Enemies of this good work of
reclaiming sinful Men. How Zealous and industrious is the Prince of Darkness,
in corrupting the Lives and destroying the Souls of Men? All his Cunning, and
Strength, and Activity is employed in this work. He is always laying his
Snares, and persuing his malicious Devices, running to and fro, and walking
about, seeking whom he may devour. How zealous are his Agents and Ministers, in
carrying on the pernicious design of their Master, to advance his Kingdom, to
increase the number of his Captives, to entice Men to run with them into the
same excess of Riot, and to carry them down to Hell with them? And shall we lie
down and sleep, and tamely suffer them to carry all before them? Are we not
confounded with Shame to think, that they should be more bold and industrious,
in dishonouring God, and propagating Sin, and Death, and Misery, than we can
find in our hearts to be, in promoting the Glory of God, the interest of Piety,
and the everlasting Happiness of Men? Is the Devil a better Master than God, or
corrupting with sin a better Cause than restraining Men from it? Do we see Men
resolutely defying the Power and Wrath of God, and boldly proceeding in their
ungodly Attempts against the amazing Terrors of Death and Hell? And are we
discouraged from the most necessary, and honorable, and beneficial
undertakings, for fear of men that shall die, or any light afflictions for a
moment? Is it thus we love God and Goodness? Is it thus we answer the
engagements of our Profession, and the Vows we have made to our Lord and
Redeemer? Is this our fighting manfully against Sin, the World and the Devil?
Blessed be God that there are any sparks of this Zeal, I have been recommending
to you, reviving amongst us. Who can tell how great a matter this little Fire
may kindle? May the Blessed Spirit of God, who appeared a^ Fire upon the
Apostles, kindle it more and more in all our Hearts; that it may at length
consume all those Tares the Enemy has sown amongst us, and we may henceforward
bring forth such Fruits unto perfection, which are worthy of all the care and
husbandry God has bestowed upon us. Then we might comfortably hope, that God
would be merciful unto us and bless us, and lift up the light of his
Countenance upon us, and make us a praise in the earth, that he would be a Wall
of Fire, round about us, an invincible Defense against all our Enemies, and the
Glory in the midst of us, and that we should once more see Jerusalem in
prosperity, and Peace upon Israel.

Amen.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Sermon Preached at Bow-Church before the Lord Mayor, etc. upon a General
Fast. On Nehem. 9. part of the 26th. and 27th. verses.

A Sermon Preached at St. Lawrence Jewry at the Election of the Lord Mayor,
1696. On Prove. 29th. and the 2. verse.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Mr. James Lordell, March 27. 1694. On Rev.
14. 13.

All three by Lilly Butler Minister of St. Mary Aldermanbury. Sold By B. Aylmer.

Some Books Printed for B. Aylmer at the three Pigeons in Cornhil.
SIX Sermons, viz. Of Stedfastness in Religion. Of Family Religion. Of
Education of Children. Of the Advantage of an Early Piety. By his Grace John
late Archbishop of Can-terbury. Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Also by his Grace. Price bound 6 d. and sticht 3 d.

A Brief Exposition on the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments.
To which is added the Doctrine of the Sacraments. By the Learned Jsaac Barrow D.
D. And late Master of Trinity College, Cambridge. (This on the Creed never
before Published.) In 8o. Price 4 s. 6 d.

Practical Discourses upon the Consideration of our latter End, and the Danger
and mischief of Delaying Repentance. Also by Dr. Jsaac Barrow in 8o. Price 1 s.
6 d.

The Four last things, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell: practically
considered and applied, by W. Bates D. D. in 12o Price 2 s.

Contemplations of Death and Immortality. By the late Earl of Manchester The
15th Edition; in 12o. Price 1 s.

A Familiar Guide to the right and profitable Receiving of the Lords Supper.
Wherein also the Way and Method of our Salvation is briefly and plainly
declared. By Theophilus Dorrington. Price 12 d.

A Conference with an Anabaptist, in 8o. Price 12 d.

A Theological Discourse of last Wills and Testaments. Price 12 d.

A Seasonable Vindication of the Blessed Trinity. Being an Answer to this
Question, Why do you believe the Doctrine of the Trinity? Collected from the
Works of the most Reverend, Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury. And the Right Reverend, Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, now Lord Bishop
of Worcester. in 8o. Price 12 d. These three last by Dr. Asheton of Beckenham
in Kent.

Several small Books against Debauchery, Profaneness, Blasphemy, Cursing and
Swearing, etc. Also by Dr. Asheton. Price 2 d. each; but something cheaper to
them that give away Numbers.


