Licensed,

Aug. 29. 1688. Rob. Midgley.

portrait of Dr. Edward Rainbow THE EFFIGIES OF THE (...)ATHER IN GOD DR.
EDWARD RAINBOW LATE BISHOP ^F CARLISLE AETAT.74 His face you see; but not his
noble mind:
That like his fame, was great and unconfined;
Yet humble too, and honors would prevent:
But's virtues built the greatest momum^nt.
Which all devouring time cannot deface,
Till the world wants both gratitude and grace.


THE LIFE Of the Right Reverend Father in God,

EDW. RAINBOW, D. D. Late Lord Bishop of Carlisle.

To which is added, A SERMON Preached at his Funeral by Thomas Tully, his
Lordships Chaplain, and Chancellor of the said Diocese of Carlisle; At Dalston,
April the 1st. 1684.

PROVE. X. 7. The memory of the Just is blessed.

HEB. XI. 4. By it he being dead, yet speaks.

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Robert Clavell at the Peacock at the
West End of St. Paul's, 1688.

THE PREFACE.
TO write the Lives of Great and Good Men, has been the peculiar Care of
Persons of all Ages and Religions; and this as well to transmit their Names and
Actions to Posterity, and to make them (as it were) live after death, as to
propagate their Opinions, and to excite others to the prosecution of those
Virtues, which have contributed to make their Names immortal. Hence among the
Heathens, nothing was more carefully attended to, than the Writing of their
Histories; In which particular, the Egyptians, the Chaldeans, and the Persians
excelled. For they generally would not suffer any to Compile the Histories of
their own Countries, but such as were appointed thereto on purpose. And among
those, as the Babylonians had their Public Archives; so had the Egyptians
their Pillars, on which in Hieroglyphick Notes and Sacred Characters they were
wont to Record their memorable Acts. Nor were the Romans inferior to those
Polite Nations, in this Point; since they had their Pontifices Maximi, to make
up their Public Records or Annals. But above all others, the Chinese, so
renowned for their Government and happy Inventions, do herein merit also the
largest Fame, having generally in their Historians, as well as Princes, but the
same continued Series.

To come nigher to the present Subject; What has been more Read, and that with
Applause, among the Latin Historians, than Suetonius's Lives, and Plutarch's
Morals among the Greeks. Not to mention, That Alexander the Great had a
Curtius, and an Arian, who undertook, that the Memory of his Victories,
wherewith that young Conqueror overran Asia, and made Europe and Afric to
tremble, should not perish in the same Grave with him.

To pass on to the Philosophers; Diogenes Laertius wrote their Lives, but
whether well or ill I shall not now determine; but add, that even Apollonius
Tyanaeus, one of the worst of Men, wanted not his Damis and Philostratus to
consign the Memoirs of that Diabolical Pythagorean to after Ages.

And not to dwell any longer among the Heathens, The Jews, who were taught by
immediate Revelation from Heaven, had their Priests to Register the Actions of
their Republic. Nor were the Christians, as they professed the best Religion,
less careful than others, to have the gallant Actions of those Primitive Hero's
transcribed and committed to Posterity. And therefore Care was taken, That
there should be Notaries in every Church, (and that early too) which were to
transcribe the Acts of the Martyrs, the particulars of their Discourses, and
the circumstances of their Sufferings, that in those Days of Trial, others
might be encouraged to aspire to that Celestial Glory, which was to be the
Sequel of so many famous Terrestrial Miseries.

And in the Fourth Age, when Christianity begun to triumph over Paganism, as
having Christian Emperors for its Nursing Fathers, tho sore afflicted by the
pestilent Heresy of Arius, as it was the most Learned Age, that (at least) the
Primitive Church had; so nothing was more common than a recital of their
Virtues at the Funerals of good Men, and those described with all the Eloquence
and Ornament, that Truth, assisted with Secular Learning, could bear. Which
strains of Rhetoric, however abused by the Superstition and Ignorance of the
following Ages, were only designed, that the Living should Copy after those
fair Patterns, which those dying Worthies had set them.

To omit others, we have Saint Gregory Nazianzen justly styled the Divine, not
scrupling in his Funeral Orations to commend his Father Gregory, his Brother
Caesarius, and his Sister Gorgonia, notwithstanding the nearness of their
Relation, in that flowing Vein of Oratory, which he had so often seen opened at
Athens. He there opened all the Boxes of his Perfuming Eloquence, that the
sweet Odor of their Virtues might be diffused with a more chearing fragrancy.

This was the Practice of that Age, which celebrated Virtue in Persons,
distinguished thereby from the Crowd of common and bare Professors, by Men, tho
not much separated in Blood. And it was by such Instances, that Christianity
showed what it could do, when its Divine Precepts are strictly observed, and
what Monuments of Praise and Gratitude it has erected to its Glorious Founder
in every Age.

And although this Reverend Bishop, whose Life is now designed to be written, was
a great Example of true Piety in his Generation; yet has he not been so happy
as to meet with a Pen sit to transcribe his Actions to succeeding Times; tho,
to balance that Defect, what has been done in the following Sheets is with all
fidelity and candor. As he detested Flattery when living, so (I hope) there
has nothing been delivered here, which will not endure the shock of Envy as to
the Verity in matters of Fact; and those expressed in a plain Style, like the
Life of the Original. Because true Merit, like true and native Beauty, needs no
Fucus, no Adulterate Paint to set it off to advantage.

THE LIFE OF Dr. Edward Rainbow, LATE Lord Bishop of Carlisle.
DOctor Edward Rainbow was Born at Bliton, a Village in Lindsey Coast in
Lincolnshire, near unto Gainsborough, a noted Market Town upon Trent, that
English Ganges, which divides this Kingdom into two parts, Southern and
Northern.

The Day in which he first drew breath was the Twentieth day of April, in the
Year of Grace One thousand Six hundred and Eight; a Year not forgotten in our
English Annals, since in it there were three Scottish Bishops Consecrated by Men
of the same Sacred Order in this Nation, our Church being thereby made at least
a Nurse to that of Scotland. And no less remarkable was it for extending the
Civil power of our Monarchs, together with the propagation of the Gospel, by
the English planting of Virginia, although formerly discovered by the learned and
unfortunate Sir Walter Raleigh.

As an honest Extraction is that which gives a greater luster to all persons,
and often recommends them more easily to the esteem of others; so cannot this
our Right Reverend and Worthy Prelate be without Injustice denied that respect
which is due to one virtuously descended, He deriving his Original from Parents
more good than great, and eminent for their Piety and real Worth.

His Father, Mr. Thomas Rainbow was a Reverend Divine, noted for his Learning
and Virtue, who after his being educated at Christ's College in Cambridge, was
first presented to the Rectory of Bliton abovementioned, and then to that of
Wintringham* in the same County of Lincoln, situate upon Humber, that great
Aestuarium, where so many Rivers meet e're they pay their Tributes to the
Ocean: Both which Places were conferred upon him by the Worshipful Family of
the Wrays of Glentworth.

And he is said to have well deserved such Advancement, being a Man, who
preached as well to his Parishioners by his exemplary good Life, as by his
sound Doctrine; and when he died (tho I cannot learn certainly when that was)
left the Odor of a good Name behind him.

Nor was his Mother, Mrs. Rebecca Allen, Daughter to Mr. David Allen, Rector of
Ludbrough in Lindsey-Coast aforeseid, an unfit Consort for so Worthy a Man.
For, to many of those good qualifications of a Woman mentioned by the wisest of
Kings, she added that of the knowledge of the Scriptures even in the Original
Languages, being trained up by her Father to the understanding of the Latin,
the Greek, and the Hebrew. So that, if the Female Sex, Eustochium and others
have been so much commended by S. Hierom for their great Skill in the Sacred
Writings, the Praise that this excellent Matron merited in this kind ought not
to be forgotten. Which is also a pregnant instance, that the other Sex is not
incapable of some of the most profound Studies, and not altogether unfit to
walk in the most retired Paths of Learning.

Our Edward Rainbow had the Name of Edward given him from his Godfather Mr.
Edward Wray of Rycot, who was younger Brother to Sir John Wray the elder, and
who was a great Courtier and Favorite of the elder George Duke of Buckingham,
by whose Interest Mr Wray married the Heiress of the Honor and Fortune of the
Lord Norris of Rycot, and to whom jointly with his Brother Sir John Wray, his
God-Son Mr. Rainbow afterward dedicated his first printed Sermon, Preached at
S. Paul's Cross, Entitled, Labor forbidden and commanded.

But to return whence we have digressed a little; From such pious Parents, who
can doubt but Edward Rainbow met with a good Education? Goodness, is diffusive
of it self by Nature, and most especially when seated in those of so near a
Relation as Parents to Children. The sense of their Duty in the first quickens
their desires of propagating their Virtues in their Offspring, as well as
continuing in them their Names to Posterity. And accordingly this virtuous
Couple took great care early to instill into this their Son the Principles of
Religion, a great and cordial Love for his Heavenly Lord and Master, and a just
Fear to offend him in the breach of any of his Divine Commands. They taught him
to aspire to the possession of that Celestial Country, where that love for true
Piety would be as unbounded as that God who is the Original of it. And
doubtless the early cultivating of so hopeful a Plant was not ineffectual as
the Sequel showed. He had been taught that this Life was but a Pilgrimage, and
what would be the conclusion of minding his walking therein soon, which made
him hasten his pace to Heavenward: For Travelers never hasten so much, as
when they expect good Lodgings at their Journeys end.

His Infancy being past, about Nine years of Age he was sent to Fillingham, a
Village in the so often mentioned County of Lincoln, where his Grandmother
Allen, and his Ant Peachel his Mothers Sister, lived. At which place he begun
to lay the Foundation of Secular Learning; which his Parents, observing him to
be very capable of improving to a considerable height, sent him in A. Dom.
1619. to the public School of Gainsborough, and from thence in April 16^0. to
Peterborow in Northamptonshire, to be one of the Scholars of Dr. John Williams,
who was then Prebend of that Church. And it was upon his account that Edward
Rainbow was sent to Westminster School in June 1621; Dr. Williams, old Mr.
Rainbows great Friend, being advanced to the Deanery of Westminster and the
Bishopric of Lincoln, and consequently had thereby better opportunities to
gratify his Friends Son in Westminster, where he then chose to reside.

In all these short Stages of his Youth, he was so far from frustrating the
Hopes which his Parents had conceived of him, that the great Proficiency under
his several Masters, adorned with his meek and obliging humor, easily gained
him the Favor of his Instructors, and the Esteem of his more diligent
School-Fellows. In which state he continued till fitted for the University; and
then he was sent to Corpus Christi College in Oxon, in July 1623. at the Age of
Fifteen; where his elder Brother John was admitted, and died Fellow of that
House.

He had before this, viz. in March 1621, lost his dear Mother, which loss gave
him all the disturbance that a dutiful Son was capable of, for the Death of so
prudent and tender a Mother, and whom he never mentioned without Honor. Nor
did she dye lamented by him alone; but by all those who were acquainted with
her extraordinary Parts and religious Conversation, and who were not generally
Enemies of, or Strangers to true Virtue.

Having paid the Debt due to the memory of his good Mother, I am obliged to
resume the Thread of his History, and consequently to mention, that during his
stay in Oxford he applied himself to his Studies with that attention, which
became the Son of so Learned a Father; which course he held on in Magdalen
College in Cambridge, whither he was transplanted in June 1. 1625, and that
upon the following occasion.

The Right Honorable and truly Noble Lady, Frances, Countess Dowager of
Warwick, and Daughter to Sir Christopher Wray, sometimes Lord Chief Justice of
England; as she inherited her Fathers Liberality, who had been a great
Benefactor to the last mentioned College of Magdalen, in giving Lands and
Moneys to it for the Founding a Fellowship and two Scholarships; so did she
also inherit the kindness of her Family to that of Edward Rainbow, and
therefore in her life time did him that honor to nominate him one of her
Scholars there: Upon which account (as has been already hinted) he removed
from Oxon thither, and was admitted into that College and Scholarship at the
time abovementioned.

He took his Degree of Bachelor of Arts there in Anno Dom. 1627, and commenced
Master of Arts in 1630; a Year which is sufficiently remarkable in History for
the Birth of our late Gracious Sovereign, Charles the Second; and for the
descent of Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden into Germany; where, till death
put a Period to his Martial Atchievments, Victory seemed to be his constant
Attendant.

In July after he had proceeded Master of Arts, he was sent for to teach the
Free School at Kirton in Lindsey Coast (three or four Miles from Bliton) which
was proffered to him, by that Great Patron of his Family, Sir John Wray, whither
he went; choosing rather to be employed, tho in a low Station, where he might be
serviceable to his Country, than to indulge himself in ease and idleness, which
are not seldom the incentives to Vice, and too often do prove the ruin of the
most hopeful young Men.

But before we conduct him from Barnwell in Northamptonshire, from Mr.
Botelers, who had married his Mothers Sister, whither he had sometimes before
retired by reason of the hot Sickness, give me leave to add, that as few
Graduates, at least such as are Masters of Arts, and have behaved themselves
according to the Statutes of the University, do depart thence without a
Testimony under the public Seal of that University; so he had, together with
that, an unusual Approbation from that Learned Body.

For, during his stay there, he had early given such undeniable proofs of his
being the Master of a prompt and facetious Wit, and that upon several
accidental and less remarkable occasions, that he was thereby sufficiently
distinguished from the Crowd and the Fame hereof, put him and it to so unusual
a trial, that perhaps the History of that famous University cannot furnish us
with many Parallels thereto.

The Tripos, who was at the Scholars Act chosen to divert the University with
his Wit, did it with so much Sarcasm and Abuse, and with such severe
Reflections upon the Principal Persons in that Eminent Body, that the
Vice Chancellor not suffering him any longer to continue in his Scurrility, had
ordered him to be pulled Our Mr. Rainbow, tho unprovided and without the least
fore thought, was called up to succeed him in that slippery place of Honor.
Which difficult Province, (and made then more difficult by the public Reprimand
of his Predecessor) he managed so dexterously, and made his extemporary Speech
with so facetious an Air, and delivered it so smoothly and agreeably, that far
from dashing against the Rock of Censure, which the other had split upon, he
procured the general satisfaction of his Auditors, and a just Applause to
himself.

Nor had he before this departure gained himself less Esteem in that College of
Magdalen, where he had been Educated, than in that more public Stage of the
University. For, among others, Dr. Henry Smith, who was then Master of that
College, being the Chaplain to the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Suffolk,
sometimes Lord Treasurer of England, and presented by him to that place, and
one who was an able Judge of a Scholars worth, having taken notice of Mr.
Rainbow's excellent Parts and good deportment, was very desirous to have
retained him in the College. But there being then no prospect of any Preferment
that might invite him to stay, the Worthy Doctor consented, tho not without
some reluctance, to Mr. Rainbow's removal to Kirton School aforesaid. Which
laborious employment, so uneasy to most ingenuous Persons, he discharged a
little while with more satisfaction to those Men, whose Children were entrusted
to his Care, than to himself. For this new Charge being not so agreeable to his
inclinations, he quitted it e're long and went to London with two or three more
of the same standing and College; after he had by the way paid a visit to his
Friends in Cambridge, and settled himself at Fullers Rents.

When he went into Sacred Orders, I cannot learn; for he has in his Diaries
very rarely taken any notice of any Preferment bestowed on him, as incompatible
with that low and mean Opinion he entertained of himself; only this I find,
that the first time he Preached was in April 1632, at Glentworth; by which may
be collected, that he was not admitted into Orders till he had commenced Master
of Arts.

He stayed a Quarter of a year in Fullers Rents, whence he removed to Sion
College, for the benefit of the good Library in that place. And he enjoyed
himself and his Friends freely and without noise; and as he thirsted after more
Knowledge, and daily improved it in that Retirement, so he had in the year
following some hopes of showing it to the benefit of others (tho he was
sufficiently averse to all ostentation) in becoming Chaplain to that Worthy and
Learned Society of Lincolns Inn. And there he met with no small encouragment in
his Pretensions, having gained the approbation of the most Judicious Persons
concerned in that Election; but he succeeded not in his design, another man
(who had a louder Voice) being preferred before him.

And now, lest his disappointment should tempt him to despond, the All-wise
God, who knew best what was fit for him, and who never fails those that
diligently seek and serve him, as we may charitably conclude our Mr. Rainbow
then did, since he has left so many Testimonies of his private Devotion in his
Diaries; He, I say, did not forsake him in his exigency. For, after this
generous dismission, rather than refusal of him at Lincolns Inn, where he had
stayed two or three Months, he was in June the same year made Curate at the
Savoy, and from thence invited to return to his beloved College of Magdalen, by
Doctor Smith, the Master, and some of the Fellows, with the profer of the first
Fellowship that fell. Any Preferment in that place was like to be acceptable to
Mr. Rainbow; but the thought thereof had an irresistible Charm to bring him
thither, when seconded with the kindness of that Society, which (in
contradiction to the old Proverb) forgot him not in his Absence.

The Profer was noble and tempting and met with an agreeable success; for Mr.
Rainbow upon this returns to the College; and accordingly on Nov. 13. 1633 he
was Pre-elected Fellow pro Domino fundatore, of the Foundation, and thereupon
in Jan. 28 following he was admitted to the Vacancy of the next Fellowship. But
that, it seems (as Expectations often are but airy) did not soon fall, and
therefore that he might not have a Title without profit, he was elected and
admitted into a Fellowship pro Doctore Goch, in June 24. 1634 which
notwithstanding he would not accept of without a Salvo jure and interesse in
his former Election, lest it should prejudice his Right to a Fellowship of the
Foundation: To which condition the Master and the Fellows willingly consented.
For they who so much desired his company, would not (to enjoy it) scruple at
any thing which was not inconsistent with their Oaths and Statutes. Pursuant of
which design on December. 19 following, they unanimously decreed, that his first
Election and Admission should be sufficient for him to obtain and enjoy what
Fellowship soever first and next vacant, unless appropriate to some School or
Scholarship by its Original Foundation. Which Decree extended to four
Fellowships more than his first Admission; a thing so uncommon, that I am
assured from a very good hand, the like instance cannot easily be met with in
that College Books.

We have seen Mr. Rainbow resetled in that College, let us in the next place
see, whether he will answer that expectation and hopes which had been conceived
of him.

To understand this the better, we will consider him under a double capacity,
as a Preacher, and as a Tutor. As to the former of these, tho I cannot (as I
have already mentioned) find the Time when he entered into Holy Orders; yet I am
informed, That after his fixing again in the University, he preached two
Sermons at S. Paul's Cross; the one in Sept. 28. 1634, upon Joh. 6. 27, which he
printed at the entreaty of his Friends, and Entitled it, Labor forbidden and
commanded; and Dedicated the same to Sir John Wray, Baronet, and his Brother
Mr. Edward Wray: And another in 1639. And in the University he became a very
celebrated Preacher, as he had formerly been highly respected for some other
Exercises performed by him there in his younger years: For his Sermons before
the University were heard with great applause. His Audience was always crowded
and thronged; and to give you one Instance of the great esteem he had publicly
gained as an eminent Preacher, I need only mention, that when he who was
appointed to Preach in the University Church, failed to perform that duty, the
Vice Chancellor (that then was) earnestly desired Mr. Rainbow to supply that
public Defect; which, tho unwilling to undertake, as having neither any Notes
about him, nor time for Premeditation, at last through the solicitation of that
Public person he condescended to it. And his ready Parts and great Abilities
enabled him, by Gods Blessing thereon, to perform that difficult Task to
satisfaction and even admiration, which his Modesty would have dissuaded him
from attempting.

This was indeed a Public Trial and Attestation of his Worth, and that before
so Eminent and Learned a Society; and therefore when in the sequel of this
performance he found himself but too apt in Cases of this nature to be pleased
and elated with the vain Praises (as he styled them) of a frothy Wit, he upon
serious consideration with himself, finding such Encomiums to be but glittering
Nothings, and no fit Objects for his Contemplation, which should not six upon
any thing but more lasting and solid Joys; and begging the Divine Assistance to
the completing of that pious Design, did set himself to bend his studies
another way, tho with much more difficulty and toil to himself; since those (by
him) unaffected Flowers of Rhetoric which appeared, and those sparkling Rays of
Wit which shon forth in his first Performances at the University (as well as in
the late mentioned Sermon, Labor forbidden and commanded,) tho they came to
him naturally in a manner, and with much ease, did not in his Judgment (at
least) tend to the advancement of God's Glory, which is the principal end of
our Nativity; and which, he wisely and truly judged, ought to be the chief end
and design of every Sermon.

He did not think, that a Sermon (or rather an Harangue) garnished with
Tropical and Figurative Flowers, and beautified with gay Similies taken from
the Historians or Poets, could contribute much to the saving of a Soul. 'Twas
not a labored Oratorial Sentence, a round Period, or a Quaint expression, that
could (in his Opinion) much assist to the completing of that grand Affair,
among the Unlearned. He judged a plainness of Matter, a clearness and
perspicuity of Style, in the expounding of the Sacred Oracles of the Old and
New Testament, and adapting and applying them home to the Consciences and
Spiritual Necessities of the meanest Persons, and that in an easy and familiar
Language, was the grand design of a true Christian Orator, in persuading his
Audience to the love and imitation of the Great Captain of our Salvation, Jesus
Christ; to adore him sincerely here, and to enjoy him eternally hereafter, by
our being adopted into that happy number of his Brethren. For the persuading of
one poor Soul, whom our Blessed Savior has redeemed with his dear Blood, to
live as a Christian ought to do, first by working upon the Judgment, and then
by engaging the Affections, is of an infinite more value than to acquire the
empty glory of being accounted a Christian, a Demosthenes, or a Cicero; to
rival in Eloquence a Lactantius, a Chrysostom, or a Bernard. And in this method
of Preaching did he continue till Death put a Period to his Labors and Toils.

You have seen him in a Public Capacity, as a Preacher; now consider him in his
Private one, as a Tutor.

In the Year 1635 he begun to take Pupils, which he instructed with so much
care, and by his frequent Lectures, both in the Mysteries of Philosophy, and in
that, to which the other ought always to be subservient, the Fundamentals and
necessary superstructure of Religion, as well as by his constant inspection
into their Manners and Behavior, fearing, that otherwise, while they perused
the large Volumes of the sage and quick-sighted Heathen Philosophers, they
should forget that they were Christians; and should not remember God, the First
Cause and Author of all, while they wandered in the Maze and Labyrinth of Second
Causes; and lastly, lest while they dwelt upon the study of Ethics, they
should contradict the Divine Precepts of their own Religion, by a deplorable
Immorality. So that Dr. Henry Smith, whom I have had occasion to mention twice,
as his great Friend, pleased with his real Industry, as well as satisfied with
his acute Parts, which he had the opportunity of knowing better by the
assiduity of his Company, committed to his Care the two Sons of Theophilus,
Earl of Suffolk, who had been recommended to his own, when at the same time
another Nobleman, my Lord Daincourt had entrusted Mr. Rainbow with the like
number. Which Trust he did so far answer, that that joined to the often Visits
he made the Earl of Suffolk, in the Company of the Earls Sons from Cambridge,
during the time of that Noble Persons long affliction upon the racks of the
Gout, acquired him not only an high esteem at that time, but made way for his
higher advancement in the Church afterward, through the Favor and Kindness (I
might have added the true Gratitude) of that Noble Family. For the Earl by this
means came to have a true knowledge of Mr. Rainbow's real worth and from thence
contracted an high value for him, and a Kindness proportionable thereto.

To return again to Cambridge, from whence we have been absent a while at
Audley Inn, 'twas after his Settlement in the College, that the frequency of
his Visits to Dr. Smith occasioned an Acquaintance and Kindness betwixt Mr.
Rainbow and Mrs. Elizabeth Smith, Daughter, to the said Worthy Doctor, whose
Virtues I would have mentioned in this place, if her Modesty (she being yet
alive) did not restrain me from doing it, and withal make that Character, I
might now give her, look like Flattery in me to her now living; which would be
but Justice and a debt to her Virtues, when dead. Therefore, to wave this just
Panegyric, I must only add, that then began that virtuous Affection betwixt
them, which continued for several years before it was completed by the
Conjugal Tie, by reason of the Iniquity, and the Threatening of those (to give
them a soft Epithet) Cloudy Times.

In the Year 1639 our Mr. Rainbow was chosen Dean of the College; which Office
he discharged with great care and prudence; discouraging and punishing the
Vicious, and encouraging the diligent and sober young Students. Upon the 20th
day of April he fell into a dangerous Swoon, so that that Day wherein he first
drew Breath, had like to have proved the day of his death. And hence after his
Recovery he had Meditations suitable thereto, to be seen in his Diary.

I have already mentioned, what Favor he had gained of the Earl of Suffolk,
one of whose Ancestors had founded that College: Consequent of the high Opinion
that Earl had of Mr. Rainbows Integrity, in making a Settlement of his Estate
in the Year 1640, he did him the Honor (among other Trustees) to make him one;
as remembering not only how careful a Tutor he was over his Sons, but how happy
an Instrument he had that year been in reconciling a Difference betwixt himself
and his Eldest Son.

This great Trust Mr. Rainbow, because young, undertook with some
unwillingness; but he discharged it afterward with all imaginable Fidelity;
therein not proposing to himself the least improvement of his own private
Fortunes, but the Advantage of that Noble Family. And, while he continued
therein after the death of Earl Theophilus, which happened in June in the Year
last mentioned, tho his Care for the Estate of his Honorable Charge was great,
yet was it no less for the great Concern of their Souls, without which the
other had been less valuable; and over whom, agreeable to his Function, he was
very watchful and diligent; and God was not wanting to bless his Pious
endeavors therein with a suitable Return. Which Happiness was not confined to
those Noble Youths he had under his peculiar Tuition, but extended to other
young Persons of the Nobility, who frequented that Family. For he observing
some Extravagancies in them, too incident to men of their Figure, and who meet
with many Temptations, and especially with one, that of Flattery, the bane of
Youth, wrought so upon their Spirits by his cogent Reasons, and insinuating
Rhetoric, that they gratefully accepted of some Prayers composed by Mr.
Rainbow, which were suited to their particular condition, as was apparent by
some Papers seen after his death. And those Noble Persons had ever afterward a
just veneration and a true kindness for him. Hence became he so much the
Favorite of the Families of Suffolk, Northumberland, Warwick, and Orrery. And
since I have mentioned the last, I cannot forbear to add, that he who first
bore that Title, has in his Divine Poems, which he wrote in his declining
years, bating the difference of the Languages, outstript those of Prudentius
(who also composed his in his old Age) in the richness of Fancy, and in
delicacy of Expression. And as he had in other Topics (composed for his
diversion) shown, that he wanted not a chaste and elegant Style, even when he
treated on less severe and serious Subjects; so has he in those his Poems on
the Festivals acquired a Reputation, which will never be denied his Merit till
Wit and Judgment be exiled the World, no more than Posterity can without the
higest Injustice refuse the Title of a most acurate Experimental Philosopher to
his yet surviving Brother, and our Bishops Friend, the Honorable Mr. Robert
Boil; a Gentleman, who is no less happy in, and respected for a sweetness of
Temper, than for his Ingenuity. And the present Age seems so much in love with
his Philosophical Experiments, and Discourses upon them, by which he has
signalized himself to the greatest part of Europe, that even a Critic of
another Nation, not very ready to bestow Complements upon others; but when even
compelled thereto by Truth, cannot deny, but that his Experiments and
Reflections have always an Air of Solidity. To which may be justly added, that
as he has enriched Natural Philosophy with his choice Observations; so has
he, in contradiction to the trite Objection of such Students, being near
Neighbors to Atheists, made that dear Mistress an Handmaid to Religion. But I
now forget, that I trespass against the Readers Patience by this long
digression, as well as hereby offend this Religious Gentleman's Modesty; for
which, after I have craved pardon of both, I shall return to Mr. Rainbow; whom
we shall (according to the Series of his History) find ready to attend the
young Earl of Suffolk, James, to the Long Parliament in October 1640. A
Parliament, a small part of which afterward, under the specious pretense of a
thorough Reformation, brought one of the best of our Kings, Charles the Martyr,
to the Block, and laid waste that Church of England, which has been long the
Glory and Bulwark (under God) of the Reformed Religion, and the Envy of the
Romish.

In 1642 Mr. Rainbow had the Honor to Marry the Right Honorable Algernoon
Earl of Northumberland, to the Lady Elizabeth Howard.

His great Friend, Dr. Henry Smith dying, and the Mastership of Magdalen
College become thereby vacant, in October 1642, Mr. Rainbow having formerly had
a Promise and Grant of that Place upon the first vacancy from the Right
Honorable Theophilus Earl of Suffolk, was now admitted into it with the
concurrence of his Son, Earl James. And now seeing himself set upon an higher
ground, and consequently his Actions thereby exposed more to the Public view
and censure, his next and chief Care was to discharge his new Trust
conscientiously; and therefore having, while he was a Fellow of that same
College, taken notice, that some very hopeful young Men had, upon their being
too early Advanced, fallen from their former studious and virtuous course of
living into Debauchery; He, upon his accession to the Mastership, resolved not
to admit any man to a Fellowship, who had not first commenced Mr. of Arts; that
their longer stay before their Preferment might give the College a clearer
demonstration of their Worth, and they thereby might become (as it were)
Probationers for three Years.

He took the Degree of Dr. of Divinity in the Year 1646, when his chief
Question (on which he made his Thesis) was, That Ecclesia Anglicana tenet omnia
ad salutem necessaria. A Point which he durst defend in the worst of Times,
when that Church was so much oppressed, for asserting her Loyalty to God and
the King; for her agreement with the Primitive Church in not rebelling against
a lawful Magistrate, and in owning the Jus Divinum of the Episcopal Hierarchy
and Liturgy.

But that Black Storm, which (occasioned by the Sins of this Nation, then
surfeiting of Ease and Plenty) was permitted a while to hover over our Heads in
Black Clouds, broke out at last in dreadful Thunders upon our Trembling Israel,
and tore down all that opposed its way. In this common Calamity Dr. Rainbow had
his share both by sympathizing with the Losses of others, and by his particular
Sufferings.

The Royal Martyrs death was that, which in a terrible manner opened the Eyes
of all those who before would not, or could not see, that under the Masque of
Piety, Rebellion Lorded it over Loyalty; when one of the most horrid Villainies,
that the Sun ever saw in this Nation, was perpetrated in open Day! A Pious
King, and one who held his Crown of none, but his Great Creator, first haled to
a Tribunal, (an Act not to be paralleld in all preceding Ages) who when he had
justly denied that Usurped Power before whom he was Convened; after he had
suffered all the Indignities that the deluded Rabble, and the ruder Soldiery
could throw upon him, was Beheaded upon a Scaffold purposely erected before his
own Palace. An Act so heinous, that it could not be equalled by any thing, but
by the Malice of His Majesty's Enemies, from whom it had its Original.

In the fall of this tall Cedar, the other Trees of our Forest were rudely
shaken, and tho they were not all hewn down by the fatal Ax, yet were they sore
cut; their Boughs and Branches at least lopt off, unless that some of the
Shrubs escaped, because their Lowness excused them from the Levelling Stroke.

Thus several Persons truly Noble, both for Descent and proper Merit, attended
their most Gracious Sovereign in his Sufferings, even to his Fall and their
Death; whose greatest Crime was that, for which disinterested Posterity will
have them in the highest admiration, their Loyalty. Because they could not
consent to Usurpations in the Civil Government, and to Innovations in the
Ecclesiastical, they must be Martyrs; or taught to obey in that new way of
Gospelling by Pike, Gun, and Dragoons.

This, among many other Confessors, was the Fate of our Dr. Rainbow, who, for
refusing a Protestation against the King in 1650, lost his Mastership of
Magdalen, which he had hitherto kept by the powerful ^ntercession of his Noble
Friends; and which he was very willing to sacrifice, rather than to make a
Sacrifice of his Conscience to those Anakims, which had nothing to Entitle them
to the Government, but Violence and Rapin.

He had been a Mourner before this, in the general loss of the Nation, in the
horrid Murder of their Gracious Sovereign, and was a particular one in the
Interment of that truly Religious Lady, the Lady Susanna, Countess of Suffolk;
the History of whose Virtues is far from being Apocryphal. Nor did she want a
faithful Historian in Doctor Edward Rainbow, who in May 13. 1649. made her
Funeral Sermon in a pathetical and moving Air; but did it as far from Flattery,
as she was above it; since he spoke nothing but what he believed, and was not
her Orator to present her Virtues in a gaudy Dress, but her faithful Historian,
to deliver what he knew upon good grounds to be true.

Dr. Rainbow being exiled from Magdalen College, by the Order of the Rump
Parliament, which College now became a Mourner for losing her Orthodox
Governor, was Presented by the Earl of Suffolk to a small Living a^ little
Chesterford, near Audley Inn in Essex, in 1652, which he accepted, when he saw
no probability of that dark Cloud's dispersing, which still hung ove^ this then
distempered Nation.

But he, who had lost the Mastership of a College for his Loyalty, was resolved
not to stain his Conscience by a base submission to those Usurpers, in the
acceptance of that place; and therefore held it only by my Lord of Suffolk's
Presentation, without being settled therein according to the prevalency of those
Licentious Times by their Tryers. In which privacy, since we have found him
settled, we will see how he manages in that Critical Juncture; after I have
subjoyned, That it was in this Year of 1652 that he married Mrs. Elizabeth
Smith, his Predecessors Daughter; who (without Flattery I speak it) were so
happy in each other, that those who had the longest Acquaintance with them,
never heard an harsh Word fall from them against each other: A Felicity rarely
to be found! and which ought to be mentioned to their Honor; and which
doubtless was a true sign, that they were both unfeigned Votaries to Virtue.

In this his Recess, a place much more agreeable to his Inclination than Merit,
did Dr. Rainbow continue for some years. And, tho he was so far retired from
the Noise and Bustles of those Tumultuous Times; yet he knew he could not
retire out of the piercing Eye of the Almighty, with whom he had to do. He
knew, it was as much incumbent upon him to do his duty there, as in a more
conspicuous station; and therefore, tho he could not openly use the English
Liturgy, yet he used some of those excellent Prayers of which it is composed;
and that not only in his private Family, but also composed such Prayers as he
used in the Church out of those in the Liturgy; and so gradually brought the
Ignorant People to affect the Common Prayers, a little transformed and altered;
who disliked the Common Prayer Book it self, they knew not why.

Nor was he satisfied with his own Practice alone in this Case; when therefore
he lodged one Night at a Clergyman's House, an old Acquaintance of his, who
then used other Prayers in his Family, he out of civility to him commended his
Friends form of Prayer; but advised him for the future to use the Prayers of
the Church, for there were none other like them.

Nor did this Pious Doctor look upon his constant Preaching to be a sufficient
discharge of his duty, and that which would serve to clear him when he was to
give an account of his Stewardship to his great Master. He believd, That many
of his Hearers came to Church purely out of Custom and Form, and consequently
that their Attention was not very profitable and advantageous to their Souls,
in minding what was delivered to them from the Pulpit, and therefore often went
to their Houses to Catechize and instruct them, and to those who were indigent
he often gave Money to oblige them to attend to his Instructions; thereby making
their Temporal. Necessities to contribute to the supplying their Spiritual
Wants. A double Charity! for which, I doubt not, he has long since met with a
double reward from the Liberal Dispenser of all good things.

In this place did our Dr. Rainbow reside, pleased with his present condition,
and his Parishioners no less pleased with him, till April 1659, when the
Rectory of Benefield in Northamptonshire, valued at 200 l. or 300 l. per Annum,
and of the Gift of the Earl of Warwick, fell Vacant, and was proffered him by
the said Noble Earl; which he utterly refused, because the Tryers, with whom he
was resolved to have nothing to do, were then in power; till there was sent him
a Presentation from the Earl of Warwick, with an Assurance, That he might be
possessed of Benefield without going to the Tryers. Which last Favor had been
procured him by the Earl of Orrery, then only Lord Broghil, and both out of the
respect which those Honorable Personages had to his Worth and sweet Temper.

Having (tho very unwilling to leave his Retirement at Chesterford) accepted of
the Presentation to Benefield, upon the abovementioned Conditions; wherein by
the by the Reader may see, how careful he was not to make Shipwreck of a good
Conscience for any Temporal Benefit or Advancement, he managed things there as
he had done at Little Chesterford, composing all his Prayers for the Church out
of the Liturgy; which being repeated by him at the Offices of Christening,
Burial, etc. by Heart, which the Ignorant People not understanding, liked well.
And there he lived with great content, and in quietness; being kindly treated
by that People, who roughly treated others of the same Function.

Before, in the course of our History, I come to that Great and happy year of
1660, when our late Sovereign, CHARLES the Merciful, was restored with the
joyful Acclamations of all his Loving Subjects to his Crown and Dignity, and
his Loyal Subjects to their Privileges, Laws and Religion, I am to inform the
Reader, That Dr. Rainbow had the satisfaction to hear, as the Nation had to
know, that Oliver Cromwell put a Period to the sitting of that Long Parliament,
which had ruined three Kingdoms, and unhinged the whole Royal Family, by
pretending to Reform the first. And this was done after they had sat about
Twelve years, in 1653, on that very day in which Dr. Rainbow was born. A
Transaction, at which he not only publicly rejoiced, because it happened on
the Day of his Nativity; but he also noted it in his Diary, with a Prayer, That
God would turn it to the good of the Church and Nation.

But to proceed: In the Year 1660, when the Finger of God signally appeared in
bringing, in this our Nation, a King to the Throne of his Royal Progenitors,
after Twelve years Exile, and without a Stroke struck, notwithstanding that
there was a Veteran Army, flushed in Blood and Victory, and trained up in an
aversion to Monarchy then in being, the Church was also restored with the King.
And then all those Worthy Persons, who in the preceding Times of Rebellion and
Confusion had been Sufferers by loss of Goods or Places, or by Imprisonment, or
by Banishment, were either restored to the places which they had formerly
possessed, or were preferred to higher Honors. Among others, Dr. Rainbow was
restored to his Mastership of Magdalen College, and by the favor and
solicitation of his Noble Friends was made Chaplain to his late Majesty, King
CHARLES the Second; and in the Year following was made Dean of Peterborough,
where he had formerly been a Scholar.

Thither he removed in August 1661, with a design to reside there; but his stay
there was not long, Preferments coming now thick upon him. For he was the next
Year called to Cambridge, being elected Vice Chancellor of that famous
University in Nov. 1662. Which early Election of him to that great Trust, was
not only a public Testimony of the Universities great esteem for him, but of
his Loyalty too

In the discharge of the Vice-Chancellors Office he acquitted himself with
sufficient Reputation, and in the management thereof forgot not the Care and
Interest of that College, whereof he was the Head. For whereas the Office of a
Proctor came not to that College in 44 Years, he got it to be publicly ordered
and confirmed by His late Majesty, that that Office should return to Magdalen
College every Ninth Year; and by a Politic fixing the Epoch of this new
Circle, got a Course to his own College sooner than it could expect. And not
only so, but because some who were put up to Preach in the University Church,
got for a small sum of Money others to do it for them, who performed it so
meanly, that it turned often to the dishonor thereof; to prevent which, he
procured a Mulct of 40 s. to be imposed on every such Offender, and to give a
good Example therein to the Masters of Art, the Heads of the Colleges (by his
instigation) yielded to Preach there in their Turns.

And now being fixed again in his former station, with the additional Revenue
of the Deanery of Peterborough, he had more than satisfied his Ambition, which
never aimed higher than such a station, as wherein he might live decently, and
might be capacitated to be serviceable to his Country. But, beyond his Wishes,
no less than above his Expectation, was he Elected Bishop of Carlisle in 1664,
upon the Translation of the Right Reverend Dr. Richard Stern to the
Archiepiscopal See of York.

This new Advancement was directly contrary to his mind, as he declared it to
those Honorable Friends of his, who had therein solicited for him. His truly
Primitive temper put him upon the declining of that high and honorable
Employment in the Church; the great Care of so many Souls, as would thereby be
devolved upon him, affrighted and deterred him a while from embracing that
Honor, which so many court in vain, who so little know how to discharge it. He
looked upon himself, as did the Ancient Fathers, to be unfit for that High
Calling; which was, tho in his Judgment, highly honorable, yet withal a
burden too heavy for his weak Shoulders to bear and sustain. He was desirous,
as our Most Reverend and Learned Primate, Archbishop Parker, was in the last
Age, to be serviceable to the Church, tho moving in a lower Sphere, and only
that he might enjoy those Promotions and Dignities he had then arrived to,
without ascending higher.

Thus meanly did he think of himself (what others often contradicted him in) as
not sufficiently qualified for that high Dignity, and had still refused it, if
the Importunity of his Friends had not at last prevailed with him to decline it
no longer. And there was one thing which contributed not a little to his
accepting of it; the great respect which he had for two ancient and very
deserving Friends, which upon his removal to Carlisle were to succeed him in
his present Promotions; the one in his Deanery, and the other in his Mastership.

Overcome at last with the Desires and Arguments of his Friends, he accepted of
that Honorable Dignity, that was procured him by his Noble Patrons Mediation;
and accordingly was Consecrated in July 1664, at London, by the Most Reverend
Father in God, Dr. Gilbert Sheldon, then Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and
came to settle at Rose Castle in Cumberland, the Palace for the Bishops of that
See, on Sept. 3. following.

I ought to mention, That his generosity in this Case was so great, that tho
(perhaps) he was at that time in such Circumstances, as to need some assistance
to defray the necessary Charges of his Consecration, First Fruits, and his
Journey to, and Settlement in his Diocese; yet did not he so much as desire to
hold the Mastership of Magdalen College in Commendam for a while with his
Bishopric; but presently and freely resigned both that Place and his Deanery of
Peterborough to his Successors in them both; although such Favors as the
retaining one of them for some time, had not unusually been granted to others
upon the like Promotion.

We have now seen him ascend by Steps into the Episcopal Throne; a Dignity
which the Primitive Church of Christ had so great a Veneration for, and which
in Times of hot Persecution had been so often sprinkled with the Blood of those
who sat thereon; they exchanging that ticklish Honor for an Immortal Crown of
Glory, by that of Martyrdom, we will now take a stand, and view how he
discharges that Sacred Office.

He found his Palace at Rose-Castle much ruinated; a great part of it being
burnt down by the Rebels in the late times of Rebellion, and but little
Repaired by his immediate Predecessor; tho he had received great Advantages by
entering upon that Bishopric after so long a Vacancy, and the Expiration of the
Tenants Leases, which engaged him in a Suit about Dilapidations with his
Predecessor, then his Metropolitan. In which Trouble he was unwillingly
embarked, as that which was both repugnant to his Meek Nature, and was (in his
Thoughts) unbecoming Persons of that Sacred Character.

After the conclusion of that long Suit, he was at great Expense in Building at
Rose-Castle, for he built the Chapel anew, and made several other Additions and
Conveniences there.

But tho these Edifices were Costly as well as Troublesome; yet there was
another sort of Building which he was more intent upon, the Building of God's
Church in the Spiritual sense; and that, either by himself or his Assistants,
his Brethren, the Clergy, in the diligent Preaching of Gods Word; in the due
Administration of the Holy Sacraments; in Catechizing of Youth, (which word is
rendered by some Grammarians, To build up in the Holy Faith;) in advising them
to walk in the Paths of Virtue and Holiness, and in admonishing and reclaiming
the more Loose from their Immoralities.

As this was his great Province; so was it his desire and endeavor to see,
that the Clergy subordinate to him should do their Duties. In the management of
which, when some who had been sufficiently Criminal and Neglectful in the
discharge of their Function, were justly reproved by him for so doing; tho that
was done too at the first with Meekness enough, yet he met with a very rude
Treatment from them, and much unbecoming their station; nevertheless both that
and the Ill Returns made him from persons whom he had highly obliged, was far
from making him Vindictive, if his public Character and the interest of the
Church were not interwoven with his own Concern. For then he would take care to
rescue both from Contempt, lest the Common Cause might suffer by his own supine
Negligence. I shall not here revive the remembrance of those Affronts to that
Sacred Order by particularizing those which were offered to him, and therefore
will forbear to mention the offending Persons Names, wishing that the Faults of
some of them may be buried in the same Graves with their Authors; and only add,
That generally the Troubles which befell him after his advancement to the
Episcopal Authority, were occasioned by his Conscientious discharge of that
Sacred Office; which does not seldom make the best of Men fall under the weight
of popular Odium. For, although I am far from pretending to exempt him in his
Management of that Dignity from Mistakes and Errors, and it is certain his own
Humility taught him another Lesson, than to aspire to the swelling Title of
Infallible; yet generally his Failings were such as might admit of an easy
Apology, without the assistance of Political Refinings, to which he was very
much a Stranger.

But to return from whence I have digressed: As he inspected the Lives and
Manners of his Clergy, and their performance of their Pastoral Charge; so was
not he wanting to set them a good Pattern himself, being assured, that nothing
won more upon the Minds and Consciences of Men than a good Example, especially
in those who attend at Gods Altar, and dispense his Holy Word, and unfold the
Sacred Mysteries of our holy Religion. He therefore resoved to set them a Copy
as legible as his human Frailties would permit it to be written, that they
fairly imitating it, the Laity might be invited to transcribe it from them.

Pursuant of his Pious design, he Preached not only in his Courses at the
Cathedral, but often there also upon occasional days; as also frequently at his
own Chapel at Ross, at Dalston Church, and the adjacent Chapels, till hindered
from this performance by the Gout; the Racks of which were not probably more
troublesome than their Consequence; his being thereby forced to omit his Public
Duty. And Catechizing he so much kept up, that to oblige some indigent Persons
to attend it, to their own Spiritual advantage, and the building themselves in
the most Holy Faith, he gave them Money. Neither was his Hospitality, offending
against the Canons of the Church; but like that of a Bishop. His Entertainment
was free; his Table was well furnished with Varieties; his Conversation
pleasant and yet grave, divertive and yet instructing; often feeding the Minds,
as well as the Bodies of his Guests.

We have observed his way of Procedure as to what related to the Church; now
the ordering of his Family challenges our next Consideration.

The Government of his private Family was modelled in imitation of that of the
Church; that is, Regular. Four times a day was God publicly called upon by
Prayers in that Family; twice in the Chapel, which part his Lordships
Chaplains performed; and twice in the Dining Room; the later of these at Six in
the Morning and Nine at Night, was the usual Task of our Right Reverend and
Worthy Prelate himself, if not disabled by Sickness. As if he who was the
Master of the Family, would open it every Morning, and lock it up every Night,
by the Key of Prayer.

All known Profaness and Swearing were banished thence: For this made as much
discord in that Family, as an ill Musician did in Plato's Schools. Offenders in
Debauchery were at first reproved and admonished; and if they relapsed into the
same Fault, they were often dismissed the House; unless there appeared visible
signs of Repentance, and those ushered in with fervent Promises, to make those
good by their utmost endeavors.

While the Suit was continued betwixt the then Archbishop of Tork and our
Worthy Prelate, viz. in the Year 1668, he was once offered to be removed from
the Sea of Carlisle to that of Lincoln, by the most Reverend Father in God
Gilbert Sheldon, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. A Prelate, who, besides the
Monuments he erected to his Name by his truly primitive Virtues, has left one
at Oxford, that famous Theater built at his own charge, and dedicated to the
uses of the Public, the service of the Church, and the Muses. A Structure,
which (if the World last so long) may continue the Name of that Pious
Archbishop longer than the Egyptian Pyramids, have continued the memory of
their ambitious and vainglorious Founders.

Dr. Rainbow listened with some pleasure to that Motion of the good Archbishop,
as being desirous to be freed from the Inquietudes which his legal Dispute with
his Metropolitan in the abovementioned Case of Dilapidations did create him.
But herein he met with too potent an Adversary to be successful; a great Lady,
with whom he had formerly had some acquaintance, and a just respect: But, when
she had forfeited his Esteem, and that of all good Men, by the prostitution of
her Honor, our good Bishop did not then think himself obliged, notwithstanding
her greater Quality, to pay her those Regards he had formerly done. And when
she, after that, offered him Civilities, he was so far from laying hold on such
opportunities to advance his Fortunes by her mediation, that he declined her
very Company; contemning the most innocent Favors of such a Person, who had
forgotten her Noble practices in the addition of new Titles, and those
purchased at a dear rate with the loss of her Fame.

This slight from our pious Prelate, the Lady so highly resented, that partly
out of particular Pique, and partly out of a design to prefer an Uncle of hers
to the Bishopric of Lincoln, tho far unfit to be placed in so much Light, she
hindered the Translation of Dr. Rainbow thither. Albeit the pious Archbishop so
far prevailed over that Ladies Interest as to get an Irish Bishop, designed
before for Carlisle, and with the thoughts whereof he had been well enough
contented, to be placed in the stead of that Ladies Uncle, who was thereby
gently laid aside.

Our Prelate was not much displeased at this turn of Assairs, tho he had wished
the contrary for the abovementioned Reason; to which another might be added,
That the Bishop of Lincoln's Palace at Bugden was so situated as to be near
Cambridge, and not far distant from London; in which respect he could not have
wished to have been better fixed than there, for the enjoyment of his Relations
and intimate Acquaintance; yet when he first considered in his cooler, by whose
interest he was frustrated of his expectations; and that the Bishopric of
Lincoln, besides its vast extent, which still increased the Cure of Souls, and
consequently made that greater burden balance the greater Revenue, it had (as
he thought) a greater inconvenience, that that Revenue, superior to the other
of Carlisle, (which notwithstanding was far from tempting our Prelate to a
removal to Lincoln) consisted much in Pensions from the Clergy; so that he used
to say, That that Bishop was maintained out of the poor Clergy man's Mouths.

Dr. Edward Rainbow had continued nigh Twenty years in the exercise of his
Episcopal Function, tho often indisposed, and especially in his later years,
with the Stone and the Gout; two Diseases of so acute a pain, that they would
not only pose the patience, or rather pretended apathy of the proudest Stoical
Philosopher, but put even a Christian one to fly from Second Causes to the
First of all, for his support under that torment, more cruel than the
dispatching and devouring Flames; He had been Bishop, I say so long, when in
March 1683. his Pains occasioned (as was supposed) by the Gout in the Stomach,
increased; and the more they augmented, the more did our Pious Bishop apply
himself to the Physician of Souls, as looking upon the Bodily health to be in a
declining condition; albeit, to preserve it, he neglected not to consult
Physicians for the Body too, but in vain.

When he was therefore ascertained, that Death was approaching him, with how
much cheerfulness, and with what a true Christian Magnanimity did he look the
King of Terrors in the Face! He prepared to receive him, not as an Enemy, but
as a welcome Friend, who was to conduct him out of this Vale of Tears, into the
Mansions of Eternal Joy, far above all the Regions of Instability. He saw his
Course was almost finished, and he longed to be at the Goal.

During this his last Sickness, not one idle or impertinent word fell from him.
He had in his Lifetime, before this last Arrest of his Body by Distempers,
learned a perfect resignation of himself to the Divine Will and Pleasure of
Almighty God, and therefore received the approaches of Death with that humble
submission to the Divine Will, and with that calmness and serenity of mind,
which are not often found but in Persons of a Primitive Piety.

He had indeed begged of God, that he might over-live Lady Day, because it
would much conduce to the Prosit of his then Consort, and since Mournful Widow.
And this seems to have been granted to him, since he survived the Return of
that time no more than one day. Another Petition he also made, That his Reason
and Senses might continue to the last moment of his Life; which was also
granted; evidencing thereby, That he was no mean Favorite in the High Court of
Heaven: For he lived till Wednesday, March 26. 1684. in the Evening; and yet
did he not mispend his precious Hours. His care for Secular concerns, which was
never so great as to merit the Title of Fondness, was now taken off by a more
pressing and laudable one; and that which was to be entertained in the
preparation for, and contemplation of a Future and Eternal state. Hence the
last Moments wherein he enjoyed the use of his Tongue were spent in a most
Pious manner: Prudent Counsel to those that were about him; Holy Meditations
upon his own Condition at that time; fervent Prayers and Supplications to the
King of Mercy, were the happy employments of his Heavenly Soul; and all these
performed with so much zeal and fervor, that it seemed already to be upon the
Wing toward Heaven.

Toward Even, on Wednesday abovementioned, being got into Bed, and finding
himself very weak, he called for Prayers; which being concluded, and observing
his Speech to fail, he spoke these Words to the Company which were then with
him: It has pleased God to take away my Speech, and I am heavy and dull; I
desire you all to Pray for me, That God would assist me with his Grace.

After this he lay quietly, and slumbred sometimes, till Eleven a Clock at
Night, when a starting Fit (which formerly in his Sickness had troubled him at
times) seized him sharply for some time; then he lay quietly a while, tho
sensible (as might be perceived) to the last, and so breathed out his last
Breath; yielding up his Spirit to God, the Auth^^^ of it, and leaving all the
Spectators of this his happy End, dissolved in Tears at this long Separation,
in going to inherit, I hope, a Crown of Glory, which God has prepared for all
them which unfeignedly love and sincerely serve him.

Thus died that Right Reverend and Pious Prelate, Dr. Edward Rainbow, late
Bishop of Carlisle, about Eleven of the Clock at Night, on Wednesday March 26.
1684. at the Age of near Seventy six years, and was Interred on Tuesday
following in Dalston Church yard, April 1. 1684. as he had desired upon his
Deathbed. His Hearse was attended with a great multitude of the Gentry, the
Clergy, and other Neighbors; Mr. Thomas Tullie, his Lordships Chaplain and
Chancellor of the Diocese of Carlisle, Preaching his Funeral Sermon.

As he had requested, That no Pomp nor State should be used at his Funeral, no
more than any Elogium should be made of him (such was his rare Modesty and
Humility:) So did he desire to be buried in Dalston Churchyard, and to have a
plain Stone laid over his Grave with no other Inscription, but that such a Day
and Year died Edward, Bishop of Carlisle.

Which accordingly was performed. These his two last Requests are a declaration
to the World in his last Moments, how little he valued the Pageantry of Funeral
Pomp, and all Monuments, which were not built upon the sure and firm Basis of
Piety.

We have now seen him laid in the Chambers of the Dust, let us draw the
Curtains about him, leaving his Body to repose till the last Trumpet shall
awake him to the general Resurrection of the Just.

He left no Works in Print, but three occasional Sermons; the two former of
which are scarce to be got.

The first of these Sermons, and which has been already twice mentioned, was
Preached at S. Paul's Cross, on Sept. 28. 1634, Entitled, Labor forbidden and
commanded; and which to all Persons that peruse it without prejudice will
sufficiently evince, That the late Dr. Rainbow could cloth his Thoughts in all
the gaiety of expression suitable to a great Audience, when he judged it
convenient.

The second was at the Funeral of Susanna, Countess of Suffolk, Preached May
13. 1649. on Eccles. 7. 1. which was printed together with some Elogies in
praise of that Virtuous young Lady; which were composed by his two intimate and
no less Learned Friends, Dr. S. Collins, Regius Professor of Divinity in
Cambridge, and Dr. James Duport, Greek Professor there, and his Successor, in
the Mastership of Magdalen and Deanery of Peterborough.

The third was Preached at the Interment of Anne Countess of Pembroke, Dorset
and Montgomery, at Appleby in Westmorland, April 14. 1676. with some Remarks on
the Life of that Eminenr Lady, on Prove. 14. 1.

In his Youth he had a rich Vein in Poesy, in which appeared somewhat of Ovid's
Air and Fancy, tempered with the Judgment of Virgil; but none of his Poetical
Exercises and Diversions have been published, but a Paper of Verses upon the
Frontispiece of Mr. Henry Isaacson's Chronology; which acurate Chronologer was
our Bishops particular Friend, and had formerly been Amanuensis to that living
Library, while he was alive, the Reverend and Learned Bishop Andrews; and
another Paper on Mr. Shelton's Art of Short-Writing.

Of the Honor of the former of these Poems, printed without the addition of
any Name in 1633, he was robbed by the Publisher of Mr. Richard Crashaw's
Poems, Entitled, Steps to the Temple, and ascribed by him to that Ingenious
Epigrammatist. But he having no Title to it, but what the modest silence of Mr.
Rainbow gave him, I have recovered it to the true Owner by a Melius
inquirendum, and subjoyned it here.

The Frontispiece of Mr. Isaacson 's Chronology explained.
IF with distinctive Eye and Mind, you look
Upon the Front, you see more than one Book.
Creation is God's Book, wherein he writ it.
Each Creature as a Letter filling
History is Creation's Book; which shows,
To what effect the Series of it goes.
Chronology is the Book of History, and bears
The just Account of Days, and Months, and Years:
But Resurrection in a later Press,
And New Edition is the sum of these.
The Language of these Books had all been one,
Had not the aspiring Tower of Babylon
Confused the Tongues, and in a distance hurled
As far the Speech, as Men of the Newfound World.
Set then your Eyes in method, and behold
Time's Emblem, Saturn; who, when store of Gold
Coined the first Age, devoured that Birth, he feared,
Till History, Time's Eldest Child appeared,
And Phoenix-like, in spite of Saturn's Rage,
Forced from her Ashes, Heirs in every Age;
From the Rising Sun, obtaining by just Suit
A Spring's Engender, and an Autumn's Fruit.
Who in those Volumes at her motion Penned,
Unto Creation's Alpha does extend.
Again ascend, and view Chronology,
By Optic Skill pulling far, History
Nearer; whose hand the piercing Eagles Eye
Strengthens, to bring remotest Objects nigh:
Under whose Feet you see the Setting Sun,
From the dark Gnomon, over her Volumes run,
Drowned in Eternal Night, never to rise,
Till Resurrection show it to the Eyes
Of Earth-worn Men; and her shrill Trumpets sound
Affright the Bones of Mortals from the Ground.
The Columns both are Crowned with either Sphere,
To show Chronology and History bear
No other Culmen, than the double Art,
Astronomy, Geography impart.
Another POEM, upon Mr. Shelton 's Art of Short-Writing.
To the Author, his Friend, upon his Art of Short-Writing.
FOrtunate Art, by which the Hand so speeds,
That Words are now of slower birth than Deeds!
Dissembling Age, that Faith so often breaks,
Learn hence to do more than the Proudest speaks.
Speak not the Author's Praise; his Art commands,
Our Tongues should be more cripled than our Hands;
Nor can we escape (this Spite his speed affords)
From being over-taken in our Words.
What shall become of their Divinity,
Which scattered through two hours Tautology.
Gathered by these Characters, must hence
Endure the doom of such as can speak sense?
But that thine Art's a Friend to Repetition,
Their hourly Breath; they would damn the next Edition.
Print then that Praise which Volumes cannot hold,
But in thine own compendious Figures told:
Figures, which make us duller-handed think
Words from the Speaker's Mouth dissolve to Ink;
And fall upon thy Papers, or thy Quill,
Made of some nimble Tongue gave thee this Skill.
Still may that full-fledg'd Pen with moisture spring,
Snatched from the Eagles, not the Gooses Wing.
But that which would have been most useful to the Church of God, if it had
pleased the Almighty to have granted him Life to finish it, was a Treatise
called by him, Verba Christi, or, The Words of Christ. His design in it was
this;

He considered, how great an Eyesore it was to all good Men, to see Christians
persecute each other, and as violently as those of the same Religion had been
Persecuted in former Ages by the grossest Heretics, by Jews or Heathen
Infidels. His desire therefore was to make enquiry (I now use his own
Expressions) into the Causes and Reasons why Christians should be so animated
against one another, and having fixed it in his Mind and Judgment, that all
reasons of this, and indeed of the decay of Christianity in general, were to be
resolved into this one; namely, the not duly attending unto the Words of our
Savior; not only his Precepts and Doctrins, but all his Sayings.

He therefore thought it not an unprofitable Task, to bring into one Body and
Complex all the Words and Sayings of our Savior, which lie dispersed in the
four Evangelists; making them appear in a distinct and larger Character from
the Words with which they have a necessary connection and dependence. In the
Words (says he) uttered by our Saviors own Mouth, or by direct consequences
from them, we may find a Body of Divinity, a Complex of all necessary
Theological Truths, fundamental to the Faith. Here (added he) may be found
ground for decision of Controversies, so as to keep us from Erring damnably, or
Sinning mortally; for resolving all Casuistical Points of moment to Salvation.
Here we might learn to direct and moderate our Passions, to attain and exercise
all Virtues, and shun all Vices. Here (says our Prelate) patience to bear, and
strength to conquer all Afflictions. From our Saviors Lips have flowed words
of sweetest Consolation to erect the Soul, when oppressed under heaviest
burdens.

So far as to the Reason and Foundation of his Work, now hear him as to the
manner and platform of it. And that was this; he would endeavor to show from
the time in which, and the occasion upon which, each saying was uttered by Our
Savior, the scope and drift of his Words, and what application may be made of
them for our instruction; either to guide us in our Faith, or to direct us in
our life, in several Cases and Occurrences.

This was the design, and this the method of the pious Author in that imperfect
Treatise of his, Verba Christi. A work truly worthy of its Author, and
agreeable to the pacific temper of him in particular, and to the design of
Christianity in general. But his being snatched away by the rude hand of Death,
in the very beginning of that undertaking, as the Learned and Pious Archbishop
Usher was in the prosecution of his Sacred Chronology, has left it an
Abortive. A loss which as it cannot now be retrieved, is not enough to be
lamented; since it might have contributed in part to allay the flames, and cool
the heats among Christians; which administer so much occasion thereby of
Scandal to the common Enemies of our Faith, Jews, Mahometans and Heathens.

And tho his Name should not live in these his scattered Works, some of which
notwithstanding may escape the Teeth of Time, if not those of Calumny; yet will
he live, at least, in the remembrance of all virtuous and honest Men, who knew
his real Merit and Worth. The Hopes which I have conceived of the duration of
his unspotted Fame, obliges me to hasten to a Conclusion, after I have
endeavored to draw his Picture in Miniature, in Little; tho therein I stand in
need of the Pencil of an Vrbin, or an Angelo.

His Learning (to begin with that which is not the least Characteristic of a
good Divine) was sufficiently attested in those public Exercises performed by
him with so much Applause, and attended with so much Pomp (as has been already
mentioned) before that famous University, and which certainly wanted not many
Men as fit to judge of worth, as there are others to censure it without any
Title to that unmannerly Freedom, but Confidence and Ignorance.

How his Preaching was received and valued in the University, has been already
shown; and with so clear a demonstration, that Venerable Antiquity cannot
furnish us with many parallel Instances. It Is true, in his Elder years he had
declined to use that florid way of Preaching, for which he had been so much
celebrated in his Younger times; and tho after that he affected no pompous
Expressions, no gaudy Oratory; yet were his Reasons masculine, his Arguments
cogent, and his Phrase plain and clear; and have offense to none but some
superficial Witlings: Persons who applaud nothing but their own Tinselware, and
consequently judged his studied Plainness to be incompatible with the design of
a Pulpit-harangue.

His Humility set off all his other Virtues, like a Diamond in a Ring; and was
so conspicuous, that, tho it gave a greater luster thereto among good and sober
Men; yet did his humble condescension to the meanest of Men, and especially to
any of those who had a Ray of the Immortal Wisdom darting upon their Souls,
seem to lessen him among the unthinking Rabble, who being strangers to his real
Worth, resolved to diminish it.

And tho he was remarkable for this last Virtue, and which may be said (at
least) to be the Nurse of the rest; yet as he in all Businesses of moment
pondered long with himself all the Causes and Circumstances thereof, and
resolved them into Cases of Conscience, when he had once thus satisfied his
Conscience, and consulted therein his Judgment, 'twas not the insinuations of
the promising Flatterer that could persuade, nor the frowns of the Great that
could bias or withdraw him from his Post, and from the lines of Just and
Right; although in more minute Matters he might in some Cases be imposed upon, by
his Credulity to those who therein pretended to advise him. And, to finish that
part of his Portraiture, in the management of Public Concerns he showed himself
to be both Prudent and Courageous. In all Affronts or Reproaches cast upon him,
as a Private Man, his Reason and sweet Temper so far subdued his passionate
Resentments, as not to study any Revenge against the Offender. He would have
looked upon himself as a notorious Violater of the Divine Precepts, if he did
not forgive Injuries, and write them in the Dust. The tart Reflections which
ensued such a Crime, as the meditating a Revenge, were made upon himself; and
he inferred, That God was displeased with his ways, since those became his
Enemies whom he had obliged to a more Friendly procedure, by his having
formerly laden them with Kindnesses. For he used to say; It was just with God
to suffer him to be so ill used by Men, who had been far more ungrateful to
God. And, if herein some sallies of Passion showed, that he was a Man; his
quick correction of them showed, that he was a Christian. How patiently, and
how calmly did he often resent such Indignities to his private Person! of which
all the abovementioned Discourse is intended.

His Piety might be read in visible Characters, in his public Actions, and was
best drawn by his own Pencil in his Diaries, and in keeping his Birthday with
Fasting and Prayers; some of which I have here added, that by this taste the
Reader may perceive, how near this Prelates Devotion came to the warm Zeal and
vigorous Piety of the Christians of the first Ages; and how much his humble
complaining of his Infirmities, and the mean performances of his Duty, when at
best, suits with their holy Practices.

Meditations on April 20. 1681. by Dr. Edward Rainbow.

WHen I make a serious retrospect into the several Stages of my past Life, I
cannot but acknowledge a continued Series of merciful Providence from God
toward me in my several Capacities; but I have cause to lament, that my
Returns have been very unsuitable.

God assist me with his Holy Spirit, and Wisdom, and grant, that I may improve
my left Talent, and all the remaining Moments of my Life, to gain a comfortable
assurance, That Death shall open a Gate to let my Soul pass out of the old
Prison of this Body, into that Freedom to which the Son of God gives right,
even to the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. O, that I might so preach him
in his Kingdom of Grace, that I may be one, tho the meanest in his Kingdom of
Glory!

Meditations on Jan. 30. 1652. after a Recovery from a Cold with a Cough.

LOrd! thy Mercy is most seen in Judgment, when it is not lengthened to
Eternity. If I had not now felt the smart of this one Twig of thy Rod, I had
utterly persevered in an incorrigible Disobedience. But by this Touch thou have
graciously healed me of that, giving me time and opportunity to look up at
thee, now admonishing by thy Finger. From this I see nothing but the sweetness,
indulgence and mercy of a wise Father: In my self nothing but the stubbornness
and rebellion of a perverse Child. O, how have I abused a longer reign of
Health for now well nigh Thirty years!

If I should write all his Meditations, I might transcribe a good part of his
Diary.

You have here had a Specimen of his private Devotion; in the next and last
place we shall consider, whether his Liberality to the Poor and Needy was
agreeable to his Sacred Character, or no.

In examining his Actions by the Test of this Virtue, we shall find that he
left a large Inventory of charitable Deeds. And, as Nerva Coesar was called
Pater Patrioe, the Father of his Country, by reason of his gentle and kind
Government; so might he be termed Pater Pauperum, the Father of the Poor, for
his liberal Donative to them, unto whom his Compassion was never denied, nor
his Hand closed up, without something to warm their Hearts and cheer their
Spirits; and what was still more obliging, what he bestowed was with a free
heart, taking pleasure in the good Offices he did any of those Mystical Members
of Jesus Christ.

To descend to particularize the several methods of this Bishops Charity, after
he came to be so, would look something like Flattery; such variety did he use
in the dispensing the Goods of Fortune to his Indigent Brethren; since the
Proverb in these Dregs of Time proves too true, which asserts the great disuse
of that most extorting Usury, when the Use out-strips the Principal.

To proceed; He usually gave 20 s. to the Poor at Carlisle, when it was his
turn to Preach there, that his Liberality might tempt them to listen to his
Doctrine. His Allowance to the Poor of Dalston Parish (within the Limits of
which Rose Castle stands) was 30 s. a Month, besides what was given them at his
Castle-Gates, and to Sick People; not to mention, what was given them at
Sacraments, and upon other occasions. In Dear Years, when his own stock of Corn
was spent, he ordered Barley to be bought at 12 s. or 14 s. per Bushel, and to
be given to the Poor; which came then in such great numbers to the Gates, that
the Porter who served them, having sometimes the curiosity to tell them,
affirmed, that he often served Seven or Eightscore People in one and the same
day. He allowed Money to a School Master for teaching Eight Poor Children to
Read, at Dalston. He put out Poor Boys to Apprentices. In Pensions to Poor
Scholars at the University, and to some Indigent Persons he gave 32 l. per
Annum constantly, for several Years. To which may be added, his share with
other Bishops in yearly Pensions to Foreign Converts, and to other public
Charities, as the Rebuilding of S. Paul's Church; to French Protestants large
Sums, etc. Nay, his Charity was often so extensive, that he forgot his own
Secular Interest to lend unto God, by his Largesses to the Needy.

At his Death, he gave to the Poor of eight or nine Parishes, and in some other
Modes of Charity, which amounted to the Sum of 200 l. And what that pious
Prelate left, his Widow punctually performed. For as she loved him entirely; so
did she show her true respect for his Memory, in enlarging his gift. And thus
that Religious Couple, as they strove whether should love more; so did they
rival each other in Charity.

Moreover I should be injurious the memory of this good Bishop, if I should not
further add, that besides these Public Acts of Liberality, his Charity was yet
in some respects so secret (according to our Blessed Savior's Advice) that he
kept a Private Purse for that end, and that so private, that even his dear
Consort, the Partner of all his Joys and other Counsels, was a Stranger to it;
not knowing how he disposed of it, till he himself discovered to her a little
before his death whereabout 20 l. of that Money lay, which he desired might be
given to three or four of the French Protestants, or to some decayed Gentleman
of honest Conversation; and that without naming of him. Which his Loving
Consort accordingly performed. This last Act is not only a plain demonstration
of his extensive Bounty, but how far he was from that pompous and ostentous
Charity, which is made (by too many) the foundation of Merit in another
Communion.

And, as his Kindness was unlimited to the corporal Wants of the Needy; so no
less compassionate was he to those who went astray from the true Fold. To such
he used lenity and mildness, endeavoring to bring them into the way by strong
Argumenrs and soft Words; convincing their erroneous Judgments by Reason and
Scripture, rather than by affrighting them with Corporal punishments out of
that by-way into which they had fallen by mistake. As to his own Practice, none
could be more observant of the Rules of the Church of England than he was; tho
he pitied the Errors of others, who differed from him in Opinion.

To conclude, May this mean Monument, which I have erected to the Memory of
this Right Reverend Prelate, suffice to continue his Name, and the History of
his Virtues to succeeding Ages, and that thereby the luster of his Pious
Actions may so shine forth in this debauched and profligate Age, that others
may be induced to Copy after so fair an Example; serving God faithfully and
sincerely in this Life, and enjoying him eternally in that which is to come.

Ephesians. 3. 20Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us; unto him be
glory in the Church, by Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages, World without end.
Amen. FINIS.
A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward,
Lord Bishop of Carlisle.
REV. XIV. 13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.
WHen Moses died, God himself Interred him with the expense of a Miracle, Deuteronomy.
34. 6.
and bestowed the highest Title of Honor upon him in this Epitaph, Moses my
Servant is dead. Josh. 1. 2.
And here we have a Voice from Heaven directing John the Divine to write a
Text, proper for the Funeral of a Prophet in Israel, such an one as gives us
the sad Occasion of paying him the last Office of our Duty and Charity at this
Mournful Solemnity. Sad it is to us, For know thou not that the Lord has
taken away 2 King. 2. 3.
thy Master from thy head to day? as the Sons of the Prophets said of Elijah.
But to him who lived to Christ, to dye is gain, and the day of his death better
than the day of his birth. The one brought him into a Vale of Misery, where his
days were to be few, and full of trouble; the other we hope has advanced him to
a Region far above assaults of Mutability, where his Happiness shall be as
Eternal, as God the Author and the Object of it. Where they who dye in the
Lord, shall sing an everlasting Requiem to their Souls; nothing of the busle of
this life attend them, but their Works; and they from thenceforth, as says the
Spirit, rest from their labors.

Some Critics read the words thus; Blessed are the dead that are in the Lord,
which die within a while, (...). And then by the Connection this Verse seems to
have with the former. which speaks of the patience of the Saints, by (...),
which we render Labors, they understand Persecutions, and so take the Text to
be a particular Prediction of the bloody and severe Tyranny under Dioclesian,
when they were happy, most happy who were gathered unto their graves in peace,
where the wicked cease from troubling, that their eyes should see all the evil
which was coming upon the Church of God. Now tho perhaps this may be the Strict
and Primary meaning of the Heavenly Voice, yet the words are but too applicable
to our present Times, even in this sense: for tho we are not now under the
Persecution of Heathen Emperors, but have Kings for our Nursing Fathers; yet
it is Scripture still; All that will live 2 Timothy 3. 12.
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution. Satan has his Agents even in
the outward visible Church. Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of Joh. 6. 70.
you is a Devil? and these have so much of the Hellish temper and Complexion of
their Father, that they rejoice and triumph in running down all the practices
of an Holy life, which in the Judgment of the Holy Ghost (if perhaps they have
heard whether there be any Holy Ghost, or no) is looked upon as Persecution; as
plainly appears by comparing Genesis 21. 9. with Gal. 4. 29. in the case between
Ishmael and Isaac. I hope some men's Consciences will tell them, what
Unchristian opposition this most Pious and Right Reverend Prelate has been
forced to contest with, purely for his steady resolution of Religiously
executing the weighty Charge of his Sacred Function, and so save me the
ungrateful task of doing it.

But I shall take the Words in the most obvious and easy sense, as they in
general import the Blessed estate of those who dye in the Lord. And to handle
this in the best method I am able to reduce my hasty and troubled Meditations
to, 'twill be requisite that I (first) explain what it is to die in the Lord.
After which I shall endeavor to show, wherein the blessedness of that Estate
consists* Which I shall illustrate,

First, by representing unto you the Emptiness and Dissatisfaction of all
Worldly Enjoyments from which they are delivered; suggested in these words, for
they rest from their labors.

Secondly, by showing that positive and superabundant Satifaction, that
glorious recompense of Reward, which they shall meet with in a better World;
couched in these words, and their works do follow them.

First then, What it is to die in the Lord.

To die in the Lord, is to die in the true Christian Faith. But then by Faith,
we must not mean the bare profession of an Historical belief; but the Cordial
and Sincere Embracing of the Promises of the Gospel upon the Conditions they
are offered to us. This is so comprehensive a Subject, that it implies the
whole Duty of Man; and cannot be fully described, unless I should either
present you with the Original (the New Testament) or with the lively transcript
of it, in the History of our departed Fathers life; in which the Severest Eye
might gratisie its Curiosity in viewing those refined strokes which the Pencil
of God had drawn upon his Soul; in beholding with Veneration the awful and
Majestic Character of his Maker Signally imprinted upon all the Powers and
Faculties of his Mind: (...). 'Twas indeed an Instructive sight to those who
had the honor and happiness of his more immediate Converse, to see the many
Originals of Christianity, which lay scattered and dispersed in the Writings of
the Apostles and Evangelists, elegantly contracted in the System of his
Actions, unto a perfect Man of God, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ. How exemplary was his Meekness in bearing the rudeness, the
Insolence and Indignities of some, whom the common Obligation of Religion, as
well as the more special Ties of their peculiar Subjection, might have taught
more duty and observance? How familiar was his Converse, and of how easy
Access was he to the meanest Christian, treating them more like Brethren, than
Sons in Christ? Having always before his eyes both the Command and Precedent of
his Savior, He that is greatest among you shall be your Servant. With Math.
23. 11.
how tender and compassionate a sense did his Bowels earn upon the Necessities
of his poor Brethren; whom he freely relieved with the most enlarged Heart and
open hand! O how often have the Loins of the naked blessed him, for being
warmed with the fleece of his Sheep! His Job 31. 20.
Liberality and Charity were as Extensive as the obligation of his duty. His
Riches consisted most in good Works; he was indeed a faithful Steward, who
carefully employed the Talent God entrusted him with, to the use and service of
Christ's Members upon Earth: for the only Usury he ever put his Money too, was in
thus lending to the Lord; which he did, not out of any Pharisaical affectation
of Popularity or Applause; to avoid that, he so industriously studied a modest
Secrecy, that his left hand knew not what his right hand did. By which means he
lost indeed what he never valued, the Fame and Reputation of it, being seen of
men; looking up rather unto him, who then saw him in secret, and will one day
reward him openly.

How admirable was his Humility, both in his Civil and Spiritual Capacity!
which his earnest desire of being Interred among the meanest of those that own
the same common Savior and Redeemer, will testify to all Posterity. As for
the Pageantry of Funeral Pomp, and the Artificial voice of Monuments; he looked
not upon them as Ensigns of Honor, but rather as Trophies erected by Death, in
memory of that fatal Victory Sin got over us in the Garden of Eden, when we
became like the Beasts that perish. But tho his Merit and Virtue do loudly call
for all the Justice Oratory can do them, yet I dread to disturb his Sacred
rest, by profaning the Religion of his last, peremptory, dying Command, that I
should, (to express my self in his own words) be very sparing in any Character
of him: But yet the Modesty of the dead must not rob the living, of the
comfortable and happy Influence the manner of his death may have upon every one
that hears it. My Text leads me directly to that: And indeed his was such a
Ravishment to all that beheld it, that their Hearts grew warm within them,
ready to break out into that pathetic Expression of the Apostle. Let us also
go, that we Joh. 11. 16.
may die with him. And whenever thou, O God the Lord, to whom belong the Issues
of Life and Death, shall call us to follow him; O let us die the death of this
righteous person, Number. 23. 10.
and let our last end be like his.

'Twas admirable to observe with what submissive Humility and cheerful Devotion
he received his last Sickness as the Messenger of Death: How steadily he
maintained a Divine temper of Mind, without the impertinent and vain
interruption of Secular Concerns; vigorous Ejaculations, fervent Prayers, holy
Meditation, seasonable, prudent and pious Advice, were the constant Employment
of his heavenly Soul; till his weak and languishing Voice concluded the Period
of his life with this pious and submissive Expression; God has now taken from
me the use of my Tongue but I desire you all to employ yours in Prayers to him
for me. This sweet disposition of Spirit was so pleasing to God, that he
therefore seemed to dissolve his earthly Tabernacle without either pain or
sickness, on purpose that the Troubles of a Body might not interrupt the
Calmness and Serenity of his Soul.

Thus he lived, Copying out through the whole tenor and series of his Actions,
the Noble draught St. Paul has left of a good Bishop (1 Timothy 3.) adorning his
Sacred Function with the glorious variety of all those Graces which qualify
the Man of God to bear the Character of Ambassador from Heaven. And thus he
died in the Lord. Is not he then blessed? Yea, says the Spirit. And this leads
me in the second place, to show wherein the blessedness of that Estate
consists. And,

First, In being delivered from the toil and fatigue, the emptiness and
dissatisfaction of things below. To read the many Noble Discourses the Heathen
Philosophers have transmitted to Posterity of the emptiness and insignificancy
of the (...), the outward enjoyments of Life, those Toys and Bables upon which
we fool away the (...), the precious time God has put into our hands to secure
unto our Selves a blessed Eternity, were sufficient to give any thinking man an
Eternal disgust against them. So little happiness could those refined Wits, and
great Masters of Reason, find in the fluttering Pomp of temporal Grandeur. But
if you are not satisfied with the Authority of the Heathen (tho herein they
uttered the genuine Oracles of Nature;) why, then let us refer the
Determination of the Point to Solomon; a person peculiarly qualified to be
Judge in the Case, both in respect of the Excellent Spirit of Wisdom that was
in him and because he is one that stuck not to gratify his Curiosity in trying
all Experiments of that Nature; for he gave his heart Eccl. 1. 17.
to know madness and folly, as well as wisdom. And what was the result of all?
Why, after this glorious and potent Monarch had made Silver in Jerusalem as
Stones for abundance, and 1 King. 10. 27. 1 King. 11. 3.
had taken him a thousand Wives and Concubines, erected him Magnificent
Buildings, planted him delicious Vineyards, fruitful Orchards, pleasant
Gardens, adorned with Lillies, more splendidly arrayed than he himself in all
his glory; after he had gotten him great Possessions, Numerous choice of Men
Singers and Women Singers, and the delights of the Sons of Men, and denied
himself nothing that his Eyes desired, nor withheld his heart from any Joy; and
having thus contracted unto himself an Epitomy of the Worlds glory, he might
well ask, What can the man do that comes after the King? yet this King
confesses, that when he had looked on all the works that his Eccl. 2. from
ver. 1. to ver. 13.
hands had wrought, and on the labor that he had labored to do, behold all
was vanity and vexation of Spirit, and there was no profit under the Sun.
Believe it, if Solomon, whom both Nature and Art so highly conspired to divert
and please, yet Nauseated all as Vanity; 'twere but common Prudence in us to
set our Hearts at rest, who have neither the thousandth part of Solomon's
Grandeur, nor of his Wit neither, to improve the small stock we have to the
best advantage. Yet, say we had all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of
them, as they were most artificially drawn to the life in a tempting Landscape,
presented by Satan to our Saviors Imagination, yet since all that is in the
World is but either the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, or the pride
of life; i. e. Pleasure, Riches, and Honor, as we are told by S. John, who
lived long enough in the World to know what it afforded. It Is the (...), the
Grand Fundamental Error, and folly of our whole lives, to look for any
happiness in the Enjoyment of them. Human Beatitude consists in the
gratification of those Faculties which make Man, i. e. Intellect and Will; the
perfective qualifications of which are Truth in the Understanding, and
Rectitude or Holiness in the Will. Now could any of the forementioned
Enjoyments make a man either more Wise or more Virtuous than his Neighbor;
Could they secure us from being imposed upon by false Notions, Ignorance and
Error, and Enlighten the darkness of our Minds with clear Conceptions of Truth,
that Secret of the Most High GOD; with certain knowledge of the admirable Works
of Nature, and GOD the Mysterious Author of them; or with Prudence in the
rational Conduct of our Actions, which would be the Glory and Ornament of our
Understanding; Could they redeem us from the shameful Captivity of sordid
Appetites, and Vile Affections, which like Rebel Vassals dethrone the Sovereign
Goodness that should Reign within us; Could they restore again that generous
Magnanimity, Temperance, Justice, and Universal Complacency in what is good and
honorable to its Empire in the Soul, which would be the grace and perfection
of the Will; Could they but secure unto us the Vnum necessarium, the blessed
Hopes of an immutable Felicity in the next World, when we leave them behind us,
and bid them Adieu for ever, which is the only Foundation whereupon we may
build a firm peace and uninterrupted comfort; I grant they were richly worth
all the Care, Anxiety and Toil, we expend in the prosecution of them. But alas!
they are mere Emptiness, and nothing; so fantastical and airy, that they
delude our Embraces, when we think to enjoy them most. As for Riches, the Eye
is not satisfied with them, Eccles. 4. 8.
tho we labor and bereave our Souls of good; first to procure, and then to
keep them; and after the Poor Wretch has spent himself in drudging for them,
he shall leave them in Jer. 17. 11.
the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a Fool. And pray what is
Honor, that Idol of Worldly men? We know that an Idol is nothing in 1 Cor. 8.
4.
the World, so is Honor too; too thin and too airy to yield any solid, real
satisfaction: It puffs a man up indeed, and blows him a little bigger than his
Neighbor; but the Timpany renders him uneasy both to himself and others; and
when God sends him a Thorn in the Flesh, it pricks the Bladder, and the gaudy
Bubble vanishes. This is Pharaoh and all his multitude. Ezekiel. 31. 18.
And as for Pleasures (such I mean as the Voluptuary calls so;) why, grant the
Epicure (which yet he rarely meets with) a lucky concurrence of all that can
possibly advance a delight, the Spirits are presently exalted into a Rapture,
and so the goodly Transport dies in a moment, leaving Penitential Nature to
repair the damage and Prodigal expense of a short Extravagance.

What profit then has he that has Eccl. 5. 16.
labored for the Wind? So little Satisfaction can the Creatures afford, which
themselves groan and travel in pain under the bondage of Vanity, the primitive
Curse of Sin. Indeed had Man been created like the Angels in Heaven, all Soul
and Spirit, and not tied to the cumbersom luggage of a Body; he had then been
free from all the Troubles and Calamities which attend a Mortal State. But
since we are doomed to dwell in these Houses of Clay, whose foundation is in
the dust; Every man in his best Estate is altogether Vanity; And yet, while we
do Sojourn in these tottering Tabernacles, the Natural Respect we bear to the
Noble Guest that lodges in them, puts us to a vast expense and trouble in
Repairing the Decays, and patching up the Ruins of them. This indeed is but
good Husbandry. But when I observe the prodigal and luxurious Ornament some
bestow upon this mean Cottage, I can hardly hold from asking them Socrates his
Question, What do you mean, to make your Prison so strong? And yet when they
have done all, the Tenure of them is but for life under an Arbitrary Lord; and
how soon that Lease may expire we none of us know; perhaps this Night may our
Souls be required of us. However, at the furthest, the Age of Man is threescore
years and ten; or if he Psalm. 90. 10.
come to fourscore years, yet is his strength then but labor and sorrow, so
soon passes it away and we are gone.

Thus much concerning the Blessedness of their Estate who dye in the Lord, in
their being delivered from the Toil and Fatigue, the Emptiness and
Dissatisfaction of things below.

The second and last Topic I purposed to show it from, was that positive and
superabundant satisfaction, that glorious recompense of Reward, which they
shall meet with in another World; couched in these words, and their works do
follow them.

When Man apostatized from the Allegiance he owed his Maker; he fell under the
Power and Dominion of Sin, and Sin delivered over the Captive Rebel to the
Bondage and Tyranny of Death, which gnawed revengfully upon his Flesh in the
Grave, and tortured his polluted Soul, upon the Eternal Rack of Anguish and
Despair in Hell: Hell, originally prepared for the Arch-Rebel of Heaven, the
great Leviathan of Sin, and his Accursed Train; but now become the common Gaol
of Men and Devils; Such a Prince of Terrors is Death, when armed with the
poisonous Sting of Sin. But the Captain of our Salvation has conquered Death,
and disarmed it of that power it had got over us by Sin. See how the Apostle
triumphs over it in the Lesson appointed for this Solemnity: O Death 1 Cor. 1^.
55, 56.
where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin,
and the strength of Sin is the Law; i. e. There is nothing makes Death like a
Serpent, able to hurt us, but Sin; without which the Grave is but a Bed,
wherein we take a long Lethargic Sleep: And that which impowers Sin to do us
mischief, is the Law, which prohibits it, and consequently involves us in the
Curse, due to our Guilt. But thanks be to God who gives us Ver. 5^.
the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed be the Father of Mercies, who
(by what Christ has ^one for us) has gotten us the Victory over Sin, and by
this happy Conquest, has made Death only a Silent passage to a glorious
Immortality; where they who dye in the Lord shall for ever (for ever) enjoy
such Divine Transports of Soul, (...), which it is not lawful for a man to
utter, 2 Cor. 12. 4.
said the Eloquent S. Paul, when the over flowing sense of them rapt him into
Ecstasy. Blessed Souls! which always behold the Face of God, in whose presence,
is fullness of Joy for evermore. A sight, even a bare sight, able to transform
us into his own likeness, and make our Faces (like the face of Moses) too
bright and dazzling for any mortal Eye to look upon. We shall be like him, for
we shall see him as he is. 1 John 3. 2.
Blessed are those that-stand before the Lamb of God in his Throne of Glory;
that are admitted into the Society of the Cherubims and Seraphims, those
sprightly Choiristers of Heaven, where nothing is heard, but the voice of Joy
and Gladness. There Is no Sin to stain their white Robes of Purity, or eclipse
the glorious Emanations of Light which they receive from the Sun of
Righteousness; no Jealousies or Fears to disturb their Enjoyments; neither can
any imperfection taint that state, where God shall be all in all. 1 Cor. 15. 28.


Surely now the Blessedness of dying in the Lord is so ravishing a
Contemplation, as even to make S. John's Wish the language of all our Souls;
Come Lord Jesus, come Rev. 22. 20
quiokly. And indeed the happiness of our future Life is not fully and sensibly
revealed unto us, but seems on purpose to be hid with Christ in Col. 3. 3.
God, that we might not be too restless and impatient under the burden of
Mortality; nor break the Prison of our Bodies, to redeem our Souls into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Dii coelant homines, ut vivere durent,
quam sit dulce Mori. So then the same blessed Providence of God, which in mercy
to his Church continued our Departed Father so long among us, has now in mercy
to himself, translated him to the Church Triumphant, and exchanged his Mitre
for a Crown, for a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. And he who
turned many to Righteousness, now shines as the Stars for ever and ever.

Thus I have done with the Doctrine of my Text; and shall only beg your patience
for a short Practical Inference or two, and then you shall see this Right
Reverend Prelate pay his last Debt to the Law; Dust thou art, and unto Dust
thou shall Genesis 3. 19.
return.

The first Inference shall be for such as are more particularly concerned in
the Loss of a great and worthy Friend, a dear and kind Relation; which I draw
from the Consideration of the blessed Estate of those that are departed in the
Lord: And it is this in the Apostles words, that ye sorrow not as others, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
which have no hope. Were we Heathens, and looked upon Death as the
Annihilation of our Souls; or Sadducees, who deny that there is Luke 20. 27.
any Resurrection; or Papists, who dream of a frightful place called Purgatory,
we might then justly either bewail the utter perishing of the Dead, or the
Misery of their State. But since we believe the Spirit, that they are blessed
in resting from their labors, and that their works follow them; what reason
have we to lament the End of that Life, which is the Period of our Misery, and
the beginning of a happy Eternity? Ay, but said the Jews, when our Savior wept
over the Sepulcher of his Friend Lazarus, See how he Joh. 11. 36.
loved him. Alas! they mistook the cause of our Saviors Tears; which flowed
only from his Compassion to poor Lazarus, who was now again to lanch into the
deep, after he had weathered the Harbor where his Soul was at Rest. It Is like
indeed we would have been glad to have enjoyed him longer, he was so kind a
Friend: but is it not preposterous to commemorate the kindness of a Friend with
so high an Argument of Ill nature, as to repine at his being happy sooner, than
we expected? God was more merciful to him than it seems we should have been,
that would have kept him longer out of Abraham's Bosom, only that we might have
hugged him in our own. Could he but look down as low as us, he would certainly
say, Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for me, but weep for your selves; I am
comforted, having received the Wages of my Labors in the Evening of my days;
but you are tormented, that have the heat and burden of the day to bear.
Wherefore comfort one another with 1 Thessalonians. 4. 18.
these words.

The other Inference is the common concern of all that hear me, taken from the
Consideration of the toil and labor of this World, viz. to wean us from too
passionate love of it.

It Is so Childish an Infirmity to dote upon Shadows, and catch at them, that
methinks we should blush when we are become men, not to have put away such
Childish things, but still to walk on in a vain shadow, and disquiet our selves
in vain. But tho we have all of us sufficiently experienced the Cheats and
disappointments of a false uneasy World; yet the Magnetism of the Earth does
so powerfully attract our Affections, that tho we live long and see not the
Grave, yet we are apt to complain with Theophrastus of the shortness of our
days, and are still crying, O spare me a little! as if we were in love with
impotence and pains, and loath to retire to the only place where the weary be
at rest. But if all Arguments drawn from the Vanity of what we pursue, be
ineffectual to convince us of the folly of it; yet certainly it is a
Perfidiousness below the Ingenuous Spirit of a Christian, basely to Espouse his
Soul to what he most solemnly renounced in his Baptism. That were equally our
Sin in prevaricating with God, who will not be mocked; and our Misery too, in
meanly placing our Affections upon the Sordid things below, that bear no
proportion to the Appetites of a Rational Agent, because they are too capacious
and sublime, ever to be satisfied with any thing less than the full Display of
GOD himself in the glory of all his Attributes. But this I say Brethren, the
time is 1 Cor. 7. 29.
short, it remains that both they that weep, be as tho they wept not; and
they that buy, as tho they possessed not; and they that use this World, as not
abusing it; for the fashion of this World passes away.

And I pray God give us Grace, so to pass through things Temporal, that we finally
lose not things Eternal; for the sake of Jesus Christ, who is the Resurrection
and the Life. To whom with the Father and the Eternal Spirit of Grace, be
ascribed all Power, Glory, and Praise, for Ever and Ever. Amen.

FINIS.

