AN APOLOGY FOR THE BUILDER: OR A DISCOURSE SHOWING THE Cause and Effects OF
THE INCREASE OF Building.

LONDON, Printed for Cave Pullen at the Angel in St. Pauls-Church-yard, 1685.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE BUILDER.
TO write of Architecture and its several parts, of Situation, Platforms of
Building, and the quality of Materials, with their Dimensions and Ornaments: To
discourse of the several Orders of Columns, of the Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick,
Corinthian, and composit, with the proper inrichments of their Capitals, Freete
and Cornish, were to transcribe a Folio from Vitruvius and others; and but
mispend the Readers and Writers time, since we live in an Age and Country,
where all the Arts belonging to Architecture are so well known and practiced:
And yet at the same time and place to write an Apology for the Artist may seem
a greater trifling. In a time when since the Grecian Greatness their Arts were
never better performed. In a place where Buildings are generally so well
finished, that almost every House is a little Book of Architecture; and as the
ancient Artists made Athens and the rest of their Cities famous by their
Buildings, and still preserve the memory of the places by the ruins of their
excellent Arts: so the Artists of this Age have already made the City of London
the Metropolis of Europe, and if it be compared for the number of good Houses,
for its many and large Piazzas, for its richness of Inhabitants, it must be
allowed the largest, best built, and richest City in the world. But such is the
misfortune of Greatness to be envied. The Citizens,nay the whole Nation is
astonished at the flourishing condition of this Metropolis, to see every year a
new Town added to the old one; and like men affrighted are troubled with
misapprehensions, and easily imposed on by the false suggestions of those that
envy her Grandeur, and are angry with the Builders for making her so great.

The Citizens are afraid that the Building of new Houses will lessen the Rent
and Trade of the old ones, and fancy the Inhabitants will remove on a sudden
like Rats that they say run away from old Houses before they tumble.

The Country Gentleman is troubled at the new Buildings for fear they should
draw away their Inhabitants, and depopulate the Country, and they want Tenants
for their Land. And both agree that the increase of Building is prejudicial to
the Government, and use for Argument a simile from those that have the Rickets,
fansying the City to be the Head of the Nation, and that it will grow too big
for the Body.

This is the Charge that is laid on the Builders: Therefore the design of this
Discourse is to answer these aspersions, to remove these fears and false
conceptions, by confuting these Popular Errors, and showing that the Builder
ought to be encouraged in all Nations as the chief promoter of their Welfare.

This is done by showing the Cause of the increase of Building, and the
Effects; as they relate to the City, to the Country, and to the Government.

Of the Cause.
THE Cause of the Increase of Building is from the natural increase of Mankind,
that there is more born than die. From the first blessing of the Creation,
Increase and multiply, joined to the good Government of a Gracious King.

There are three things that man by nature is under a necessity to take care
of, to provide food for himself, Clothes and a House. For the first, all the
rest of Creation as well as man is under that necessity to take care of: For
life cannot be maintained without food.

The second belongs only to man, and it is a question by some, whether it is
required of him by nature, or custom, because in some Countries (and those
cold) men go naked.

But as to the last, it is most certain, that Man is forced to build by nature,
as all those Creatures are, whose young are born so weak (like the offspring of
Mankind), that they require some time for strength after their birth, to follow
their Parents, or feed themselves. Thus the Rabbit, the Fox and Lion make
themselves Burrows, Kennels, and Dens to bring forth, and shelter their young,
but the Mare, Cow, Sheep, etc. bring forth in the open field, because their
young are able to follow them as soon as folded.

So that the natural cause of Building a House is to provide a shelter for
their young; and if we examine man in his Natural condition without Arts, his
Tenement differs little from the rest of Nature's Herd: The Fox's Kennel though
not so large; being a lesser creature, may yet for its contrivance in its
several apartments be compared with any of his Cottages: Earthen walls, and
covering are the manner of both their Buildings, and the Furniture of both
their Houses alike: Now as the Rabbits increase, new Burrows are made, and the
Boundaries of the Warren are enlarged. So it is with Man, as he increases, new
Houses are built, and his Town made bigger.

When Mankind is civilized, instructed with Arts, and under good Government,
every man does not dress his own meat, make his own Clothes, nor build his own
House. He enjoys property of Land and Goods, which he or his Ancestors by their
Arts and industry gained. These Possessions make the difference among men of
rich and poor. The rich are fed, clothed, and housed by the labor of other
men, but the poor by their own, and the Goods made by this labor are the rents
of the rich men's Land (for to be well fed, well clothed, and well lodged,
without labor either of body or mind, is the true definition of a rich man.)

Now as men differ in Estates, so they differ in their manner of living. The
rich have variety of Dishes, several suits of Clothes, and larger Houses; and
as their riches increase, so does their wants, as Sir William Temple has
observed, men are better distinguished by what they want, than by what they
enjoy. And the chief business of Trade is the making and selling all sorts of
Commodities to supply their occasions. For there are more hands employed to
provide things necessary to make up the several distinctions of men. Things
that promote the ease, pleasure and pomp of life, than to supply the first
natural necessities from hunger, cold, and a house only to shelter their young.
Now the Trader takes care from time to time, to provide a sufficient quantity
of all sorts of Goods for man's occasions, which he finds out by the Market:
That is, By the quick selling of the Commodities, that are made ready to be
sold. And as there are Butchers, Brewers and Cooks, Drapers, Mercers and
Tailors, and a hundred more, that furnish him with food and clothes; so there
are Bricklayers, Carpenters, Playsterers, and many more Traders, that build
houses for him, and they make houses of the first, second, and third rate of
building in proportion to the increase of the several degrees of men, which
they find out by the Market, that is by letting of Houses already built: so
that if it were thoroughly believed, that Mankind does naturally increase; this
miracle of the great increase of Houses would cease, it is therefore necessary
to show that man does naturally increase.

This may be sufficiently proved by Sacred History, That the World was first
peopled by the increase from Adam and Eve, and after the deluge repeopled by
Noah and his Sons Shem, Ham, and Japhet. That the Jews began from the single
stock of Abraham by Isaac, and so from Jacob; and when Moses numbered them,
which was not long distance of time (being computed to be about Two hundred and
sixty years from Jacob) they were above Six hundred thousand fighting men,
reckoning only from Twenty years old and upward, besides Women and Children.
And when numbered by David, which was about four hundred and fifty years after,
they were grown a very great Nation, being Thirteen hundred thousand fighting
men of Judah and Israel.

But the late Lord Chief Justice Hales in his Discourse on this subject was not
contented to rely wholly on Arguments from Authority of of Holy Writ, and
therefore takes other Topics to confirm the relation of Moses concerning the
beginning of the world, and the peopleing of it by a natural increase.

I. From the novity of History, That no Authentic History is older than four
thousand years, and none so old as Moses of the Beginning of the World.

II. From the Chronological Account of Times. That the Assyrian, Egyptian, and
Grecian Accounts are to be found out in what year of the World they began.

III. From the beginning of the ancient Kingdoms, That Rome was built by
Romulus in the Seventh Olympiad, the Assyrian Monarchy began by Cyrus in 55
Olympiad, and the Grecian by Alexander in 111.

IV. From the first invention of Arts, That the times of the first invention of
Husbandry and making of Wine are as well known, as the later Inventions of
Gunpowder and Printing.

V. From the beginning of Religions, That the time of the Inauguration of the
Heathen Deities are known; As when that Jupiter, Bacchus, Ceres and
Aesculapius, and the rest of them were but men of great renown, and for their
Good Deeds after their death worshipped; As well as when Moses, our Savior,
and Mahomet were born.

VI. From the Decays of Humaue Nature; but how far that may be true, I leave to
further inquiry.

VII. From the beginning of the Patres familias, or the first Planters of the
Continents and Islands of the World; that Helen gave denomination to the
Grecians called Hellenista, Pelasigus, to the Pelasgi, Latinus to the Latins,
and the place called Latium, Italus to the Italians, and Italy is as much to be
believed, as that the English gave name to New England in America, and the
Names of the Towns there, London and New York.

VIII. From the gradual increase of Mankind; That considering the time of his
first Procreation, which is agreed to be about 15 or 16 years, to the time he
gives over, which is about sixty: It cannot be otherwise believed but that in
the space of five and forty years he must produce a numerous offspring: And it
is no wonder amongst us; For a person to live to see some hundreds descended
from his loins.

Afterward he comes to a particular Observation of the Increase of England by
comparing the present State of it with the Survey set down in the
Doomsday-Book, and makes an Instance in Gloucester-Shire, by which it
appears, that the Inhabitants of that County since that time are greatly
increased. And last of all he argues the Increase of London from the Bills of
Mortality.

These are the Arguments of the late Lord Chief Justice Hales, to prove that
Mankind naturally increases, of which he discourses at large in his Book of
the Origination of Mankind, and therein answers all the Objections to the
contrary. And because these two last Arguments from the Survey of the
Doomsday-Book, and Bills of Mortality carry with them the greatest force, for
they best discover the matter of Fact as to our own Nation. I have therefore
made it my business to make a scrutiny into the truth of them: As to the first,
it is easy to make it appear that there is thirty times more people in England
than they were in William the Conqueror's time, when the Survey was taken. And
as to the latter, I shall have occasion to discourse of at large hereafter.

And if it were necessary to use any further Arguments for the proof of this
Matter, they would plainly appear by comparing ancient Histories with Modern in
the Descriptions they give of the Countries. As to the great Woods, the many
little Governments, and the manner of the Peoples living without Arts: But not
to wander over many Countries, and among several Historians I will only take
the short description that Caesar gives of our own, to show how it differs
from what it now is.

He says, That the inner part of Britan^y is inhabited by such as memory
records to be born in the Island: And the Maritime Coast by such as came out
of Belgia, either to make Incursions or Invasions, and after the War was ended
they continued in the Possessions they had gained, and were called by the name
of the Cities from whence they came. It is true, he says, The Country is very
populous and well inhabited, with Houses like unto them in Gallia.: But that
must be understood as other Countries of Europe were then. It appears that in
England there were many Governments and little Colonies of people, for he
reckons four Kings in the County of Kent, besides some little States. And he
says, Most of the Inland people sow no Corn, but live on Milk and Flesh,
clothed with skins, and having their faces painted with a blew color to the end
they might seem more terrible in fight. The Britans Towns, he says, is a place
ditched about to make a shelter for themselves and Cattle. And their manner of
fighting was by making sudden Excursions out of the Woods, and then retiring
into them for shelter. All which Descriptions show the Country was not so
populous as now.

For were there are great Woods, there is not room for Pasture or Corn, to feed
Mankind: Besides they are a shelter for beasts of prey, which man as he
increases does every where destroy, and suffers no Flesh-eaters to live but
himself, except the Dog and Cat, which he makes tame for his use. The Lion,
Wolf, and the Bear are not to be found in a populous Country; and it is the
first business of all the Planters in America to destroy the wild Beasts, and
the Woods, to make room for themselves to plant in.

And the reason probably of those Roman Causways, that we find in England, was
to make Roads through great Woods to the several Roman Colonies; though at this
time we find them in open Champaign Countries; for had the Country been so
then, they would certainly have made them straiter than we now find them.

The many little Governments show the infancy of a Country, for from single
Family-government first began; those Governments were but so many families of
great Men: Now the large Boundaries that so many little Governments take up in
a Country, make one half of the Country useless: For men are afraid to plant or
sow too near their enemies Country for fear they should lose their Harvest.
Therefore the same Land cannot feed so many people as when it is under but one
Government.

Besides without Arts, a great number of People cannot live together; the earth
by the arts of Husbandry produces ten times more food than it can naturally.
And neither can there be any great Cities, for the Inhabitants have nothing to
exchange for their food, for it is the Arts of the City which are paid for the
provisions of the Country.

To conclude, nothing is so plain from ancient History as that Asia was first
peopled, and (according to the Description of Moses) began about Babylon: And
as Mankind increased, and the Country filled with Inhabitants; Arts were
invented, and they possessed more ground, till they spread themselves into Egypt,
and so over Africa, and from thence into Greece, over Europe, and now Europe
being full, their swarm begins to fill America.

And all the ancient Descriptions of the Countries of Europe, in the times of
the Roman Greatness, are just such as are now given of America, and differs
vastly from what they are now, in the number of Cities, Towns, and Arts of
Inhabitants.

For were America so well peopled as Europe is, those great Countries that are
possessed there by the Spaniards, French, Dutch and English, some of them bigger
than their own Countries in Europe, could not be so quietly held, and enjoyed
by not a hundredth part of the people of their own Country.

And although the valor of the Roman Soldiers, and their affected Bravery
(grown as it were a fashion, and a popular Emulation) conduced much to the
greatness of the Roman Empire; yet nothing promoted its success so much, and
gave it such large extent as the Infancy of Europe at that time, being thinly
inhabited with people, without Arts, and full of little Monarchies and States.
For had it not been so, Caesar could never have overrun Gallia, Belgia,
Britany, and some part of Germany, and kept them in subjection with only ten
Legions of Soldiers, which was but fifty thousand men; for we have seen within
these late years much greater Armies in Belgia alone, (that is within the
Seventeen Provinces, and amongst them men not inferior either in courage or
skill in War, and yet have not wholly subdued one Province. And perhaps had
these Forces at the same time been sent into America, they might have extended
their conquest over as much ground and over as many people as Caesar did.

Nor was England so populous then as now it is; For had it been, Caesar would
never at first have ventured to invade it with two Legions; and at the second
time when he designed a full conquest brought over with him but five Legions,
that is but five and twenty thousand men.

For although some may think from the great Armies we read of; near two
Millions of men under Cyrus and Xerxes in Asia; and of vast swarms of the Goths
and Vandals in Europe, in their Invasions under King Attila and others, that
the world was more populous than now, because we hear of no such numbers of
late; yet if it be considered, it demonstrates only the manner of their
fighting, and the infancy of the world; The want of people, and Arts, rather
than that it was populous.

For the Gentiles Armies were made up after the manner of the Jews, by taking
all that were able to bear Arms, reckoning from about 20 years old to sixty.
For when Caesar had slain the Army of the Nervii, being about 50000 men, (a
valiant people, one of the Seventeen Provinces); the old men and Women
Petitioning for mercy, declared that there was not 500 men left in the whole
Nation, that were able to bear Arms.

And if the King of England should reckon his Army after this manner; Of his
eight Million of Subjects (as they are computed to be) there could not be less
than three Millions that were able to bear Arms, which would be a greater Army
than ever we read of; which must show that the world was thin of People; since
the Assyrian Empire the oldest, and therefore most populous did never raise so
great a number.

And those great numbers show that they wanted Arts; for we read that the
Athenians a small but learned people baffled and destroyed all the great Army
of Xerxes, reckoned by some to be Seventeen hundred thousand men; And Alexander
with a small number of skilful and valiant Greeks subdued the then inhabited
World.

And although the Goths and Vandals, and the Cold parts of the World made their
Invasion for want of room to live in, yet that proceeded from the want of Arts.

For by Arts the Earth is made more fruitful, and by the invention of the
Compass and Printing, the World is made more habitable and conversable: By the
first the Countries Traffic and Exchange the Commodities they abound with, for
those they want. The Timber, Pitch and Tarr of the cold Countries are Exchanged
for the Wine, Brandy, and Spices of the hot. By the latter all Arts are easier
discovered; By Traffic and Arts the Inhabitants of the cold Countries are
better fed, better clothed, and better lodged; which make them endure the
Extremities of their Climates better than formerly; and as they increase they
build new Towns, enlarge their Cities, and improve their own Country; instead
of invading and destroying their Neighbors.

But to return home: It is plain that the natural increase of Mankind is the
cause of the increase of the City, and that there are no more Houses built
every year in it, than are necessary for the growth of the Inhabitants: As will
somewhat appear by the number of Apprentices made free, and Marriages every
year in the City.

By the best computation that I can learn, there are no less than ten thousand
Married every year in the City; which is no great number considering the number
of Inhabitants: And if we should allow two Weddings in a Parish every week one
with another, (there being a hundred and thirty Parishes in all) it will much
exceed this proportion. Now in some Parishes there is seldom less than ten in a
week. And in Dukes-place, and St. Katharine's, being priviledg'd places, there
is ordinarily twenty or thirty in a week.

As to the number of Apprentices that come every year out of their time, there
are not less than Nine thousand; which will not be thought too great a number,
if we reckon the Houses in the City, to be about Fourscore thousand: And if the
fourth part of this number be allowed for the Gentry, or those which live
without Trades or Professions; and the three other parts being Sixty thousand,
for Trades or Professions; and one Aprentice to every House (though in some
Houses are three or four Apprentices); and that in seven years the whole number
come out of their time; then in every year a seventh part of Sixty thousand,
(which is about Nine thousand a year) will come out of their time. Now if Mr.
Grant's Computation be right, that these Houses contain Eight persons, one with
another, then there ought to be a thousand Houses at least built every year for
these Nine thousand Apprentices that come out of their time, and the Ten
thousand Weddings to have room to breed in. And this proportion is only
sufficient to lodge them, and not for places to Trade in, for nine Traders
cannot live in one House. Therefore some of their Masters, or other Traders
must either die, break, or being grown too rich give over their Trades to make
room for some of them to have places to Trade in, besides those that are
furnished with places by the new Houses.

But I find Mr. Grant much mistaken in his account about the number of
Inhabitants in each House in the out-parts; Perhaps it was from the rebuilding
of the City with Houses more capacious and more in number. For in this last
five and twenty years: the Inhabitants are now a third part more, as appears
by the Bills of Mortality; For in the year 1660 and 1661 there died between
Thirteen and fourteen thousand a year, and now there dies betwixt Twenty one
and twenty two thousand a year. So that there ought to have been built above
Twenty six thousand Houses in these twenty five years, which is above a
thousand Houses a year to lodge this increase, which are much more than have
been built in the out parts, for it appears by Mr. Morgan's Map of the City
that there have not been built in this time 8000 Houses, that is not 300 Houses
one year with another.

But this is certain, that there are no more Houses built every year than are
occasion for; because there are Tenants for the Houses, when built, and a
continuancee every year to build more. For the Builders will do as other
Traders, who, when the Market is overstocked with their Commodities, and no
occasion for those already made, forbear to make any more, or bring them to
Market, till a new occasion requires them. And when they find they cannot let
those already built, they will desist from building, and need no Act of
Parliament to hinder them. So that we may as well complain that there is too
much Cloth and Stuff made, too much Corn sowed, too many Sheep or Oxen bred, as
that there are too many Houses built; too many Tailors, Shoo-makers, Bakers and
Brewers, as there are too many Builders.

Of the Effects of the increase of Buildings, and first as it relates to the
City.
NEW Buildings are advantageous to a City, for they raise the Rents of the old
Houses. For the bigger a Town is, the more of value are the Houses in it.
Houses of the same convenience and goodness are of more value in Bristol,
Exeter and Northampton, than in the little Villages adjoining.

Houses in the middle of a Town are of more value than those at the out ends;
and when a Town happens to be increased by addition of New Buildings to the end
of a Town, the old Houses which were then at the end, become nearer to the
middle of the Town, and so increase in value.

Houses are of more value in Cheapside, and Cornhill, than they are in
Shoreditch, White-Chappel, Old-Street, or any of the Out-parts; and the Rents
in some of these Out-parts have been within this few years considerably
advanced by the addition of New Buildings that are beyond them. As for
instance, the Rents of the Houses in Bishopsgate-Street, the Minories, etc. are
raised from fifteen or sixteen pounds Per Annum, to be now worth thirty, which
was by the increase of Buildings in Spittle-Fields, Shadwells and
Ratcliff-Highway. And at the other end of the Town those Houses in the Strand
and Charing Cross are worth now fifty and threescore pounds Per Annum, which
within this thirty years were not Let for above twenty pounds Per Annum, which
is by the great addition of Buildings since made in St. James's,
Leicester-Fields, and other adjoining parts. But in those Our-parts where no
New Buildings have been added, as in Old-Street, Grub-Street, and all that side
of the City which does not increase, Houses continue much of the same value, as
they were twenty years ago: And the reason of this is; because Houses are of
value, as they stand in a place of Trade, and by the addition of new Buildings
the place becomes to be a greater Thorough-fare, by the passing and repassing
of the Inhabitants to these new Buildings.

2. They are advantageous to the City, because they increase the Trade of it:
The Trade of the City is either Wholesale, or Retail. Now the New Buildings of
Bloomsberry, Leicester-Fields, St. James's, Spittle-Fields, etc. are like so
many new Towns for the Wholesale-Trader to Traffic in. The Inhabitants of
these places do eat, wear Clothes, and furnish their Houses, and whatsoever
Commodity they use, come first from the Merchants, or Wholesale-Trader. For
the City is the great Mart for Goods, from whence all other places must be
furnished; so that the New Buildings are beneficial to the Wholesale Trade of
the City. And it appears that they are likewise advantageous to the
Retail-Traders, because they can afford to give more Rent for their old Houses,
than they did formerly; for otherwise none would believe that the Tenants of
Bishopsgate-street, and the Minories could subsist and pay double the Rent for
their Houses within this thirty years, had they not a better Trade in those
places than formerly.

Of the Effects of New Buildings as they relate to the Country.
NEW Buildings are advantageous to the Country: I. By taking off the
Commodities of the Country,

The Materials of these Houses, as Stones, Bricks, Lime, Iron, Lead, Timber,
etc. are all the Commodities of the Country. And whatsoever the Inhabitants of
these New Houses have occasion for, either for food, Apparel, or Furniture for
their Houses, are at first the growth of the Country; And the bigger the Town
grows, the greater is the occasion and consumption of these Commodities, and so
the greater profit to the Country.

II. New Buildings provide an habitation and livelihood for the Supernumerary
and us^less Inhabitants of the Country. The younger Sons of the Gentry, the
Children of the Yeomen and Peasants are by these means provided with Callings,
Employments, and Habitations to exercise them in; which should they have
continued in the Country, would have been burdensome, and chargeable to their
Friends for want of Employments.

For there is always Inhabitants enough left in the Country for the employments
of the Country. For if the Country wanted people, there would be a want of
their Commodities, for want of hands to provide them.

Now there is as much Land Plowed, and all sorts of Grain sown, and reaped
every year, as there is occasion for; and sometimes more: For the Crown in some
years has been at charge to Export it. And there is as much Wool provided and
made into Clothes and Stuffs, as the Market can take off, and so for all other
Commodities of the Country.

Nay there are more of all the Country Commodities every year made than
formerly: There are more Stuffs, more Clothes sent up to Gerard's and
Blackwell-Hall, as appears by the Entries of those Halls; and more Sheep and
Oxen sent to London, and eaten, than formerly. For there are more people in the
City to be fed; so that there must be more hands in the Country to provide this
greater quantity of Commodities: And the Country does increase as well as the
City, as has been already observed from the Doomsday-Book.

Therefore if the Rents of the Lands fall in the Country, it must not be
ascribed to the New-Buildings draining their Inhabitants, but to some other
occasions; Which probably may be from the great improvements that are made upon
the Land in the Country, either by draining of Fens; improving of Land by
Zanfoin; or other profitable Seeds; enclosing of grounds, or disparking and
plowing of Parks, by which means the Markets are over stocked and furnished at
a cheaper rate than those Lands can affford, who have had no advantage from
improvements: Or else the Market is removed at a greater distance, and the
Lands are forced to abate in their price for the carriage; The Town perhaps is
decayed, that they used to furnish, and the Trade removed to some other
flourishing place at a greater distance; occasioned some times by the death or
removal of some great Clothier or Trader; or some other natural obstruction of
the place; as the choking up of some Haven, and the forsaking of the Sea,
which is the reason of the decay of the Cinque Ports. These or some other
occasions may make some particular men's Farms fall in value; but there is never
a County in England, where the Land of the whole County does not produce a
third part more in value than it did within a 100 years, and whosoever will
compare these present Rents, with what they were then, will find them generally
increased. Therefore the New Buildings of this City cannot prejudice the
Country, but are greatly advantageous to it.

Of the Effects of the New Buildings, as they relate to the Government.
1. NEW Buildings are advantageous to the King and Government. They are
instrumental to the preserving and increasing of the number of the Subjects;
And numbers of Subjects is the strength of a Prince: for Houses are Hives for
the People to breed and swarm in, without which they cannot increase; And
unless they are provided for them from time to time in proportion to their
increase, they would be forced to go into the Plantations and other Countries
for habitations; and so many times become the Subjects of other Princes; but at
the best the Country loses the profit of feeding them; for they that live in a
City are unskilful and unfit for Country-life; and this is the reason why so
many Scotch Citizens are wandering Pedlers: and that every Town in Europe has a
Scotchman for an Inhabitant.

And that this will be the Effects will appear plainly by examining the growth
of the City of London, since the Buildings have flourished, with its condition,
when the Buildings were prohibited; And we cannot make a better discovery of it
than by the Bills of Mortality, for it is reasonable among such a number of
Mankind, such a number should die; and whether it be in such a proportion as
one in three and thirty, as Mr. Grant and Sir William Petit have observed, is
not not so material to this purpose; but it is a certain demonstration, That if
the Burials have increased, the number of Citizens has increased, though the
proportion may be uncertain.

Now to begin the Observation from the first Bills, that were Printed, which
was in the year 1606, for the space of six and seven and twenty years, we shall
find very little increase in the City, for in 1606 and 1607, there died between
six and seven thousand a year; and in the years 1632 and 1633 there died
betwixt eight and nine thousand; Now the reason of this was the People of
England were a little before that time under the same mistake, as they are
generally now, and cried out against the Builders, that the City would grow too
big; and therefore in the 38 of Queen Elizabeth they made a Law to prohibit
Buildings in the City of London; which though it was but a probationary Act, to
continue only to the next Sessions of Parliament (which was but a short time)
yet its effects were long; For it frighted the Builders, and obstructed the
growth of the City; and none built for thirty years after, all King James his
Reign, without his Majesty's License; But for want of Houses the increase of
the People went into other parts of the world; For within this space of time
were those great Plantations of New England, Virginia, Mariland, and Burmudas
began; and that this want of Houses was the occasion is plain; For they could
not build in the Country, because of the Law against Cottages. For people may
get children and so increase, that had not four Acres of ground to Build on.

But the People of England at last were convinced of this popular error, and
petitioned in Parliament his Majesty's K. Charles the Martyr, that he would
take his restraint from the Builders; and if the next period of seven and
twenty years be examined, wherein there was a greater liberty of Building,
though in this space there was a great Rebellion and Civil Wars, which is a
great allay to the growth of the People, yet there appears a much greater
increase of the City of London; For in the years 1656 and 1657, the Burials
were twelve and thirteen thousand,

But the flourishing condition of the City of Londen raised a new clamor
against the Builders, and Oliver the Usurper glad of any pretense to raise a
Tax, made use of this clamor, and laid it upon the new Foundations; but though
it was an heavy and unjust Tax upon the Builders, yet he got little by it, for
the whole Sum collected was but Twenty thousand Pounds clear of all charges,
as appears by the Records of the Exchequer; however it had the same ill effects
to stop the Builders, and growth of the City; for the People for want of Houses
in that time began that great and flourishing Plantation of Jamaica.

Now if the last Period since his Majesty's happy Restoration be examined,
wherein the Builders have had the greatest liberty, it will appear that the
Inhabitants of the City have increased more than in both of the former Periods;
for the yearly Bills of Mortality are now betwixt two and three and twenty
thousands, so that the City is since increased one third, and as much as in
sixty years before.

This is sufficient to show that a Nation cannot increase without the
Metropolis be enlarged, and how dangerous a consequence it may be to obstruct
its growth, and discourage the Builders. It is to banish the People, and
confine the Nation to an Infant Estate, while the Neighboring Nations grow to
the full strength of Manhood, and thereby to render it an easy conquest to its
enemies.

For the Metropolis is the heart of a Nation, through which the Trade and
Commodities of it circulate, like the blood through the heart, which by its
motion gives life and growth to the rest of the Body; and if that declines, or
be obstructed in its growth, the whole body falls into consumption: And it is
the only symptom to know the health, and thriving of a Country by the
enlarging of its Metropolis; for the chief City of every Nation in the world
that flourishes does increase.

And if those Gentlemen that fancy the City to be the Head of the Nation, would
but fancy it like the heart, they would never be afraid of its growing too big;
For I never read of such a disease, that the Heart was too big for the Body.
And if we are of Machiavel's opinion, this simile is the best, for he says,
that Citizens make no good Counselors, for having raised their Fortunes by
Parsimony and Industry, they are usually too severe in punishing of Vice, and
too niggardly in rewarding of Virtue.

2. It is the interest of the Government, to encourage the Builders; not only
because they preserve and increase the Subjects, but they provide an employ for
them, by which they are fed, and get their livelihood.

There are three great ways that the People in all Governments are employed in:
In provividing Food, Clothes, and Houses. Now those ways are most serviceable
to the Government, that employ most of the People; Those that are employed in
feeding of them, are the fewest in number: for ten men may provide food enough
for a thousand: but to cloth, and build Houses for them, requires many hands:
And there is that peculiar advantage that ought to be ascribed to the Builder,
that he provideth the place of birth for all the other Arts, as well as for
man. The Cloth cannot be made without houses to work it in. Now besides the
vast numbers of People that are employed in digging and making the Materials,
the Bricks, Stone, Iron, Lead, etc. all those Trades that belong to the
furnishing of an house, have their sole dependencies on the Builders, as the
Upholsterers, Chair-makers, etc.

But that which is the greatest advantage, they do not only provide a
Livelihood to those that belong to the building, and furnishing of Houses, but
for the Tenants of those New Houses: For the People being collected and living
together in one Street, they serve and trade one with another: For Trade is
nothing else but an exchange of one man's labor for another: as for instance,
supposing an hundred men which lived at great distance before; some in
Cornwall, others in Yorkshire, and so dispersed over all the Countries in
England, live together in one Street; one is a Baker, the other a Brewer, a
Shoo-maker, Tailor, etc. and so in one Trade or other the whole hundred are
employed; The Baker gets his living by making Bread for the other ninety, and
so do all the rest of them; which while they were dispersed at distances, were
useless, and could not serve one another, and were ready to starve for want of
a Livelihood.

3. But they get not only a Livelihood, but grow rich: There arises an
emulation among them to outlive and out-vye one another in Arts. This forces
them to be industrious, and by industry they grow rich.

4. The increasing of Buildings, and enlarging of Towns, preserves the peace
of a Nation; by rendering the People more easily governed. First it is the
Builders interest of all sorts of men to preserve peace: Every man that
builds an House, gives Security to the Government for his good behavior. For
War is the Builders ruin. The Countryman may expect to enjoy his Land again,
though for a time it be laid wast; the Merchant may hide his Goods, or remove
them; but when the Town is besieged, the Houses are fired, the place made
desolate, and nothing is left to the Builder but ruins, the sad remembrance of
his condition.

Besides, all Cities are more inclined to Peace, than the Country; the Citizens
Estates are in Trade, and in Goods; many of which grow useless in War, and lie
in other Peoples hands, and their Debtors run away, and take Sanctuary under
the Sword; And Citizens being usually rich, cannot endure the hardship of War.
Next, great Cities are more easily Governed, because they are under the eye of
the Prince, as generally the Metropolis is; or else under some Governor, who
by his rewards from the Crown, is engaged to be very watchful in preserving the
Peace; so that if they should grow factious, they are more easily corrected.
Thus the Ottoman Power governs his Conquest by destroying Villages and lesser
Towns, and driving the People into Capital Cities, which by the presence of
some Basha are governed. Thus the King of France in his late Conquests in
Flanders and Alsatia, burnt some hundreds of Villages; but Luxembourg,
Strasbourg, and other great Towns are preserved. And the bigger the City, the
more advantageous to the Government; for from thence they are on a sudden the
better supplied with Men and Ammunition, to suppress any Rebellion, or oppose a
Foreign Enemy.

Lastly, New Buildings increase his Majesty's Revenues, not only by the
Chimney-Money, which makes it a growing Revenue; but by the Customs paid for
the Materials to build and furnish the Houses. Besides they being the cause of
the increase of the City, all the increase of the Revenues from the Excise and
Customs (since the Cities increase) must be ascribed to them: which are a
fourth part more than they were five and twenty years ago. And the Excise is
not only increased in the City, but it is so in the Country; which must not be
ascribed solely to the good Management, but chiefly to the natural increase of
the People. For if there be a third part more People in the City than there
were five and twenty years ago, there must be a proportionable increase in the
Country to provide Food and Clothes for them.

To conclude, It was upon these considerations, That by the building and
enlarging of a City, the people are made great, rich, and easily governed: That
those ancient and famous Governments, Thebes, Athens, Sparta, Carthage and
Rome, began their Dominions, and enlarged them with their Cities; and of late
the States of Holland have followed these Examples.

The Citizens of Amsterdam have thrice flung down their Walls to enlarge it; so
that from a little Fisher-Town within less than 200 years it is become the
third or fourth City of Europe: and the rest of their Cities have followed
their Pattern; and made Grafts and Streets at the charge of the Government;
endeavoring to outvie one another by giving Privileges to encourage the
Builders and Inhabitants. And these States have found the effects of it; for by
this means they have changed their Style from the Poor Distressed States, (as
they wrote to Queen Elizabeth) to the High and Mighty States of the United
Provinces.

And if the City of London has made such a Progress within this five and
twenty years, as to have grown one third bigger, and become already the
Metropolis of Europe, notwithstanding the Popular Error the Nation have been
infected with, and the ill censures and discouragements the Builders have met
with; had they been for this last hundred years encouraged by the Government,
the City of London might probably have easily grown three times bigger than now
it is.

And if we consider what the natural effects of so great a City must have been;
To be furnished with such large Provisions for War suitable to its greatness;
Such a vast number of Ships; being situate on an Island and Navigable River;
filled with innumerable Inhabitants, of such natural courage as the English
are; and to be so easily transported on a sudden with all things necessary for
War, it would long before this time have been a Terror to all Europe; and now
would have had the opportunity, under the Government of such a Martial Prince
as now reigns, to be made the Metropolis of the World; to have caused England's
Monarch to be acknowledged Lord of all the Navigable Cities and Sea-port-Towns
in the World; to have made an Universal Monarchy over the Seas, an Empire no
less glorious, and of much more profit, than of the Land; and of larger extent,
than either Caesar's or Alexander's.

FINIS.

