JOHN BARCLAY HIS DEFENSE OF THE MOST Holy Sacrament OF THE EUCHARIST, TO THE
SECTARIES OF THE TIMES^

BOOK II. CHAP. II.

Englished by a Person of Quality.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Mary Thompson at the Entrance into Old-Spring-Garden near
Charring-Cross: And Sold by Matthew Turner at the Holy-Lamb in Holbourn; And
John Lane at the Corner of Wild-street, 1688^

OF THE MOST Holy Sacrament OF THE EUCHARIST^
CHAP. II.
LET us now speak a little of the Eucharist, if in treating of so great a
Subject it may be lawful to say but little. Do not thou, O Lord, leave us, to
whom thou have left thy self; but restore Sight to the blinded Sectaries, that
they may courageously acknowledge this thy Gift, which is so wonderfully great,
that they believe it not only above themselves to Receive, but also above thee
to Give. For, as nothing more frequently deters the Jews from embracing the
Christian Faith, than their being obliged to believe in it, that the living
GOD, the GOD of Abraham, became Man, led a mortal Life, and died on a Cross: So
nothing more offends many of our Sectaries than the Excellency of this
Sacrament, whilst they cannot persuade themselves, the Bounty of CHRIST could
ever make him stoop so low, as to permit that very Body to be held in the Hands
of Priests, and received by the Mouths of Sinners, which, having been once
extended on the Cross, now sits in Glory at the Right Hand of the Father.

But there is not, O ye Sectaries, any greater prejudice against you, than the
universal Agreement of all Christians in their Belief of the Eucharist at such
time, as you first began to appear, and the exceeding great Disagreement
amongst your selves in this your Error. Is it probable, that there was then no
Church in the World, which had a right Belief of this Sacrament? Or must we
think, the Spirit of Truth resides in you, who in this so great Affair contest
more fiercely with one another, than with Us? All Christians in the World,
Latins, Greeks, Armenians, Abissines and Muscovites, had at that time one and
the same Sense of that Sacred Mystery. They all, I say, (except a few Hussites
in Bohemia, who as they were none of Ours, so neither are they Yours, there not
being any amongst you altogether of this Opinion concerning the Eucharist)
agreed with Us (and still do) that under the Species or Appearance of Bread and
Wine the Body and Blood of CHRIST are really Concealed; that there is no Bread,
no Wine remaining; that the Eucharist is therefore to be Adored, because there
is in it no other Substance but CHRIST himself.

But you, O ye Sectaries, were nothing moved with this general Consent of
Christians. You departed from them all, that is, you resolved to be Heretics.
Nor did you all take one way; but having once left the well known Path of the
Church, You wandered in your own Inventions: So that if any one enquires, what
your Thoughts are of the Eucharist, you are fain to tell him a long Story,
which in the end wants an Oedipus to unfold it. For so numerous are your
Dissensions concerning this Point, that there are reckoned amongst you above
forty different Opinions, altogether contrary to each other. Nay farther, you
do not sufficiently explain, or to speak more truly, do not well understand,
what the several Sects amongst you hold. Those of you which follow Luther,
confess, that our Lords Body is really contained in this Sacrament, though they
think withal the Bread still to remain. The Hugonots, English Protestants, and
other Calvinists affirm on the contrary, that it is nothing but mere Bread;
because, say they, CHRIST is sitting at the Right Hand of the Father, and
therefore cannot be in several places. Others think otherwise; But these two
are the most eminent Opinions amongst you. Let us now see, how absurd they both
are.

The Lutherans confessing CHRIST's Body to be really present, deny
nevertheless, that it is to be Adored. And behold, how excellently they Reason!
For, say they, CHRIST instituted not this Sacrament, that it might be Adored,
but that it might feed our Souls. Why do they not also say, that Kings and
Princes ride a Hunting for Recreation, and not to be Reverenced by their
Subjects: And that they are therefore mistaken, who, when they meet their King,
as he is Hunting, pay him the Respect, due to their Sovereign? CHRIST was on
the Cross, That he might save the Souls of many, and bear the Reproach, which
was due to us; not that he might be there Adored. Had thou, O Lutheran, been
then present, would thou have thought it a Crime to have Prostrated thy self
on Earth, and Adored him hanging on the Cross. What madness is it in thee, not
to Adore CHRIST, wherever he is; who, wherever he is, is GOD, the Disposer of
thy Life, and Judge of thy Soul?

But this Opinion of the Lutherans, which asserts the Bread to remain in the
Eucharist, is no less contrary to Scripture, than to the Doctrine of the
Primitive Church. For if the Bread and CHRIT's Body were both there, CHRIST
would not have said, This, but here, is my Body; nor yet would he have said,
The Bread, but In the Bread, which I will give is my Flesh. And if the Church
in the Apostles Time had not believed with Us, that there is no Substance of
Bread remaining in the Eucharist, St. Justin Martyr would not have written,
that this Sacrament, after the words of Consecration are pronounced, Is the
Flesh and Blood of that Incarnate Jesus; but that after the Consecration, that
Flesh and that Blood are added to the Eucharistical Bread and Wine: Nor yet
would St. Cyril of Jerusalem have used these words, This which We see, is not
Bread, though the taste thinks it to be Bread; but it is the Body of CHRIST; But
he would rather have taught Us, that the Bread, which is seen, is Bread, and
the Taste not deceived in it; but that with the Bread is joined CHRIT's Body.

Nor do the Calvinists talk more wisely, when they say, that CHRIST's Body is
not really present in the Sacrament; but yet that we are really Partakers of
it. An Opinion so Foolish, and so Destructive to it Self, that they themselves
understand it not. For tell me, O Sectary, can thou really receive CHRIST's
Body, and CHRIST not be really present? But thou say, He is always in Heaven;
and cannot be in several places at once. Thou then being only on Earth, and he
only in Heaven, how can his Body really come to thee? And when at the same
Instant thou Communicat'st at London, another at Geneva, by what Art can it be
effected, that ye should be really Fed with CHRIST's Body, if CHRIST cannot be
really present in two places at once?

Will thou say, that thy Soul by Faith flies up into Heaven, and is there
really Fed with this Holy Food? This is nothing to the purpose. For though thou
may by Faith, by Thought, by Will mount above the Stars, and Converse in the
midst of Heaven; yet art thou still really on Earth: Nor is any part of thee;
that is, either thy Mind, or Body really in Heaven, there to receive
Nourishment. Should thou never so Seriously fix thy Thoughts on Rome, or on
Jerusalem; could thou be therefore said to be really at Rome, or in
Jerusalem? It remains therefore, that thou show, how thy Soul, which ascends
not really into Heaven, can be really Fed with the Flesh of CHRIST, unless
CHRIST be truly and really on Earth, and there also in many places at one and
the same time, since many of you at the very same moment Communicate both in
England and France.

But thou will Reply, thou art indeed ignorant of the manner; yet certainly
know, that thou art Fed. Is it so? If thou know not, by what means these
things are done, then art thou not sure, but it may be by Transubstantiation.
Why then do thou with so great Boldness and Fury inveigh against it? But be
it, that thou know not the Manner; yet thou at least know, that the Manner
is such, as may not in Thought and Faith only, but in very Deed, join thee to
CHRIST's Body, or else thou must confess, that thou do not indeed receive
CHRIST's Body.

For thou say, that by Faith thou eatest our Lords Body. Now what do thou
mean by these words? That thou by Faith hold'st and believ'st, Virtue so to
flow into thy Soul from the Body of CHRIST, who is in Heaven, that thou art
thereby in some sort united to him? But this, O Sectary, is not really to
receive CHRIST's Body, it is at most to receive it but imaginarily. For that
Power, and those Virtues, which thou say, flow from CHRIST into thee, are
not indeed CHRIST's Body: And thou believe that thou receivest really nothing
else. Nor do thou, I suppose, eat these Virtues. Why therefore to elude the
Sentence of the Fathers, who testify, That CHRIST's Flesh and Blood is in very
deed received; do you make use of such vain Deceits, saying, that you also hold
the same? But if thou say, that thou by Faith apprehend'st, and believ'st
CHRIST's Body to be really Communicated to thee; I answer, that this Faith of
thine is, even in thine own Judgment, false and ridiculous, as making thee
believe, that which is not: Since in thy Opinion our Lords Body is no where but
in Heaven, and thou art really no where but on Earth.

But because thou frequently appeal'st to the Scriptures, come and let us hear,
what they say. In St. Matthew (Chap. xxvi.) our Savior says, This is my Body,
this is my Blood: In St. Mark (Chap. xiv.) This is my Body, this is my Blood:
In St. Luke (Chap. xxii.) This is my Body; this is the Chalice of the New
Testament in my Blood: In St. John (Chap. vi.) Unless ye shall eat the Flesh of
the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye shall not have Life in you: And St.
Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians (chapter xi.) pronounces him who comes
unworthily to the Eucharist, Guilty of the Body and Blood of our Lord. These
are plain Words, no perplexed Testimonies, nor things mentioned but once. (...)
which being clearly vanquished, you presently fly to (...) ^xposition; whereas,
when any thing seems to fav^^ you, ye stick close to the letter, refuse all
Interpretation, and cry out, we must adhere to the Word of GOD. As if you were
the sole Judges, and had Authority, at your pleasure, one while to decide by
the bare Text of Scripture, without admitting any Expositor; and soon after to
appeal to Interpretations, and those only of your own Invention.

But come on: What do you object against us? Arguments you say, taken out of
the Scriptures. First, that the Eucharist is sometimes in the Scripture called
Bread and Wine. Next, that CHRIST said in St. John (chap. vi.) It is the Spirit
that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing. The words, which I have spoken
unto you, are Spirit and Life. Lastly, That CHRIST sits at the Righthand of the
Father, and shall come from thence to Judge the quick and the dead. But I
answer, that these words are more obscure, than those you would have explained
by them, to wit, This is my Body; my Flesh is Meat indeed. Now what kind of
Philosophy is this, to explain one Obscurity by a greater; or, that I may speak
more truly, to gather the Sense of a clear place from a dark one? But what, if
we should say, that these Places, you object against us, are to be interpreted
by those, we have alleged? What if we deny, that you have any more Right to
expound them, than we? You bring only doubtful Arguments, and such, as will be
turned upon your selves. Nor will it be any great labor briefly to solve them
all.

The Eucharist, you say, is in the Scriptures called Bread and Wine. Therefore
the Scriptures, you say, acknowledge Bread and Wine to be truly in that
Sacrament. Proceed, Sectary, and by the same Argument more closely press us in
this manner. The Catholics in their Discourses and Prayers frequently call the
Eucharist Bread: They believe therefore, that there is in it true Bread; and
not only our Lords Body. Is not the reason and strength of the Argument the
same? Why will you rather make the Scriptures, when they mention the Eucharist
by the Name of Bread and Wine, to assert true Bread and Wine to be therein,
than us Catholics, when we call it by the same Names?

Give me leave therefore thus to retort this Argument upon you. In the
Catholic Church we often term the Eucharist Bread and Wine; and yet believe
not any Substance of Bread or Wine to be therein. Therefore it cannot from the
Scriptures, using the same Names, be concluded, that they acknowledge true
Bread and Wine to remain in it. Lay aside, Sectary, the prejudice of thy
Faction, and tell me, whether thou art not more justly overthrown by the same
Argument, with which thou assaulted'st us. For, that we often style this
Sacrament Bread and Wine, is so well known to those, who live amongst us, that
'twere Impudence to deny it, and gross Ignorance not to know it. How often do
we desire, that not only the Eating, but the Effect of this Bread may be
granted us? How often do we beg of GOD the Father, that this Bread may be to us
not a pledge of Death, but of Glory? And all this by Similitudes and Figures.
Which kind of Speeches you your selves also do not deny to be frequent in Holy
Writ. So St. Bernard (whom none can without blushing deny to be ours) calls the
Eucharist Bread, when in his first Sermon on the sixth Sunday after Pentecost
distinguishing Bread into several Species, he says, Moreover the seventh kind
of Bread is the Eucharist, because our Savior says, the Bread, which I give,
is my Flesh for the Life of the World. We therefore with the Scriptures call
this Sacrament Bread: Both because, as the Natural Man lives by Bread, so does
the Spiritual Man by the Eucharist. To signify which, CHRIST commanded it to be
made of Bread and Wine, and many of the Fathers by Our daily Supersubstantial
Bread, which we are taught to Pray for, understand this Heavenly Food. And
also, because it is in the Form of Bread; but principally because 'twas Bread
before. For we often call a thing, that now is, by the Name it formerly had.
And how often have you heard from our Writers the Example of Aaron's Rod,
which, being turned into a Serpent, was certainly no longer a Rod, unless you
will say, that GOD rather put an Illusion on Pharaoh's Eyes, than by a real
Miracle admonished him of his Majesty; and yet even then it was called a Rod:
to wit, Because it had from a Rod been changed into a Serpent: And they all
cast down their Rods, which were turned into Serpents; but Aaron 's Rod
devoured their Rods, Exodus Chap. vii. But not to say much against so weak an
Argument. The Scriptures call the Eucharist Bread: Be it so. The Ancient
Fathers have often done the same: And we also do the same. Why then may we not
be believed to think with those, with whom we speak?

Nor is the Arrow of any greater force, they shoot against us from these words
of our Lord: It is the Spirit which quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing. For
if they will have them simply understood, That the Flesh of Christ profits
nothing; I would ask them, why they then say, that our Lord's Body is received
by them in the Eucharist: Nay, why CHRIST said, Unless ye shall Eat the Flesh
of the Son of Man, and Drink his Blood, ye shall not have Life in you. Do they
think that CHRIST contradicted himself? Or will they deny it to have been
always believed in the Church, that CHRIST's Flesh profits the Receiver? They
must ever be fain to distinguish between the manner, how our Lord's Flesh,
being received, profits, and how it profits not. They must, to wit,
acknowledge, that the Capharnaits hearing CHRIST's Words, fancied to themselves
some gross, unworthy, and carnal manner, in which he would affirm, he should be
eaten: My Flesh so taken, as you in your selves imagine, profits not: I will
give my self in a more Noble and Spiritual manner than you believe. and being
by you taken for Food, will quicken your Souls. And thus of the manner of
taking, and not merely of the taking it self, did CHRIST say, The Flesh
profits nothing. Let us now see the Force of your Argument. CHRIST says, His
Flesh taken as the Capharnaits fancied, will profit nothing: Therefore, say
you, it will not profit, being taken in such manner, as the Catholics believe:
But thou must first, O Sectary, prove, that we think, as the Capharnaits did,
and that we will not hear the Spirit, which quickens. Now both these are false.
The Capharnaits, as is manifest from the Scriptures, had no higher conceit of
our Saviors words, than that he promised, His Body should be eaten as other
Meats; that it should be divided into parts, taste like Flesh, and being taken
Consume. We in a Spiritual quickening Sense believe, that CHRIST is indeed truly
and really present in the Eucharist. but after a Spiritual and Incomprehensible
manner; that he is received by us, whole, inviolate, and never consuming. Thus
will there be a mutual agreement between those words of our Lord, by which he
asserts, that His Flesh is truly given for Meat; and those others, by which he
shows, that, if you understand this matter Carnally with the Capharnaits, The
Flesh profits nothing. Now if you deny, that the Flesh of our Lord is any way
profitable, you will contradict those words, Unless ye shall Eat the Flesh of
the Son of Man, ye shall not have Life in you. But if you say, that it is in
some manner, but not in that Capharnaitical one, both received and profitable:
This indeed we shall readily grant, but shall withal add, that this Holy
manner is in our Church, and that neither these Texts, nor any other, have any
thing to the contrary.

You say lastly, that the Scriptures often affirm, that CHRIST is, and shall be
in Heaven, till he shall come in great Majesty at the end of the World: And
that therefore he cannot be on Earth, in the Eucharist, in the Hands of the
Priests. The Answer is ready. CHRIST is and shall be in Heaven in that great
and visible Majesty till the end of the World. He is not seen publicly by us
in that Brightness, nor is he yet so much as Conversant amongst us, to receive
those Offices, which may be indeed profitable to a Body. Such, as St. Mary
Magdalen performed, when she Anointed him, and in respect of which our Savior
said, The poor you have always with you; but me you have not always. He will
not therefore come down from Heaven In the Glory of His Majesty till the
calling of all Men to Judgment. But he is often present at our Affairs in
another manner, after another Fashion, with lesser State; he is, I say, often
truly and really present with us here on Earth. He appeared in the way to St.
Paul, as he was going to Damascus, and spoke to him in the way. So says Ananias
to St. Paul (Act. ix.) Our Lord JESUS has sent me, who appeared to thee in the
way, as thou came. And Barnabas declared to the Apostles, How Paul had seen
our Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him. And ( Acts xxxiii.) Now the
night following our Lord, standing by him, said, Be constant, for as thou have
testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou testify at Rome also. And lastly,
(Act. xxvi.) I am JESUS, whom thou Persecutest. But arise, and stand upon thy
feet: For to this end have I appeared to thee, that I may ordain thee a
Minister and Witness of those things, which thou have seen, and of those
things, in which I will appear to thee. And say not, that, 'twas an Angel, who
having taken CHRIST's shape, appeared to St. Paul. For to let pass its being
distinguished in the Acts of the Apostles, when our Savior or when an Angel
appeared to St. Paul, he himself has in his first Epistle to the Corinthians
(Chap. xv.) taken away the doubt, where, after he had, to prove CHRIST's
Resurrection to them, affirmed him to have been seen after his rising again by
his Apostles and Disciples, he adds, And last of all he was seen of me also, as
of an Abortive. Now it is certain, that this his being seen of St. Paul was not
till some years after the day of his Ascension: For St. Paul was a long time a
Persecutor, not an Apostle. It Is certain also, that 'twas not an Angel, but
CHRIST himself, who thus appeared to St. Paul: Since he affirms him to have
been the same, that was seen by St. Peter and the other Apostles, to assure
them of his Resurrection. For sure thou will not say, that 'twas an Angel, and
not our Lord himself, that appeared to the Apostles during the forty days,
which were between the Pasch and his Ascension. Childish moreover would St.
Paul's Argument be, were it thus to be understood, that CHRIST was undoubtedly
risen, because he had seen an Angel in CHRIST's Shape. Our Lord was then really
present on Earth with St. Paul, and has been so with several other Saints. He
is really also present with us in the Sacrament, but covered with the Form of a
Creature, and under Vails, that conceal the Creator.

And do thou still say, thou doubt'st, whether the Body, which is in Heaven,
can be also on Earth? Assuredly, Sectary, it can. Our Lord's Body can be at one
time in two several places: And if in two, why not in Infinite? For what
hinders our Bodies, that they cannot be at once in several places? Is it not
the condition of our Nature? But why cannot he, who framed our Nature, change
also its Laws? This is the humble Learning, this is the Christian Philosophy of
the Primitive Church. St. Ambrose (lib. 11 Hexam. cap. 11.) has this
Expression: Since his Word is the beginning of Nature, he may by right assume
the giving the Law to Nature, who gave it its Original. And again (lib. 3.
Hexam cap. 11.) The Word of GOD is the efficient Cause of Nature. But this
perhaps thou can not sufficiently comprehend: No more indeed can thou
comprehend GOD; and yet GOD is is not therefore less GOD. If thou measurest the
Works of GOD by the extent of thy Understanding, how weak, how obscure, how
depending on thy self thou will make him! Thy Strength of Understanding depends
on him, and not his Power on thy Understanding.

But is there any greater difficulty in granting one Body to be in several
Places, than two Bodies to be in one; or admitting, as the Ppilosophers speak,
A Penetration of Dimensions? The difficulty is altogether equal. Now CHRIST
brought his revived Body through Stone, Which was very great at the Door of the
Monument, that is, he showed, there might be a Penetration of Dimensions,
whenever he pleased: For the Stone was not rolled away by the Angel, till St.
Mary Magdalen came to Anoint our Lord. Mary Magdalen came, and the other Mary
to see the Sepulcher: And behold there was a great Earthquake: For the Angel of
our Lord descended from Heaven, and coming rolled back the Stone, and sat upon
it, etc. And the Angel Answering, said to the Women, Fear not you, Mat. chap.
28. After Christ came to his Disciples through close and solid Walls. And when
it was late that day, the first of the Sabbaths, and the Doors were shut, where
the Disciples were gathered together for fear of the Jews, JESUS came, and
stood in the midst, etc. Joh. chap. 20. Again, JESUS came, the Doors being
shut, and stood in the midst.

Here some of you are not ashamed to pretend certain unworthy Trifles, that
CHRIST perhaps came in at the Window, or descended by the Tunnel of the
Chimney, or opened the Doors, which before were shut: An impudent saying,
proceeding, if I am not mistaken, from men, who seek to gain Repute by
inconsiderate Cavilling. Is it then to no purpose, that we hear these Words so
carefully repeated: When the Doors were shut: The Doors being shut? To what end
did St. John use these Words, but to signify CHRIST's miraculous Entrance, at
which himself was present? Why did he not add, that he came in at the Window,
or the Chimney, or by opening the Doors, the shutting of which he had so
distinctly noted: That he entered then, O Sectary, the Doors being shut, is
nothing else, but that he entered against the Laws of Nature through the said
Doors. Moreover, says St. Hierom in his first Book against Jovinian, He so
entered the Doors being shut, which the Nature of Humane Bodies suffers not:
Shall we therefore deny that our Lord and St. Peter had true Bodies, because
contrary to Nature they walked on the Waters? St. Ambrose on the four and
twentieth Chapter of St. Lukes Gospel has these Words: But St. Thomas had just
cause of Admiration, when he saw a Body brought in through Places unpassable to
Bodies, all things being shut, and no place broken. And 'twas therefore a
Miracle, how a Corporal Nature should introduce it self through an in
penetrable Body, by an invisible Passage, in a visible appearance, easy to be
touched, hard to be understood. And in the same place, Though St. Peter
believed the Resurrection, yet might he be troubled, when he saw our Lord on a
sudden with his Body come in upon them into those places, which were
encompassed with locked Doors, and close Walls.

Nor did CHRIST at his Resurrection only, but at his Birth also show this
Penetration of Dimensions, coming into the World from the Womb of his most Holy
Mother without violating the Enclosers of her Virginity. St. Augustine in his
two and twentieth Book of the City of GOD (chap. 8.) relates to this purpose a
famous Miracle, hapening in his time. He says, That Patronia a Carthaginian
Matron, had obtained from a Jew a certain Ring, which she wore bound to her
naked Body with a Girdle for the Cure of her Disease. That, she going
afterward in Pilgrimage to the Relics of St. Stephen; the Ring which she
wore, fell from her whole and unhurt; the Girdle to which it was tied,
remaining whole also; that the Judaical Remedy might by a Christian Miracle be
removed from this Woman before she was healed through the Martyrs Intercession.
He further adds, They believe not this, who believe not, that our Lord JESUS
was brought forth without detriment to his Mothers Virginity, and went in to
his Disciples the Doors being shut. But let them indeed enquire of this, and if
they find it true, believe those. She is a Woman of Quality, nobly Born, nobly
Married, and dwelling at Carthage; The largeness of the City, and the Dignity
of the Person will not suffer the Truth to be concealed from the Enquirers. The
Martyr himself, by whose Intercession she was Cur^d, certainly believed in the
Son of her, who remains a Virgin; in Him, who went in to his Disciples, the
Doors being shut.

These then are the Scripture Histories of our Lords Nativity and Resurrection;
this the Primitive Churches Sense of those Histories; that two Bodies may, GOD
commanding it, be together in the same place; or, to speak with the
Phylosopbers, that there may be a Penetration of Dimensions by the Divine
Power. Now it is certainly no less repugnant to humane Sense and Nature, that
two Bodies should be thus together in one place, than that one should be at the
same time in many. The difficulty on both sides is not only alike, but the very
same. The Church has always acknowledged both of them above the force of
Nature, but below the Power of GOD, having ever taught her Children, that
CHRIST both penetrated the Walls, and is present in the Blessed Sacrament in
several places at once.

But there are three things, which you, O Sectaries, cannot well digest: The
Name of Mass, the Eucharists being termed a Propitiatory Sacrifice, and lastly
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. The Mass is to you so hateful a Word, that
the Hating of it is amongst you a token of Love. And yet, were it not, that I
confine my self to that briefness, I began with, it might abundantly be shown,
that this Holy Word has always been used to signify the Celebration of the
Eucharist. It Is now about thirteen hundred years, since the time of St.
Ambrose, who in his Epistle to Marcellina, says, I began to say Mass: And soon
after, I began to Pray unto GOD in the Oblation, that he would help, etc. St.
Telesphorus Pope and Martyr, who might for his Age have seen St. John the
Apostle, testifies the Mass to have been in his Time, ordaining many things in
the Celebration of it: Which very thing the Sectaries themselves confess. For
the Magdeburgians in their second Century (cap. 10.) blame him for Multiplying
Masses, increasing their Ceremonies, and tying them to a certain time. Behold,
how, whilst they unwarily accuse Telesphorus, they acknowledge the Antiquity of
the Mass: Confessing even the Name to have been used in the very beginning of
the Primitive Church. But whatever becomes of the Name, let us consider the
thing it self.

We say, that the Celebration of the Mass is a Sacrifice truly and properly
Propitiatory. You, or rather some of you deny it; for the more Learned agree,
at least tacitly, with us. Isaac Casaubon but few Months before his Death being
in the Presence Chamber of the most Serene King of Great Britain, I fell in
Discourse with him, as did also another Gentleman, a Courtier, but no
Catholic; whom, were it necessary, I could easily Name. Passing from one thing
to another, we happened amongst the rest upon the Eucharist, which I earnestly
defending, You need not, (said Casaubon) take all this pains, I willingly
profess, and do assert it to be manifest from the Rites of the Ancient Church,
that the Eucharist is a Sacrifice; and not only a Sacrifice of Praise, as many
amongst us would have it, but a Propitiatory Sacrifice; Sacrificium (...).
These were his very Words: Thus did he in two Languages express, what kind of
Sacrifice he thought it to be. I was not a little glad to hear him; whilst the
third person, who was present at our Discourse, wondered at this his Opinion,
affirming, that he was more startled at these words, than at an hundred
Arguments of the Papists. He can testify the Truth of this, being still alive,
and daily attending on the King. And he has been so far from being a Catholic,
that it cannot be feared, he would advantage us by speaking contrary to the
Truth.

And the Oblation indeed of the Eucharist is so frequently by the Fathers
called Sacrifice, that the Sectaries no longer dispute with us about the Name;
but only about what is to be understood by it. It cannot, (says Kemnitius) be
denied, that the Ancients, when they spoke of the Celebration of the Lords
Supper, used the words Sacrifice, Immolation, Oblation, Host, and Victim; as
also the Verbs to Offer, Sacrifice, and Immolate. Hear therefore, Sectary, but
St. Augustine alone, and thou will say, that the Church in his Age used not
these Words as borrowed or Figuratively taken, but understood them in their
proper, true and usual Sense; that the Eucharist is a true Sacrifice, properly
so called, and Propitiatory not for the Living only, but also for the Dead.

He relates therefore in the ninth Book of his Confessions (Chapter 11.) that his
dying Mother spoke thus, Lay this Body any where, let not the Care of it
trouble you in the least: This only I desire of you, that when you shall be
present at our Lords Altar, you will there remember me. And again, (Chap. 13.)
he says of her, She thought not of having her Body Sumptuously Buried, etc. She
commanded us not this, but only requested, that she might be remembered at thy
Altar, where she had without one days Intermission constantly served, whence
she knew the Holy Victim to be dispensed, by which the Handwriting that was
against us, is blotted out. He had also before (Chap. 12.) said more plainly;
Behold, when her Corpse was carried out, we went and returned without Tears. Nor
did I so much as weep at those Prayers, we poured forth to thee, when the
Sacrifice of our Redemption was offered for her; her Body now being placed near
the Grave, before it was deposited therein, as the Custom there is; but I was
all the day in secret exceeding sad, etc. Thou hear'st now, O Sectary, not only
St. Augustin's Mother, not only St. Augustine, but the very Custom and Sense of
the Church in that Age. When the Sacrifice of our Redemption was offered for
her. Here thou have three things: That the Oblation of the Eucharist is a
Sacrifice; that it is also Propitiatory. For in vain, or impiously would the
Church offer a Sacrifice to our Lord for the Dead, which could not render him
Propitious to them. Thou have lastly, The Church in that Age, wherein, you are
wont to say, she was yet Pure, by Public Consent Praying for the Dead. Hence
the Matter is so clear and certain, that the Blindness of those is to be
lamented, who refuse so clear a Light.

Now what is their Complaint against Transubstantiation? Does the Word offend
them? Or the Thing, that is signified by this Word? They say, it is a Popish
Fiction, sprung up under Innocent III. in the Lateran Council. To wit, Because
Transubstantiation is there manifestly Decreed. Now, I ask, Sectary, if Pope
Innocent delivered this Faith to us, who delivered it to the Greeks? For
certainly they wholly agree with us in this matter. Would they, who have
rejected our Communion, who hate the very Name of the Roman Pontifs, have all
generally admitted, and inviolably held such a Doctrine, of so great moment, so
newly (as you would have it) devised by the Latins? But they have not the Word
Transubstantiation. What then? They hold and believe the Thing. For they
believe that the Bread and Wine after Consecration cease to be such, and that
instead of them succeed the true Body and Blood of our Lord. Why then may we
not believe, that the Roman Church holds still the same Faith, which she held,
before the Word Transubstantiation came into use; when the Greeks at this very
day use not the Word Transubstantiation, and yet have in this matter altogether
the same Belief with the Romans? Was not the Holy Trinity believed to be
Homousian or Consubstantial, before the Word Homousian was ever taken up? What
matter is it, if some Significative Word, lately found out by Divines, be
received into use, as long as the thing signified by it, was before part of the
Christian Faith, though expressed in other Words and Phrases?

Now that the Christians before the time of Innocent the III. had the same
Belief of the Eucharist, as we now have, may be easily shown from approved
Authors, who preceded Innocent. St. Bernard died fifty years, before Innocent
the III. was advanced to the Pontificat. Now what can be more express than
these words of his in his Sermon on our Lords Supper? This is truly an Heavenly
Favor, this is certainly an abundant Grace, this is surely a super excellent
Glory, that a Priest should hold his GOD, and with his Hand give him to others.
But left he should repeal these Testimonies by such frivolous Exceptions, as
you for the most part use (pretending, that an universal Darkness had then
over-shadow'd all Mankind, and driven them into many and great Errors) let us
go back to those Ages, which were even in your own Judgment uncorrupted.

We have already given you not only the Judgment of St. Augustine, but also the
Opinion and Practice of the Church described by him: That the Eucharist is a
Victim, whereby our Sins are effaced; that it is a Sacrifice; that it is a
Propitiation, which is offered to GOD for the Dead. You require those, that are
more Ancient than St. Augustine? St. Justin Martyr the very next Age after the
the Apostles in his second Apology to the Emperor, has these Words. As by the
Word of GOD our Savior JESUS CHRIST was Incarnate, and took Flesh and Blood
for our Salvation: So we are taught, that by Prayers taken from GOD's Word the
Eucharist, by him made Food, with which our Blood and Flesh are through
mutation nourished, is the Flesh and Blood of that Incarnate JESUS. St. Hilary,
who lived in the third Age of the Church, says in his eighth Book of the
Trinity, There is no room to doubt of the Truth of the Flesh and Blood: For now
both by the Profession of our Lord himself, and our own Faith, it is truly
Flesh, and truly Blood. St. Gregory Nyssen of the same Age in his Catechetical
Oration (chap. 37.) We rightly believe, that the Bread, sanctified by the Word
of GOD, is truly changed into the Body of GOD the Word. St. Chrysostom in his
two and fiftieth Homily on St. Matthew speaks thus, Why should he disdain to
give thee his Body, who did more, that is, laid down his Life for thee? Let us
hear therefore, Priests, as well as others; how great, how admirable a thing is
granted us; let us hear, I Pray, and tremble, he has delivered us Flesh, he has
set before us himself Immolated. And St. Cyril of Jerusalem, more Ancient than
St. Chrysostom, says in his fourth Catechism, That a Christian Man knows, and
certainly holds, this Bread, which is seen by us, not to be Bread, though the
Taste thinks it to be Bread, but the Body of CHRIST; and the Wine, which is
beheld by us, though it seem Wine to the Sense of Tasting, yet not to be Wine,
but the Blood of CHRIST? What needs many Words? No Age of the Primitive Church,
none of the Fathers dissented. The Testimonies of all Ages and Writers have
been formerly given thee by such, as have thought good to handle this Argument
more at large.

Let me now speak to thee, O Sectary, if thou desire to be cured. This is one
of the greatest Affairs in the Christian Faith, whether in the Eucharist be
CHRIST himself, or only Bread, which is the Figure of CHRIST's Body: In so
great a matter, and in which to err, is certain Destruction; consider, whether
side is supported by the safest Arguments. As to the Scriptures, 'twould be
Impudence to affirm, that there are clearer, or even as clear Words for you, as
these are for us: This is my Body, this is my Blood: The Bread, which I will
give, is my Flesh. Some places therefore are plain and clear of themselves; and
others, which want Interpretation, we expound according to the Sentiments of
Men certainly great and numerous, whose Wisdom, Learning, and Piety were
remarkable; and lastly, as is most agreeable to the Divine Institution, This is
my Body. Now if you would understand, what the Sense of the Church was from the
Apostles time, it can no way better be understood, than by that of the Fathers,
who then lived. But there is not any one of the Fathers, that have written of
the Eucharist, whom we approve not, or whom we refuse for our Judge. For though
some of them may have sometimes used certain obscure Words, which you also have
endeavored to abuse for the support of your Heresies; yet is there none of
them that have spoken thus dubiously, who has not also other Words extant,
which are plain and clear for us. Nay, most of them have so written, that
asserting our Opinion, they cannot be so much as imagined to have the least
Word or Expression, which favors your Heresy. Then, if you have regard to the
Consent of Christians, it must be confessed, that not only the Latin and Greek
Churches, but all Christians throughout the whole World unanimously agree in
our Opinion. So that which way soever you seek for Arguments, there are still
more for us: If the Learning of the Persons be respected, we have far the
greater part of Men, famous for Knowledge; if Ages, we have unquestionably
more; if the number of Men, you may well be ashamed to compare with us.

Thus being every way inferior to us, you have nothing remaining but your
Obstinacy, and vain Incredulity, which with you is called Prudence, or Wisdom,
wholly consisting in such kind of Philosophy as this: Can GOD do this; or is it
likely, that he would; what Inconveniences hence arise; how unworthy is this
of the Divine Majesty? After the same manner did the Heathens put up Queries
against CHRIST, and the Arians against the Trinity. Away with this vain
Solicitude: You may possibly sometimes know, why GOD's Works are done; but
never how. Give me leave to use the Words of St. Ambrose, Who (says he, 11
Hexam. Chap. 1.) seeing these things, can with his weak understanding search
out a possibility of the Reason? All which the Divine Power, not to be
comprehended by humane Minds, nor expressed by our Discourses, has knit
together by the Authority of his own Will.

But if thou, O Sectary, art not moved by our Agreement, let the blind
Contention, that is among your selves, startle thee: Since divided into Sects,
you with great bitterness contend about the Opinion, you ought to have of this
Sacrament. Would to GOD thou knew, how pleasant it is to prostrate thy self
before the Altar, Where the Angels (says St. Chrysosthm in his third Homily on
the Epistle to the Ephesians) with Trembling Reverence the Host: How sweet it
is there to Adore our Lord, Who (to use St. Augustin's words in his Commentary
on the 98 Psalm) walked here in the Flesh, and gave the same Flesh to be eaten
by us for our Salvation: How far lastly it excells all humane Delights to
reject vain Circumstances, and believe only the Word of GOD, to which so many
foregoing Ages have Assented; to acknowledge that to be our Lords Body which
our Lord himself has affirmed to be his Body; and with a Mouth of Flesh to
receive in all due Humility the Flesh of our Lord, that he may nourish our
Souls with the effect of the Sacrament, and the Spirit which quickneth. None
shall before the Tyranny of Antichrist deprive the Faithful of these Joys, nor
can any one, but he, who has experienced them, comprehend them.

The End of the second Chapter.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere being many Excellent Pieces of the same Author, containing a Direct,
Short, and Full Proof of all those Points commonly Objected to Roman Catholics
by Sectaries, as having furnished a pretended Occasion of their Schism: I
design God willing, one by one to prepare them for the Press, that the World
may see, how unreasonable and groundless are all the Exceptions made against
Us; and Manifestly Repugnant to God's Holy Word, and the received Judgment of
all Antiquity.


