THE Blessed Effects Of True and Saving FAITH: With Good COUNSEL, Wholsome
ADVICE; AND Also Encouragement to all Friends every where, that Suffer for
Truth and Righteousness Sake.

Given forth by a Servant of the Lord, who is in a Travail for the Prosperity
of Sion, and that Jerusalem may become the Praise of the whole Earth. known by
the Name of JOHN BANCKES. Let this Epistle be read in the fear of the Lord, in
all the Meetings of Friends, both in Prison and at Liberty, thorough England,
and where it may go or be sent elsewhere.

Faith is the Gift of God, and it Purifieth the Heart.

Blessed are they that suffer for Truth and Righteousness Sake, for there is is
the Kingdom of Heaven.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1684.

The Blessed Effects of True and Saving FAITH, etc.
DEAR FRIENDS:
THE great Work of God in the Sons and Daughters of Men, is to purify the
Heart, and make clean the inward, part which is through Faith in his Son; Faith
is the Gift of God, and the work of it is to purify the Heart, and cleanse the
inside from dead works, to serve him the true and living God, in the newness
thereof; this is the great work of God in and through Faith in his Son, to work
out the old Leaven, and mould into a new Lump, to make the Heart anew, the Mind
heavenly, and the Soul living.

Oh! the blessed effects of True and Saving Faith; even that Faith which stands
in the Power of God, which as Man and Woman comes truly to the knowledge of,
with the Heart such comes truly to believe in God, and Confession with the
Mouth is made to Salvation, and so gradually a casting off and forsaking every
thing that is Evil, whereby a learning to do well (by the Teachings of the
Grace thorough Faith) comes more and more to be known, this is the blessed
Effects of true and saving Faith, which true faith thorough the power of it,
works a true tenderness in the Heart, instead of hardness, and brings to true
openness those that have been shut up, and into a true nearness with the Lord,
and one with another, even such that have been far separated from him, and that
by Wicked Works; this is true Faith, that works in the Heart, to the
overcoming of it, which is True and Saving Faith, saves them that were lost,
quickens them that were dead, and brings them in and through the Strength and
Power thereof, to serve the true and living God, in the newness of Life.

The blessed Effects of this true and saving Faith, is to make Clean, Pure and
Holy, sanctifies throughout both in Body, Soul and Spirit; makes a new
Creature, which brings to a true Knowledge, What it is to be in Christ Jesus,
and so the Heart and Mind with the whole Affections, comes to be set on things
that are Heavenly, Everlasting and Eternal: Oh! the pure change and blessed
Alteration that comes to be known herein and hereby; Man that has been
unclean, is made clean, and Man and Women that has been unholy and impure, is
made holy and pure; and so in the Holy Life, Holy Men and Holy Women come to
worship and serve the pure Holy God, in the Newness, Livingness and Tenderness
thereof; and so according to measure, whether more or less, come with the
Blessed Apostle, to say, by living experience; The Life that I now live, is by
Faith in the Son of God. Here, Old things are past away, and behold all things
are become new. the old words past away, the bad Actions and vain Conversation
put off, which is for Judgment and Condemnation, which being put off, the
Armor of Light, and true and saving Faith comes to be put on through the
blessed Effects thereof.

So in and thorough this true and saving Faith, that stands in the Power of
God, Gods people come to have their Armor on, whereby and because of which,
they are made more then Conquerors, made able to withstand all the Fiery D^rts
of the Devil, and all his Instruments both within and without, are made able
thorough this same Faith with the Prophet to leap over a Wall, run through a
Troop, and to break that which is as a Bow of Steel Spiritually, that
otherwise, to wit, out of the Faith, cannot be got over, run through, nor
broken: Oh! what is too hard, for those that are of and in this true and saving
Faith?

As the Author unto the Hebrews says, the 11th Chap. Verse. 22th, having spoken
largly of the Fruits and Effects of Faith, says he, What shall I more say? for
the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Bariak, and of Sampson, and of
Jephthar, of David, and also of Samuel, and of the Prophets; who through Faith
subdued Kingdoms; wrought Righteousness; obtained Promises; stopped the Mouths
of Lions; quenched the violence of Fire; escaped the Edge of the Sword; out of
weakness, were made strong; Women received their Dead raised to Life again; and
others were tortured, not accepting of Deliverance, that they might obtain a
better Resurrection; and others had Trials of Cruel Mockings and Scourgings;
yea, moreover of Bonds and Imprisonment; they were stoned, they were sawn
asunder, were Tempted, were slain with the Sword, they wandered about in
Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being distitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the
World was not worthy, they wandered in Deserts and in Mountains, and in Dens
and Caves of the Earth, and these all have obtained a good report through Faith.

So Dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters, wherever this may come, unto whom the
Salutation of my Life reaches; try your selves, prove your selves, for that
end you may know whether you be in this Faith or not, whereby all these blessed
Effects are wrought and brought to pass, and many more, to the making perfect
throughout, and none to content or satisfy your selves with the word Faith, or
with the bare Profession of Faith; but carefully mind what Christ Jesus our
Lord says, If thou have Faith as a grain of Mustard seed, thou shall say unto
this Mountain, be thou removed, and it shall be so. If Faith in this small
measure or degree, through the blessed effects of it, be thus able, or those
whose Faith is no more, thus gain Victory, how much more Victory shall those
obtain that keep it unto the end, for it is those that finish in that same Faith
in which they have begun, that shall be saved, and that the Crown of Life and
of Immortal Glory is laid up for.

But now some may say that are young in the Truth, and that the Enemy may bear
hard upon by Temptations, I thought I had had Faith in some Measure, however in
the least degree, and yet those things stand in my way, like Mountains, that I
cannot get over as yet, and great Oppositions and Temptations I meet with, both
within and without, that prevail with me.

Dear Friend, in much tenderness does my Soul breath unto the Lord for thy
Deliverance, and in order that thou may be delivered from that which so
oppresses thee in Spirit, or stands in thy way, [mark well what I say unto
thee] thou willest too much, and through thy willing thou would run too fast,
and make too much haste through thy Will, striving to be out and over things,
which is the great cause of hindering thee, or why thou comes sho^t of
obtaining Victory through Faith; and that thou do not come to know the
blessed Effects or Work of it in thy Heart and inward part. Remember the
Counsel given to Israel of old, Thy Strength oh Israel, is to stand still: So
true Strength, Ability and Victory thorough Faith, over and against Enemies
both within and without, is in standing still, and being quiet and cool in thy
mind; for as the Scriptures of Truth testify, it is certainly true, It Is not
in him that wills nor runs, the Battle is not unto the Strong, nor the Race
unto the Swift. And Christ says, Which of you by taking thought can add one
Cubit to your Stature? So to stand still and patiently wait to receive the true
power that the Lord will give to all in his own time (though not in their's)
that patiently wait for it, that so patience in thee may have its perfect work,
that so true Experience thou may gain of Victory given unto thee, over all the
Temptations of the Enemy through Faith in the Power of God, and so will all
those things come to be removed out of thy way that thou stands questioning and
reasoning about, and this is true Faith indeed, that gives Victory, and its
known to be so by the blessed Effects of it, and as Christ said, This is that
which gives Victory, even your Faith; and this is the way thorough Faith for
all to come to know an Anchoring and Establishing upon the sure Rock, through
Faith and Hope, that never makes ashamed.

And now Dear Friends, unto all you whom God in and through Christ Jesus his
Son, has not only called to believe in his Name, but also to suffer for Truth
and Righteousness sake; Blessed and Happy of the Lord are all you, and happy
shall you be, if you continue unto the end, that has a true Knowledge and
right Understanding, that your Suffering is for Truth and Righteousness sake,
(that is to say) whose Suffering is for Christ's sake, as those that are his,
that he has Redeemed, and Saved, and Sanctified by his Blood, Death and
Suffering, as those that are not your own, nor any thing you have or enjoy,
(mark well and take good Notice, as those) that your Suffering may be for
Christ your Redeemer, your Savior, your Shepherd, Counselor, King, Priest,
and Lawgiver, and so for Righteousness, as those, that because of the
tenderness of your Consciences cannot do, nor consent to be done, that which is
Unrighteous, Unjust, nor Lawful, according to the righteous Law of God, and
tends to Oppression.

Blessed and Happy of the pure God are all you whose Suffering is on this wise
and in this manner; for it is not only that any does suffer, whether in Body or
Goods, that will tend to bring the recompense of Reward home, to the comfort of
the Heart, and joy of the Soul, as a confirming encouragement in the Suffering;
but also that you all know and be sensible for what you suffer (to wit) to be
in the Name, in the Power, in the Truth, in the Seed Christ, for which you
suffer; here is the true ease, the true peace, the true quietness in Spirit in
Suffering this makes the Yoke easy, and the Burden light, and the blessed
Recompense of Reward from the Heavenly Hand of the Blessed God comes, and is
extended unto all such of an Hundred fold in this Life, and also shall inherit
Life Everlasting, as Christ Jesus our Lord said unto Peter, Where there is a
willingness to forsake Father or Mother, Wife or Children, Houses or Lands for
his Name sake, this shall be their Reward. So Dear Friends, the Council and
Advice of my Life unto you all, in the Testimony of it is, that you all be
truly careful what you suffer in and for, that none may have only a Name that
you live, and be dead; but as those who have Faith in the just Principle, and
are in a Spiritual Travail; for if any one suffer in Body or Goods, and not in
the Truth, that will be a sad comfortless Suffering.

So Dear Friends, while as a great Mercy from God, you have yet Health and
Liberty to meet together to Worship and serve him, be faithful in meeting often
together, First day and Week day (Men and Women's Meetings) and when met, be
diligent in waiting upon him, for to receive of his living power from day to
day, and time to time, which is that which truly Fits, Furnishes and Prepares
in every good Word, Work and Service; I say, make good use of time every one,
in being truly careful how you spend it, for it is the ill use made of time, or
the careless squandering away of it, that makes many unfit for a day and time
of Trial, when called thereunto; remember the ten Virgins they had all Lamps,
but five wanted Oil, and it is said their Lamps were gone out; it seems they
once did shine, (mark) they were all called unto to prepare, but the five
Foollish wanted wherewith, and so were left behind, and the door was shut
against them, as to enter into rest, and partake of Joy, because of their
Unwatchfulness, and Sleepy Sluggardliness in the time they had given them* and
although they came calling and crying afterward, it was to no purpose, the door
was shut; it is plain there was a time the door was open, when the Wise, that
had both the Lamps and Oil entered in; so all be upon your watch continually,
with a care to have Oil in your Lamps, that an entering into the Place of Rest,
where you shall partake of Joy unspeakable and full of Glory in your Suffering,
as in a House and Habitation of Safety, where none nor nothing can make afraid;
that if the Storm or Tempestuous Trial last long, you shall never want for
Bread, but it will be sure, and your Water will never fail; for he for whose
Name Sake ye suffer, will spread your Table, fill your Cup, and maintain your
cause; where your Communion will be sweet with the Lord, and your Unity and
Fellowship will be very comfortable, that you will have and feel, with all his
Faithful Suffering People.

This is the Counsel and Advice of your Brother, in Bowels of tender Love, that
all who do suffer in oppression for Truth and Righteousness sake, that it may
be on this wise and in this manner, that so cause of great Encouragement you
may all have in and under Suffering, whether in Body or Goods, which I can give
in Truth by good experience, (to wit, Encouragement to all faithful Sufferers)
who have had my own Goods spoiled, and my Body Imprisoned time after time, and
now am a Prisoner, because for Conscience I cannot uphold that great oppression
of Tithes; and the same day and hour I was to go to Prison, were the Spoilers
carrying away my Goods, for no greater Crime then Worshipping and Serving the
Lord my God; and oh! the Joy, Gladness, and Rejoicing that was in my Heart and
Soul, that same hour and moment of time, being I was truly sinsible of the
cause wherefore I suffered the same, being born up in my Understanding, my Joy
was unutterable on this wise, and under this consideration, That the Lord my
God should not only count me worthy to believe in his Name, but also to suffer
for the same, and in that that Christ Jesus the Son of the Fathers love
suffered all to save and redeem my Soul; and therefore should not I willingly
offer up all I had and did enjoy, in answer to what God through Christ his Son
had done for me? yea surely, I said in my Heart, I Will offer up all freely; I
speak to his Praise and Glory, and the great Encouragement of all faithful
willing Sufferers, whose Suffering on this wise will never be wearysome nor
tedious unto you, no murmuring nor complaining will take place, or have room in
any such a Heart, as to say or think, How shall I live? Or how shall my Wife
and Children be maintained? Or my Business carried on? (not to be void of an
honest care in those things) yet not to murmur because of the Suffering.

What! is not God Almighty All-sufficient for the Soul? And must not he be
relied upon, through Christ his Son our Lord, for the Salvation thereof? And is
not he that is all-sufficient for the Soul, sufficient for the Body also? (yea
assuredly, by living experience can my Soul say) and is not the Earth the
Lord's, and the fullness thereof? And cannot he take and give according to his
Good Will and Pleasure?

Let all remember the Patience of Job, in his still retaining his Integrity, in
his deep Affliction and Suffering, both in Goods and Body, whose Wife gave him
bad Counsel, in saying, Will thou always retain thine Integrity? Curse God,
and Die: but he refused it, and reproved her; and suffered the loss of all his
Thousands of Sheep and Camels, and Hundreds of Oxen; all his Children and
Servants; yet the Lord restored him double, so that it is said, The latter end
of Job, was far more Happy and Blessed than the Beginning.

Oh! that the care of all called to suffer may be, to refuse all Evil Counsel,
given either by Wife or Husband, Kinsfolk or Relations, that would persuade any
to require the Lord Evil for Good, and desert their Testimony in Suffering, as
such that would give Counsel on this wise. Oh! this is but a small matter, and
the other is but a little thing; thou may do it well enough, or suffer
another to do it f^r (...): Oh! nay, (says the honest-hearted and true to God)
I must (...) be faithful in the little, and then my Lord and Master will make
me Ruler over more; and that which I cannot for Conscience do my self, I cannot
suffer ^^y co^nivingly to do it for me, for this is great Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation.

Oh! what Encouragement has all the Faithful in Suffering, to trust the Lord
with all they have and do enjoy, rightly to consider, and mind the Patience of
Job; the Faithfulness of Daniel; and the Faith, Courage and Nobility of
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego; Daniel could not but open his Window, and Pray
to his God, though a Decree made to the contrary, to cast him into the Den of
Lions, the Angel of whose Presence shut their Mouths, and preserved Daniel, the
Servant of the Living God; as the King was made to call him, when he saw his
Faithfulness.

Oh! the great Encouragement that all the Faithful have in Suffering, for the
Kings and Rulers of the Earth with many People, are made to confess, We are the
People of God indeed; when they see us to stand faithful in our Testimony, as
Nebuchadnezzer was made to call the three Servants of the Lord before named,
Come forth ye Servants of the Most High God; although before as many now will,
(threatened) that, If they would not fall down, and Worship the Image he had set
up, they should be cast into the Fiery Furnace, seven times hotter then ever;
and who is that God that shall be able to deliver out of my Hand? said he; yet
as the Lord had then, so he has a way now, to deliver all whose Trust and
Confidence is in him* beyond the expectation of the Wickedest and Cruellest of
Men, notwithstanding their Fury and Decrees made in their Wills; for Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednego said, Be it known unto thee O King, we will not serve thy
Gods, for our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the Burning Fiery
Furnace; and if not, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. And so
because they could not bow to the Kings Image, at the sounding of several sorts
of Instruments of Music, they were bound, and cast into the Burning Fire, with
their Coats, Hosen, and Hatts; and the Flame of the Furnace was so great, that
those Men that cast them in, were slain thereby; but not so much as one Hair of
the Head of the three Faithful Servants of the Lord singed, nor the smell of
Fire found on their Clothes.

Oh! what great Encouragement is here, for all that in any measure know God, to
believe and trust in him in Suffering, whether in Body or Goods, though never
so deep; for hereby it is evident and plain, that the Lords always had, and has
a true regard to his People, who by the Angel of ^is Presence and Arm of his
great Power, the more need they stood and stand of him, so accordingly he
appears, and works their Deliverance, (according to that saying, The Rod of the
Wicked shall not always ly upon the back of the Righteous) and not only so but
brings Plagues and Judgments upon the Heads of the Persecutors and Afflictors
of his faithful Ones; One Hair of whose Head, (says Christ) shall not fall to
the ground without your Fathers Providence.

And although Herod the King, the troubler of the Church, then killed James;
and because it pleased the Jews, he took Peter also, and put him in Prison,
intending to bring him forth to the People, with Wicked intents no doubt; but
the same Night before he so intended, although Peter lay bound in Prison with
two Chains betwixt two Soldiers, an Angel from God came upon him, and loosed
his Chains, and caused the Iron-gate to open of its own accord; and Paul and
Silas they were put in the Inward Prison, after they had been beat and sore
abused, and their Feet fastened in the Stocks, (mark, in the Inner Prison)
where they Prayed and sang Praises unto God at Midnight; and such was the
wonderful Appearance, of the great Power of the Mighty God, that caused the
Prison Doors to open, that it is said, The Foundations of the Prison were
shaken, and when the Jailer awaked, he thought to have killed himself, seeing
the Doors open, supposing the Prisoners had been fled; but Paul said, Do thy
self no harm, we are all here; and then he came trembling, when he perceived
what was done, and said, What shall I do to be Saved? and Paul and Silas spoke
unto him the Word of the Lord, and bid him, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and he should be Saved; and he and all his House Believed.

Oh! what great Encouragement is here, for all faithful honest Hearted Friends,
though in and under Suffering, or that yet may be called thereunto* to go on in
all faithfulness, freely giving up Life and Liberty, and all into the Lords
hand, willing to cast their care and put their Confidence in him, who has all
power in his own hand, to do and bring to pass whatsoever seems good in his own
Eyes; Oh! how the Wicked many times in the height of their Wickedness are
frustrated, and Gods People, beyond all expectation preserved and delivered, as
you your selves have many times been made living Witnesses; hold it fast Dear
Friends in your Remembrance.

And you may also see when there is a freely giving up to answer what the Lord
requires, in the faithful performance of the same, thorough the Might of Gods
Power, Peoples Hearts and Consciences are reached, to the causing of them to
tremble, whereby good desires are begotten and raised, What Men shall do to be
Saved; though before they have been Persecutors and Afflictors of Gods People,
as you may see by the Jailer before mentioned, and whose care it is thus to walk
and show forth a Godly Conversation and Example in doing or suffering, so as to
reach to the Witness of God in Peoples Consciences, though in the Inner Prison,
as Paul and Silas was, they have not only cause to bless and praise the Holy
Name of the Pure God, for accompanying them by the Angel of his Presence, but
also to Sing and make Melody unto him in their Hearts.

For now, Dear Friends, and Suffering Brethren, though the Lord our God see it
good so to come to pass, for a trial of your Faith and Patience, to see how you
will trust in him, in the hour of Temptation and time of Trial, that Man shall
be so far permitted, to take your Goods, and separate you from your dearest and
nearest Relations, your Dear Wives and Tender Children, and put you in Prison;
now this is greatly your Joy and Comfort, being sensible of the Cause wherefore
you suffer, Man with all his Power and Strength, Fury and Rage, cannot separate
you from the pure enjoyment of the presence of the Lord; but by it reaches
unto his Dear Suffering Lambs, though in a Dungeon; which if it were not so,
above all People we were most Miserable; but now above all People we are most
Blessed and Happy; Blessed, and Praised, and Magnified for evermore be the Holy
Name, and great Power of our God, by and thorough which he always did and does
carry through all his faithful Children and People; for he is for ever worthy
of all Praise, Honor and Glory, unto him alone be it given, both now and for
ever more, Amen.

And so Dear Friends put on Courage and Boldness, in the Name, Fear and Power
of the Most High, as an Armor, faithfully to follow your Captain, the Lord
Jesus Christ, that will never leave you nor forsake you, except you first leave
him, who will lead in and through the good and bad report, the Fire and the
Water, the sixth and in the seventh Trouble and Exercise, will also be your
Preserver and Upholder, who upholds all his by his Word and Power: I say Dear
Friends, all in faithfulness follow your Leader whithersoever he goes; for as
you with diligence follow him he will bring you thorough; and bring you forth
in his own time; (...) happy are they that patiently wait till it be* though as
great a Trial as ever any of his People suffered: Yet I say, if you be steadfast
in the Faith* he will still bring you forth and thorough, more bright and more
pure, Holy and Clean; for the fiery Trial makes so, concerning* which as the
Apostle Peter said, Marvel not concerning the Fiery Trial, as though some
strange thing had happened: for it is for no other end, but that you more and
more may shine, as the Stars of Heaven in the Firmament of his Power; that so a
True, Living and Faithful Testimony, whether in doing or suffering, Body or
Goods, by you all, according to your several Measures, may be born unto the
Truth, and for the pure God, and his Pure, Holy Worship, and against all
Oppression and Unrighteousness that is upheld in the World, that the same may
stand, remain, and be left upon record to after Ages and Generations, how
faithful ye were to God in your day as a confirmation unto their Faith, and as
may greatly tend to their Encouragement, as those faithful Witnesses that have
already finished their course in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and are
gone to their rest, does greatly tend to strengthen the Faith, and encourage
all those that yet remain, that are traveling on in the same way.

That so in that same love, Pure Life, and true tenderness, into which at first
you were begotten, and raised to bear a faithful Testimony for the Lord, his
Name, Truth and Glory, though but in little and small things when nothing in
that day (all keep it in Mind) was too near or dear for you to part with, that
you may all persevere and fi^ish in that in which you have begun, that that
which was known to be the First, may carefully be kept unto, to be knowa to be
the Last; the Alpha, the Omega; the Beginning and the Ending; the same to Day,
Yesterday and forever; who is from Everlasting to Everlasting, that so the
Crown of Life and of Immortal Glory may be set upon your Heads, that is laid up
in store for all that in faithfulness continue unto the end; unto which the
Lord God of Life by and through the greatness and strength of his own Power,
keep and preserve you all Faithful in Life and unto Death, and in the end, Amen.

From my Prisonhouse in Carel^le in Cumberland, the 17th of the ^th Month,
1684.
Printed by John Bringhurst in Leaden Hall.


