THE POSSIBILITY AND NECESSITY Of the INWARD IMMEDIATE REVELATION Of the SPIRIT
of GOD Toward the Foundation and Ground of True FAITH, proved in a Letter
write in Latin, to a Person of Quality in Holland; And now also put into
English.

By R. B.

Printed in the Year 1686.

ADVERTISEMENT To the READER.
THIS serves to inform thee, that it is above seven years since this Epistle
was Printed in Latin, the Person to whom it was write, the Here Paets, is a
Man of no mean account both in the Learned and Politic World; The Conference I
had with him was lately after his return from Spain, where he had been
Ambassador from the United Netherlands; I discoursed with him on the same
subject, last year at London, where he was one of the Commissioners for the
Dutch Eastindian Company; but could not find him propose any thing new, nor
what I could conceive had any weight toward a Reph; what his Reasons were, not
to prosecute this Matter further, I shall not determine: But thus far he
readily yielded, That he had been mistaken in his notion of the Quakers, for he
found they could make a Reasonable Plea for the foundation of their Religion.
Upon my reading it over again, I find an inclination in my self, and was
persuaded by some Friends, to publish it in a Language more obvious to all my
Country Men. It is a Question now frequently tossed, What is the Ground and
Foundation of Faith? And when the matter is sifted to the bottom, it resolves
in Tradition or Revelation; for those who lay claim to the Scripture, and would
make it the foundation of their Faith, do resolve it but in a Tradition, when
the Motives of Credibility are enquired unto, since the subjective Revelation
which they yield, comes but in the last place, and is by themselves termed
medium incognitum assentiendi. And such a Revelation those of Rome will not
refuse, to influence them to assent to the determination of the Church: So
those Protestants who say, the subjective operation of the Spirit influences
them, (tho they know not how) to believe the Scripture presented and conveyed
to them by Tradition, as the Dictats of GODS Spirit, and so understand them as
their Preachers interpret them; differ not much, or at least have not Reason to
differ from the Church of Rome, who say, the Spirit influences them to believe
the Scriptures as proposed by the Church, and according as her Doctors and
Councils interpret them. And neither has any better foundation than Tradition;
And to speak the truth plainly, the Faith of both resolves in the veneration
they have for their Doctors; But whereas the one affirms, they do it by an
entire Submission, they think it decent to say, they judge them infallible. And
certainly, it is most reasonable that such as affirm the first, believe the
last. The other because they pretend they believe the Church but conditionally,
have denied to her infallibility, tho generally they be as credulous as the
other. And I find the Doctors of their Church as angry to be contradicted as
the other, that is an ingredient goes to the Composition of all Clergymen,
since it became a Trade, and went to make a part of the outward policy of the
World, from whence has flowed that monster Persecution. In short, the matter is
easily driven into this narrow compass; we believe either because of an outward
or inward Testimony, that is because it is outwardly delivered to us, or
inwardly revealed to us. For my part, I think the Papists does wisely in
pleading for Infallibility, for certainly the true Church never was nor can be
without it: And the Protestants does honestly in not claiming it, because they
are sensible they want it. I should therefore desire the one to prove that they
are infallible; and advice the other to believe they may, and seek after it:
But I am sure, neither the one is, nor the other cannot without immediate
Divine Revelation. Therefore as to deny Revelation, is a bad way to prove
Infallibility; so to deny Infallibility is a bad way to make a Reformation,
since they who do reform, had need to be certain they are doing so. The
asserting of Infallibility in the Church of christ, is not the error of the
Church of Rome, but the pretending to it, when they have it not, and placing it
where they should not: But since those who oppose immediate Revelation, do it
on the account that they reckon it either impossible or unnecessary. I hope
there will be as much found in this Epistle as will (...) the contrary. I have
now exceeded the limits of (...) Advertisement, (but being known not to be a
Man of form) I hope, my Reader will excuse me; to whom I wish true certainty of
Faith, and so bid him heartily Farewell,

R. BARCLAY.
The 9. of October, 87.
My Friend,
ALBEIT I judge I did fully answer to all thy Arguments in that Conference we
had concerning the necessity and possibility of Inward Immediate Revelation,
and of the certainty of True Faith from thence proceeding. Nevertheless,
Because after we had made an end, and were parting, thou would needs remit to
my further Consideration, the strength of thy Argument, as that in which thou
supposed the very hing of the Question to lie: That I might satisfy thy
desire, and that the Truth might more appear, I did further consider of it; But
the more I weighed it, I found it the weaker: And therefore that thou thy self
may make the truer Judgment of it, I thought meet to send thee my further
considerations thereon, (which I had done err now, had not I both at London and
elsewhere been diverted by other necessary occasions) Wherein, I doubt not, but
thou will perceive a full and distinct answer to thy Argument. But if thou
cannot as yet yield to the Truth, or thinks mine answer in any part to be
defective, so that there yet remains with thee, any matter of doubt or scruple
I do earnestly desire thee, that as I for thy sake, and out of love to the
Truth have, not been wanting to examine thy Argument, and to transmitt to thee
my Considerations thereon; So thou may give thy self the trouble to write and
send me what thou has further to say, which my Friend N. N. who delivers thee
this, will at what time thou shall appoint receive from thee, and transmitt to
me thy Letter, that at last the Truth may appear where it is.

And that the whole matter may the more clearly be understood, it will be fit
in the first place, to propose thy Argument whereby thou opposes the Immediate
Revelation of GOD in the Saints, thence concluding thou has fully overturned
the foundation of the People called Quakers. Which Argument of thine is,

That since (as thou judges) the Being and Substance of the Christian Religion
consists in the Knowledge of and Faith concerning the Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ Jesus; thou consider^ the substance of the
Christian Religion as a contingent truth; which contingent truth is matter of
fact: whence thou reasons, That matter of Fact cannot be known but by the
relation of another, or by the perception of the outward Senses: Because there
are naturally in our Souls no Ideas of contingent truths, such as are
concerning necessary Truths: to wit, That GOD is, and tha^ the whole is greater
than the part; And since i^ may without absurdity be said, that GOD cannot make
a contingent Truth to become a necessary Truth; neither can GOD reveal
contingent Truths or matters of Fact but as contingent Truths are revealed; But
matters of Fact are not revealed but by the outward Senses: From whence thou
concludes, That Men are not even obliged to believe GOD producing any
Revelation ^n the Soul concerning matter of Fact, whether of a thing done or to
be done, unless there be added some Miracles obvious to the outward senses, by
which the Soul may be ascertained that that Revelation comes from GOD: And
this thou endeavors also to prove from the Scripture, Rom: 10. where the
Apostle says, Faith comes by hearing: And because the Apostle speaks
afterward of those who were ^ent in the plural number: Thence thou concludes,
That to be spoken of outward Preaching by ^he Ministry of Men: And since the
Apostle uses Question, saying, How shall they believe unless ^hey hear? Thou
gathers from the Induction and ^onnexion of the Text, that the Apostle treats
^nly of outward hearing; thence concluding that without outward hearing, Faith
cannot be produced: and therefore, that there can be no Immediate Revelation by
the simple operation of the Spirit in the Mind, ^nless there be somewhat
proposed to the Out^ard senses.

Before I proceed to a direct answer to this Ar^ument, some things are
necessary to be premised,

First then, That is falsely supposed, that the ^ence of the Christian Religion
consists in the ^istoricall Faith and Knowledge of the Birth, ^eath, Life,
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ That Faith and Historical Knowledge is
indeed a part of the Christian Religion; But not such an Essential part, as
that without which the Christian Religion cannot consist; But an Integrall
part, which goes to the completing of the Christian Religion, as the Hands or
Feet of a Man are Integrall parts of a Man, without which nevertheless a Man
may exist, but not an entire and complete Man.

Secondly, If by Immediate Revelation be understood such a Revelation of GOD as
begets in our Souls an historical Faith and Knowledge of the Birth of Christ
in the flesh, without the means o^ the holy Scripture, we do not for such a
Revelalation as commonly given or to be expected by u^ or any other Christians;
For albeit many other Evangelical Truths be manifested to us by the immediate
manifestation of God, not using the Scripture as the means: yet the Historical
Knowledge o^ Christ is not commonly manifested to us, nor t^ any others, but by
the holy Scripture as the means, and that by way of a Material Object, eve^ as
when we see the Person of Peter or Paul by the help of the Suns light; that
light of the Sun re^veals the Person of Peter or Paul to our visiv^ Faculty
immediately, yet not without the m^dium of that person concurring as a
matterial O^ject to produce that sight, while the light of the Sun concurrs as
the formal Object of that vision (...) sight: So that when we Livingly and
Spiritua^ly know the History of the Birth of Christ (...) the flesh, the Inward
Revelation or Illumination (...) GOD, which is like the Suns light, proceeding
from the Divine Sun does shine into the eye of the Mind, and by Its influence
moves the mind to assent unto the Historical Truth of CHRIST'S Birth, Life, etc.
in the Reading or Hearing the Scripture, or meditating therein.

Thirdly, Nevertheless we do firmly assert, that GOD can most easily, clearly
and certainly manifest to our minds the Historical Truths of CHRIST'S Birth,
etc. when it so pleases Him, even without the Scripture or any other outward
mean. And because this Argument seems to be formed against the possibility of
such a Revelation, therefore I shall proceed to discuse it. But first, thou may
mind that the Prophets who foretold CHRIST'S coming in the Flesh, and being to
be born of a Virgin, and afterward to suffer Death, did know these Truths of
Fact, by the Inward Inspiration of GOD without Outward Means, for which see 1
Peter 1.10, 11. Now that which has been may be.

Fourthly, This Argument does at most conclude that we cannot know Naturally
any truth of Fact, but by the relation of another without us, or by the
perception of the outward senses; Because there are naturally in our minds no
Ideas concerning contingent Truths (and every Truth of Fact is a contingent
Truth) as there are of necessary Truths. This then proves that we cannot
naturally know any contingent Truth but by the relation of another, or
perception of the outward senses: But that hinders not, but we may know a
contingent Truth by a supernatural Knowledge, GOD supplying the place of an
outward Relator, who is so true, that he may and ought to be believed; Since GOD
is the fountain of Truth.

Fifthly, When GOD does make known unto Men any matter of Fact by Divine
immediate Revelation or Inspiration, GOD speaking as to the Ear of the Heart of
the inward Man, or as by his Finger writting it therein. Two things are to be
considered in such an Immediate Revelation.

1. Tomateriale, The matter of fact or thing revealed which is contingent.

2. Toformale, The form or mode, how the Revelation is made, which form is an
Inward, Divine and supernatural Revelation, which is the voice or speech of
GOD, inwardly speaking to the Ear of the inward Man, or Mind of Man* or a
Divine writting, supernaturally imprinted therein. Now as to the matteriall
part, or the thing and matter revealed; This is indeed a contingent Truth, and
of it self is not manifest to the Mind, but because of the form, that is,
because of the Divine mode and supernatural inward operation, the matter is
known to be true: For that Divine and Supernatural Inward Operation, which the
Mind does feel and perceive in it self, is the Voice of GOD speaking unto Man,
which by its Nature and specific Property, is as clearly distinguished and
understood to be the Voice of GOD, as the voice of Peter of James is known to
be the voice of such Men: for every Being as a Being is knowable, and that by
its own speci^^^k Nature or Property proceeding from its Nature, and has its
proper Idea by which it is distinguishable from every other thing, if so be it is
Idea be stirred up in us, and clearly proposed to us.

Sixthly, Now as some Beeings are Natural, some Supernatural; so some Ideas are
Natural, some Supernatural: And as when any natural Idea is excited in us, we
clearly know it. So also when a supernatural Idea is raised, we clearly know
that whereof it is the Idea: but the Voice of GOD speaking to the mind of Man,
is a supernatural Being, and stirs up in us a supernatural Idea, by which
we clearly know that inward Voice to be the Voice of GOD, and not the voice or
operation of another, or of any evil Spirit, or Angel, because none of these
has a supernatural Idea, as the Voice of GOD, and his Divine Operation has;
for it is full of Vigor, Virtue, and Divine Glory, as says the Psalmist, who
had often experience of it, and we also in our measures are witnesses thereof,
for the Voice of GOD is known to be his by its Divine Virtue.

Seventhly, The senses are either Outward or Inward, and the Inward senses are
either Natural or Supernatural: We have an example of the Inward Natural Sense
in being Angied or Pacified, in Love and Hatred, or when we perceive and
discern any Natural Truth, (such as the Natural Maxims, to wit, That the whole
is greater then the part: or when we deduce any Conclusion by the strength of
Natural Reason, that Perception also in a larger sense may be called an inward
Sense. But an Example of an Inward supernatural Sense is, when the Heart or
Soul of a pious Man feels in it self Divine Motions, Influences, and
Operations, which sometimes are as the voice or speech of GOD, sometimes as a
most pleasant and glorious Illustration or visible Object to the inward Eye,
Sometimes as a most sweet Savor or Taste, sometimes as a Heavenly and Divine
Warmness, or (so to speak) Melting of the Soul in the Love of GOD. Moreover
this Divine and supernatural Operation in the Mind of a Man is a true and most
glorious Miracle, which when it is perceived by the Inward and supernatural
Sense, divinely raised up in the Mind of Man, does so evidently and clearly
persuade the Understanding to assent to the thing revealed, that there is no
need of an outward Miracle; for this Assent is not because of the thing it
self, but because of the Revelation proposing it, which is the Voice of GOD:
For when the Voice of GOD is heard in the Soul, the Soul does as certainly
conclude the truth of that Voice as the truth of GOD'S Being, from whom it
proceeds.

These things being thus premised, I now proceed to a direct Answer: For what
is said, that GOD cannot make a contingent Truth to become a necessary Truth,
I agree: But when any Contingent Truth is manifest to us by the Immediate
Revelation of GOD: There is in it two things to be considered, to wit, the
thing revealed which is Contingent; And the Revelation it self, which upon the
Supposition that it is a Divine Revelation, is no contingent Truth, but a most
Necessary Truth. And this all mankind will say, that this Proposition, Every
divine Revelation is necessarly true, is as clear and evident as that
Proposition, That every Whole is greater then its Part.

But thou will say, how knows thou that a Divine Revelation is a Divine
Revelation? I answer, how knows thou that a Whole is a Whole, and a Part is a
Part? Thou will say, by the natural Idea excited in me of a Whole and of a
Part. I answer again, even so, a Divine Revelation is known to be such by a
Supernatural Idea of Divine Revelation stirred up in us, and that by a Divine
Motion or Supernatural Operation. But it is no wonder that Men who have no
Experience of Supernatural Ideas, or at lest do not heed them, do deny them;
which is as if a man naturally blind denied Light, or Colors; or a deaf man
Sounds, because they experience them not. Therefore we cannot dissemble that we
feel a fervent Zeal, even Divinely kindled in us against such an absurd
opinion, as affirms, That God cannot ascertain us of his will in any contingent
Truth, but by proposing it to the outward Senses. This Opinion does in a manner
turn Men into brutes, as if Man were not to believe his GOD, unless he propose
what is to be believed to the outward Senses, which the beasts have common with
us; yea it derogats from GOD's Power, and imputes weakness to him, as if he
could not do that which not only both good and evil Angels can do, but which
the meanest Creatures can do and the most unsensible; As for instance, the
heat of the fire, the coldness of the Air, and Water works upon us; yea if a
Pinn prick us, we feel it, and that by the outward Sense; because the Objects
are outward and carnal. But since GOD is a most Pure and Glorious Spirit, when
he operateth in the Innermost parts of our Minds by his will; Shall not he and
his will be clearly felt according to his Nature? That is by a spiritual and
supernatural Sense; For as the Nature of GOD is, so is the Nature of his will,
to wit, purely spiritual; And therefore requires a Spiritual Sense to discern
it; which Spiritual Sense when it is raised up in us by a divine Operation,
does as clearly and certainly know the voice or revelation of the will of GOD,
concerning any thing which GOD is pleased to reveal however Contingent, as the
outward Sense knows, and perceives the Outward Object: And it is no less absurd
to require of GOD, who is a most pure Spirit, to manifest his will to Men by
the outward Senses, else not to be credited; As to require us to see sounds,
and hear Light and Colors. For as the Objects of the outward Senses are not to
be confounded, but every Object is to have its proper Sense: So must we judge
of inward and spiritual Objects, which have their proper Sense, whereby they
are to be perceived. And tell me how God does manifest his will concerning
matters of Fact, when he sends his Angels to men, since Angels (as is commonly
received) have not outward Senses or at least not so gross ones as ours are?
Yea, when Men dye and apear before the Tribunal of GOD, whether unto eternal
Life or Death, how can they know this having laid down their bodies, and
therewith their outward Senses? And nevertheless this Truth of GOD is a Truth
of Fact, as is the historical Truth of Christ's Birth in the Flesh. And which
is yet more near; how do good and holy Men even in this Life most certainly
know that they are in Favor and Grace with GOD? No Outward Revelation does
make this known unto them, but the Spirit (as says the Apostle) bears
witness with our Spirits that we are the Children of GOD. For the mere
Testimony of a human Conscience, without the inward Testimony of the holy
Spirit, cannot beget in us a firm and immovable Testimony of our Sonship,
because the Heart of Man is deceitful, and if the Testimony thereof were true,
at most it is but a Human Testimony which begets in us only an human Faith;
But that Faith by which holy Men believe they are the Sons of GOD is a Divine
Faith, which leans upon a Divine Testimony of the holy Spirit, witnessing in
them that they are the Sons of GOD. Moreover when a good Man feels in himself
that undeclarable Joy of the holy Spirit, concerning which the holy Scripture
speaks, and which is the common Privilege of the Saints, how or whence feels
he this Joy? Truly this Argument concludes no less against this Heavenly
Spiritual Joy which is begotten in the Souls of the Saints by the holy Spirit,
then it does against the immediate Revelation of GOD; for there is no natural
Idea in Men of this spiritual Joy, else mere natural Men, yea such as are
profane and ungodly would feel it as much as the Godly: But because it is a
Supernatural thing, Therefore it can have no true Idea, but what is
Supernatural. Moreover whence is it that profane Men feel sometimes in
themselves the Wrath of GOD as Fire, when all things as to the outward go as
prosperously with them as with the Godly, and oftentimes more prosperously? For
there is no natural Idea in Men of this inward Wrath of GOD: There is also an
inward Grief oftentimes raised up in Wicked Men from the sense of this Wrath of
GOD, which very much vexes and tormenteth their Minds, and nevertheless this
Grief has no natural Idea in us: For oftentimes wicked Men feel not this
Sorrow, for God sometimes is, as it were silent while the Wicked sin, as in
Psalm 50.

All which things do most clearly demonstrate that there are in Men
Supernatural Ideas of supernatural Beeings; which Ideas are nevertheless not
perceived by us unless they be stirred up by some Supernatural Operation of
GOD, which raises up in us Supernatural and Spiritual, Senses which by their
Nature are as distinguishable from the natural Senses whether inward or
owtward, as the natural Senses are distinguished one from another by their
specific Difference. Of which Spiritual Senses the Scripture speaks
frequently, as Heb. 5. and 14. Where is spoken of the Spiritual senses in
general, by which the spiritual Man has the discerning of Good and Evil; which
Good is of a spiritual Nature, and conduces to feed in us a Spiritual and
Divine Life; And the Evil is of that kind by which the spiritual Life is in us
hurt: To wit Sins, whether carnal or spiritual: All which cannot be discerned
but by such who have Spiritual Senses stirred up in them, as says the Apostle.
In other places the Scripture also speaks of these Spiritual senses, in
particular, as of the Spiritual seeing: Ps: 34.9. Of the spiritual Hearing, Ps:
85. and 9. Of spiritual Tasting, Ps: 34.8. Of Spiritual smelling, Cant. 1.3. of
Spiritual touching, Acts 17:8. and in many other places of Scripture we read of
those Spritual Senses in particular. Yea, it is the Promise of the Gospel, that
The glory of GOD shall be seen of holy Men, such as are clean of Heart, even in
this Life: Isa. 33.17. Mat. 5.8. Which were fulfilled in the primitive
Christians, see John 1.14. 1 John 1.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Cor. 3.18. and Chap. 4.6. But
what is this Vision of GOD and Divine Glory which the Souls of the Saints
enjoy in this Life, which is only as the Earnest or first Fruits of that more
abundant glorious Vision in the Life to come, concerning which the Scripture so
much declares, which is the highest happiness of the Immortal Soul.

For this Argument seems to do no less Injury to the Saints, then to rob
them of this most glorious Treasure, both in this Life and that to come; For
there is in us no Natural Idea of this Divine Glory, as there is not of GOD
himself, which is any ways proportionable unto so great Happiness which the
Scripture so much declares of, by which the Godly are rewarded, partly in this
Life, and plenarly in that which is to come. We confess indeed, there is in all
Men as well the Godly as ungodly, some sort of Idea of GOD, as of a most
perfect Being; and that therefore this Proposition, There existeth a most
perfect Being, does as clearly appear to Human understanding, as that the
whole is greater then the part, And therefore this proposition, That a most
perfect Being existeth, ought to be numbered among the Principalls that of
themselves are manifest; But this Idea of God is as manifest to Ungodly as to
Godly Men, yea is as clearly perceived by the Devil, as by the most holy
Angels, for all the Devils know that GOD is; But yet how blind is the Devil,
and all wicked Men as to the Vision of GOD, which is the chief reward of the
Saints.

There is then either no such Vision of GOD, neither in this Life nor in that
to come, or there is a Supernatural Idea of GOD in us, by which we are made
capable of this Vision: Which Supernatural Idea of GOD, differs much from
that Natural Idea of GOD, which Cartesius and his followers so much talk of,
(albeit others long before Cartesius did observe this Natural Idea of GOD, and
spoke of it) But the happiness of the Saints consists not in contemplating this
Natural Idea of GOD; Else the wicked would be as happy as the Godly, yea the
very Devil as the most holy Angel; Since as is said, both the Devil and most
wicked Men do as clearly perceive this Natural Idea of GOD, as the most holy
Men or Angels.

If the Scriptures then be true, there is in Men a Supernatural Idea of GOD,
which altogether differs from this natural Idea, I say, in all Men; Because
all men are capable of Salvation; and consequently, of enjoying this Divine
Vision: Now this capacity consists herein, that they have such a Supernatural
Idea in themselves: For, if there were no such Idea in them it were impossible
they should so know God: For whatsoever is clearly and Distinctly known, is
known by its proper Idea, nether can otherways be clearly and distinctly known;
For the Ideas of all things are Divinly planted in our Souls, for they are not
begotten in us by outward objects, or outward causes, (As the better Philosophy
teaches) but only are by these outward things excited or stirred up: And this
is true not only in Supernatural Ideas of GOD, and things Divine, and in
Natural Ideas of the natural Principals of Human understanding, and
conclusions thence deduced by the strength of human reason; but even in the
Ideas of outward objects, which are perceived by the outward Senses; As that
noble Christian Philosopher Boethius has well observed, to which also the
Cartesian Philosophy agrees: For when I see any outward object, whether it be
a Man, or Horse, or Bird, the outward object does not treat in my eye, nor yet
in my mind the Idea of those things; For the outward object does nothing but
Imprint in our sensible Organs a Corporal motion: Now there is nothing in a
Corporal motion that can form in us, the Ideas of those things; For all Ideas
are of a Spiritual Nature: Now nothing that is Corporal can produce that which
is Spiritual, because the less excellent cannot produce the more excellent,
Else the effect would exceed its cause, which is against all sound reason that
it should bring forth what were of a higher and more excellent kind. Therefore
all Ideas whether Of Natural or Spiritual things, are Divinly implanted in our
minds; Which nevertheless do not always appear, but sometimes appear, and
sometimes are as it were hid in us, and sometimes are stirred up in us by
causes outward or inward, and again do as it were sleep and shun our
observation, and seem not to be otherwise distinguished by our minds, but as
thoughts and perceptions of the mind from the mind it self. That is as the Mode
from the Subject, or as a Bod^lie Motion from the body whereof it is the
Motion; For as is the Relation of a Bodily Motion to a Body, so is the Relation
of a thought or perception of the mind to the mind. In this nevertheless they
differ that the mind can move it self and operat in it self which a body cannot
do; But as a Body can be moved by another, So also can the Mind after its
manner be moved by another, and that both by outward and inward causes; But
chiefly by GOD himself, in whose hand all Souls and Creatures are. But of these
things there is enough said at present, and I hope, I have not thus far
Impertinently Philosophised.

To return again to the matter in question It is already proved, That there is
in a Man a Supernatural Idea of GOD, from whence it easily may be concluded
There are other Supernatural Ideas in man also: To wit, Concerning Divine and
Supernatural things; Yea (as the Saints experience does prove it) neither does
sound reason any ways contradict it.)

As there are then Natural Ideas concerning the things of the natural World,
as for instance, Ideas of Light and Colors, Ideas of Voice and Sounds, Ideas
of Savouring and and Smelling, Ideas of Tasting and Feeling, as of Heat and
Cold, of Grief and Joy: It follows also that there are Ideas of supernatural
things, concerning the Divine and supernatural things of the Divine and
Supernatural World; As Ideas of those things above mentioned in the Spiritual
World; And as the Natural Ideas are stirred up in us by outward and Natural
Bodies; So those Divine and Supernatural Ideas are stirred up in us by a
certain Principle, which is a body in naturalls in Relation to the Spiritual
World; And therefore may be called a Divine Body; Not as if it were a part of
GOD, who is a most pure Spirit, But the Organ or Instrument of GOD, by which he
works in us and stirs up in us these Ideas of Divine things, This is that
Flesh and Blood of Christ, by which the Saints are nurished, which is a Mystery
to all unregenerated and mere natural Men, never to be reached by them, while
they remain in that state.

Now if there be such Supernatural Ideas, there are also Senses, or Perceptive
faculties by which those Ideas are perceived, for those are two relatives that
suppose and infer one another: But in wicked men those Senses or faculties do
as it were sleep (as the Visive faculty of a blind man) But in the Godly they
are stirred up. Now by these Divine and Spiritual Senses which are distinct
and distinguishable from all the natural faculties of the Soul, whether of
Imagination or natural reason, Spiritual minded men do behold the Glory and
Beauty of GOD, In respect whereof and for which all the Glory of this World is
despicable to them; Yea even as dross and dung, and they also hear GOD Inwardly
speaking in their Souls words truly Divine and Heavenly, full of Virtue and
Divine Life; And they savor and taste of Divine things, and do as it were
handle them with the hands of their Souls, And those Heavenly Enjoyments do as
realy differ in their nature from all false similitudes and fa^itious
appearances of them, which either the mind of Man by its own streng^h can
imitate, or any evil spirit to deceive man can counterfit, as a true Man
differs from the dead Image of a Man, or true Bread, Honey, Wine or Milk does
from the mere Picture of those things. And albeit either the Imagination of Man
or subtility of the Devil may Counterfit false likenesses of these Enjoyments,
by which men may be deceived; and no doubt many are deceived; That does not
hinder but that those divine Enjoyments are clearly perceived in such in whom
the Divine and spiritual senses are truly opened, and the true Supernatural
Ideas of those things truly raised up: And if there be at any time a mistake,
the Divine Illumination is not the cause of that mistake, but some evil
disposition of the Mind, as happens in those things relating to natural
Reason; For there are many false appearances of Reason, which differ as much
from true Reason, as those false and pretended Revelations and Diabolical
Inspirations from such as are truly Divine. Now how many Men who would be
esteemed Philosophers, are miserably deceived by those false likenesses of
Reason? Judging their false Reasons to be the true similitudes of things and
solid Ratiocinatione; which nevertheless moves no man of sound Reason to
reject sound and solid Reason, as doubtful and uncertain: For even sound
natural Reason is an excellent Gift of GOD, and very useful to mankind, when
used in its proper place; But let none think to comprehend by their natural
reason things that are of a divine and supernatural kind: And as we use to do
when any one is deceived by false appearances of Reason, we endeavor to reduce
them to contemplate the first natural Ideas of natural things, and to
meditate therein, which is as a Test, or Touchstone, by which all the
appearances and likenesses of Reason are to be examined, if they contradict
them to be rejected: So also when any one is deceived by his own Imagination,
or the cunning of satan, thinking any evil inspiration of the devil to be a
true Divine Revelation; He that is so deceived, is to be reduced to the
natural Ideas of things (if so be that pretended Revelation does contradict
them; For no true Divine Revelation can contradict the true natural Idea) or
to the Supernatural Ideas of Divine things, which are most simple, clear and
obvious to the minds of men, if they will turn their minds to the Divine seed
in them; or at least those Ideas are readily and easily stirred up: For as in
Natural Ideas, so in Supernatural, Some are more easily raised then others;
For there is an certain order both of Natural and Supernatural Ideas, whereby
they are gradually excited; Nor is there any Mortal Man in whose Mind at some
time or other there is not stirred up some Idea, that is truly Supernatural and
Divine: And who has not felt in himself both the Wrath and Judgment of GOD
for his sins; And also some tender and gentle taste of GOD'S Love and Goodness,
by which wicked men are invited to Repentance. Now that which is thought to be
a Divine Revelation, is felt to contradict any Divine and Supernatural Idea,
which is clearly perceived in the Soul, it is a manifest token that it is not a
Divine Revelation, but either a false Imagination, or the wicked sugestion of
some evil spirit

But to proceed if we will hear the Scripture (as all Christians ought) It
testifies to us, That GOD has declared his Mind and Will, even concerning
Contingent Truths to come in the Prophets; As that of the first to the Heb(...)
does evidently declare, GOD who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke
to our Fathers in the Prophets; Yea let us hear the Prophets themselves* Hosea
Chap: 1. says plainly, That the Word of the LORD was made in him, As it is in
the Heb. Habakuk also says, As he was standing on his Watch to see what
Jehovah would speak in him: And it is so manifest that the most Heavenly
Revelations are by Inward Illustrations and Inspirations in the very minds of
the Prophets, That it is strange how any that believes the Scripture should
doubt of it. And if it happened at any time such Revelations were made in the
natural Imaginations of the Prophets, or any of their Inward ^aturall Senses,
Then it may be confessed, they could not be infallibly certain they came from
GOD, unless they also felt GOD in the Divine and Supernatural Senses; by which
they did most nearly approach to him, from these Superior and most Inward
Senses working upon the lower and less noble Faculties of the Mind. But which
ever way the Prophets were certain that they were Inspired of GOD, even when
they foretold Contingent Truths to come; It is without doubt they were most
certainly persuaded that they were Divinly Inspired, and that frequently
without any Outward Miracle; For John the Baptist did no Miracle, and many
Prophesied where there appeared no Miracle, as in the Scripture may be often
observed. And, we also by the Inspiration of the same Divine Spirit by which
the Prophets prophesied do believe their Words and Writtings to be Divine
concerning Contingent Truths, as well past as to come; else that Faith by which
we believe the Scripture would not be Divine but merely Humane: And thence we
need no outward Miracles to move us to Believe the Scriptures, And therefore
much less were they necessary to the Prophets who Write them; For we see in
many places of the Prophets, where they declare Prophesies as revealed to them
of GOD, there is not a word mentioned of any outward Miracle, as that by which
alone they were certain of it. Moreover the falseness of this Argument does
appear, in that the Scripture does declare many Contingent Truths to have been
revealed to the Prophets in Dreams: Now as natural and wicked men do not see
what they dream, by a real perception of the Outward Senses, but by Inward
Ideas which are presented to the Mind and perceived by it: so it is also in
Divine Revelations of this nature, Of which we have a clear Example in Joseph
the Husband of the Blessed Virgin, who when he observed his Wife with Child,
was told in a Dream, That She had Conceived by the Holy Ghost. Now I would
Know, to which of Joseph's Outward Senses was this revealed? or what miracle
had he to Induce him to Believe? Which could neither be proved, (so as to make
an Infallible application to Mary) by the Testimony of the Scripture, And which
being against the Order of nature did choke his reason: The Scripture mentions
no miracle in this matter, and yet no doubt Joseph had highly sinned, had he
not Believed this Revelation, and not withstanding rejected his Wife as an
Adulteress: But if thou say, That according to thy Hypothesis, there must have
been a miracle; That is only to beg the Question: And how false this Hypothesis
is, The Apostle shows clearly, Corinth. 2.14. The Natural or Animal Man
knows not, receives not the things of GOD: Now Divine Revelations are of
this Nature; and if either chiefly or only those things were to be Judged by
the Outward Senses it would contradict the Apostle; For natural Men, yea the
most wicked have the use of the outward senses as true and exact as the most
Godly: And whereas the Apostle adds, For they are Spiritually Discerned: It
puts the Matter out of all Question; For thence it abundantly appears, that
this discerning is not by the Outward Senses, according to the following verse,
for the Apostle says, The Spiritual Man Judges all things: This then must be
done by some senses or Properties Peculiar to the Spiritual man, and in which
he excells the natural man, which is not in the outward senses (as all do
know) Therefore the perception of spiritual things cannot be by the outward
senses, either as the chief or only means, as is falsely contended for.

Now as to these words of the Apostle, Romans 10. That Faith comes by Hearing;
Zuinglius observed well* That the Apostle intended not to affirm Faith to come
by the hearing of the Outward Word, Neither does the following words prove it;
How shall they Believe unless they hear? And how shall they hear without a
Preacher? And how shall they Preach unless they be sent? For the Apostle uses
these words not as his Arguments, but as Objections which might be formed, As
the same Apostle uses in other places; To which Objections he answers in the
same Chapter, as appears verse 18. But I say, have they not all heard? Yes
truly, their Voice went into all the Earth; That is of the Father and Son, Or
the Father in the Word, which Word is not only near us, But (according to the
same Apostle, in the same Chapter) in our Mouths, and in our Hearts. But
further thou can conclude nothing from this, But that Faith is begotten by
Outward Hearing only, and no otherwise: For this is the strength of thy
Argument, That since Faith cannot be without Outward Hearing, Therefore nothing
can be certainly believed, but where somewhat is proposed to the Outward
Hearing, For if thou acknowledge Faith can be begotten any otherwise then by
Hearing, thou looses the strength of thy Argument: And if that Argument hold
That Faith comes only by Outward Hearing, thou destroys the whole Hypothesis;
For having before affirmed that outward miracles are sufficient to render one
certain of the Truth of any Revelation; those miracles whether it be the
healing of the Sick, or the raising of the Dead, would avail nothing, because
those (as for most part all miracles) are obvious to the sight, not to the
Hearing: And if it be not by Outward Hearing only, thou can conclude nothing
from this place. But I the more wonder, thy using of this Argument, considering
the Discourse we had together before we entered upon this debate; For when we
were speaking of the Opinions of a certain Person, who denied the certainty of
every thing, but what was discerned by the outward Senses, thou condemned as
most absurd; But why, I cannot conceive since there is no great difference
betwixt those two Opinions, the one says, There can be no certainty concerning
any Truth, whether they be necessary or Contingent, but by the perception of
the Senses; The other affirms the same of Contingent Truths, though not of
Necessary Truths* But among the number of Contingent Truths thou Esteems what
belongs to Christian Religion: For thou reckon the necessary Truths only to
belong to natural Religion. This then is all the difference that that other
Person says, There is no certainty of any Religion, neither Natural nor
Christian but by the perception of the Outward Senses; But thou says, though
thou Esteems the Certainty of Natural Re^i^ion to be without them, yet not of
the Christian Religion. But again since thou Esteems that not Natural Religion
but the Christian Religion is necessary to Salvation; Thou must necessarly
conclude, That th^se Truths which are necessary to Salvation are only known and
believed by the benefit of the Outward Senses: In which Conclusion, which is
the Sum of all, thou yields the Matter to that other Person. But lastly, If
all the certainty of our Faith, Hope, and Salvation, did depend upon the
Infallibility of outward Senses, we should be most mis^rable; since these
Senses can be easily deceived, and by many outward Casualities, and Natural
infirmities, whereunto the Godly are no less subject then the wicked, are often
vitiated and there are (as the Scripture affirms) false miracles which as to
the outward cannot be distinguished from the True, of which we cannot
infallibly Judge by the outward Senses, which only discern what is outward.

There is a necessity then to have recourse to some other Means.

From all which it does appear how fallacious and weak this Argument is, but
thanks be unto GOD, who would not that our Faith should be built upon so
uncertain and doubtful a Foundation: And whoever has known True Faith, or
has felt the Divine Testimony of GOD'S Spirit in his Soul, will judge
otherwise, neither will be moved by such Reasonings; I pray GOD therefore
remove these Clouds which darken thy Understanding, that thou may perceive the
Glorious Gospel of CHRIST. This is that Saving Word of Grace which I commend
thee unto; And that GOD may give thee a Heart inclinable to believe and obey
the Truth, is the desire of,

Thy Faithful Friend, R. BARCLAY.
The 24th. of the Month, called, November, 1676. This Letter a Year ago at the
desire of my Friend, R. B. I delivered into the hands of the aforenamed
Ambassador, desiring his answer in writting, which he then promised; but not
having as yet done, It was seen meet to be published.

B. F.
Rotterdam the 28 of March; 1678.



