A Short DISCOURSE Of the Rise, Nature, and Management OF THE Smallpox, And
all Putrid FEVERS.

Occasioned by the Death of our Late Incomparable QUEEN.

Together with a Philosophical Account of an Excellent REMEDY for these and
many other Diseases.

By T. Byfield, M. D. and Fellow of the College of Physicians in Dublin.

LONDON, Printed for John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultry. MDCXCV.

Price Six Pence.

A DISCOURSE Of the Smallpox, etc.
OUR late Universal Loss, as it has given opportunity to many Reverend, Learned
and Ingenious Persons to oblige the World with the just Character of this Great
and Good PRINCESS, than whom, these Nations in many Ages have not afforded a
Nobler Subject: So for the sake of all those who are yet to run the Risque of
this Distemper for their Lives; that the lesser Barks may happily avoid those
Rocks, on which the Royal Sovereign was lost, I shall with all plainness and
brevity give an account of the Rise and Nature of the Smallpox, and all Putrid
Fevers, for if that be not thoroughly understood, persons are liable to
innumerable Errors and Mistakes, which too often (God knows) prove fatal to
those they are concerned about.

I very well know what I have to say is unusual, but since it is most true; for
I take not these Notions on Trust but Trial. I confess I cannot but deeply
regret the World was not better acquainted with what I now offer to their
serious Consideration before the Glory of our Age was past receiving any
Advantage by it.

But to proceed: The very Hypothesis of my Discourse is this; That the Venom of
these Distempers is of a Sulphurous and Viscous Nature, and being so, there is
but one way to Expel or overcome it; all other Experiments being not only
altogether useless, but highly injurious.

Those that have taken the pains to enquire into the Causes of things, have
found that Sulphurs are both the Life and Venom of Bodies.

The first of the Nature of Light, so rarefied that it is not perceptible, but
by its Effects, some of which are these, it Tinctures the Blood in which is its
chief Residence, it Irradiates and enlivens the whole Body, every part of which
is animated by it: If it be suppressed, Diseases prevail; if assisted it has
power sufficient to work them off; if extinguished, Death necessarily and
inevitably follows, for it is the Animal Soul.

The other Sulphureity is of a far different nature, the Matter out of which
all Fiery Diseases are shaped; it is Crude, Viscous, Corrosive and Malign; yet
Nature deals well enough with it, throwing it off continually by her proper
Passages; till by some accident or other they are obstructed, being pent up it
returns, and being a more materiated Fire, feeds on the gross indigested
humors, assimilating to its likeness whatever it lays hold on, and thus it
grows more Corporeal, Dense, and a potent Venom; insinuating its Contra-natural
Heat into the whole Mass of Blood, which is thereby immediately inflamed and
corrupted: And according to the quantity and Venomous quality of this unnatural
Fire, the Distemper terminates in a Fever less or more Malignant; or in
Smallpox, Measles, etc.

The Spirit of Life, not able to keep House with this Guest, there arises a
terrible Contention; and since on the decision of this Quarrel no less than
Life depends, a Fundamental Knowledge is here most necessary, not only of the
Cause, but of the Nature of the Cause; since it produces a clear Judgment, and
a certainty in Practice: Whereas when People Act in the dark they are always at
a loss, and know not to what they owe the success or misfortune that befalls
'em: But trying many Experiments the poor Patients oftimes, as their last
Refuge, are forced into the cold Arms of Death, the only shelter from so many
Calamities.

To my Purpose; this Venom being, as I said before, Sulphurous and Viscous,
it is further requisite to know the Nature of this Sulphurous Viscosity, since
it is easy to deal with what we understand.

Now in few Words, the Nature of such Bodies is at first to ascend in the form
of a light and thin Vapor, which unduly detained grows more ponderous, gross
and corporal, and then most difficult to be expelled, till by some inward Agent
it be again rarefied into the form of a Vapor. And this Task the Spirit of
Life only is able to perform: Though at present, being overpowered by these
Sulphurous Mists and Fogs, it likes lie the Sun behind a thick Cloud unable to
expand its Beams: But when it receives auxilliary Force by proper Cordials of a
temperate and lively Nature, with ease it drives out this Intruder, and
restores the Body to its former Vigor and strength. For do not mistake, and
think that Cordials alone do this, it is impossible. And this is the reason why
compassionate Ladies, Nurses and old Women, whom Experience only makes Wise,
often serve the Intention of Nature by promoting her Design, though by plain and
Ordinary Means, which refresh the Animal Spirits, and enable them to go through
their Task. Yet there is a vast difference in Cordials and things of that
Nature given in this case; for that only is a true Medicine which is so
qualified that it chears the Spirits, expels the Distemper, and at the same
time abates the Fever; nay carries off a great part of the Malignity insensibly
through the Pores, which would have turned to Smallpox, and though not an
Opiate, gives an Enjoyment not to be understood, but by those that feel it. And
as Opiates always make dull, stupid and Stomach sick; so this makes brisk,
lively and cheerful; and yet when the time of rest comes, causes the Sleep to
be sound and sweet.

And now I Am obliged to show the uselessness and danger of other Methods: And
since Bleeding is the first thing commonly prescribed, I shall begin with that,
and do solemnly protest, it is my Opinion, that in this Distemper there is no
more occasion for a Chyrurgion than there is for a Bone-setter; nor is it only
useless, but highly dangerous; for when the Blood is in a great Ferment in
order to throw off what ever is obnoxious, at that time to let any of it out,
is as if we should do so to Liquors in Fermentation, which every Body knows
would hinder their Working over; to which there is required a fullness.

To fat People it is more pernicious, their Natures are not so fiery, but more
apt to receive a check, and have the Venom congealed before it reaches the
Superficies; To lean hotter Constitutions it is less dangerous, though safe for
neither. No fear People should burst or dye for want of outlets, every Pore
will prove a Portal wide enough, when the Matter is sufficiently rarefied from
within: But when the Blood is let out the empty space is immediately filled (for
Nature admits no vacuum) with a cool thin Air, which causes this Vapor that is
of a heavier Nature to flat; sink, and fall back on the Vitals, of which an
undeniable Proof is the depression of the Spirits, and sick Qualms of dangerous
consequence, if immediate relief be not given. Nor is this all, for the Blood
as I said before, being the very Mansion of the Spirit of Life, as the
Scripture it self bears Witness, you part with your dearest Friend, under
pretense of expelling an Enemy, which yet you can never do this way, though you
should draw it half out; no more than you can fine thick muddy Liquors by such
unlikely Experiments; For what is left is as bad still. But we daily see when by
a lively Principle within they have work't out and thrown off all that is of a
contrary Nature, they fine and grow clear, without any more ado, and then are
at rest, as all Agents are when they have attained their end.

Another common Practice is Blistering and Sweating, which though not quite so
bad, are yet without use, but not without danger. For as it is impossible to
draw out inward fiery Venoms (unless they were beforehand mounted near the
Skin) by an outward Application, which only attracts Watery Substances: So
considering this Distemper as such, a fiery Venom, it is hereby deprived of the
Moisture necessary for its Latitude and Allay, in both which respects it is of
vast concern to keep it within, that joining with the heat or unnatural fire,
they may between them from an Air, and so rise with ease and safety to the
Patient; And being thus tempered and allayed they are generally of a large
sort, that don't leave deep Marks. Whereas, were the the Moisture drawn off, as
the Heat would grow violently intense, so neither would it (without great
force) breath out: But circulate and prey on all it finds within, to the utter
extinction of the Lamp of Life.

I know the general Incentive both to Blood-letting and Blistering, is that the
Fever is high, and they fear it may get into the Head, and these are of great
use to prevent it, as also to hinder such a number of Smallpox from coming out.

I grant indeed there is a likelihood of these Sulphurous Fumes in their
rising, to get into the Head, nay of making the Patient talk Idly too, for they
are of an intoxicating Nature, but of no more Danger than the Fumes of Wine,
provided no Error be committed to make them strike back. For when they come to
the Superfices of the Skin, the Watery and more Aerial Part, which as a Vehicle
helped it thither, easily passing through the Pores Wings away; and the other
being Sulphurous and gross, receiving a check from the Air, settles there in
its own Fiery from, and then the Head is clear and settled, the Spirits brisk
and lively, the Appetite pretty good, and the Fever abated.

As for the other Advantage pretended of preserving a good Face, I have more
than once observed this: That when Physicians by Drawing-Blood, or giving
cooling things, etc. have sunk the Spirits, and hindered the kindly coming out,
which is never so well as at Natures first attempt, the Patient on the return
of the Venom, growing Heart-sick and oppressed almost to Death, to gain the Point
they have lost, they have been forced to double their Files, and heap Cordial
upon Cordial, which being Common Preparations, and so not divested of their own
unnatural heat, as they ought to be, have increased the Fever, and drove out
more than can well be maintained: And these Pit most, are a very small sort, and
of great virulency and danger. Because Nature now having done her utmost, if
she be baffled once more, a thousand to one resigns.

But that I may comprize all in few words, whatever rebates, drives back,
stupifies, dejects, overcools, makes great discharges of any kind; or on the
other hand, whatever over-heats, drives out too forcibly, and fires the
Spirits, is directly contrary to these Distempers, which ought so to be
managed, that the Natural, not Unnatural Heat be assisted, the former being the
very Agent that must do the Work; which if allowed: A Medicine rightly
qualified ought to have these properties; That it be stripped of all false fire,
which would assist and heighten the Distemper. That instead thereof it be
plentifully furnished with the Salubrious Principles of Life and Sanity, readily
joining in this extremity with that Vital Spark within us; That it be of
Ability to clear the first passages insensibly in the Operation; yet most
sensibly in the Effect: For this is no time for Violent Means: That it likewise
be endowed with a Power to compose and quiet the Spirits, by bringing to
equality and unity the Principles which are at Variance: And not as Opiats
(which stupifying the Senses for a while) detain and tie down, not only the
Spirits, but the Distemper, hindering its going off in its proper season, and
Nature from assisting; so that when its Somniferous Virtue is spent, you find
you have lost time, the Patient only growing sensibly weaker, but the Distemper
remaining in its full Vigor and more Fatal.) And that in a word, by its innate
Virtue (with God's blessing) it can bring you safe through this dangerous Disease
to your desired Health, and a more than ordinary Strength; and such a Medicine
is the Panacea, of which the following Discourse Treats.

Some Account of a Universal Remedy.
THE Contemplation of Man's Body (though Dead) in its wonderful Structure by
Anatomical Display is a curious View: But the consideration of him alive in his
vital Form and Spring of Action enlivening the whole, is a more Elegant Review.

It Is to my purpose at present to behold him informed with the principle of
Celestial Fire, enkindling vital Airs, and stretching 'em through the whole
Circumference, promoting thereby an animal Nourishing Heat to every Organ of
the Body, and by a Magnetic Love, panting after the Universal Breath of the
World, and sucking through the Medium of the Air, a continued Reparation of
Enlivening Beams to his Central Spirit, from the Fountain of Life and Form, the
Sun.

Having thus United the Lesser to the greater World, by joining breath to
breath, my design is to show how this inbred Fire is maintained, may be
enlarged, and when perverted and wrought into a destructive Heat and Fire
against Nature, by Art, may be reclaimed to an Oleose, Soft, Nourishing Heat,
from its harsh, enraged consuming Fire.

But before I proceed, I must take care to keep under the warm influences of
the Sun, and regard him as the common Parent of us all, and the Soul of the
World, a Globe of Central Sulphur Gloriously Illuminating dark and shady Bodies
(I had almost aid Understandings too) whose Masculine Principle, endowed with
an hidden Fecundity bestows quickening Virtues on all the scattered Natures of
the Earth, whereby numberless Efficacies and vital Breathings are conveyed
through Spiritual Channels, for the avoiding Corruption, and replenishing them
with Light, Adequate to that Tincture of Light which powerfully informs mixed
Bodies: So that He may truly be called the Heart of the Universe, deriving Life
to all parts, and impregnating decaying Nature with new Vitality.

This Magazeen of the Empyrean Heaven, where the Light first seized upon
matter, fills with Light and Life, the soft and yiedling Natures of the Air,
which cannot be supposed a nothing, or an empty space, but an Essential Body of
its own, admitting of great Powers and Virtues, where the matter is swallowed
up by its Form, and Translated into a Nature almost Spiritual. For where Form
and Matter meet in equal poise or just Equality, the matter's rescued from all
Blemishes and Accidents, and freed in a wonderful manner from Infection and
Corruption.

The Air thus richly stored with beams of Life and Universal Sperm supplies the
various kinds of being on the Earth, according to the strength of their
Specific Magnets. And it does so superabound in Principles, they cannot take
em off her hands, and she so lusts to be Imbodied, that where there is an
aptness to Congelation, she will strike the form of her Spiritual Essence: As I
have strictly observed the Rhyme in an Hoar-Frosty Morn exactly shot into
Stiria, which are the Signatures of abounding Volatiles.

And now it is time to derive this flowing Bounty to the Sons of Men, who lift
up their Heads to Heaven for Life and Breath, and all things, and well they
may; for I know not where else they will feed their vital Flame: Since nothing
more humors the Tincture of Life in Man, or his animal Fire, than the
Nutritive beams from the Sun.

For that Spark of Original Sulphur which transmutes into Redness, the Mass of
Blood is the Spring of Natural Fire and radical Moisture, and the Sun in the
little World, Man; discenter'd from the great Luminary: But held in Life by the
intercourse of large Breathings, whereby he repairs his Store from that
inexhausted Fountain.

In vain then shall I look for a fit Remedy amidst the Domestic or Exotic
Drugs for Man. By Food he may, and must supply a Faecunda Terra, but this is
but dunging the Ground, by Respiration he must support his Vital Air.

Having thus pointed out the Noblest Principle of Life in Man, I would give a
little aim at a suitable Medicine adequate thereto, as the most apt to repair
and set him right when decayed or overpowered; and of such a Nature are the
undetermined Sulphurous Sparks of the Universe collected at certain Seasons of
the year, when the Air is richly impregnated: but the manner of attracting, and
further knowledge of what is taken, together with the Artful handling of the
matter are too curious and troublesome Niceties. For who would take the pains
to reunite Atoms, and consult the Poise so strictly in the cotempering of
Principles, as just to give the Dominion to a living Sulphur: but such a
temperament obtained becomes a Medicine Spiritually fixed, and a noble
Preservative against the Spirit of Diseases, and its consequent Materiation by
contact with material Thus our internal Air maintained (by Art upon Nature)
free from disturbance or Venoms, is always salubrious and pleasant.

It plain enough appears, that the truest Medicine for the Life of Man is a
well exalted Sulphur* whereby it becomes Spiritualized, not Volatiliz'd. But
betwixt these two words lies seven years labor, with brains too. It Is
sufficient then to suggest the Nature of it, that it may appear at least
harmless.

Since I assumed this Notion of Sulphur, as the most Essential Principle of
Life, I have revolved again and again the most powerful Specific Sulphurs,
especially those of the Mineral Nature, which are difficulty enough obtained in
Purity, and notwithstanding Art, they will retain some Portion of their
Specific Venoms, which are not to be destroyed but by the Death of the
Species: So strongly is Nature determined to the preservation of her Kind. I
could Instance in many of 'em that retain very Churlish Qualities after all the
pretended Art about them, such as Vomiting, Purging, Sweating, etc. merely as
Venomous to our Bodies, tho they are banter'd off, as having a Contest only
with Offending Humors. I have used 'em in my Practice, and know as well what
they are, and can do, as another.

After abundance of Experiments and Trials, for the attaining of Noble Pleasant
Medicines: I must confess, I think my self not a little Fortunate in my Art of
drawing down from the Sun and Air plenty of illuminated Sulphurs, and in my
Skill of ordering 'em so as to result in the most effectual and pleasant
Remedy; which is Preservative, Curative and Restorative, able at once to season
the whole Fountain, so as to cleanse it self and all its streams. Far unlike to
other Medicines, which are reputed Good for some One Disease, and that
mistaken, kill instead of cure. But this Medicine (dilated in an appropriate
Vehicle,) is rendered dispensable to all Persons, under any Circumstances, and
as salubrious as the most refined Air. And this I call my Panacea, which I
think abundantly more difficult to make, than to make it appear to be of such
General Use, as the Nature of the Thing imports, and the Experience of it can
attest. But I Will not much concern my self to gain Proselytes. I would have it
valued only at the Rate of its Real worth, and my self not too much undervalu'd
for being the Author of it.

Universal Matter once obtained, may be Reasonably thought productive of a
Universal Remedy. Now no passive actuated matter is undetermined, and I have
already declared against Specificks, and Dead Matter is not for my turn. The
Living, Permanent, Active Matter of the World is my Subject, which (after it is
rendered fusible by Art) penetrates the very Center of Life, bringing with it
the Riches of Superior Orbs, Generously enriching Nature's Store with Beams of
Life and Balmy Fire, enlarging her Magnetic Virtue; whereby she Vigorously
attracts both Air and Common Food, assimilating them to her wholesome Nature.
Hereby tender Stamina Vitae become Robust, the body hail and strong, quick and
bright, able to dispel diseasie Forms, and resist their first Attempts. For the
due Feeding, and Maintaining the Animal fire in its Resplendent Luster, at once
forbids all Jars, Discords, False Fire, etc. and gives a Free Enjoyment of the
body in all its necessary and pleasant Actions.

Truly to sweeten, unite and strengthen the Mass of Blood, is of huge
Advantage: And it is not Vomiting, Purging, nor Steel, nor Alkalisate Powders,
nor washing with Waters will do the Business: A Course of pure Air, with
Temperance, bids fairer, and many are relieved thereby.

But to restore Essential Sulphur, the Origin of the Tincture of the Blood, and
subdue fixed Salts, inferring Corrosive Fires, and renew and increase a sweet
Vital Air, is the Work rather of a Philosopher than a Phisician. For the doing
of all which this Panacea is a Complete Medicine, altogether Philosophical, and
an entire Dispensatory.

Having now Regaled the Spirits with this lively Mellow Remedy; from so good a
stock we may derive fresh Vigor to the branches, Plumpness to the whole, and
cause every part to rejoice with 'em; for their Nourishment depends so much on
a wholesome Fountain, that Health or Diseases are communicated to 'em according
to the decay or strength, Purity or Impurity of it. And what a Catalogue of
Distempers is assigned to the sundry Organs of the Body, and Elaborate Methods
and Medicines for their Cure? When as a well informed Principle of Life,
benignly darts at once kind Rays throughout the whole, assisting with proper
Vigor the Faculties, duly to separate what ought to be discharged through the
cleansing Ducts, and refine and purify what should be retained.

What need then is there to run out the Ordure by Violent Purgatives, and the
wholesome Juices too, sharpened and envenomed first by Physic, even to the
Excoriation of Bowels, and damage of the adjacent parts? Many are mistaken in
this Point, and many take the Advantage of it. The blood is not at all purified
thereby, nor sweetened; but often exasperated and fretted by such Contraries.
Besides, the bowels well filled keep out Wind, Cholicks, Gripes, Twistings, and
many more Disorders: And what Hurt in the Congestion of wholesome Food?

It seems to be the design of Nature, by the Length, Windings and Position of
the Guts in such order, that there should be due Retentions. Digestion in Dung
we that experiment by Heats, know to be the Truest and most Natural. The
Situation then of the Great Gut called Colon, the last but one, and the
Amassment of the Feces in it, lying under the Great Organs of Digestion and
Separation, show that Nature had a design from that warm bed to comfort and
assist the Neighboring Viscera.

For such as are always flurting and jerking their bowels with purging Physic,
less than one yard of a strait Gut (from the Pylorus to the Anus) had been
better for them. Nevertheless, I don't say, but discreet Evacuations, at some
times, are truly Necessary for some, and the Drinking of Cleansing Waters, in
their Seasons, as Epsom, North-hall, etc.

The Danger of Vomits, Diaphoreticks, Blisters, Salivations, improper
Bleedings, Opiates, internal Stiptick Medicines, etc. ought to be discovered;
but I Will pass 'em by at present; for the very thoughts of 'em Jar my Nerves.

Since I can with this Remedy keep the stomach and bowels clean from Choler,
Phlegm and Wind, and make a quick and clean Digestion, what needs Vomiting and
Purging? 'Twill cause a Generous Transpiration; No occasion then to melt and
waste the Nourishing Juices with Provokers of Sweats, sometimes to a
Colliquation, Faintness and Death. 'Twill cleanse and strengthen the Glands,
first separate flowing and unclean Serosities, then keep 'em Tite from an
Overflowing: forbear to swell, inflame and corrupt 'em by Salivation with
Mercury; or to distort Nature by forcing a little water through the Skin with
Blisters.

And if this proves an Antiferment, 'twill often save the Hazard of Bleeding in
many Diseases.

It helps to sound and undisturbed sleep; No Use then of Opium. It reconciles
great disorders, and always is on Nature's side; No need then of Iron Chains to
bind an Enemy in your breast. While some lay on with Vomit, Purge, Blister,
Clyster, Helter, Skelter, blowing up, pulling down, like the Insurancers from
Fire, I can deal with Life so subtily, as to touch her to the quick; yet so
kindly, that instead of crying Oh! I sweetly feed her Vital Flame, and give
fresh Vigor to her Languishing or Fretted Spirits: And from a Rich Storehouse
derive 'em strong and mellow to all the withering and enfeebled branches,
Reconciling Feuds and Quarrels by giving satisfaction to every disturbed Member
of the Body. All the Juices thus enriched, are Supple, Generous and Quick: All
the parts supplied with both are Agil, Plump and Strong.

I have been more than Twenty Years a Great Seeker of Medicines, and have been
at Great Expense every way about 'em, and have at any Rate possessed my self of
the Reputed Best. And I sincerely profess I slight 'em all for this, knowing it
to be a Truth in Nature and Art, and as great a Truth in Practice.

The Height of common Chemistry is to mount a Volatile Salt, that is quick,
pungent and fugitive. This Medicine is no such thing: But being greatly enricht
with spiritual Sulphurs, and retained by its own Magnet, is permanent and
fusible, yet innocent and efficacious.

But that the designed Benefit of this Discourse may not be lost, I must, for
the sake of some persons, descend to particulars.

To Declining Age, when the Fire abates, and Moisture, Clouds and Cold Diseases
prevail, with the Decay of Organs by the Impoverishment of Spirits, through
their often Eclipsed and declining Sun: Nothing more aptly repairs the Central
Fire and Radical Moisture; whereby not only Diseases are dispersed, but the
whole body is replenished with proper Nourishing Juices: So as to recover, in
some measure, Quickness and Strength of Parts; at least to furnish 'em with
Good Appetite, strong Digestion, liberal Expulsion of Wind, Large and Clean
Breathings, free from Clammy, Tough Humors; Clarity of Brain and Senses, and
an entire dissipation of the Winter Diseases. So that Prolongation of Life, and
pleasant Enjoyment of it need not to be doubted, since God gives means thereto.
Therefore to be persuaded at Seventy to sit quietly down with the Common Wear
and Tare of Nature is more than needs: For such hail Principles as could reach
thither, may with timely good Repair, pass on I know not whither.

To such as are coming into the World, as well as those that are going out, and
bring with them hereditary Diseases, or an unthriving Nature, it is of singular
Advantage: For next to the benefit of being derived from Parents of a sound and
strong Constitution, there is nothing more beneficial than to convey by their
first Food Fundamental Principles of Health, which may prove as lasting as
their Lives. To be drank by the Nurses while the Children suck.

It Is a Complete Medicine to such as have a general disorder, or decay of body
and spirits, and know not where to lay the blame.

For Consumptive Persons, and those endangered by it, aptly suits all their
Complaints, and needs no Second, provided there be a proper Regimen, and
careful avoiding of injurious things. For in a Hectic the blood having
suffered a great dissolution and separation, the Spirits of it are turned into
a kind of Wildfire, which flies about, and wanting allay, burns and consumes a
person almost to Nothing. Now this excellent Medicine here becomes a
Peacemaker, sweetly attracting back again (by Virtue of its Magnetic Quality)
the dispersed Spirits; and by reason of its likeness to the most constituent
parts of the blood, joins it again, and determines its Action within its own
proper Sphere. And then all things go well, and Symptoms disappear* Thus this
Distemper, commonly accounted incurable, is forced to yield the Victory to this
salutiferous Remedy.

In every Scorbutic Distemper it is very available, and acts as variously as
the Scorbutic Form is various; for being a Medicine truly Natural, Nature can
use it any way to her own benefit. And it is so Fortunate, that it cannot be
taken to amend the blood, but 'twill into the bargain communicate Health and
Vigor to all the parts of the body.

For Fevers of all sorts, especially malignant, it is incomparable. Whereas in
the use of other Medicines, these Distempers hold a considerable time, with
imminent danger, and often end in Death; I have many a time, with great
pleasure, beheld, this Noble Medicine surprising us with its admirable Effects;
taking off common Fevers in a few Days; sometimes in 24 Hours totally. And as
for malignant Fevers, it secures the Vitals from being overcome by their Venom;
and keeps 'em up through the whole Course of their sickness, from running very
low.

Here I omit to account for the Smallpox, because of the Preceding Discourse.
Yet I may say thus much; That I have had five Patients at one time sick of the
Smallpox, and through the blessing of God on this Medicine, not one
miscarried; although I did not visit after they were out (having never had 'em my
self) but only gave directions to those who attended 'em.

I might mention the several Concerns of Women and Virgins, to whom I
abundantly dispense it: But here I Will only particularize that restless and
uneasy distemper of Vapors, for which it is valuable, by removing the Cause,
in reducing the parts distended, and expelling those Fumes that fly upwards.

I might add, how it obliges Women in Labor and Lying-in, assisting in all
their Circumstances, and is the most Natural Cordial.

The bare Experience of ir for Cholicks, Cholical Dispositions, and tender
Bowels; how it recovers the strength of Fibers, gives a Liberal Expulsion of
Wind, and makes the Belly always easy; were a sufficient, Character.

For melancholy people, such as are Dropsical, short-breathed, Asthmatical,
Paralytick, Lethargical, Apoplectick, and many others, as tho I had named them
all; it is abundantly qualified. But I choose rather to nullisie than enumerate
Diseases.

It Is as easy and pleasant to take as Canary, and may be used as
Entertainment, all the while receiving health and pleasure. No one can injure
himself with it. And it is so loose and free from Physical Rules and Hours, that
it ought not to be rank't with the unpleasant Crew of Medicines: But reposited
with the most Delicious Wines.

From my House in Great Carter-Lane.

